2

Whetting the appetite: Historical averages and forward-
looking returns

• I present some historical performance statistics for major
asset classes and investment strategies, but I also highlight the
pitfalls in using such data.
• Average returns across asset classes seem positively related
to volatility and illiquidity. Bearing duration risk and emerging
market risk were exceptionally well rewarded during the past 20
years, equity risk not.
• The results for 1990–2009 may be sample specific,
reflecting an abnormally benign environment for certain asset
classes. This problem can be mitigated by adjusting average
returns for any windfall gains and by studying subperiod results
and longer return histories.
• Historical average returns are particularly misleading
measures of prospective long-term returns if expected returns
vary over time and the past sample period includes a significant
repricing. Forward-looking value indicators have their own
limitations but are often superior proxies for expected returns.

Before 
delving 
into 
the 
terminology 
and 
theories 
of 
expected 
return
determination in the next chapters, I provide some empirical appetizers.
Chapters 2 and 3 focus on historical average returns over a 20-year window
and over even longer windows. I emphasize the pitfalls in interpreting
historical data. If you do study historical returns, as most investors do, this
chapter reminds you of several skeptical questions you should ask.
I first summarize the performance of all major (and some minor) asset
classes and a few exceptionally successful active strategies over the past
two decades.

• The choice of my starting point (1990) is rather arbitrary, largely
driven by data availability for certain strategies and factors. (Data for
the principal asset classes go back much further.) Any such historical
analysis is inherently sample specific, a problem for which I will
suggest some remedies.
• One 20-year window gives only one historical data point to
assess the prospects for the next 20 years. For any serious statistical
analysis, hundreds of years of data would be needed. Chapter 3 turns
to evidence over longer time spans, but data availability and quality
deteriorate the further back we look, and structural changes may make
older data irrelevant.
• Historical average returns can be especially poor proxies of
future expected returns in a world with time-varying expected returns.
I prefer ex ante measures of long-run expected returns, such as bond
yields or earnings yields, and this point, indeed, is one of the key
themes of this book.
• The reported returns may not have been achievable due to
trading costs (which are especially significant for illiquid assets and
for strategies with high turnover). Total nominal returns also ignore the
detrimental impact of taxes and inflation.
Nonetheless, historical returns are a natural starting point of investment
analysis, partly because humans are hardwired from prehistoric times to
imitate 
successful 
actions 
and 
to 
learn 
from 
past 
experiences. 
Such
hardwiring helped our ancestors survive and develop but it may work
poorly or even be harmful in the domain of competitive modern financial
markets. The disclaimer “past performance is no indication or guarantee of
future results” seems overused but bears repeating because it goes against
key evolutionary traits.
2.1 HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE SINCE 1990

Table 2.1 
documents 
raw 
annualized 
compound 
average 
returns 
(nominal
geometric means) and risk-adjusted returns (Sharpe ratios), as well as some risk
statistics, for various investments over the period 1990–2009. The Sharpe ratio
(henceforth SR) is the annualized arithmetic mean excess return over cash,
divided by its annualized volatility; cash can be represented by the deposit rate
(here) 
or 
by 
the 
Treasury 
bill 
rate 
(Chapter 
3). 
Illiquidity 
estimates 
are
subjective assessments of each asset’s liquidity on a scale from 1 (liquid) to 5
(illiquid).

Commenting on results for 1990–2009

• It barely paid to move from government bonds to either equities or
to corporate bonds (i.e., the realized equity risk premium and credit risk
premium were very low over this exceptional sample period).
• Global equities (the developed market index) even underperformed
government 
bonds, 
dragged 
down 
by 
Japanese 
stocks 
whose 
bubble
peaked just before our sample period started. Both U.S. and European
stocks earned an annualized return over 8%, but Japanese stocks averaged
—2% returns each year.
• Among U.S. equity styles, small-cap value stocks fared best, while
small-cap growth stocks fared worst.
• Emerging market equities and debt earned much higher returns than
developed market assets.
• 
Duration 
risk 
was 
abundantly 
well 
rewarded, 
thanks 
to 
the
persistent decline in yields. Global government bonds also benefited from
diversification and earned the highest SR among traditional assets: 0.8.
• Corporate credit risk bearing was poorly rewarded. I will later
return to one key exception, which is that buying short-dated (1-to-3-year)
top-rated (AAA/AA) credits while shorting duration-matched Treasuries
earned a high Sharpe ratio.
• Real estate markets ended up earning returns similar to those of
stocks 
and 
bonds. 
Among 
other 
real 
assets, 
commodities 
and 
art
underperformed while timber fared especially well.
• Actively managed venture capital, private equity, and hedge funds
earned double-digit net returns, according to well-known indices (which
may 
tend 
to 
capture 
the 
better 
performing 
funds 
and 
thus 
overstate
industry returns).
Table 2.1. Summary statistics of asset classes and strategies, 1990–2009

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
MSCI 
Barra, 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Citigroup,
Barclays Capital, J.P. Morgan, Band of America Merrill Lynch, S&P
GSCI, MIT-CRE, FTSE, Global Property Research, UBS, NCREIF, Art
Market Research, Hedge Fund Research, Cambridge Associates, own
calculations.
• Certain active strategy styles earned very high returns, especially
until 2007. The last rows in Table 2.1 highlight four popular dynamic
strategies that I will review in this book:
• Within equities, buying global value stocks (and selling
“growth” stocks) has been a winning systematic approach, despite the
pains in 1999 and 2007–2008.
• In the FX arena, high-yielding currencies were the best
performers, despite large losses in 2008. Carry-seeking long–short
strategies—buying 
high-yielding 
currencies 
against 
selling 
low-
yielding currencies—achieved a high SR. (I focus on G10 markets
but the performance was even better in emerging markets.)
• 
Momentum 
style 
strategies 
across 
assets 
(buy 
recent
winners, sell recent losers) and trend-following strategies for a single
asset performed well in many asset classes, including the commodity
space.
• Finally, selling volatility on equity index options was a
highly lucrative strategy until autumn 2008, when a decade’s worth
of slowly earned gains were lost in two months. Our sample began
soon after the 1987 crash and, despite many financial crises over two
decades, no comparable tail event occurred until 2008.
Relating average returns to volatility and illiquidity

You do not have to be an efficient market purist to believe that long-run
average return differences across assets reflect ex ante required rewards for
bearing risk and illiquidity. I now take a first look into the determinants of
return 
differentials 
across 
assets, 
starting 
from 
the 
classic 
mean 
variance
relation as it was manifested in 1990–2009.

Figure 2.1 shows that the relation between average returns and volatilities is
positive and reasonably consistent:
• So, across asset classes, volatility has been historically rewarded.
(The same is hardly true within asset classes.)
• 
The 
link 
is 
not 
exact—assets 
don’t 
line 
up 
perfectly 
on 
the
regression line—nor should it be. Certain asset classes faced headwinds
while others benefited from tailwinds during this sample, and volatility is
not the only driver of expected returns. Some asset classes also benefited
from active management and reporting biases. In particular, the returns of
the 
three 
best-performing 
asset 
classes 
may 
be 
overstated 
due 
to
survivorship and other biases [1].

Deviations from the fitted line in Figure 2.1 can be justified by many
reasons: all volatility is not equal. One key characteristic missed by volatility is
liquidity. Over the long run, less liquid assets should offer some compensation
for their higher trading costs and lower trading/rebalancing flexibility. This
reward is not constant over time. Illiquid assets tend to underperform during
financial crises when liquidity dries up. Thus, illiquid assets should compensate
investors for both the illiquidity and the systematic tendency to underperform
in bad times. Moreover, less liquid assets tend to exhibit smoothed or stale
pricing, which reduces their measured volatility and their correlations with
other assets. Both positive illiquidity premia and the understatement of risk in
the denominator of the Sharpe ratio calculation imply that we should observe
higher Sharpe ratios for less liquid assets. Figure 2.2 confirms such a positive
relation, based on my subjective estimates of illiquidity (with scale from 1 to 5,
with 1 most liquid and 5 most illiquid). This empirical relation was even more
positive before 2008. Yet, the apparent positive relation between illiquidity and
asset class performance may reflect other factors than liquidity besides the
various biases noted above.

Figure 2.1. Scatterplotting average returns on volatilities, 1990–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, MSCI Barra, Ken French’s website, Citigroup, Barclays
Capital, J.P. Morgan, Band of America Merrill Lynch, S&P GSCI, MIT-CRE,
FTSE, 
Global 
Property 
Research, 
UBS, 
NCREIF, 
Hedge 
Fund 
Research,
Cambridge Associates.

Figure 2.2. Scatterplotting Sharpe ratios on illiquidity estimates.

Sources: Bloomberg, MSCI Barra, Ken French’s website, Citigroup, Barclays
Capital, J.P. Morgan, Band of America Merrill Lynch, S&P GSCI, MIT-CRE,
FTSE, 
Global 
Property 
Research, 
UBS, 
NCREIF, 
Hedge 
Fund 
Research,
Cambridge Associates, own calculations.

2.2 SAMPLE-SPECIFIC RESULTS: DEALING WITH THE
PITFALLS

The choice of 1990 as a starting year is somewhat arbitrary. When selecting
any historical sample period, we make a stark all-or-nothing choice as to
what historical data are relevant, obtainable, and representative of the future
[2]. We effectively assume that the sample period is “neutral” with positive
and 
negative 
unexpected 
surprises 
just 
washing 
out, 
without 
one-off
windfall gains from changing valuations, and with just as many rare events
occurring during the sample as the market had been expecting. We also rule
out structural changes within the sample, time-varying expected returns,
and systematic reporting biases. Do you still think the numbers in Table 2.1
are useful for forecasting after all these qualifications?

I mitigate the sample specificity of historical analysis by:
• using three endpoints (2009, 2008, and 2007) that give very
different results;
• reviewing empirical evidence before 1990 for asset classes
where good-quality data histories extend further back;
• adjusting average realized returns for sample-specific windfall
gains from changing asset valuations;
• showing cumulative performance charts that illustrate subperiod
fluctuations in asset returns since 1990.

Contrasting different endpoints, 2009 vs. 2008 vs. 2007

Figure 2.3 shows that the historical reward to risk was even more perverse
at the end of 2008 than at the end of 2009. Equities barely outperformed
cash and clearly lagged longer Treasuries. Going back to 1990–2007,
equities were still ahead of bonds but only modestly so when compared
with longer histories. The lesson is that the selection of the sample period
can matter a lot. Endpoints (or starting points) are especially misleading if
they 
coincide 
with 
bubble 
or 
bust 
valuations 
(say, 
2000 
or 
2008 
for
equities). The end of 2009 was fortunately a reasonably neutral period from
the valuation perspective.

Figure 
2.3. 
Empirical 
reward-to-risk 
relations 
can 
be 
highly 
sample-
specific.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
MSCI 
Barra, 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Citigroup,
Dimson–Marsh–Staunton (2010).

Figure 2.4. Many long-run Sharpe ratios plummeted in 2008.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
MSCI 
Barra, 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Citigroup,
Barclays Capital, MIT-CRE, S&P GSCI, Hedge Fund Research, Cambridge
Associates, own calculations.
Figure 2.4 contrasts long-run historical Sharpe ratios at mid-2007 and at
end-2009. The 2008 carnage did real damage to many risky assets, despite
the 2009 recovery. Global equities, credits, and commodities had not had
particularly good SRs even between 1990 and the first half of 2007, but
after the 2008 turbulence these SRs fell below 0.2. Private equity funds and
(funds of) hedge funds, as well as real estate, had had high SRs but these all
plummeted in 2008. The regression slope of long-run average returns vs.
volatilities across numerous asset classes halved from 0.4% to 0.2% (not
shown).

Up to 2007, embracing risk had especially paid off for strategies that
resembled selling lottery tickets that pay off in bad times. Since really bad
times 
did 
not 
materialize 
until 
2007–2008, 
these 
skewed 
strategies
performed so well that they attracted hot money, which further boosted
returns:
• The archetypical strategy of this type is equity index volatility
selling which profits from the normally steady gap between implied
and realized volatilities. The strategy lost in September–October 2008
more than a decade’s worth of profits. The long-run SR sunk from 1.3
to 0.4.
• The FX carry strategy and the aforementioned short-dated credit
carry strategy also had SRs near 1 before the crisis and resemble a
lottery-selling 
strategy; 
these 
too 
suffered 
dramatically 
in 
autumn
2008, and their SRs dropped.
• Not coincidentally, the hedge fund styles that gave the worst
surprises in 2008 were also short financial catastrophe risk. Among the
HFR hedge fund style indices, the largest declines in the long-run
Sharpe ratio (not shown) were for convertible arbitrage (1.5 to 0.7),
fixed income (1.5 to 0.9), and relative value arbitrage (1.9 to 1.3).

Returns over longer histories (pre-1990)

Twenty-or-so years are an alarmingly short data window for forming views
on long-term expected returns [3]. However, going back before 1990 would
narrow the available set of asset classes—either no data or poor data quality
in immature markets. Too long return histories also make it likely that we
include 
data 
from 
a 
different 
regime 
(i.e., 
from 
before 
an 
important
structural change). Despite these caveats, it is important to study long
histories, and Chapter 3 thus contrasts the experience of the past 20 years
with longer periods using extensive historical data.

Let us go back to Figure 2.3. On the left, the 20-year sample shows that
global bonds outperformed stocks 7% vs. 6%. On the right, the 110-year
sample shows that global stocks trounced bonds 8.6% vs. 4.7%. Which
evidence do you give more weight to? The answer is not quite obvious
because structural changes could make the recent past more relevant.
However, a shorter history is also more likely to suffer from sample-
specific effects, and I have already alluded to the secular yield decline and
the Nikkei drag on global equities since 1990 [4].

Adjusting for sample-specific valuation changes

The decades from the 1980s through 2007 were characterized by declining
macroeconomic 
volatility 
and 
rising 
asset 
market 
valuations. 
The
consequent windfall gains were presumably unexpected by investors; these
gains boosted realized asset returns well beyond the ex ante returns that
investors actually required. Government bonds benefited from this repricing
more than most asset classes. I show next how to “neutralize a non-neutral
sample” and adjust average returns to account for sample-specific (and
presumably unexpected) changes in yields and risk premia.

U.S. Treasuries enjoyed great tail winds when market yields fell from
over 15% in 1981 to 8% at year-end 1989 and then further to 3.5% at year-
end 2009, thanks to lower inflation expectations and lower required risk
premia on Treasuries. The cumulative windfall gains were roughly 23%
(using the following approximation: yield decline of 4.5 percentage points
times an average market duration of just above 5). Prorated to each of the
20 years, this repricing gain boosted the annual return of U.S. Treasuries by
a tad over 1%. Without this repricing, the average annual return on U.S.
Treasuries would have been 5.8% rather than 6.8% and the Sharpe ratio
0.32 rather than 0.53.

The emerging market debt spread over Treasuries fell from 10% in 1990
to 3% at the end of 2009, so these assets enjoyed even better tail winds.
Depending on emerging debt duration, the average return was boosted by
2% to 5% by the repricing due to lower yields and spreads.

In 
contrast, 
U.S. 
corporate 
bonds 
and 
equities 
experienced 
mixed
valuation changes during this sample period. Corporate spreads widened
from 1% to 1.5% but yield levels fell together with Treasuries. The S&P
500 P/E multiple expanded from about 15 to 20 and dividend yield fell from
3% to 2%.

The above exercise of removing unexpected repricing gains should give
us a better picture of what investors actually required ex ante during this
sample period. The repricing-adjusted average return does not necessarily
give us a good picture of what investors require now. Higher valuation
ratios now would also mean that long-run expected returns are currently
lower than their average during past decades.

The misleading nature of historical average returns is easy to see when
we 
consider 
Treasury 
yields. 
Treasury 
investors 
understand 
that 
with
current market yields below 3%, the high historical average return says
little about future prospects. Repricing effects are much harder to see with
other assets, such as equities, whose ex ante expected returns are less
transparent and more ambiguous (see Box 2.1). Investors in equities and
alternatives are thus more susceptible to naively extrapolating historical
returns. When equity valuation multiples expand (and thus equity earnings
yields 
fall), 
wishful 
investors 
hope 
that 
this 
change 
reflects 
rational
expectations of faster future earnings growth instead of lower expected or
required future returns. Empirical evidence suggests, however, that earnings
yields are a better predictor of future equity market returns than of changing
earnings growth rates.
Box 2.1. Repricing effects (extract from my 2003 article in the Journal
of Portfolio Management)

Bond investors understand better than equity investors the folly of
extrapolating expected returns from past average returns drawn from a
time when valuation levels have trended up or down. A rally—high
realized returns—caused by falling discount rates will reduce feasible
expected returns, rather than raise them. The example in Figure 2.5
shows that, between 1982 and 2001, 10-year Treasury yields averaged
8.1%, but the realized annual return was 10.7% because the downtrend
in yields (from 14.4% to 5.1%) added almost 3 percentage points of
annual capital gains to the yield income. Using the 10.7% realized
annual return or even the 8.1% average yield as an expected return
proxy makes little sense now that the yield is 5%. The transparency of
market yields prevents bondholders from harboring excessive return
expectations after a long bull market. Figure 2.5 shows that the
revaluation effect was even greater for equities. The earnings-to-price
(E/P) ratio fell from 12.4% to 4.0% in 20 years; that is, the market paid
3.1 times more for a given amount of dollar earnings at the end of
2001 than at the end of 1981. This repricing explains almost 6
percentage points of the S&P 500’s 15.5% realized annual return.
Again the realized average return clearly exceeds the forward-looking
return that was reasonable to expect in the 1980s, let alone now.
Unfortunately, most equity investors may have focused more on
historical returns than on forward-looking returns.

Figure 2.5. Valuation improvements bring one-off windfall gains: U.S.
experience between 1982 and 2001.

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup (Schroder Salomon Smith Barney).
Figure 2.6. Cumulative excess returns of major asset classes, 1990–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, MSCI Barra, Barclays Capital, MIT-CRE.

Subperiod analysis

My preferred approach to studying return consistency across subperiods is
to plot cumulative returns over time. Careful eyeballing of such graphs
reveals performance for any subperiod of interest, especially if the graphs
are 
in 
log 
scale 
so 
a 
given 
percentage 
return 
has 
the 
same 
impact
irrespective of where it is on the Y-axis. Distinctions are even sharper if we
subtract the common riskless return from all series and plot cumulative
excess 
returns 
(cumulative 
outperformance 
over 
cash, 
here 
one-month
deposit) (as in Figure 2.6).

Developed market equities enjoyed persistent rallies in 1993–2000 and
2003–2007 but lost about half of their value in 2000–2003 and again in
2008. 
Partly 
due 
to 
the 
Japan 
drag, 
the 
asset 
class 
ended 
up
underperforming 
emerging 
markets, 
fixed 
income, 
and 
real 
estate.
Emerging market equities gave investors a characteristically bumpy ride but
delivered the highest returns. Fixed income returns were most stable, while
real estate (in the U.S.) was the best-performing asset class between the
mid-1990s and 2007 but then busted.
2.3 FORWARD-LOOKING RETURN INDICATORS

All historical return data may be beside the point if expected returns vary
over time. One key theme in this book is that time-varying expected returns
can 
make 
historical 
average 
returns 
highly 
misleading. 
The 
market’s
expected returns are unobservable. Yet, as I will show, forward-looking
indicators, such as simple value and carry measures, can be useful proxies
of 
long-run 
expected 
returns. 
They 
certainly 
give 
better 
signals 
than
extrapolation of, say, past decade realized returns. In addition, there is mild
evidence of long-run reversal patterns for certain asset classes—say, a
decade with abnormally high returns on equities is more likely to be
followed by a decade of below-average returns. Recall equity markets in
2000 
following 
a 
two-decade 
rally 
when 
extrapolative 
expectations
attracted many investors to invest just when expensive market valuations
pointed to low prospective returns.

One 
common 
approach 
to 
estimating 
prospective 
returns 
involves
relating current market prices to some sort of value anchor (one that can be
as simple as historical average price, yield, or spread—or something more
complex). The presumption is that market prices will gradually revert
toward fair values that are proxied by such value anchors.

Carry captures an asset’s income return over time or, more broadly, an
asset’s expected return if the capital market environment stays unchanged
over time. Carry indicators are often related to value indicators but details
differ.

A narrow use of the term “carry” may originate from borrowers, or those
who are short an interest-bearing asset. The cost of borrowing, or of
remaining short, is the interest rate (not the coupon rate, but the full yield to
maturity including drift toward par). For investors carrying, or holding, a
long investment position that is financed by borrowing, the carry of this
self-financed 
position, 
or 
zero-investment 
position, 
is 
the 
difference
between the yields of the long (investment) leg and the short (financing)
leg. Most investments are income generating, providing yield-like returns,
and investors typically prefer positive-carry trades. The term “(positive-)
carry 
trading” 
refers 
to 
yield-seeking 
activities—buying 
high-yielding
assets, financed by borrowing in low-yielding assets.

An expanded use of the term “carry” (to cover equities, commodities,
etc.) includes any income return and other return (such as drift toward par,
or roll up or down a futures curve; or broader payout yields to stock
investors) that is earned when capital market conditions (such as the term
structure level and shape) are unchanged. Note that, under this broader
definition, carry is not always equal to income return or to yield, hence my
use of the umbrella term “carry” to refer to all of these generically.

For equities, the earnings yield or earnings/price ratio (E/P)—the inverse
of the price/ earnings (P/E) ratio—is the most popular value indicator. The
E/P is too broad a measure for income return because investors do not
receive 
all 
earnings 
as 
income. 
The 
classic 
income 
return 
proxy, 
the
dividend yield (D/P), is too narrow a measure because dividends are not the
only way firms distribute cash to investors. (The dividend payout ratio has
fallen since the 1980s, especially in the U.S., as many firms have replaced
dividend payments with share repurchases.) For bonds, yield to maturity
(YTM) or the internal rate of return is the traditional measure of value and
income return. Yield spread is the classic relative value indicator in fixed
income analysis, preferably adjusted for embedded options. Chapter 21
reviews these measures and their pitfalls.

Value 
or 
carry 
indicators 
are 
inherently 
narrow. 
Broader 
statistical
forecasting models take into account many other sources of predictability in
returns, 
such 
as 
momentum, 
volatility, 
and 
the 
macroeconomic
environment. 
Another 
distinction 
is 
that 
statistical 
forecasting 
models
typically have a short horizon, while value and carry signals give a longer
term view on an asset’s prospects. I will discuss some key predictors for
equity market timing, duration timing, and credit spread timing in Chapters
8 through 10 and later drill into four specific predictability patterns in
Chapters 12 through 15. Chapter 24 will give a slightly broader overview
on forecasting models and dynamic trading strategies.
Figure 2.7 shows proxies of ex ante real yields of major U.S. asset classes
over a very long historical period. Real yields are calculated as explained in
Appendix B. Clearly, these yields vary a lot over time. If we take them at
face 
value, 
the 
relative 
attractiveness 
of 
different 
asset 
classes 
varies
drastically 
over 
time, 
suggesting 
that 
value-oriented 
market 
timing 
or
tactical asset allocation strategies can be profitable. These indicators have
their own shortcomings, but empirical evidence indicates that they do have
some ability to forecast long-term asset returns.

Figure 2.7. Forward-looking real yields of U.S. equities, corporate bonds,
Treasuries, and housing, 1900–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Robert 
Shiller’s 
website, 
Moody’s, 
Ibbotson
Associates (Morningstar), Federal Reserve Board, Davis–Lehnert–Martin
(2008)/Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

The message from these valuation measures in early 2009 was that
corporate bonds were historically cheap and government bonds historically
expensive, while equities and real estate were rather normally valued. These
relations normalized so much during the year that by early 2010 no glaring
market opportunities were evident.

There are of course many other ways to predict asset returns—to be
discussed in Sections 8.6, 9.6, and 24.4—but the contrarian approach shows
promise and at least seems to do better than extrapolating long-run past
returns. For an example popularized by Robert Shiller and John Campbell,
Figure 2.8 shows how well smoothed earnings
Figure 2.8. Valuation ratios have been good predictors of subsequent multi-
year equity market return.

Sources: Robert Shiller’s website, Kenneth French’s website.

yields (the inverse of the P/E ratio, with 10-year average trailing earnings
used instead of current year earnings, adjusted for inflation) have been able
to predict subsequent multi-year equity market returns [5].
2.4 NOTES

[1] The venture capital (VC) asset class shows the highest average returns,
perhaps partly reflecting various biases. (Moreover, PE fund and VC fund
returns are based on internal rates of returns, so not quite comparable with
the returns of other investments.) For anyone getting enchanted by the
venture capital’s 16% compound average return (and a higher arithmetic
average return) between 1990 and 2009, I hasten to note that the annual
return of 39% in the 1990s was followed by an annual return of—3% in the
2000s.

[2] Even at best, historical means are just point estimates of expected
returns that are subject to estimation error and in some cases also model
error. Rebonato (2007) favors the use of Bayesian probabilities, which
honestly 
reflect 
our 
uncertainty 
about 
expected 
returns, 
whenever
conditions for using standard probabilities are not met. (In the Bayesian
setting, estimation error is comparable with higher volatility.) Problems
include time-varying expected returns, importance of rare events, a high
ratio of forecast horizon to data history, and feedback loops (such as when
observing 
past 
performance 
influences 
investors’ 
asset 
demands 
and
thereby future returns).

[3] If we make predictions of one-year returns, we may be able to make
statistically significant inferences about excess returns using 20 years of
historical 
data; 
whether 
such 
short-term 
forecasts 
are 
economically
significant is a topic of debate. The Sharpe ratio is closely related to
statistical 
significance. 
It 
is 
the 
ratio 
of 
mean 
excess 
return 
over 
its
volatility, while statistical signifcance uses the same two variables plus
sample size. (The standard error of a mean is σ/√N where σ is standard
deviation and N is sample size. The denominator of a Sharpe ratio only
includes σ.) Given a 20-year sample period, an asset’s annual excess return
is statistically significantly above zero if the Sharpe ratio exceeds 0.44 (i.e.,
the critical value of a two-sided 5% significance level is 1.95 and 1.9/√20 ≈
0.44). However, classical assumptions include an unbiased sample period,
normally distributed asset returns, and constant expected returns—and the
empirical validity of each of these is questionable. For example, if expected
returns are not constant but vary over time, past average returns have less to
say about future returns than do ex ante measures.

[4] Expressing the same contrast in Sharpe ratio terms, global bonds beat
stocks hands down, 0.79 vs. 0.18, between 1990 and 2009, but global stocks
beat bonds, 0.34 vs. 0.13, between 1900 and 2009. Note that the Dimson–
Marsh–Staunton long history uses currency-unhedged bonds with very long
maturities. Intermediate-maturity bonds tend to offer similar returns with
lower volatility, and hedging the currency exposure has the same impact.
Hedging poorly rewarded FX risk, avoiding the longest duration bonds, and
diversifying across countries may give bonds a long-run SR similar to that
of equities, 0.3–0.5. Any better SR for Treasuries probably reflects sample-
specific yield trends.

[5] The predictive correlation of 0.55 may look impressive but long-horizon
relations are often overfitted. Even if the relation is spurious, the high
correlation of slow-moving indicators may have less investment value than
fast indicators, with a correlation of only 0.10 over a one-month horizon
(and thus an R
2
of just 1%; recall that explanatory power or R
2
is just
correlation 
squared), 
that 
offer 
many 
more 
trading 
opportunities. 
For
readers who find these correlations low, I remind them that predictive
correlations are always modest because realized short-term returns of risky
assets largely reflect unpredictable news. A monthly predictive correlation
of 0.10 is already a good basis for a profitable trading rule. Finally, this
correlation—like the others presented in this book—is based on an in-
sample fit and arguably overstates the investment value of the predictive
correlation. A real-world investor in 1921 would not have known the full
distribution 
of 
future 
earnings 
yields 
to 
come, 
while 
we 
know 
with
hindsight that the series peaked at that time.

Source notes. This chapter’s topics are discussed in more detail later in the
book. The various works by Roger Ibbotson and Elroy Dimson, as well as
their co-authors, are the best reference sources on historical returns.