3

The historical record: The past 20 years in a longer perspective

• Any historical snapshot is sample specific. I try to put the
experience of the 1990s–2000s in a longer perspective.
• Between 1990 and 2009, duration risk was well rewarded,
credit and equity risk were not. Emerging Latin American
equities, venture capital, and small-cap value stocks earned the
highest average returns. Equity assets had modest SRs compared
with various fixed income assets as well as active funds and
strategies. Front-end Treasuries had the highest SRs.
• Asset return data from different sample periods are not
really comparable even if the sample periods are quite long, but
here are some empirical findings. Equities outperformed other
asset classes; in particular, they outperformed bonds by 4% per
year since 1900. Small-cap value stocks earned especially high
returns, although trading costs reduced their paper advantage. The
long-run reward for extending duration peaked at intermediate
maturities at about 1%. The long-run credit premium was only
0.3% for investment-grade debt but over 1% for high-yield debt.
Among rating classes, BB-rated debt—just below investment
grade—performed best and CCC-rated bonds performed
surprisingly poorly. Non-income-earning assets earned low long-
run returns.
• The best long-run SRs were for front-end Treasury trades
(that cannot be levered), high-turnover reversal strategies (before
accounting for costs, which are substantial), short-dated credits,
and active value/carry/momentum strategies. I require at least 30-
year histories, so this comparison excludes hedge funds, private
equity, timber, etc.
• Most of the analysis focuses on nominal returns but the last
section presents evidence on real returns.

Although one of my key themes is to de-emphasize historical average
returns when assessing prospective asset returns, I review asset return
histories over 1990–2009 in considerable detail in this chapter. The purpose
is not to use the historical returns as forecasts but simply to make the
historical information available to the reader consistent. The choice of the
1990–2009 time frame was arbitrary, and was guided by the availability of
data for a large spectrum of assets. In this chapter, I also contrast this 20-
year experience with a longer history. Even such longer histories may have
limited relevance in a world of time-varying expected returns.

Many of the tables and graphs that follow show the annualized nominal
returns (geometric means) and Sharpe ratios for the common sample period
1990–2009 as well as for longer histories back to the 1970s, 1920s, and
even 1900 [1]. Table 3.1 dissects global equities, Table 3.2 turns to fixed
income, and Table 3.4 to real assets as well as active funds and strategies.
The data series and sources are explained in Appendix B. Because the
length of the longer history varies across investments (rows), the last
column shows the start year for each one. Health warning: Performance
comparisons across rows can be misleading if different sample periods are
used. One obvious reason is that each sample period may be associated with
high or low inflation and short-term interest rate levels [2].

Table 3.1. Summary statistics of asset classes and strategies, 1990–2009
and longer: equities

Sources: Bloomberg, MSCI Barra, Ken French’s website, Dimson–Marsh–
Staunton (2010).
The reported returns may not have been achievable due to trading costs,
the impact of which is greater for illiquid assets, or for active strategies with
high turnover. Total nominal returns also ignore the detrimental impact of
taxes and inflation.
3.1 STOCKS

Before dissecting equity market returns, let us recap the evidence on stocks
vs. bonds, as made familiar by the works of Roger Ibbotson (with co-
authors) as well as Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton. Figure 3.1 contrasts
recent decades against a longer history. Bars show the 1990–2009 average
returns for major asset classes, while the line shows average returns over a
longer window. Only the values for the long sample are labeled. I use the
same format in several of the graphs below.

Long Treasuries, corporates, and equities all earned average returns near
8% since 1990, smartly beating T-bills. Bearing duration risk was rewarded
magnificently, while bearing further credit or equity risk was not. Small-cap
value stocks were the best performers over both the short and the long
history.

The history of the 1990s–2000s more closely resembles the 19th-century
experience than it does that of the first nine decades of the 20th century. In
the former, fixed income earned relatively high real returns and equities
offered only a slim advantage over bonds, while earlier in the 20th century,
stocks beat bonds by large margins. However, it bears repeating that the
high realized returns of long-duration bonds in the past 20 to 30 years
reflect windfall gains from the trend of falling yields.

Figure 3.1. Compound annual returns (nominal geometric means) of U.S.
asset classes, 1990–2009 and 1926–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, MSCI Barra, Barclays Capital, Ibbotson Associates
(Morningstar), Ken French’s website.
Figure 3.2. Cumulative total nominal returns of global assets since 1900.

Sources: Bloomberg, Dimson–Marsh–Staunton (2010).

For an even longer and more global perspective, Figure 3.2 plots (in log
scale) Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton’s world equity and bond returns since
1900. Over the long haul, equities handily beat fixed income. Global long
bonds underperformed short-dated bills until 1990 due to capital losses
from both rising yields and depreciation of non-U.S. currencies against the
dollar. The graph also includes the interesting history of Japanese equities.
After four decades of success (1900–1939, including strong performance
during the Great Depression), investors in Japanese equities lost nearly
everything after World War II, then recouped these losses and much more
between the 1950s and the 1980s, and then faced the two “lost decades”
after 
1989. 
Still, 
the 
experience 
of 
Japan 
and, 
even 
more 
clearly, 
of
Germany reminds us that hyperinflations can fully destroy fixed income
wealth while leaving equity holders with a real nest egg.

Emerging market equities outperformed developed market equities since
1988 
(when 
MSCI 
emerging 
market 
indices 
began) 
but 
they
underperformed between 1976 and 1987 so badly that over the full 1976–
2009 period for which Dimson–Marsh–Staunton (2010) have emerging
market 
data, 
they 
lagged 
developed 
markets 
(9.5 
vs. 
10.5%). 
Among
regions, Latin American stock markets were by far the best performers in
the 1990s and 2000s, partly because their valuations were so cheap after the
1980s’ debt crisis. Japan lagged, having been the world’s best performer
from 1950 to 1989; our sample period begins just at the peak of the Nikkei
bubble. Over the 110-year window, U.S. equities unsurprisingly earned the
highest returns among major markets.

Figure 3.3 turns to U.S. industries. Over the past 20 years, energy and
manufacturing offered the highest returns, but since 1926 the health sector
performed best. Moreover, there is no obvious relation between industry
volatilities and average returns.

The relative performance of both countries and industries, even over
relatively long samples, seems to reflect period-specific developments.
History simply tells us what happened in the past, with no information
about what is likely to happen in the future. Thus, country-specific and
industry-specific exposures are good examples of systematic risks that may
not warrant any significant risk premium. That is, even if all stocks in the
same country or in the same industry tend to move together, expected stock
returns across countries or industries may not systematically differ—unless
some countries or industries exhibit other characteristics that confer an
expected return advantage on them.

Figure 3.3. Compound annual nominal returns of U.S. industry portfolios,
1990–2009 and 1926–2009.

Source: Ken French’s website.
Value and size are the best known stock characteristics that are related to
cross-sectional differences in average returns. Figure 3.4 shows that the
average return ranks of the six size-sorted and value-sorted Fama–French
portfolios are the same for the 1990–2009 and 1926–2009 periods (see the
definitions of equity styles in Chapter 12 and Appendix B). Small-caps beat
large-caps and value stocks beat growth stocks, on average. The small-value
sector is thus understandably the best performer. Small-growth stocks—the
proverbial lottery tickets—had the lowest average returns.

Table 3.1 shows that, on paper, momentum strategies fared even better
than value, and short-term reversal strategies did even better. It is no
coincidence that we find the highest gross returns in small-cap stocks and in
high-turnover 
strategies 
such 
as 
short-term 
reversal 
and 
medium-term
momentum. Recall that the numbers here exclude transaction costs, which
would be substantial for these strategies. Incorporating trading costs would
eat seriously into these paper gains. Ghayur et al. (2010) estimate that—net
of costs—value and momentum strategies earned similar long-run returns.
Others estimate that the double-digit gross returns of the short-term reversal
strategy would have been negative after costs.

For evidence on the long-run stability of these relations, Figure 3.5 plots
decade average returns over time. The graph shows long–short strategy
returns (implicitly assuming that no net capital is invested), while in the
table a cash return is added for style factors and active strategies (implicitly
assuming the presence of cash collateral). The average market premium was
negative in 15% of these decade-long windows. Value and momentum
strategies were even more consistently successful than investing in the
overall market, earning negative returns only 4% and 10% of the time. The
size premium fared the worst, with 32% of decade-long returns being
negative. Excluding small-growth stocks from the small-cap universe would
cut this fraction to 20%.

Figure 3.4. Compound annual nominal returns of U.S.-style portfolios,
1990–2009 and 1926–2009.

Source: Ken French’s website.

Figure 3.5. Rolling 10-year average excess returns of U.S. equity markets
and style factors.

Source: Ken French’s website.

3.2 BONDS

Table 3.2 analyzes fixed income assets from various perspectives. The first
point to note is the generally high level of average returns and SRs during
the 1990–2009 period. The tail winds from falling yields were exceptional
and color all the performance statistics. Table 2.1 showed that emerging
market debt outperformed all the assets in Table 3.2, earning double-digit
returns (11.5%) but due to the short histories available for this market
sector, I will not study it further.

Hedged global government bonds had an SR near one, partly due to the
yield decline, but also because they enjoyed several structural benefits.
Diversifying across several countries, hedging away volatile currency risk,
and holding intermediate-duration rather than long-duration bonds all help
reduce volatility. Adjusting for the annualized gains from sharp yield falls
between 1985 and 2009, the SR for hedged global government bonds would
be close to 0.5 instead of the 0.85–0.99 in Table 3.2, but this is still far
higher than the 0.11 SR documented for a composite of unhedged long-
duration bonds since 1900. Among major markets, German bonds fared the
worst. Interestingly this is not due to the 1923 hyperinflation (because both
the long holding of bonds and the implicit short position in bills lost
everything, so these netted out in the hedged return). Currency hedging will
be explained in Section 4.4.

Looking 
across 
investment-grade 
fixed 
income 
sectors 
in 
the 
U.S.,
corporates 
earned 
the 
highest 
returns 
between 
1990 
and 
2009, 
while
mortgages and agencies earned the highest volatility-adjusted returns. The
new 
sector 
of 
asset-backed 
securities 
(and 
even 
newer 
commercial
mortgage-backed securities for which data only exist since the late 1990s)
gave 
the 
worst 
returns. 
Over 
long 
histories, 
long 
AA 
corporates
outperformed 
Treasuries 
by 
0.3% 
since 
1926, 
while 
junk 
bonds
outperformed Treasuries by about 1% since 1953.
Figure 3.6 assesses the reward for duration extension. For the 20-year
sample, average returns rise steeply and monotonically with maturity. This
period is unrepresentative and misleading for assessments of future returns
as the downtrend in yields benefited all bonds but not evenly; for obvious
reasons 
it 
benefited 
longest 
duration 
bonds 
most. 
Despite 
unexpected
windfall gains, longest duration bonds have clearly lower Sharpe ratios than
short-dated bonds, because of the higher volatility of long-dated issues. The
SRs above one for short-dated issues reflects the fact that the excess return
used for computing the SR is in excess of the one-month bill rate, at which
only the U.S. Treasury can borrow.

Over a longer sample period, the reward for duration extension is more
meager. If average returns were plotted vs. maturity, duration, or return
volatility, the long-run relation would look more like a hockey stick, rising
steeply into the 2-to-5-year range before tailing off. The period on which I
focus (1952–2009) is driven by data availability—1952 is the first year for
which we have return data for several maturity buckets. Conveniently, this
data period also starts just after the episode during and after World War II
when 
Treasury 
yields 
were 
regulated 
and 
were 
kept 
artificially 
low.
Moreover, this period is broadly neutral in that yield levels were similarly
low at the start and end of the sample. Later starting dates would imply
windfall gains to bonds, just as we see for 1990–2009.

Figure 3.7 assesses the reward for bearing credit risk. Average returns are
modestly better for investment-grade (IG) credits than for Treasuries, and
much better for high-yield (HY, non-IG, speculative-grade, junk) bonds
than for IG bonds. Interestingly, the BB-rated sector, the first speculative
rating notch, gives the highest long-run return over both the 20-year sample
and the longer period. Just as with average yield spreads, there is a distinct
kink 
in 
returns 
when 
moving 
beyond 
the 
IG 
threshold. 
The 
likely
explanation is that many investors are restricted from holding non-IG
bonds; 
the 
related 
selling 
pressure 
makes 
BB-rated 
“orphan” 
bonds
structurally cheap. Indeed, more recent data suggest that “fallen angels”—
HY bonds downgraded from IG—outperform original issue HY bonds (9.6
vs. 5.7% in 1997–2009). B-rated bonds still provide quite decent long-run
returns but CCC-rated junk bonds have a poor long-run record, partly due to
their high volatility and possible lottery ticket status.
Table 3.2. Summary statistics of asset classes and strategies, 1990–2009
and longer: fixed income

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Bank of America Merrill Lynch,
Citigroup, Center for Research in Security Prices, Ibbotson Associates
(Morningstar), Dimson–Marsh–Staunton (2010).
The 1990s and 2000s were benign for all fixed income due to the falling
yield trend, but in a relative sense many “spread products” (bond market
jargon for issues exposed to credit and/or prepayment risk, selling at a yield
spread over comparable duration Treasuries) did not fare as well as the total
return series imply. Total returns also reflect yield level changes, and
corporate bond indices benefited from their slightly longer duration than
Treasuries amidst falling yields. Option-adjusted spreads and excess returns
are 
better 
measures 
of 
spread 
products’ 
ex 
ante 
and 
ex 
post 
return
advantage over comparable duration Treasuries. Such data are available
since 1989. The realized duration-adjusted excess return for IG credits was
0.2%, compared with the 0.6% total return edge. At the same time, HY
bonds had a true (duration-adjusted) 1.7% excess return over Treasuries, but
even HY bonds’ cumulative advantage dropped to negative levels in 2002
and 2008.

Table 3.3 explores the degree to which various spread products really
captured their ex ante yield advantage. Between 1990 and 2009, the Barcap
(formerly Lehman) U.S. corporate index had a much wider average yield
spread than agencies or mortgages; yet it earned a slightly lower realized
return advantage (over Treasuries) than either of these two bond categories.
Corporates’ spread capture, defined as the ratio of the ex post return spread
to the ex ante yield spread, was a poor 21% (27 bp excess return vs. 129 bp
average spread). Where did the remaining 102 bp go? About 20 bp of the
“missed” return can be explained by the 75 bp spread widening, the rest by
default 
and 
downgrading 
biases 
and 
by 
index 
investors’ 
poor 
selling
patterns described in Chapter 10. (For the more benign 1990–2006 period,
over which the corporate spread narrowed slightly, the spread capture was a
still modest 44 bp of the 104 bp average spread.)

In contrast, U.S. agencies’ fixed rate debt delivered even more than their
33 bp average spread; their spread capture exceeded 100%. There were no
credit losses because, in the end, it was decided that Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac were too big to fail. Mortgages captured only 40% of their 69
bp average spread. This may appear surprising because the spread over
Treasuries narrowed during our sample, but the short embedded option in
MBS really hurt when prepayment speeds and interest rate volatility rose.
Finally, the spread capture was much better at short maturities: 64% for 1-
to-3-year corporates compared with 33% for 1-to-10-year corporates and
15% for long-dated issues.

Table 3.3. Average capture by ex post excess returns of ex ante yield
advantage, 1990–2009

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital.
Figure 3.6. Compound annual nominal returns of U.S. Treasury maturity
portfolios, 1990–2009 and 1952–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Citigroup, Center for
Research in Security Prices, Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar).

Figure 3.7. Compound annual nominal returns of U.S. credit portfolios,
1990–2009 and 1973–2009. * Using B returns for CCC pre-1985 and
Lehman index data for all pre-1980.

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Citigroup.
Figure 3.8. Cumulative excess returns from bearing credit and duration
exposures, 1990–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

The last rows in Table 3.2 compare total returns across ratings and
maturities. The combination of abundant duration reward and consistent
credit reward gave high-rated 1-to-3-year credits an SR of 1.2. If we purge
the duration effect, excess returns over duration-matched Treasuries are less
impressive but still smoother than for long credits.

The thick line in Figure 3.8 illustrates the poor reward to risk from
generic non-government risk taking in the 1990s and 2000s. At short
maturities 
the 
excess 
returns 
were 
consistent 
until 
2008. 
Duration
extensions were very profitable thanks to the falling yield trend. Most
active 
fixed 
income 
managers 
selected 
credit 
overweights 
rather 
than
duration overweights as their preferred structural tilt, which gave them a
rollercoaster ride in 2008–2009.
3.3 REAL ASSET INVESTING AND ACTIVE INVESTING

The last performance table, Table 3.4, looks beyond equities and debt into
various “real” assets as well as active funds and strategies. Among real
assets, timber and crude oil futures earned the highest returns in the 1990s
and 2000s. The three spot commodity price series as well as housing and art
earned lower returns partly because they include no income [3].

The active funds and strategies that I study here had relatively high
returns, perhaps overstated by selection biases. The SRs of illiquid assets
are further boosted by understated volatilities. Data issues notwithstanding,
venture capital had the highest return and HFs the highest SR between 1990
and 2009. VC suffered a 67% drawdown since its 2000 peak, coming soon
after a 280% gain in 1999, and remains deeply underwater. The HF index
produced 
much 
more 
consistent 
profits, 
with 
only 
two 
double-digit
drawdowns (1998 and 2008). The active equity value, FX carry, and
commodity momentum strategies had impressive SRs even in the simple
baseline variants I describe. These SRs could have been boosted further by
diversifying each style into other asset classes; but incorporating trading
costs would have reduced the SRs. The commodity trend strategy had a
high long-run return partly due to double-digit volatility and higher trading
costs.

Table 3.4. Summary statistics of asset classes and strategies, 1990–2009
and longer: real and active

Sources: Bloomberg, S&P GSCI, Commodity Research Bureau, MIT-CRE,
NCREIF, FTSE, Robert Shiller’s website, Global Property Research, Art
Market 
Research, 
Hedge 
Fund 
Research, 
Cambridge 
Associates, 
Ken
French’s website, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, own calculations.
Figure 3.9 shows that most real assets could not match stock or bond
market performance after 1990 but outperformed bills. Looking back to
1978, real assets earned “bond-like” returns (U.S. bonds earned 8.5%).

The histories I have for real asset returns do not date further back than
the 1970s. Yet, secular trends may be especially important in driving real
assets’ long-term returns. Figure 3.10 shows the real (inflation-adjusted)
price-only return for several real assets starting in 1920. Long-run real price
growth was fastest for the stock market (2.7%), beating houses (0.8%), oil
(1.1%), and gold (1.7%). Stocks’ advantages are further boosted by their
dividend income, which is ignored in this exhibit. (Nor are the rental
income return from housing or the roll and margin returns of commodity
futures accounted for in this exhibit.).
Figure 3.9. Compound average nominal returns of real assets, 1990–2009
and 1978–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
S&P 
GSCI, 
MIT-CRE, 
Artmarketresearch, 
Ken
French’s website.

Figure 3.10. Real asset price growth over 90 years.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Robert 
Shiller’s 
website, 
Knut 
Kjaer
(correspondence).
3.4 FX AND MONEY MARKETS

I focus above on dollar-denominated returns. The returns on non-dollar
assets are mostly reported unhedged, in which case their dollar return
includes the appreciation or depreciation of the foreign currency during the
sample period. The returns on some foreign bonds are reported currency-
hedged into dollars, in which case their dollar return also reflects the
hedging cost, which is proportional to the money market interest rate
differential across countries. Figure 3.11 shows that most G10 currencies
appreciated against the dollar between year-end 1989 and year-end 2009.
The Japanese yen spot exchange rate strengthened the most, by 2.2% per
annum (cumulatively 54%), which enhanced Japanese assets’ dollar returns.
Currency hedging would have boosted these assets’ dollar returns even
more because the hedger would have benefited from Japan’s low interest
rates (on average 2.7% lower than U.S. money market rates); thus the
hedged investor would have netted an additional 0.5% per year. A pure
currency investment into the yen mildly underperformed U.S. deposits
(reflecting the net of spot rate appreciation and the average interest rate
differential). Cash investments denominated in the currencies of all G10
markets other than the United States outperformed U.S. deposits. High-
yielding 
currencies 
earned 
the 
highest 
average 
returns 
as 
their 
yield
advantage was amplified by net currency appreciation. Many economists
would consider this a surprising outcome because a high yield is usually
interpreted as compensation for 
high expected 
inflation, 
which 
causes
currencies to depreciate—not appreciate. However, during this period the
high yields attracted capital and caused currency appreciation, while the
feared inflation did not materialize. Carry strategy profits were not riskless,
however; during financial crises the high-yielders suffered and the yen
served as a valuable safe haven (see Chapter 13).
The near-monotonic link between average returns and average yields in
Figure 3.11 is not evident if I redo the analysis with available G8 data since
1971 (when the Bretton Woods system collapsed); the high-yielding British
pound and Australian dollar earned average returns similar to those of the
low-yielding Swiss franc and Japanese yen. However, this approach only
looks at long-run average yields to determine the results from holding static
positions for decades; more dynamic currency carry strategies did make
money between 1971 and 1989 as well as thereafter. Still, it is fair to say
that the currency carry strategy benefited from tail winds in the 1990s and
2000s.

Figure 3.11. Average nominal returns for G10 FX, and their components,
1990–2009.

Source: Bloomberg.

Figure 3.12. Money market spreads over one-month Treasury bill, 1965–
2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, St. Louis Fed.
Average returns for one-month Treasury bills and one-month deposits
between 1990 and 2009 are 3.8% vs. 4.5%. The 70 bp yield advantage,
called 
the 
“TED” 
or 
Treasury–eurodollar 
spread, 
reflects 
credit 
and
liquidity differences. Historically, the TED spread was narrow and stable
for two decades until 2008 (see Figure 3.12). Money market credit spreads
blew out in 2008 to levels not seen since 1982, and it is more impressive to
see 200 bp to 300 bp spreads when Treasury bill rates are near 1% than
when they are near 10% [4].

The average yield spread of private money market paper—whether repos
(RP), commercial paper (CP), certificates of deposit (CD), or eurodeposits
(ED)—over Treasury bills (TB) more than halved between the 1980s and
the 2000s, despite spiking back to the 1981–1982 level in 2008 (see Table
3.5). Between these extreme events, the major spikes occurred after the
1987 stock market crash, during the 1990 recession, the 1998 Russia/LTCM
debacle, and during the year 2000 (“Y2K”) computer scare. It was a sign of
the 
times 
that 
credit 
spreads 
widened 
only 
marginally 
following 
the
September 11, 2001 terrorist strikes and the resulting temporary closing of
some financial markets. As noted, there is a particularly attractive reward to
risk when shifting away from short-dated Treasuries, but such opportunities
cannot be arbitraged away by leveraged investors. Only the U.S. Treasury
can fund at Treasury rates, while the holders of short-dated Treasuries can
become less risk averse and more willing to accept non-Treasury risk. This
indeed 
has 
happened—especially 
among 
central 
banks—resulting 
in
significant spread narrowing and decline in the ex ante reward–risk tradeoff
over time (until 2007). However, the 2007–2008 experience reminded
investors that money market spreads widen at the worst possible times for
financial institutions: during systemic crises. Only unprecedented central
bank actions—“whatever it takes” was the motto—brought these spreads
back down and caused a semblance of normality to return to financial
markets.

Table 3.5. Summary statistics of U.S. money market rate spreads, 1980–
2009

Assets not covered in this chapter include many interesting cases with too
short histories or poor data quality. Candidates range from the obvious to
esoteric: emerging market debt, inflation-linked bonds, convertible bonds,
interest 
rate 
swaps, 
credit 
derivatives, 
various 
structured 
products,
exchange-traded 
funds, 
catastrophe 
bonds, 
distressed 
debt, 
and 
carbon
trading.
3.5 REAL RETURN HISTORIES

The results above focused on nominal returns, as does most of this book. To
compensate for what some readers might find to be insufficient emphasis on
real returns, Table 3.6 presents the compound average real returns for many
assets, decade by decade for the 110 years, and also for the 19th century
(actually the 98-year period from 1802 to 1899) where possible. For the
data shown, the 1980s and 1990s were among the best decades for most
asset classes, while the 2000s were among the worst.

Table 3.7 supplements the above with information about average real
price-only returns (i.e., excluding income, which was an important if not
dominant source of return for both stocks and bonds in early periods). In
addition, 
the 
exhibit 
shows 
valuation 
indicators 
and 
macroeconomic
indicators. All real series are deflated by consumer price inflation (CPI),
except for the ex ante 10-year real yield which uses long-run inflation
expectations 
(based 
on 
survey 
data 
in 
recent 
decades 
and 
statistical
estimates earlier; see Appendix B).
3.6 NOTES

[1] Technical notes: I do not show arithmetic means, but the SRs are based
on arithmetic excess returns divided by volatility. In contrast to what I do in
Chapter 2, the excess returns and Sharpe ratios here use the return on one-
month Treasury bills, rather than somewhat higher deposit rates, as the
riskless rate. The latter time series is not available for very long histories
and 
I 
want 
to 
keep 
the 
20-year 
and 
long-history 
statistics 
somewhat
comparable. Some of the long-run Sharpe ratios are based on annual data. I
show US$ (i.e., unhedged) returns (except that foreign bonds are hedged in
US$). For long–short portfolios, I cumulate only the excess return when
computing geometric means, or GM (instead of taking the ratio of 1 + GMs
of the long and short sub-portfolios’ total returns). I then add the bill return
to convert these excess returns into total returns.

Table 3.6. Centuries, decades, and years of average real returns for major
asset classes (mainly U.S.)

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Arnott-Bernstein 
(2002), 
Ken 
French’s 
website,
Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar), Barclays Capital, MSCI Barra, S&P
GSCI, 
NCREIF, 
Dimson 
(2004), 
Hedge 
Fund 
Research, 
Cambridge
Associates.
Table 3.7. Centuries, decades, and years of average real price changes,
valuation, and macroeconomic indicators
Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Robert 
Shiller’s 
website, 
Knut 
Kjaer, 
Ibbotson
Associates (Morningstar), Homer-Sylla (1991), Federal Reserve Board,
Moody’s, 
Arnott-Bernstein 
(2002), 
Haver 
ANAlytics, 
Federal 
Reserve
Bank 
of 
Philadelphia, 
Blue 
Chip 
Economic 
Indicators, 
Consesus
economics, Sharon Kozicki, own calculations.
[2] The average riskless (Treasury bill) return between 1990 and 2009 was
3.8%. Average riskless rates for periods ending at the present (2009) are
lowest for the shortest and longest sample periods. Any history starting
between 1900 and 1931 or near 1990 has an average riskless rate close to or
less than 4%, while any history starting in the 1970s has an average riskless
rate of 5.7% to 5.8%. Any period starting between 1953 and 1982 has an
average riskless rate over 5%.

[3] Readers may wonder how gold futures and spot earned the same
average return in 1990–2009. Mechanically, the futures return includes the
spot price change, roll return (as the futures roll up or down the term
structure over time), and Treasury bill return (because actual gold is not
bought, the cash can be invested into Treasury bills and used as margin in
the futures exchange). In this case, the roll return for gold was typically
negative (reflecting contango) and exactly offset positive cash income. For
crude oil futures, the roll return was only mildly negative (and indeed was
positive until 2004), so the average futures return is higher than the average
spot price change.

[4] In 2008, money markets also started to more effectively tier rates among
issuers; earlier most banks could borrow at the same LIBOR rate. Even
LIBOR’s 
benchmark 
role 
was 
increasingly 
challenged 
by 
the 
OIS
(overnight index swap) rate, which is effectively a collateralized rate,
independent 
of 
a 
borrower’s 
credit 
quality. 
The 
LIBOR–OIS 
spread
widened sharply during the 2008 crisis, but later narrowed back to <10 bp.

Source notes. This chapter’s topics are discussed in more detail later in the
book. The various works by Roger Ibbotson and Elroy Dimson, as well as
their co-authors, are the best reference sources on historical returns.