4

Road map to terminology

I briefly review many definitions, distinctions, relations, and pitfalls.
(Readers looking for the “meat” may skip this chapter and later use it
as a reference section, as needed. Readers only interested in empirical
evidence may jump all the way to Part II.)

4.1. Constant or time-varying expected returns?
4.2. Rational or irrational expectations formation?
4.3. Return measurement issues.
4.4. Returns in which currency?
4.5. Risk-adjusted returns.
4.6. Biased returns.

The terminology used to describe expected returns can be confusing. For
most assets, expected returns are uncertain ex ante but they are also
unknowable ex post. This is in contrast to realized returns, which are
knowable ex post but which do not reveal what investors expected [1].
Realized returns are only one of many needed clues for inferring what
investors might have expected. Since we cannot directly observe market
expectations of returns or rates, we must infer expected returns from
empirical data, including market yields or valuation ratios, past returns, and
investor surveys, and from models.

An 
exception 
is 
the 
expected 
return 
on 
a 
default-free, 
zero-coupon
government bond. The yield on such a bond is the return that investors
expect—and in fact receive—if the bond is held to maturity.

When reading about expected returns, it is important to distinguish
between time series predictability—variation in the expected return for a
given asset class over time—and cross-sectional predictability—variation in
the return expected at a given point in time for various different assets (e.g.,
for individual stocks within the equity asset class).
4.1 CONSTANT OR TIME-VARYING EXPECTED
RETURNS?

Empirical 
research 
in 
finance 
since 
the 
1960s 
has 
focused 
on 
cross-
sectional differences in average returns, giving much less attention to the
possibility of time variation in expected returns. Until 10 or 20 years ago,
most academics and finance textbooks routinely assumed constant expected
asset risk premia. Given constant expected returns, the best way to estimate
expected future return is to calculate the sample average realized return
over a long sample period [2].

During the 1980s and 1990s, empirical and theoretical research on time-
varying risk premia began to challenge the assumption of constant risk
premia in stock and bond markets. At the same time, behavioral finance
suggested that boom–bust cycles may reflect time-varying sentiment and
aggregate mispricing. Textbooks and academic consensus gradually shifted
away from using the historical long-term average equity excess return as the
best proxy for the future equity risk premium.

When expected returns vary over time, historical average realized returns
reflect (i) historical average expected returns and (ii) historical average
unexpected returns. The latter part includes the impact of changes in
expected or required returns. This item can dominate realized returns if
valuations change meaningfully during the sample period—especially when
the sample period is relatively short.

Adjusting historical average returns for past valuation changes only gives
us an estimate of past average expected return, not necessarily current
expected return. The problem of misleading historical average returns is
compounded because current expected returns are lower after valuation
increases. If expected returns vary over time, prospective expected returns
reflect 
current 
starting 
conditions—such 
as 
valuation 
ratios—and 
not
historical average conditions. For example, the decades during which equity
market valuations increased (the 1920s, 1950s, and 1990s) ended with
historically high trailing returns but low expected returns.
4.2 RATIONAL OR IRRATIONAL EXPECTATIONS
FORMATION?

Rational expectations have been a key paradigm in economics and finance
since the 1970s. Rational investors make forecasts that correctly incorporate
all available information, leaving no room for systematic forecasting errors.
Early studies assumed a stable structural model whose structure agents
know. More realistic hypotheses allow agents to rationally learn about
evolving 
economic 
structures. 
This 
learning 
process 
over 
time 
could
explain 
apparently 
biased 
expectations 
(predictable 
forecast 
errors) 
in
empirical data.

Behavioral economics and finance have challenged this paradigm. Fully
rational 
behavior 
requires 
quite 
complex 
calculations 
from 
Homo
economicus, prompting the alternative idea that investors exhibit bounded
rationality—rationality that is limited by their cognitive resources and
observational 
powers. 
Psychological 
biases 
predict 
specific 
systematic
deviations from rationality (to be discussed in Chapter 6). Two of the main
examples 
of 
irrational 
expectations 
are 
excessive 
extrapolation 
and
insufficient adaptation. 
That 
is, many investors 
expect past 
multi-year
trends to persist more than they do, while they also underreact to recent
news.

Box 4.1. Terminology: expected vs. required returns

I find the term “expected return” potentially misleading because
“market expectations” sometimes hardly conform to what most people
expect. An extreme example occurred during the tech bubble when
surveys pointed to exceptionally high subjective expectations of future
equity market returns while objective forward-looking indicators
pointed to exceptionally low future equity returns, given that market
valuation ratios were so high. More generally, persistent market rallies
may raise subjective return expectations (due to extrapolation bias)
while they reduce objectively feasible returns (due to higher market
valuations). Behavioral finance suggests that subjective (hoped-for)
return expectations may well be negatively correlated with rationally
objective return expectations.

Traditional academic terminology is based on the concepts of
market equilibrium and rational expectations. In equilibrium (i.e., if
price is equal to value), the expected return on the market portfolio, the
return forecast for the equity market or any other market, should equal
that market’s required return. The expected return determines how
high a return the market can feasibly supply, while the required return
determines how high a return market participants (as a group) demand
(in order to hold the amount of an asset that is on offer, so that markets
clear and all assets are held). As always, market prices adjust to
balance supply and demand. For example, if all investors suddenly
require higher risk premia, current market prices of risky assets must
fall.

Time variation in objectively feasible future returns may reflect
mispricing caused by irrational expectations or sentiment fluctuations
—but its origins could also be fully rational, reflecting risk premia that
are time varying due to variation in the amount of risk in the market or
in market participants’ tolerance for risk. In the latter case, using the
term “required returns” or “required premia” seems more fitting than
“expected returns” or “expected premia”.

...
4.3 RETURN MEASUREMENT ISSUES

Expected returns need to be viewed over some time horizon, in some base
currency, and using one of many possible averaging and compounding
methods. For meaningful comparisons, consistent methods should be used.
(I remind technically oriented readers that simple returns [P
t+1
/P
t
—1] are
additive across assets but not over time, whereas continuously compounded
returns [ln(P
t+1
/P
t
)] are additive over time but not across assets.) My
empirical analysis will focus on monthly return data, denominated in U.S.
dollars, 
and 
typically 
measured 
as 
annually 
compounded 
returns.
Fortunately, 
the 
main 
results 
are 
robust 
to 
using 
other 
reporting
conventions, so they tend to hold generally.

Returns can be expressed in various ways. Raw nominal returns may be
deflated 
to 
real 
returns, 
and 
this 
is 
typically 
done 
using 
the 
realized
“headline” consumer price inflation rate. For yields and for forward-looking
estimates of return, a survey-based or other measure of expected inflation
may be more appropriate if such data exist. (The Treasury/TIPS break-even
inflation rate is an example of a measure of expected inflation that is market
based rather than survey based. Chapter 17 discusses pitfalls with this
measure.) 
For 
excess 
return 
(risk 
premium) 
estimation 
the 
question
“premium over what?” must be answered; the default answer is to subtract
the return of a riskless money market asset, such as the Treasury bill rate,
from the raw asset return, to arrive at an “excess return” or return premium.
Many other types of premia can, of course, be calculated.

An important distinction is between arithmetic and geometric average
returns. For example, the arithmetic average of two successive returns of
+50% and—50% is 0%, but the geometric average is—13% {[(1 + 0.5) * (1
—0.5)]
(1/n)
= 0.87], where n = number of periods = 2}. Basic finance
theory, including single-period Markowitz or mean variance optimization
and the single-period CAPM, requires that one use arithmetic means (AM)
as inputs. However, most investors are interested in wealth compounding
and this is better captured by geometric means (GM, also called compound
average returns or compound annual returns). When I present historical
evidence I focus on GMs, which show realized buy-and-hold returns. An
asset’s GM is always lower than its AM, and the difference is larger for
high-volatility assets. An excellent approximation of the relation between
GM and AM is: GM ≈ AM—Variance/2. For example, given 20% equity
market volatility, annual variance is 4% (20% squared) so the difference
between AM and GM is roughly 2%. For more on the AM–GM gap, see
Box 28.1.

...
4.4. RETURNS IN WHAT CURRENCY?

Most of my empirical evidence is expressed as dollar-based asset returns.
For non-dollar assets this practice bundles local currency asset returns and
exchange rate changes [(1 + H
LC
) * (1 + ΔFX)] into unhedged return. (The
same is true for dollar assets from a Japanese investor’s perspective.) It is
often better to unbundle the two parts of unhedged returns and make
separate 
active 
decisions 
on 
asset 
and 
currency 
allocation. 
Currency
hedging can be done in various ways—selling expected FX proceeds using
FX 
forward 
contracts, 
funding 
foreign 
asset 
purchases 
with 
foreign
currency 
deposits, 
or 
directly 
buying 
non-dollar-denominated 
futures
contracts. All these approaches keep the capital (and expected income)
currency-hedged, with low trading costs. Only unexpected profits or losses
would be subject to FX risk but this is inherently a second-order effect.

Consider an example where the U.S. equity market falls 5% and the
dollar weakens by 5% against the yen. An unhedged Japanese investor
holding U.S. equities would lose roughly 10% in yen terms (—9.75%
return). A currency-hedged investor would lose something closer to 5% but
not exactly 5%. The currency losses would not be exactly zero because
investors 
can 
typically 
hedge 
only 
the 
expected 
proceeds 
of 
their
investment, leaving the unexpected asset return exposed to FX risk. In this
example, 
dollar 
depreciation 
makes 
yen-denominated 
losses 
slightly
smaller, giving the currency-hedged Japanese investor holding U.S. equities
a total loss of 4.75% in yen terms. The FX gain of 0.25% (—5% of—5%) is
an order of magnitude smaller than the FX loss for an unhedged investor.
(In contrast, if the 5% U.S. equity market fall had coincided with 5% dollar
appreciation, the unhedged Japanese investor would have ended roughly
flat (—0.25% return) in yen terms, while the hedged investor’s losses
would have grown to 5.25% in yen terms.) Shortening the hedging horizon
tends to improve hedging accuracy because the volatility of unexpected
returns is reduced.

International 
comparisons 
are 
sometimes 
made 
using 
local 
currency
returns. This convention can be misleading if inflation rates and nominal
money market rates systematically differ across countries. For example, a
10% nominal asset return is much more impressive in a country with an
inflation rate of 2% than in a country with an inflation rate of 7%. Because
real short rates have been closer together across countries than inflation
rates, it has been relatively fair to compare real returns across countries.
Arguably the cleanest cross-country comparisons involve using common
currency returns (say, unhedged dollar-based returns) or local returns in
excess 
of 
a 
local 
money 
market 
rate. 
These 
local 
excess 
returns 
are
approximately equal to currency-hedged excess returns because the cost of
currency hedging (the forward–spot premium in currency markets) is, by
arbitrage, directly related to the money market interest rate differential
across 
countries. 
The 
relation 
between 
the 
forward–spot 
premium 
in
currency 
markets 
and 
the 
short-term 
interest 
rate 
differential 
across
countries is called “covered interest parity” and holds tightly for most
currencies under normal market conditions. It follows that, for any investor,
the currency-hedged return of a risky foreign asset is well approximated by
the sum of the investor’s home currency deposit rate and the foreign asset’s
excess return over the foreign deposit rate.

Table 4.1. Annualized average spot exchange rate appreciation against the
USD over each decade

Source: Bloomberg.

EUR GBP JPY
(%)
(%) (%)
1970–1979
7.7 —0.8
4.1
1980–1989
0.2 —3.1
5.3
1990–1999 —1.4
0.0
3.5
2000–2009
3.6
0.0
0.9
For global assets other than bonds, this book shows mainly unhedged
dollar-based returns. Table 4.1 shows that the yen and the euro (or the
deutschmark before 1999) have tended to strengthen against the dollar in
recent decades. The dollar’s downtrend lowers U.S. assets’ performance for
many non-U.S. investors, while the returns of many unhedged non-U.S.
assets have been augmented by currency appreciation.

...
4.5 RISK-ADJUSTED RETURNS

Performance evaluation of any asset, strategy, or fund is increasingly done
on returns that are somehow adjusted for the average risk taken. Adjustment
for volatility is the most common risk adjustment, based on the logic that it
would be “unfair” to compare, say, returns of 4% on two different assets
with very different volatility levels. Specifically, the Sharpe ratio (SR) is the
average excess return over the riskless rate of return (proxied, in practice,
by a near-riskless money market asset) divided by the volatility of this
excess return. The SR is a measure of volatility-adjusted or risk-adjusted
return.

In the CAPM context, the optimal risky asset portfolio can be levered or
de-levered 
through 
borrowing 
or 
lending 
of 
cash 
(i.e., 
short 
or 
long
positions in cash). Investors can combine such cash positions with the
optimal risky asset portfolio to reach any portfolio on the capital market
line (which shows the maximum expected return for each volatility target).
All portfolios on the capital market line have the highest attainable SR; in
this sense maximum-SR portfolios are optimal. Conveniently, the SR is
scale invariant (i.e., it cannot be increased by levering up the risky asset
portfolio, while returns themselves—not adjusted for risk—can be [3]).

The SR has its shortcomings because all volatility is not equal. For
example, 
since 
SR 
uses 
volatility 
as 
the 
risk 
measure, 
it 
ignores 
the
distinction between systematic and diversifiable risks. According to classic
portfolio 
theory, 
systematic 
risk 
such 
as 
equity 
market 
beta 
is 
more
dangerous 
than 
idiosyncratic 
risk 
that 
can 
be 
diversified 
away. 
More
modern critics point out that volatility does not distinguish between losses
that occur in good or bad times or even between upside and downside
surprises.
Another approach to risk-adjusted returns focuses on an asset’s—or a
strategy’s or a fund’s—contribution to portfolio risk as opposed to its
standalone risk (a part of which is typically diversifiable). The classic
Jensen’s alpha is the intercept when regressing asset returns on equity
market returns. More generally, alpha is the intercept of any risk factor
model. Thus, alpha is risk-adjusted return where “risk” is some measure of
the asset’s contribution to portfolio risk. In the past 10 to 15 years, the
Fama–French three-factor model—which contains size and value factors
besides the market beta factor—has become increasingly popular among
equity managers. Others use even more extensive multi-factor models
including various industry and style factors for equities, another set of
systematic factors for fixed income managers, and yet another set for hedge
fund managers. Whatever risk factors are used, significant average loadings
on any risk factor are viewed as evidence of a systematic risk tilt. As the
number of factors increase, there is ever less scope for alpha (alpha being
the return not explained by the various systematic factors included in the
model).

Other risk adjustment methods also adjust returns for the higher moments
of 
a 
distribution. 
(The 
mean—or 
expected 
return—and 
volatility 
are,
respectively, the first and second moments of a distribution. The third and
fourth 
moments 
measure 
the 
distribution’s 
asymmetry 
and 
fat 
tails,
respectively.) 
Yet 
other 
methods 
take 
into 
account 
varying 
liquidity
characteristics, but none of these measures captures all the dimensions of
risk.

Box 4.2. Riskless return—no longer so clear

Short-dated Treasury bills are the traditional proxy for the riskless
asset. Government debt issued in the government’s own currency was
long perceived as default free, thanks to a sovereign’s taxation power
and access to the printing press. Recently, markets have begun to
reassess the risks of inflation, sovereign default, and currency
depreciation in supposedly riskless assets. Inflation-indexed (“real”)
bonds are now available to eliminate inflation risk but they leave the
investor exposed to default risk as well as FX risk for foreign buyers.
The depreciation of the dollar since 2001 has made Treasuries
anything but riskless for their main holders, the Asian central banks.
At least the prospect of outright default seems more remote for the
U.S. than for many other countries. The fewer chances a fiscally
stretched government has to inflate, or devalue its debt through a
depreciating currency, the greater is its temptation to default. In most
countries, government bonds still have the lowest yields, but it is no
longer unthinkable to see government yields rising above high-quality
corporate yields. Indeed, even in developed markets, long-dated
interest rate swaps are increasingly trading below government yields,
and sovereign credit default swap spreads have dramatically increased
since 2008.

The time horizon also matters. Long-dated Treasuries are arguably a
more natural riskless asset for long-horizon investors, given the
uncertain reinvestment rate for short-dated bills. Pension funds match
their liabilities best by buying long-dated real or nominal bonds.

...
4.6 BIASED RETURNS

For many asset classes, returns may be positively or negatively biased over
a 
given 
historical 
sample. 
For 
active 
asset 
managers 
with 
voluntary
reporting, published returns are almost certainly upward biased. Section
11.4 reviews a host of selection biases such as survivorship bias and
backfill bias in the context of hedge fund return databases, but similar
caveats apply to the reported performance of other managers. Backtested
results of active strategies also suffer from overfitting and data-mining
biases, which also overstate published returns.

Whenever we observe exceptionally attractive historical returns, it is
healthy to adopt a skeptical approach. The financial industry has limited
incentives to emphasize this needed skepticism beyond printing required
disclaimers, while our innate tendencies for extrapolation and optimism
make 
most 
of 
us 
too 
easy 
prey 
for 
the 
upbeat 
marketing 
of 
past
performance.

...
4.7 NOTES

[1] The distinction between realized (ex post) and expected (ex ante) returns
should be crystal clear. Ex ante is Latin for “before the event”, ex post is
Latin for “after the event”. Unfortunately, unevenly applied terminology
can 
cloud 
the 
issue. 
For 
example, 
“high 
equity 
premium 
last 
year”
sometimes refers to realized equity market return over cash or bonds. I
prefer to use the term “realized excess return” instead—and only keep the
word “premium” for ex ante measures.

[2] 
Long 
data 
histories 
are 
necessary 
to 
make 
statistically 
significant
inferences of one-year returns, even assuming constant expected returns and
no structural changes (see Note 3 in Chapter 2). Assessing the statistical
significance of multi-year horizon returns would require much longer data
histories.

[3] Sharpe ratio and relative return investors: The information ratio is the
benchmark-oriented relative return manager’s counterpart to an absolute
return manager’s Sharpe ratio. Information ratio is the mean excess return
of a portfolio vs. its benchmark, divided by the tracking error (i.e., volatility
of that excess return). Sharpe ratio is sometimes computed as the ratio of
total return and its volatility, which is plain wrong; the return on a money
market asset should be subtracted from total returns. The ratio of total
return and its volatility is sometimes called the information ratio for hedge
funds, on the premise that their benchmark is zero (motivated by the
absolute return mandate).

Source notes. This chapter’s topics are discussed in more detail later in the
book.

...