5

Rational theories on expected return determination

• New academic views on expected return drivers are more
complex—and more realistic—than the neoclassical CAPM-and-
efficient-markets view.
• Expected return differentials across assets reflect rational
risk premia as well as market inefficiencies and supply–demand
effects.
• Instead of a single equity market factor, many rational risk
factors as well as liquidity and skewness characteristics appear to
influence expected asset returns.
• Risk premia are higher for assets or factors (e.g., equities,
carry strategies) that fare poorly in bad times, whereas safe haven
assets (e.g., government bonds) may even have negative risk
premia over cash.
• Expected returns can vary over time due to rationally time-
varying risk or risk aversion and due to investor irrationality and
sentiment.
• The efficient markets hypothesis has been challenged by
various anomalies and financial crises but its main implication—
that beating the market is very difficult—remains valid for most
investors.

This chapter reviews the revolution in academic thinking about expected
returns. Twenty-five years ago the consensus assumptions included
• a world with a single risk factor—the asset’s sensitivity to the
equity market (i.e., the CAPM beta);
• constant expected returns over time;
• investors care only about the means and variances of asset
returns;
• frictionless markets; and
• efficient markets/rational investors.

The current view is more complex but also more realistic. There are
• multiple risk factors (whose required rewards ultimately depend
on their covariation with “bad times)”;
• time-varying risk premia;
• skewness and liquidity preferences (liking lottery tickets and
liquid assets);
• supply–demand effects on asset prices; and
• 
market 
inefficiencies 
(due 
to 
investor 
irrationalities 
and/or
market frictions).

Behavioral finance and investor irrationalities will be discussed in the next
chapter. In case you are a practitioner thinking that rational investor models
are irrelevant or obsolete, you may be tempted to skip this chapter and
move directly to the next chapter.

Do this at your peril. You will miss many insights about the drivers of
expected asset returns—which I try to make as palatable and practitioner
friendly as I can. By reading both chapters, you may also find that the
debate between the efficient market camp and the behavioralists remains
healthy and has deepened our understanding of financial markets. Certainly,
neither side has a monopoly on “the whole truth”.

...
5.1 THE OLD WORLD

At the core of finance is always the present value relation that an asset’s
market price should equal its expected discounted cash flows. Investors set
prices so that the marginal cost of an asset (its price) equals its expected
marginal benefit (its expected discounted future payoff):
(5.1)

There are different types of expected cash flows. The most common are
promised coupons and principal payments of bonds, and dividends of
equities:
• Government bonds are typically assumed to be default free; thus
their expected cash flows equal promised cash flows. Other bonds
have uncertain cash flows that may reflect the possibility of default
(corporate bonds) or the future path of interest rates (mortgage-backed
securities or floating rate notes), for example.
• For equities, the sum of expected cash flows crucially reflects
the expected growth rate of dividends (or other cash distributions to
the shareholder).
• Although equity cash flows continue in perpetuity and bonds
may have very long maturities, this equation applies even without long
holding periods. Since the next period’s asset price should be priced in
a similar fashion, the current price reflects the expected discounted
sum of next period cash flow and next period market price.

However, the main topic of this book is the denominator of equation (5.1).
At the market level, discount rates are just another name for expected
returns. In equilibrium (i.e., if prices are fair), the discount rates investors
require for holding assets are the expected returns they can rationally
anticipate. Equilibrium market prices are set by supply and demand among
investors applying equation (5.1).

The discount rate or the expected return contains both compensation for
time and compensation for risk bearing. The return on the riskless asset
reflects only the former; short-term Treasury bills are typically used to
measure this riskless rate of return (in nominal terms). The expected excess
return of a given asset over the riskless rate is often called the (ex ante) risk
premium of that asset.

In 
the 
pre-Markowitz 
world, 
even 
uncertain 
cash 
flows 
were 
often
discounted 
using 
the 
riskless 
discount 
rate. 
This 
approach 
implicitly
assumes 
a 
zero-risk 
premium—a 
special 
case 
that 
applies 
only 
in 
an
unrealistic world of risk-neutral investors. Understanding the various risk
premia—“what influences expected asset returns or discount rates beyond
the riskless rate?”—has been the main question in academic finance for the
past 50 or 60 years. The capital asset pricing model (CAPM), originated by
Sharpe, Lintner, Mossin, and Treynor, was the profession’s first answer and,
for a long time, the principal one [1].

The CAPM can be based on various sets of assumptions. I will not derive
it formally here but show one traditional set of assumptions (that can later
be relaxed):
• 
one-period 
world 
(this 
implies 
a 
constant 
investment
opportunity set and constant risk premia over time);
• access to unlimited riskless borrowing/lending and tradable
risky assets;
• no taxes or transaction costs (i.e., frictionless markets);
• investors are rational mean variance optimizers (only caring
about means and covariances can be motivated by normally distributed
asset returns or by a quadratic utility function); and
• investors have homogeneous expectations (all agree about asset
means and covariances; all investors see the same picture).

These assumptions ensure that every investor holds the same portfolio of
risky assets, combining it with some amount, positive or negative, of the
riskless asset (this latter amount depends on the specific risk aversion of a
given investor). Moreover, these assumptions lead to the conclusion that the
holdings just described are optimal. Finally, in equilibrium, market clearing
requires that the risky asset portfolio demanded in common by all investors
equals the market portfolio of risky assets.

The 
CAPM’s 
asset-pricing 
implication 
is 
that 
assets 
with 
a 
higher
sensitivity to the market [2] should offer a higher expected return—see
equation (5.2), which is a simple rendition of the CAPM. Why? Investors
require compensation for the risk each asset contributes to their portfolio—
not for accepting an asset’s standalone risk. In a CAPM world where all
investors hold the same market portfolio of risky assets, assets with higher
market beta contribute more to portfolio risk:
(5.2)

While the CAPM’s assumptions, including the single-factor idea, turned
out to be too restrictive, one broad insight in CAPM remains valid in most
new models: only systematic risk is “priced” in the sense that it influences
expected asset returns. Realized returns reflect both common (systematic)
risk factors and asset-specific (idiosyncratic) risk. Risk premia compensate
investors for systematic risk that cannot be diversified away, whereas
idiosyncratic risk can be diversified away and does not warrant any risk
premium [3].

Box 5.1. Risk-based expected returns

As an illustration of a risk-based model of expected returns, the next
graph shows what expected excess returns CAPM would imply for
various asset classes if we use a global equity index as the risk factor.
(This kind of across-asset-class analysis is hardly the most common
use of CAPM. CAPM is mainly applied for single stocks or actively
managed portfolios and uses the local equity index as the “benchmark”
or market index.)

Even apart from the CAPM’s theoretical shortcomings, simply
estimating asset betas and the market risk premium is difficult. In
Figure 5.1, I estimate betas using monthly data from 1990 to 2009 and
assume a global market risk premium of 4% (over deposits). Each
asset’s expected excess return is, by CAPM assumption, proportional
to its beta. Only relatively liquid asset classes are included because
illiquid assets have notoriously understated betas.

The graph is only illustrative. Serious practitioners use more
complex risk models with several factors and have more advanced
techniques for estimating betas. Finally, despite the theoretical appeal
of CAPM, the empirical relation between betas and realized average
returns is weak.

Figure 5.1. Expected excess returns based on a risk model (global
equities as a single risk factor).

Source: Bloomberg.

...
5.2 THE NEW WORLD

...
5.2.1 Covariance with “bad times” is the key

The CAPM was a beautifully simple theory but it became clear over time
that 
it 
could 
not 
explain 
the 
observed 
behavior 
of 
asset 
markets. 
So
academics began to relax the model’s various simplifying assumptions. The
parallel to the evolution of modern corporate finance research from the
Modigliani–Miller theorems is clear.

There is little consensus as to which extension to the CAPM is most
needed, so I cover here several strands of literature. In the new thinking on
expected returns, multiple systematic factors, time-varying risk premia,
skewness 
and 
liquidity 
preferences, 
supply–demand 
effects, 
market
frictions, and investor irrationalities can all play a role [4]. (No single
model can capture all of these features. Theoretical models need to be
analytically tractable and they should be parsimonious. My survey will be
neither.)

Despite the diversity of new models, at least the rationally oriented
academic literature retains one key idea in its core, albeit subtly different
than in the old world. The asset price still equals expected discounted cash
flows, but in a world of uncertainty and time-varying expected returns,
equation (5.1) needs to be generalized. Using the new terminology:
(5.3)

where SDF is the stochastic discount factor; and x is the payoff (cash flow)
for asset i [5]. The term “stochastic” in SDF emphasizes the uncertainty in
time-varying discount rates. But the great intuition is that SDF is an index
of “bad times” and that the required risk premium for any asset (or a risk
factor) reflects its covariation with bad times. Investors are willing to pay
more—accept lower expected returns (i.e., lower risk premia)—for assets
that tend to do well in bad times. Conversely, investors require higher risk
premia for assets that tend to suffer in bad times. Here is a fundamental
generalization of equation (5.2) for any risk premium or ex ante excess
return:
(5.4)

The million dollar question is, of course, how to define bad times. Investors
care about more than just low market returns. Formally, bad times are
periods when investors’ marginal utility (MU) is high—when an extra
dollar in their pockets feels especially valuable. I might paraphrase U.S.
Supreme 
Court 
Justice 
Potter 
Stewart’s 
famous 
comment 
about
pornography: bad times are difficult to define but “I know it when I see it.”

What kinds of environments imply high marginal utility?

• Consumption-based asset-pricing models associate bad times
with negative consumption growth rates. The intuition of consumption
smoothing is powerful: an extra dollar when we are hungry is worth
more than when we are satiated [6].
• Recessions are often used to proxy for macroeconomic bad
times. Periods of rising and/or high unemployment, rising and/or high
inflation, 
or 
unexpected 
monetary 
policy 
tightening 
are 
other
macroeconomic states that may be associated with high MU.
• Although neoclassical models do not emphasize this, it seems
plausible that financial crises are important “high MU” environments,
especially if financial institutions have a major role in setting asset
prices. If we can equate bad times with stock market losses we get
back the old CAPM, but “bad times” are likely to be more multi-
dimensional. Sometimes other aspects of financial crises—a bond or
housing market selloff, vanishing liquidity, de-leveraging spirals, a
breakdown 
in 
financial 
intermediation, 
spiking 
volatility, 
high
correlations that limit diversification—boost MU even when stock
markets are relatively stable.
• 
The 
worst 
times 
are 
characterized 
by 
both 
financial 
and
economic turbulence. Table 5.1 lists some periods that, in Justice
Stewart’s spirit, were manifestly bad times. One might formalize the
definition but there is no (academic or practitioner) consensus on how
to do this. All 20th-century recessions could qualify but the period of
the Great Moderation was characterized by the absence of severe
economic downturns and, instead, an abundance of periodic financial
crises. The last two rows highlight episodes where major financial
turmoil triggered depression fears—echoes of 1929—but Fed easing
and/or bailouts saved the system yet again (and over time gave rise to
ever greater risk taking).
Table 
5.1. 
Prototypical 
bad 
times—both 
real 
economy 
and 
financial
markets suffer

Sources: Bloomberg, Haver Analytics, Ken French’s website.

The implications for asset pricing and expected returns are huge:
• On one hand, some safe haven assets like government bonds are
not 
only 
“good 
diversifiers”. 
They 
diversify 
best 
just 
when
diversification is most needed (1998H2, 2001–2002, 2007H2–2008)
and 
other 
diversifiers 
fail, 
they 
hedge 
equity 
markets 
best 
when
equities are suffering most, and they benefit from “flight-to-quality”
flows during financial crises. Safe haven assets may well warrant
negative risk premia (i.e., expected returns below the riskless rate [7]).
• On the other hand, various strategies with asymmetric payoffs
(positive carry trades, selling volatility and correlation, buying AAA
credits vs. government bonds) may be even riskier than their negative
skew and fat tails imply. The key point is the timing of losses: many
such strategies effectively sell (not buy!) lottery tickets that pay off
disproportionately during financial crises, just when MU is high. Thus
these strategies face losses just when the losses are most painful. The
coincidence of losses could reflect similar fundamental (tail) risk
exposures 
but 
also 
liquidity-induced 
and 
positioning-induced
correlation spikes (the latter were especially apparent in 1998, 2007,
and 2008).
• I show empirically that many strategies with the best Sharpe
ratios since the 1980s are of the second type. Their covariance with
MU is high: they tend to lose money in bad times. This feature can
largely explain their high Sharpe ratios. It is harder to explain the
performance of government bonds since the 1980s as an equilibrium
outcome, 
given 
the 
combination 
of 
a 
high 
Sharpe 
ratio 
and 
a
wonderful diversification/hedging role. As noted, the high in-sample
Sharpe ratios of Treasuries over that time frame likely reflect windfall
gains from unanticipated yield declines. Note that the Sharpe ratios of
Treasuries over periods ending in the early 1980s were very poor,
reflecting windfall losses from unanticipated yield increases—a mirror
image of the situation from the early 1980s to the present.
• Many practitioners define risk as unexpected losses, thereby
ignoring 
the 
environment 
in 
which 
losses 
occur. 
In 
contrast, 
for
academics, the timing of losses can determine riskiness as much as the
amount of losses does (correlations matter more than volatilities).

...
5.2.2 Multiple risk factors

Since we cannot empirically identify one “true” factor for bad times, it is
tempting to use multi-factor models. Robert Merton’s Intertemporal CAPM
and 
Stephen 
Ross’s 
Arbitrage 
Pricing 
Theory 
introduced 
multi-factor
models to finance theory as early as the 1970s. The empirical Fama–French
three-factor model, developed in the early 1990s, has probably replaced the
CAPM as the most popular factor model for equity investors.

Recall that, according to the CAPM, the ith asset’s expected excess
return, 
, is a product of its market beta, 
, and the market risk
premium, 
, so that:
(5.5)

β is the amount of systematic risk in any given asset (thus, it varies across
assets); and λ
M
is the market risk premium that is common to all assets. We
can further say that λ
M
reflects both the amount of risk in the overall market
(e.g., stock market volatility) and the price of risk (investor risk aversion).
Not surprisingly, CAPM’s stance that “only market risk matters, all other
risks can be diversified away” proved too restrictive. Empirical studies as
early as the 1960s indicated that there are other common risk factors (e.g.,
industry factors) that are so systematic that they cannot be fully diversified
away. It was still possible that such additional factors driving realized
returns would not influence expected returns (i.e., these risk factors might
not “be priced” in the sense of having nonzero risk premia), so the CAPM
prevailed. However, over time academics and practitioners came up with a
string of anomalies—evidence of dissimilar long-run average returns across
stock portfolios that were inconsistent with the CAPM. The tide really
turned when the seminal Fama–French (1992) study showed that a “value
factor” and a “size factor”—actually the book-to-market ratio and market
capitalization 
as 
equity 
characteristics, 
respectively, 
rather 
than 
factor
sensitivities—could explain the cross-sectional variation in average equity
returns better than a “market factor” could. Even worse for the CAPM, the
cross-sectional reward for bearing beta risk appears to have been negligible
or negative in recent decades.

If there are several common factors that generate undiversifiable risk,
then a multi-factor relation holds. If there are K systematic factors, the ith
asset’s expected excess return reflects its factor sensitivities 
and the factor risk premia (λ
1
, λ
2
, . . . , λ
K
). For illustration, here is a simple
two-factor case (K = 2) with equity market risk and inflation risk. The
expected excess return for any asset equals its equity beta times the equity
risk premium plus its inflation beta times the inflation premium:
(5.6)

where 
is the expected excess return of asset i; 
(beta) is asset i’s
sensitivity to factor j (here, j = 1 is equity market, and j = 2 is inflation); and
(lambda) is the factor risk premium (market price of risk) for factor j.
Realized per-period excess returns for any asset can be expressed as a
sum 
of 
the 
two 
systematic 
exposures 
(products 
of 
the 
asset’s 
factor
sensitivities and factor returns), plus an uncorrelated residual term (the part
unexplained by the systematic factors). Realized factor returns contain both
expected and unexpected components (λ + F).

Within the SDF framework, if we assume that the SDF is linearly related
to a set of common risk factors, then asset returns can be described by a
linear factor model. Moreover, the idea that the risk premium depends on
covariation with the SDF (bad times, high-MU periods) also applies to the
risk 
factors—not 
just 
to 
individual 
assets. 
Different 
sources 
of 
return
uncertainty can have different market prices.

If we view bad times as an underlying concept, the sign/size of each
factor’s market price of risk reflects its covariance with this meta-concept.
Alternatively, we can treat different dimensions of bad times (negative
growth, 
high 
inflation, 
financial 
crisis, 
illiquidity 
spiral, 
high
volatility/correlations, 
etc.) 
as 
distinct 
factors. 
Each 
factor 
defines 
a
different, though overlapping, set of high-MU periods that the average
investor cares about. Investors who bear these priced factor risks effectively
supply insurance to other investors against enduring losses in bad times and
earn a factor risk premium as a compensation for this.

Which factors?

Anything goes? Multi-factor models could include any factors, since theory
gives limited guidance. Intertemporal (multi-period) models provide some
direction. Merton’s Inter-temporal CAPM implies that priced factors other
than market beta should hedge against future changes in the investment
opportunity set. If investment opportunities vary over time, required returns
also depend on assets’ covariation with future investment opportunities.
Merton suggested the long bond rate as one natural candidate factor, since
all investors are exposed to the risk that they will not be able to invest at
current rates.

Empirical models are theory-free representations in which factors are
chosen to fit empirical asset return behavior; thus they are more prone to
data-mining bias even if they may be justified with some economic logic.
For example, the Fama–French value factor may reflect pronounced distress
risk and the size factor may reflect illiquidity—though competing rational
and irrational explanations exist. Both theoretical and empirical models
serve 
a 
purpose. 
Empirical 
factor 
models 
are 
statistically 
better 
at
explaining the cross-sectional and time series variation in asset returns, but
economic models couched in theory may explain why any factors that are
identified earn their risk premia.

Empirical models relate average returns to certain risk factor sensitivities
(covariances) or directly to certain asset characteristics (value and size as
noted above, carry, duration, or credit rating; etc.):
• One way to identify risk factors is to examine which factors are
effective at explaining realized return variation over time and then to
determine empirically if these factors are cross-sectionally “priced”;
that is, if assets with high exposures to the candidate factor have
significantly different average returns from assets with low exposures
to that factor.
• 
Although 
it 
may 
seem 
even 
more 
ad 
hoc 
to 
use 
asset
characteristics instead of factor sensitivities, the former are directly
observable 
and 
might 
be 
less 
noisy 
measures 
of 
true 
factor 
risk
exposures than historically estimated factor sensitivities.
• Often both approaches work empirically. For example, illiquid
stocks 
have higher average returns than liquid 
stocks; 
separately,
stocks whose returns covary more closely with a systematic “liquidity
factor” (i.e., stocks with high-liquidity betas) have higher average
returns than stocks with lower liquidity betas.

Factors 
with 
a 
strong 
theoretical 
basis 
include 
aggregate 
consumption
growth (extensively studied for 30 years, with limited empirical success),
investment growth (for production-based asset-pricing models) [8], as well
as overall labor income growth and idiosyncratic job risk (recall that for
many people the return on human capital is more important than the return
on financial capital).

Equity factors that are primarily empirical include the last two of the
three Fama–French factors (market beta, value, size) and often momentum
as a fourth factor (driven by return evidence rather than by any economic
risk story). The list could be extended, given growing evidence of cross-
sectional return predictability, using indicators like return reversals (both
short 
term 
and 
very 
long 
term), 
volatility, 
liquidity, 
distress, 
earnings
momentum, quality factors such as accruals, and corporate actions such as
asset growth and net issuance. Beyond equities, sensitivities to major asset
classes (interest rate risk and credit risk in fixed income, and housing, oil,
and dollar risks) are the most obvious factors to consider. The inflation
factor is especially important for bonds, and liquidity for other assets. This
chapter will not cover asset-pricing theories tailored for particular asset
classes, such as government bonds (term structure of interest rates), credits,
real estate, commodities, and currencies. I will briefly discuss such theories
in Chapters 8–13.

...
5.2.3 Time-varying risk premia

Single-period models such as the CAPM indirectly imply constant expected
returns over time. Other, more complex economic models often assume that
volatilities and other risk measures are constant over time, and the most
popular utility function implies constant relative risk aversion. No wonder,
then, that for a long time academics were happy to assume constant risk
premia and to estimate them using long-run average historical excess
returns.

Things started to change in the 1980s. Diermeier–Ibbotson–Siegel (1984)
made an early and largely ignored, but prescient, attempt to introduce time-
varying risk premia from a purely theoretical standpoint. They argued that,
in 
the 
indefinitely 
long 
run, 
stock 
prices 
could 
not 
grow 
faster 
than
earnings, which could not grow faster than GDP adjusted for net new
issues. The risk premium is the growth rate of earnings, plus the dividend
yield, minus the riskless rate. Since all these variables are dynamic, the risk
premium is time varying.

However, empirical evidence drove most of the change in thinking. It
became 
increasingly obvious that ex ante real interest rates were 
not
constant. Robert Shiller (1981) challenged the prevailing paradigm with
evidence of excess volatility in financial markets. These patterns hint at
irrationality but could be rationally justified with timevarying risk premia
(because discount rate variation is another cause of volatility, in addition to
the variation of expected cash flows that Shiller focused on). Elsewhere,
academic journals began to fill with models of time-varying volatilities,
while the introduction of stock and bond option markets confirmed that
implied volatilities vary over time. Long-horizon studies presented evidence
of mean reversion in stock prices, although it turned out that such long-
horizon 
analysis 
is 
plagued 
with 
econometric 
problems. 
Fama–French
(1989) documented countercyclical patterns in expected returns for both
stocks and bonds, in line with required risk premia being high in “bad
times” such as business cycle troughs. Although the focus soon turned to
cross-sectional 
expected 
returns 
across 
equities, 
new 
evidence 
of
predictable time variation in stock and bond returns was uncovered through
the 1990s. Near the turn of the millennium, the equity market boom and
bust reinforced the view that expected returns vary over time—for rational
or irrational reasons. Practitioners became much more interested in ex ante
return measures such as valuation ratios or dividend discount models.
Several studies of the equity risk premium also shifted the academic focus
from historical average returns to more forward-looking measures.

On the theoretical side, multi-period models make it plain that constant
expected returns are a special case—albeit one that has the benefit of
analytic tractability. Some early models made an ad hoc link between the
risk aversion coefficient and equity market returns or the current health of
the economy, but only habit formation models (discussed below) could
formally derive wealth-dependent risk aversion (WDRA) from consumption
utilities.

Theoretical models that imply time-varying risk premia can be quite
complex. As an empirical shortcut, conditional (point-in-time) multi-factor
models have become popular ways of allowing time-varying risks or time-
varying risk aversion. In conditional models, βs (factor sensitivities) or λs
(factor risk premia) can be specified as linear functions of any set of
predictors (conditioners) that are assumed to be in investors’ information
sets.

Time-varying risks

Rolling estimates of second moments (historical volatilities, correlations,
and factor sensitivities) are simple proxies of ex ante risks. In the past 20
years, academics have tried to improve on them by developing theoretical
models of stochastic volatilities, simple linear models that predict future
volatilities with a set of conditioners, more complex regime-switching
models, and most importantly, a variety of so-called GARCH models.
Opening up the acronym GARCH, to read “generalized autoregressive
conditional heteroskedasticity”, scares many investors, but the main idea is
simply that volatility is not constant but varies predictably over time. Initial
models focused on the idea that volatility comes in clusters—large shocks
tend to be followed by large shocks and uneventful periods by more of the
same. Despite persistence, volatility tends to gradually decay to a “normal”
level from abnormal highs or lows. We have seen this pattern occur
repeatedly in the financial market turmoil of 2007–2010. Extensions to
GARCH-based volatility estimates included longer memories and return
asymmetries 
(higher 
equity 
volatility 
in 
down 
markets, 
interest 
rate
volatility depending on the rate level, etc.). GARCH models were also
broadened to estimate ex ante correlations and factor sensitivities.

Time-varying risks are natural predictors of time-varying risk premia.
However, models that link conditional volatilities and conditional mean
returns have had limited success. Other empirical attempts to uncover a
positive risk–reward relation between conditional equity market volatility
and subsequent equity market return have had mixed results. While it is
clear that high volatility tends to depress current equity prices, it is not clear
that high volatility predicts above-average near-term returns for the equity
market. I will describe some of this time series evidence in Chapter 19 as
well as evidence on the cross-sectional relation between volatilities and
equity returns.

Time-varying risk aversion

The Fama–French (1989) evidence that expected stock and bond returns are
especially high near business cycle troughs is exactly in line with the
“covariance with bad times” idea. In Section 5.2.1, I expressed this idea as a
cross-sectional prediction: assets that perform especially poorly in bad
times should offer higher risk premia than assets that help us through bad
times. In a time series context, we might then expect to see generally higher
ex ante risk premia in bad times such as cyclical troughs or financial crises.
However, this idea is not consistent with the widely used CRRA (constant
relative risk aversion) utility function where risk appetite is independent of
the investor’s wealth level. (This utility function is widely used because it is
mathematically tractable—not because it is realistic.) Only by incorporating
a subsistence level into this utility function can we make risk aversion and
required 
risk 
premia 
time-varying. 
When 
investors 
are 
closer 
to 
a
subsistence level, any losses become less tolerable (see Figure 5.2).
Formal models are quite harsh in that agents really must ensure that they
don’t fall below the subsistence level or they face extinction (the academic
term is “infinite negative utility)”. In developed economies, subsistence
level is not really linked to starvation or other causes of physical extinction,
but to the (still painful) loss of the standard of living one is accustomed to.
Despite this caveat, to me the insight that people or institutions become
more risk averse when they become poorer captures something essential in
investor behavior. In an institutional setting, breaching a subsistence level
might have an analogue in the institution’s bankruptcy, a trader reaching his
or her terminal stop-loss limit or the point of an unaffordable margin call, a
pension 
fund’s 
minimum 
acceptable 
funding 
ratio, 
or 
a 
financial
intermediary’s binding capital constraint.

The presence of a broadly defined subsistence level makes investors’
relative risk aversion vary with their wealth level and prompts them to act
like someone trading a portfolio insurance strategy. When people feel
wealthy (have a high cushion over the subsistence level) they can afford to
take large risks. But if their wealth falls close to the subsistence level their
risk aversion rises exponentially and they must shift their holdings to the
riskless asset. Because falling aggregate wealth pushes many investors
simultaneously closer to their subsistence levels, wealth-dependent risk
aversion (WDRA) can have highly self-reinforcing effects on asset prices,
especially crashes. Greater risk appetite after rising wealth and greater risk
aversion after falling wealth creates a feedback loop (a virtuous or vicious
circle) that contributes to boom–bust cycles and that makes asset returns
more predictable and volatile than they would be had CRRA been a realistic
assumption about investor utility.

Figure 5.2. Stylized illustration of wealth-dependent risk aversion.
However, the idea of WDRA is hard to model in a tractable fashion,
especially in a multi-period context. The Campbell–Cochrane (1999) paper,
“By force of habit”, describes the best known finance model that exhibits
WDRA. 
Habit 
formation 
captures 
the 
idea 
that 
past 
living 
standards
influence the utility we derive from current consumption. Habit can be
expressed as a time-varying subsistence level. Campbell and Cochrane
model the subsistence level as a weighted average of past consumption, in
the 
spirit 
of 
habituation 
or 
adaptation. 
Consumers 
derive 
utility 
from
surplus consumption (excess of current consumption over subsistence level)
and become exceedingly risk averse when this cushion becomes small.

In a broader context, habit formation and a time-varying subsistence level
have evolutionary origins in human adaptiveness. People can adapt to new
situations partly because their expectations adjust over time based on past
experiences (both their own and neighbors’ living standards). This is the
best explanation of the apparent puzzle that various surveys find little
change in self-reported happiness over the past half a century while material
standards of living have dramatically improved [9].

The 
Campbell–Cochrane 
habit 
formation 
model 
is 
exceptionally
successful in explaining various empirical puzzles, including the observed
predictability (countercyclical time variation) in stock and bond market
excess returns. Habit formation models imply changing tastes (for risk) over
time. Rationally oriented economists tend to dislike the assumption of
changing 
tastes, 
while 
behavioral 
economists 
embrace 
this 
idea 
(e.g.,
wealth-dependent market sentiment which would be hard to distinguish
from WDRA).
It is important to understand that if time-varying expected returns reflect
rational variation in risk premia, it does not follow that every investor
should try to take advantage of them. For most investors these fluctuations
do 
not 
give 
opportunities 
for 
utility-enhancing 
active 
trading 
because
periods of high expected returns coincide with bad times and abnormally
high risk aversion. However, a minority of cool-headed investors who in
some relevant characteristics differ significantly from the market (long
horizon, deep pockets—Warren Buffett and sovereign wealth funds come to
mind) may be well served by contrarian market-timing strategies or at least
by a disciplined rebalancing regime [10].

Unfortunately, the theoretical literature on time-varying risk premia is
largely separate from the studies explaining the cross-sectional variation in
expected asset returns. Fama’s (1991) survey called for a coherent story that
(1) 
relates 
the 
cross-sectional 
properties 
of 
expected 
returns 
to 
time
variation in expected returns, and (2) relates the behavior of expected
returns to the real economy. The search is still on—and some answers may
need to be found outside the rational paradigm.

...
5.2.4 Incorporating skewness preferences

One way to extend the single-factor CAPM is to relax the assumption that
people only care about mean and variance. The idea that people have
skewness preferences (they are willing to pay up for lottery-type payoffs or
for downside protection) is one of the key themes of this book. A growing
literature studies the observed asymmetries in asset returns as well as their
pricing 
implications 
(including 
pricing 
of 
options 
whose 
payoffs 
are
inherently skewed).

If the SDF is linearly related to both market return and its variance, we
get a three-moment conditional CAPM where expected asset returns reflect
their conditional covariance with market return and with market variance
(conditional co-skewness). In this model, the key aspect of skewness is not
asymmetry in the standalone returns of a given asset but its contribution to
the market portfolio’s skewness (i.e., the co-skewness of the asset with the
market). All else equal, people prefer assets that tend to earn high returns
during volatile markets and thus make their portfolio more positively
skewed (lottery ticket like). Such assets are rare, however, and people are
willing to pay a high price for this characteristic. Conversely, people dislike
negative skewness and require extra ex ante reward for holding assets—
often volatility selling or carry trades—that perform poorly during volatile
markets (and thereby make their portfolio more negatively skewed).

More behavioral considerations need to be invoked to explain the reward
for assets’ standalone skewness. Some authors simply assume that investors
prefer assets with lottery-like payoffs while others argue that overweighting
of low-probability events can make skewness “priced”. More on these
questions in Sections 6.2 and 19.4.

...
5.2.5 Investor irrationality and rational learning

The next chapter covers investor irrationality in detail; here I make brief
remarks on rational learning. Rational expectations, a key paradigm in
economics and finance since the 1970s, has been increasingly challenged
over the past decade. Rational expectations involve making an optimal
forecast that uses all available information—there should be no systematic
(predictable) 
forecasting 
errors. 
Rational 
investors 
have 
correct 
beliefs
about 
the 
probability 
distribution 
they 
face 
(which 
implies 
“Bayesian
updating” when processing new information) and make decisions like
expected utility maximizers. It is common to assume a stable structural
model whose structure agents know. More realistic hypotheses allow a
time-varying structure and agents rationally learning about it. Such settings
can explain the observed predictability of markets or apparently biased
expectations, such as 
the well-known 
phenomenon in which investors
underpredicted inflation in the 1970s and then overpredicted it in the 1980s.
One need not resort to irrationality to explain these behaviors.

Brav–Heaton 
(2002) 
stress 
the 
mathematical 
similarity 
between
behavioral finance models (investors who are irrational but possess correct
information about market variables and economic structures) and learning
models (investors who are completely rational but possess substantially
incomplete information). The similarity is not just a coincidence but is
related to the limits of arbitrage. Both in theory and in the real world,
irrationality and incompleteness of information may be highly correlated.
Where information is more complete, arbitrage opportunities are often
taken advantage of, and irrationality-induced anomalies are less likely to
survive.

...
5.2.6 Other determinants of expected returns

Supply–demand factors

In economic theories supply and demand are central concepts, but in
neoclassical finance theories they are not, thanks to arbitrage arguments.
Arbitrage between assets that are perfect substitutes makes demand curves
for specific, non-unique assets flat (horizontal). Thus the CAPM implies
virtually flat demand curves for individual stocks because their diversifiable
risk can be ignored (investors act as if they were risk neutral with regards to
diversifiable risk). The market will price assets so that the expected returns
on assets with similar risks are equal. If any particular asset should offer a
higher 
expected 
return 
due 
solely 
to 
the 
increase 
in 
the 
quantity
outstanding, investors will soon arbitrage away such profit opportunities.
Arbitrage is possible because assets are “not unique works of art” but have
close counterparts in other assets or mixes of other assets (Scholes, 1972).
If 
there 
are 
perfect 
substitutes 
and 
frictionless 
markets, 
buying 
a
highexpected-return asset while selling a substitute with a lower expected
return constitutes a riskless arbitrage.

Subsequent empirical studies disputed the notion that perfect substitutes
exist. Demand effects may play a key role in explaining time-varying risk
premia, given the lack of substitutes for market risk exposures. Even the
substitutability of single stocks can be challenged. A key example is the
S&P 500 inclusion effect—the finding that new entries to the S&P 500
index experience a sudden and persistent price jump, presumably due to
new buying pressure from index funds. Shleifer (1986) argued that if stocks
have horizontal demand curves, no price impact is expected, but if demand
curves are downward sloping, the rightward shift in the demand curve
implies a sudden price increase, consistent with the evidence. Later research
shows that the degree of substitutability varies (some stocks to be included
have close counterparts, while others have much lower correlations—and
thus have greater arbitrage risk). Stocks lacking close substitutes experience
higher price jumps upon inclusion into the S&P 500. Still, index funds are
expected by their investors to hold every stock in the S&P 500 index and
some price pressure effect should be observed for any stock added to that
index, no matter how many close substitutes the stock has.

These findings are interesting by themselves but they also have a broader
message. 
If 
asset 
demand 
curves 
slope 
downwards 
(due 
to 
imperfect
substitutability), shifts in asset supplies can influence prices and expected
returns. Scarcity may boost current asset prices and reduce expected returns
while abundance may do the opposite. Arbitrage does mitigate the supply–
demand effects on asset prices and expected returns (especially among
stocks 
with 
close 
substitutes) 
but 
because 
market 
frictions 
exist 
and
arbitrage is not riskless, it does not fully eliminate them.

Supply effects—examples

• 
Shorter 
run 
supply 
influences 
are 
especially 
notable 
for
commodities that lack substitutes. A sudden shortage can cause sharp
upward spikes in certain commodity prices.
• Another setting where scarcity may be important is the case of
riskless assets where financial intermediaries cannot affect the net
supply of demanded assets.
• 
Persistent 
fiscal 
surpluses, 
bond 
buybacks, 
and 
the
prospective 
scarcity 
of 
Treasuries 
widened 
U.S. 
swap–
government 
spreads 
to 
record-wide 
levels 
in 
2000–2001,
especially for ultra-long bonds. In the United Kingdom, long gilts
became 
even 
more 
expensive 
due 
to 
supportive 
supply 
and
demand factors.
• The most actively traded bonds often become “special”
in the repo market, having financing rates 100 bp or more below
general collateral rates, when “shorts” cannot borrow sufficient
amounts of the bond.
• Even with stocks, there are occasions where an issuer has
enough monopoly power to create (deliberate or accidental) scarcity. A
well-known example is the Palm/3Com case, in which, near the peak
of the dot.com mania, 3Com spun off its subsidiary Palm, selling 5%
of its shares in the open market and promising the rest later. Palm
instantly 
acquired 
a 
greater 
total 
market 
capitalization 
than 
its
corporate parent 3Com, implying that the stub (3Com ex Palm) had a
negative value. The Law of One Price clearly did not apply. Too few
shares of Palm were available for arbitrageurs to take advantage of the
opportunity (to sell Palm shares and buy 3Com shares, earning a large
riskless 
profit). 
Once 
further 
Palm 
shares 
became 
available, 
this
anomaly disappeared.
Demand effects—examples

• Demographic developments may have a significant impact on
asset prices but the results are controversial. The high proportion of
prime-age savers (40 to 60-year-olds) in the population may have
contributed to the 1990s “baby-boomer rally” in the stock market.
Similar considerations have led to fears of falling prices for risky
assets when baby-boomers retire.
• 
The 
savings 
glut 
story 
was 
one 
key 
explanation 
of 
the
“conundrum” of low bond yields in the 2000s. Some controversial
estimates suggest that foreign investor (mainly Asian central banks)
demand for U.S. Treasuries reduced Treasury yields by more than 100
bp and other bond yields (close substitutes) by somewhat less.
• New assets may be structurally cheap until they find their
natural home. Investor demand for inflation-linked bonds was quite
limited following their introduction in 1997. The U.S. Treasury’s
hopes of cost savings—avoiding the inflation risk premium by issuing
“real” rather than nominal bonds—were soon quashed. Inflation risk
premia apparently had become tiny by 1997 and in the early years
TIPS had to offer a large illiquidity or novelty premium to attract
investors. 
Gradually 
investor 
interest 
in 
TIPS 
grew 
and 
the
illiquidity/novelty premium decayed. Yet in 2008 de-leveraging and
scant institutional demand made TIPS again very cheap for a short
while.
• Investor positioning matters, especially during de-leveraging
episodes. However, commentary about overcrowded trades is often too
simplistic. Some forget that tautologically for every buyer there is a
seller, so net active positions always amount to zero. When desired net
buying wanes, market prices need to fall to attract new buyers. More
meaningfully, overcrowding refers to situations where levered traders
—the 
least 
reliable 
asset 
holders—have 
concentrated 
positions 
or
where the whole financial market or a certain sector is exceptionally
levered. In such situations, any trigger may lead to a mass rush toward
the exit and to vicious cycles of liquidations and further price falls. A
liquidity drought is the possible final outcome of such a cycle.
• The wide yield gap between Treasury debt and top-rated money
market deposits or corporate bonds used to be one example of market
segmentation 
caused 
by 
investor 
regulation 
or 
preferred 
habitats.
Another example is the kink between the yields and long-run average
returns of BBB-rated and BB-rated bonds—the borderline between
investment-grade and speculative-grade ratings. Many investors are
only allowed to hold investment-grade bonds; this constraint seems to
boost the long-run return of BB-rated bonds.
• Market segmentation effects may be even more pronounced
across countries given that the liberalization of foreign capital flows is
incomplete. The full integration of all countries into global markets is
a hoped-for outcome, not a reality.
Market frictions and illiquidity premia

The impact of supply–demand factors—and of investor irrationalities—on
asset prices is made possible by market frictions. Frictions related to
illiquidity, funding constraints, and trading costs, as well as counterparty
risk, agency concerns, and other information problems can be first-order
important, as the 2008 experience shows. Bearish expectations, elevated
risk, and risk aversion do not alone explain the distressed price levels of
securitized 
bonds 
and 
other 
assets. 
Many 
financial 
intermediaries 
and
investors became forced sellers as market frictions prevented them and
other investors from taking advantage of good deals or nearly riskless
arbitrage opportunities. Opportunities that appeared compelling over the
long horizon could not be taken due to the possibility that further de-
levering and related mark-to-market volatility would make the investment
positions unsustainable over the short run.

A diverse literature on market frictions explains why asset prices might
deviate 
from 
fair 
values 
or 
respond 
sluggishly 
to 
new 
information.
However, few asset-pricing models relate asset risk premia to market
frictions 
such 
as 
funding 
and 
liquidity 
constraints. 
Garleanu–Pedersen
(2009a) propose a model in which the CAPM risk premium is boosted
when binding funding constraints make capital scarce, while Acharya–
Pedersen 
(2005) 
have 
adjusted 
the 
CAPM 
to 
include 
liquidity-related
premia.

Illiquidity is the most important market friction. Early studies of liquidity
premia 
focused 
on 
the 
cost 
(rather 
than 
the 
risk) 
of 
illiquidity—they
observed that greater trading costs when buying and selling assets would
reduce expected net returns. Later studies considered a liquidity factor as a
systematic exposure that may be priced. Empirical studies identified a
systematic liquidity factor—commonality of returns for assets with high
“illiquidity betas”—and showed that both the illiquidity characteristic and
the liquidity factor appear to be priced. This is not surprising given that
sudden liquidity droughts tend to coincide with bad times. These illiquidity-
related premia appear to raise the expected returns of certain alternative
asset classes as well as less liquid pockets of traditional asset classes, such
as corporate bonds and small-cap equities. Illiquidity premia are hardly
constant over time; they apparently were bid down to near zero by early
2007 and then rose sky high during the 2008 liquidity drought.

Disagreement and information asymmetries

Another 
CAPM 
assumption—homogeneous 
expectations—is 
obviously
unrealistic, but this was a very convenient modeling device. In the past
decade, disagreement models showed how differences in investor beliefs
can 
influence 
financial 
markets 
through 
several 
channels: 
gradual
information flow, limited attention, and heterogeneous views. Disagreement
is especially important for explaining the high level of trading volume, but
it also can help explain correlation or volatility risk premia as well as some
cross-sectional patterns in equity returns. For example, high levels of
disagreement and short-selling constraints together predict relatively low
equity returns because overvalued stocks cannot be shorted and tend to be
held by the most optimistic investors.

Asymmetric information refers to situations in which one party is better
informed than the other, leading to so-called principal–agent problems
(including moral hazard, adverse selection, conflict of interest). Vayanos–
Woolley 
(2010) 
show 
that 
delegated 
asset 
management 
can 
cause
momentum patterns. As investors (principals) try to learn about a manager’s
(agent’s) skill from his past performance and effectively chase returns, the
resulting fund flows push prices away from fair values, inducing short-term
momentum and long-term reversal patterns.

...
5.3 DETOUR: A BRIEF SURVEY OF THE EFFICIENT
MARKETS HYPOTHESIS

Before turning to behavioral finance, it is appropriate to briefly survey the
efficient markets hypothesis (EMH). The classic statement from Fama
(1970) is that markets are informationally efficient if “prices reflect all
available information”. The EMH is also closely tied to the assumption of
investor rationality.

The main practical implication of the EMH is investors’ inability to
consistently 
beat 
the 
market. 
Why? 
Competition 
among 
many 
profit-
seeking agents eliminates any easy pickings. Active management is a zero-
sum game even before costs; after trading costs and fees it is a negative-
sum game (this observation is mathematically true regardless of whether the
market is efficient). Empirical analyses unequivocally confirm that most
managers 
underperform 
passive 
indices 
after 
fees 
and 
leave 
open 
the
possibility that winners have just been lucky. People’s innate optimism and
the financial industry’s marketing machines have been able to muddle these
messages, thereby slowing the lure of passive investing.

In its early years, the EMH was often equated with the random walk
hypothesis (RWH). The ideas are closely linked. According to the RWH,
aggressive 
competition 
among 
market 
participants 
to 
exploit 
any
predictable patterns makes price changes fully random and unpredictable.
All news is instantly incorporated into market prices. However, the EMH
allows time variation in rational risk premia whereas the RWH assumes the
special 
case 
of 
constant 
expected 
returns. 
Thus, 
evidence 
of 
return
predictability only rejects the RWH—not the EMH. More generally, Fama
stresses that only a joint hypothesis of market efficiency and a particular
asset-pricing model is testable. If the joint hypothesis is rejected it can
reflect the failure of either part. Indeed, Fama raised the possibility of time-
varying expected returns (return predictability) even before the empirical
studies of Shiller and others challenged the joint hypothesis of EMH and
constant expected returns.

Grossman–Stiglitz (1980) pointed out that in the presence of information-
gathering and trading costs, markets cannot be perfectly efficient. Some
degree of inefficiency is needed to motivate information gathering and
trading. A variation on this theme notes that general overconfidence may
lead 
to 
more 
information 
gathering 
than 
is 
cost-effective 
and 
thus 
to
markets that are more efficient than is economically warranted. A practical
compromise argues that although markets are not quite efficient, it is so
difficult to beat the market that for most investors it is best to act as if they
were efficient.

One interesting newcomer is Andrew Lo’s adaptive markets hypothesis
(2004), which begins to apply evolutionary and ecological principles to
financial markets. So far, it is not a disciplined theory but a collection of
interesting ideas, such as the following. Market relationships are inherently
less stable than fixed physical laws. Human interactions, such as market
participants’ 
copying 
successful 
strategies, 
lead 
to 
complex 
feedback
effects. Asset prices may thus reflect the number and nature of investor
groups in the market ecology. Greater competition in one area will deplete
profits but also reduce the population, thereby reducing the competition and
possibly starting a new cycle of renewed profitability. Aggregate risk
preferences will vary with the relative sizes and preferences of various
groups in the market ecology. Recent market experiences will, through
natural selection, influence the current investor population’s composition
and aggregate risk preferences. Lo argues that various apparently irrational
behavioral traits could reflect our ancestral behavior having not yet had
time to adapt to modern contexts, so that individuals adapt to a changing
environment through simple, and ultimately incorrect and unprofitable,
heuristics (such as naive extrapolation of the recent past).

My take is that changing ecology tends to make markets more efficient
over time—although not in a straight line, as the experience of 2008 shows.
Active market participation has shifted from individuals to institutions and,
among institutions, from traditional managers to hedge funds. Combined
with the computer/Internet revolution, these shifts seem to raise the relative
size 
of 
the 
smart 
money 
share 
in 
the 
ecology 
and 
thus 
the 
level 
of
competitiveness and market efficiency. As a result of growing arbitrage
capital and leverage, markets probably grew more microefficient before
2008, 
while 
arguably 
becoming 
macro-inefficient, 
given 
the 
broad
underpricing of risks [11]. In 2007–2009, risk aversion returned with a
vengeance. Amidst de-leveraging and dwindling arbitrage capital, micro-
inefficiencies 
(relative 
mispricings) 
ballooned 
and 
expected 
macro-risk
premia shifted quickly from historic lows to multi-decade highs.

Recent criticism of the EMH

Besides “anomalies” (patterns of return predictability that are not easily
explained by rational models), the crash of 1987, the 1999–2002 tech
bubble and bust, and the 2006–2009 boom–bust period have been major
challenges to the EMH. In 2008–2009 some critics went further and blamed
the EMH for being one cause of the crisis. They blamed widespread belief
in the EMH, and more loosely “market fundamentalism”, for the laissez
faire attitude of policymakers and regulators: letting leverage and asset
booms 
grow 
unchecked 
and 
allowing 
ever 
more 
complex 
financial
instruments 
and 
questionable 
sales 
practices 
flourish 
without 
restraint,
under the cover that the market would inevitably get the prices of these
securities right. Other criticisms come as though out of a scattergun: some
attack the classical notion that competitive markets are inherently self-
stabilizing, others blame the Fed’s asymmetric policy responses, while
others fault the use of normal distribution and VaR-based risk management
in a world where fat tails dominate. All of these criticisms are only
tangentially related to the EMH, yet some of the critics do not seem to
realize that.

To me, a fair conclusion is that recent events have undermined the
validity of the EMH’s main idea—that market prices are always “right”
(near 
the 
fair 
value)—but 
have 
underlined 
the 
validity 
of 
its 
main
implication 
for 
most 
investors—that 
beating 
the 
markets 
is 
extremely
difficult (no free lunches).

It is ironic that while the EMH is seen as one scapegoat for the 2008
crisis, behavioral finance has survived unscathed, with its reputation even
enhanced. On this topic critics apparently focus on policymakers’ and
regulators’ apparent faith in the EMH, while ignoring the mistakes made by
banks and investors. If the financial industry carried an academic banner in
recent decades, it was certainly not for the EMH but for behavioral finance,
given the promise that the latter holds for profit-making opportunities.

Critics of the EMH often use as a straw man the most extreme version of
the hypothesis, a version that not even the most ardent proponents of the
EMH subscribe to any more, if they ever did. Although the EMH paradigm
has faced a vigorous challenge from behavioral finance, there is no doubt
that the EMH has been a powerful organizing principle for theoretical and
empirical work in finance that has improved our understanding of asset
returns.

...
5.4 NOTES

[1] It is perhaps useful for intuition to rearrange equation (5.1) to show that
1 + Expected return = Expected future cash flows ÷ Their current cost
(market price). This is only a linear approximation, however, if expected
returns 
are 
uncertain. 
I 
ignore 
nonlinear 
“Jensen’s 
inequality” 
terms
throughout this book because their empirical impact tends to be small.

[2] This sensitivity or “beta” is the simple regression coefficient of asset
returns on market returns (typically the U.S. equity market). It is also the
ratio of the covariance of an asset with the market to the variance of the
market 
itself, 
and 
under 
CAPM 
assumptions 
it 
measures 
the 
asset’s
marginal contribution to portfolio risk. Covariance between an asset and the
market is the correlation between the two, multiplied by the standard
deviation of both the asset and the market.

[3] Here is a more modern statement of CAPM’s key insight (Campbell,
2000, p. 1515): “If all investors are single-period mean variance optimizers,
then the market portfolio is mean variance efficient, which implies a beta-
pricing 
relation 
between 
all 
assets 
and 
the 
market 
portfolio.” 
This
formulation stresses the mean variance efficiency of market portfolios and a
consequent linear risk–reward relation. It leaves open the specification of
the unobservable market portfolio. Most of the empirical work on CAPM
has focused on the U.S. equity market as its proxy. The market portfolio
was later broadened to include global equities and other risky asset classes.

[4] In the rational framework, the expected return equation (5.2) can be
extended 
to 
include 
multiple 
risk 
factors, 
possibly 
with 
time-varying
amounts or prices of risk. Irrational stories may be better viewed in the
context of equation (5.1), with a distinction between the market price and a
perceived fair price. The market price can exceed the fair price if investors
are 
overoptimistic 
when 
predicting 
future 
cash 
flows 
or 
excessively
complacent, requiring insufficient compensation for risk (too low a discount
rate). The perceived fair price may be based on a valuation model or an
active discretionary view.

[5] Wonkish: Equation (5.3) requires very weak assumptions. The existence
of an SDF (pricing kernel) that relates payoffs to market prices for all assets
follows from the absence of arbitrage opportunities. Further assumptions
about the economy’s structure produce more specific results than equation
(5.3). For example, the SDF can be related to the marginal utility of
consumption—as 
discussed 
in 
the 
main 
text—or 
asset 
returns 
can 
be
described by a linear factor model—including single-factor models’ CAPM
(equity market return as the only risk factor) or consumption CAPM
(aggregate consumption growth rate as the only risk factor). If we assume a
linear relation between the SDF and the market return (plus the existence of
a riskless asset), we get CAPM.

General equilibrium models make assumptions about preferences and
production technology to derive optimal asset demands. In equilibrium,
expected 
returns 
adjust 
until 
all 
wealth 
is 
invested 
in 
the 
production
processes. Most equilibrium models ignore the production side by assuming
an exchange economy with one consumption good and then focus on the
preferences of a representative agent who maximizes the expected utility of
lifetime consumption. The prototypical case involves time-separable utility
(only current and future consumption matter, not past consumption) and
constant relative risk aversion (the same proportion of wealth is invested in
the risky asset at all wealth levels). In equilibrium, asset prices are set so
that the consumer holds all the assets (market clearing) and is indifferent to
buying or selling a small unit of any asset. Such optimizing behavior
implies the fundamental valuation equation (5.3), that asset price is equal to
the expected product of a future payoff and the SDF.

[6] A common formal specification assumes a representative agent and
time-separable utility of consumption. Then the SDF equals an impatience
factor times a ratio of MU next period over MU today (where MU is the
marginal utility of one additional unit of consumption). The latter ratio is
called the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution—the rate at which
investors are willing to substitute one unit of consumption today for one
unit of consumption next period. This relation determines the theoretical
level of the real riskless rate.
[7] A caveat is in order. Safe haven characteristics can be unstable, like
other correlations. Government bonds have been excellent safe haven assets
since the late 1990s, but they were anything but safe havens during the
inflationary recessions of the 1970s (see Chapter 7).

[8] One interesting newcomer is “An alternative three-factor model” by
Chen–Novy-Marx–Zhang (2010). Loosely motivated by Tobin’s q-theory,
the authors use three factors: the market, corporate investment (return gap
between stocks with a low and high investment/ assets ratio), and return on
assets (return gap between stocks with a high and low return on assets). The
model can better explain a wide spectrum of cross-sectional anomalies than
the Fama–French model.

[9] 
Actually 
the 
Campbell–Cochrane 
model 
uses 
“external 
habit” 
for
tractability reasons: People adapt to general living standards rather than to
their personal experience (“internal habit”). This idea is known as “keeping
up with the Joneses” and is consistent with evidence that peer comparisons
matter hugely for happiness, perhaps more than actual wealth levels. As an
aside, smart happiness researchers note from an evolutionary perspective
that humans are not designed to be happy but to pursue happiness—
including wealth and status. Unfortunately, such a pursuit partly promotes
unhappiness. Discontent with our current lot gives us the drive for absolute
and 
relative 
success—an 
evolutionarily 
useful 
trait. 
However, 
setting
(unrealistically) high expectations and choosing (too) challenging peer
benchmarks raise the bar but also lead to frequent disappointments.

[10] Cochrane (2007) argues that discount rate variation emphasizes the
role of the average investor compared with the marginal investor, who is
central in neoclassical finance models. The elusive marginal investor (often
a smart arbitrageur) sets asset prices when new information arrives and
modest, if any, new positions are needed to move the asset price to a new
equilibrium that incorporates the new information. In contrast, discount
rates (factor risk premia) reflect the average demands of all investors. The
market’s expected return for an asset reflects a wealth-weighted average of
its participants’ expected returns. Thus, if one systematic factor has a too
high risk premium, the average investor needs to change his behavior and
make this risk more widely shared. Since this process may be slow, markets
can maintain segmented risk premia for a long time. However, hedge funds
are 
speeding 
up 
this 
process 
of 
arbitraging 
away 
any 
attractive 
risk
premium opportunities.

[11] Microefficiency refers to the efficient relative pricing of assets. In
contrast, macro-inefficiency refers to mispricing in the aggregate level of
risky assets (say, the stock market) that may be harder to battle because of
the undiversifiable nature of the mispricing and the risk that it might
worsen.

Source notes. 
This chapter owes 
a 
special 
debt to 
the 
work of 
John
Cochrane (e.g., 1999, 2005, 2006) and John Campbell (e.g., 1999, 2000).
No one has surveyed the huge academic literature on the macro-foundations
of expected returns with as much insight and lucidity as the two JCs. I will
not give due references here to the fathers of modern asset-pricing models
—Sharpe, Merton, Ross, and others—but rather point to the survey books
by Peter Bernstein (1991, 2007), Mark Rubinstein (2006), and Justin Fox
(2009). On the huge literature of multi-factor models, I only mention Chen–
Roll–Ross 
(1986), 
Fama–French 
(1992), 
and 
Chen–Novy–Marx–Zhang
(2010).

On time-varying expected returns I mention Shiller (1981), Poterba–
Summers (1986), Fama–French (1989), and Campbell–Cochrane (1999), on
skewness Harvey–Siddique (2000), on learning Brav–Heaton (2002) and
Pastor–Veronesi (2009). On supply–demand factors I cite Scholes (1972)
and Lamont–Thaler (2003), on index inclusion effects Shleifer (1986) and
Wurgler–Zhuravskaya (2002), on inflation-linked bonds D’Amico et al.
(2010), 
on 
market 
frictions 
Garleanu–Pedersen 
(2009a), 
on 
liquidity
Acharya–Pedersen (2005), on disagreement Hong–Stein (2007), and on
information asymmetries Vayanos–Woolley (2008).

On the efficient markets hypothesis, I recommend Fama’s surveys (1970,
1991, 1998), on extensions Grossman–Stiglitz (1980) and Lo (2004), on the
many criticisms Soros (2008), Akerlof–Shiller (2009), and Fox (2009), and
on defense Rubinstein (2001), Cochrane (2007), and Ball (2009).

...