6

Behavioral finance

• Behavioral finance states that investor irrationality causes
systematic mispricings that rational arbitrageurs cannot fully
offset due to scarce capital and riskiness of “arbitrage”.
• Irrationality reflects biased beliefs (heuristic shortcuts, such
as representativeness and conservatism, and self-deception, such
as overconfidence and hindsight) as well as nonclassical
preferences (loss aversion, narrow framing, overweighting low-
probability events, etc.).
• Behavioral finance literature is fun and offers stories for
most observed empirical anomalies, perhaps too easily.
• The best known market-level mispricings are speculative
bubbles—related to extrapolative expectations, overconfidence,
and herding. The best known relative mispricings are value and
momentum effects. There is an alternative rational explanation for
each of these—and it is often impossible to discriminate
empirically between the rational and irrational alternatives.
• Behavioral finance is often used as justification for active
management. Yet, the limits-to-arbitrage literature stresses how
difficult it is to exploit mispricings over any sustained time
period.

Behavioral finance rests on two pillars:

(i) 
Some 
investors 
are 
irrational. 
Their 
biased 
beliefs 
and
preferences influence their demand for assets and can move market
prices, causing mispricings.
(ii) Various limits to arbitrage prevent rational arbitrageurs from
fully offsetting the impact that such irrational investors have on market
prices.
Before describing investor psychology (sources of behavioral biases), I start
with the limits to arbitrage to show that psychology matters. Then I review
financial 
market 
applications—speculative 
bubbles 
and 
other 
market
inefficiencies—and try to link them to their psychological foundations.

...
6.1 LIMITS TO ARBITRAGE

Behavioral finance argues that certain anomalous asset-pricing patterns—
where market prices appear to deviate from fundamental values—can be
explained by the presence of irrational traders. Experimental studies show
evidence 
of 
various 
behavioral 
biases 
that 
could 
influence 
investors’
demand for a given asset. Moreover, these biases appear to be systematic—
perhaps due to their evolutionary origins—so they would not cancel out
across investors. However, a powerful early counterargument by Milton
Friedman (1953) was that rational traders will view any such mispricings as
trading opportunities and by taking advantage of market dislocations they
will undo any price impact irrational traders might have. This argument
sounds especially compelling in today’s world with thousands of hedge
funds “on the job” competing exactly for such opportunities. Yet a sequence
of papers from the late 1980s to Shleifer–Vishny (1997), dubbed the limits-
to-arbitrage literature, argue convincingly that arbitrage is both risky and
costly, so that arbitrageurs, at least in many cases, do not have enough
capacity to fully counter the impact of irrational (“noise”) traders. The
Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) crisis in 1998—more than a year
after the Shleifer and Vishny article came out—followed the script so
closely that it showered real-world credibility on these arguments. If further
supportive evidence was needed, the next decade provided it in spades.

Noise trader models assume two types of traders—rational arbitrageurs
(“smart money”), and noise traders (mere mortals) whose sentiment and
asset demands can irrationally change over time. If irrational demand from
noise 
traders 
moves 
prices 
away 
from 
their 
fundamental 
values,
arbitrageurs will try to exploit the mispricing and bring prices back to
fundamentals. However, arbitrage strategies that are designed to correct
mispricing can be risky, limiting their use.
Arbitrage is only riskless in the extreme case of perfect substitutability
and frictionless markets. Most real-world “arbitrage” opportunities deserve
quotation marks because they are only “good deals” that can move against
the arbitrageur. With micro-inefficiencies where good substitutes (highly
correlated assets) exist, arbitrageurs can put on relative value trades so that
some of the risk in arbitrage is hedged. With macro-inefficiencies (say, a
market bubble) without good asset substitutes, such hedging is not possible,
so the arbitraging of market-level mispricing is risky and unattractive.

Arbitrageurs face both the fundamental risk of adverse news and the
“noise trader risk” of the possibility that sentiment will make mispricing
worse. If arbitrageurs have longer horizons than noise traders, they can be
more aggressive and can “ride out” temporary mispricings.

Noise trader risk is exacerbated when arbitrageurs manage other people’s
money and face the risk of capital withdrawals. In reality, such delegated
fund management is typical for arbitrageurs (such as hedge funds). The use
of outside investor funding increases the likelihood that the arbitrageur has
to liquidate his position at the worst possible time. The agency relation
means that end-customers are more likely to withdraw capital just when
mispricing trades have moved maximally against the arbitrageur. End-
customers assess an arbitrageur’s ability by studying performance track
records; 
and 
widening 
mispricing 
normally 
implies 
deteriorating
performance for the arbitrageur. To compound the arbitrageurs’ problems
when they are facing losses, creditors may make margin calls if leverage is
employed, stop-loss rules or risk managers can require position reductions,
and 
vanishing 
liquidity 
may 
reinforce 
the 
downward 
spiral. 
All 
these
considerations push arbitrageurs toward short time horizons and constrain
their position sizes. There are also transaction costs and model uncertainty
to consider. Trading costs on leveraged strategies can be significant. Barring
remarkable hubris, no arbitrageur can be completely confident that his
model or view is correct.

One important implication for long-horizon institutional investors is that
when they delegate asset management, external managers may not inherit
the 
ultimate 
investor’s 
long 
horizon. 
Principal–agent 
problems 
shorten
horizons from both sides, a phenomenon that can make the long-horizon
investor lose his natural edge.
Market turmoil in 1998 and 2007–2008 taught us additional features that
should discourage arbitrage activities—VaR-based risk management and
crowded trade risk:
• Risk management systems that make sense for any one investor
can increase systemic risk. A vicious circle can arise when rising risks
(in VaR models or in other reactive risk measures) trigger mandatory
or voluntary position reductions (but the problem is much worse if
mandatory); widespread liquidations can destabilize the markets and
require further reductions. Procyclical regulatory capital requirements
have a similar impact.
• If many leveraged arbitrageurs have similar positions, the desire
of some of them to liquidate positions can cause a rush to the exit that
makes even fundamentally unrelated positions move temporarily in
lockstep—against the arbitrageurs. Smart strategies may thus have
more 
“crowding 
risk” 
than 
popular 
naive 
strategies. 
Downside
correlations are often higher than normal correlations, especially for
“smart” trades that appear to offer a favorable long-run reward to risk.
Indeed, there may now exist an endogenous systematic risk factor
associated with crowded trades.

The limits-to-arbitrage literature has been highly influential:
• It explains why behavioral biases can leave a large footprint in
the market even in a world filled with opportunistic hedge funds. It
even 
suggests 
which 
types 
of 
mispricings 
are 
less 
susceptible 
to
attracting arbitrage—notably, those where mispriced assets lack close
substitutes, 
where 
mispricings 
correct 
slowly, 
or 
where 
perceived
model uncertainty is high.
• It stresses that even in inefficient markets there may be no free
lunches. Thus the well-documented difficulty of beating the market
does 
not 
necessarily 
imply 
that 
market 
prices 
equal 
fundamental
values.
• The literature has broadened to study more generally the role of
financial institutions and agency costs. The impediments to arbitrage
include 
diverse 
risks 
as 
well 
as 
capital, 
leverage, 
and 
margin
constraints.
• I use the terms “investor irrationality” and “market inefficiency”
interchangeably because the former is often thought to imply the latter.
This is only true given limited arbitrage; otherwise the actions of a few
smart arbitrageurs would undo the price dislocations caused by many
irrational traders.

...
6.2 PSYCHOLOGY

Experimental studies reveal systematic biases in people’s judgments as well
as 
systematic 
deviations 
from 
the 
preferences 
implied 
by 
the 
rational
expected utility paradigm. I review some main behavioral biases before
turning to their possible impact on asset prices.

All these psychological features are underpinnings of the developing
theory of investor sentiment—how real-world investors actually form their
beliefs, 
preferences, 
and 
demand 
schedules 
for 
assets. 
This 
second
foundation of behavioral finance is still much patchier, and less coherent,
than the limits-to-arbitrage literature but, in a sense, this is where the meat
is.

...
6.2.1 Biases

6.2.1.1 Heuristic simplifications

Evolutionary logic is most obvious with heuristics. Humans have limited
attention, 
memory, 
and 
information-processing 
capacities. 
Given 
our
limited 
cognitive 
resources, 
we 
cannot 
analyze 
the 
world 
around 
us
optimally. Instead, heuristics—rules of thumb or mental shortcuts—have
evolved to help us select subsets of available information that are believed
to be the most relevant. Recent psychological and neuro-finance research
suggest that we humans have two models of probabilistic assessment that
work in different parts of the brain: system I thinking (quick heuristics,
intuition) and system II thinking (deliberative rational reasoning). System I
mechanisms are much older; they evolved to help humans survive the most
important challenges faced in the prehistoric environment. These inherited
mechanisms can still help us cope in the more complex modern world but
they can also lead to systematic errors, including some that can cost us
money. The evolutionary character of this argument also suggests that
people share similar heuristics; biases are not whims that average out across
different individuals.

These fascinating ideas are elaborated on in Hirshleifer (2001), Montier
(2007), and Zweig (2008).

Attention and memory biases
Selective attention on easily accessible information causes availability bias.
We are more likely to recall—and overweight—information that is salient,
vivid, attention grabbing, familiar, emotionally hitting, or simply more
recent. We also like stories; we want to understand complex events through
simple 
narratives. 
These 
biases 
distort 
our 
probability 
and 
frequency
judgments.

Representativeness

Representativeness is the phenomenon by which people rely too much on
stereotypes instead of cold probability analysis. People who judge the
probability of an outcome based on how similar it is to the stereotype of the
perceived true process tend to ignore sample size and neglect “base-rate”
information. (Base-rate neglect refers to the tendency to misappraise the
frequency of an event in a relevant population. The classic example is that
based on a brief characterization—a quiet older woman wearing glasses—
people guess that the person described is a librarian because she resembles
a stereotypical librarian; information about the relative scarcity of librarians
in the population is neglected.) They also expect each data sample to reflect
the 
salient 
characteristics 
of 
the 
underlying 
true 
process. 
This
misconception causes them to be surprised if they see a random series
appear to exhibit trends and can make them see patterns in truly random
sequences, 
leading 
to 
extrapolation 
where 
none 
is 
justified. 
The
evolutionary origin of extrapolation is obvious: humans are hardwired to
mimic visibly successful solutions to problems because such imitation
enhanced our distant ancestors’ survival prospects.

Box 6.1. Extrapolation and reversal tendencies

Shefrin (2002) discusses evidence that individual investors tend to
extrapolate (predict trend continuation) while professional managers
and strategists tend to predict reversals. Why this difference? And can
we really claim that both biases are caused by representativeness?

• People use representativeness to form a judgment about the
most likely true process from which the sample they observe is
generated and then make predictions based on this perceived true
process. People often mistakenly assume that small samples
should feature the same essential properties as the true process.
(This error is called “the law of small numbers.”) For example,
although runs of five or six tails are quite possible in a coin-
flipping exercise with a fair coin (which is a random walk process
with 50/50 odds), people erroneously think that such runs should
be extremely rare in a truly random process. Thus, if people know
the coin is fair and see a small sample with four or five successive
tails, they may think “heads is due” and predict a reversal, to
make the sequence look more representative (the gambler’s
fallacy). However, if people don’t know for sure that the true
process is 50/50 (fair coin, random walk) they often make the
opposite mistake—they use representativeness to infer the process
from which the small sample is drawn. In the example with a run
of tails, they see something that resembles a trending process so
they decide that the true process is trending and predict trend
continuation, implicitly or explicitly concluding (against actual
evidence) that the coin is unfair.
• Which effect dominates? Availability bias helps distinguish
between settings where people become excessively prone to make
reversal or continuation predictions. If the true process is salient
(e.g., flipping a fair coin), reversal error is common, whereas if
the true process is unknown, people extrapolate too much. Real-
world financial markets are often characterized by ambiguity, so it
is no wonder that individual investors tend to “see trends” and
over-extrapolate. Professional investors are better educated about
the (near) random walk behavior of asset prices and thus are more
confident about the 50/50 process, which makes them more prone
to committing the gambler’s fallacy.
• Perhaps a broader lesson is that settings with greater
uncertainty about the true process (e.g., new assets, limited data,
lack of valuation anchors) make investors more prone to
extrapolation and markets thus more susceptible to trending
(momentum) and to overreactions.
Conservatism

Conservatism is the tendency of people to underweight new evidence when
they update their priors (e.g., by giving insufficient attention to new public
data). Anchoring and adjustment is another related bias that can contribute
to underweighting new evidence. When people make predictions, they start
from some initial value (anchor)—one that can be quite arbitrary if no
relevant 
information 
is 
available—and 
then 
adjust 
it 
to 
get 
a 
final
prediction. 
Such 
adjustments 
are 
typically 
insufficient 
and 
leave 
final
predictions biased toward the anchor.

Box 6.2. How to reconcile the apparent contradiction in
representativeness and conservatism stories

If prior beliefs are viewed as base rate information, conservatism
implies overweighting base rate information (and underreacting to new
data) whereas representativeness implies base rate neglect (and
overreacting to new data). Griffin–Tversky (1992) propose a theory
that explains the coexistence of conservatism and representativeness
effects. Their thesis is that when making forecasts, people pay too
much attention to the strength of the information and too little to its
statistical weight, relative to a rational Bayesian investor. (I explain
this thesis in greater detail below.) Whether the market underreacts or
overreacts to new signals, then, depends on the application setting—in
particular, the nature of new information.

• Each piece of information can be judged along two
dimensions—strength and weight. Strength is tied to the salience
and extremity of the evidence while weight is tied to its statistical
reliability, including sample size. For a funny illustration, you are
reading a glowing letter of recommendation for a job candidate
you are about to hire—and infer a very strong message. However,
when you realize that the letter is signed by the candidate’s
mother, the weight of its informativeness is deflated.
• Conservatism arises in the face of evidence that has low
strength but a high weight (e.g., a sample that is large relative to
the population); people underreact to such evidence even though
the high weight would justify a stronger reaction. On the other
hand, representativeness arises when evidence has high strength
but low weight (e.g., people “see” a short trend); people pay
excessive attention to salient evidence and overreact to it.
• The literature on representativeness and conservatism also
suggests the following: people tend to overreact to salient events,
concrete anecdotes, good stories, and extreme realizations. They
underreact to abstract statistical information, such as sample size
or predictive ability, as well as remote events. People often
underweight changes in a series unless recent changes are
prominent and attributable to a clear cause. If people can
associate an observed new data sample with a salient past event or
model or, even better, their personal experience, they overweight
the new data (representativeness); otherwise, people rely too little
on the data and too much on their priors (conservatism). One-time
strong news events are likely to generate more overreaction than a
sequence of smaller events. Given overconfidence, people
probably overreact more easily to private signals (their own
research, word of mouth) than to public news. A possible
exception: Price trends may be especially attention grabbing, even
if they are very public information.

6.2.1.2 Self-deception (overconfidence and limits to learning)

There are certain evolutionary benefits in being overconfident. In general,
confidence and optimism may give a person energy to strive for challenging
goals and may result in more success, happiness, and even longer life.
Excessive confidence has some downsides (e.g., may lead to frequent
disappointments) and there is some debate among psychologists about the
net benefit. Appearances are especially important for this argument—those
able to appear smart and strong are more likely to attract mates and pass on
their genes. Self-deception is a part of the story because it is easier to
appear competent if you believe in yourself. Overconfident people tend to
fail more often than they expect to but nature has provided them with
various other biases that help them ignore such feedback and maintain their
overconfidence.

Overconfidence

Overconfidence is a well-documented bias in many contexts. Most of us
feel we are above average when it comes to sense of humor, intelligence,
car-driving skills, and many other contexts. We also think that we are less
prone to behavioral biases than others. (I do, don’t you?) Being an expert
does not help. More knowledge may even be harmful as it often raises our
confidence more than our forecasting ability. Experts in most professions
are 
prone 
to 
overconfidence—typically 
more 
so 
than 
laymen 
when
predictability 
is 
low 
and 
evidence 
ambiguous, 
making 
feedback
inconclusive. Financial professionals are particularly overconfident.

Overconfidence is one key reason for excessive trading volumes but it
may also contribute to several asset-pricing regularities. Overconfident
investors assign too much weight to information and analysis that they
collect or produce themselves, while underweighting public information.
The 
tendency 
to 
disregard 
public 
information 
may 
explain 
investor
underreaction to corporate news, while the high weight placed on one’s own
experience may contribute to observed momentum and reversal patterns as
explained below.

Overoptimism

Overoptimism is related to both overconfidence in one’s own abilities and
to wishful thinking. “The future will be great, especially for me.” Optimists
are prone to an illusion of control; they underrate the role of randomness
and they underestimate risks.

Biased self-attribution

People tend to attribute good outcomes to their own abilities (skill) and bad
outcomes 
to 
external 
circumstances 
(bad 
luck). 
This 
feature 
feeds
overconfidence when people succeed and inhibits learning when people
fail. Thus it enables self-deception rather than accurate self-assessment.
Confirmation bias

We seek evidence that supports our view and we interpret ambiguous
evidence as supportive.

Hindsight bias

Hindsight makes past outcomes, even major surprises, appear virtually
inevitable after the fact. (“The market crash was bound to happen.”) More
personally, memories play tricks on us: we often recall that we had assigned
a high likelihood to events that subsequently materialized. (“I knew all
along that housing was overpriced.”) Hindsight reinforces overconfidence
but may also cause regret. By making the past appear more predictable than
it 
really 
was, 
hindsight 
bias 
fools 
us 
into 
seeing 
the 
future 
as 
more
predictable than it can ever be. Thus the inevitable disappointments that
befall investors from time to time are seen, mistakenly, as having been
avoidable. The financial media seem especially prone to hindsight and they
promote it among the public. Investors underappreciate the degree to which
chance 
(randomness) 
determines 
observed 
outcomes—and 
this
misconception 
partly 
explains 
why 
active 
management 
is 
so 
popular,
despite its poor record.

...
6.2.2 Preferences

Traditional decision theory analyzes choices between uncertain gambles,
the simplest of which are characterized by two possible outcomes and their
associated probabilities. People form beliefs, or make judgments, about the
probabilities; they assign values, or utilities, to outcomes; and they combine
beliefs and values to make decisions. Preferences, in particular attitudes
toward risk (quantified as the chooser’s degree of risk aversion), determine
what choices people make among the various opportunities that exist, given
their beliefs. Traditional theory says that people calculate the expected
utility of each gamble as the probability-weighted sum of utility outcomes,
then choose the gamble with the highest expected utility. This theory has
dominated neoclassical economics and finance, but experimental work has
found 
substantial 
violations 
of 
this 
rational 
model, 
leading 
to 
the
development of various alternative theories. The most famous behavioral
alternative is prospect theory (PT).

Prospect theory

In PT, Kahneman–Tversky (1979) developed an intentionally positive, or
descriptive, 
model 
of 
preferences 
that 
would 
best 
characterize 
the
deviations 
of 
actual 
choices 
(“what 
do 
people 
really 
do?”) 
from 
the
normative expected utility model (“what should rational people do?”). It
seems likely that PT’s key ideas have evolutionary origins in that they
reflect quick and intuitive reasoning. The main findings of PT, as revealed
in Kahneman and Tversky’s experimental studies, are:
— people care more about gains and losses (changes in wealth)
than about overall wealth;
— people exhibit loss aversion and can be risk seeking when
facing the possibility of loss;
— people overweight low-probability events.

Here is a well-known example from behavioral experiments:
1. Suppose that you are paid $1,000 to participate in a gamble that
presents you with the following further choices:
(1A) a sure $500 gain;
(1B) a 50% chance of winning $1,000, a 50% chance of
$0.
2. Suppose that you are paid $2,000 to participate in a gamble that
presents you with the following further choices:
(2A) a sure $500 loss;
(2B) a 50% chance of losing $1,000, a 50% chance of $0.

The typical strategies chosen in these situations are (1A) (certainty) and
(2B) (risk seeking), even though the total wealth outcomes in (1A) and (2A)
are identical (you gain $1,500 overall), and the total wealth outcomes in
(1B) and (2B) are likewise identical. People act as if they are risk averse
when only gains are involved but become risk seeking when facing the
possibility of loss and they view the initial bonus and the gamble separately.
Such findings, together with the observation that people tend to reject
actuarially fair (50/50) gambles, point to loss aversion (losses loom larger
than same-sized gains) [1].

Let us look at the specifics. In PT, people maximize the weighted sum of
values (utilities) where weights are not probabilities themselves (using the
probabilities would be rational) but their nonlinear transformations:
• Whether an outcome is seen as a gain or a loss determines the
value (utility) of a dollar (as shown in Figure 6.1a). In other words, a
dollar is not worth a dollar; its value depends on the context. The focus
on gains and losses rather than on overall wealth is consistent with
evaluating each gamble in isolation. If people naturally took into
account their whole wealth when considering the offered gambles, they
would not reject actuarially advantageous gambles as often as they do.
• The value function is kinked at the origin or the “reference
point”; the steeper slope below zero implies loss aversion. Many
studies show that losses hurt twice to two and a half times as much as
same-sized gains satisfy. Following the example above, the value
function has concave (convex) shape to the right (left) of the reference
point, implying risk aversion among gambles that involve only gains
but risk seeking among gambles that involve only losses.
• Overweighting low-probability events is the main feature of the
probability-weighting function (Figure 6.1b). This feature explains the
simultaneous demand for both lotteries and insurance, a real-world
phenomenon that has puzzled economists who assume rationality.
Such overweighting of small probabilities can be strong enough to
reverse the sign of risk appetite in the value function. Lotteries that
offer a small chance of very large gains can induce risk seeking,
despite a general tendency to risk aversion when gambles only involve
gains. Conversely, people dislike low-probability large-impact losses
so much that they pay up for insurance to avoid such losses (thus
implying risk aversion), despite the general risk-seeking tendency that
appears when gambles only involve losses [2].

PT simply postulates the leaning S shape of the value function. Novel
research proposes an alternative foundation based on salience while using
standard risk preferences. According to Bordalo–Gennaioli–Shleifer (2010),
decision-makers overweight the likelihood of salient states (where lotteries
have extreme, contrasting payoffs), and this can explain both the reflecting
shape 
of 
the 
value 
function 
and 
the 
overweighting 
of 
low-probability
events. The authors stress that investors only overweight salient low-
probability events—a point that may resolve the tension between PT and
the idea that blackswan-type low-probability events, events that investors
think are nigh impossible or do not think about at all, are underweighted.

PT itself does not generate many testable predictions. It needs to be
combined with other assumptions, such as narrow framing or the house
money effect (as discussed below).

Figure 6.1. Prospect theory’s value function and probability-weighting
function (stylized forms).
Framing effects

One feature of PT preferences is that people derive decision utility from the
gains and losses of a single trade. Ignoring the rest of wealth implies narrow
framing. Narrow framing involves analyzing problems in too isolated a
fashion. It can be caused by the fact that our cognitive resources are limited.
Evaluating each trade on a standalone basis is easier and may be more
natural than assessing it by its contribution to our total portfolio, as modern
portfolio theory prescribes. Thus, many people focus too much on asset-
specific risks (volatility, default) and underappreciate correlation effects.
The more general finding in experimental studies is that framing matters.
People make different choices depending on how a given problem is
presented to them [3]. Mental accounting refers to the process by which
people formulate problems for themselves. It involves assigning gains
and/or 
losses 
related 
to 
decisions 
into 
separate 
mental 
accounts 
(e.g.,
expenditure accounts and investment accounts) which may be broad or
narrow (narrowness in the extreme being to view each trade in isolation)
and 
which 
may 
have 
different 
evaluation 
periods. 
Decisions 
may 
be
influenced by the extent to which their outcomes are mentally integrated
with, or segregated from, the outcomes of other choices—with other assets
in the portfolio or across time (i.e., with the outcomes of past trading).

One important aspect of framing is the selection of a reference point as
the benchmark for comparisons. Kahneman and Tversky do not specify this
but note that in many cases the status quo (doing nothing, one’s current
asset position) is a natural reference point:
• For investments already made, the buying price becomes an
important reference point against which gains and losses are measured.
The disposition effect refers to investors’ tendency to hang on to
losers, hoping to see the price recover back to the buying level.
Prospect theory and mental accounting may explain such reluctance to
realize losses. (I recall from my days as a young bond portfolio
manager how hard it was to resist this bias even though my colleagues
warned me on my first workweek to ignore the purchase price! “The
stock does not know that you own it, let alone at what price.”)
• The reference point could also be coded with respect to an
expected or aspirational level of wealth different from the status quo.
Such 
a 
difference 
could 
reflect 
incomplete 
adaptation 
to 
recent
changes in wealth, so past experiences can matter: “A person who has
not made peace with his losses is likely to accept gambles that would
be 
unacceptable 
to 
him 
otherwise.” 
Standard 
PT 
is 
sometimes
mistakenly interpreted to say that people become risk seeking after
they have lost money but this really depends on framing (as discussed
next).

More risk preferences

The house money effect is an important example of mental accounting.
Gamblers tend to become less loss averse and more willing to take risks
when they are ahead (“playing with house money)”. Greater willingness to
gamble after recent gains suggests that losses are easier to take when they
can be mentally added to earlier gains. At first blush, this may sound
inconsistent with PT. However, PT as described above pertains to one-off
gambles. Risk preferences in a sequence of gambles depend on how prior
gains and losses influence loss aversion over time. An experimental study
by Thaler and Johnson finds evidence in favor of the house money effect—
more aggressive risk taking following successful trading, and cautiousness
following losses. Such dynamic loss aversion is broadly consistent with
wealth-dependent 
risk 
aversion. 
There 
is 
one 
interesting 
exception 
to
caution after losses: if investors have a chance to fully recover a prior loss,
they will accept gambles that they would normally reject. This last feature
reflects an apparent desire to “get even” and is related to the disposition
effect. Overall, it is hard to make generalizations about risk preferences
because they are so sensitive to the framing of investor options.

Ambiguity aversion. People dislike vague uncertainty (ambiguity) more
than objective uncertainty. In the classic Ellsberg’s paradox, people prefer
to take a gamble from an urn containing red and black balls with known
50/50 proportions than from an urn where balls are in unknown proportions,
even though the objective probabilities are the same. Such dislike of
“unknown unknowns”, as compared with “known unknowns” (a distinction
first made by Frank H. Knight in 1921) may explain home bias and other
observed preferences for familiar investments.

Regret aversion. We may be motivated by the desire to minimize regret
(e.g., when hanging on to losers). While risky choices always involve the
possibility of adverse outcomes, some outcomes are more likely to trigger
regret 
than 
others. 
Regret 
is 
often 
intertwined 
with 
hindsight—some
decisions 
are 
easier 
to 
justify 
ex 
post 
than 
others. 
Moreover, 
acts 
of
omission lead to less regret than active efforts (status quo bias); one feels
less bad about not buying a stock that went up than about buying a stock
that went down. Regret minimization may be a behavioral motivation for
diversification (as even Harry Markowitz has suggested from his personal
experience).

Moods and feelings sound even more arbitrary as sources of irrational
sentiment than the behavioral stories above. Yet moods may be the most
plausible explanations for empirical observations that average stock returns
tend to be higher near major holidays (Thanksgiving and Christmas in the
U.S., Chinese New Year and Japanese Golden Week in Asia, etc.), that U.S.
stocks fare better on days with better New York weather, that some calendar
year seasonalities appear consistent with seasonal affective disorder, and
that lunar cycles and soccer results have some predictive ability on equity
markets. Some patterns are likely to be due to data mining and most of
these patterns are so weak that they cannot be exploited after trading costs.
In contrast, the influence of broad market sentiment—animal spirits—can
be huge, and we turn to it next.

...
6.3 APPLICATIONS

Now I turn to applications of behavioral finance. Bubbles and many other
observed anomalies can be explained by psychological stories, as well as by
alternative, rational, risk-based stories.

...
6.3.1 Speculative bubbles and other macro-inefficiencies

Robert Shiller’s book Irrational Exuberance, which summarizes his work of
over 20 years, was published, with some luck, in March 2000 just at the
peak of the equity bubble. Shiller’s timing was only slightly off with the
second edition which emphasized housing market overvaluation; it came
out in 2005, two years before the U.S. real estate bubble burst. Since
Shiller’s thinking on this topic is as insightful and influential as anyone’s, I
describe his theory on bubbles before discussing some other analyses.

Shiller argues that equity market bubbles have four elements:
1. Precipitating factors. What gets the bubble started? In the late
1990s, the Internet boom was the most important factor, but other
important 
factors 
included 
improving 
macro-fundamentals 
(lower
inflation and real yields) and the tendency of middle-aged baby-
boomers, with high savings rates, to allocate much of their buying to
the stock market.
2. Amplification mechanisms. What gets the bubble to propagate?
Shiller calls feedback patterns “natural Ponzi schemes” that are the
essence of a bubble. Rising prices and the success of some investors
attract public attention and heighten expectations for further price
rises, raising investor demand. (The high prices are ultimately not
sustainable because they are high only because of expectations of
further 
price 
increases, 
so 
the 
bubble 
eventually 
bursts.) 
Besides
simple price-to-price feedback loops, there can also be feedback loops
from price to GDP or earnings growth and back to price.
3. Cultural factors. All overvaluations involve appealing stories.
Stories surrounding the bubble are important in convincing people why
things are different this time. “Major speculative bubbles are always
supported by some superficially plausible popular story, a ‘new era
theory’ 
that 
is 
widely 
viewed 
as 
having 
sanction 
from 
some
authoritative 
figure(s).” 
News 
media 
have 
an 
essential 
(often
uncritical) 
role 
in 
generating 
conventional 
wisdom 
and 
setting 
in
motion a sequence of public attentions.
4. Psychological factors. Overconfidence and representativeness
(extrapolating from a recent uptrend) are among the individual biases
that support the bubble. Herd behavior and other social influences are
perhaps even more important. Shiller highlights the power of word-of-
mouth 
transmission, 
such 
as 
personal 
stories 
of 
a 
neighbor’s
investment success. Information cascades and “groupthink” are further
illustrations of social dynamics: people cannot believe that so many
others are wrong, so they ignore their private warning signals.

It is interesting to relate Shiller’s description of feedback loops to the
“reflexivity theory” of George Soros, one of the pioneers of hedge fund
management 
and 
still 
probably 
the 
world’s 
most 
famous 
hedge 
fund
manager. 
Soros 
defines 
reflexivity 
as 
the 
feedback 
loop 
(two-way
interaction) 
between 
market 
participants’ 
understanding 
of 
their
environment and the environment itself. Market prices not only reflect
expectations of future outcomes but also shape economic outcomes—and
can 
result 
in 
boom–bust 
cycles. 
“Financial 
markets 
operate 
with 
a
prevailing bias,” Soros writes, “that can validate itself by influencing not
only 
market 
prices 
but 
also 
the 
fundamentals 
that 
market 
prices 
are
supposed to reflect . . . Beyond a certain point the self-validating feedback
loops become unsustainable. That is how reflexivity gives rise to initially
self-fulfilling 
but 
eventually 
self-defeating 
prophesies 
and 
processes”
(Soros, 2003, p. 5). Soros (2008) argues that 2007–2008 is not only an end
to a cyclical housing bubble but also to a more secular super-bubble—
decades-long 
trends 
of 
credit 
creation, 
globalization 
of 
finance, 
and
deregulation—whose underlying misconception was excessive reliance on
the market mechanism (“market fundamentalism”).

When Soros’s The Alchemy of Finance was first published in 1987,
academics ignored or dismissed the reflexivity idea, partly because the
practitioner-oriented book was written “in a different language”. Yet, it has
found a large following among investors and it may have also influenced
later academic work on positive-feedback trading and on bubbles. Other
research also confirms that fast credit growth and financial deregulation
/innovation are common characteristics of major booms that end in tears.
Bubbles have a long, infamous history since the Dutch tulip mania
(1637) and the South Sea and Mississippi company bubbles (both about
1720). Wall Street in 1929, Japan in 1989, and global technology stocks in
1999 are the most famous equity market bubbles of the past century. Of
course, there are alternative explanations for these high equity prices but the
explanations involving purely rational stories, such as time-varying risk
premia, are unsatisfactory. Credit and real estate bubbles may be even more
detrimental to the real economy than equity bubbles, because the former
reside closer to the heart of the financial system and may be harder to detect
[4].

Three economists besides Shiller warrant mention:
• John Maynard Keynes for such pearls as “Most of our decisions
. . . can only be taken as the result of animal spirits, a spontaneous urge
to action rather than inaction, and not as the outcome of a weighted
average 
of 
quantitative 
benefits 
multiplied 
by 
quantitative
probabilities” and “It is the nature of organized investment markets,
under the influence of purchasers largely ignorant of what they are
buying and speculators who are more interested in forecasting the next
shift of market sentiment than with a reasonable estimate of future
yield of capital assets, that, when disillusion falls upon an over-
optimistic and over-bought market, it should fall with sudden and
catastrophic 
force.” 
Keynes 
is 
also 
credited 
with 
a 
quote 
that
foreshadows a central argument in the limits-to-arbitrage literature:
“The 
market 
can 
remain 
irrational 
longer 
than 
you 
can 
remain
solvent.”
• Hyman Minsky for his insight that financial stability can be
destabilizing 
(because 
prolonged 
stable 
periods 
make 
investors
extrapolate the stability too far and induce them to overprice risky
assets) as well as for his analysis of bubble stages. Each boom starts
with displacement (an exogenous shock, akin to Shiller’s precipitating
factor) that triggers profit opportunities in some sector. Asset prices
begin to rise, aided by easy credit (monetary expansion and credit
creation—often via financial innovation), and both developments also
stimulate the real economy; this is the moment at which stability
becomes destabilizing. At the euphoria stage, speculation dominates
and any value concerns are dismissed. Eventually euphoria gives way
to the critical stage where some insiders take profits and financial
distress ensues. The final stage is revulsion—panicky capitulation.
• Lawrence Summers for his pioneering work on the noise trader
and 
limits-to-arbitrage 
literature. 
He 
stressed 
that 
market 
prices,
especially the overall market level, can deviate from fundamental
values even if we agree that it is hard to beat the market (difficult to
profit from such deviations). Summers’ commentary during the 2007–
2009 crisis, and his academic work 20 years earlier, emphasized the
destabilizing potential of various positive-feedback loops (vicious or
virtuous cycles) that occasionally overwhelm normal self-stabilizing
forces in a market economy.

An 
equity 
market 
bubble 
is 
an 
extreme 
form 
of 
aggregate 
market
overvaluation. Paul Samuelson once conjectured that the stock market is
microefficient but macroinefficient—that relative prices are close to being
correct but that the overall market level is prone to overvaluations or
undervaluations. The limits-to-arbitrage literature buttresses “Samuelson’s
dictum”. 
Recall 
the 
greater 
risk 
in 
arbitraging 
away 
overall 
market
valuation: given a lack of close substitutes for a position in the market
index, directional equity market or bond market risk cannot be effectively
hedged or diversified away. The years 2005–2007 are a good example of a
period when microefficiency was high but macroefficiency low (there were
few relative value opportunities but all risks were underpriced).

Irrational shifts in investor sentiment can lead to bubbles, crashes, and
market overvaluations or undervaluations and thus explain the observed
time 
series 
predictability 
of 
equity 
market 
and 
its 
excess 
volatility
compared 
with 
fundamentals. However, rational time variation 
in risk
premia is an alternative or, more likely, a complementary explanation for
such empirical evidence.

The equity premium puzzle refers to the fact that the high historical
average return of equities over riskless assets is hard to justify using
standard macroeconomic models unless an extremely high risk aversion
parameter is used. The behavioral solutions that have been proposed for the
puzzle will be discussed in Section 8.2.

Price moves not explained by fundamentals. The EMH suggests that it is
very difficult to predict price moves in advance. This certainly is true but it
has been embarrassingly difficult to explain price moves even after the fact.
We 
do 
observe 
large 
and 
logical 
price 
moves 
around 
corporate
announcements and other news. Yet, the overall explanatory power of
fundamental news is surprisingly low. Most days’ market moves and even
many of the biggest daily moves ever observed cannot be linked to obvious
fundamental 
developments. 
The 
crash 
of 
October 
1987 
is 
the 
prime
example; there were several news items but no clear rational trigger to
change market valuation by 20% in the U.S. (45% in the most affected
country, Hong Kong). The most compelling explanations center on the
market discount rate—rational stories may be about wealth-dependent risk
aversion or learning about other investors’ positions, but the irrational story
of changing market sentiment seems most plausible (albeit pretty empty in
content) [5].

The general volume of trading, arguably overtrading, is also explained
more easily by irrationality than by rational models. (Rational models
suggest that any news could push prices to new equilibrium levels with
minimal trading. Investors’ liquidity needs over time would justify only a
fraction of the observed trading in equity markets.) Overconfidence and
disagreement 
promote 
active 
trading. 
Volume 
seems 
to 
be 
positively
correlated with market valuations—over time (heavier turnover in booms)
and cross-sectionally (greater turnover for glamour or growth stocks and
positive-momentum stocks).

Memory biases. Empirically we observe that various risk factors’ ex ante
excess returns seem to be higher for a long while after a large negative
factor 
shock. 
This 
pattern 
could 
reflect 
time-varying 
risk 
premia 
(the
perceived amount and/or price of risk is high) or rational learning from the
past but it is also suggestive of behavioral memory biases. Our probability
assessments are distorted by the availability heuristic in that we tend to
overweight strong signals, salient (vivid, emotion-triggering) events, and
recent events.

Memories decay only gradually after a major event; this fact might cause
attractive 
reward-to-risk 
ratios 
to 
linger 
for 
surprisingly 
long 
periods.
Famously, the ex ante equity premium remained high for over 20 years after
the Great Depression (whereas investor memories were shorter after the
2000–2002 and 2007–2009 bear markets). While financial markets are
often criticized for having too short a memory, it is also true that they tend
to “keep fighting the previous war”.

Fascinating empirical evidence in Malmendier–Nagel’s (2010) study of
“depression babies” shows how personal experiences and lifetime equity
market returns influence investors’ equity and bond allocations as well as
reported 
risk 
aversion 
across 
birth 
cohorts. 
In 
the 
late 
1970s, 
young
investors who had only experienced adverse market conditions were more
bearish than old investors, while the reverse was true in the late 1990s.
During the equity bubble, young mutual fund managers were more likely to
buy tech stocks and chase trends than older managers—patterns that had
been successful during their (short) personal investing experience.

Other examples of salient events influencing asset prices, possibly due to
lingering memories, include the bond risk premium that decayed slowly
after the Great Inflation of roughly 1969–1982, the “crash premium” in
implied volatilities of equity index options and especially in out-of-the-
money put options for 10 to 20 years after the crash of October 19, 1987,
and 
liquidity 
premia 
that 
rose 
to 
record 
highs 
during 
the 
2007–2008
liquidity drought but came down fast afterwards. In the same vein, investors
may require abnormally high interest rates from borrowers for several years
after corporate defaults and currency devaluations, and people may buy
more earthquake or flood insurance after a recent calamity, despite higher
insurance premia (“closing the barn door after the horses have bolted”).

Money illusion says that people confuse nominal and real values, perhaps
due 
to 
anchoring 
and 
insufficient 
adjustment 
or 
to 
limited 
attention.
Economic quantities can be represented in nominal or real terms. The
nominal representation is simpler, more salient, and often a reasonable first
approximation of real worth (except in hyperinflation situations) even if the
real representation is more accurate in capturing true value. Money illusion
arises in large part because it is considerably easier and more natural to
think in nominal than real terms. The illusion is more common when
inflation is relatively low and stable and the costs of this mistake are
perceived to be small; people do become more rational and sensitive to
inflation during hyperinflations.

Asset prices reflect expected nominal cash flows discounted at nominal
rates or expected real cash flows discounted at real rates. Rationally, any
shift in inflation should impact the numerator (expected cash flows) of the
asset-pricing equation—equation (5.1)—just as much as its denominator
(discount rate). However, if some investors mistakenly use nominal rates to
discount real cash flows, rising inflation tends to make equities undervalued
while falling inflation tends to make them overvalued. This story can
explain the low equity market valuations in the 1970s and high valuations
in the 1990s. It is unlikely that money illusion was complete, in the sense of
all 
investors 
making 
the 
mistake 
described 
above; 
but 
an 
insufficient
adjustment for inflation effects is enough to distort market pricing, given
the 
extreme 
sensitivity 
of 
equity 
prices 
to 
their 
discount 
rates. 
The
continuing popularity of the “Fed model”—an asset allocation analysis
comparing (real) earnings yields with (nominal) bond yields—is suggestive
of money illusion.

The money illusion anomaly at the market level is non-diversifiable and
slow 
moving, 
making 
it 
particularly 
unattractive 
to 
arbitrage. 
Related
anomalies 
have 
been 
observed 
in 
equity, 
bond, 
and 
housing 
markets.
However, simple money illusion stories are not sufficient to explain all
asset price histories: equity market valuations were cheap both in the
deflationary 
1930s 
and 
the 
inflationary 
1970s, 
while 
housing 
markets
boomed amidst high inflation in the 1970s and amidst low inflation in the
2000s.

...
6.3.2 Cross-sectional trading opportunities and micro-inefficiency

If the bubble story above says that shifting investor sentiment over time
creates periods of overvaluation and undervaluation in the aggregate equity
market 
level 
that 
a 
contrarian 
market-timer 
can 
exploit, 
then 
varying
investor 
sentiment 
across 
individual 
stocks 
creates 
cross-sectional
opportunities that a contrarian stock-picker can exploit. However, short-
term market-timers may also join the bandwagon while the bubble keeps
growing; 
and 
there 
is 
a 
cross-sectional 
counterpart 
for 
this 
behavior.
Specifically, 
momentum-based 
stock 
selection 
strategies 
that 
involve
buying recent winners appear profitable. Next, I discuss the literature on
value and momentum strategies which initially focused on the U.S. equity
market.

Cross-sectional trading strategies may be relatively value-oriented (buy
low, sell high) or momentum-oriented (buy rising stocks, sell falling ones;
essentially buy high, sell low)—and they may be applied within one market
(say, equities) or across many asset markets. Micro-inefficiency refers to
either the rare extreme case of riskless arbitrage opportunities or the more
plausible case of risky trades and strategies with attractive reward-to-risk
ratios. 
Cross-sectional 
opportunities 
are 
safer 
to 
exploit 
than 
market-
directional 
opportunities—one 
can 
hedge 
away 
directional 
risk 
and
diversify specific risk much more effectively.

The value effect refers to the pattern that “value stocks”, those with low
valuation 
ratios 
(low 
price/earnings, 
price/cash 
flow, 
price/sales,
price/dividend, and price/book value ratios) tend to offer higher long-run
average 
returns 
than 
“growth 
stocks” 
or 
“glamour 
stocks” 
with 
high
valuation 
ratios. 
(These 
“price/something” 
ratios 
or 
their 
inverses 
are
together sometimes called scaled price ratios.) Value investing has a long
history wherein Benjamin Graham and David Dodd (1934) are seen as the
intellectual godfathers. Although academics have documented interesting
value-related patterns in stock returns since the 1970s, the topic really
caught attention in the early 1990s with two influential publications—
Fama–French 
(1992, 
henceforth 
FF) 
and 
Lakonishok–Shleifer–Vishny
(1994, henceforth LSV).

The two studies presented broadly similar empirical results—portfolios
of value stocks earn above-market returns while growth stock portfolios
earn below-market returns—but their interpretations were very different.
Fama and French interpreted the high average returns of value stocks as
rational risk premia for the additional systematic risk of those stocks. In
contrast, LSV argued that the success of value strategies reflects their
contrarian nature and that the evidence was more consistent with investor
irrationality than with a risk-based story. LSV list several common errors
that may give rise to the mispricings that contrarian investors can exploit:
• extrapolating past earnings trend growth too far into the future;
• assuming a trend in stock prices, leading to price overreaction;
• overreacting to good or bad news;
• 
simply 
equating 
a 
good 
company 
with 
a 
good 
investment
irrespective of the stock’s price.

In Chapter 12, I return to the value effect and to the first error (over-
extrapolating and overpaying for the hope of growth), which seems the
most important.

Behavioral studies propose further (complementary) explanations. Value
stocks typically have achieved their low valuations (low market prices
compared with some value metrics) by performing poorly and suffering a
price fall. Value strategies require a long investment horizon as value stocks
pay off slowly and unevenly; meanwhile some of the companies in a value
portfolio 
look 
like 
“dogs” 
(badly 
managed 
companies 
in 
declining
industries) 
and 
are 
embarrassing 
to 
hold. 
The 
discomfort 
may 
reflect
personal 
considerations 
(regret 
aversion 
if 
a 
visible 
loser 
keeps
underperforming; it is harder in retrospect to justify having held it), social
dynamics (herding and conformity biases; there are no great vivid stories
for value firms, unlike growth or glamour firms; being a contrarian may feel
unfashionable and even anti-social). For professional managers there are
also agency issues and career concerns (“no one gets fired for holding IBM
or Microsoft”). Finally, small-growth stocks may have lottery-ticket-like
characteristics that make them overpriced [6].
Momentum and reversal, overreaction and underreaction

Behavioral 
finance 
theorists 
turned 
in 
the 
1990s 
to 
the 
library 
of
psychological biases to explain various empirical regularities uncovered
since the mid-1980s. The most important biases pointed to both momentum
and reversal effects:
• DeBondt–Thaler (1985) found a long-term reversal effect—
stocks that had underperformed in the previous 12 to 36 months tended
to subsequently outperform the market. The authors attributed long-
term reversal to investor overreaction—the reversal part represented a
correction after excessive overvaluation or undervaluation. (This long-
term 
reversal 
is 
related 
to 
the 
value 
effect 
in 
that 
multi-year
underperformers typically had become value stocks with attractive
scaled price ratios.)
• 
Jegadeesh–Titman 
(1993) 
found 
a 
short 
to 
medium-term
momentum effect—stocks that had outperformed in recent months
tended 
to 
keep 
outperforming 
up 
to 
12 
months 
ahead 
[7]. 
Such
momentum may be related to buildup of the overreaction found by
DeBondt and Thaler, and which reverted after 12 months. But there is
also an alternative underreaction story, given growing evidence of
market underreactions to discretionary corporate announcements. The
classic example was post-earnings-announcement drift: after a sharp
move on the announcement day, stock prices tended to move gradually
over several months in the same direction as the initial reaction,
suggesting 
slow 
adaptation 
to 
new 
information. 
Such 
apparent
underreactions could also contribute to price momentum.
• The above effects are cross-sectional relations across equities. In
addition, time series evidence suggests that many financial time series
exhibit positive autocorrelation over short horizons and (albeit less
consistently) negative autocorrelation over multi-year horizons. I will
show later that trend-following strategies are profitable for many risky
assets in the short run, while value strategies, which may in part rely
on long-term (relative) mean reversion, are profitable in the long run.
Momentum and value strategies also appear to be profitable when
applied across countries, within other asset classes, and across asset
classes (global tactical asset allocation). However, the time horizons
required for successful strategies in other contexts do not always
match the time horizons that are profitable for comparable strategies
within equity markets.

The combination of momentum patterns up to 12 months followed by
reversal patterns beyond 12 months was a challenge that seemed better
suited to behavioral finance than to traditional (rational) finance. Different
academic teams soon developed alternative models that rely on different
behavioral errors, or other mechanisms, to explain observed momentum and
reversal patterns. I review the four most prominent models:
• DeLong et al. (1990) developed the first formal model that
predicted both short-term momentum and long-term reversal. The
model focused on the interaction of noise traders and arbitrageurs. The
study 
simply 
posits 
that 
noise 
traders 
follow 
positive-feedback
strategies (buying recent winners and selling recent losers), which
could reflect extrapolative expectations, stop-loss orders, margin calls,
portfolio insurance, or wealth-dependent risk aversion or sentiment.
Arbitrage 
need 
not 
always 
be 
stabilizing; 
it 
may 
be 
rational 
for
arbitrageurs to jump on the bandwagon and push prices further away
from fundamental values. Positive-feedback trading clearly creates
short-term momentum and price overreaction. The eventual return
toward 
fundamental 
values 
creates 
long-term 
price 
reversal.
Subsequent studies present more detailed behavioral motivations as to
why investors follow positive-feedback strategies.
• The Barberis–Shleifer–Vishny (1998) model is motivated by
two 
heuristic 
biases: 
conservatism 
and 
representativeness.
Conservatism 
bias 
makes 
investors 
underreact 
to 
economic
announcements and other public news, giving rise to price momentum
as well as post-event continuation patterns. Representativeness can
cause overreactions and subsequent long-run reversals. One aspect of
representativeness is that investors seek, and can see, patterns in truly
random series. The model focuses on investor reaction to public
information. 
The 
model 
assumes 
that 
earnings 
streams 
follow 
a
random walk; yet investors mistakenly believe that observed earnings
come from either of two regimes—a normal mean-reverting regime or
a momentum regime—and they switch back and forth between the two
mindsets. They try to infer the prevailing 
regime 
from 
the data,
predicting earnings reversals when they believe that normal conditions
apply, but extrapolating apparent earnings trends when they observe a
string of same sign shocks and infer that a momentum regime is more
likely. The first type of mistake (proxying for conservatism) leads to
price underreactions and momentum, while the second type of mistake
leads 
to 
(delayed) 
price 
overreactions. 
Because 
the 
true 
earnings
process is a random walk, the extrapolating investor will eventually be
disappointed, resulting in long-term price reversal and value effects
[8].
• The Daniel–Hirshleifer–Subrahmanyam (1998) model relies on
different behavioral biases—overconfidence and self-attribution bias
regarding investors’ private information (see Section 6.2.1). Investors
do their own research to come up with active views about an asset’s
value. For example, if their private view is that a stock is undervalued
they will overconfidently buy and push up its price. When public news
subsequently arrives and allows investors to re-evaluate their original
private view and its accuracy, biased self-attribution helps them boost
or 
retain 
overconfidence 
(recall 
the 
asymmetry—good 
outcomes
reflect one’s own skill, bad outcomes reflect bad luck). If subsequent
public news is consistent with their bullish view, they will become
more overconfident and push up the price further. If subsequent public
news disconfirms the bullish private view, attribution bias makes them
underweight such conflicting news. Such investor behavior creates a
short-term momentum effect through price overreaction, followed by
more overreaction, and eventually long-term reversal. (The model
implies overreaction to private signals but underreaction to public
news.) A further reason for observed return predictability is that
company managements take advantage of mispricings, due to investor
overconfidence, by “timing” their issuance of stock to match times of
overvaluation and their buybacks to times of undervaluation.
• The Hong–Stein (1999) model relies on the interaction between
two not-fully-rational investor groups—newswatchers and momentum
traders—under 
conditions 
of 
heterogeneous 
information. 
Slow
diffusion 
of 
private 
information 
across 
newswatchers 
creates
underreaction 
and 
momentum 
effects. 
When 
momentum 
traders
observe trends, they jump on the bandwagon, hoping to profit from the
continued 
diffusion 
of 
information. 
However, 
their 
own 
activity
generates further momentum and causes prices to overreact beyond
fundamental values. Eventually, a reversal ensues.
These four models rely on different behavioral stories. All explain long-
term 
reversal 
as 
a 
return 
toward 
fundamental 
values 
following 
an
overreaction. However, their explanations for momentum differ. In the first
two models, momentum is generated by overreaction and more overreaction
whereas in the latter two models, it is initially generated by underreaction
and only later by overreaction.

One other behavioral bias has been found to cause and exacerbate
momentum. Recall that the disposition effect refers to investors’ reluctance
to realize small losses (“getevenitis”). People are willing to take on gambles
they would not otherwise accept if these might permit them to make up for
losses. Empirical studies show that both individual investors and mutual
funds tend to hang on to losing stocks (being more willing to sell small
winners than small losers), against the trader maxim “cut your losses, let
your profits run” and despite the tax advantage pointing to the opposite
action. It appears that experience can reduce this bias; the fact that real
estate is traded infrequently may thus make real estate investors especially
prone to this bias, because such investors have fewer learning opportunities.

The 
disposition 
effect 
can 
generate 
stock 
price 
momentum 
and
predictable 
post-event 
continuation 
effects 
such 
as 
post-earnings-
announcement drift. Data on stock turnover or on investor holdings help to
identify the stocks most prone to underreactions. The difference between
the current market price and current equity holders’ average buying price
(which serves as an aggregate reference point for gains and losses) is
crucial and needs to be estimated. If most current holders bought the stock
well above current market levels (so that they have large unrealized capital
losses), disposition-biased investors will be slow to sell assets and any bad
news will travel slowly (into the market price). Conversely, if most current
holders bought the stock well below current market levels (so that they have
large unrealized capital gains), disposition-biased investors will be quick to
sell assets and any good news will travel slowly.

...
6.4 CONCLUSION

Behavioral finance implies 
that market 
prices do not only reflect the
rationally expected discounted cash flows from an asset. Shifting asset
demands from irrational investors influence market prices and expected
returns. If there is some mispricing—overvaluation or undervaluation—
then that should disappear over time. Active investors can exploit such
mispricing and earn alpha through security selection across assets and
maybe also through market timing over time.

Five points are worth noting:
• First, because we cannot directly observe expected returns, there
has been considerable debate as to how much time series or cross-
sectional predictability of returns really exists. On this question, the
consensus academic view has changed over time from “not much at
all” to “surprisingly much . . . but less than published studies suggest
(because of data mining) and any predictability still is not easy to
exploit.”
• Second, academics in the behavioralist camp may not stress the
last point loudly enough! The limits-to-arbitrage literature highlights
how difficult it can be to take advantage of market inefficiencies—
especially macro-inefficiencies. Yet, this is hardly the message most
active investors take away from behavioral finance. Although the
behavioral finance literature may have the benign intent of helping
investors correct their own mistakes, I suspect its readers have focused
more on potential profits from exploiting other people’s systematic
errors. In this way, the field may do a disservice by promoting active
trading among investors who already are overtrading and need no
further encouragement. It is probably not too cynical to observe that
both 
the 
buy 
sides 
and 
sell 
sides 
of 
the 
financial 
industry 
have
harnessed behavioral finance as a potent intellectual justification for
active 
management 
and 
thus 
took 
better 
advantage 
of 
behavioral
finance lessons than their customers did.
• Third, there is some evidence that asset market regularities
become weaker or fully disappear after they have been published (due
to both data mining and investor learning; only the former implies that
the opportunity never really was there). Hedge fund alphas also seem
to have edged lower in the past decade. One interpretation is that
markets gradually became more (micro) efficient, reflecting learning
by arbitrageurs (who exploit any identified regularities or mispricings)
as well as growing arbitrage capacity. This trend reversed in 2007–
2008. 
As 
market 
liquidity 
and 
arbitrage 
conditions 
deteriorated,
apparent mispricings and market frictions increased. There was clearly
less arbitrage capital available, as attempts to arbitrage the mispricings
often resulted in losses as de-leveraging made cheap assets even
cheaper. There is one problem with this story: it is hard to argue that,
with abundant arbitrage capital, the market was fully efficient in 2006–
2007. Perhaps fewer relative mispricings and underreactions existed
but a general underpricing of risk distorted most asset prices. More
generally, abundant risk capital, flush liquidity, and easy access to
leverage 
may 
reduce 
micro-inefficiencies 
but 
boost 
macro-
inefficiencies in a Minskyan sense.
• Fourth, virtually any observed predictability pattern can be
interpreted to reflect either irrational mispricings or rational time-
varying risk premia (or rational learning about structural changes). On
this question, there is little agreement among academics. Some argue
that the matter may be inherently unresolvable by empirical evidence;
the 
answer 
will 
always 
depend 
on 
prior 
views. 
Fortunately, 
the
religious tones in this debate have subsided over time and an agnostic
view may have become more common. It is likely that both irrational
and rational forces drive asset prices and expected returns, and we can
argue 
about 
the 
relative 
contributions 
of 
the 
two 
for 
any 
given
regularity, 
without 
expecting 
to 
find 
a 
conclusive 
answer. 
“Both
matter” is an unsatisfactory answer to those academics who want to
take sides and find the most parsimonious model to explain asset price
behavior, but in reality both really do matter.
• Fifth, critics argue that behavioral finance lacks discipline. The
field 
offers 
too 
many 
good 
stories—at 
least 
one 
psychological
explanation for every empirical regularity. This criticism hits home,
but it also applies to the widening menu of rational explanations for
each regularity.

...
6.5 NOTES

[1] The second feature could also reflect classic risk aversion—diminishing
marginal utility of wealth. However, loss aversion seems a more plausible
explanation given the finding that expected utility maximizers should act in
an almost risk-neutral fashion over small-stake gambles unless they exhibit
absurdly high risk aversion over larger stakes. For example, an expected
utility maximizer who turns down a 50/50 bet of “gain $110/lose $100”
should 
also 
turn 
down 
a 
50/50 
bet 
of 
“gain 
$1 
billion/lose 
$1,000.”
(Technically speaking, the utility function in the expected utility framework
is nearly linear—risk neutral—locally but exhibits more curvature—risk
aversion—for larger gambles.) In contrast, the kink of PT’s value function
at zero easily explains people’s aversion to small-stake gambles.

[2] Prospect theory and its extensions also highlight the “certainty effect” in
the probability-weighting function: people put much greater value on the
complete elimination of a hazard than on a reduction in its probability. The
following example gives compelling intuition. You are forced to play
Russian roulette but can buy yourself the right to remove a single bullet
from the gun before it is fired. Would the amount you are willing to pay
depend on the total number of bullets in the gun? Most people would pay
more for removing the only bullet if only one chamber was loaded (“fully
removing the risk”) or for removing one bullet if all six chambers were
loaded (“giving a chance”), compared with what they would pay if they
could merely reduce the probability of death from 4/6 to 3/6. This example
explains vividly why the weighting curve is shallower at intermediate
probabilities than near either extreme. It also underscores the fact that the
weighting function may not refer to mistaken probabilities; in the above
example people understand the probabilities correctly but value highly the
shift from “no chance” to a possibility. In the more mundane world of
finance, the certainty effect may explain the popularity of various capital-
guaranteed products (and retain investors’ willingness to overpay for them).
The steepness of the probability-weighting function at very low and very
high (but not quite extreme) probabilities is complicated by one more
feature. Extremely low probabilities are treated as impossibilities (“rounded
down”) and extremely high probabilities as certainties (“rounded up”).
Thus, in some contexts low-probability events may be underweighted (as in
the black swan idea) and not overweighted (as in prospect theory).

[3] The classic example is preference reversal when the same question is
posed in terms of lives saved vs. people dying if a new program is adopted.
The fact that framing influences decisions contradicts the basic tenets of
expected utility theory.

[4] A Chicago School view is that bubbles are mostly visible in retrospect.
People identify bubbles with hindsight—assets were overpriced because
they subsequently fell. While valuations were high there were both buyers
and sellers; market mispricing was more contentious in real time. An
extreme (and not widely held) version of this position is that bubbles do not
exist. I believe that they do.

[5] One culprit for the 1987 crash was so-called portfolio insurance activity.
This strategy was a popular way of protecting portfolio value through
dynamic trading—essentially selling risk assets when markets fell. Note the
close parallels between wealth-dependent risk aversion in Figure 5.2 and
portfolio insurance that tried to ensure a certain subsistence level. During
the crash the insurance strategy failed because counterbalancing buyers
failed to materialize and the market gapped lower.

[6] Lottery ticket preference: Overweighting of small probabilities may
explain the low average returns for IPOs amd small growth stocks (growth
options, 
great 
stories)—these 
are 
akin 
to 
(buying) 
lottery 
tickets.
Overpaying for lotteries may also partly explain the high prices and low
expected 
returns 
of 
equity 
index 
options 
(especially 
out-of-the-money
options) and of the most volatile securities within each asset class. The
observed high average returns of carry strategies and volatility-selling
strategies are also consistent with this story, as are the observed long shot
bias in horse race betting and the particular popularity or overpricing of
lotteries with the most extreme payoffs. Lottery ticket preferences are
linked to general skewness preferences (see Section 19.4).
[7] Yet other studies found a very-short-term reversal effect—especially
sharp for the first few days but strong enough that even portfolios of last
month’s outperformers tended to underperform in the subsequent month.
Few 
behavioral 
models 
try 
to 
explain 
this 
effect, 
although 
short-term
overreactions to salient news are a possibility. More common explanations
are related to market frictions: the so-called bid–ask bounce and temporary
price concessions for large trades.

[8] In the spirit of the Griffin–Tversky (1992) distinction between the
strength and weight of informaton (see Box 6.2), investors may ignore the
high weight of fresh earnings information but overweight consistent multi-
year patterns (a salient but unreliable signal given the mean reversion
tendency in growth rates).

Source notes. Behavioral finance is such a diverse field that when trying to
give some structure to this chapter I have benefited from several previous
surveys. For one overall survey of this field, I would recommend Barberis–
Thaler (2003). For a survey emphasizing the limits to arbitrage, pick
Shleifer’s (2000) book Inefficient Markets; for one focusing on investor
psychology, pick Hirshleifer (2001); for one covering speculative bubbles,
pick 
Shiller’s 
(2000) 
book 
Irrational 
Exuberance. 
Other 
useful 
books
include Shefrin’s Beyond Greed and Fear (2002), Montier’s Behavioral
Investing (2007), Zweig’s Your Money and Your Brain (2008) as well as
the superb collections of major academic articles in this field in Thaler
(1993, 2005) Advances in Behavioral Finance I–II and Kahneman and
Tversky (2000) Choices, Values and Frames.

I follow the structure of the Barberis–Thaler (2003) in treating limits to
arbitrage and psychology separately, and in the latter section distinguishing
systematic errors in beliefs (judgment biases) and errors in preferences.
However, my classification mixes in Hirshleifer’s (2001) argument that
heuristic 
simplification 
and 
self-deception 
together 
provide 
a 
unified
explanation for most of the judgment and decision biases identified in
experimental psychology.

On the limits to arbitrage, Shleifer–Vishny (1997) is the classic article,
while on psychology and prospect theory the definitive paper is Kahneman–
Tversky (1979). Among other works, I allude to Griffin–Tversky (1992) on
representativeness/conservatism; 
Taleb 
(2001) 
and 
Zweig 
(2008) 
on
hindsight 
bias; 
Bordalo–Gennaioli–Shleifer 
(2010) 
on 
salience 
theory;
Shefrin–Statman (1985), Odean (1998), and Frazzini (2006) on disposition
effect; Thaler–Johnson (1990) on the house money effect; and Ellsberg
(1961) on ambiguity aversion.

Turning to applications, besides Shiller’s book Irrational Exuberance, I
highlight the writings of Keynes (1936), Minsky (1986), and Soros (2003,
2008). 
McCulley 
(2010) 
has 
been 
one 
of 
Minsky’s 
main 
posthumous
ambassadors. 
Jung–Shiller 
(2005) 
contrast 
macroefficiency 
vs.
microefficiency, 
and 
Malmendier–Nagel 
(2010) 
discuss 
generational
memory effects. On money illusion I highlight Modigliani–Cohn (1979), on
value effect Fama–French (1992) and Lakonsihok–Shleifer–Vishny (1994),
on 
momentum/reversal 
effects 
DeBondt–Thaler 
(1985) 
and 
Jegadeesh
(1993), and on explaining them DeLong et al. (1990), Barberis–Shleifer–
Vishny (1998), Daniel–Hirshleifer–Subrahmanyam (1998), and Hong–Stein
(1999).

...