7

Alternative interpretations for return predictability

• Observed return predictability over time can reflect time-
varying risk premia, market inefficiency, or a mirage. Parallel
interpretations (rational, irrational, noise) exist to explain large
average return differences across assets.
• Each interpretation has different investment implications.
However, it is often impossible to empirically distinguish these
explanations from one another, and they may all matter.
• “Mirage” is my catch-all term for explanations that do not
imply investment opportunities for the future: data mining and
selection biases, peso problems and learning, market frictions and
structural changes.

...
7.1 RISK PREMIA OR MARKET INEFFICIENCY

The two main competing explanations for return predictability are time-
varying risk premia and market inefficiency. (As a cross-sectional parallel
to time series predictability, abnormally high average returns for certain
assets 
or 
investment 
strategies 
also 
have 
both 
rational 
and 
irrational
explanations.) The two alternatives are often empirically indistinguishable
and a spirited debate about them has persisted for over two decades. In
reality both explanations likely have contributed to observed regularities.
These two explanations have been discussed in the previous chapters, so I
keep things brief here.

Time-varying risk premia may reflect either assets’ changing riskiness or
investors’ changing risk aversion over time—or both. Either way, time-
varying opportunities may not justify active trading for an investor who is
similar to the market. Buying opportunities tend to be greater in bad times
just when the risk or risk aversion is commensurately higher. Contrarian
market timing is not for everyone (and cannot be—or contrarian investors
would have no one to trade with). Investors who differ from the market by
having a longer investment horizon and greater risk tolerance than most
investors 
may 
be 
natural 
risky 
asset 
buyers 
during 
bad 
times 
when
valuations are attractive. (This last statement is based more on strong
intuition than on existing theoretical models; see note 5 in Chapter 28.)

Time-varying risk premia can generate a “discount rate effect”: changes
in the market’s required returns cause opposite-signed moves in realized
returns. This effect makes extrapolation of past returns doubly dangerous.
Falling required returns (whether due to lower market volatility or lower
risk aversion) can boost in-sample average returns. For example, the high
realized equity returns in the 1990s were a sign of lower ex ante returns, a
fact that return-chasing investors missed at the time. In addition, if investors
learn gradually about assets’ changing riskiness, a delayed discount rate
effect can contaminate the observed short-term risk–reward relation and
even flip its sign at first (recall the mixed evidence relating volatility to
expected return).

Market 
inefficiencies 
caused 
by 
behavioral 
biases 
should 
have 
a
predictable lifecycle: dwindling opportunity once the inefficiency becomes
well 
known. 
(Time-varying 
risk 
premia 
should 
not 
have 
any 
such
predictable lifecycle.) If smart investors find out about inefficiencies, they
want to exploit them and may arbitrage them away. However, arbitrage
capital is sometimes insufficient to eliminate such opportunities. Recent
years have clearly shown that the availability of arbitrage capital varies over
time, and that the amount of arbitrage capital available is clearly insufficient
to eliminate all inefficiencies.

Arbitrage capital may be scarcer for slow-moving and hard-to-diversify
macro-opportunities 
(market-directional 
trades) 
than 
for 
micro-
opportunities (relative value trades). The flipside is that the latter are more
likely to become crowded and capacity constrained. Regularities based on
underreaction-to-news effects may also be more easily arbitraged away than
value and momentum effects. Finally, some market inefficiencies have
arguably transformed into systematic risk factors; for example, equity value
style and currency carry style alphas have over time morphed into betas,
which may imply more persistent rewards.

...
7.2 DATA MINING AND OTHER “MIRAGE”
EXPLANATIONS

There are several explanations for market regularities besides the above
two. Data mining is the best known, but I also mention peso problems,
learning, market frictions, and the changing world. I call all of these
explanations mirages because whatever predictability was observed in the
past was sample specific and/or has no investment value for the future. Here
is some color on each explanation.

Data mining (also called data snooping, overfitting, or selection bias)

Any interesting empirical regularities could be spurious (which does not
mean that they all are). When thousands of academics and practitioners
study the same historical dataset, all motivated to find profitable strategies,
they (we) are bound to uncover many empirical relations that just happened
to work well in sample and fail miserably out of sample. Overfitting can be
unintentional—the summed outcome of many apparently minor choices in
developing, refining, and combining trading strategies—but the cumulative
impact can be large. Data-mining biases are innate in us but academics’
incentive to publish and practitioners’ incentive to attract capital make them
worse. Advances in computing power and data access compound these
effects. Finally, the tendency of negative findings (that a tested-for effect
does not exist) to go unpublished accentuates the impact of data mining:
• We should recognize the reality that any simulated (backtest)
performance presented to us likely overstates future prospects. By how
much? 
Statistical 
techniques 
exist 
to 
quantify 
the 
degree 
of 
data
mining but they are accurate only if researchers work in a vacuum. In
reality, any empirical analysis is influenced by past experience and
literature, and this collective heritage cannot be measured.
• Overfitting bias is so insidious that we cannot eliminate it (we
cannot “become virgins again” and forget our knowledge), but we can
mitigate its impact. In theory, the best approach is to use pure out-of-
sample data from actual investing. However, it is often impractical to
wait 
for 
the 
slow 
accumulation 
of 
fresh 
data, 
especially 
when
competitive pressures push us to implement the best possible model
now. (Judging that any decay in out-of-sample performance is due to
overfitting is also questionable. Such decay could be sample specific
or could reflect learning by investors, or structural breaks.)
• 
Besides 
out-of-sample 
analysis, 
other 
ways 
to 
mitigate
overfitting 
bias 
include 
requiring 
a 
certain 
economic 
logic 
from
regularities (incorporating economic priors is useful but in reality they
too 
reflect 
our 
experience); 
conducting 
cross-validation 
exercises
(testing findings on a dataset other than the one used for fitting the
model); extensive robustness checks (subperiod consistency, etc.); and
being simple in model specification and conservative in parameter
estimation. On the last theme, academics often use “predictive” models
with in-sample coefficient estimates although estimates could not have
been known to real-time investors until the end of the sample. Even if
we 
remedy 
this 
problem 
by 
using 
rolling 
coefficients 
based 
on
available data, the set of indicator variables in a model was likely
selected 
with 
hindsight. 
Dynamically 
selecting 
indicators 
and/or
models from a large pool of candidates would be less hindsighted but
is data intensive and slow to respond to any changes in the market
environment.

Reporting biases apply to actively managed funds and are close cousins to
selection 
biases 
among 
simulated 
paper 
strategies. 
Data-mining 
bias
involves selecting attractive trading strategies among many variants that
have been backtested on paper. Actively managed funds (mutual funds,
hedge funds, etc.) have a real-world track record but those being offered to
investors are selected from a larger pool and are hardly representative of the
whole pool, the poor performers among which are either shut down or their
performance is not reported. Given well-known evidence that fund flows
tend to follow good performance, it makes sense that fund marketing
focuses on past winners and that past losers tend to fall by the wayside. In
the 
mutual 
fund 
industry, 
fund 
families 
offer 
and 
incubate 
a 
diverse
selection of funds, in part to ensure that they have some recent winners to
use in marketing. Biases are larger in industries with voluntary reporting:
databases purportedly describing the whole industry can overstate industry
returns due to survivorship bias, backfill bias, and other biases (see Section
11.3). These caveats are more relevant to forming a skeptical assessment of
high average returns than they are for critiquing findings of time series
predictability.

Peso problem

Return regularities may also reflect an abnormal or unrepresentative sample
period (say, 2003–2007). The peso problem refers to the difficulty of
assessing time series that are plagued by important rare events which may
or may not be realized in sample—closely linked to fat tails and black
swans (see Rogoff, 1980; Taleb, 2007) [1]. Peso problems are especially
important when we interpret the performance of assets or strategies with
asymmetric return distributions. If a rare adverse event to which the market
assigns a low probability does not materialize during the sample period,
selling insurance against such an event appears highly profitable. Just
consider the absence of double-digit equity market crashes after October
1987 and the persistent profitability of selling out-of-the-money put options
over the two decades following the crash. More generally, risky asset
returns have benefited from events that did not happen although they could
have happened. Headline examples include no depression after the 1930s as
well as no destructive wars or hyperinflations in advanced countries after
the 1940s. Likewise, emerging market returns have been boosted in recent
decades by surprisingly few devaluations and sovereign defaults. Hindsight
bias makes investors especially prone to being misled by peso problems.
The role of luck or randomness in observed outcomes is underappreciated;
whatever happened seems predictable and even inevitable, ex post.

Learning

Rational 
learning 
amidst 
structural 
uncertainty 
can 
lead 
to 
statistical
evidence of predictable returns that is indistinguishable from the impact of
irrational expectations. For example, the Treasury bond market apparently
underpredicted inflation in the 1960s and 1970s (it was repeatedly surprised
by higher inflation) and then overpredicted inflation in the 1980s and 1990s
(it made the opposite systematic forecasting errors). With hindsight, we
know that the inflation process underwent a structural change (higher, more
volatile, more persistent inflation) and that the process was later reversed,
but 
real-time 
bond 
investors 
could 
only 
learn 
about 
this 
development
gradually. The long bull trend in emerging market assets amidst a gradual
improvement in emerging market fundamentals is another example where
data are consistent with investor irrationality as well as rational learning.
Peso 
problems 
and 
learning 
stories 
help 
in 
interpreting 
past 
return
predictability but contain no lessons about future profit opportunities.

Market frictions

Most academic predictability evidence is presented without taking into
account trading costs and other market frictions. It is not surprising, then,
that paper profits tend to be most consistent in illiquid assets (e.g., small-
cap stocks) or in trading styles that involve high turnover (e.g., short-term
reversal). Faced with evidence of profitable trading strategies, it is always
reasonable to question whether trading cost estimates (including both direct
costs and market impact) have been understated. Fortunately, newer studies
increasingly adjust profits for trading costs, financing costs, short-selling
constraints, 
and 
other 
market 
frictions. 
While 
the 
limits-to-arbitrage
literature 
explains 
why 
speculative 
capital 
is 
generally 
scarce, 
these
adjustments explain why certain paper regularities are harder to exploit in
practice 
than 
others. 
Only 
market-makers 
and 
other 
efficient 
low-cost
traders can take advantage of such opportunities, and even then, only on a
limited scale.

Changing world

Past 
success 
can 
prove 
ephemeral 
without 
implying 
that 
potential
predictable profits never were there in the first place (as other mirage
explanations imply). Some strategies truly were exploitable in the past but
then the world changed. In some cases, one can easily identify the structural
breaks that removed the profitability—for example, the inception of the
European Monetary Union, decimalization of price change increments in
stock exchanges, or the introduction of Regulation FD (Fair Disclosure). In
other 
cases 
(e.g., 
many 
underreaction 
effects 
and 
arbitrage 
strategies)
greater 
competition 
gradually 
eroded 
market 
inefficiencies. 
Financial
regularities are fragile because any highly profitable regularity attracts
competition.

Of course, we cannot observe directly which of these alternative forces
push(es) asset prices around. When investors face a sharp and/or sustained
underperformance 
of 
a 
previously 
successful 
strategy, 
it 
is 
incredibly
difficult to decide whether or not to give up on the strategy or, instead, even
double-down. 
Extrapolative 
biases, 
learning 
from 
history, 
stop-loss
discipline or other risk control, and sheer pain avoidance point to cutting
losses (but if losses turn out to be temporary, these occasions provided good
entry 
opportunities 
that 
were 
missed). 
The 
response 
depends 
on 
the
perceived cause of recent underperformance. If the investor believes that
the source of long-run profits is a sustainable risk premium, it is easier to
tough it out than if the investor fears that past success may have been a
mirage (overfitting, peso problem, etc.) or that the source of profits has
been eroded. Data provide limited assistance. Even when we can formulate
the question well, there are no easy answers.

...
7.3 NOTES

[1] For example, too few rare disasters may have occurred during the
historical window studied compared with what the markets anticipated. The
name derives from the experience of the Mexican peso that had been
pegged to the U.S. dollar between 1955 and 1976 but consistently sold at a
forward 
discount 
(Mexican 
yields 
were 
higher). 
Investors 
may 
have
rationally assigned a small probability of a large devaluation through this
period 
but 
its 
timing 
was 
highly 
uncertain. 
Until 
the 
rare 
event
(devaluation) materialized in 1976, forward rates were biased predictors of
future spot exchange rates and carry strategies were highly profitable.

Source notes. This chapter’s topics are discussed in more detail elsewhere
in the book.

...