Part II

A dozen case studies

Assets
8. Equity risk premium
9. Bond risk premium
10. Credit risk premium
11. Alternative asset premia

Dynamic strategy styles
12. Value-oriented equity selection
13. Currency carry
14. Commodity momentum and trend following
15. Volatility selling (on equity indices)

Underlying risk factors
16. Growth factor and growth premium
17. Inflation factor and inflation premium
18. Liquidity factor and illiquidity premium
19. Tail risks (volatility, correlation, skewness)

We now get to the meat of this book: return sources. Returns can be viewed
from many angles—which asset classes earn them, what active strategy
types deliver them, what fundamental factors explain them. In the dozen
case chapters that follow, I present all three complementary angles. All
reasonably static asset classes and dynamic strategies may reflect certain
underlying risk factors. Beyond rational risk factors—such as growth,
inflation, 
liquidity, 
and 
volatility—related 
investor 
irrationalities 
and
supply–demand considerations can influence the prospective returns of both
asset classes and dynamic strategies.

The cube of asset, style, and factor perspectives that was introduced in
Chapter 1 will be used as a navigational tool at the beginning of each
chapter.
The boundaries between these three types of return sources are fuzzy.
This book stresses that investors could be better off focusing on underlying
factors rather than on asset classes when considering investment risks and
returns. Each 
asset is a 
bundle of characteristics or systematic factor
exposures that largely determine its expected returns. The challenge is
admittedly greater because investors do not agree on a unique set of factors
for any given asset class.

When we refer to constant expected returns or risk premia, constancy is
assumed 
only 
for 
assets 
or 
portfolios 
with 
certain 
relatively 
stable
characteristics. Many asset characteristics change gradually over time, and
occasionally 
experience 
sudden 
jumps. 
Bond 
durations 
shorten, 
credit
ratings change, firms mature from volatile startup growth stocks to stable
income-producing value stocks, and liquid assets turn into illiquid ones
through a buyout. Assets’ required returns (discount rates) evolve over time
in line with these changing characteristics—even if underlying factor risk
premia are stable over time. To isolate the rewards for characteristics or
factors we often study specially constructed portfolios—say, one loaded
with a “unit” of a given factor exposure, such as equity value.

The fact that asset characteristics evolve over time blurs the boundary
between static holdings and dynamic strategies. Buy-and-hold strategies are
static (passive) in terms of assets but they allow changing characteristics
over time. Conversely, to maintain a portfolio with stable characteristics—
whether it is the S&P 500 index, a small-cap value stock portfolio, or a
constant 
duration 
Treasury 
portfolio—a 
certain 
amount 
of 
portfolio
rebalancing or trading is required. I refer to portfolios with relatively stable
characteristics 
and 
limited 
turnover 
as 
“static 
holdings” 
portfolios. 
In
contrast, I refer to active portfolios that vary their risk exposures based on
the current market environment, with relatively high turnover (e.g., market
timing or momentum portfolios), as “dynamic strategies”. Equity-value
style portfolios and FX carry portfolios are on the borderline between static
and dynamic because their constituents change, but quite slowly.

Whether we study asset classes, strategy styles, or risk factors, the
assumption 
of 
constant 
premia 
may 
be 
inappropriate. 
Even 
many
characteristics or systematic factor exposures exhibit time-varying ex ante
rewards.
...