8

Equity risk premium

• The historical annual excess returns of U.S. stocks over
government bonds average 3% to 5% over long data windows, a
further 1% over short-dated bills and about another 2% higher if
arithmetic means are used. Global excess returns of stocks over
bonds are somewhat lower.
• Forward-looking measures of the equity–bond premium—
based on a yield ratio or Gordon model (dividend discount model
or DDM)—exhibit significant time variation, probably for both
rational and irrational reasons. Extreme values range between
zero (or even negative) and 10%.
• The Gordon model states that long-run real equity returns
equal the sum of the dividend yield and the real dividend growth
rate (assuming no valuation changes). Both inputs can be debated
but estimates in the 2000s point to modest real returns (say,
2%+1% = 3%) and an even thinner premium over Treasuries.
Any higher expected return estimates must be justified by broader
yield measures, more optimistic growth inputs, or expanding
valuation multiples.
• Real long-run growth in dividends and earnings per share
has clearly lagged the GDP growth rate. Aggregate earnings
growth also includes net new equity issuance, which does not
benefit existing shareholders.
• Equity market valuations have been especially high amidst
stable mild inflation and low macro-volatility, which is not a
promising sign for future multiple expansion.
• Standard economic models suggest that the equity premium
should be negligible (<1%). A cottage industry of academic
papers offers diverse explanations for the puzzle of stocks’ much
stronger historical outperformance.
• Survey forecasts of equity premia vary across sources and
over time. Retail investor expectations appear extrapolative and
procyclical, professional investor views less so. The latter tend to
predict a long-run equity premium of 3% to 4%—below the
historical average but above some estimates from valuation
models. Academics’ estimates average near 6%, the higher value
apparently reflecting benign 20th-century experience and/or the
widespread use in academia of the future-equals-past model for
the equity premium.
• Valuation, cyclical, and sentiment indicators can be useful
for market timing, but all such relations are fragile.

...
8.1 INTRODUCTION AND TERMINOLOGY

It is natural to begin the analysis with the asset class perspective and with
the reward for stock investing, traditionally the most important source of
long-run excess returns (see cube). The equity premium or equity risk
premium (ERP) refers to the (expected or realized) return of a broad equity
index in excess over some non-equity alternative. Different alternatives
have been used: a short-term “riskless” asset (Treasury bill or other money
market asset), a long-term Treasury bond (which is a better horizon match
for a long-term equity investment), a corporate bond, or even a hypothetical
asset returning the rate of inflation. I will use the term ERPC for the
premium over short-dated assets (“cash”) and ERPB for the premium over
long-dated Treasuries (“bonds”). I will discuss both measures, ERPC and
ERPB, in the context of both nominal and real (inflation-adjusted) returns.
This entire analysis focuses on pretax returns [1].

The 
other 
important 
distinction 
among 
equity 
premium 
concepts 
is
between the ex post equity premium (historical realized excess return) and
the ex ante equity premium (forward-looking excess return):
• both can be measured either as an arithmetic average or a
geometric average;
• the latter may be based on objectively feasible future returns
(rational 
expectations) 
or 
subjective 
return 
expectations 
(that 
are
possibly irrational). Thus, the label “ERP” can be misleading if non-
risk considerations cause equities’ ex ante return advantage.

The equity premium is ideally computed for stock market indices that
weight each constituent stock by its market capitalization. Early research
also analyzed equally weighted stock indices that effectively overweight
small-cap stocks and require frequent turnover to maintain equal weights.
Newer 
research 
focuses 
on 
fundamental 
value-weighted 
indices 
and
(inversely) volatility-weighted indices, given the historic tendency of both
kinds of indices to outperform market cap indices (see Chapters 12 and 19).

The rest of this chapter covers the equity premium from different angles:
theoretical 
determinants, 
historical 
experience, 
forward-looking 
value
measures, survey forecasts, and tactical forecasting models.

...
8.2 THEORIES AND THE EQUITY PREMIUM PUZZLE

On the normative question of how high the equity risk premium should be,
the academic literature provides limited guidance. The CAPM implies a
cross-sectional relation—that each asset’s expected excess return is the
product of its market beta and the market risk premium—but it does not
specify how large the market risk premium should be. The required market
risk premium should reflect the price of risk and the amount of risk. While
the CAPM is a static model, a more realistic approach might reflect the
view 
that 
market 
risk 
aversion 
varies 
with 
recent 
market 
moves 
and
economic conditions, and that the amount of risk in the market varies with
stock market volatility and asset correlations.

For many academics, equilibrium asset-pricing models have been a more
important path of inquiry. Recall the general idea that required risk premia
reflect the way that asset returns covary with the marginal utility of an extra
dollar of investor wealth. Consumption-based asset-pricing models link
high marginal utility to slow or negative consumption growth. In such a
model, the single factor that drives risk premia is consumption growth
rather than equity index performance. While it is satisfying to derive asset-
pricing 
theories 
from 
economic 
fundamentals 
like 
consumption, 
such
theories 
have 
found 
it 
hard 
to 
explain 
why 
equities 
have 
historically
outperformed bonds by several percentage points.

The equity premium puzzle refers to the difficulty of explaining the
magnitude of the observed (historical) equity risk premium (4 to 8%) in the
context of a standard macroeconomic model and rational expectations
equilibrium. Mehra–Prescott (1985) used a standard neoclassical finance
model (for those familiar with the jargon: an exchange economy, a serially
uncorrelated consumption growth rate, and a representative agent with a
utility function that exhibits constant relative risk aversion). The model
predicts a very low equity risk premium (well below 1%) due to the low
observed volatility of consumption growth and low observed correlation
between consumption growth and asset returns, unless an extremely high
risk aversion coefficient is used. A huge academic literature has tried to
reconcile this puzzle, using market frictions (borrowing constraints, limited
market 
participation, 
incomplete 
markets, 
and 
idiosyncratic 
risk), 
non-
standard 
utility 
functions 
(habit 
formation, 
recursive 
utility), 
modified
consumption data (durable goods, luxury goods, long-term consumption
risk), and biased sample explanations (survivorship bias among countries
studied, absence of negative rare events in the sample, unexpected repricing
of equities or bonds) as rational explanations for high observed equity
outperformance—but there is little consensus to date.

The 
following 
explanations 
advanced 
in 
some 
recent 
studies 
ring
particularly true to me:
• Rare disaster risk. Investors may have historically assigned a
higher probability to rare catastrophic events than actually materialized
during the sample period. This idea—closely related to peso problems
and fat tails—can justify a higher historical premium.
• Structural uncertainty. In contrast to assumptions in standard
economic models, investors do not fully know the structure of the
economic 
system, 
so 
they 
must 
gradually 
learn 
about 
unknown
structural parameters. The premium for such uncertainty can be an
order of magnitude larger than the premium in a well-understood
economic 
model. 
A 
topical 
example 
of 
structural 
uncertainty 
is
political risk. The ongoing changing of “the rules of the game” by
policymakers, regulators, and politicians in the post-2008 world is
understandable. 
Yet, 
the 
related 
(significant 
if 
unquantifiable)
uncertainty presumably raises the risk premia that investors demand—
especially for assets most exposed to such political risk.
• Long-run risk. Short-term volatility in consumption and output
is easily measured (albeit with noise), but for investors the bigger
concern is the uncertainty about long-run growth rates. Academics
have developed theoretical models on this theme, while empiricists
argue that the secular decline in dividend yields and other equity
premium 
proxies 
has 
been 
matched 
by 
a 
secular 
decline 
in
macroeconomic volatility.
• Straddling the above explanations, the legacy of the Great
Depression may have sustained for decades a widespread morbid
expectation/fear of another serious slump. Learning about rare events
requires 
many observations, so the Depression-induced pessimism
dissipated extremely slowly, ending only in the 1960s. New research
confirms 
that 
investors’ 
risk 
attitudes 
depend 
on 
their 
lifetime
experiences and memories, in the spirit of conservative “depression
babies”. These stories are especially relevant now that two major bear
markets during the past decade may cast a long shadow on investor
behavior.

The two main behavioral explanations both require combining loss aversion
with one other behavioral feature—a short time horizon (myopia) or the
house money effect:
• The myopic loss aversion model relies on a variant of mental
accounting related to the investment time horizon (evaluation period).
A given expected return advantage will attract investors more, the
longer their investment horizon is. If investors evaluate their portfolios
very frequently, the odds of risky assets outperforming riskless ones
are close to 50/50 and loss aversion kicks in. Over longer horizons, the
odds steadily improve. A typical degree of loss aversion applied to
annual changes in financial wealth can justify an equity premium of
6.5%, suggesting that an annual portfolio evaluation period is plausible
for the overall market.
• Yale’s Nicholas Barberis and co-authors develop an equilibrium
model in which investors derive utility both from consumption and
from annual changes in wealth. They too assume a typical degree of
loss aversion (just above 2) but find that a model with constant loss
aversion cannot fully explain the equity premium puzzle. However,
they can resolve the puzzle if they include in their model the “house
money 
effect”—the 
idea 
that 
the 
degree 
of 
loss 
aversion 
varies
dynamically with prior gains and losses. The model thus implies that
investors’ risk attitudes become more conservative in down-markets.

The next section shows that estimates of the equity premium have edged
lower since the 1990s. During the Great Moderation years, it was popular to
argue that lower macro-volatility and investor learning about equities’ long-
run return advantage could justify a sustained fall in the required equity
premium. Such arguments ring hollow after the 2008 experience. Yet, it
remains plausible that the fair premium has declined somewhat due to lower
trading costs and better global diversification opportunities.

...
8.3 HISTORICAL EQUITY PREMIUM

Table 8.1 and Figure 8.1 recap the U.S. experience since the 19th century,
documenting compound (geometric) nominal and real returns as well as
equity premia over cash (mainly one-month Treasury bills) and over bonds
(mainly 10-year Treasury bonds). The variation in average nominal equity
returns across very long (at least 50-year) samples may partly reflect
different inflation levels over time—near-zero inflation in the 19th century
vs. 3% in the 20th century. Real equity market returns have been more
stable over time, with a 6.3% annual average.

It is dangerous to extrapolate the 6% real growth trend for equities, partly
because some of it reflects one-off valuation gains from expansion of the
P/E multiple. Moreover, 20-year real returns varied between 1% and 13%.
The highest 20-year real returns took place after calamities such as the Civil
War, World War II, and the Great Inflation. It is also important to remember
that, in reality, most investors could not have achieved 6% real returns even
if they had regularly reinvested their dividends and had managed to avoid
poor market timing. Trading costs, investment management fees, and taxes
would 
have 
eaten 
into 
the 
performance 
for 
even 
such 
rare 
virtuous
investors.

Table 8.1. Compound average U.S. equity returns and equity premia over
200+ years

Sources: Arnott–Bernstein (2002), Bloomberg.
Figure 8.1. Cumulative real return to equity investing has been surprisingly
stable, 
but 
a 
large 
premium 
over 
bonds 
is 
mainly 
a 
20th-century
phenomenon.

Sources: Arnott–Bernstein (2002), Bloomberg.

The equity premium over bonds was especially high from the 1950s to
the 1970s as the persistent rise in inflation hurt bonds. This premium was
only half a percent over the 19th century but 10 times higher in the 20th
century [2]. Since the Civil War (1861–1865), U.S. equities almost never
underperformed bonds over a 20-year window. This consistency of long-
horizon outperformance was made famous by Jeremy Siegel’s book, Stocks
for the Long Run, first published in 1994. However, the DMS data remind
us that in other countries there have been many examples of negative 20-
year equity premia—most recently, of course, in Japan. During the early
2009 trough, U.S. equities had underperformed bonds over 20 years. If
stocks are compared with 20-year Treasuries (rather than the 10-year bonds
used in Figure 8.2), they had even underperformed over a time span in
excess of 40 years (November 30, 1968 to March 31, 2009), by far the
longest window since the Civil War.

Figure 8.2. Rolling average 20-year returns and premia of U.S. equities.

Sources: Arnott–Bernstein (2002), Bloomberg.

Lower equity premium estimates by studying global evidence

Many observers attribute the high equity premium to the particular success
of the U.S. economy. Even multi-country studies involve various biases
which suggest that realized market returns exceed the returns that were
anticipated:
• Survivorship bias raises the odds that we examine countries that
have had good or at least continuous capital market performance (say,
the G5 as opposed to Russia, Austria–Hungary, India, Turkey, or
Argentina).
• Easy data bias makes it likely that we start samples after unusual
events (war, hyperinflation, market closure), which often means that
assets are cheap at the start of the period and that no comparable
turmoil reoccurs during the period.
• The peso problem literature recognizes that past U.S. market
pricing was influenced by the rare disasters that could have happened
but did not. Hindsight tells us that the United States and its market
economy survived two world wars, the Cold War, and the Great
Depression, and did not suffer the hyperinflation, invasion, or other
calamities 
experienced 
by 
many 
other 
countries. 
This 
was 
not 
a
foregone conclusion at all times, so it is little wonder that realized
equity returns were boosted by the absence of catastrophes and then by
a repricing effect by the end of the 20th century, when the perceived
likelihood of catastrophe had fallen.
The comprehensive global studies by Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton address
these questions by analyzing the performance of equity markets in 19
countries since 1900. Table 8.2 shows that the (market cap or GDP-
weighted) global equity premium is about 0.5% to 0.8% lower than the U.S.
premium for 1900–2009—consistent with mild selection bias. The authors
argue that use of their world premium captures the bulk of any survivorship
or selection bias given that the 19 countries in their database may have
accounted for 90% of world equity market capitalization at the start of the
20th century [3]. Equity returns are a tad lower outside the U.S. but the
broad patterns are similar.

Table 8.2. Compound annual (geometric) equity returns and premia, 1900–
2009

Source: Dimson–Marsh–Staunton (2010).

Lower premium if realized returns are adjusted for unexpected windfall
gains

Despite concerns about survivorship bias, peso problems, and time-varying
expected returns, many investment textbooks still use historical excess
returns as a proxy for the ex ante risk premium. Historical average returns
equal expected returns, however, only if expected returns are constant and
unexpected returns from persistent growth surprises and valuation changes
do not distort within-sample results. Such valuation changes can materially
impact average realized returns even over long sample periods—and indeed
they have done so in the 20th century. Starting from the early or mid-20th
century, equity market D/P and E/P ratios have fallen, while bond yields
have returned to their previous low levels, having visited double digits
around 1980. Thus, realized equity–bond excess return in the 20th century
almost surely exaggerates the expected premium investors actually required
(in the past, let alone now, after required returns have arguably declined).
A key theme in this book is the crucial distinction between realized (ex
post) average excess returns and expected (ex ante) risk premia. If required
returns vary over time, past average returns may be poor predictors of
future returns—and they can even be poor proxies of past expected returns,
returns that were expected or demanded by investors at the time. If markets
undergo significant valuation changes, realized average returns are strongly
influenced by unexpected capital gains and losses even over long sample
periods.

We can try to recover past average expected returns by adjusting realized
returns for the estimated impact of repricing (unexpected capital gains or
losses). 
Several 
studies 
take 
this 
approach, 
notably 
Dimson–Marsh–
Staunton (2002), Fama–French (2002), and Ibbotson–Chen (2003). Each
study uses a slightly different method of removing the impact of unexpected
windfall gains to recover the equity risk premium that was expected over
some past sample period. All three studies find an (adjusted) expected
equity–bond risk premium near 4% in the United States, averaged over long
histories.

Lower expected premium if current equity market valuations are especially
high

Such estimates are still based on past average expectations and are not
necessarily 
relevant 
for 
the 
current 
environment, 
if 
current 
market
valuations differ from historical averages (see Box 2.1). I will soon discuss
forward-looking expected returns in detail, but I first review the Ibbotson–
Chen (2003) building block approach.

Figure 8.3. Decomposing historical equity market returns, 1900–2009.

Sources: Arnott–Bernstein (2002), Bloomberg, Robert Shiller’s website.
Figure 8.3 decomposes the realized 110-year (1900–2009) compound
annual stock market return of 9.6% into its elemental parts, using separate
decompositions for the “demand” and “supply” of returns. The total return
is split into either:
• the sum of required (demanded) returns on the assumption that
sample averages capture required returns well (4.7% nominal Treasury
bond 
return 
+ 
4.7% 
ex 
post 
equity 
risk 
premium 
+ 
small
interaction/reinvestment terms); or
• the sum of supplied returns (3.0% average inflation + 4.3%
average dividend yield + 1.3 % average real earnings-per-share growth
rate + 0.5% repricing effect, the annualized impact of the expansion of
the P/E ratio by 75% from 12.5 to 21.9 during the sample period +
small interaction/reinvestment terms).

Following Ibbotson and Chen, I deem the 0.5% repricing gain as an
unexpected windfall and subtract it from the supplied returns (third bar). I
could use the real dividend growth rate (averaging 1.2%) and the repricing
effect based on dividend yield changes (having a slightly higher annualized
impact, 0.7%) instead of earnings data, with broadly the same results.

The third bar suggests, then, that investors required an ex ante nominal
equity market return of 9.1% between 1900 and 2009, on average. This
inference carries over to the return that is expected now or in the future only
if we assume that expected returns are constant. If expected returns vary
over time, and current values differ from average levels over the sample,
this analysis can be misleading. Given that long-term Treasury yields are
below 4%, few observers would extrapolate the realized 4.7% average bond
returns into the future. Similar considerations suggest that we might reduce
the CPI and D/P components for equities. The fourth column shows that
using 2.3% CPI (consensus forecast for long-term inflation) and 2.0% D/P,
a forward-looking measure predicts only 5.6% nominal equity returns for
the long term. Admittedly the D/P value could be raised if we use a broader
carry measure including net share buybacks, so I add 0.75% to the estimate
(and call it “D/P+”). Even more bullish return forecasts than 6.4% would
have to rely on growth optimism (beyond the historical 1.3% rate of real
earnings-per-share growth) or expected further P/E expansion in the coming
decades (my analysis assumes none). More generally, these building blocks
give us a useful framework for debating the key components of future
equity returns.

Box 8.1. The cross-sectional relation (or lack of it) between equity
betas and returns

This chapter focuses on the equity premium computed as the
difference between the return on an equity market index and the return
on default-free Treasury debt. The CAPM predicts a positive risk–
reward relation (given a beta of 1.00 for the equity market and a near-
zero beta for fixed income). The CAPM also predicts a cross-sectional
relation across equities: expected returns rise as a linear function of
equities’ betas. However, using postwar data, the empirically observed
relation (security market line) has been too flat relative to what the
CAPM predicts, or even inverted. High-beta stocks have not
outperformed low-beta stocks. In Figure 8.4 I show six Fama–French
size-sorted and value-sorted portfolios as well as three beta-sorted
portfolios (courtesy Eric Falkenstein). In contrast to the clearly
positive long-run equity premium over bonds, there is no evidence for
a positive beta premium across equities.

Figure 8.4. Positive-beta pricing relation between stocks and bonds
but not across stocks, 1962–2009.

Sources: Ken French’s website, Bank of America Merrill Lynch,
Center for Research in Security Prices, Eric Falkenstein.
The surprisingly good performance of low-beta stocks may reflect
their tendency to have large loadings on other priced factors or
characteristics. To me the most compelling explanation is that many
volatile high-beta stocks are bought as lottery tickets and as proxies for
high-leverage investments (Section 19.5 drills deeper into the apparent
overpricing of high-volatility stocks), whereas low-beta stocks tend to
be stable, dull stocks with a value bias. While high-beta stocks
outperformed low-beta stocks between 1926 and 1963, perhaps
because value stocks had higher betas than growth stocks in these
decades, Fama–French (2006b) stress that any variation in betas
unrelated to size and value was unrewarded both before and after
1963.

Another plausible explanation stresses the distinction between
“good” betas and “bad” betas (i.e., sensitivities to discount rate
changes as opposed to cash flow changes, respectively). (Value stocks
and low-beta stocks are more exposed to bad beta which has a more
permanent price impact. Thus they warrant higher premia; see Section
12.4.)

MSCI Barra recently estimated a similar decomposition for their global
equity index between 1975 and 2009 but they used book values rather than
earnings as the measure of fundamental value. The annual gross return of
11.1% consisted of 4.2% inflation, 2.9% dividend income, 2.1% real book
value 
growth, 
1.5% 
valuation 
multiple 
expansion, 
and 
0.4% 
residual
interaction terms. The past decade (the 2000s) saw the fastest real growth
(3.8%) but this was more than offset by valuation multiple contraction (—
8.3%).

...
8.4 FORWARD-LOOKING (EX ANTE OBJECTIVE) LONG-
TERM EXPECTED RETURN MEASURES

Among forward-looking measures of equity market carry or value, dividend
yield was the early leader. However, broader payout yields that include (at
least) share buybacks have replaced it as the preferred carry measure, while
earnings yield and the Gordon model (DDM) equity premium have become
the preferred valuation measures.

...
8.4.1 Carry (narrow dividend yield vs. broader total payout yield)

Dividend yield (D/P) is the classic proxy for equity carry and was seen as a
useful predictor of future equity returns until it failed in the 1990s. Having
ranged between 3% and 6% for 40 years, the D/P of the S&P 500 fell for
the first time ever below 3% in 1993 and then below 2% in 1997, remaining
there for the next decade. Thus, D/P gave a bearish signal through the
whole 1990s’ equity rally, denting its record as a market-timing signal. The
trend decline in D/P in the 1980s and 1990s partly reflected a structural
change: 
many 
firms 
replaced 
dividends 
with 
repurchases 
(i.e., 
stock
buybacks), which were more tax efficient, more flexible, and had a more
positive impact on share price. If top executives are compensated based on
share price, they naturally prefer buybacks over dividend payments as a
means of distributing cash to investors.

The 
obvious 
improvement 
for 
measuring 
equity 
market 
carry 
is 
to
include share buybacks, which became much more prevalent starting in the
early 1980s. One reason was the 1982 change in SEC rules that provides a
safe harbor from price manipulation charges for firms conducting share
buybacks. Buyback yield never exceeded 1% before 1985 but did so in
most years thereafter. Even though buyback yield has in some years even
exceeded dividend yield, the former arguably should not get as high a
weight as the latter in any long-run carry measure because it is not as
persistent. 
It 
is 
much 
easier 
for 
a 
management 
to 
reduce 
repurchase
activities than to cut dividends.

Figure 8.5. Ex ante equity carry measures, 1984–2009.

Sources: Haver Analytics, Michael Afreh (Nomura).
Only adding share buybacks but not share issuance, as is sometimes
done, would overstate effective carry. Firms may repurchase shares or pay
dividends when they have excess cash, while they issue “seasoned” equity
(additional equity in an existing company) when they need more capital
from investors. Net buyback-adjusted yield, net payout yield, and the
change in Treasury stock use somewhat different data to adjust dividend
yields but the intent of all of them is the same, to estimate total cash flow
from the company to the investor. Some argue that cash-financed merger
and acquisition (M&A) deals are a further component of cash flows to the
investor 
that 
should 
be 
included 
in 
a 
carry 
or 
yield 
measure. 
This
component is less frequently included—and its predictive ability is worse
because high M&A volumes tend to coincide with bull markets. Figure 8.5
plots some of these time series.

Table 8.3 shows that net buyback-adjusted dividend yield (the sum of
dividend yields and buybacks, less issuance) has the highest correlation
with next quarter equity market returns (0.27). The same is true when
predicting annual equity returns (0.42). Moreover, this carry measure is less
persistent than others—the autocorrelation between its values 12 months
apart 
is 
lowest. 
Dividend 
yield 
was 
by 
far 
the 
most 
persistent 
carry
component, as expected. The data confirm that including M&A yield would
reduce the predictive ability of a broad carry composite, and is best left out.
These data start only in 1985, but academic studies document good market-
timing ability using total payout yield and net buyback yield since the
1920s. 
The 
strong 
results 
may 
partly 
reflect 
corporate 
managers
successfully market timing their equity issuance to coincide with expensive
market levels.

Table 8.3. Predictive market-timing correlations of narrow and broad carry
measures, 1985–2009

Sources: Haver Analytics, Michael Afreh (Nomura).

...
8.4.2 Value measures: Earnings yield and the Fed Model

Absolute valuation

A stock market’s price–earnings (P/E) ratio and its inverse, the earnings
yield (E/P), are the most popular equity market valuation indicators. The
spread (arithmetic difference) or, alternatively, the ratio of government bond
yield (Y) over earnings yield (E/P) is the most popular measure of relative
valuation between the two major asset classes—and thus shorthand for the
equity–bond premium.

Several choices need to be made on the earnings series used in E/P
measures:
• Nature of earnings: Trailing vs. forward looking (based on a
consensus of analyst estimates), and operating vs. reported. Trailing
reported earnings are available for almost a century for the S&P 500
and its predecessor index, the S&P 90, while the latter (operating vs.
reported) 
only 
became 
available 
in 
the 
1980s. 
Analysts 
typically
forecast 
operating 
earnings 
that 
ignore 
non-recurring 
items 
like
writeoffs, 
which 
may 
distort 
the 
picture 
of 
“normal” 
earnings.
However, operating earnings are almost invariably higher than trailing
reported earnings—partly due to analysts’ overoptimism, partly due to
the management bias toward viewing good news as recurring but bad
news 
as 
non-recurring, 
and 
partly 
due 
to 
the 
normal 
uptrend 
in
earnings (so that next year earnings are, on average, higher than
trailing earnings, all other things being equal).
• Window 
length. 
Trailing 
reported 
earnings 
are 
traditionally
shown for the past year. Annual earnings are so volatile, however, that
E1/P 
can 
fall 
during 
a 
bear 
market 
(1932, 
2002, 
2009). 
Longer
windows with smoothed earnings may thus be preferred, and Robert
Shiller has popularized the use of a real version of Ben Graham’s
nominal E10/P series (see Figure 2.7 for a 110-year history of this
indicator).
• Adjustments to earnings to make E/P a more realistic measure
of 
expected 
real 
return. 
For 
example, 
Wilcox 
(2007) 
shows 
that
because reported earnings are not real but based on current period
prices, 
it 
makes 
sense 
to 
make 
an 
accounting 
adjustment 
for
depreciation 
expenses 
and 
a 
debt 
adjustment 
for 
creditor 
claims.
Wilcox shows that earnings yield thus inflation-adjusted is empirically
a better predictor than unadjusted earnings yield. The correlation of the
former measure with next year real equity market return is 0.28 (over
1970–2006), more than twice that of the latter.

Relative valuation: Lower bond yields explain lower earnings yields

Note that E/P is an “absolute value indicator”—relating an asset’s price to
its earnings and judging whether the current E/P level is high or low
compared with its own history. Of course E/P and other value measures
(book to price, dividend yield, Tobin’s q) can be compared across individual
equities or equity market sectors and countries, thus making them “relative
value indicators”. The most popular relative value indicator across major
asset classes is the spread or ratio between equity market E/P and 10-year
Treasury yield. Figure 8.7 shows the history of the earnings yield and the
10-year government bond yield for over a century. Unless otherwise stated,
our earnings yield refers to the trailing one-year operating earnings per
share of the S&P 500 index and its predecessors.

Figure 8.6. Different variants of earnings yields, 1982–2009.

Sources: Haver Analytics, Standard & Poor’s, Robert Shiller’s website,
Stephen Wilcox’s website.
Figure 8.7. Trailing and forward earnings yield and Treasury yield, 1900–
2009.

Sources: Haver Analytics, Standard & Poor’s, Robert Shiller’s website,
Federal Reserve Board, Homer–Sylla (1991).

The broad picture is that earnings yield has ranged between 2% and 18%,
but has been near historical lows since the 1990s. Bond yields traded
systematically below earnings yields for most of the century, but traded
above them between 1980 and 2002. While earnings yields and bond yields
were almost uncorrelated until 1960, since then they have shared common
uptrends and downtrends. Figure 8.8 plots the ratio of Treasury yield over
earnings yield. This ratio is high when stocks are expensive vs. bonds. For
nearly half a century, this ratio was rather neatly mean reverting, providing
good relative value signals for asset allocation trades between stock and
bond markets. Over this period, we can say that lower bond yields explain
lower earnings yields. This is not surprising, because bonds are the main
asset class competing with equities for investor capital, and the bond yield
constitutes the riskless part of equities’ discount rate. More surprising is
that nominal bond yield (or even the inflation rate) gives a better fit to E/Ps
than real bond yield, even though equity earnings yield is a real—not
nominal—concept.

Figure 8.8. Yield ratio (E/P divided by Treasury yield) tracks the return
volatility ratio between stocks and bonds.

Sources: Haver Analytics, Standard & Poor’s, Robert Shiller’s website,
Federal Reserve Board, Homer–Sylla (1991), own calculations.
Whatever the fundamental reason for the close relation between equity
and bond yields, investors have tried to exploit it. Yield ratio became a
popular 
relative 
value 
indicator, 
labeled 
“the 
Fed 
Model” 
after 
Fed
chairman 
Alan 
Greenspan 
referred 
to 
this 
indicator 
in 
Congressional
testimony in 1997. Asness (2003) stresses that while the Fed Model is
poorly constructed, in that it mixes real and nominal quantities, it may
describe well how investors choose to set stock market P/E. In other words,
if investors set P/E in relation to nominal bond yield, whether rationally or
irrationally, over the short term the Fed Model may be a moderately useful
trading tool. Over the long run, Asness argues, the Fed Model gives poor
timing signals.

What are we to make of the long-run trends in yield ratio? The series was
relatively trendless in the first half of the 20th century but clearly upward
trending in the postwar decades, signaling relative richening of stocks vs.
bonds. One appealing explanation for this upward trend is that the relative
risk of bonds vs. stocks grew over time. The thin line in Figure 8.8 shows
the relative return volatility of 10-year government bonds and of the stock
market index, measured by 15-year moving standard deviations. In the first
half of the century, stock market returns were about seven times as volatile
as bond returns. By the 1980s, relative volatilities were virtually equal—
although subsequent disinflation reduced bond volatility to less than half of
stock market volatility. The trend increase in the volatility ratio reflects an
increase in bond volatility, particularly in the 1970s and 1980s, and a
decline in stock volatility from the 1930s until recently. In addition to time
variation in volatilities, the changing recession-hedging ability of bonds
contributed to changing asset class valuations. In the 1930s, 1950s, and
2000s, Treasuries were perceived to be good recession hedges—and were
thus negatively correlated with equities. In contrast, Treasuries did not have
such safe haven characteristics and actually lost money during the 1970–
1982 stagflationary recessions.

Shifts in the relative risk of asset classes are a structural change that
undermines the usefulness of valuation signals like yield ratio. This ratio
serves well as a mean-reverting signal within any one regime, but it
typically gives a wrong value signal when a structural or regime change
occurs. How should one watch out for those structural changes? One
guidepost is a secular change in long-run inflation expectations or in long-
run economic growth rates or in their volatilities. Both of these variables are
fundamental drivers of the relative prospects and risks of bond and stock
asset classes.

Puzzlingly close relation between earnings yield and inflation

Since stock prices reflect the expected values of discounted future cash
flows, it is a mathematical identity that low earnings yields (high P/E ratios)
reflect 
some 
combination 
of 
low 
discount 
rates 
and/or 
high 
expected
earnings growth rates. Yet, various growth indicators are only loosely
related to earnings yield fluctuations and the market P/E ratio has only a
modest ability to predict subsequent earnings growth. The discount rate
may affect the riskless yield component or the required equity–bond risk
premium. Historical analysis suggests that earnings yields have been more
closely related to inflation than to nominal or real bond yields or any
growth metrics.

Figure 8.9 depicts the relation between U.S. earnings yields and realized
inflation rates. A comparable relationship exists in many other countries,
either using ex post or ex ante inflation data. High correlation between
earnings 
yields 
and 
inflation 
rates 
may 
be 
surprising, 
because 
E/P 
is
supposed to be a real variable. The textbook view is that stocks are real
assets. 
Since 
higher 
inflation 
should 
be 
fully 
compensated 
by 
higher
nominal earnings growth rates, changing inflation rates should have little
impact on stock prices or valuation ratios. However, this principle does not
hold up in practice. Many empirical studies have documented a negative
relation between (expected or unexpected) inflation and stock returns, but
the slow-moving relation between inflation and equity market valuation
ratios is even stronger.

Figure 
8.9. 
Over 
1900–2009, 
trailing 
earnings 
yield 
tracked 
inflation
surprisingly closely for the first half of the period, then less closely.

Source: Robert Shiller’s website.

What explains this apparently anomalous relation? Here are the main
candidates, all of which may contribute:
• Inflation may impact real earnings growth prospects—high
inflation is detrimental to growth.
• The required real equity returns may be correlated with expected
inflation (rational inflation-related risk premium).
• Inflation may raise prospective real returns because irrational
money illusion (discussed below) makes equity markets undervalued
(overvalued) when inflation is high (low).
• Distortions due to accounting rules and taxation—accounting
rules include inflationary gains in reported earnings. Higher inflation
boosts 
reported 
earnings 
due 
to 
inventory 
gains 
and 
insufficient
depreciation expenses. The interaction of depreciation, corporate taxes,
and inflation also influences reported net profits.

The last candidate could explain why the correlation is strongest between
past year inflation and past year trailing earnings. It turns out that Wilcox’s
adjusted earnings yield has a lower correlation with the inflation rate than
does simple earnings yield.
The 
third 
candidate, 
irrational 
money 
illusion, 
has 
attracted 
most
attention. 
Modigliani–Cohn 
(1979) 
argue 
that, 
when 
inflation 
is 
high,
investors and analysts incorrectly discount real dividend streams using
nominal discount rates, resulting in a price that is below fundamental value.
Another variant of the money illusion hypothesis says that investors and
analysts actually discount nominal cash flows using nominal discount rates,
but make an insufficient inflation adjustment to their nominal growth
forecasts, so that here, too, high inflation implies underpriced stocks. While
academics often argue that confusing nominal and real values is too basic
an error for investors to make, it seems plausible that money illusion is
common at low to moderate inflation levels. Even the commentaries of
professional market practitioners frequently reveal such confusion, as does
the use of the Fed Model. The money illusion story explains both the
apparent cheapness of equities in the 1970s and their richness in the 1990s
—but not the equity market cheapness in the 1930s or in 2008–2009 (or
cheapness in Japan in the 1990s and 2000s).

Bekaert–Engstrom (2010) argue that the second explanation—a rational
inflation-related premium on equities—can explain much of the observed
covariation between equity yields and bond yields in the U.S. They start by
assuming that two variables cause equity premia to be time-varying—real
economic uncertainty (using survey data on the consensus probability of
recession and on cross-sectional disagreement about next year GDP growth)
and time-varying risk aversion (based on the habit formation model and
consumption 
data)—and 
then 
document 
that 
high 
expected 
inflation
coincides 
with 
high 
rationally 
required 
equity 
yields. 
Intuitively, 
if
inflationary episodes tend to occur during recessions (stagflation), both
equity and bond risk premia tend to be high at the same time. The authors
also show a clear positive cross-country relation consistent with their
hypothesis: countries with a higher inflation–recession correlation tend also
to have higher correlation between stock and bond yields.

The first candidate has its merits too, but it needs to be qualified. It is true
that high inflation tends to hurt equity markets but so does deflation.
Steady, low, but positive inflation appears to be the optimal environment for
real growth and asset valuations. Figure 8.10 shows a sombrero-shaped
relation between equity market valuation levels (P/E10) and inflation levels
over the past 110 years. The sweet spot of peak valuations occurs with
inflation in the 1% to 4% range. The graph also hints at a mechanism
behind this nonlinear relation. Economic uncertainty—here measured by
inflation volatility and equity market volatility—tends to be higher amidst
deflation and high inflation. Thus, inflation may not directly influence
equity market valuations but affects it through its impact on economic
growth and uncertainty. Whatever the reason, the pattern is bad news for
market 
valuations 
because 
the 
likelihood 
of 
both 
deflation 
and 
high
inflation 
for 
the 
coming 
decade 
has 
substantially 
increased 
after 
two
decades at the sweet spot.

Figure 8.10. The sweet spot for U.S. equity market valuations is low
positive inflation: U.S. experience 1900–2009.

Sources: Haver Analytics, Robert Shiller’s website, own calculations.

Note: The graph is created by sorting each month into one of 10 buckets
based on the level of inflation during the month, and then computing
average level for inflation (x-axis), the P/E10 valuation ratio, and the two
volatility series (y-axis) in these 10 subsets of history.

What E/P 
drivers 
are 
there 
besides 
inflation?—volatility, 
profit 
cycle,
demographics

The inflation level is highly correlated with earnings yield but the absolute
deviation of inflation from the sample average fares even better (0.69),
consistent with the “sombrero” graph. Other useful explanatory variables
include 
output 
volatility 
(e.g., 
rolling 
GDP 
volatility 
in 
recent 
years),
profit/GDP ratio, and the demographic pattern discussed below.

One broad story is that a secular decline in macroeconomic volatility can
justify secular richening in equity market valuations. However, some argue
that the fall in macroeconomic volatility after World War II merely reflects
better quality data or a change in the output mix (industrial vs. services).

Even though P/E ratios are conceptually a forecast of future growth, they
have had a limited correlation with subsequent actual growth. Still, it is
clear that P/E levels—both across firms and over time for the market
aggregate—are 
linked 
to 
analysts’ 
consensus 
forecasts 
of 
long-term
earnings growth. (Such data have been available only since the mid-1980s
—see Figure 12.5. The profit/GDP ratio has a longer history and appears
related to both earnings growth expectations and the market P/E ratio.)
Disappointments following excessive growth optimism may be a key reason
for the success of contrarian stock selection and market-timing strategies.

The share of prime-age savers in the population peaked in Japan in the
late 1980s and in the U.S. around 2000, consistent with broad patterns in
market valuations. Some observers call the 1990s “the baby-boomer rally”
in the U.S. and predict market declines when the retiring boomers begin to
dissave (i.e., use past savings for current consumption). The story rings true
but demographic developments are at best only one influence on asset
prices. Moreover, there is some evidence of retirees continuing to save
rather than dissave and the story ignores the entry of savers from younger
emerging market countries.

...
8.4.3 Ex ante equity premia based on the DDM

While the yield ratio is useful shorthand for the equity–bond premium, the
dividend discount model (DDM) gives us directly what we want to see: a
numerical estimate of the difference between stocks’ and bonds’ expected
long-run returns.

In the basic version of the DDM (Gordon’s growth model), equity cash
flows (dividends) are assumed to grow at a constant annual rate G. A feasible
long-run return on equities (H) is then the sum of cash flow yield (D/P) and
trend cash flow growth rate G. The required return on equities, or the discount
rate, can be viewed as the sum of riskless long-term government yield (Y) and
the required equity–bond risk premium (ERPB). Intuitively, markets are in a
steady state when the equity market return that investors require (Y + ERPB)
equals the return that markets are able to provide (D/ P +G). These expressions
can be reshuffled to state the ex ante equity–bond premium in terms of three
building blocks:
(8.1)

The DDM can be expressed in nominal terms (with G
nom
and Y
nom
), or in real
terms (with G
real
and Y
real
) if we adjust both expected cash flow growth and the
bond yield for expected inflation. The model can also be expressed as an
earnings discount model if we assume a constant dividend payout rate k ≡ D/E.
With a constant payout rate, the growth rates of dividends and earnings are
equal. Moreover, if we assume that retained earnings are reinvested at expected
return H, it can be shown that E/P equals real expected return.

It is easy to extend the DDM to include different short-term and long-term
growth rates, but the use of the DDM to analyze time-varying equity premia is
only informal, given that it is a steady-state model that assumes constant
expected returns and valuation ratios. In a dynamic variant of the DDM, one
that allows time-varying expected returns, D/P is a combination of the market’s
expectations of future (required) stock returns and dividend growth [4].
The DDM framework is simple and flexible, but there is wide disagreement
about 
what 
inputs 
to 
use 
in 
calculating 
the 
equity 
premium. 
Even 
the
observable inputs—dividend yield and bond yield—are ambiguous. It may be
debated whether to include share repurchases in addition to the dividend yield
and whether to use inflation-linked bonds or nominal bonds adjusted for
expected inflation. One must also decide which maturity of bonds to use. The
main source of contention, though, is the assumed trend profit growth rate G.
Instead of assuming a constant profit growth rate, we may allow G
real
to vary
over time according to survey forecasts or statistical estimates.

Figure 8.11. One estimate of the equity market’s forward-looking returns,
1958–2009.

Sources: Haver Analytics, Robert Shiller’s website, own calculations.

For illustration, I use a D/P proxy based on smoothed earnings, a constant
payout ratio (60%), and a G
real
proxy that is based on an average of a survey
forecast of future output growth and several realized real growth rates (of GDP,
corporate profits, and earnings per share over the past decade). The sum of
these two terms (D/P proxy + G
real
) gives a proxy of the real ex ante equity
market return. I subtract from it expected real bond yield (10-year Treasury
yield minus an estimate of expected long-term inflation that is based on
surveys for the past 30 years, and on statistical estimates by central bank
economists for earlier dates) to estimate ERPB (the ex ante equity premium
over bonds). As Figure 8.11 shows, the ERPB estimate peaked during the
1970s and troughed in the 1980s when bond risk premia were particularly high.
The ex ante ERPB fell below 1% at the turn of the millennium when the tech
boom peaked, and rose above 4% in 2003 and even higher in late 2008.
Forward-looking analyses of the ERP became more popular after the tech
bubble, partly because they sent a good warning signal about low future returns
(albeit prematurely) and because they highlighted the shortcomings of basing
equity premium estimates on historical average returns. The best known study
in this genre is Arnott–Bernstein (2002), who constructed ex ante real long-
term stock and bond return series since 1802, given the information available
at the time. Despite similar contours, their estimates for the common period are
lower than mine, mainly because they use the historical average real dividend
growth rate to proxy for G
real
—and this series averages about 1%, which is
lower than my proxy above. (I use yet another dataset in my 2003 Journal of
Portfolio Management article that discusses these issues in much more detail.)

Figure 8.12. Cumulative real growth of U.S. output and per share earnings and
dividends, 1900–2009.

Sources: Arnott–Bernstein (2002), Haver Analytics.

Debates on growth rate G in dividend discount models

There will never be full agreement about the equity–bond premium because
there is a wide range of views about DDM inputs. The main debate is about the
long-run growth rate (G), the least-anchored DDM input.

Earnings or dividend data? In historical analyses, some authors use earnings
data, others dividend data, and yet others gross domestic product data to proxy
for cash flows. While earnings data have their own shortcomings, I use them.
Historical dividend growth is understated by the declining trend in dividend
payout rate since the late 1970s, which is partly related to firms’ substituting
share repurchases for dividend payments.
Relation to GDP growth? Historical evidence on the gap between earnings
(or dividends) and GDP growth is discouraging. Several recent studies show
that earnings-per-share growth and dividends growth have, over long histories,
lagged the pace of GDP growth and sometimes even GDP-per-capita growth
(see Figure 8.12). Table 8.4 shows that, between 1950 and 2009, earnings-per-
share and dividends-per-share growth rates almost matched the 1.9% real
growth rate of GDP per capita but clearly lagged real GDP growth (3.1%):
• Taking longer histories or studying global evidence does not help.
The last row shows that the first half of the 20th century looked even
worse 
for 
earnings 
and 
dividends 
growth. 
Dimson–Marsh–Staunton
(2002) show that, between 1900 and 2000, real dividend growth lagged
real GDP-per-capita growth in 15 of the 16 countries they examine.
Across countries, real dividend growth averaged near zero and lagged real
GDP-per-capita growth by 2.4%. U.S. dividend growth was somewhat
better but still lagged real GDP-per-capita growth by 1.4%.
• Taking shorter histories did give a prettier picture, for a while.
Between 1988 and 2007, U.S. real earnings-per-share growth averaged
3.7% per annum, clearly faster than the real GDP growth rate (2.4%).
However, this was an exceptionally benign period for capital markets
(e.g., the corporate profits share of GDP rose from 8% to 11%). After
2008, the trailing 20-year real EPS growth rate was negative; after the
2009 recovery it was still only 1.3%.

Table 8.4. Average real long-term growth rates (geometric means) since 1900

Sources: Arnott–Bernstein (2002), Haver Analytics.

While many practitioners think that the GDP growth rate is a floor for earnings
and dividend growth, historically it has been a ceiling that has been broken
only during benign decades. In the long run, GDP and profits should have
similar 
trend 
growth 
rates 
or 
else 
the 
corporate 
sector 
would 
eventually
dominate 
the 
economy. 
Admittedly, 
this 
argument 
is 
only 
relevant 
over
extremely long periods. Nonetheless, it seems puzzling that earnings-per-share
growth has lagged GDP and corporate profits growth as much as it has. The
further gap between dividend and earnings growth rates is less puzzling
because it may reflect declining payout rates (i.e., the shift toward share
buybacks).

What explains these disappointing results? Arnott–Bernstein (2002) attribute
them to the dynamic nature of entrepreneurial capitalism. New entrepreneurs
and labor (including top management) capture a large share of economic
growth at the expense of the shareholders of existing companies. Stock market
indices (made up of listed stocks) do not participate in all growth, and indeed
may miss the dynamic growth of yet unlisted startup ventures, other small
businesses, and sole proprietorships—all of which count toward total business
profits:
• The aggregate earnings growth of the corporate sector (listed and
unlisted firms) should better keep pace with aggregate GDP growth.
Indeed, aggregate earnings and corporate profits have kept pace with GDP
since the late 1940s—with real annual growth a little over 3% for all
series. EPS 
growth 
lags because it does not include 
new 
enterprise
creation.
• Total corporate profit growth is thus effectively diluted by net
equity 
issuance. 
Cornell 
(2010) 
shows 
that 
the 
annual 
dilution 
rate
(mainly through new business creation but also through net issuance of
existing firms) between 1926 and 2008 is 2% and reasonably stable over
time.
• Despite several studies confirming the underlying logic of the
proposition, it is not widely appreciated that investors in existing listed
stocks only capture part of the aggregate profit growth because a portion
of this growth is financed with newly issued equity. Cornell concludes
that subtracting the 2% dilution effect from 3% real aggregate earnings
growth makes 1% real EPS growth a realistic long-run prospect. Adding
the dividend yield to this 1% gives a modest prospective real return for
equities, though some claim that expected returns are better measured by
arithmetic means, which exceed the geometric means (compound growth
rates) used above. Arguing that the structural increase in repurchase rates
is not fully included in these estimates is another way to prettify the
expected return.

Can we do better than using historical averages? Empirical studies find limited
predictability in long-term aggregate dividend rates or earnings growth rates.
Unpredictability means that the historical sample average may be the best
estimate of future earnings growth. How long a sample? Table 8.4 shows that
very long windows point to lower estimates, while the Great Moderation
period boosted this number. Here are some other ideas:
• Payout rates appear to have some ability to predict future growth,
but the empirical relation is surprising to many. On theoretical grounds
low dividend payout rates should signal high future growth rates (because
companies 
that 
have 
promising 
internal 
investment 
prospects 
should
hoard money, instead of paying it out in dividends), but the empirical
experience has been exactly opposite.
• While dividend yields don’t forecast dividend growth, the ratio of
dividends to slow-moving macro-variables like consumption or labor
income 
does 
have 
predictive 
ability. 
That 
is, 
dividend 
growth
predictability may be concealed by correlated variation between expected
growth and expected returns. For example, in a recession, dividends may
be temporarily depressed and expected to grow faster in the future, but
this effect may be offset by a higher required risk premium. The former
effect reduces dividend yield while the latter raises it. Using a control
variable 
such 
as 
the 
consumption/wealth 
ratio 
or 
the
consumption/dividends ratio in a regression, in addition to dividend yield,
can uncover such cyclical predictability.
• The long-run rate of productivity growth is important because it
determines the potential earnings growth rate, and because persistent
changes in productivity growth should influence stock prices much more
than cyclical changes. Economists can identify some time variation in the
trend rate of productivity growth but this is incredibly hard to measure in
real 
time. 
We 
only 
understood 
in 
hindsight 
the 
1970s’ 
decline 
in
productivity 
and 
there 
was 
later 
much 
debate 
about 
a 
renewed
productivity increase in the 1990s, perhaps due to information technology,
the Internet, and the growth of the financial sector.
• Time variation in the profits/GDP ratio might be more predictable,
given its apparent mean reversion tendency. A high profit share in 2007,
for example, may suggest that future profits growth will be slower. If this
signal is used, it is worth recalling that corporate profits in national
accounts series and S&P earnings series are only imperfectly correlated
(e.g., the former peaked in 1997 and the latter in 2000).
• There are some signs that real earnings growth is higher when the
inflation rate is low but positive (deflation hurts earnings so much that
even real earnings tend to be poor in a deflation) and when earnings
volatility is low. Table 8.5 (the column numbered 3) reminds us, as we are
often told in Wall Street research, that the arithmetic annual average of
(nominal) earnings growth rates has been a relatively stable 7% over long
periods. However, the compound average real growth rate is much lower,
only 1% to 2%, due to volatility and inflation drags. The table also shows
that the inflation drain was larger since 1950 while the volatility drain was
larger before 1950. Lower drains from inflation and volatility boosted real
earnings after the mid-1980s but this pattern has not been sustained.
Table 8.5. Compound (geometric mean) and simple average (arithmetic
mean) growth rates of earnings per share in the U.S.

Sources: Arnott–Bernstein (2002), Haver Analytics.

...
8.5 SURVEY-BASED SUBJECTIVE EXPECTATIONS

Subjective ex ante equity returns may be based on direct return forecasts or
on estimates of future growth (G); the latter may be combined with carry to
arrive at estimates of expected return. I first discuss investors’ return
forecasts, 
then 
academic 
views 
on 
the 
equity 
premium, 
and 
finally
economists’ GDP forecasts and analysts’ earnings growth predictions.

While there are many surveys of investors’ equity market views, the
questions are often qualitative—say, asking whether investors expect the
market to go up or down. The main surveys that poll investors’ numerical
equity return forecasts are Duke University’s quarterly CFO survey since
2000, University of Michigan’s consumer survey over 2000–2006, and the
UBS/Gallup poll taken of individual investors in 1998–2003. The time
horizons in these surveys differ but a plot in Figure 8.13 suggests that return
optimism peaked in 1999–2000 and declined during the subsequent bear
market. Short-horizon forecasts by retail investors appear to be particularly
extrapolative but even CFOs’ long-horizon forecasts reached double digits
in 
2000. 
This 
pattern 
stands 
in 
stark 
contrast 
to 
more 
objective, 
and
inherently contrarian, ex ante measures that were quite low at the time
given the high market valuations.

Figure 8.13. Survey-based expected equity market returns, 1998–2009.

Sources: Vissing–Jorgensen (2003), Amromin–Sharpe (2009), Graham–
Harvey (2010).
Retail 
investors. 
The 
Michigan 
survey’s 
medium-term 
(2-to-3-year)
forecasts are higher following strong realized returns and during perceived
good 
economic 
times. 
Moreover, 
when 
investors 
expect 
improving
macroeconomic conditions they tend to expect higher equity returns and
lower volatility; this result provides direct evidence of procyclical expected
Sharpe ratios. Amromin and Sharpe (2009) argue that these results lend
support to behavioral explanations related to representativeness: optimism
regarding the macroeconomy translates (too) directly into optimism on
stock market prospects. Conversely, during recessions, retail investors have
an unduly pessimistic view of the macroeconomy and equity markets; their
selling drives down equity prices and causes equity expected returns to rise.
In this way, low subjective return expectations “cause” high objective
expected returns.

The UBS/Gallup poll focuses on even shorter term expected returns—the
next 12 months’ equity market return—and finds extreme extrapolative
tendencies. The correlation between this series and trailing 12-month equity
returns is over 0.9. The predicted 10-year returns in this poll are more stable
and high, hovering around 14% between 1998 and 2002. Most survey
questions stress the near-term outlook, however.

Another 
survey 
(polling 
individual 
investors 
on 
what 
they 
consider
respectable rates of return on their investments) documents even more
extreme exuberance during the end of the tech boom: The Securities
Industry Association’s annual survey reports that between 1999 and 2003,
median, year-by-year “respectable” stock returns were 30%, 33%, 19%,
13%, and 10%.

Professional investors. Portfolio managers and CFOs may be more cool-
headed than retail investors and have more countercyclical views when
making 
long-run 
forecasts. 
Institutional 
investors 
in 
Bank 
of 
America
Merrill Lynch’s global fund manager survey are polled on the equity risk
premium they use to assess equity valuations. The ERP started at 3.6% in
July 2006, edged lower and troughed near the global market peak in late
2007 at 3.4%, then rose to a peak of 4.0% in late 2008 before edging back
to 3.8% in 2009. Graham–Harvey (2010), who conduct the Duke CFO
surveys, 
provide 
an 
even 
longer 
series 
of 
views 
on 
the 
equity–bond
premium. They report that the expected ERP started above 4% in 2000,
troughed at 2.4% in 2005, then rose again and peaked at 4.7% in early 2009
amidst the financial crisis. They also document a strong positive relation
with market volatility (a high survey premium when the VIX is high, as
Figure 8.14 shows—the correlation was 0.61) but little extrapolation bias or
correlation with market valuation levels.

These 
survey 
measures 
suggest 
that 
the 
relative 
sentiment 
of 
retail
investors compared with institutional investors may be a useful contrarian
indicator for aggregate market timing. Edelen–Marcus–Tehranian (2010)
survey the literature. They focus on a more direct measure of relative
sentiment and show that when the share of retail investable wealth held in
equity relative to the share of total investable wealth held in equity is high
(low), subsequent stock market returns tend to be low (high).

Academics. Even academic views on the equity premium have evolved
during the past decade—perhaps reflecting a shift from basing equity
premium estimates on historical average returns to basing them on forward-
looking analysis like the DDM. Ivo Welch has polled hundreds of finance
professors about their view on the equity premium on four occasions: 1997–
1998, August 2001, December 2007, and January 2009. His main survey
question focuses on the (arithmetic) 30-year equity premium (over short-
dated Treasury bills, so the premium is slightly higher than the equity–bond
premium). The mean premium fell from the first survey’s 7% to 5.5% in
2001, then edged up to 5.7% in 2007 and 6.0% in 2009. Academics’
forecasts of one-year equity–bill outperformance fell sharply from 6% to
7% in the first survey to 3% in 2001, before recovering to 4.9% in 2007 and
6.2% in 2009. Interestingly, near-term forecasts were reduced after a large
market selloff in 2000–2001, while the opposite happened after the 2008
selloff. 
Fernandez 
(2009) 
surveyed 
an 
even 
broader 
set 
of 
finance
professors, finding an average expected premium of 6.3% among U.S.
academics and 5.3% among European academics. He also finds a 7% mean
premium among academics who cite classic textbooks and sources of
historical average premia (Ibbotson yearbooks) as references, but a mean of
only 5% among those who cite newer references, highlighting the influence
of personal history (specifically, where, when, and how a given person
learned about the ERP) on current thinking. In a subsequent survey, he finds
an average required market risk premium near 5% among analysts and
5.5% among corporate executives.

Figure 8.14. Expected long-term equity–bond premium and equity market
volatility, 2000–2009.

Sources: 
Bank 
of 
America 
Merrill 
Lynch, 
Graham–Harvey 
(2010),
Bloomberg.

Economists’ GDP forecasts. Expected long-term growth estimates may
be based on economists’ real GDP forecasts or analysts’ (nominal) earnings
growth 
forecasts. 
Consensus 
long-term 
real 
GDP 
forecasts 
have 
been
relatively stable, fluctuating between 2.3% and 3.5% for the past 25 years.
Earnings and dividend growth forecasts are often mechanically tied to GDP
growth forecasts, at least beyond the first 5 to 10 years.

Analysts’ long-term earnings forecasts. More commonly, studies use
analysts’ long-term earnings forecasts even if these have been historically
upward biased, presumably due to behavioral biases and analyst incentives.
Moreover, Figure 8.15 is indicative of time-varying analyst sentiment.
Analyst 
forecasts 
are 
almost 
as 
procyclical 
as 
retail 
investors’ 
return
forecasts. Both in the U.S. and in Europe, analysts’ consensus forecasts
peaked above 16% in 2000—more than 10% above nominal GDP forecasts
at the time—and fell significantly during the 2000–2003 bear market and
again 
in 
2008–2009. 
The 
thin 
line 
shows 
one 
natural 
benchmark—
economists’ consensus forecasts of long-term output growth, which have
been pretty sensible. Note that equity premium estimates that rely on
analyst forecasts will inherit their overoptimism.

Figure 
8.15. 
Analyst 
forecasts 
of 
long-term 
earnings 
growth 
are
overoptimistic (but less so than in 2000).

Sources: Citigroup, Credit Suisse, Blue Chip Economic Indicators.

Surveys provide direct estimates of changing return expectations, but
they may reflect wishful thinking rather than required returns. We can
contrast objectively feasible return prospects and less rational subjective
expectations. Are survey-based risk premium estimates useful proxies for
the equity risk premium that the market requires? One can always question
how 
representative 
any 
survey 
of 
market 
views 
is. 
More 
importantly,
because of behavioral biases, survey-based expected returns may tell us
more about hoped-for returns than about required returns . . . and these
hopes 
tend 
to 
rise 
in 
bull 
markets, 
despite 
rising 
valuations. 
Retail
investors’ short-term forecasts appear more prone to extrapolation and
procyclicality than those of finance professionals, leaving open the question
of what impact such biases have on aggregate market pricing.

As a light-hearted exercise I create a proxy of investors’ subjective return
expectations by combining three irrational factors: extrapolation of past
market returns, long-term earnings growth forecasts by analysts, and money
illusion. The composite series troughed in 1981, exactly when a successful
market-timer should have bought, and peaked in 2000, when the market-
timer should have sold. The composite series is, not very surprisingly, in
line 
with 
market 
valuation 
ratios 
and 
gives 
almost 
perfectly 
wrong
forecasts. All three proxies contributed to the increase in return expectations
in the 1980s and 1990s. My composite series lines up reasonably well with
the limited data we have on the equity returns that investors say they
expected, and has a correlation of —0.9 with “objective” market earnings
yield and the “objective” equity premium proxy. If we take these estimates
seriously, it appears that subjective and objective expected returns are very
much inversely related.

...
8.6 TACTICAL FORECASTING FOR MARKET TIMING

Both professional and amateur investors have tried to “time” equity markets
as 
long 
as 
markets 
have 
existed. 
Some 
do 
fundamental 
analysis 
on
economic/profit prospects or the monetary policy outlook (“don’t fight the
Fed”), others focus on technical indicators and price momentum (“don’t
fight the tape”), while others rely on slow-moving valuation indicators (“buy
low P/E’s, sell high”) as discussed above. However, tactical market timing
gradually earned a bad name as a mug’s game because very few investors
were consistently successful doing it. It is not easy and its bets are highly
concentrated; at least security selection strategies can benefit from wide
diversification. Finally, if the long-run equity premium is large, it requires
considerable market-timing ability to offset the disadvantage of being in
cash part of the time and forfeiting the ERP at those times.

By the 1980s, academic research on “anomalies” had hinted that market
timing might add value. Rising inflation and interest rates appeared to
predict poor equity market returns, average returns were seasonally high in
January and cyclically high after business cycle troughs, and volatility
seemed excessive given a model of rational investors and constant expected
returns. Academic studies reporting long-horizon return predictability using
dividend yields, term spreads, and default spreads attracted much attention
but were challenged on econometric grounds.

The 
1990s’ 
mantra 
of 
buy-and-hold 
investing 
gave 
way 
to 
renewed
interest in market timing after the repeated boom–bust cycles of the 2000s.
The tech stock bubble and the later credit/housing bubble indicated that
absolute market valuations can deviate from fundamental values by large
amounts and for extended periods. Yet they also made it clear that exploiting
such misvaluations was difficult, because few investors had the patience to
stay with a bearish stance through a lengthy bull market. Figure 8.16
highlights the best known relation—the ability of market valuation ratios to
predict future equity market returns—which has been popularized by Robert
Shiller (also see Figure 2.7).

Figure 8.16. Future equity returns are higher when the market’s starting
valuations are cheap, 1900–2009.

Sources: Robert Shiller’s website, Haver Analytics.

Figure 8.16 shows that buying stocks when market valuations are cheap
tends to produce much better returns than buying when valuations are rich.
Of course, such contrarian market timing takes nerve and sometimes fails;
that is why the relation is there. (To be fair, the strength of timing ability is
overstated in the graph because I use hindsight, specifically in-sample
knowledge of the range of E/P outcomes. Investors in 1921 and 1932 did not
know in real time that the E/Ps prevailing in those years would be the
highest of the whole period between 1900 and 2009.) The reason for
predictability has long been debated: rational time-varying risk premia and
irrational investor sentiment have been the main alternatives. Worse, while
practitioners 
and 
academics 
kept 
coming 
up 
with 
new 
market-timing
indicators—many 
of 
them 
listed 
below—few 
performed 
well 
“out 
of
sample”. For example, low dividend yields emitted a bearish timing signal as
early as the early 1990s and naive market-timers following such signals
would have missed the massive equity rally of 1995–1999. This poor out-of-
sample 
performance 
raised 
the 
possibility 
that 
any 
appearance 
of
predictability was due to data mining. Thus it is understandable that many
observers remain skeptical about the usefulness of market timing.

Short and long-horizon predictive ability

As a basic measure of an indicator’s market-timing ability, Table 8.6 shows
the simple correlation between a host of predictors and the subsequent (next
quarter, one-year, and 5-year) excess return of the S&P 500 equity index
over Treasury bills between 1962 and 2009. This is an in-sample measure
and can be misleading if the correlations are not stable over time. Note,
though, 
that 
most 
academic 
studies 
rely 
on 
such 
in-sample 
relations;
econometricians 
simply 
assume 
that 
any 
observed 
statistical 
relation
between predictors and subsequent market returns was already known to
rational 
investors 
in 
real 
time. 
Practitioners 
who 
find 
this 
assumption
unrealistic 
try 
to 
avoid 
in-sample 
bias 
by 
selecting 
and/or 
estimating
statistical models repeatedly using only data that were available at each point
in time, so as to assess predictability in a quasi-out-of-sample sense, but
never completely succeeding in doing so.

Table 8.6. Correlations with future excess returns of the S&P 500, 1962–
2009

Sources: Haver Analytics, Robert Shiller’s website, Amit Goyal’s website,
own calculations.
Valuations. Various valuation ratios have predictive correlations between
10% and 20% for the next quarter [5]. Perhaps more importantly, their
correlation with long-horizon returns is much higher, but these results are
especially plagued with econometric problems. Dividend yields adjusted for
net buybacks have the best timing ability but data for this variable are only
available since the 1980s. Different variants of earnings yields (raw or
smoothed 
trailing, 
forward 
looking, 
adjusted) 
and 
of 
the 
Fed 
Model
(earnings yield vs. Treasury yield) also have reasonably consistent positive
correlations, as have the ratios of GDP and corporate profits to equity market
capitalization.

Money and credit. Monetary policy indicators have quite mild predictive
correlations. The old adage, “Follow the Fed”, reflects the idea that easy
monetary policy—falling or low real short rates and a steep yield curve—is
bullish 
for 
equities. 
However, 
the 
Fed’s 
increasing 
transparency 
and
predictability may have reduced any such delayed effects and these patterns
are not evident in data after the mid-1980s. The impact of inflation has also
become weak over time (not shown).

Secular credit and leverage developments appear to be important drivers
of 
asset 
markets. 
Positive 
feedback 
effects 
can 
be 
important 
in 
credit
creation and contraction, and in related asset valuation changes over the
business 
cycle, 
but 
these 
patterns 
also 
operate 
at 
lower 
frequencies.
Empirically, the growth of broker–dealer balance sheet leverage has been a
strong predictor of aggregate market returns. In Table 8.6 the quarter ahead
correlation 
is—0.20 
but 
the 
number 
is—0.35 
since 
the 
mid-1980s
(approximately the pivot point of the transformation in the U.S. from bank-
based intermediation to a market-based financial system). Adrian–Moench–
Shin (2010) show that aggressive levering by financial intermediaries is a
sign of strong risk appetite and low prospective returns, while de-leveraging
episodes signal high risk aversion and bode well for subsequent returns. On
the other hand, Chava–Park–Gallmeyer (2010) show that tightening credit
conditions, measured by the Fed’s survey of senior loan officers, predicts
lower near-term stock market returns. Thus both excessively loose credit
conditions and recent tightening in these conditions are bearish market-
timing signals. These patterns may seem mutually inconsistent but, in fact,
they echo the long-term reversal pattern (due to overreaction) and short-term
momentum pattern (due to underreaction) observed in many asset return
series.

Real 
activity. 
Business 
cycle 
indicators 
are 
classic 
equity 
market
predictors. 
While 
equities 
have 
some 
ability 
to 
predict 
future 
growth
developments, 
the 
opposite 
relation 
is 
more 
controversial. 
The
consumption/wealth ratio (CAY) is the strongest predictor—with a 21%
correlation to next quarter equity returns and a much higher correlation over
long windows. Yet, CAY is based on an in-sample fit so its values would not
have been available to investors in real time. Cooper–Priestley (2009) find
that an output gap measure has an in-sample correlation of—0.22 and an
out-of-sample correlation of —0.14 with next quarter equity returns. Thus,
near-term 
expected 
equity 
returns 
are 
predictably 
high 
in 
recessionary
environments and low in boom times. In the same vein, the unemployment
rate has a 0.15 correlation with next quarter equity returns, manufacturing
confidence (ISM)—0.21, and consumer confidence (Conference Board)—
0.14. Both past year and decade average real GDP growth and economists’
consensus forecast of future GDP growth have correlations around—0.11 to
—0.13 with next quarter equity returns:
• Such cyclical indicators may have worked especially well in the
second half of the 20th century when business cycles were driven by
countercyclic Fed policy actions, but work less well when recessions
are caused by financial de-risking and de-leveraging. Broader indices of
financial 
conditions 
may 
serve 
better 
now 
(and 
are 
likewise
countercyclical; 
favorable 
financial 
conditions 
augur 
low 
future
returns).
• Over a longer horizon, persistent strong economic growth and a
low unemployment rate predict low stock market returns.
• 
One 
rational 
interpretation 
is 
that 
cyclical 
asset 
return
predictability reflects the high required equity risk premium during bad
times when investors’ risk aversion is especially high. Many studies
document countercyclical ex ante Sharpe ratios based on valuation
ratios or yield curve steepness and then assume that such predictability
reflects investors’ rational risk assessments and preferences. While I
firmly 
believe 
that 
wealth-dependent 
risk 
aversion 
(implying
countercyclical 
required 
returns) 
is 
an 
important 
real-world
phenomenon, 
I 
also 
believe 
that 
psychological 
factors 
exacerbate
boom–bust 
cycles. 
At 
least 
retail 
investors’ 
subjective 
return
expectations exhibit procyclical expected Sharpe ratios in a manner
consistent with behavioral sentiment stories.

Risk. Looking at various risk indicators, the relation between equity market
volatility 
and 
subsequent 
market 
returns 
is 
famously 
fragile. 
The
contemporaneous correlation between volatility news and equity returns is
strongly negative but the predictive relation is weak—see the single-digit
correlations in the table. Here I just note the Pollet–Wilson (2008) finding
that the weak empirical relation reflects two offsetting effects. Equity market
volatility reflects both the average volatility of individual equities and the
average correlation among equities. The latter part is more important: high
intraequity-market correlation—typical during market crises—predicts high
future market returns (with a correlation of 0.20). In contrast, high average
time series variance of individual equities mildly predicts low future market
returns and thus conceals a systematic relation between risk and returns. It
also appears that the gap between implied and realized volatilities has some
timing ability.

Sentiment and technicals. Besides long-run valuation indicators, a host of
contrarian 
sentiment 
indicators 
have 
attracted 
attention. 
Baker–Wurgler
(2006) identify several sentiment indicators (e.g., the share of equities in
new corporate issuance, market turnover, as well as IPO market activity and
pricing) and create a composite indicator with a predictive correlation of—
0.11. Among practitioner work, the Crowd Sentiment Poll of Ned Davis
Research combines timing signals from stock market newsletters, individual
investors, commodity advisers, and put–call ratios. Other potentially useful
momentum style technical indicators include net volume, breadth, fund flow
momentum, and lead–lag relations (say, from core markets to peripheral
ones or from large caps to small caps). However, short-term contrarian
trading is difficult in markets that exhibit any momentum bias. Equity
market momentum is mild, but trend-following models have had some
success in market timing. Retail flows have the best ability to serve as
contrarian indicators (see Trim Tabs, 2010 for short-term flows and Edelen–
Marcus–Tehranian, 2010 for long-term flows).

Seasonals. The best-known seasonal regularities are the so-called January
and Hallowe’en effects (respectively: higher average returns in January,
especially for small-cap stocks; and higher returns in November–April than
in May–October). Irrational sentiment stories are appealing explanations, but
greater risk appetite at the beginning of the year also rings true. Research
also documents higher average returns around major holidays, the turn of
month, and days of scheduled macroeconomic news announcements. Few of
these seasonal patterns can be profitably exploited due to high turnover and
trading costs, but they are a puzzle for risk-based explanations and especially
for models with constant relative risk aversion. Repeated data mining of the
same history must have contributed to some of these findings.

Market timing is not easy; it requires judicious choices to leave risky
assets and later re-enter the market at lower levels, if such levels are reached.
It involves a high tolerance of regret and of being “wrong and alone” for a
long 
time. 
Still, 
the 
last 
decade’s 
experience 
has, 
rightly, 
made 
many
investors reconsider the wisdom of static market exposures. Even if expected
returns vary over time, it may not be advisable for a typical investor to
change 
the 
optimal 
risky 
asset 
mix. 
But 
large, 
long-horizon 
investors
arguably have a natural edge in contrarian market timing, because in bad
times their risk aversion does not rise as much as that of most investors. At a
minimum, 
disciplined 
rebalancing 
to 
constant 
weights 
implies 
a 
mild
contrarian bias that tends to add value in the long run. One factoid that
encourages market timing is that return predictability patterns are stronger
during recessions, perhaps due to the scarcity of risk-taking capital.

...
8.7 NOTES

[1] One simple way to view expected returns is to ask what returns
investors require for major asset classes. Short-term Treasury bills earn
expected inflation plus the expected near-riskless real rate. Long-term
Treasuries earn the short-term bill rate plus a bond risk premium (BRP).
Long-term corporate bonds earn the Treasury bond rate and a credit risk
premium (CRP), minus an allowance for losses from defaults. Equities earn
a further premium for being equities rather than debt—the residual or junior
claimants for firm assets. The equity risk premium (ERP) can be narrowly
defined as this last term, but it is more common to compute ERP as excess
return over short-dated or long-dated Treasuries. This “demand-based”
decomposition 
of 
returns 
into 
their 
elemental 
parts 
(after 
Ibbotson–
Sinquefield, 
1976 
et. 
seq.) 
is 
simplified 
and 
does 
not 
get 
into 
the
fundamental drivers of each premium. This chapter discusses other (more
useful) decompositions of equity returns. Moreover, it is problematic to
view the broad equity premium (ERPC) as the sum of BRP, CRP, and ERP
over corporate bonds. Equities share some long-term real risk with long-
dated Treasuries but they have different exposures to inflation risk, different
effective durations, and very different safe haven characteristics; it follows
that many drivers of BRP have no impact on equities’ expected returns.
Thus, certain declines in BRP will directly be offset by widening ERPB.
Equities also contain a different type of exposure to issuer risk than
corporate bonds—in particular, volatility tends to hurt the firm’s debt holder
and benefit the equity holder, as the former has effectively written a call
option on the firm’s assets to the latter.

[2] However, markets were evolving and data quality was lower. Equity
returns are disputed for the period before the 1870s, especially due to
uncertainty 
about 
dividend 
yield 
levels. 
Government 
debt 
was 
hardly
considered default free and sometimes was proxied by high-quality non-
government debt, so the meaning of the equity–bond premium was different
at the time. Also cash returns are not shown in Table 8.1; they are relevant
to 
the 
general 
ERP 
question 
and 
it 
should 
be 
noted 
that 
short-dated
commercial paper, used as the cash return in some studies of the 19th
century, promised equity-like real returns (of 4 to 10%) in that century,
albeit with significant default risk.

[3] An aside: Counterintuitively, world ERPB has a lower GM than either
of its components. This fact seems to reflect time-varying weights in the
capitalization-weighted “world” (i.e., poor apparent “market timing” in
having maximum weights in Japan in 1990 and in the U.S. in 1999–2000).
Studying data since the 1980s, I find that the relative weight of the U.S. vs.
the 
rest 
of 
the 
world 
has 
a—0.4 
correlation 
with 
next 
year 
relative
performance. Rebalancing U.S. and non-U.S. weights to 50/50 each year
would have clearly improved portfolio performance.

[4] Campbell–Shiller (1988) developed an approximate dynamic version of
the DDM identity. With only a few additional assumptions, they show that a
high 
price/dividend 
ratio 
reflects 
some 
combination 
of 
high 
expected
dividend growth rate and low expected future stock returns (i.e., low
discount rates). Similarly, unexpected stock returns in a given period can be
decomposed into changing expectations of future dividend growth (“cash
flow news”) and changing required returns on equities (“discount rate
news”). Such exercises can help us interpret expected and realized asset
returns wihout fully developed theoretical models.

[5] Some indicators (D/P, Fed Model) have much higher correlations for
two subsamples than for the full sample, but this may reflect one insidious
aspect of hindsight in in-sample correlations. Both predictors experienced a
large mean shift between the two subsamples (e.g., mean D/P halved from
near 
4% 
to 
near 
2%). 
Correlation 
measures 
the 
covariation 
of 
D/P’s
deviation 
from 
the 
sample 
mean 
with 
that 
of 
the 
subsequent 
return’s
deviation from the sample mean. “Knowing” with foresight that the sample
mean has fallen sharply after the mid-1980s would have improved the
econometrician’s forecasting ability, just as it would have improved the
trading success of anyone buying (selling) equities when the D/P is above
(below) the sample mean. An econometrician who only knew the full-
sample mean D/P (near 3%) or a market-timer who incorrectly sold equities
when D/P fell below 3% in the early 1990s would have underperformed his
more hindsighted counterpart.

Source notes. The equity premium is covered in major books such as Siegel
(1994), Cornell (1999), Dimson–Marsh–Staunton (2002), and Goetzmann–
Ibbotson (2008). Surveys of the topic include AIMR (2002), Ilmanen
(2003a), Fernandez–Aguirremalloa–Liechtenstein (2008), and Damodaran
(2010). 
The 
contrast 
between 
historical 
averages 
and 
forward-looking
expected returns was a theme in three influential papers after the 2000
equity bust: Arnott–Bernstein (2002), Fama–French (2002), and Ibbotson–
Chen (2003).

The equity premium puzzle was introduced in Mehra–Prescott (1985)
and 
the subsequent academic literature 
thoroughly 
reviewed in Mehra
(2008). My highlighted explanations include Rietz (1988), Benartzi–Thaler
(1995), 
Barberis–Huang 
(2001), 
Bansal–Yaron 
(2006), 
Barro 
(2006),
Weitzman 
(2007), 
Cogley–Sargent 
(2008), 
Gabaix 
(2008), 
and
Malmendier–Nagel (2010). The failure of a beta-pricing relation among
stocks is discussed in Campbell–Vuolteenaho (2004), Fama–French (2004),
Polk–Thompson–Vuolteenaho (2006), and Falkenstein (2009).

For broadening equity yields beyond dividend yields, see Fama–French
(2001), Allen–Michaely (2002), Robertson–Wright (2003), Lei (2006), and
Boudoukh et al. (2007). For extensions of earnings yields, see my 2003
survey 
as 
well 
as 
Campbell–Shiller 
(2005) 
and 
Wilcox 
(2007). 
For
understanding 
valuation 
ratios 
through 
money 
illusion 
and 
other
explanations, see Modigliani–Cohn (1979), Asness (2000, 2003), Ritter–
Warr (2002), Campbell–Vuolteenaho (2004), Bekaert–Engstrom (2010),
and Berge–Ziemba (2008). Specifically on demographic influences on stock
markets, see Goyal (2004), Favero–Gozluku–Tamoni (2010), and Reid–
Burns (2010). For extending the DDM, see Campbell–Shiller (1988). For
the low trend growth rate of EPS and DPS, see Arnott–Bernstein (2002),
Bernstein–Arnott (2003), DMS (2005), and Cornell (2010). For survey
evidence on equity premia, see Welch (2000, 2009), Vissing–Jorgensen
(2003), 
Amromin–Sharpe 
(2008), 
Fernandez 
(2009), 
Graham–Harvey
(2010).

For the academic debate on stock market predictability, see Welch–Goyal
(2008) for a skeptical view and Campbell–Thompson (2008) and Rapach–
Strauss–Zhou (2009) for more positive views. I will not list the pioneering
research 
on 
return 
predictability 
but 
mention 
a 
few 
more 
recent
contributions: Lettau–Ludvigson (2001) on CAY, Pollet–Wilson (2008) on
correlation, Cooper–Priestley (2009) on output gap, Baker–Wurgler (2006)
and 
Edelen–Marcus–Tehranian 
(2010) 
on 
sentiment, 
Longstaff–Wang
(2008) on credit market size, Adrian–Moench–Shin (2010) on broker–
dealer leverage, and Chava et al. (2010) on tightening credit conditions.
Among practitioner work, Ned Davis’s book The Triumph of Contrarian
Investing (2004) lists several sentiment indicators used in the Ned Davis
Research Crowd Sentiment Poll.

...