9

Bond risk premium

• The bond risk premium (BRP) or term premium is the
expected return advantage of long-duration government bonds
over short-term (one-period) bonds.
• The yield curve reflects both the BRP and the market’s
interest rate expectations. Yield curve steepness is a noisy
measure of either part. Better BRP proxies try to isolate out
unobservable rate expectations from the curve.
• Historical average returns increase with duration,
especially at short durations. Realized average excess return is
about 1% but is higher during periods when falling yields give
unexpected windfall gains.
• Empirically the yield curve has been a better predictor of
near-term excess bond returns than of future yield changes.
Survey data hint that much of the predictability in the bond
market may reflect expectational errors rather than rational BRPs.
• The yield curve is not able to predict multi-year excess
bond returns. It may be a poor BRP proxy because mean-
reverting rate expectations dominate curve steepness when short-
term rates are exceptionally high or low. High inflation and yield
levels are not only associated with falling rate expectations but
also with elevated bond risk premia. These forces tend to push the
curve shape in opposite directions and offset each other. The
clearest example of this tension occurred in 1980–1982 when the
curve was inverted but the required ex ante BRP was high—as
were subsequent realized bond returns in the 1980s.
• Since rate expectations taint information about the BRP in
the yield curve, a natural solution is to estimate rate expectations
(e.g., with the help of survey data) and subtract them from bond
yields.
• The survey-based BRP has been primarily driven by a
level-dependent inflation premium—rising in the 1960s and
1970s from near zero to 3%–4% and falling back in the 1980s and
1990s. Other key drivers of BRP are safe haven, supply–demand,
and cyclical factors. Since the late 1990s, the safe haven role of
Treasuries (negative stock market beta) has contributed to a
negative BRP. Overall, the ex ante BRP has been near zero
through the 2000s but could well rise in the 2010s.
• Duration-timing models predict near-term bond returns. A
steep yield curve, weak economic growth, or weak equity
markets, as well as positive bond market momentum, have
historically been bullish indicators.

...
9.1 INTRODUCTION, TERMINOLOGY, AND THEORIES

Between the two main asset classes, stocks are rightly viewed riskier and
bonds safer. However, even government bonds differ in their volatilities and
other risks, often depending on their maturity or duration. The reward for
such risks is the topic of this chapter (see cube). The bond risk premium is
the ex ante excess return of a default-free long-term bond over holding a
sequence of short-term bonds, or, loosely speaking, the required reward for
duration extension. A one-period variant of the BRP is the next period
expected excess return of a long-term bond over the one-period riskless
bond. The BRP is also called the term premium, horizon premium, maturity
premium, or duration premium. The terminology used in the literature
varies but I distinguish the BRP (the expected term premium) from realized
average excess bond return and from yield curve steepness (term spread).
The BRP needs to be estimated but the latter two are directly observable.

Analysis of the BRP is typically done using government bond data
because 
the 
BRP 
compensates 
for 
uncertainty 
in 
default-free 
yields
(uncertain discount rates). Other bond yields also reflect issuers’ uncertain
creditworthiness or otherwise uncertain cash flows as well as possible
illiquidity premia.

After a section on terminology and theories, I present evidence on
historical 
average 
returns. 
In 
the 
case 
of 
bonds, 
such 
rearview-mirror
evidence 
is 
obviously 
less 
important 
because 
market 
yields 
provide
relatively 
transparent 
information 
on 
prospective 
or 
expected 
nominal
returns. Even this picture can be surprisingly murky, so a key focus in this
chapter is to identify useful ways to extract information about bond risk
premia from the yield curve. Because I have researched and traded the BRP
for two decades, this chapter is more personal and opinionated than other
chapters.

Approximate identities

I first describe some identities (which are less ambiguous) and then discuss
theories and evidence (which are more open to debate) [1]. For illustration,
I use a 10-year maturity to represent the long bond and a 1-year maturity for
the short-term rate. The choice of a one-year horizon lets me ignore
annualization terms in the exposition.

Realized and expected (excess) bond return

Realized bond return over a year has two components: the yield income
earned over time, and the capital gain or loss due to yield changes:
(9.1)

We can subtract the return of the short-term asset (Y
1
) and take expectations
to get a variant of the bond risk premium related to near-term returns:
BRP
H
≡ E(excess bond return over the riskless rate for next year)

(9.2)

Bond yield
Here is a brief explanation on how bond yields reflect the market’s rate
expectations and required risk premia. Break-even (forward) rates are, by
construction, a sequence of future short rates such that an investor rolling
over short-term securities at those rates would earn exactly the same return
as the long bond. If investors are risk neutral, these break-even rates equal
the market’s expectations and the long yield equals the expected average of
future short rates. If not, the long yield also contains a risk premium term.
This observation merely states a consistency requirement for expectations:
if market long-term yield is currently high while future short-term yields are
expected to be low, then the long-term bond yield includes a positive
premium. Assuming investor rationality, that premium, or higher expected
return, is what investors require as compensation for some perceived risk,
so we call it a risk premium:
(9.3)

This BRP
Y
is the average expected return of the bond over its life in excess
of a sequence of riskless 1-year investments. The two BRP variants, BRP
Y
and BRP
H
, are closely related: BRP
Y
is an average of the bond’s expected
future BRP
H
each year (a 10-year bond’s BRP
H
for the coming year, 9-year
bond’s BRP
H
for the following year, etc.). I will not make a distinction
between these two variants outside this subsection.

We can further slice nominal rate expectations into inflation and real rate
expectations, averaged over the next decade:
(9.4)

Combining the two equations above we get our three-way decomposition of
10-year yield:
(9.5)
Curve steepness
(9.6)

Alternatively, we can rearrange the BRP
H
equation above to get:
(9.7)

A steep curve reflects either market expectations of rising yields or high
required bond risk premia—or, more likely, some combination of the two.
The 
rate 
expectation 
component 
can 
be 
expressed 
either 
in 
terms 
of
expected multi-year changes in the 1-year yield over the next decade or,
alternatively, as the expected next-year change in the 10-year yield, scaled
by its (end-of-horizon) duration. The first yield curve equation focuses on
gradual changes in short rates and the yield-based BRP
Y
while the second
equation focuses on near-term changes in long yields and the return-based
BRP
H
.

Alternative theories

Which of the two components has a larger influence on the yield curve
shape? To interpret the yield curve, one can usefully contrast the classic
pure expectations hypothesis (PEH) with the random walk hypothesis. The
PEH makes the extreme assumption that risk premia are zero and is
consistent with the idea of investor risk neutrality. One can then virtually
read the market’s rate expectations off the yield curve (specifically, off the
forward rate curve). Suppose a particularly steep yield curve indicates that,
according to the PEH, the market expects short rates to rise quickly over
time (to exactly offset longer bonds’ initial yield advantage; thus all bond
investments have the same expected return). The random walk hypothesis
makes the opposite extreme assumption, that an upward-sloping yield curve
only reflects required compensation for bearing duration risk and does not
contain any information at all about the market’s rate expectations. Since
both 
the 
market’s 
rate 
expectations 
and 
required 
risk 
premia 
are
unobservable, economists have long debated the relative importance of the
two components.

Both hypotheses have had their days in the sun. For decades, investors
and central bankers seemed to take the PEH as a given, as they equated
forward rates with the market’s rate expectations, despite accumulating
contrary evidence. Yet, when empirical studies in the 1980s ran direct horse
races between the two hypotheses, they clearly came down in favor of the
random 
walk 
hypothesis: 
an 
upward-sloping 
yield 
curve 
predicts
empirically high future excess bond returns rather than rising yields. It is
ironic that just as risk premia became smaller in the past decade, gradually
making the PEH a more realistic approximation of yield curve behavior,
consensus shifted away from the PEH and toward time-varying risk premia.
The 
pendulum 
swung 
too 
far; 
I 
will 
argue 
that 
mean-reverting 
rate
expectations have a greater role in yield curve behavior than the current
academic consensus appreciates.

A few words on modern term structure models. So-called arbitrage
models of term structure are, by design, silent on the determinants of bond
risk premia in that they focus on relative pricing and take current market
prices of risk as a given. So-called equilibrium models at least link the
premia to interest rate volatility, and the idea of covariance with bad times
always 
lurks 
in 
the 
background. 
Such 
models 
can 
be 
mathematically
complex 
but 
still 
most 
“only” 
imply 
constant 
risk 
premia. 
For
understanding the determinants of expected returns, I find empirically
oriented models, such as that of Campbell–Sunderam–Viceira (2010), more
relevant than either pure term structure models or macro-finance models
(see Box 9.1).

Box 9.1. Macro-finance models—a recent academic focus

Unlike models that rely purely on term structure data, macro-finance
models link bond yield fluctuations to macro factors in the context of a
“no-arbitrage” term structure model. The seminal paper by Ang–
Piazzesi (2003) uses the basic insight of the Taylor rule that a
reasonable central bank policy makes short-term rates functions of real
activity and inflation [2].

While the growing macro-finance literature offers promise, its
practical relevance remains limited to date, perhaps due to challenges
with model specification and estimation errors. For example, such
models have not been effective at capturing slow-moving changes in
inflation expectations.

My preferred response: Kim–Orphanides (2005) show that term
structure model estimation can be improved by incorporating survey
data to anchor inflation or interest rate expectations. I find such
anchors hugely valuable because many macro-finance models or
purely empirical models produce clearly unrealistic estimates of the
market’s interest rate expectations and required BRPs. In contrast, the
Kim–Orphanides and Kim–Wright models that are anchored by survey
data (incorporated with some measurement error so that survey data do
not dominate estimation) provide estimates that appear plausible to
both investors and policymakers.

...
9.2 HISTORICAL AVERAGE RETURNS

Figure 9.1 and Table 9.1 present the longest available history of monthly
returns for a broad set of maturity subsector portfolios of U.S. Treasury bills
and bonds—from 1952 to 2009. Importantly, this is also a reasonably
neutral period in that bond yields ended the period at roughly the level at
which they started. Thus, average return differences largely reflect ex ante
yield spreads rather than unexpected yield changes. The starting point is
also guided by data availability for multiple maturities and by the end (in
1952 with the Treasury–Fed accord) of a decade-long period of regulated
(capped) Treasury yields.

Clearly, the risk–reward relation is positive but the more interesting
pattern is that the relation is quite nonlinear [3]. In my earlier research I
have claimed that the long-run risk–reward relation in the Treasury market
looks like a hockey stick: very steep up to two years and flat thereafter.
Also, for the longer sample used here, the reward for extending the duration
is highest at short maturities and decays at longer maturities. Indeed, the
Sharpe ratios at short maturities exceed one (if the one-month Treasury bill
is used as the riskless rate) and decline monotonically from the shortest to
the 
longest 
portfolios. 
The 
hockey 
stick 
shape 
is 
more 
attenuated 
in
subperiods of the sample during which longer duration bonds benefited
from falling yields and where the richness of the shortest Treasury bills was
less extreme.

Figure 
9.1. 
Long-run 
reward 
for 
bearing 
the 
risk 
of 
longer 
maturity
Treasuries, 1952–2009.

Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Center for Research in Security
Prices, Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar).
Table 9.1. Representing Figure 9.1 in numbers

Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Center for Research in Security
Prices, Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar).

What about yield data? Looking at average yield curve shapes (e.g., the
Fed’s fitted Treasury curves since 1961) tells a similar story. Average yields
rise monotonically between one-year and 7-year durations (corresponding
roughly to one-year and 10-year maturities) and are 80 bp higher for the
long duration than the short duration (6.7% vs. 5.9%). These yield curve
histories miss the curvatures that appear below one year and beyond 10
years [4].

Figure 9.2. Treasury market reward and risk during two subperiods

Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Center for Research in Security
Prices, Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar).
Large changes in the overall yield level can cause capital losses or gains
that overwhelm ex ante expected returns [5] even over relatively long
horizons. 
Whenever 
we 
study 
historical 
bond 
data, 
the 
results 
are
dominated by persistent yield increases until 1981 and declines thereafter.
Figure 9.2 contrasts return volatility scatterplots for the first and second
halves of the 58-year sample. The reward–risk relation was steeply upward
sloping in recent decades but downward sloping (beyond money market or
very short maturities) in the earlier period. Bond return volatility was also
higher during the second subperiod (visually the average return curve
extends further to the right). Enough on historical bond returns. Forward-
looking or expectational measures of bond returns can tell us more about
whether the reward for duration extension is currently high or low. I turn
next to such measures, covering various longer term ex ante proxies for the
bond risk premium and ending with more tactical forecasting models.

Box 9.2. Front-end Treasury richness

Average Sharpe ratios are especially high at short maturities, and the
reward–risk curve is very steep at the front end (with longer maturities
providing higher returns) even in the bond-bearish subsample. Private
issuer curves in the money market tend to be much flatter. Duration
extension from one-month Treasury bills looks like a no-brainer:
• Why did the opportunity arise in the first place? (The past
tense seems appropriate because this opportunity has declined
steadily since the mid-1980s, except in 2007–2008.) The main
reason was the limited desire of natural holders of short-dated
Treasury bills to maximize return. Foreign central banks and other
buyers—who parked their money into short Treasury bills due to
regulatory reasons, liquidity needs, or sheer laziness—have, over
recent decades, learned to put more emphasis on asset returns
instead of safety and liquidity goals. The opportunity cost of only
seeking safety at the expense of return conservatism became
increasingly apparent as flight-to-quality spikes in money market
spreads were seldom seen—until 2007 and 2008.
• Why did arbitrageurs not remove this opportunity?
Investors other than short-term Treasury bill holders (and the U.S.
Treasury as the debt issuer) were unable to exploit this
opportunity because they could not sell short one-month Treasury
bills to buy 6-to-12-month bills. These arbitrageurs faced a
financing rate that was much higher than the one-month Treasury
bill rate; markets were effectively segmented. The main way to
eliminate this opportunity was for conservative investors to
become less conservative; as a group they could influence the
relative price of different money market assets. This happened
gradually between the mid-1980s and the mid-2000s, so it took
some time for conservative investors to become sufficiently
conscious of the opportunity costs they were incurring. And
perhaps they went too far, given the reappearance of extreme safe
haven premia during the 2007–2008 systemic financial crisis.

...
9.3 ALTERNATIVE EX ANTE MEASURES OF THE BRP

I discuss four ex ante measures: curve steepness and three smarter measures
of the bond risk premium (BRP).

Yield curve steepness (YC)

Yield curve steepness is the simplest and most popular proxy for the ex ante
BRP, but it has its flaws. Since the shape of the yield curve reflects the
market’s expectations of future rate changes as well as the required BRP,
some alternative measures (see below) try to isolate the BRP component by
purging the rate expectation component from the YC.

Empirical BRP estimates predicted by the forward rate curve (“C-P
BRP”)

Cochrane–Piazzesi (2005) find an even better predictor of future bond
returns than the YC, loosely related to yield curve curvature. They regress
subsequent 
realized 
bond 
returns 
on 
five 
one-year 
forward 
rates 
(the
marginal discount rates for the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth years in
the term structure) and find that across maturities all bond returns seem to
be predicted by the same single forecasting factor. I label it the “C-P BRP”.
The slope coefficients on the five forward rates have a neatly symmetric
tent shape (—2.1, +0.8, +3.0, +0.8,—2.1), peaking at the forward rate
between 2 and 3 years. The forward rate between 4 and 5 years has a
negative coefficient, suggesting that YC curvature rather than steepness
predicts returns: the more curved (humped) the forward rate curve, the
higher the expected excess return of all long bonds. The authors later find
that this expected return factor, C-P BRP, is a reward for the first empirical
factor that drives the yield curve (changes in the level of the curve). This
factor is most likely related to persistent changes in inflation expectations
and productivity that influence all yields roughly equally across maturities.
Other empirical factors do not appear to be rewarded.

BRP measures extracted from term structure models (e.g., “K-W BRP”)

The most common academic approach for disentangling rate expectations
and risk premium components is to posit a term structure model and extract
rate expectations from its assumed dynamics and from the cross-sectional
restrictions implied by the no-arbitrage condition (the assumption that
bonds are priced consistently with each other). Pure term structure models
may 
only 
use 
yield 
data 
while 
macro-finance 
models 
also 
include
macroeconomic factors. I use the Kim–Wright (“K-W”) model because it
incorporates survey data and because its realistic-looking curve histories are
regularly updated in the Fed website.

BRP measures based on survey data (“SBRP”)

Using survey data (consensus forecasts of future interest rates) is the most
direct way to assess the market’s rate expectations. I will discuss the pros
and cons of this approach in Chapter 23. Fortunately, academics’ aversion
to using survey data is gradually receding because such data are important
in a world of time-varying expected returns. The most useful data series is
the long-term consensus forecast of average future short-term rates (only
available in the U.S. and even there only on a semiannual basis starting in
1983). Simply subtracting this measure from current long-term yield gives
an estimate of the BRP. In March 2010, for example, both the 10-year
Treasury yield and the survey forecast of the 2010–2020 average Treasury
bill rate were near 3.5%, indicating an SBRP around zero. Apparently, the
very steep YC at the time reflected only market expectations of steeply
rising short rates, and no BRP was built into the curve.

...
9.4 YIELD CURVE STEEPNESS: IMPORTANT
PREDICTIVE RELATIONS

Table 9.2 assesses the YC’s predictive ability by estimating the correlation
of the 10-year vs. 3-month yield spread (i.e., the “gross” slope of the yield
curve) with next quarter and next year excess returns for 7-to-10-year
bonds, 10-year bond yield changes, and 3-month bill rate changes. This is a
crude approach but it gives results similar to more careful studies by Fama–
Bliss (1987) and Campbell–Shiller (1991). The yield curve predicts future
excess bond returns rather than future yield changes: see the positive
correlations in the second column and negative correlations in the third
column. Admittedly the empirical relation has become weaker over time.

The last column shows that while the yield curve is a poor forecaster of
near-term 
changes 
in 
long-dated 
yields 
(wrong 
sign!) 
it 
is 
better 
at
forecasting changes in short-dated yields, especially over medium horizons.
In the next few pages I link the latter predictive ability to mean-reverting
short-rate expectations.

Having put the YC on a pedestal as a good forecaster of bonds’ near-term
expected return I now take it down a notch by noting that the YC is quite a
poor proxy for the long-term BRP. I will argue that the main story about ex
ante BRP postwar behavior is the mountain shape: a secular rise and fall,
apparently related to level-dependent inflation uncertainty and the related
inflation premium. This shape is evident in the (limited) data we have on ex
ante real yields and bond risk premia. In contrast, curve steepness has not
exhibited 
any 
secular 
uptrend 
or 
downtrend. 
It 
has 
been 
rangebound
between +400 bp and—400 bp for most of the past half century (and
longer). Worse, it was steeply inverted when inflation expectations peaked
in 1980–1981. The early-1980s’ episode highlights YC’s inability to predict
the high long-run bond returns that followed in the 1980s, in contrast to the
survey-based BRP’s good forecast (see Figure 9.3).

Let us compare the empirical ability of these measures to predict excess
bond returns over short (one-quarter) and long (five-year) horizons. I
already noted that the YC is an excellent predictor over the quarterly
horizon with a correlation of 0.21. The ex ante real bond yield is even better
at 0.28 as is the Cochrane–Piazzesi BRP measure at 0.24. (The survey-
based BRP series that begins only in 1983 has a predictive correlation of
0.19.) The 5-year predictive correlation is 0.69 for the ex ante real yield and
0.67 for the survey-based BRP—compared with just 0.06 for the YC (i.e.,
no predictive ability). The Cochrane–Piazzesi measure fares better, with a
0.32 correlation.

Table 9.2. Predictive power of yield curve steepness: Correlations with
future returns and yield changes, 1962–2009

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Federal 
Reserve 
Board, 
Center 
for 
Research 
in
Security Prices, Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

Figure 9.3. (a) The curve does not exhibit the secular trends implied by a
level-dependent inflation risk premium, (b) while survey-based measures
do.

Sources: Bloomberg, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, 
Blue 
Chip 
Economic 
Indicators, 
Consensus 
Economics,
Sharon Kozicki, own calculations.
Why does the YC fare so poorly as a secular predictor?

The best explanation for this puzzle appears to be mean-reverting rate
expectations. To reiterate, curve steepness reflects both rate expectations
and required risk premia. Unless we can identify those rate expectations (as
we will try to do with the help of survey data and term structure models),
curve steepness gives us a very noisy measure of the BRP.

When short rates are exceptionally low or exceptionally high, yield
curves clearly contain mean-reverting rate expectations: the market expects
increases from record-low rate levels (thus the steep curve in 2003) and
declines from record-high levels (thus the inverted curve in 1981). Even
simple 
single-factor 
term 
structure 
models 
capture 
the 
idea 
of 
mean
reversion but such models assume that the longest rates are constant. Figure
9.4 suggests that the long-end anchor has not been constant over time but
has fallen significantly between 1981 and 2003, presumably due to lower
long-term inflation expectations. Thus, formal term structure models often
include at least two factors. Informal yield curve commentary suggests that
central bank policy determines the front end of the curve while the market’s
inflation expectations determine back-end levels. This is of course a too
simplistic statement but it does capture the essential drivers of the curve.

Figure 9.4. Mean-reverting rate expectations dominate at extreme (high or
low) rate levels.

Sources: Bloomberg, Federal Reserve Board.

The rate expectation and risk premium components in the YC are related
in opposite directions to the rate level, a situation that weakens the overall
link between the YC and the BRP. The YC has a net negative correlation
with the level of short rates, unlike survey-based and many model-based
BRP measures. Indeed, the empirical correlation between curve steepness
and the 3-month bill rate is—0.53. The linkage is even stronger if we use
de-trended bill rates (de-trended by subtracting the past decade average
from the current level): the correlation is—0.79, as illustrated by the good
fit in Figure 9.5. Detrending is consistent with the mean reversion story
because the past decade average is a plausible anchor for mean-reverting
rate expectations: the wider the gap between the current short rate and this
anchor, the stronger the market’s expectation of normalization (as long as
the central bank has sufficient credibility that yields well above the past
decade average are not taken as a signal for much higher future inflation).

So my story is that record-high short rates around 1980, together with
mean-reverting rate expectations, inverted the yield curve despite the fact
that the ex ante BRP was positive and quite high. The level-dependent
components offset each other in the opposite way during the early 1990s
and early 2000s and also in 2009–2010: short rates were exceptionally low
and 
the 
yield 
curve 
was 
exceptionally 
steep 
due 
to 
mean-reverting
expectations of eventual rate normalization. During such times the steep
curves 
reflected 
expectations 
of 
rising 
rates 
more 
than 
they 
did 
high
required BRPs.

Overall, 
these 
offsetting 
level 
dependencies 
(positive 
for 
the 
BRP,
negative for mean-reverting rate expectations) help explain why the YC has
been so rangebound in past decades and why it has “missed” secular trends
in both the level and volatility of inflation. We also better understand why,
over 
short 
horizons, 
the 
yield 
curve 
shape 
(forward 
rates) 
primarily
forecasts excess bond returns, whereas over a 5-year horizon the curve
possesses little return-forecasting ability (but rather predicts future short-
rate changes in line with the PEH).

Figure 9.5. Inversely level-dependent curve steepness is related to mean-
reverting short-rate expectations.

Sources: Bloomberg, Federal Reserve Board.

One implication of the above analysis is that the YC’s ability to foresee
negative near-term excess returns in 1980–1981 may not be a sign of the
YC being a good proxy for ex ante BRP. More likely the YC reflected
mean-reverting rate expectations that proved wrong in the near term but
correct in the long term. I emphasize below that bond return predictability
may 
reflect 
irrational 
expectations 
and 
investor 
learning 
as 
well 
as 
a
timevarying BRP.

...
9.5 EXPLAINING BRP BEHAVIOR: FIRST TARGETS, THEN
FOUR DRIVERS

Identifying the BRP target series. There are numerous ways to break down the
yield 
curve 
into 
(unobservable) 
rate 
expectation 
and 
risk 
premium
components. My preferred approach uses survey data in some way. Without
this anchor, the values can be quite silly—reflecting model specification or
estimation errors—as well as hindsighted. To me, the SBRP and ex ante real
yield are underutilized but useful real-time measures of ex ante risk premia.

Survey-based BRPs give the most direct estimates, albeit with measurement
error. Figure 9.6 uses the consensus forecasts in the semiannual economist
survey of Blue Chip Economic Indicators to decompose the 10-year Treasury
yield into three parts: expected inflation (over the next decade), expected
average Treasury bill yield (over the next decade), and the required BRP.

The various BRP proxies in Figure 9.7 show broadly similar contours.
Recall that the Kim–Wright model combines the discipline of a no-arbitrage
term structure model with a survey anchor. The C-P BRP reflects yield curve
curvature and is purely based on statistical estimation.

Figure 9.6. (a) Decomposing the 10-year Treasury yield based on survey data,
(b) inflation-level-dependent bond risk premium (correlation 0.87).

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Federal 
Reserve 
Board, 
Federal 
Reserve 
Bank 
of
Philadelphia, Blue Chip Economic Indicators, Consensus Economics.
With some statistical tricks we can even extend the survey-based BRP series
to times before 1983 when published long-term rate forecasts began. A Fed
study 
by 
Rosenberg–Maurer 
(2008) 
spliced 
different 
types 
of 
data 
and
estimation methods (for periods when the Kim–Wright curves are not yet
available) 
to 
create 
a 
long 
history 
of 
curve 
steepness 
split 
into 
its 
rate
expectation and risk premium components. Their evidence, reproduced in
Figure 9.8, is consistent with my argument that much of the curve’s cyclical
fluctuation reflects mean-reverting rate expectations, while the risk premium
exhibits the mountain shape that echoed inflation trends over the sample
period.

The YC, Kim–Wright BRP, C-P BRP, and survey-based BRP all proxy for
ex ante BRP without telling why. I now turn to the main explanations. I
discuss in some detail four major drivers of ex ante bond premia and real
yields:
• level-dependent inflation uncertainty;
• equity and/or recession-hedging ability;
• supply–demand factors;
• cyclical effects.

The second and fourth factors, in particular, can be motivated by covariance
with 
bad 
times, 
while 
the 
first 
and 
third 
factors 
are 
related 
to 
bonds’
standalone risks. In my opinion, long-run variation in the BRP has been
primarily driven by a level-dependent inflation premium. This is the only
premium that can move yields by several percentage points; the yield impact
of other factors amounts at most to 1%. Over the past decade, given stable
inflation 
expectations 
and 
near-zero 
inflation 
premia, 
real 
factors 
have
mattered more: negative equity beta (the safe haven role), supply–demand
factors, 
and 
perhaps 
cyclical 
factors. 
The 
countercyclical 
pattern 
in 
the
predictable component of bond returns has dominated the academic literature
but it might reflect systematic forecast errors as much as it does a time-varying
BRP.

Figure 9.7. Comparing various bond risk premium measures (smoothed)

Sources: Bloomberg, Federal Reserve Board, Blue Chip Economic Indicators,
own calculations.

Figure 9.8. Curve steepness (YC) and its split into rate expectations and risk
premium components.

Source: Joshua V. Rosenberg and Samuel Maurer (2008), “Signal or noise?
Implications of the term premium for recession forecasting,” Federal Reserve
Bank of New York—Economic Policy Review 14(1), July. Reproduced by
permission of Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Inflation risk premium (IRP)

The IRP is the most important secular driver of required expected real bond
yields and BRPs; it contributed 3%–4% to nominal bond yields when they
peaked in the early 1980s and subsequently fell close to zero. The story is
simple and rings true with investment practitioners: higher inflation levels are
associated with greater inflation uncertainty, which in turn warrants higher
required premia for holding nominal bonds. Note the common trends in Figure
9.6(b).

This 
view 
is 
supported 
by 
cross-country 
evidence, 
as 
shown 
in 
the
scatterplot of expected real bond yields and expected inflation in Figure 9.9.
While the sample covers only the disinflationary period since the early-1980s,
both the within-country pattern in each country and the cross-country pattern
are consistent with a level-dependent inflation premium in ex ante real yields.

The view that BRP history is primarily driven by time-varying inflation
premia used to be non-standard but has become increasingly accepted. The
evidence in favor of this view is pretty strong even if data limitations—
unobservable market expectations as well as limited histories of long-term
investor surveys and inflation-linked bonds—require us to provide several
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle (here, in Chapter 17, and in Figure 23.2):
• Level of inflation expectations. Realized and expected inflation
series share similar contours—the postwar mountain shape (the 1960s’
and 1970s’ uptrend and the 1980s’ and 1990s’ downtrend). Before 1978
no forecasts of long-term inflation are available so I use one-year-ahead
inflation forecasts or time series estimates by Fed researchers instead.
Figure 9.9. Expected 10-year real yield scatterplotted on expected long-
term inflation rates for G4 markets, 1983–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Haver Analytics, Blue Chip Economic Indicators,
Consensus Economics.
• Inflation uncertainty. Realized time series volatility of inflation and
bond yields likewise show a peak around 1980 and later fall sharply.
More 
relevant 
measures 
include 
option-based 
implied 
volatility,
dispersion 
among 
many 
forecasters, 
and 
self-reported 
inflation
uncertainty (individual forecasters’ wide probability density).
• Ex ante real yields and BRPs. The mountain shape in the postwar
period is also apparent in BRP proxies where data are available. The BRP
appears to have moved nearly one for one with the expected inflation
level, 
at 
least 
since 
1983. 
Thus 
changing 
(long-term) 
inflation
expectations had a double-whammy impact on nominal bond yields both
on the way up and on the way down, albeit with a slight delay.
While I just posit the positive relations between expected inflation, inflation
uncertainty, 
and 
required 
bond 
premia, 
many 
Fed 
studies 
supply 
hard
evidence. 
For 
example, 
D’Amico–Orphanides 
(2008) 
analyze 
Survey 
of
Professional Forecasters data between 1968 and 2006 and show that expected
one-year inflation, self-reported inflation uncertainty, and disagreement across
participants are all positively correlated with each other and with some BRP
estimates. In addition, Wright’s (2008) analysis of time-varying inflation risk
premia using multi-country panel data documents a strong positive relation
between time-varying premia and various measures of inflation uncertainty
(including model-based time series volatility where the focus is appropriately
on the volatility of the permanent component in inflation, dispersion among
forecasters 
in 
a 
survey, 
and 
mean 
uncertainty 
as 
assessed 
by 
individual
forecasters.)

The inflation uncertainty explanation may appear simplistic to academics
who link risk premia to covariances with major risks and not to assets’
standalone risks. One reason to focus on standalone risk might be market
segmentation between bond and equity investors: for bondholders, inflation is
the primary risk. A theoretically more appealing explanation is that inflation
has real effects in that it exhibits predictable covariation with equities and real
growth. 
Campbell–Sunderam–Viceira 
(2010) 
present 
a 
model 
where
temporary and permanent components of expected inflation uncertainty as well
as real-vs.-nominal covariance (in addition to time-varying real rate and
market risk aversion) cause time variation in required BRPs.

No studies have extended the empirical analysis of level-dependent inflation
premia before World War II but here is some speculation. Yield curves were
typically inverted in the 19th century when real risks dominated, and typically
upward sloping in the 20th century when inflation risks dominated. The gold
standard implied low and well-anchored inflation expectations and stable long
rates in the 19th century, while the lack of central bank smoothing of money
market rates at the time exacerbated short-term (real) rate volatility. The
greater risk of rolling short-dated bonds may have given an (inverse) term
premium for the front end (though bonds’ different credit qualities across
maturities may also have contributed to an apparent term premium for the
front end if shorter dated bonds were perceived as less creditworthy).

Conversely, explicit or implicit interest rate targeting smoothed short-term
rate volatility after the Fed was created in 1913 and the gold standard was
abandoned in 1933. Following centuries of flat long-term price levels, with
inflation followed by deflation, in the 1900s inflation became higher, less
stable, and more persistent. Inflation risks began to dominate real risks,
especially after the end of the postwar Bretton Woods regime in 1971 (which
finalized 
the 
shift 
to 
fiat 
money) 
was 
followed 
by 
large 
fiscal 
deficits,
productivity slowdown, and two oil crises. The economic costs of high and
unstable inflation became apparent during the miserable decade following the
Bretton Woods breakdown. The Great Disinflation began soon after Paul
Volcker became the Fed chairman in 1979 and continued for over two decades
as inflation expectations fell and became increasingly well anchored. Cochrane
(2008b) used this history to explain the 2005 “conundrum” of low and/or
falling bond yields during a period of Fed tightening. The experience appeared
consistent with low or even negative BRPs at a time of pronounced real risks
and well-anchored inflation expectations. Thus the experience of the mid-
2000s looked like a return to the olden days (i.e., the 19th century) where the
BRP and the normal shape of the YC had a negative sign.
Covariance risk and safe haven premium

In contrast to the standalone inflation risk stories above, theoretically kosher
stories relate the BRP to the covariance of inflation with marginal utility. In
theory, covariances rather than variances determine risk premia. I will focus on
the stock–bond correlation, whose time variation and sign changes highlight
dramatic changes in Treasuries’ safe haven qualities over time:
• 
During 
the 
negative-supply 
shocks 
between 
1973 
and 
1981,
recessions, equity weakness, and high unemployment rates coincided
with high inflation and poor bond performance, while during the 1930s in
the U.S. and in the 1990s in Japan, the same real economic factors
coincided with deflation and strong bond performance. (Nominal bond
returns are inversely related to inflation developments.) So at some times
in history, Treasuries have been terrible investments that have lost money
“at 
the 
worst 
possible 
time”, 
while 
at 
other 
times 
they 
have 
been
wonderful recession hedges and safe haven assets that smooth portfolio
returns “just when it is most needed”.
• The stock–bond correlation tracks government bonds’ hedging
ability almost in real time. Campbell–Sunderam–Viceira (2010) use the
stock–bond 
correlation 
to 
obtain 
information 
about 
the 
correlation
between real and nominal assets (and between real activity and inflation).
Over the past two centuries, the average stock–bond correlation has been
mildly positive but the sign has not been constant. The stock–bond
correlation was especially consistently positive between 1965 and 1997
during a period of large gyrations in expected inflation. During this
period, changes in inflation expectations drove stock and bond returns in
tandem. Periods of negative stock–bond correlations have been shorter:
the decade between the mid-1950s and mid-1960s and a few years around
the 1929 crash. Then, during the past decade, the stock–bond correlation
reached its most negative level ever, reflecting government bonds’ role as
the ultimate safe haven assets (see Figure 9.10). The sign flipped to
negative around 1998 in the U.S.
• 
Measured 
correlations 
between 
real 
activity 
and 
inflation 
are
noisier than asset return correlations. In theory, the growth–inflation
relation is positive if demand shocks move the economy up and down a
stable Phillips curve: nominal bonds are then valuable recession hedges
that 
may 
even 
warrant 
a 
negative 
BRP. 
Conversely, 
the 
relation 
is
negative if supply shocks shift the Phillips curve in and out: nominal
bonds exacerbate losses for risky assets during stagflations and warrant a
positive BRP. Strong central bank credibility and well-anchored inflation
expectations support a stable Phillips curve whereas weak credibility
makes for an unstable Phillips curve— and riskier government bonds.
The contrast between the 1990s and 2000s, on the one hand, and the
1970s, on the other hand, is clear.
Figure 9.10. Stock–bond correlation, 1890–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Robert 
Shiller’s 
website, 
Ibbotson 
Associates
(Morningstar).

We cannot be sure that negative correlation will prevail but we do know that it
has sustained government bonds’ high valuations in the past decade. Even the
simple CAPM suggests that a negative stock–bond correlation can justify a
negative risk premium for Treasuries. Losing the safe haven characteristic
would compound bonds’ problems in the coming years as the loss would likely
occur in an inflationary scenario and put further upward pressure on bond
yields. In Ilmanen (2003b), I argue that the stock–bond correlation is likely to
be negative in a world of low and stable inflation expectations—as well as
during financial crises (high-market-volatility, flight-to-quality, and flight-to-
liquidity 
episodes). Figure 9.10 
supports 
this 
argument 
with 
a 
60-month
variation loosely tracking the inflation level. Higher frequency fluctuations
(26-week correlations) show broadly similar contours but better highlight the
downspikes during financial crises (1987, 1998, 2002, 2008) when Treasuries
served as great safe havens.
If it is true that the stock–bond correlation varies with the inflation level,
any future rise in inflation expectations could have a triple-whammy effect on
nominal bond yields. Besides the direct inflation expectations impact, the
required BRP would rise due to a level-dependent inflation premium and a lost
safe haven value. This logic reinforces the view that the inflation-induced BRP
peaked around 1980 and was much lower both 20 years earlier and 20 years
later. Not only was inflation uncertainty higher around 1980 than during earlier
and later decades, but inflation and poor bond returns also coincided with
various aspects of bad times.

Supply–demand factors

The various supply–demand factors that influence the pricing and required
returns on bonds can also be viewed as contributing to the time-varying nature
of 
risk 
premia. 
However, 
these 
factors 
imply 
some 
degree 
of 
market
segmentation or imperfect asset substitutability (and possible irrationality). I
discuss below three types of supply–demand factors: fiscal effects; regulatory
effects 
and 
pension 
fund 
demand; 
and 
foreign 
flows. 
Other 
factors 
that
occasionally influence yield levels include flight-to-quality flows (discussed in
the 
previous 
section), 
yield-seeking 
demand, 
convexity 
hedging 
in 
the
mortgage market, and potentially large demographic effects.

Fiscal supply effects:
• One obvious example is the Treasury scarcity scare in 2000 where
the prospect of continued fiscal surpluses raised widespread concern that
the Treasury bond market would disappear within a decade. (I know this
view seems hard to believe given how quickly those surpluses turned into
deficits 
. 
. 
.) 
The 
substitutability 
of 
other 
assets 
for 
Treasury 
debt
weakened, pushing yield spreads of near-riskless debt—U.S. agencies,
interest 
rate 
swaps, 
and 
so 
forth—even 
higher 
than 
during 
the
Russia/LTCM 
crisis 
in 
1998. 
Note 
that 
although 
there 
were 
some
buybacks of U.S. Treasuries in 2000, the more important channel was the
market expectation of continued large buybacks in future years (which in
the end did not materialize). Similar richening occurred in other markets
though it was only as pronounced in the U.K. Announcement effects
provide interesting evidence: the plan to discontinue 30-year Treasury
issuance in October 2001 had a large market impact within minutes of
announcement—the expected scarcity was instantly priced.
• The maturity structure of government debt influences expected
excess bond returns, perhaps because long-duration issuance inflicts more
interest rate risk on the marketplace. Looking at a 53-year history in the
U.S., 
the 
share 
of 
long-maturity 
(greater 
than 
10 
year) 
bonds 
in
outstanding government debt is positively correlated with both yield
curve 
steepness 
and 
with 
next 
year 
excess 
bond 
return. 
This 
fiscal
variable is very slow moving and its predictive ability is even better when
used 
to 
forecast 
the 
next 
three 
years’ 
average 
excess 
returns 
(see
Greenwood–Vayanos, 2010).
• Historically, the maturity structure of Treasury debt has mattered
more than the level of indebtedness (say, divided by GDP). The latter
variable may suffer from cyclicality that offsets its predictive ability:
fiscal deficits and debt tend to expand during recessions when low growth
and low inflation keep bond yields low. Japan during the 1990s and 2000s
is a major example of high debt ratios not boosting bond yields, thanks to
ample domestic savings and a stagnating economy. The market’s response
may well be different in the coming years. Empirical studies with U.S.
and global data suggest that a 1% rise in the public-debt-to-GDP ratio
raises bond yields by 2 bp to 6 bp. The impact of rising debt and deficits
on bond yields is greater when expected inflation is higher and initial
fiscal conditions are poor; if the level of indebtedness is already high, the
expectation of more debt issuance raises investor concern about debt
sustainability and eventual debt monetization.
• Supply–demand effects have been especially important during and
after 2009 as sharply rising public bond issuance (and the prospect of
persistent fiscal deficits) battle with public purchases of financial assets
(and other types of liquidity support). Gagnon et al. (2010) estimate that
the Fed’s large-scale asset purchases in 2009 reduced 10-year Treasury
yields by 40 bp to 80 bp and non-Treasury yields even more. However,
yield curves are record steep and, in the future, unfunded pension and
health care costs related to demographic challenges will be an even larger
fiscal problem than the legacy of the 2008 crisis and recession. The
creditworthiness of sovereign issuers—especially in developed markets—
may be reassessed in the coming decade and the fiscal outlook may
become a first-order driver of bond yields.

Regulatory effects and pension fund demand:
• The fact that the yield curve is typically flat or inverted at long
maturities 
partly 
reflects 
demand 
from 
pension 
funds 
and 
other
institutional investors with long-dated liabilities (although some yield
algebra issues also contribute). For such investors, nominal or real long
bonds are the natural riskless asset.
• 
Such demand forces 
are hardly constant over time. 
In 
many
countries there are clear examples of regulatory or legislative changes
that quickly influence the pricing of long-term bonds. For example, in the
U.K., the combination of the minimum funding requirement (legislation
that encouraged pension funds to shift from equities to bonds) and fiscal
surpluses made long-term gilts extremely expensive at the end of the
1990s.

Foreign flows:
• In the early 2000s, Asian central banks channeled their surpluses
mainly into U.S. Treasuries. The “savings glut” view maintained that
such demand was the main reason for historically low real bond yields.
Some estimates of the impact of foreign flows on U.S. Treasury yields
exceeded 100 bp, but the consensus view was 30 bp to 50 bp. Near-
substitutes to Treasuries also benefited from this demand, but to a lesser
extent.

Cyclical factors

Yield curve shape is closely related to (interrelated) business cycles, credit
cycles, 
and 
monetary 
policy 
cycles. 
YC 
inversions 
predict 
recessions 
as
defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research, but the YC tends to
steepen fast during recessions and peak near business cycle troughs. A steep
YC coincides with a high unemployment rate (correlation +0.45) and predicts
fast economic growth. YC countercyclicality may explain its ability to predict
near-term bond and stock returns: high required premia near business cycle
troughs result in a steep YC, while low required premia near business cycle
peaks result in an inverted YC (see Figure 9.11). In addition, Cochrane–
Piazzesi or C-P BRP measure is distinctly countercyclic. However, survey
evidence suggests that these countercyclical patterns in curve shape have less
to do with rational required BRP than with systematic forecast errors (see Box
9.3).

The typical business cycle is closely related to the monetary policy cycle
except for recessions characterized by de-leveraging (the 1930s and 2008–
2009). The Fed tends to tighten policy through expansion (on average, the Fed
has been tightening in 78% of months during the last third of expansions since
the 1950s, due to overheating and inflation pressures) and it then eases through
contraction (the same frequency falls to 36%, 16%, and 0% over the three
thirds of the contraction). Inversion in the YC and negative C-P BRPs also
ordinarily coincide with Fed tightening.

Figure 9.11. Countercyclical curve steepness moves with the unemployment
rate—but 
yield 
curve 
inversions 
predict 
recessions 
(as 
well 
as 
curve
steepenings)

Sources: Bloomberg, Federal Reserve Board.

Vanishing monetary policy premium. It used to be the case that policy
tightening initially raised the required BRP, due to what was then the Fed’s
lack of credibility as well as market uncertainty about where the tightening
would end. The disappearance of a monetary policy premium since the mid-
1990s may reflect enhanced Fed credibility or enhanced transparency. As the
Fed has influenced market expectations through its communications, any
predictive ability that policy rate moves might have had in the past has
vanished. In recent years, long yields rose before actual tightening started.
Simple trading rules like “Follow the Fed” have not been successful since
1994. More recently, the tools of monetary policy have changed even more
dramatically, as being stuck at the zero interest rate bound has pushed the Fed
to conduct large-scale asset purchases in lieu of rate cuts.

Box 9.3. Alternative interpretations for the YC’s ability to predict bond
returns

Regression studies that predict future bond returns using the YC
emphasize return predictability that appears to be tied to the business
cycle. In contrast, survey-based BRP estimates exhibit little cyclical
variation and much secular variation. To reconcile the evidence, I note
that predictability regressions are implicitly conditioned on rational
expectations and structural certainty, while survey-based BRP estimates
do not impose such assumptions. The apparent predictability of returns
may reflect systematic forecast errors due to irrational investor
expectations or structural uncertainty (gradual learning of structural or
regime changes). Empirical evidence suggests two types of expectational
errors.

First, expectational errors on short rates (cyclical). When policy rates
are abnormally high or low, the market expects fast mean reversion
(policy normalization) and is initially surprised by the persistence of the
policy stance. Eventually

(over a 4 or 5-year horizon), the rate forecast implied by the yield
curve proves broadly correct:
• For example, when the YC is steep, bond yields are more
likely to fall than rise in the near term, thus augmenting any carry
advantage with capital gains. Such return predictability tends to
occur near cyclical troughs and thus has been taken as evidence of
cyclically high risk premia. However, survey expectations do not
support this interpretation but, instead, indicate that investors
overestimate future bond yield rises near cyclical troughs and earn
unforeseen capital gains thanks to this forecast error.
• Conversely, when the inverted YC in 1980 preceded rising
bond yields and associated capital losses, an econometrician could
later interpret this, with hindsight, as an instance of predictable
negative BRP (an apparent negative ex ante BRP can be interpreted
as having predicted a negative ex post one).
• Thus I would reinterpret some of the predictability regression
evidence (future excess returns regressed on curve steepness) and
would not view the fitted values in excess return–curve steepness
regressions as rationally time-varying BRP. Indeed, Bacchetta–
Mertens–van Wincoop (2009) and Piazzesi–Schneider (2008)
suggest that much cyclical asset return predictability in classic
predictive regressions is not related to (survey-based) risk premia
but rather to systematic forecasting errors.

Second, errors in estimating expected inflation (secular). Both long yields
and surveys underestimated recent changes in inflation during the postwar
long uptrend and then the downtrend. Inflation expectations were
insufficiently adaptive: investors should have looked more at the most
recent year’s inflation than the past decade’s inflation when setting
expectations:
• It seems harsh and hindsighted to call this irrational, given
that the inflation process was changing dramatically. If we recognize
that inflation expectations in the 1970s and 1980s evolved amidst
almost unprecedented structural uncertainty (the end of Bretton
Woods, oil shocks, and other wrenching changes), rational learning
models may be relevant. In a regime shift context, people may have
adjusted too slowly to the probability of being in a high-inflation or
low-inflation regime.
• A few decades earlier, price stability was the long-run norm
(zero inflation expectations and little persistence in annual inflation
rates); by the 1970s, the level of and uncertainty regarding inflation
were rising and so was its persistence; the inflation rate (as opposed
to the price level) became close to a random walk. Only with
hindsight do we know that all these aspects (inflation level,
uncertainty, persistence) peaked around 1981 and that the Great
Disinflation ensued.

Overall, the broad postwar contours of curve steepness are better
explained by rate expectations (mean reversion in short rates) than by
time-varying risk premia.

Mean-reverting rate expectations (which are negatively related to the
level of inflation) have offset the impact on yield curve steepness of the
inflation risk premium (which varies positively with the level of
inflation).

...
9.6 TACTICAL FORECASTING—DURATION TIMING

I focused on bond market predictability in Ilmanen (1994)—my Ph.D.
dissertation—and in several published articles on duration timing. Here I
just summarize (see Table 9.3) predictive correlations over short and long
horizons for various generic risk premium proxies and other predictors,
which are sorted into four themes driving ex ante BRP. (I remind the reader
that 
there 
are 
valid 
econometric 
questions 
regarding 
long-horizon
predictability because the effective sample size is small, the predicted return
involves overlapping observations, and many series are quite persistent. As
usual, reported correlations are computed in sample.)

Table 
9.3. 
Correlations 
with 
future 
excess 
return 
of 
(7-to-10-year)
Treasuries, 1962–2009

Sources: Bloomberg, Haver Analytics, Federal Reserve Board, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Blue Chip Economic Indicators, Consensus
Economics, Sharon Kozicki, Robin Greenwood, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, Center for Research in Security Prices, Bank of America Merrill
Lynch.
Comments

Generic BRP proxies have the best predictive correlations and most work
well both for short-horizon and long-horizon forecasting. Generic proxies
have the advantage that they do not have to identify why prospective
returns are high. Ex ante real yield shows the highest correlations. To give
readers a sense of what the 0.31 correlation means in return terms, I sort the
history of ex ante real yields and subsequent quarterly excess bond returns.
Quarters forming the quintile with the highest (lowest) real yields were
followed by +2.0% (—0.7%) quarterly excess bond returns, on average.

Inflation uncertainty. I don’t have very good empirical proxies for this
variable but, a priori, I would expect a positive relation only over long
horizons. Indeed, expected long-term inflation and bond market volatility
have high predictive correlations over the 5-year horizon (0.31 and 0.64,
respectively), consistent with the idea that high expected inflation and
related uncertainty make the ex ante BRP high. Over short horizons the
correlations are low.

Safe haven influences. These influences should be observed best at short
horizons, perhaps even shorter than one quarter if they are related to brief
flight-to-quality episodes and wealth-dependent risk aversion. Negative-
equity returns and high equity market volatility are bullish news for bonds
both contemporaneously and predictively (with—0.15 and +0.11 predictive
correlations to bonds for equity returns and volatility, respectively, over a
one-quarter horizon). The negative coefficient on equity returns may also
reflect an underreaction effect for growth news and not just risk aversion
news. However, the absolute values of the correlations are not high, so the
evidence on stock–bond correlation is weak.

Supply–demand factors. I do not have good data on demand factors but I
would expect slow-moving supply factors to mainly influence long-horizon
expected returns. The debt maturity share indicator has a 0.66 predictive
correlation over the 5-year horizon.

Cyclical. 
A 
strong 
economy 
(e.g., 
captured 
by 
ebullient 
business
confidence) empirically predicts low bond returns. I find the correlation
signs consistent with this logic at all horizons but, surprisingly, largest
correlations for the longest horizon. Business confidence measures give
pretty similar results. The Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI) is
a summary measure of 85 economic announcements. The unemployment
rate has the opposite sign because it is inherently countercyclical.

The fact that bond returns are predictable over a 5-year horizon must
reflect secular rather than cyclical features, such as the apparent inflation-
level dependence of the unemployment rate and corporate profits. For
example, the corporate profit share of overall GDP derives its forecasting
ability for bond returns (—0.52 over a 5-year horizon) largely from one
observation: the profit trough in the 1970s followed by massively positive
bond returns in the early 1980s. The same single observation may explain
the 
significant 
correlations 
of 
the 
unemployment 
rate 
and 
business
confidence with bond returns over the next 5 years.

For shorter horizon tactical trading, I also assess predictive correlations
for 
next 
month 
excess 
bond 
returns. 
I 
just 
report 
here 
that 
the 
best
predictors (which reach double-digit correlations) include several generic
risk premium proxies and carry/value measures as well as past month equity
market return and bond return. Note that recent bond market momentum
works well for very-short-term trading but not over multi-month or multi-
year horizons (thus not shown in Table 9.3). In Chapter 24, I will illustrate
forecasting models using a tactical duration-timing model that employs
information about curve steepness as well as recent equity and bond returns.

This chapter focuses on a single BRP, implicitly assuming that it is
perfectly correlated across the curve. The working assumption that BRP
varies across Treasuries in proportion to duration or volatility is reasonable;
it is likely that most fluctuations in yield curve shape over time reflect
investors’ changing rate expectations. Empirically, single-factor models
(roughly, assuming parallel shifts in the yield curve) do explain a large
chunk 
of 
bond 
return 
variation 
and 
the 
remaining 
factors 
(related 
to
evolving 
curve 
steepness 
or 
curvature 
or 
even 
more 
maturity-specific
details) may not earn significant long-run premia. The typical concave
shape of the yield curve (a steeper curve at short durations than at long
ones) does suggest that duration-neutral curve-steepening positions earn a
positive long-run premium. This empirical feature could reflect a single
BRP because curve steepening is correlated with falling short rates. In any
case, most active yield curve traders hunt view-based opportunities and
such trades are too “micro” for this book’s broad focus.

...
9.7 NOTES

[1] 
The 
identities 
are 
actually 
approximations 
because 
I 
ignore 
small
compounding effects, convexity effects, coupons, and bond-aging/rolldown
effects. 
The 
analysis 
would 
be 
more 
accurate 
if 
I 
used 
continuously
compounded zero-coupon rates. However, the basic ideas work as good
approximations and, because I do not restrict my analysis to zero-coupon
issues, apply to popular traded assets. Both on-the-run bonds and interest
rate 
swaps 
closely 
resemble 
coupon-bearing 
par 
bonds 
(bonds 
whose
coupon 
rate 
equals 
market 
yield) 
and 
there 
are 
straightforward
mathematical mappings between par, zero-coupon (spot), and forward rate
curves.

[2] 
Wonkish: 
Macro-finance 
models 
have 
two 
distinct 
elements: 
a
forecasting model for a set of state variables and a no-arbitrage asset-
pricing model that expresses bond yields as a function of state variables.
The no-arbitrage restriction ensures that, adjusted for risk, the dynamic
evolution of yields over time and across states is consistent with the cross-
sectional shape of the yield curve. A key assumption that the common
market price of risk is a linear function of state variables allows bond yields
to be written as functions of state variables. However, if the underlying
factor model is misspecified, the no-arbitrage restriction might degrade the
model’s empirical performance.

[3] One can display average returns as geometric or arithmetic means and
relate either to the volatility of total returns or of excess returns over the
one-month bill. Figure 9.1 shows that arithmetic means and the volatility of
excess returns make the reward–risk relation more linear. The 1952–2009
period is also not quite neutral because short rates fell and long rates rose
mildly during the sample period (i.e., the curve steepened). Adjusting for
sample-specific yield changes would boost the longest portfolios’ return
and make the average return curve flat after the 5-year maturity (GM near
6.5%).

[4] Arithmetic average bond returns at intermediate maturities are 30 bp to
50 bp higher than average yields because they benefit from the rolldown
effect. For example, a 5-year duration bond has on average a 10 bp higher
yield than the 4-year bond; as a bond ages and becomes a 4-year bond its
yield falls even if the yield curve stays unchanged (the bond is “rolling
down the yield curve”), resulting in a roughly 40 bp capital gain (Rolldown
return ≈ Duration × Rolldown yield decline). Rolldown returns tend to be
largest at intermediate maturities because at the front end curve steepness
creates a smaller rolldown effect due to short duration, whereas at the back
end a long duration can even hurt because there the yield curve is often
mildly inverted.

[5] Ex ante expected return reflects initial yield spreads and rolldown
returns, perhaps adjusted for expected yield changes. I will ignore here the
value of convexity (i.e., the expected economic value of nonlinearity in a
bond’s price–yield relation). The effect is quite small unless yield volatility
is extremely high and/or bond duration very long.

Source notes. This chapter differs from the others by being more subjective.
I have contributed to the bond risk premium (BRP) literature for two
decades as an academic and a practitioner (Ilmanen, 1994, 1995, 1997,
2003a, b; Best–Byrne–Ilmanen, 1998). In this chapter, I argue that level-
dependent inflation premium and a safe haven premium are key drivers of
the BRP; that the survey-based BRP captures relatively well the “true” ex
ante BRP while historical variation in the yield curve shape is contaminated
by mean-reverting rate expectations; and that the predictable time variation
in bond returns reflects both time-varying risk premia and systematic
forecast errors.

Key academic works in this topic are Fama–Bliss (1987), Campbell–
Shiller 
(1991), 
Cochrane–Piazzesi 
(2005), 
and 
Campbell–Sunderam–
Viceira (2010). Much interesting work has also been done in the Fed and
other central banks, see the survey of Kim–Orphanides (2007).

On the macro-finance literature, see Ang–Piazzesi (2003) and surveys by
Kim (2008) and Rudebusch (2010). On empirical models with survey data,
see Kim–Orphanides (2005), Kim–Wright (2005), and Rosenberger–Maurer
(2008). On the relation between yield curve and economic growth, see
Harvey (1989) and Estrella (2005).

Recent 
works 
that 
discuss 
the 
idea 
of 
a 
level-dependent 
inflation
premium include Backus–Wright (2006), Kim–Orphanides (2007), Wright
(2008), and D’Amico–Orphanides (2008). The models of Ulrich (2008) and
Campbell–Sunderam–Viceira (2010) combine both standalone inflation risk
and covariance-based risk. The role of safe haven demand and stock–bond
correlation on BRP was noted in Li (2002), Ilmanen (2003), and Connolly–
Stivers–Sun (2005).

For 
supply–demand 
factors, 
see 
Laubach 
(2003), 
Warnock–Warnock
(2006), 
Baldacci–Kumar 
(2010), 
Gagnon 
et 
al. 
(2010), 
Greenwood–
Vayanos (2010), and Krishnamurthy–Vissing-Jorgensen (2010). For cyclical
influences as well as survey evidence, see Fama–French (1989), Froot
(1989), Cochrane–Piazzesi (2005, 2008), Piazzesi–Schneider (2008), and
Bacchetta–Mertens–van 
Wincoop 
(2009). 
For 
return 
predictability, 
see
Fama–Bliss 
(1987), 
Cochrane–Piazzesi 
(2005), 
Naik–Balakrishnan–
Devarajan (2009), and my own research listed above.

...