10

Credit risk premium

• Bonds exposed to credit risk have outperformed Treasuries
only marginally over long histories (by 0.2–0.5% annually for
investment-grade credits), arguably giving poor compensation for
their lower liquidity and poor timing of losses. Long-dated
corporate bonds have performed especially poorly, while barely
speculative-grade bonds (BB-rated) have performed best.
• In this generally bleak picture, short-dated top-rated credit
bonds have given an attractive reward–volatility ratio. Levered
arbitrageurs cannot remove this opportunity because of the
financing rates they face. This group of bonds is also risky, with
the largest losses occurring during financial crises.
• Credit spreads are observable measures of the prospective
return advantage of risky assets over “riskless” Treasuries.
However, spreads overstate this advantage due to expected losses
from default or downgrading losses, and due to embedded
options.
• Historical average yield spreads for investment-grade debt
have by far exceeded average default rates. Yet, it does not
necessarily follow that investors have earned the bulk of the
spread as excess returns. Indeed, evidence suggests the contrary.
One explanation for the apparently contradictory sets of evidence
is that index investors constrained by rating requirements, unlike
buy-and-hold investors, sell exactly the types of corporate bonds
that subsequently tend to perform well (BB-rated “fallen angels”
and short-dated debt).
• Spread variation over time reflects the scarcity and
liquidity edge of Treasuries over other issues as well as cyclical,
volatility, and default developments.
• Credit spreads have some ability to predict excess returns,
as do various cyclical and supply–demand indicators.
• Besides corporate bonds, I briefly discuss other non-
government debt: interest rate swaps, mortgage-backed securities,
and emerging market bonds.

...
10.1 INTRODUCTION, TERMINOLOGY, AND THEORY

Decomposing the credit spread

Bonds differ from each other in other important ways than duration. This
chapter turns to another key characteristic—credit risk—that appears to
warrant 
a 
risk 
premium 
(see 
cube). 
Government 
debt 
such 
as 
U.S.
Treasuries almost always has lower yields, and presumably lower expected
returns, 
than 
comparable 
non-government 
debt. 
Credit 
spreads 
are 
a
convenient measure of corporate bonds’ prospective return advantage over
Treasuries [1]. However, they clearly overstate this advantage. Besides
presenting empirical evidence on historical experience, this chapter reviews
the pitfalls in equating credit spreads with expected excess returns.

Credit spreads would be positive even if investors only expected the
same return from corporates as from Treasuries. The main reason, only
recently challenged, is the perception that developed country government
debt is default free. The uncertain repayments of bonds exposed to credit
risk (“credit” for short) mean that these bonds have lower expected cash
flows than matching Treasuries with the same promised yield. Risk-neutral
investors will require a break-even yield cushion over Treasuries to offset
expected default losses. Risk-averse investors in the real world likely
require further compensation (a higher return than riskless assets after
losses from defaults, thus a credit risk premium or CRP). If issuerspecific
default risk could be perfectly diversified away, there should be no expected
excess return in equilibrium, and we could obtain risk-neutral pricing even
given risk-averse investors. However, defaults are empirically correlated
and tend to cluster in “bad times” (recessions, financial distress), so they
contain significant systematic risk; so corporate bonds should offer some
credit risk premium beyond the break-even cushion.

Besides credit considerations (break-even spread due to expected default
or downgrading losses plus the credit risk premium), yield spreads over
Treasuries likely reflect a premium for the lower liquidity of corporate
bonds. Disentangling these unobservable components is an even greater
challenge than disentangling the market’s rate expectation and required
bond 
risk 
premium 
components 
in 
Treasury 
yields 
(discussed 
in 
the
previous chapter).

Raw yield spreads may further be boosted by the embedded options held
by an issuer. For example, the issuer may have the right to call (repay) the
bond at par before the maturity date. Since the 1990s, institutional investors
have had access to option-adjusted spread measures that account for such
embedded options (although estimates do vary across models and especially
depend on assumed volatility levels) [2].

The stylized illustration below decomposes the raw corporate–Treasury
yield spread into three parts: the true ex ante return advantage and two
break-even cushions that offset the expected impact of default losses and
optionality. Unfortunately, the terminology is used unevenly. Comments on
yield spreads rarely mention whether the spread is option-adjusted or not.
Worse, the term “credit premium” (or default premium) is sometimes used
for ex ante yield spread, at other times for ex ante excess return or even
only its credit-related component (excluding the illiquidity premium), and
yet elsewhere for realized excess return:
Before turning to empirical evidence on credit spreads and premia, I briefly
discuss the huge literature on credit risk analysis and modeling. This
literature is relevant for understanding both corporate bonds’ expected cash
flows and their discount rate (the excess returns that bond buyers may
require for bearing default risk and related systematic risks).
There are different ways of analyzing credit risk, including statistical
(purely empirical) and analytical approaches. The latter literature has split
into structural and reduced-form models.

Statistical credit risk analysis

The most common approach is to extrapolate historical loss experience for
each credit-rating class. Refinements are possible. The statistical scoring
models pioneered by Professor Edward Altman use key financial ratios to
predict defaults. Later studies improved such default probability models by
including market-based data.

The expected loss from default depends not just on the probability of
default but also on its severity, where severity is measured by the recovery
rate. By construction, Expected default loss = Default probability * (1—
Recovery rate). A 40% recovery rate is commonly assumed for senior debt,
broadly consistent with long-run experience. However, recovery rates vary
over time and with debt seniority.

For 
top-rated 
investment-grade 
(IG) 
bonds, 
defaults 
are 
a 
remote
possibility and rating downgrades are a more realistic risk. Downgrades
may be analyzed in the same way as defaults. Downgrades are consistently
associated with credit spread widening and thus capital losses. However,
market spread changes typically predict rating changes several months
ahead. Some rating agency actions (e.g., putting a credit on a watchlist) that
typically precede downgrades are also more forward looking.
For example, Elton et al. (2001) use the rating transition matrix (the
historical frequency of rating changes or defaults) to estimate the long-term
default probability for various rating classes. Combined with a recovery rate
assumption, they compute the break-even spreads that would equal the
market spreads in a risk-neutral world. These break-even spreads (14 bp for
A-rated and 40 bp for BBB-rated bonds at a 10-year maturity; even lower
for shorter bonds) are much below market spreads.

Analytical models on single-name risk

Academic and practitioner literature in the 1980s and 1990s focused on
single-issuer credit risk (default probability, recovery value, and maybe also
downgrading events), either based on structural models or on reduced-form
models. 
Structural 
models 
price 
all 
corporate 
securities 
in 
a 
common
framework, grounded in the pioneering theoretical models of Merton (1974)
and Black–Scholes (1973). In the classic “Merton model”, a firm’s capital
structure is particularly simple: a single zero-coupon debt and a single
equity issue. The firm’s equity can be viewed as a call option on the firm’s
assets (struck at the maturity value D of its debt), while the firm’s debt
consists of a riskless zero-coupon bond (which guarantees the payment of
D) and a short put option on the value of the firm (struck at D). Thus the
bondholder is effectively writing a put on the firm’s assets, being long
equity but short equity volatility. The value of any option depends crucially
on the volatility level of the underlying asset (as well as time horizon and
leverage, where leverage is the difference between the current value of the
firm’s assets and the value of its debt):
• While all corporate stakeholders tend to benefit from rising
equity prices, a key difference between the exposures of equity-holders
and bondholders is that the former benefit from rising volatility while
the latter are hurt by it. The alignment of management and shareholder
interests makes debtholders vulnerable to discretionary management
decisions—such as sharp increases in leverage—that cause volatility to
rise and redistribute wealth from the bondholder to the equity-holder.
• Moody’s KMV model is the most popular variant of the Merton
model. It measures default risk by “distance to default” (the number of
standard deviation moves required to push the firm’s value below the
default point within the time horizon being evaluated). Instead of
assuming a log-normal distribution of asset values as in the Merton
model, 
KMV 
uses 
historical 
default 
experience 
to 
convert 
this
distance-todefault 
measure 
into 
expected 
default 
frequency. 
Such
measures 
of 
default 
probability 
and 
rating 
migration 
probability
outperform rating agency predictions.
• Standard structural models predict much lower credit spreads
than observed in reality. These models can imply that very short-dated
spreads should be near zero. Some recent structural models have been
able to explain actual debt pricing by adding a jump component and an
illiquidity premium.

Reduced-form credit-pricing models bypass firm valuation and, instead,
directly model default probability. They treat default (or rating change) as a
random event whose probability can be estimated from observed market
prices in the context of an analytical model (or directly from historical
default data). Useful indicators, besides equity volatility and leverage,
include past equity returns, certain financial ratios, and proxies for the
liquidity 
premium. 
This 
modeling 
approach 
is 
sort 
of 
a 
compromise
between 
statistical 
models 
and 
theoretically 
purer 
structural 
models.
Reduced-form 
models 
can 
naturally 
match 
market 
spreads 
better 
than
structural models, but unconstrained indicator selection can make them
overfitted to in-sample data.

Box 10.1. (wonkish) Risk-neutral and actual default probabilities

Under certain assumptions (continuous trading, a single-factor
diffusion process), positions in risky assets can be perfectly hedged
and thus should earn riskless return. This arbitrage pricing allows risk-
neutral valuation where investor preferences (risk aversion) need not
be specified: the security price reflects expected cash flows discounted
at the riskless rate.

Credit-pricing models often apply the risk-neutral valuation
technique by adjusting the default probability (from actual to ) instead
of adjusting discount rates to include a risk premium. When a bond’s
expected future payoff is computed using risk-neutral default
probability it can be discounted using the riskless rate in the bond-
pricing equation. Risk-neutral default probabilities must be higher than
actual real-world probabilities if credit spreads contain a required
premium beyond the break-even spread needed just to offset expected
default losses.

Using, first, risk-neutral default probabilities and, then, real-world
probabilities in the bond-pricing equation (when calibrating an
analytical model to historical default experience), and evaluating the
difference, enables us to disentangle the two credit-related components
in bond yields. The residual part of the yield spread, unexplained by
the credit-pricing model, is then deemed to be related to illiquidity
(and any other non-credit factors). However, such decomposition is
accurate only if the assumed model is correct.

Default correlations and portfolio risk

In the past decade, the credit risk modeling literature increasingly turned its
focus from single-issuer default risk toward portfolio analysis, due to the
growing importance of structured products (pooled composites of bonds
and loans, either pass-through or tranched). The joint probability of defaults
(default correlation) is a crucial factor in such portfolio analysis. Both
structured 
finance 
instruments 
and 
the 
related 
literature 
became
increasingly 
complex 
in 
the 
2000s, 
arguably 
going 
too 
far 
(ahead 
of
investor understanding), thereby contributing to the market turmoil when
defaults began in earnest in 2007–2008, resulting in vanishing liquidity and
the virtual extinction of many market sectors.

...
10.2 HISTORICAL AVERAGE EXCESS RETURNS

The realized average outperformance of credits should in principle be an
accurate measure, not suffering from the overstatement of prospective
return 
advantage 
that 
is 
an 
inherent 
characteristic 
of 
yield 
spreads.
However, average returns can be contaminated by capital gains or losses
from sample-specific spread trends—and excess returns are estimated with
some noise. In any case, historical average returns are not very informative
about the future if expected returns vary over time, but we study them in the
hope of gleaning something useful about long-run reward.

Dimson–Marsh–Staunton 
(2002) 
estimate 
that 
long 
U.S. 
corporates
outperformed long Treasuries by 50 bp between 1900 and 2000. This ex
post default premium estimate is subject to the caveats that data sources
vary, average rating is ambiguous, and durations are mismatched. My
reading of the evidence suggests an even lower number—about 30 bp.

The further back we look the worse quality data we have. Since about
1990 we have access to properly duration-adjusted excess returns over
Treasuries. Between 1973 and 1989 some interpolations are needed to
compare corporate returns with matching Treasuries. Before 1973, the main
data source is Ibbotson Associates’ long corporate bond index; it has higher
credit quality (only Aaa and Aa-rated debt) and longer maturity (over 10
years) than the full Barcap (Barclays Capital, formerly Lehman Brothers)
index, and its monthly return is simply compared with the Ibbotson long
(20-year) Treasury index return. However, returns on the Ibbotson corporate
series are calculated from yields, with no allowance for defaults and/or
downgrading. Thus, the Ibbotson estimates overstate corporate returns.
Note that I use Moody’s and S&P’s ratings notation (e.g., Aaa vs. AAA)
interchangeably because my diverse sources use both of them.
Figure 
10.1. 
Cumulative 
excess 
returns 
of 
corporate 
bonds 
vs.
duration/maturity-matched Treasuries.

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar).

For the longest history in Figure 10.1, the geometric mean (GM) ex post
credit risk premium is 24 bp and is no better for Barcap index data available
since 1973 [3]. All excess return in the long series came in the first 42
years, nothing in the second 42 years. The Barcap IG index shows a mild
positive outperformance trend since 1973, despite sharp falls in 1973–1974,
1986, 1990, 1998–2002, 2007–2008. Performance is better for HY bonds,
but even this picture is not compelling, given deep drawdowns during the
past three recessions. (The active original issue HY market developed only
in 
the 
late 
1970s 
but 
earlier 
data 
exist 
on 
low-grade 
bonds—“fallen
angels”—all the way back to 1953.)

Table 10.1 analyzes average excess returns across rating classes. Lower
rated IG classes have earned higher mean returns, but excess returns are
small and inconsistent (with an information ratio of, at best, 0.16). The
long-run record was unimpressive even before 2008 and, as of late 2008,
the cumulative outperformance over many decades was negative for most
rating classes.

The BB-rated sector, just below the IG threshold, provides the best long-
run performance of any bond-rating category. This relative success likely
reflects partial market segmentation caused by the constraints under which
many 
portfolio 
managers 
operate. 
Fallen 
angels 
(“orphan” 
bonds
downgraded from IG to HY, which IG portfolio managers are forced to sell)
appear to outperform bonds originally issued as HY.

Table 10.1. Excess returns of Citigroup credit indices over 7-to-10-year
Treasuries, 1973–2009

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital (pre-1980), Citigroup.

The riskiest subsector has fared the worst. The lowest rated sector, CCC,
has clearly underperformed Treasuries since 1985. These surprisingly poor
returns may have been caused by some combination of a reach-for-yield
mentality, overoptimistic cyclical views, investors’ excessive confidence
regarding their timing and/or selection ability, and lottery-seeker preference
for the riskiest assets. Admittedly investors only recently accumulated
enough data on CCC-rated bonds from which to learn, since there were few
issuers below a B-rating until the 1990s.

In the bull markets (2003–2004, 2009), CCC-rated bonds fared extremely
well (after having lost nearly half of their value in 2000–2002 and in 2008).
Low-rated 
bonds 
can 
be 
good 
tactical 
investments 
during 
economic
recoveries and when initial spreads are wide—but apparently not great
long-term investments.

Even with very limited outperformance, a simple argument could be
made that corporates are superior investments to Treasuries: they offer
slightly higher long-term returns and slightly lower volatilities. These facts
hold 
for 
corporate 
bond 
indices 
and 
Treasury 
benchmarks 
over 
long
periods. However, this naive comparison ignores important considerations
such as Treasuries’ superior liquidity and better recession-hedging and
equity-diversifying abilities. At a more mechanical level, corporate bond
index volatilities, and correlations with equities and other asset classes, are
understated because of the stale pricing of corporate issues.
Why such low ex post credit premia?

Corporate 
bonds’ 
ex 
post 
excess 
returns 
have 
only 
delivered 
a 
small
fraction of their historical ex ante yield advantage, a fact that may not be
widely appreciated. For example, the Lehman/Barcap investment-grade
Corporates Index earned a 30 bp average ex post excess return over
comparable maturity Treasuries between 1973 and 2009, compared with the
120 bp average option-adjusted (or yield-to-worst) ex ante spread and to an
even 
wider 
average 
yield-to-maturity 
ex 
ante 
spread 
over 
those 
same
Treasuries. Where did the rest of the spread advantage go? This question
may surprise experts. The better known puzzle in academic circles is about
inexplicably wide credit spreads. Recall that long-run historical default
experience implies average default losses much lower than average yield
spreads—perhaps just 20 bp of the long-run average credit spread, which
exceeds 100 bp [4].

Figure 10.2 highlights the tension between these two findings. The left
bar says that because realized returns were so low, default and downgrading
losses must have eaten much of the yield spread. The right bar says that
because realized default and downgrading losses were so low, credit bonds
must have earned the rest as true outperformance over Treasuries. Both
excess return analysis and default rate analysis seem to say: “It is not me
causing those wide spreads, it is that other part.”

How can we reconcile the conflicting evidence? The key is to distinguish
between investor types. For buy-and-hold investors it is sufficient to adjust
credit spreads for embedded options and expected default losses. However,
for active investors, downgrading bias and trading activity due to index
changes, discussed in detail below, can further reduce expected returns.
Moreover, within-sample widening of general credit spreads can cause
capital losses that reduce investors’ realized returns. This repricing effect
should be small over long data windows but can matter even over 20 years.

Figure 10.2. Does the puzzle relate to too wide or too narrow credit
spreads?
Downgrading bias. Among IG bonds, the impact of defaults is modest
but the impact of downgrading bias can be significant for top-rated bonds.
Expected 
capital 
losses 
due 
to 
downgrading 
bias 
reflect 
the 
relative
likelihood of upgrades vs. downgrades as well as the asymmetric spread
and price outcomes of upgrades vs. downgrades:
• Asymmetric probabilities of rating changes: For example, an A-
rated bond is twice as likely to be downgraded next year to Baa as to
be upgraded to Aa. Migration probabilities are more symmetric for
lower ratings but the asymmetry in outcomes still causes downgrading
bias for most IG bonds.
• 
Asymmetric 
outcomes: 
More 
importantly, 
the 
cost 
of 
a
downgrade is much greater than the benefit of an upgrade because the
spread roughly doubles per full rating notch. Using average spreads
since 1994, if an A-rated bond is upgraded to Aa, the spread narrows
by 36 bp but a downgrade to Baa widens the spread by 56 bp, and
spreads widen even faster for further downgrades.

Trading activity. This explanation is important even if we ignore the costs
associated with active view taking and merely track the costs of trading
according to index rules. The large excess returns in the second bar accrue
to “buy-and-hold investors” who keep the credit bonds irrespective of their
subsequent rating changes or aging. In contrast, the modest excess returns
in the first bar accrue to “index investors” who hold credit bonds only as
long as they satisfy the index criteria. Specifically, IG index investors are
presumed to sell bonds that are downgraded below IG rating and bonds
whose maturity falls below the usual one-year threshold. (Also, bonds with
a small issue size, that no longer satisfy the liquidity criteria for the index,
need to be sold.) Given empirical evidence of the good performance of BB-
rated bonds—especially of fallen angels—and short-maturity bonds, such
actions damage long-run returns!

Table 
10.2. 
Reconciling 
the 
twin 
credit 
spread 
puzzles: 
stylized
components of long-run spreads

Realized excess return (Credit + Illiquidity premia) 30–40 bp
Losses due to within-sample spread widening
0–20 bp
Index investors’ bad selling practices
30–40 bp
Losses from default and downgrading biases
20–40 bp

Ng–Phelps (2010) quantify these effects and show that IG corporate
index investors would enhance their annual returns (based on experience
over 1990–2009) by 38 bp by retaining all bonds that initially qualified for
this index. Most of the gains (32 bp) accrue from retaining fallen angels
instead of selling with the crowd (index rules imply selling at the bid price
at the end of the month when a bond is downgraded to a sub-IG rating).

Investment 
practices 
could 
clearly 
be 
improved. 
However, 
some
institutional investors have no choice because regulatory requirements or
investment mandates force them to sell non-IG bonds within a relatively
short period.

All in all, the information in Table 10.2 can loosely account for the 120
bp 
average 
(option-adjusted) 
credit 
spread 
in 
recent 
decades. 
Any
decomposition 
is 
further 
complicated 
by 
various 
interactions 
and
compounding effects as well as by data mismatches. For example, average
default rates are based on the fraction of issuers in distress, while the yields
and returns of bond indices are weighted by issues. Other factors may also
need to be taken into account: The market cap weighting of indices could
explain some of the gap between ex ante and ex post credit premia if
average 
losses 
from 
default 
and 
downgrading 
are 
not 
similarly 
cap
weighted. Separately, the return impact of corporate “events” (leveraged
buyouts, 
mergers 
and 
acquisitions, 
initial 
public 
offerings, 
and 
the
withdrawing 
of 
bond 
ratings) 
may 
not 
be 
well 
captured 
in 
empirical
analysis of average yields and defaults.

Back to my original question: “Why such low ex post credit premia?” I
wonder whether the highly visible ex ante yield advantage has outweighed
much less visible negatives (embedded options, downgrading bias, agency
problems, lower liquidity, bad timing of losses) in investors’ minds and
made credits a structurally overpriced asset class. Investors may be more
aware of historical average yield spreads than of historical excess returns;
the excess return analysis above is somewhat complex and its unappealing
evidence is rarely publicized in Wall Street research. More commonly, we
hear how much wider average yield spreads have been than average default
losses.

The appeal of credit to institutional investors is not universal. Swensen
(2009), just to give one example, is highly critical of non-government debt
and 
argues 
that 
the 
principal–agent 
problems 
in 
corporate 
bonds 
are
underappreciated. Because firm managers’ interests are better aligned with
shareholders than with lenders, discretionary management actions are more
likely to benefit the former at the expense of the latter. Finally, institutional
demand may contribute to overpricing: banks are the largest asset managers
and must hold credit risk disproportionately, while insurers often opt for
high-yielding 
assets 
as 
long-term 
investments, 
adding 
to 
the
oversubscription of corporate bonds.

...
10.3 FOCUS ON FRONT-END TRADING—A POCKET OF
ATTRACTIVE REWARD TO RISK

There is one exception to the disappointing performance of credit. In the
U.S. credit markets, the highest volatility-adjusted returns have accrued
from 
overweighting 
top-rated 
credits 
(AAA/AA 
bonds 
or 
interest-rate
swaps) against Treasuries at short maturities (1 to 3 years; perhaps even
better in money markets). The evidence is similar in U.S. agency markets
and in swap–government spread positions in dollar, euro, sterling, and yen
markets. For unlevered investors in traditional asset classes, overweighting
short-dated credits was perhaps the best structural tilt on a risk-adjusted
basis in the past 10 to 20 years.

Let us review the long-term evidence. Good data exist for U.S. credits
since 1978: such as Bank of America Merrill Lynch corporate indices’ 1-to-
3-year maturity subsector portfolios for AAA/AA vs. Treasury (pretty
similar durations) and, even better since 1988, duration-adjusted excess
returns of Lehman/Barcap index 1-to-3-year maturity subsector portfolios
(given separately for each rating class). Figure 10.3 shows that short-
maturity credit carry trades gave much smoother outperformance than
longer maturity trades and ended up earning higher raw excess returns as
well. Post-1988 duration-adjusted excess returns paint a similar picture, as
does evidence on U.S. agencies and swap–government spread trades (not
shown).

Drilling 
into 
duration-adjusted 
excess 
returns 
from 
Lehman/Barcap
across maturity and rating subsets in Figure 10.4, we see that the 1-to-3-
year AAA/AA vs. Treasury trades achieved an information ratio in excess
of 0.5 (and above 1.0 before the 2008 crisis), while most lower rated and
longer dated credit portfolios actually underperformed Treasuries over the
past 20 or more years. The consistency of this pattern was exceptional as
rolling 2-year outperformance was always positive since the late 1980s until
late 2007 (not shown). In all rating classes, the short-maturity credit trade
gave a higher return and (of course) lower volatility than a long-maturity
trade.

Figure 
10.3. 
Cumulative 
excess 
returns 
of 
corporate 
bonds 
vs.
duration/maturity-matched Treasuries.

Sources: Bloomberg, Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

What explains this superior risk-adjusted performance? I first give a
mechanical answer and then turn to the economic questions: why the
opportunity exists in the first place and why it has not been arbitraged away.
The success has been quite predictable. Ex ante Sharpe ratios (e.g., spread
per unit of volatility) have persistently been higher for top-rated front-end
carry trades than for most other credit trades—and ex post Sharpe ratios
have broadly reflected delivery of these promised outcomes. Although yield
spreads can be quite narrow at short durations, they are not zero as standard
structural credit models imply, and that is the key. A positive intercept
(positive spread over Treasuries at near-zero maturity) and the relatively flat
slope of the spread curve ensure that the spread–duration ratio peaks at the
front end. Mechanically, high ex ante Sharpe ratios reflect large spread–
duration ratios (i.e., broad break-even cushions [5]) and relatively stable
spreads at short maturities. Only if yield spreads rose one for one with
duration would the break-even cushions be equal across maturities (see
Figure 10.5). Thus, it is common to see the broadest break-even cushions at
the 
front 
end, 
despite 
the 
narrowest 
spreads. 
Moreover, 
yield 
spread
volatilities tend to be lower at short maturities, at least for highly rated debt.
Together these features explain high ex ante Sharpe ratios—and lesser ex
post Sharpe ratios. Only an exceptionally dramatic spread widening (or
actual default) can make short-dated carry trades underperform ex post, and
since the 1980s this has occurred only in 1998 and 2007–2008.

Figure 
10.4. 
Information 
ratios 
for 
U.S. 
credit-vs.-Treasury 
strategies
across ratings and maturities, 1988–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital.

Which forces have given rise to such an attractive ex ante opportunity?

We can first rule out one plausible answer. Shorter dated credit bonds have
lower spread duration (price sensitivity to yield spread widening) than
longer dated bonds, but they have just as much exposure to pure default
losses as longer bonds. This default risk could conceivably explain the wide
front-end spread. However, top-rated short-dated bonds hardly suffer from
any default risk: historically, less than 0.3% of AA-rated issuers have fallen
below IG status over a one-year horizon, let alone defaulted.

This opportunity may originate from the partial market segmentation and
convenience yields related to the higher liquidity of Treasuries. Some
investors are constrained to hold Treasuries even if close substitutes with
moderately higher risk offer consistently better performance. The number of
such return-insensitive investors have declined over time and have reduced
this opportunity; even foreign central banks have become more return
conscious 
and 
less 
constrained. 
For 
active 
investors, 
Treasuries 
offer
superior liquidity and real savings in trading costs. Finally, Treasuries
perform 
especially 
well 
during 
flight-to-quality 
episodes, 
and 
most
investors value this safe haven feature.

Figure 10.5. (a) Stylized shapes of empirically typical and “theoretical”
high-grade 
spread 
curves, 
and 
(b) 
corresponding 
break-even 
spread-
widening cushions.

Source: Citigroup, own calculations.

Why has this opportunity—with persistently high ex ante Sharpe ratios—
not been arbitraged away?

The above analysis ignores funding rate spreads that would make carry
positions less attractive. Financing rates have limited impact for long-only
managers (who only hold investments without explicit leverage) for whom
the decision is whether to hold an unlevered long position in Treasuries or
in corporate bonds. But any levered trader needs to take into account
Treasuries’ below-LIBOR financing rates. Loosely speaking, a leveraged
corporate–Treasury trade involves funding the long corporate bond position
at a high rate (near the LIBOR deposit rate) while borrowing Treasuries (for
the purpose of shorting them) at a less advantageous repo rate (near the
Treasury bill rate). (When Treasuries are borrowed, cash must be left at the
bond lender as security; it is compensated with the general collateral repo
rate or an even lower special repo rate.) To proxy for this effect, I subtract
from the positive carry of the asset legs (say, 2-year corporate bond minus
Treasury spread) the negative carry of the financing legs (using one-month
repo minus LIBOR). If funding spreads at money markets were as wide as
longer dated bond spreads, there would be no opportunity for levered
traders. Incorporating funding rate spreads cuts the information or Sharpe
ratio of the aggregate trade from 0.7 to 0.4 and makes the proposed
strategies less compelling for levered traders.

After 
the 
funding–cost 
adjustment, 
the 
average 
return 
advantage 
is
relatively 
modest 
(about 
40 
bp) 
compared 
with 
other 
available
opportunities. When leverage is restricted, less capital gets devoted to front-
end trades that lack inherent volatility (and thus require leverage to achieve
meaningful returns), so that arbitrage opportunities are less fully exploited
and Sharpe ratios are higher. More generally, the best trading opportunities
that markets offer often involve levering up low-volatility positions. In the
mid-2000s, ex ante Sharpe ratios declined both because Treasury holders
gradually became more conscious of the opportunity cost of their low-
returning holdings and because more levered capital became available to
pursue any remaining “arbitrage” opportunities. The strategy of buying
corporates and shorting Treasuries suffered unprecedented losses is 2007–
2008 
but 
these 
losses 
of 
course 
improved 
the 
subsequent 
ex 
ante
opportunity. 
Some 
evidence 
suggests 
that 
this 
opportunity 
can 
be
“markettimed”: the ex ante spread has had some ability to predict next year
performance. 
A 
strategy 
of 
sizing 
positions 
based 
on 
the 
ex 
ante
opportunity would have helped in the long run but would have stumbled in
2008.

Besides the financing rate gap and unexciting unlevered returns, the
obstacles faced by capital-constrained arbitrageurs include limited liquidity
in short-dated corporate bonds and the poor performance of this trade in
serious flight-to-quality episodes. While losses from this strategy are rare,
they tend to materialize just when it hurts the trader the most. Arguably the
strategy’s payoff profile resembles that of writing put options on a systemic
catastrophe.
...
10.4 UNDERSTANDING CREDIT SPREADS AND THEIR
DRIVERS

So much for average returns. A key theme in this book is that expected
returns vary over time and that we should study ex ante opportunities. With
corporate bonds, it is harder than with equities to believe that the ex ante
premium is constant when observable spreads vary so much and so visibly
over time. Indeed, history reveals that wide spreads predict higher future
returns. Between 1973 and 2009 the correlation between the spread level
and next month (next year) corporate sector excess return was 0.12 (0.48).

While recognizing that historical credit spreads overstate the expected
return advantage, these spreads are a natural starting point for assessing
corporates’ likely expected return advantage over governments. Figure 10.6
displays spread histories dating back to 1926 to show that Great Depression
era spreads have still not been matched or exceeded even during the
stagflationary recessions between 1973 and 1982 or during the 2008 Credit
Crunch. I include a recession “dummy” variable (recessions are shaded) to
highlight the strong countercyclicality in spreads. While Baa–Aaa and Aaa–
Treasury spreads move together, lower rated bonds (as shown by the Baa–
Aaa spread) exhibit more pronounced countercyclical variation than top-
rated bonds.

Figure 10.6. Long-dated credit spreads since the 1920s.

Sources: Bloomberg, Moody’s, Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar), Federal
Reserve Board, National Bureau of Economic Analysis.
These Moody’s and Ibbotson yield indices (Treasury yields are from
Ibbotson and represent a roughly 20-year maturity) are the best known long
histories. In addition to data quality concerns regarding individual bonds,
we caution that yield spreads are not option-adjusted and that there may be
duration mismatches between these indices which matter when the curve is
steep (all indices are for long-dated bonds). Given the embedded options
and perhaps longer maturities of Aaa-rated corporates, the graphed spreads
may be overstated.

With the introduction of bond indices by Lehman Brothers (now Barcap)
and others, better quality data have become available, including option-
adjusted spreads (OAS). Starting in 1973 we have access to crudely option-
adjusted yields (“yield to worst”) and since 1990 to OAS data that also are
naturally duration matched. The broad contours of the results using modern
data are similar to those obtained using Moody’s yield spread data, but
details differ. While the OAS adjusts for embedded options and for duration
mismatches, it remains in various ways an imperfect measure of expected
returns—even if the OAS model’s term structure specification and volatility
assumption were correct. The OAS ignores, on one hand, expected capital
losses due to downgrading bias and defaults and, on the other hand,
expected gains or losses from rolling along the credit spread curve. It is
possible, if tedious, to adjust for these shortcomings based on historical
experience.

Despite 
their 
shortcomings, 
credit 
spreads 
are 
the 
most 
directly
observable measures of the prospective return advantage of risky assets.
Thus it is worth drilling into their drivers. Recall the spread decomposition
at the beginning of this chapter. The yield spread over Treasuries for
straight corporate bonds or the OAS for bonds with embedded options
reflects (1) the break-even spread needed to offset expected capital losses
from defaults and the downgrading bias, and (2) the true risk premium,
consisting of the excess return required mainly to compensate for default
risk and illiquidity. Corporate bonds also have a tax disadvantage and
trading cost disadvantage compared with Treasuries. These features would
require a further break-even spread for actively trading taxable investors but
if 
the 
marginal 
investor 
in 
corporate 
bonds 
is 
a 
passive 
non-taxed
institution, taxes, or costs should have no impact on market spreads.

Overall, the key explanatory variables for corporate spreads include
• liquidity premium proxies and Treasury scarcity measures;
• cyclical indicators;
• (equity and spread) volatility measures; and
• default rates.

Different 
aspects 
dominate 
the 
determination 
of 
spreads 
for 
top-rated
credits, most IG corporates, and high-yield bonds:
(i) For top-rated (AAA/AA) credits, the default probability is
minimal, and even downgrading bias appears to be a small part of the
yield spread. The ratio of yield spread to expected credit losses is very
high (>5) for top-rated bonds, and modest (<2) for high-yield bonds. In
contrast, liquidity, tax, and systemic factors dominate. Top-rated bonds
are more exposed to (rare but toxic) systemic risks and less to easily
diversifiable idiosyncratic default risks.
(ii) For A-rated and BBB-rated bonds, various economic factors
are important but the actual default risk remains moderate. Cyclical
effects and (equity and spread) volatility are important drivers. Spreads
are wide in economic downturns and in periods of high volatility.
(iii) For speculative-grade (HY) bonds, the expected default rate
is the most important driver of spreads. These bonds behave most like
equity.

More details on (i)–(iii) are given in the following subsections.
(i) Top-rated bonds

It is difficult to disentangle the credit and liquidity components in corporate
yield spreads. Figure 10.7 tracks yield spreads that involve minimal default
risk and that consequently can be viewed primarily as liquidity spreads. For
example, 
government-guaranteed 
Resolution 
Funding 
Corporation
(Refcorp) bonds offered an average yield spread of 50 bp over Treasuries
but widened to 200 bp in late 2008. Swap–government spreads did not
widen 
out 
as 
much 
because 
the 
market’s 
supply 
concerns 
cheapened
Treasuries.

The tax effect reflects the fact that corporates are taxed at the federal,
state, and local levels, while Treasuries are only taxed at the federal level.
The impact on yields might be 30 bp but it has declined over time with
falling yield levels.

For 
top-rated 
bonds, 
the 
uniqueness 
of 
Treasuries 
may 
be 
a 
more
important pricing factor than the risk in the credits (and is accentuated
whenever 
Treasuries 
are 
relatively 
scarce 
and 
less 
substitutable). 
The
AAA–Treasury spread has been inversely related to the Federal debt–GDP
ratio since the 1920s (see Figure 10.8). The scarcity premium on Treasuries
was especially pronounced in 2000 amidst concern about the disappearance
of the Treasury market, while the spread troughed postwar amidst record
debt/GDP levels.

Figure 10.7. Liquidity spreads vary over time.

Sources: Bloomberg, J.P. Morgan.
Figure 10.8. Credit spreads also reflect Treasury scarcity or abundance.

Sources: Bloomberg, Moody’s, Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar), Federal
Reserve Board, Haver Analytics.

(ii) A-rated and BBB-rated bonds

Cyclical effects

Below the top-rated bonds, cyclical influences are the primary drivers of
yield spreads. Recall Figure 10.6, which shows spread widening during
recessions. In addition, Figure 10.9 shows the close relation between the
BAA–AAA spread and a composite of a broad set of real activity indicators
published by the Chicago Fed (the CFNAI). Academics emphasize the
correlation of spread widening with bad times as a reason for a required
default premium. Credit spreads are often widest during recessions when
they hurt the holder the most, consistent with habit formation models in
which consumers are closest to their time-varying subsistence level during
recessions.

Figure 10.9. Credit spreads are wide when the real economy is weak.

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

The link between ex ante equity yields and corporate yields is weak.
Corporate spreads appear more closely related to equity market volatility
and to recent realized losses in equity markets.

Volatility

Many equity volatility measures—from rolling historical volatilities and
idiosyncratic volatilities to implied market volatility—move in synch with
credit spreads (see Figure 10.10). So do other proxies for uncertainty, such
as analyst disagreement (the dispersion of beliefs in earnings forecasts). The
standard Merton model story of default risk rising with equity volatility is
especially applicable to lower rated bonds. Moreover, recessions and flight-
to-quality episodes tend to see both higher equity volatilities and wider
credit spreads. These features may explain the link between Baa–Aaa
spreads 
and 
equity 
market 
volatility. 
The 
importance 
of 
idiosyncratic
volatility may reflect either firm-specific fundamentals or discrete events
(e.g., acquisitions or leveraged buyouts) that can suddenly change the
riskiness of firm debt.
Figure 10.10. Credit spreads widen amidst higher realized equity market
volatility.

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital.

Cross-sectionally, spread volatilities increase nearly linearly with spread
level. This pattern is useful in risk management and hedging. Conversely,
spread 
levels 
vary 
directly 
with 
spread 
volatilities, 
perhaps 
reflecting
differences 
in 
assets’ 
credit 
risk 
premia. 
Spread 
widening 
and 
rating
downgrades tend to boost an asset’s measured riskiness and maybe its
required relative risk premium (the causality can work both ways). The
evidence for this story is primarily cross-sectional but time series evidence
appears consistent with it: higher spread volatilities over time tend to
coincide 
with 
wider 
aggregate 
spread 
levels 
and, 
presumably, 
higher
required risk premia.

Yield-level dependence

The 
empirical 
relation 
between 
the 
levels 
of 
yields 
and 
spreads 
is
ambiguous and period specific; I argue that the cyclical effect dominates
any 
level 
dependence. 
Any 
rate-level 
dependence 
for 
spreads 
is 
a
coincidence, 
depending 
on 
whether 
recessions 
were 
inflationary 
or
deflationary. During the stagflationary 1970s, recessions, rating downgrade
waves, and wide spreads coincided with high inflation and bond yields,
whereas in the 1930s and in the various economic slowdowns since 1998,
downgradings and wide credit spreads coincided with low inflation and
bond yields. Perhaps the true relation is U shaped. Both deflation and high
inflation are bad news for corporate profits and valuations. The sweet spot
of low and stable inflation that we found for equity market valuations may
also support narrow credit spreads.

One key factor causing the yield level to affect spreads in a positive
direction is the tax effect. Corporates need to provide additional yield to
offset their state and local tax disadvantage—and the related break-even
spread varies directly with the yield level. The key factor causing the yield
level to affect spreads negatively is optionality. Lower yields make the
(short) options more valuable and widen credit spreads. Structural credit
models imply a negative relation because corporate bonds are effectively
short the volatility of the firm’s assets. Short options embedded in callable
bonds exacerbate this feature. The negative relation between changes in
yield levels and corporate spreads is consistent with this story.

(iii) High-yield bonds

When defaults matter

High-yield 
bond 
market 
performance 
is 
primarily 
driven 
by 
changing
default rates (see Figure 10.11) that tend to cluster, peaking near economy-
wide recessions. Default rates are backward looking while rating changes
suffer from inertia, so it is no wonder that HY spreads lead both modestly.
Despite loss clustering, long-term bond spreads could look “through the
cycle” in the way that rating agencies do, but in practice spreads are more
sensitive to current conditions than simple default arithmetic suggests, due
to timevarying risk premia, human nature, and capital constraints among
HY 
specialists 
and 
financial 
intermediaries. 
Moreover, 
credit 
market
deterioration is not only reflected in rising default rates; downgrading rates
(net downgrading bias in rating changes) and spread volatilities also rise
near recessions, while recovery rates in defaults decline.

Figure 
10.11. 
Moody’s 
annual 
investment-grade 
and 
speculative-grade
default rates, 1920–2009.

Sources: Moody’s, Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Citigroup.
Figure 10.11 shows Moody’s annual issuer-weighted default rates since
1920 for both investment-grade and speculative-grade debt. The long-run
averages are 0.15% and 2.8%. However, looking only at data since 1970,
the average is lower for IG (0.08%) but higher for the HY sector (3.9%).
The Great Depression experience was more exceptional for IG than for HY,
but the postwar stability of IG was also exceptional—with no IG defaults
between 1941 and 1969. HY debt has seen spikes in the default rate
comparable 
with 
the 
1930s’ 
spike 
on 
several 
occasions 
since 
1970—
perhaps because the growth of the original issue HY market in the 1980s
has made this segment riskier. The graph also plots the HY–Treasury spread
for reference. Since 1978, this spread has averaged 5.3%, compared with a
4.3% default rate and default losses of roughly 2.6% after the recovery rate
is included. Roughly speaking, investors realized half of the ex ante spread,
but it has been a roller coaster ride, and the cumulative 30-year excess
return evaporated fully in the depths of the 2008 crisis.

It is important to recall that actual default losses are smaller than default
rates. Annual losses can be computed by multiplying the default rate by one
minus the recovery rate. The typical recovery value for all seniorities
averages near 40%—and this is the base assumption in many analyses.
However, lower annual recovery rates clearly coincide with higher annual
default rates, compounding the adverse effects of clustered defaults. Thus,
long-run average default losses are higher than the product of the average
default rate and average amount not recovered (i.e., the average of 1—
Recovery rate). Adjusting for the recovery rate (but ignoring downgrading
bias or rolling down the spread curve), and apportioning the losses evenly
across years, gives us the break-even yield spreads that would have exactly
offset the default losses. Table 10.3 gives an example of such calculations
based on Moody’s default data over 1-year, 5-year, and 10-year horizons,
using a 40% recovery rate assumption and the 1970–2009 global default
experience (except for the fifth and ninth columns, which use 1920–2009
data for comparison).

Giesecke et al. (2010) have collected the longest available database of
defaults—a history covering 1866–2008 for U.S. non-financial bond issues,
irrespective 
of 
their 
rating 
or 
even 
being 
rated. 
Long 
histories 
are
interesting, notwithstanding problems with very old data. Unlike Moody’s
statistics that capture the fraction of issuers in default, the default rate is
computed here by the fraction of issues (par value of debt) in default,
thereby better matching market yields. The authors find an average annual
default rate of 1.5%, with a clear downtrend (4% in the late 19th century,
1.4% for 1900–1945, and only 0.3% postwar). Default rates at the peak of
the 1870s’ railroad bust exceeded 30%, much worse than during the Great
Depression. The long-run default rate matches the 1.5% average estimated
corporate spread over Treasuries for this long sample. Assuming a 50%
recovery rate, investors earned a 0.8% annual excess return over Treasuries,
measured as the difference between spread and average default losses. Note
that 
this 
crude 
estimate 
is 
for 
all 
bonds 
(whether 
investment 
grade,
speculative 
grade, 
or 
unrated) 
and 
is 
not 
tainted 
by 
index 
investors’
tendency to sell fallen angels.

Table 10.3. Cumulative default rates 1970–2009 and corresponding break-
even yield spreads

Sources: Moody’s (2010), Reid–Bhimalingam–Burns (2010).
...
10.5 TACTICAL FORECASTING OF CORPORATE BOND
OUTPERFORMANCE

While my focus is on long-term expected returns, I also discuss tactical
forecasting models. I only focus on the period for which we have good-
quality excess return data. Table 10.4 shows simple correlations between a
kitchen sink list of predictors and subsequent excess returns of the IG
corporate bond index for the period 1990–2009.

Wide credit spreads are the strongest bullish indicators. High implied
volatilities—both equity market volatility and interest rate volatility—are
also bullish, partly reflecting the contemporaneous correlation between
volatility and spread levels. Weak real activity and a low profits/GDP ratio
are bearish predictors. The two best growth predictors in financial markets
give a mixed message—steep yield curves predict high credit returns while
strong equity markets (somewhat unexpectedly) predict low credit returns.
Credit bonds appear to exhibit short-term momentum and longer term
reversal patterns. Finally, fiscal deficit concerns predict corporate bond
outperformance vs. Treasuries. Many of these predictive correlations have
the same sign contemporaneously, suggesting that corporate bonds may
suffer from underreaction effects.

Table 10.4. Correlations in predicting corporate bond excess returns, 1990–
2009

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
Federal Reserve Board, Haver Analytics, Consensus Economics.
Next quarter corporate
excess return
Next year corporate
excess return
Corporate spread
(OAS)
0.25
0.46
MOVE-implied
Treasury volatility
0.19
0.40
VIX-implied equity
volatility
0.28
0.39
Yield curve (10-to-2-
year)
0.20
0.27
Equity momentum (6-
month)
—0.07
—0.37
Corporate excess return
momentum
0.15
—0.32
Yield momentum (10-
year)
—0.10
—0.11
CFNAI real activity
index
—0.25
—0.35
Corporate profit/GDP
—0.19
—0.37
Expected fiscal
balance/GDP
—0.34
—0.31

...
10.6 ASSESSING OTHER NON-GOVERNMENT DEBT

Various derivative contracts are more liquid and easily tradable than actual
bonds; I will focus on interest rate swaps that can be used to take views on
swap–Treasury spreads, but I only briefly discuss credit default swaps.

I then turn to non-government debt other than corporate bonds. In the
U.S., the mortgage-backed securities (MBS) market constitutes an even
larger market segment than either Treasuries or corporate bonds. Among
smaller market sectors, I highlight emerging market debt, given the strong
performance of that asset class and the timeliness of the topic given recent
developments, but I leave out many classes of securitized debt, municipal
bonds, convertible bonds, and large money markets. I have little to say
about complex structured finance products—partly because of my limited
expertise but also because many new sectors that blossomed during the
boom and crashed in 2007–2008 may not recover as viable investments in
their current form. Future product innovations and trading arrangements
should mitigate illiquidity, opacity, and counterparty risks.

Swap–Treasury spread positions

I start with interest rate swaps because swap–Treasury spreads may be
viewed as a common element in various non-government vs. government
spreads. Non-government assets tend to have more stable spreads over the
swap curve than over Treasuries.

Although swap–government spreads are often classified as credit spreads,
it has long been recognized that the credit risk component in swap spreads
is negligible. I first explain why counterparty credit risk hardly impacts
swaps and then review the link between swap spreads and LIBOR–repo
spreads:
• Interest rate swap contracts have minimal default exposure
because the principal is not at risk—just one side of profits/losses. This
default exposure is much lower than for comparable AA-rated bank
bonds 
where 
principal 
and 
coupon 
payments 
are 
fully 
at 
risk.
Counterparty credit exposure has been further reduced by market
practices involving posting collateral on fluctuating mark-to-market
profits/losses 
over 
time, 
netting 
arrangements, 
and 
contractual
provisions in case of downgrading.
• However, swap spreads are related to credit spreads for another
reason. A swap contract’s payoffs are tied to a LIBOR index (of
interbank deposit rates), and the contract can be priced and/or hedged
using a sequence of LIBOR futures. Similarly, government bond yield
can be seen as an average of forward government repo rates. (The
general collateral or GC repo rate is the financing rate for ordinary
Treasuries. The GC rate is lower than the deposit rate but higher than
the Treasury bill rate. Some Treasuries are priced “special” in the repo
market, with financing rates below the GC rate.) In theory, the swap–
Treasury spread equals the average forward LIBOR–repo spread over
the life of the swap. Thus, counterparty credit risk exposure in a swap–
Treasury trade resembles that of very short-dated high-quality bank
debt over Treasuries. In fact, the credit quality in swaps is better than
for single banks because the LIBOR bank basket is regularly refreshed
to maintain high credit quality, and the highest and lowest rates are
truncated when calculating the basket average. So the relevant credit
exposure is generic banking sector risk—for the short-term debt of top
borrowers in the LIBOR panel. Thus, there is not much risk unless a
systemic banking crisis materializes.

I wrote the previous sentences in 2001. The systemic crisis did materialize
in 2007–2008 and along with it came vanishing trust in counterparties and
even in the sustainability of LIBOR-based contracts. The 3-month LIBOR–
GC spread widened from 15 bp–25 bp to above 100 bp, and the 2-year
swap–Treasury spread duly followed.

Empirical behavior of swap spreads
As noted above, the expected average spread between LIBOR and the
general repo rate—plus any “specialness” of the on-the-run bond in the repo
market—should anchor the swap–Treasury spread. Such an anchoring effect
matters for 2-year swap spreads but has less impact on 10-year spreads. Yet,
between 1991 and 2006, swap spreads were systematically wider and more
volatile than LIBOR–repo spreads (the latter typically being 15–30 bp).
Despite negligible perceived credit risk in swaps as believed until recently,
credit concerns may partly explain the average level of swap spreads during
good times. Swap spreads may have long incorporated some probability of
the rare but catastrophic environment (expected spread widening) that
finally materialized in 2007–2008.

Not all observed large fluctuations in swap spreads can be explained by
credit 
concerns. 
Notably, 
long-dated 
swap 
spreads 
recorded 
their
historically widest levels in 2000 when the banking sector was quite stable.
Another—likely complementary—explanation is that swap spreads include
a premium due to the higher liquidity and related convenience yields of
Treasuries (these convenience yields also reflect other regulatory and tax
benefits, lower financing costs, and maybe also the safe haven quality of
these 
securities). 
Such 
convenience 
yields 
peak 
when 
Treasuries 
are
especially scarce. In the U.S., the year 2000 saw fiscal surpluses culminate
in a bond buyback program that made many investors worry that the
Treasury market would vanish (see Figures 10.7 and 10.8). As a result,
Treasuries, especially long-dated ones, became ultra rich and 30-year swap–
Treasury spreads reached 150 bp. Later it became apparent that the strong
fiscal position had been partly cyclical and partly related to the equity
market bubble (because capital gains tax revenues were much higher than
expected). Starting in 2001, fiscal deficits came back with a vengeance and
swap spreads returned to normal levels. Similar patterns were observed in
other countries with fiscal surpluses. In addition, there was (and remains) a
clear cross-country pattern of wider swap spreads in countries with less
public 
debt. 
More 
recently, 
fiscal 
deficit 
concerns 
have 
kept 
swap–
government spreads very narrow, often even negative.

The three most robust empirical relations are that wider swap spreads
coincide with strong public finances, risk aversion related to banking
troubles, and flatter yield curves. I have already covered the first two.
Turning to the third, the inverse correlation between curve steepness and
swap spread has been attributed to Treasury scarcity, monetary policy
stance, and issuer reactions to the yield curve environment.

Admittedly, the determinants of swap spreads have not been very robust
over 
time. 
There 
have 
been 
more 
structural 
changes 
in 
swap 
spread
dynamics 
than 
in 
many 
other 
financial 
series. 
The 
reasons 
for 
such
instability include the changing uses of swaps—reduced use in positive-
carry 
trades, 
greater 
use 
in 
convexity 
hedging 
in 
the 
dollar 
market,
occasional 
use 
by 
public 
debt 
managers, 
and 
asset–liability 
duration
matching by pension funds. Evolving perceptions of the credit risk of swaps
and government bonds over time have also played a role. Recently some
observers have emphasized swaps’ off-balance-sheet nature, a factor that
could justify swaps’ richness against government bonds that require capital
outlays.

Credit default swaps (CDS)

Compared with buying a corporate bond, a credit default swap offers a
purer and more efficient way of gaining exposure to the default risk of the
bond’s issuer. In a CDS, the seller provides default protection in exchange
for receiving a fee—in default the seller must pay the difference between
the bond’s par value and, typically, its market value after the default event.
Unlike interest rate swaps, the payoff profile is asymmetric. A CDS is akin
to a par floating rate note of the issuer; it involves the full credit risk of the
issuer over the life of the swap but no interest rate risk.

Recent controversies notwithstanding, CDSs offer several advantages.
They are more liquid and require less capital than corporate bonds. They
represent a more generic view on the firm’s default risk than corporate
bonds 
whose 
spreads 
may 
also 
reflect 
illiquidity 
and 
covenants
(“language”) that often vary across a given borrower’s specific bond issues.
They may be more defensive assets. The market spread or “basis” between
CDS and cash corporate bond spreads can widen dramatically in a crisis.
The lower liquidity and higher capital requirements of corporate bonds
made them sell off much more than comparable CDSs amidst the capital
scarcity of 2008. The basis widened to several hundred basis points and
then gradually normalized during the 2009 recovery. In this case, the
derivative turned out to be a more defensive asset than the related cash debt.

Mortgage-backed securities (MBS)

MBSs are a huge asset class (larger than Treasuries) and, unlike some
newer structured finance assets, MBSs can be expected to survive the
financial crisis and regain liquidity. Thus, while I will not discuss other
securitized assets (asset-backed securities, commercial mortgage-backed
securities) or even agency debt, I write a few paragraphs about MBS.

Basic 
MBSs 
are 
pass-through 
securities 
of 
pooled 
home 
mortgages
issued by three agencies (Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac).
Credit quality is very high given the collateral backing and explicit or
implicit government guarantees. The liquidity of MBSs is usually deemed
to be between that of Treasuries and high-rated corporate bonds. The main
complexity in valuing MBSs is the prepayment option given to mortgage
borrowers. The prepayment option caps the price upside of MBSs when
mortgage-holders 
refinance 
their 
debt 
after 
yields 
decline. 
Thus, 
the
duration of MBSs shortens just when longer duration would be most useful
to bondholders. The resulting negative convexity in the MBS price–yield
relation justifies some yield compensation over Treasuries.

How much compensation is needed? A forward-looking answer relies on
a complex combination of term structure modeling and volatility estimation
as well as theoretical and empirical analysis of prepayment behavior. The
OAS shows how much MBS yield exceeds any break-even yield that
accounts for lower expected cash flows due to the short prepayment option.
Thus, the OAS measures the ex ante premium of MBSs over the benchmark
rate (Treasuries or swaps) for any default, liquidity, and systemic risks—
assuming a correct model. As usual, different models imply different OAS
values, and part of any OAS estimate may reflect a misspecified model.

The main explanatory factors in empirical prepayment models are (1)
loan turnover for reasons unrelated to interest rates (such as relocation) and
(2) refinancings due to lower rates. A huge literature analyzes consumers’
prepayment 
behavior. 
Most 
prepayment 
models 
underestimated 
actual
prepayment speeds in each major refinancing wave (1986, 1993, 1998, and
2002–2003). The persistent downtrend in yields since the early 1980s gave
consumers many opportunities to refinance and they became increasingly
efficient in doing this over time—thanks to technology, media exposure,
and greater competition—until a slowdown in 2009, caused by credit
tightness. Speedier prepayments were bad news for MBSs that were short
the prepayment option; thus the ex ante returns promised by OASs were not
delivered.

The refinancing rate that is available to borrowers is the key input to a
prepayment model. The future refinancing rate itself depends on valuation
of mortgages in the future, which in turn depends on the prepayment model
and the future risk premium. This circularity is illustrative of the many
complexities and difficulties in valuing mortgage-backed securities with
prepayment options.

Arora–Heike–Mattu (2000) show that the realized annual excess return of
MBSs over comparable duration Treasuries was only 28 bp over 1989–
1999, well short of the 77 bp average OAS for the period. The main
explanation 
for 
the 
discrepancy 
is 
steady 
improvement 
in 
refinancing
efficiency—which continued in subsequent years, as the authors predicted.
OAS models underestimated the detrimental impact of refinancing on future
cash flows and MBS prices. Prepayment risk was not compensated during
this period since MBSs did not outperform agencies’ own fixed rate debt.
When I extend data through the 2000s, I find the same story. The average
realized excess return of MBSs between 1990 and 2009 is 40% of the
average OAS level (28 bp vs. 69 bp).

This realized performance is clearly disappointing. Some performance
attribution gymnastics are needed to understand why. The downtrend in
yields and unexpectedly efficient refinancings, some increase in volatilities,
and a sharp widening of swap spreads and MBS spreads during the Credit
Crunch have all contributed. Arora–Heike–Mattu propose a five-factor
empirical model to explain the monthly excess returns on MBSs over
Treasuries. The factors include realized and implied volatilities, swap–
Treasury spread changes (a liquidity proxy), prepayment surprises, and
spread 
directionality. 
All 
factors 
except 
prepayment 
risk 
should 
be
hedgeable 
and 
there 
is 
unresolved 
debate 
whether 
prepayment 
model
uncertainty (i.e., the possibility of model error) should be or is priced as a
systematic risk factor. Since outright (unhedged) MBS positions contain
exposure to all these five factors and some of these risk factors should earn
some positive ex ante premia, MBSs should continue to offer some long-run
excess returns. Near-term prospects are less clear because the Fed’s MBS
purchases in 2009 caused a huge rally in the sector; it remains unclear how
well the MBS market can take the gradual withdrawal of Fed support.

Emerging markets debt

The history of liquid emerging markets debt is relatively short so any
inferences are tentative. I only focus on hard-currency debt, which began
with “Brady bonds” in 1990; eventually J.P. Morgan’s indices called EMBI,
EMBI+, and EMBI Global became the flagships for monitoring these
markets. (More recently, these markets have been surpassed in performance
and size by the emerging market local currency debt market, but these
issues have even scantier histories.) Figure 10.12 shows that, between 1998
and 2001, Brady bond and EMBI spreads (over Treasuries) moved closely
in sync. However, Argentina had a much larger weight in the former, so that
its default in early 2002 hit Brady bond spreads much harder than EMBI
spreads. Despite occasional turmoil (mainly between 1994 and 2002) and
some large defaults, emerging markets debt has been a success story.
Thanks 
to 
secularly 
improving 
fundamentals 
(strong 
growth, 
inflation
falling to single digits, external deficits turning to persistent surpluses, and
more stable economic policies) as well as broader investor acceptance and
benign 
global 
liquidity 
conditions, 
the 
emerging 
markets 
spread 
over
Treasuries narrowed from 1,000 bp in 2001 to less than 200 bp in 2006.
Emerging markets used to be more crisis prone with unstable fundamentals
and greater political risk; all that has changed. Since 2007 they have even
enjoyed a safe haven role during developed markets turmoil, except for a
brief “recoupling” in autumn 2008.

Figure 10.12. Emerging markets spreads have broken away from high-yield
spreads.

Sources: Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Citigroup, J.P. Morgan.
Comparisons with U.S. corporate spreads in Figure 10.12 are instructive.
Emerging markets spreads were significantly wider than U.S. high-yield
spreads between 1993 and 1999, then moved together during 2000–2004,
traded well through 2005–2007, and in 2008 reached IG corporate spread
levels. This development partly reflects the improving credit ratings of
emerging markets; perhaps half of the debt and half of the countries in
EMBI indices were IG-rated by 2007.

Emerging markets debt has one of the best long-run returns and Sharpe
ratios of any asset class in the 1990s and 2000s. Indeed, emerging markets
have outperformed all U.S. debt market sectors. The high average return
reflects in part a huge one-off repricing as emerging markets spreads have
narrowed.

Decoupling theme. Many observers predict continued fundamental and
market advances for emerging markets in the future. Given the current
market focus on fiscal balances, it is noteworthy that emerging markets are
in a much better fiscal position than advanced economies, even before
considering their demographic prospects. The case for re-rating emerging
and developed markets debt seems even stronger than for that between
corporates and governments. In fact, even the terminology seems due for
revision: despite its relative poverty in per-capita GDP terms, China is the
world’s second largest economy, a peculiar spot to find an “emerging”
market.

Yet, since emerging markets spreads are much narrower than in the past,
future long-run performance cannot match the past. Rationally optimistic
views on emerging markets can still be based on a view of ever narrower
spreads 
for 
the 
asset 
class 
(with 
capital 
gains 
augmenting 
the 
carry
advantage) 
or 
of 
countries 
systematically 
going 
through 
the 
emerging
markets “rite of passage” and gradually upgrading from frontier markets
into developed markets with narrower spreads. More cautious observers
may expect smaller gains from long-run holdings but may try to enter
emerging 
markets 
on 
a 
tactical 
basis 
when 
spreads 
have 
temporarily
widened (market timing the whole asset class) or selecting countries to
outperform.

...
10.7 CONCLUDING REMARKS

Corporate credits have only mildly if at all outperformed Treasuries in
recent decades. The long-run advantage for IG bonds is roughly 30 bp.
Only fallen angel bonds just beyond the IG threshold and short-dated, top-
rated credits have outpaced government bonds in a reasonably consistent
manner. The disappointing performance of corporates applies to some
extent to other non-government bonds. They all went through a roller
coaster ride in 2007–2009. The newer securitized debt classes—asset-
backed and commercial mortgage-backed securities—fared worst during
the subprime crisis.

I have some sympathy with David Swensen’s extreme view that non-
government bonds may not deserve a strategic allocation in institutional
portfolios. Yet, corporates certainly can be useful tactical investments, as
they were in 2003 and 2009 when spreads narrowed from extremely wide
levels during an economic recovery. If one wants to tactically time the
corporate bond market, credit spreads give good insights about medium-
term prospects, despite their shortcomings. For reasons discussed below, I
expect credits to outperform governments over the next 10 to 20 years.
Leverage constraints should sustain risk-adjusted rewards for short-dated
credits.

Swensen’s argument is clouded by growing sovereign risk. Future credit
spreads may be as much influenced by markets’ questioning of the default-
free status of government bonds as by any default concerns about corporate
bonds. Sovereign credit risk became a hot topic after 2008 as governments
bailed 
out 
banks, 
guaranteed 
risks 
taken 
by 
the 
financial 
sector, 
and
committed to unprecedented fiscal expansion, while tax revenues were
dropping off the cliff due to economic recession. Arguably, the crisis only
brought the focus on public debts forward in time, so that current rather
than 
just 
future 
investors 
need 
to 
consider 
them. 
Demographic
developments are an even larger problem, at least for the aging nations of
the developed world. Sovereign credit default swap spreads for major
economies rose from single digits in early 2008 to almost 100 bp for the
best credits (and much wider for peripheral developed economies) at their
early-2009 
peak. 
As 
the 
appetite 
for 
risk 
revived, 
all 
credit 
spreads
narrowed, but sovereign spreads began to widen again in 2010. This topic is
discussed further in Chapter 27.

...
10.8 NOTES

[1] This chapter focuses on the yield spread of corporate bonds but at the
end briefly discusses other types of non-government debt. My empirical
analysis focuses on cash market credits that have long data histories, but I
note that over the past decade certain credit derivatives and related indices
have become the preferred, most liquid means for trading credits.

[2] Yet other considerations: In the past, yield spreads were not properly
duration matched or maturity matched, creating noise in these speads.
Corporate bonds may also earn additional rolldown gains beyond spread
income if credit spread curves are systematically upward sloping, but this
effect tends to be empirically small. Differential taxation of corporates and
Treasuries (taxable holders pay state taxes on corporate bond/income but
not on Treasury bond income) may also contribute to yield spreads.

[3] The compounding of excess returns may exclude or include the base
asset’s return. The 24 bp GM is based on compounding excess return
without giving the corporate bond the benefit of earning “interest on
interest” on the Treasury return. If I compound the total return of the credit
index and that of the Treasury index and then compute cumulative excess
return as the ratio, the GM for 1926–2009 is 41 bp. See the dashed line in
Figure 10.1 compared with the first solid line.

[4] Using the 1970–2009 default experience over a 10-year horizon and
40% recovery rate assumption, an annual break-even spread of 15bp would
offset all default losses for IG-RATED debt. However, any number of
changes would push this break-even spread wider. Switching to Baa-rated
debt, the break-even spread would be 30 bp; using a 20-year horizon (and
bond) it would be 21 bp; using 1920–2009 default data it would be 26 bp;
assuming a 20% recovery rate it would be 20 bp. Adjusting for the tendency
of recovery rates to be low when rates are high would also widen the break-
even spread. Finally, incorporating the downgrading bias (see main text)
could double the break-even spread.

[5] Break-even spread widening can be approximated by annual yield
spread divided by duration at horizon. Break-even cushions are broad at the
front end because a given spread widening causes only a small capital loss
for short-duration assets.

Source notes. Books on credit risks are more theoretical than empirical and
often focus on credit risk modeling and management instead of the reward
for bearing credit risk. On the Merton (1974) model and its extensions, see
Kao (2000), Kealhofer (2003), and Leland (2006). On analysis of rating
data 
and 
default 
histories, 
see 
Reid–Bhimalingam–Burns 
(2010) 
and
Giesecke et al. (2010).

On the empirical drivers of credit spreads, see Elton et al. (2001),
Churm–Panigirtzoglou 
(2005), 
Longstaff–Mithal–Neis 
(2005), 
Chen–
Collin-Dufresne–Goldstein 
(2009), 
and 
Cremers–Driessen–Maenhout
(2008). 
On 
return 
patterns, 
see 
Kozhemiakin 
(2007), 
Naik–Devarajan
(2009), Ng–Phelps (2010), and my analysis on short-dated credit trades in
Ilmanen–Fumagalli (2003) and Ilmanen et al. (2003).

On swap spreads, see Collin-Dufresne–Solnik (2001), He (2001), and
Liu–Longstaff–Mandell (2006). On MBS, see Arora–Heike–Mattu (2000)
and Gabaix–Krishnamurthy–Vigneron (2007).

...