11

Alternative asset premia

• Alternative asset classes improve portfolio diversification,
at least in normal times, and may enhance returns.
• Alternative assets are often less liquid and less transparent
than traditional assets.
• Alternative assets became increasingly popular in the
2000s, which inevitably reduced their prospective returns. In
2008—the quintessential bad times—most (but not all)
alternatives failed both to diversify and to enhance returns.
• Real estate can be accessed directly through less liquid
physical markets or indirectly through listed REITs and property
stocks. The long-run return of real estate is between those of
bonds and stocks, although starting valuations clearly matter.
Long-run real price growth is negligible but rental yield income
can be significant.
• Commodity futures are perhaps the best diversifiers of
financial assets and also the best inflation hedges. Long-run
average returns are more reflective of futures roll returns than of
spot price appreciation. Oil-related futures have given the highest
returns and have had the best diversification and hedging
properties in recent decades.
• Hedge fund index data suggest that HFs have been able to
add value, even as a group and after fees, unlike traditional
managers. Critics question how much the documented
outperformance reflects biases in reported fund returns (reflecting
voluntary reporting to HF databases) or various risks (traditional
and alternative betas, illiquidity, tail risks). I review attempts to
quantify these biases and risks.
• Private equity funds have a less impressive track record as
a group, according to academic studies. Adjusting for reporting
biases and some risks, they appear to underperform listed
equities, despite their liquidity disadvantage. To outperform after
fees, investors need to be able to pick top-quartile managers.

...
11.1 INTRODUCTION TO ALTERNATIVES

I conclude the analysis of asset class premia by studying a diverse group of
alternative assets (see cube). The definition of alternative asset classes is
fuzzy but a useful definition can be crafted based on what they are not.
Stocks, bonds, and cash in any country in the world, held directly or in a
long-only fund, are viewed as traditional asset classes while all other
investments are alternatives. At this time, alternatives consist mainly of real
estate, 
commodities, 
hedge 
funds, 
and 
private 
equity. 
The 
boundary
between traditional and alternative assets has shifted over time, with some
alternative 
assets 
becoming 
familiar 
and 
migrating 
into 
the 
traditional
category. As recently as the 1980s, all non-U.S. assets may have been
deemed alternative by U.S. investors, but all public markets are now
regarded as traditional (even including “frontier” equity markets and local
currency emerging debt markets). Within U.S. markets, traditional asset
classes might now include less liquid and riskier pockets of stocks, bonds,
and cash—such as high-yield bonds and small-cap and micro-cap stocks.
Based on current industry practice, I would also include index derivatives,
based on various indices of stocks, interest rates, and credits, as traditional
investments.
The 
big-four 
alternatives 
that 
I’ll 
dwell 
on 
below 
are 
real 
estate,
commodity futures, hedge funds, and private equity funds. The first two are
added to traditional portfolios more for their diversification and inflation-
hedging properties, while the latter two are perhaps brought in more as
return enhancers (perceived, or hoped-for, alpha providers). The first two
are real assets, more so than any traditional financial assets, and are clearly
distinct asset classes—but they have been around so long that some criticize
use of the term “alternative” to describe them. The latter two may be better
characterized as active investment strategies, implemented by specialist
managers 
who 
earn 
higher 
and 
more 
performance-related 
fees 
than
traditional (“long-only”) asset managers. The question of whether hedge
funds constitute an asset class has especially been debated but, in practice,
end-investors allocate part of a capital budget and/or a risk budget to them,
effectively delegating active decision making to them—for a fee [1].

The common characteristics of all four alternatives include:
• they were not part of most institutional investment portfolios
even 20 years ago but they increasingly are;
• they are rarely exchange traded and typically are less liquid than
traditional assets, involving higher costs and fees and requiring a
longer investment horizon (commodity futures are an exception to
these key characteristics);
• they are less scalable than traditional assets (capacity constraints
apply especially to newer alternatives);
• they are less transparent and more plagued by information
asymmetries than traditional assets—even historical performance data
may be limited and of questionable quality;
• they are good diversifiers of traditional portfolios and might
enhance 
returns 
(due 
to 
illiquidity 
premia, 
risk 
premia, 
and 
the
potential alpha of the asset manager)—however, both advantages have
decayed over time and, on average, failed in 2008;
• they are a source of various risk and illiquidity premia—
including both traditional equity and bond betas and “alternative betas”
that investors could not access using traditional public markets—
illiquidity premia may be especially important for some alternatives;
• they all boomed between 2002 and 2007 and were crushed in
2008.

Their 
growing 
popularity 
reflected 
diverse 
factors. 
Risky 
assets 
had
disappointed investors badly in 2000–2002 and ex ante indicators pointed to
single-digit future returns on all traditional asset classes. (Some observers
argued for negative expected returns on equities in the short run.) David
Swensen’s 
book, 
Pioneering 
Portfolio 
Management, 
showcased 
Yale’s
success in using alternative managers to diversify and boost returns. As
institutional 
interest 
in 
alternatives 
grew, 
assets 
under 
management
ballooned. With hindsight, the period 2001–2007 may be viewed as the
golden age of alternatives.

Beyond the big four, the list of alternatives has grown and become
increasingly diverse. It includes infrastructure, timber, and farmland; art and
other collectibles (fine wines, rare coins, stamps); and more novel securities
such 
as 
catastrophe 
bonds, 
carbon 
credits, 
intellectual 
property 
rights,
viatical or life insurance settlements, longevity swaps, and others. If hedge
funds can be characterized as an asset class, then the list of alternatives may
be extended to include managed futures (typically momentum-oriented
commodity-trading 
advisors 
or 
CTAs), 
global 
tactical 
asset 
allocation
managers (typically value-oriented investors), active FX, volatility trading,
alternative betas and hedge fund replication, as well as investments focused
on 
corporate 
governance, 
sustainable 
development, 
and 
shareholder
activism.

Figure 11.1 shows the cumulative returns of the big-four alternatives
since 1984. Note that historical returns on actively managed asset classes
(HF, PE) may be misleading because of survivorship and other reporting
biases that can overstate actual returns. Moreover, standard risk adjustments
don’t capture all risks to which these active strategies are exposed. Finally,
asset 
inflows 
and 
growing 
competition 
have 
shrunk 
available 
alpha
opportunities, so even if past fund performance was not overstated, future
performance may be less exciting.

This chapter relies more on historical returns because forward-looking
indicators (such 
as yields or valuation 
ratios) are 
rarely 
available for
alternative asset classes.

Figure 11.1. Cumulative total returns of four alternative asset classes,
1984–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
MIT-CRE, 
S&P 
GSCI, 
Hedge 
Fund 
Research,
Cambridge Associates.

Given such data limitations, there is little tangible evidence on time-varying
expected returns, but it seems safe to say that the various premia found in
alternative 
investments 
vary 
strongly 
over 
time. 
Alternatives 
generally
appear to excel amidst flush liquidity and high-risk appetite—and suffer
amidst tougher conditions. This procyclical tendency disappoints investors
who look to broad-based portfolios of alternatives for diversification of
equity and bond risk, and suggests that such investors should choose
alternatives more carefully for their diversification potential. It looks like
short-term momentum and long-term reversal patterns work here as well.
Some ex ante valuation signals as well as money flow (overcrowding)
signals may be useful contrarian indicators.
...
11.2 REAL ESTATE

Introduction

Real estate (RE) is an important real asset that, for institutional investors, is
a good diversifier and better inflation hedge than most financial assets. Real
estate 
is 
a 
relatively 
illiquid 
asset 
class; 
private 
real 
estate 
holdings,
especially, cannot be traded actively and any performance comparisons
need to take into account the consequences of illiquidity.

I will focus on the two types of commercial equity real estate available
for investors: private real estate (traditionally measured in the U.S. by the
NCREIF index) and publicly traded real estate investment trusts (listed
REITs) [2].

There are no definitive figures for the size of the global real estate
market. The investable commercial real estate equity universe amounts to
several trillion dollars and the listed segment is just a fraction of that. Total
real estate wealth is even larger: Francis–Ibbotson (2009) estimate that in
2007 U.S. residential real estate amounted to $18 trillion and commercial
real estate to $16 trillion. McKinsey (2009) gives much higher estimates—
that the U.S. residential real estate value exceeded $30 trillion in 2007, a
third of the global total. In any case, residential real estate is a huge market
but most institutional investors focus on commercial real estate.

The 
commercial 
and 
residential 
real 
estate 
markets 
are 
inextricably
linked, so I present data from both markets, especially because house price
histories date back further than commercial property indices. I should
stress, 
however, 
that 
real 
estate 
investors 
treat 
the 
commercial 
and
residential markets differently, and the two markets 
can move out of
lockstep for extended periods.
Box 11.1. Problematic real estate data

Although the privately held commercial real estate market is larger
than the listed segment, it has worse quality data. Appraisal-based
returns such as those collected by NCREIF are excessively smoothed
and often stale. Not only are appraisals inherently backward looking,
but the index includes appraisals over the whole past year, making it
even more stale (i.e., it is an average of prices collected during the
year, while the prices themselves were moving). Smoothing
understates measured volatility and overstates Sharpe ratios, and any
risk measures that rely on correlations are further understated. No
wonder then that private real estate can get a very high weighting in
naive mean variance optimization exercises. Statistical techniques that
“de-smooth” reported returns can easily double their volatility [3].

The REIT return series are cleaner because they reflect the market
prices of listed companies. A positive spin is that REITs are an
effective, liquid, and transparent proxy for private real estate investing.
However, there is no direct control of the property, and actual return
correlations between the two types of real estate investing are very
low, partly due to the staleness of appraisal values and the perhaps
excessive impact of equity market developments on REITs. Some
observers argue that REIT returns overstate volatility and equity
market correlations in real estate investing, warranting a higher real
risk premium for REITs than for private real estate. Many REIT
indices exist—I show returns for the popular U.S. NAREIT index
(which can be split into equity, debt, and equity–debt hybrid REITs)
and the global index constructed by Global Property Research (which
covers 250 liquid property firms in developed markets).

Both privately and publicly held real estate investments often
involve moderate leverage. However, the NCREIF index de-levers the
returns. I will not discuss realestate-related debt markets here.

Mixing the characteristics of appraisal-based and listed indices, the
transactionsbased index of MIT’s Center for Real Estate (MIT-CRE)
relies on actual transactions in the NCREIF database. It should be
more timely and accurate than appraisal-based indices but it is a
statistical product (e.g., it controls for quality differences of properties
sold each quarter) that can contain estimation error. It mitigates
problems caused by smoothed and/or stale pricing of appraisal-based
indices.

The Case–Shiller house price index and Federal Housing Finance
Agency’s index of owner-occupied house prices are the best known
indices of residential real estate, but they only cover price changes. Of
course, owner-occupied housing does not generate cash income, but
one can estimate the implicit or non-cash income by calculating the
cost savings of owning as compared with renting. The liquidity of
residential housing is even lower than for private commercial real
estate investments, making price histories even smoother.

Historical performance

A 
recent 
study 
by 
Francis–Ibbotson 
(2009) 
presents 
comprehensive
evidence on U.S. real estate (RE) returns between 1978 and 2008. Here are
the geometric average total nominal returns over this 31-year span when
inflation averaged 4%:
• 
private 
RE—commercial 
RE 
10.0%, 
residential 
RE 
5.7%,
farmland 8.8%;
• 
listed 
RE—equity 
REITs 
11.9% 
(in 
contrast, 
debt-focused
mortgage REITs earned only 4.9%);
• for comparison, large-cap U.S. stocks earned 10.8%, small-caps
13.1%, short-term Treasuries 6.7%, long-term Treasuries 9.8%, long-
term corporates 9.1%, and commodities 7.8%.

Private RE returns likely overstate what investors actually could have
achieved, because fees, costs, and taxes may be understated. Even so,
residential 
RE 
gave 
a 
disappointing 
performance 
(a 
1.7% 
real 
return,
including rental income), while commercial RE’s 6% real return looks
appealing. Equity REITs fared best but they benefited from leverage, a
favorable time period for small-cap stocks (which they resemble, with a
correlation of 0.74), and growing institutional demand for this segment.

Figure 11.2. Compound average returns of private and publicly traded real
estate investments.
Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
MIT-CRE, 
NCREIF, 
FTSE, 
Global 
Property
Research.

Figure 11.2 compares long-run average returns for many of these real
estate categories. The bars in the exhibit show average return since 1978,
and the line and numbers show results since 1984 (for which I have more
data series). These averages hide two boom markets (around 1980 and the
early 2000s), a slowdown (around 1990), and a crash (2008–2009). Private
real estate (both the NCREIF and MIT-CRE indices) earned a bit over 7%
annual return since 1984, while listed holdings (REITs and other property
stocks) all earned over 8%. Although the MIT-CRE index and the NCREIF
index have comparable long-run returns, the former has volatility that is
twice as high since it is not as artificially smoothed, so its measured Sharpe
ratio is lower—but more realistic [4].

Between 1984 and 2009, Asian property stocks were the best performers,
but if we had started the sample in 1990 after the Japanese bubble ended,
they would have had the lowest return (4%). During that 20-year period,
timber (11.8%) and infrastructure stocks (9.3%) would have been the stars
(these series were not yet available in 1984 so they are not shown in the
chart). Timber was also the only category that earned positive returns in
2008–2009 (at least on paper; pun intended); most others lost 10% to 15%
in each of the two years.

I do not have good-quality data on global private real estate or house
prices, but it is well-known that the early-2000s’ housing boom and the
subsequent bust were global phenomena. Some of the hottest property
markets in the 1990s and 2000s were the U.K., Ireland, Australia, Spain,
and South Africa, while Japan and Germany were major laggards.
Long histories are only available on house prices. NCREIF data extend
back to 1978 and REITs returns a bit earlier. Earlier data estimates are
available for U.S. house prices but not for commercial real estate. The best
known series is the composite real house price series since 1890 that Robert
Shiller and Karl Case created from various data sources (see Figure 11.3).
Shiller’s result has been summarized as saying that house prices barely kept
up with inflation, except for the bubble runup. This finding is surprising but
consistent with other evidence that Manhattan (Amsterdam) land in a great
location barely maintained its real value over 100 (400) years.

Figure 11.3. Real house prices estimated by Robert Shiller, 1890–2010.

Source: Robert Shiller’s website.

Net real house price appreciation (HPA) was minimal over the 120-year
window (0.3% per annum) but there were two big rallies—the late 1940s
(due to the postwar return of soldiers) and the early 2000s—and two big
falls—a real fall during the 1910s inflation and the recent crunch. For
comparison, Davis–Heathcote (2007) report real HPA of 1.4% for 1930–
2000, 0.5% higher than the Shiller data show for the same window.

Because these studies do not include yield income, to get estimates of
total returns I turn to the history of rental yields for U.S. owner-occupied
housing since 1960 compiled by Davis–Lehnert–Martin (2008, DLM). For
the 1960–2008 period for which DLM rental yields are available, Davis–
Heathcote nominal (real) HPA is 5.7% (2.0%). Combined with an average
rental yield of over 5%, estimated total nominal (real) return for 1960–2008
is 11.5% (7.0%). This gives a more benign picture of historical housing
returns than Shiller’s analysis, though rental yields may overstate the
benefits investors would earn because only regular utility expenses—not
repairs or other capital expenditures—are subtracted from income.

Ex ante value measures

The most popular real estate value indicator is rental yield, or the inverse of
the price-to-rent ratio. It is often thought of as the real estate market
equivalent to earnings yield in the equity market (the inverse of P/E) but it
can also be viewed as equivalent to dividend yield (D/P or carry). The
difference between these concepts in real estate is arguably small because
over very long horizons the real growth of house prices has been negligible
(i.e., there are almost no “retained earnings”, so E ≈ D). Nominal (real) total
return on housing reflects rental yield (net of unreimbursed utilities, taxes,
and other recurring expenses as well as capital expenditures) and nominal
(real) house price appreciation.

Figure 11.4. Rental yield in U.S. housing, and cap rate and income return in
commercial real estate.

Sources: NCREIF and Davis–Lehnert–Martin (2008); data located at Land
and 
Property 
Values 
in 
the 
U.S., 
Lincoln 
Institute 
of 
Land 
Policy
http://www.lincolninst.edu/resources/

Capitalization or cap rate is a concept closely related to rental yield and
income return—these can even be exactly the same but detailed usage
varies (cap rate is used in commercial RE, rental yield in residential RE).
Cap rate is the ratio of a property’s recurring earnings or net operating
income to its price. Recurring earnings are primarily rent payments less
expenses. Subtracted expenses exclude extraordinary items (lumpy capital
expenses, etc.). When all capex is subtracted from cap rates, we get cash
flow yield, which is a better indicator of the cash income an investor can
expect from a property. The average gap between the cap rate and cash flow
yield between 1979 and 2004 in NCREIF data was almost 3% (8% vs. 5%).
Income return before capex is close to the unannualized cap rate, but the
return series after capex subtraction is more realistic.

Figure 11.4 plots rental yield for U.S. housing from Davis–Lehnert–
Martin (2008) as well as cap rates and income returns for commercial real
estate from NCREIF. Rental yield fell from about 5% in the 1990s to 3.1%
in 2006 before returning to 5% by 2009. Just as with financial assets, short-
term changes in asset prices are primarily driven by valuation changes; the
correlation between year-on-year changes in real house prices and year-on-
year changes in rental yields is—0.88. Comparing the three series, it is
visually clear that the housing market led the commercial real estate market
both in the early-2000s’ rally phase and especially in the late-2000s’ bust.
Note that NCREIF annual income return before capex (not shown) closely
tracks the cap rate, so the gap between the two NCREIF series in Figure
11.4 largely reflects capex. The gap between housing rental yield and
NCREIF income return reveals something about the fluctuating relative
valuations between housing and commercial real estate, but the series are
not directly comparable.

As with other asset classes, besides making comparisons of absolute
valuation (ex ante attractiveness of an asset vs. its own history) it is useful
to look at the relative attractiveness of the asset class. For example, we can
compare the cap rate of a private real estate index or the dividend yield of a
REIT index with the dividend yield of a broad equity index or with the
(nominal or real) yields in fixed income markets.

Ruff (2007) tracks the risk premium for commercial real estate over time
by comparing estimated total ex ante real estate return with Treasury yield.
Ex ante real estate return consists of the following three components, each
shown along with the assumptions used to estimate it:
• Income (i.e., cash flow yield) = (Cap rate—2% capex);
• Income growth = Expected long-run inflation;
• Expected valuation change = 0.

The cap rate averaged 9.6% for 1965–2006, rising from 8% in 1965 to
double digits between 1978 and 1985 (higher than the NCREIF estimates
above) and back down to 7% by 2005. Subtracting capex (assumed to be
fixed at 2% per year) and adding expected inflation gives an expected total
return series which rose from 8.5% in 1965 to 19% in 1981 before falling
back and ending at 7.5% in 2006. The ex ante real estate risk premium over
the 10-year Treasury averaged 4% over 42 years, peaking at 8% in 1980
and troughing at 2% in 1984 and then again at 2.9% in 2006.

Overall, the long-run real return mainly reflects the cash yield. However,
the cash yield may be overstated because capex could well amount to more
than 2%. To balance this possibility, the income growth assumption is
conservative. While Shiller and Ruff assume no real HPA or income
growth, in line with the very-long-term empirical record, others estimate a
1% to 2% real HPA.

This long-run analysis assumes no valuation changes. However, after the
boom–bust 
cycle 
and 
some 
evidence 
on 
mean-reverting 
valuations 
it
appears that starting valuations matter even for medium-term expected
returns.

Some words on value indicators are in order in the context of the recent
real estate bubble. Real house prices, price-to-rent ratios, and price-to-
(labor-)income ratios all shot up to unprecedented levels, far from long-run
trends. Because of low mortgage rates, the proportion of one’s income
required for housing debt service was not as extreme, relative to its own
history; 
affordability 
of 
financing 
thus 
served 
as 
one 
fundamental
justification for rising house prices. The user cost of housing is a broader
concept which takes into account the financial returns from owner-occupied
housing (including expected HPA and financing costs) as well as risk
differences, tax benefits, property taxes, depreciation, and maintenance
costs. In equilibrium, the expected total cost of renting and owning a house
should be equal over the life of the house, after accounting for the above
features. Thus, higher price-to-rent ratios may reflect lower financing costs
or changes in any of the features listed above. Such comparisons are one
way 
to 
assess 
how 
much 
of 
the 
housing 
market 
rally 
was 
based 
on
fundamentals and how much was irrational, perhaps reflecting extrapolative
expectations and the naive belief that house prices cannot fall. General
liquidity, high risk tolerance (complacency), securitization innovations in
mortgage markets, and lax lending standards also contributed. Wallison
(2009) has also blamed government policy intended at expanding the
proportion of homeowners, but his argument explains only the housing
boom in the U.S.—not the rest of the world. Rajan (2010) argues that U.S.
politicians promoted home ownership and, especially, abundant mortgage
financing among low-income households as a palliative against stagnating
real wages and rising income inequality.

Real estate returns also exhibit short-term momentum and long-term
reversal 
tendencies. 
Momentum 
effects 
are 
stronger 
but 
it 
is 
hard 
to
ascertain how much they reflect smoothed and/or stale prices and how
much they identify tradable opportunities. In part, observed momentum
likely reflects extrapolative expectations. Clearly, many house buyers in the
mid-2000s expected continued price rises. Even after the wellpublicized
U.S. housing bust and double-digit price falls in the U.K., if you tell
Londoners who experienced real HPA of 6% between 1995 and 2009
(excluding rental income) that the long-run expectation is near zero, or that
valuation ratios have some predictive ability, a shrug is perhaps the most
common response.

Main determinants

Property market fundamentals (which affect income growth) and capital
market 
forces 
(which 
affect 
cap 
rates) 
both 
determine 
the 
ex 
ante
attractiveness and ex post returns of real estate investments. Fundamental
determinants 
include 
economic 
growth 
(HPA 
is 
clearly 
procyclical),
inflation, demographics, population migration, 
as 
well as shorter term
supply and demand factors. REITs are driven more by equity market
movements. 
Financing 
rates 
(Treasury 
yields 
and 
mortgage 
spreads)
influence RE prices both instantly and with a lag. Apparently, a unique RE
factor exists beyond stock and bond market influences. One reason for a
premium over Treasuries is the relative illiquidity of real estate.

Fluctuations in cap rates and rental yields are important drivers of real
estate 
prices, 
often 
overwhelming 
the 
fundamental 
impact 
of 
income
growth. 
A 
time-varying 
housing 
premium 
in 
rental 
yields 
may 
have
irrational as well as rational origins. Property income in the U.S. grew
nearly monotonically in the 1980s and 1990s. It then fell 20% between 2001
and 2004, but the negative effect of the fall on real estate prices was
overwhelmed by the sharp fall in cap rates between 2002 and 2006.
Rational capital market influences—growing liquidity, low bond yields—
explained the early part of cap rate decline but at later stages naive
extrapolative 
expectations 
of 
house 
price 
appreciation, 
combined 
with
securitization and lax lending standards, likely dominated. Besides real
yields, corporate spreads and economy-wide leverage and liquidity can
empirically explain the time series behavior of cap rates. The narrowing
credit spread and the growing availability of debt capital could explain the
fall in cap rates in the mid-2000s, while trend reversals in these series
coincided with the rise in cap rates after 2007. Such empirical evidence says
nothing about the rationality of these valuation changes, but a widespread
interpretation is that a liquidity-driven and sentiment-driven real estate
bubble and a credit bubble reinforced each other. Arguably, real estate is
more prone to bubbles than other asset classes, due to the difficulty of
pinning down fair value and the near impossibility of selling the asset short,
as well as the cost and infrequency of transactions.

Some academics argue that trend decline in global real bond yields fed
the equity and housing market rallies (of the late 1990s and early 2000s,
respectively), helping reduce discount rates in competing asset classes. This
explanation is at best partial. While real yields in all asset classes fell from
the 1980s to the 2000s, downtrends were hardly synchronous. Rental yields
only started to fall around 1997 and a major decline occurred after 2001.
Moreover, real yields fell much less than nominal yields. In theory, rental
yield is a real measure and should vary with real rather than nominal yields.
Money illusion may also have contributed to the rapid HPA of the early
2000s. The Economist frequently warned about the folly of aggressive
mortgage borrowing inspired by exceptionally low inflation and nominal
yields. Brunnermeier–Julliard (2008) argue that multi-decade evidence in
both the U.K. and U.S. housing markets is consistent with money illusion.
Empirically, 
rental 
yields—and, 
based 
on 
the 
authors’ 
decomposition,
especially their mispricing component—move with inflation and nominal
bond yields while exhibiting scant relation to real yields. It is harder to
explain 
why 
house 
prices 
also 
rallied 
during 
the 
inflationary 
1970s.
Piazzesi–Schneider (2007) propose a model where disagreement between
rational and inflation-illusioned (financially less sophisticated) investors
can cause housing rallies both when inflation is abnormally low and high.
During the 1970s, rational investor buying was behind the housing boom,
while the latest boom saw illusioned investors as key buyers.

A 
recent 
study 
emphasizes 
the 
demographic 
influences 
on 
housing
markets. Using panel data from 22 advanced countries between 1970 and
2009, Takats (2010) estimates that both real GDP-per-capita growth and
total population growth boost real house prices one for one (a 1% increase
in either series raises real house prices by 1%), while aging has a negative
impact (a 1% increase in the dependency ratio—the ratio between the old
age population and the working age population—reduces real house prices
by 0.7%). These factors are not the only drivers of house prices but they
partly 
explain 
the 
lagging 
performance 
of 
Japan 
and 
Germany. 
More
generally, the study argues that multi-decade tailwinds on housing and other
asset prices are now turning into multi-decade headwinds.

I 
have 
little 
to 
say 
about 
the 
active 
management 
of 
real 
estate
investments, or skills needed for it, partly due to my lack of expertise. I can
only note that performance measurement and separating alpha from beta
returns are inherently more difficult for illiquid asset classes than for liquid
ones. Investable performance benchmarks with frequent mark-to-market
pricing are simply not available, and it will take “forever” to distinguish
whether the returns earned reflect the risks taken (beta exposures) or
particular active management skills (alpha).

Box 11.2. Infrastructure investing

Infrastructure investments are related to real estate but are increasingly
seen as a distinct alternative asset class. Investment pools specifically
targeted to infrastructure have recently become popular as a way to
finance major projects and as a new investment alternative to
institutional investors with a long horizon. Infrastructure assets are
quite heterogeneous—the main types range from transportation
(bridges, ports, and toll roads) and utilities (power generation and
distribution, supply of electricity, gas, and water) to communications
and energy. Typical distinguishing features of an infrastructure
investment include a quasi-monopolistic position and inelastic
demand; the frequent presence of public contracts or guarantees as
well as regulation; and long-maturity stable cash flows.

Some reports quote the infrastructure market size in 2007 as nearly
$8 trillion—but this amount presumably overlaps with listed equities.
There are no indices on the performance of private infrastructure
investments as there are for, say, private equity, real estate, or timber.
However, several indices have been developed covering listed
companies that invest in infrastructure (akin to REIT indices).

I study the history of the UBS Global Infrastructure Index, including
and excluding utilities. This index dates back to 1990.

Infrastructure stocks earned an annual total return (GM) of 9.3%
over 1990–2009, handily outperforming their plausible alternatives
(global property stocks and global equities), which earned 5% to 6%.
Volatility is a bit higher (18.6%) than that of the two alternatives (15–
16%). Including utilities with infrastructure, the annual return drops to
8.2% but volatility is only 13%, giving a superior reward to risk. The
multi-year outperformance of infrastructure between 2003 and 2007
has triggered further growth in this asset class but it, too, lost half of its
value during global de-levering in 2008.

Infrastructure belongs to the broader category of real assets and is
expected to be a good inflation hedge (but given the immaturity of this
asset class, its hedging properties remain to be tested). Infrastructure
investments are subject to diverse sources of risks (construction,
operations, regulations, legal risk, and the political environment).
Illiquidity and lack of transparency are further concerns. Infrastructure
is expected to earn a significant illiquidity premium—however, such a
premium is likely to be wider when the asset class is unpopular than
when it is “hot”. I wonder whether unlisted infrastructure investments
may be overpriced because their lack of mark-to-market features
makes them too attractive for investors looking for stable long-term
cash flows with some inflation-hedging ability. Investors in
infrastructure should also be wary of high fees, which are “locked in”
over the (typically long) life of the deal and which can thus amount to
a large fraction of invested capital.
I know too little about timber and farmland to review them, but both are
interesting asset classes characterized by illiquidity and inflation protection
ability. The NCREIF website contains historical return data on both asset
classes.

Box 11.3. Art investing

Figure 11.5 shows that art prices have risen by 7.3% (nominal growth,
1.5% real growth) annually since 1976. The graph shows a more
negative history since 1990, but a literature survey paints a prettier
picture: Rachel Campbell (2008) covers a broad set of studies showing
that real long-run price appreciation has mostly ranged between 1.5%
and 5%. For the well-known Mei–Moses art price index, annual art
returns averaged 10% between 1955 and 2004 (with volatility of 19%),
nearly as high a return as equities and well above Treasuries (6.5%).
However, the period since the 1950s was benign for art and followed
some flat decades. The late-1980s’ art bubble is especially striking:
prices tripled in four years and gave back most of these gains over the
next four years. Art prices have been procyclical, with negative returns
(1929–1934, the late 1940s, 1974–1975, 1991–1992, and 2008)
coinciding with, or mildly lagging, recessions and equity market
declines.

Art obviously provides non-pecuniary benefits to its owners in terms
of viewing pleasure and status. Art does not generate an income stream
but is a bet on future tastes and expected price appreciation, which
makes valuations more uncertain than for most financial assets. The
problems with art investing include high costs, illiquidity, and lack of
transparency. Auction house commissions can amount to 30% of the
sales price (at least this is amortized over many years given infrequent
resales), and private dealers may charge even higher commissions. Art
index data suffer from problems. The most common approach is to
analyze auction sales using the repeat sales method, which likely
overstates returns (upward bias in ignoring art that does not resell). All
the business outside auction houses is missed. Commissions and
insurance costs are ignored (as they are in other asset indices, but such
costs are higher in art investing.)

Figure 11.5. Cumulative art (price) returns, 1976–2009.

Sources: Art Market Research, Artprice.com.

...
11.3 COMMODITIES

Return decomposition and theories of expected risk premia

Most 
financial 
investors 
do 
not 
hold 
spot 
commodities 
outright—just
consider the inconvenience and storage costs—but rather gain commodity
exposure through futures contracts. This chapter does not focus on the
fundamental drivers of spot commodity prices (which are quite diverse
across commodity space, say, for gold vs. oil vs. wheat) but on the more
technical determinants of commodity futures returns.

For each commodity, there are several futures contracts with different
maturities. The nearest dated (“nearby”) contract is often the most liquid.
Therefore, even investors who plan to maintain a commodity exposure over
several years often hold actively traded nearby futures contracts.

Commodity futures returns are often decomposed into three elemental
parts: spot price change, collateral return, and roll return. Collateral return
refers to the margin income earned when buying futures contracts, typically
earning Treasury bill return. Roll return depends on the shape of the futures
term structure, as explained below. Change in the spot price (often proxied
by the nearby futures price) is the most visible and volatile part of return.
However, long-run average return for commodity futures investing largely
reflects the two more stable components.

To understand roll return, consider an investor who wants to maintain a
long exposure to commodities over time through a sequence of short-dated
futures contracts. For example, investing in the popular S&P GSCI index
involves holding a long position in the nearby futures contract until it is
close to its expiry date. Index managers then sell the soon-expiring first
contract and replace it with a long position in the second contract (i.e., they
“roll their position”). The gain or loss from rolling the position is zero only
if the first and second futures contracts have the same price (i.e., if the term
structure of futures prices is flat). If the term structure is downward sloping
(“backwardated” in commodities jargon), roll return is positive as the
second contract can be bought at a lower price than the first contract was
sold. 
Conversely, 
when 
the 
term 
structure 
is 
upward 
sloping 
(“in
contango”), roll return is negative [5].

It is tempting, and not unreasonable, to think of the three components of
commodity futures return thus:
• Collateral return ≈ Riskless return;
• Roll return ≈ Ex ante risk premium;
• Spot price change ≈ Unexpected return.

An 
extensive 
literature 
reviews 
decomposition 
of 
commodity 
returns.
Mechanical decomposition into collateral, roll, and spot returns is easy.
However, 
equating 
spot 
price 
changes 
with 
unexpected 
returns 
is 
not
completely correct because markets may have expected a part of the spot
price change.

The analogy of commodity term structure with the term structure of
interest rates may help us see the limitations in this approach. Recall that
any term structure reflects some combination of expected rate changes and
required risk premia. If we equate steep backwardation and high roll return
with a high ex ante risk premium, we effectively assume that the market
expects the current spot rate to remain unchanged forever. Roll return
measures expected excess return only if the spot price (and the term
structure of constant maturity futures prices) follow a random walk and thus
are expected to remain unchanged. This empirical assumption may work
well on average (see Figure 11.8 and Chapter 22 for broader evidence), but
sometimes it is too extreme.

What 
drives 
the 
shape 
of 
commodity 
term 
structure 
and 
expected
commodity returns? The classic commodity-pricing literature focuses on
the former and only indirectly addresses the latter (expected risk premia).

The oldest idea, attributable to John Maynard Keynes, is that the term
structure of commodity prices is normally inverted (backwardated: S > F)
because 
producers 
create 
more 
hedging 
pressure 
than 
consumers.
Producers’ selling of futures—to lock in the prices of the commodities they
produce—pushes the futures price below the level of the expected spot
price. The net hedging pressure hypothesis stresses that speculators take the
other side of this trade so as to earn an insurance (or risk) premium for the
service of bearing the price risk. Speculators earn this premium by buying
at lower futures prices and expecting to sell at higher spot prices. Then F =
E(S) + RP (RP is negative due to the hedging or insurance activity of
producers), so on average S > F. However, if consumers have greater
hedging needs than producers, the futures price curve can slope upwards
(be in contango).

Alternatively, 
the 
theory 
of 
storage 
can 
explain 
a 
backwardated 
or
contangoed term structure shape by considering the role of storage and
financing 
costs 
and 
the 
“convenience 
yield” 
of 
holding 
inventory.
Convenience yield is the intangible benefit (or potential profit) from having
commodity supplies on hand when they are needed or wanted. It lets
inventory holders (of the spot commodity—not the futures holder) benefit
from temporary price increases due to temporary local shortages or from the
ability to maintain a production process despite interruptions in the supply
of a commodity used as raw material. The spot price thus reflects both the
consumption value (convenience yield) and the deferred value (expected
future asset value); the futures price reflects only the latter. Then:

Spot 
price—Futures 
price 
= 
Convenience 
yield—Storage 
cost—
Financing cost Backwardation (S > F) is likely when convenience yield is
high, storage costs are low, and financing costs are low. Conversely, high
storage costs (or high interest rates) can make spot prices systematically
low relative to futures. High storage costs also reduce inventories and thus
make spot prices more important in balancing supply and demand, resulting
in greater seasonal variation in prices (and in the S—F gap).

Convenience yield depends inversely on inventory levels, because the
potential to profit from having supplies ready is greatest when inventories
are low. For example, agricultural commodities display a greater tendency
for backwardation (S > F) just before the harvest season; low inventories
imply high convenience yields, high spot prices, and steep backwardation.
That is, when a seasonal scarcity-induced spike in the spot price makes the
whole futures term structure steeply inverted, it seems likely that inversion
partly reflects the temporary nature of richness in the spot price, and the
market’s 
expectation 
of 
mean-reverting 
(falling) 
prices 
once 
seasonal
pressures have abated.
Standard asset-pricing models indicate that required risk premia reflect
covariances with marginal utility (which is, perhaps, proxied by major
systematic factors capturing economic or market conditions). Using this
logic, 
commodities 
may 
or 
may 
not 
warrant 
high 
risk 
premia. 
Their
correlation with financial assets has historically been low. Unlike financial
assets, commodities (especially energy) tend to be good inflation hedges.
However, some commodity prices (notably industrial metals) are quite
procyclical, 
perhaps 
increasingly 
so. 
Finally, 
all 
commodities 
tend 
to
benefit from loose monetary policy and easy credit and liquidity conditions.
This last feature may explain why the correlation between commodities and
equities 
increased 
in 
the 
2000s, 
making 
commodities 
less 
effective
diversifiers. 
Inflation-hedging 
ability 
points 
to 
negative 
risk 
premia,
whereas 
growth, 
equity, 
and 
liquidity 
betas 
point 
to 
positive 
required
premia.

Interestingly, 
Erb–Harvey 
(2006) 
document 
a 
strong 
cross-sectional
relation 
between 
average 
roll 
returns 
and 
sensitivities 
to 
unexpected
inflation. That is, commodity sectors that have been the best inflation
hedges—notably energy—have also produced the highest roll returns (and,
over many time periods, the highest realized returns). Perhaps because of its
inflation-hedging ability, energy (with negative equity and bond betas) also
has 
been 
a 
better 
diversifier 
against 
equities 
and 
bonds 
than 
other
commodity sectors. This confluence of desirable characteristics seems too
good to be true. I suspect that a fortuitously benign sample is part of the
story—the increasing scarcity of oil and the growing demand from China
and other emerging markets have boosted oil prices, resulting in persistent
upside surprises.

One can try to assess commodities’ expected returns from a supply-and-
demand perspective if standard finance models do not apply well. As just
noted, growing developing world demand for energy contrasts with finite
supplies. In addition, inventory conditions influence commodity prices in
the short term but, at least for oil, what lies in the ground matters more for
the medium term. The main speculative stores are held underground by oil
producers—much more cheaply than in any above-ground storage facilities.
Owners will not rush to pump these supplies up if they expect fast oil price
appreciation 
in 
the 
future. 
Given 
OPEC’s 
partly 
monopolistic 
pricing
power, oil exporters can adjust their production and inventories until the
expected spot oil price increase just equals the risk-adjusted interest rate.
Finally, a debate continues regarding the role of growing institutional
demand for commodities as an investment, as well as speculative demand
from trend-followers, in feeding the long-term commodity bull market. This
debate has been reflected in Congressional hearings.

Fundamentally, 
it 
is 
useful 
to 
think 
that 
the 
long-run 
anchor 
for
commodity prices reflects the marginal cost of production—albeit estimated
with large uncertainty—while spot prices and term structure largely reflect
inventories 
and 
thus 
demand 
and 
supply 
conditions, 
which 
are 
more
cyclical. Long-dated forward prices of oil, in particular, were quite stable
around $20 per barrel for a long time but became unhinged after 2003,
gyrating almost as much as spot prices. Discretionary traders who take
views on commodities must take into account structural, cyclical, and
technical drivers.

Historical average returns on commodity investing

I will focus on the experience of investing in commodity futures—not
investing outright in commodities or commodity-related stocks. Over the
past 40 years, commodity futures (as represented by the S&P GSCI) earned
a 10% annualized total return, of which more than half reflected the
Treasury bill return that would be earned on the collateral required by
futures exchanges to be deposited as margin. Excess return over Treasury
bills reflects spot price change and roll return. Spot price changes dominate
short-term return volatility, but roll return has been a significant component
of long-run average excess returns. Roll return was only mildly negative
over long time periods but contributed to 8% annual losses in the 2000s due
to the prevalence of contango (akin to negative carry), which offset most of
the 10% annual spot price increases. Figure 11.6 splits the cumulative
annual excess return of the S&P GSCI into its two components: spot price
changes and roll returns. Roll returns used to be positive on average but,
between 2005 and 2009, annual roll losses ranged between—8% and—
25%. As a result, the cumulative advantage from roll since 1970 had all
been lost by the end of 2009. The general shift of oil term structure from
backwardation to contango has been the main reason, but the increasing
role of institutional commodity index investors and the temporary market
impact of index investors rolling their contracts in synchrony (i.e., at the
same predictable time each month) accentuated roll losses.

The right half of Table 11.1 shows average excess returns of index
subsectors—for the full 1970–2009 time period and for each decade. Since
1983, 
industrial 
metals 
and 
energy 
were 
the 
best 
performing 
sectors.
Agriculture had the lowest returns, and livestock and precious metals also
underperformed cash. Among individual commodities, unleaded gas and
crude oil had the highest geometric excess returns in recent decades, while
natural gas fared very poorly.

Figure 11.6. Cumulative excess returns of the S&P GSCI and its two
components, 1970–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, S&P GSCI.

Table 11.1. Compound average returns (GMs) of the S&P GSCI and its
subsectors

Sources: Bloomberg, S&P GSCI.
Eyeballing 
the 
cumulative 
performance 
in 
Figure 
11.7, 
agriculture,
livestock, and precious metals saw their heyday in the 1970s, energy in the
1970s (not shown) and 1998–2007, and industrial commodities in the 2000s
(up to mid-2008). The overall S&P GSCI has time-varying constituent
weights but has long been dominated by the energy sector.

While the S&P GSCI is the oldest and still the most popular index of
commodity futures (it was launched in 1991 and its overall return index
history was back-populated to 1970), numerous new indices have come to
the marketplace. Some perform better than the S&P GSCI, perhaps partly
reflecting hindsight in index construction. Nonetheless, the changes made in
the new indices appear a priori reasonable: less weight in the energy sector;
changes in roll schedules (because monthly rolling from nearby to second
contract according to the S&P GSCI’s schedule puts one-sided pressure on
market prices and causes temporary price distortions that other traders can
exploit or avoid); and, increasingly, a shift from holding only the most
liquid 
nearby 
futures 
contract 
toward 
including 
a 
basket 
of 
deferred
contracts.

Figure 11.7. Cumulative excess returns of subsectors of the S&P GSCI,
1970–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, S&P GSCI.
Annualized return for the index also includes a so-called diversification
return. As I will explain in Section 28.2, the geometric mean return of the
index can be several percentage points higher than the average geometric
mean return of the constituents. The reason is that diversification reduces
the volatility of the index; lower volatility (smoother returns) has no impact
on the arithmetic mean but does boost the geometric mean. For the S&P
GSCI the gap between arithmetic and geometric means is 2% (12% minus
10%), reflecting 20% volatility. For most constituents this gap is even
wider, 
reducing 
the 
geometric 
means 
of 
narrow 
subsectors 
or 
single
commodities relative to their arithmetic means.

For a longer history, Hong–Yogo (2010) show that the mean excess
return of an aggregate commodity futures portfolio between 1965 and 2008
was 7.08% per year, roughly half of which came from spot price growth and
half from roll gains. The Sharpe ratio was 0.50. The portfolio was an
equally 
weighted 
composite 
of 
four 
commodity 
sectors: 
agriculture,
livestock, energy, and metals.

Broadly speaking, the very long histories of real spot prices show a
downtrend in agricultural commodities, an upward trend in energy, and a
limited 
trend 
in 
metals. 
Roll 
returns 
and 
diversification 
returns 
are
important long-run additions to commodity index returns. If anything, roll
returns have exacerbated these spot price trends, boosting the returns of the
energy sector and detracting from the returns of the agricultural sector.
Overall, commodity sector data do not appear consistent with theories
which 
say 
that 
term 
structure 
shape 
reflects 
the 
market’s 
spot 
rate
expectations, although expectations of spot rates reverting to their long-
term mean play a role during scarcity-induced spot price spikes.
Expected commodity returns

As noted above, long-run average returns across commodities are strongly
influenced by roll return. Typically, commodities with positive roll have
earned positive excess returns (e.g., oils, nickel, and sugar tend to have
backwardated term structures and earn high returns), whereas commodities
with a negative roll have earned negative excess returns (e.g., natural gas,
aluminum, and corn tend to have term structures in contango and low
average 
returns). 
Scatter 
plots 
of 
long-term 
average 
total 
returns 
and
average roll returns across commodities line up nicely near a 45-degree line
(see Figure 11.8). Such evidence has reinforced the idea that roll return
measures commodities’ ex ante risk premium. Incidentally, the averages in
this graph conceal an interesting time variation; for example, average roll
return for crude oil fell from positive +6% for 1992–2000 to negative—3%
for 2001–2009.

Roll return has been less useful for short-term market timing, perhaps
because occasional scarcity-induced spot price spikes have coincided with
extreme backwardation and subsequent cheapening. Yet even a dynamic
cross-commodity 
strategy 
based 
on 
roll 
return—overweighting
commodities 
with 
a 
currently 
backwardated 
term 
structure 
and
underweighting those with a contangoed term structure—has added value
over time. The aforementioned Hong–Yogo study argues that aggregate roll
across 
commodities 
has 
historically 
been 
useful 
for 
market 
timing 
an
aggregate commodity portfolio (general backwardation of commodity term
structures predicts higher near-term returns), as have certain interest rate
indicators (low short rates and an inverted yield curve both predict high
near-term commodity returns).

Momentum-based dynamic strategies, such as trend following, have been
even more successful; I will describe them in Chapter 14. Empirically,
extrapolating 
recent 
performance 
has 
been 
the 
best 
predictor 
of
commodities’ near-term returns. This result may reflect irrational influences
but Gorton–Hayashi–Rouwenhorst (2007) argue that profitable momentum
and roll strategies may proxy for inventory effects in line with the theory of
storage. Low inventories, rising spot prices, and steep backwardation all
predict high near-term returns.

Figure 11.8. Long-run average returns are closely related to average roll
returns, 1992–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Brevan Howard, own calculations.

For commodities, it is often hard to come up with implementable value
anchors. The most common value indicator is simply mean reversion—
deviation from fundamental value is proxied by deviation of the current
price from a longer term trend. Given that some commodities follow
persistent trends for good reasons, this measure was not a useful value
indicator for years until 2008. For many commodities, fair value is the
marginal production cost (extracting, refining, storing, and transporting),
but these costs are often extremely hard to pin down, given uncertainty
about technology, taxation, and politics.

The modest returns of standard commodity indices such as the S&P
GSCI in recent years—notably negative roll return offsetting most of the
spot price gains in 2000s—have raised interest in more dynamic indices that
try to enhance performance in various ways. A plethora of such “second-
generation” indices are now offered to investors. Rallis–Miffre–Fuertes
(2010) systematically review three approaches from the perspective of a
long-only 
investor: 
overweighting 
upward-trending 
commodities,
overweighting positive-roll commodities, and extending futures maturity to
longer 
(deferred) 
contracts 
from 
the 
most 
liquid 
front 
contracts. 
All
approaches appear to boost returns and Sharpe ratios but they also involve
higher trading costs (and, likely, fees).
...
11.4 HEDGE FUNDS

...
11.4.1 Introduction

Hedge funds (HFs) are pools of money run by HF managers, who face less
regulation and have much greater flexibility than traditional managers,
notably in their use of short selling, leverage, and derivatives. HFs face
limited 
disclosure 
requirements, 
although 
transparency 
demands 
are
growing both from customers and regulators. HF management contracts
typically 
involve 
exceptional 
compensation 
arrangements 
with 
a 
large
performance-related component; a 1.5% to 2% fixed management fee plus
an incentive fee consisting of 20% of returns are the norm. Managers are
further incentivized by holding significant parts of their wealth in their
funds. 
Absolute 
return 
mandates 
and 
restricted 
withdrawals 
are 
also
characteristic of many HF contracts. Assets allocated to HFs grew quickly
in the 2000s, peaking above $2 trillion in early 2008 and then falling by
nearly half over a year of losses and redemptions, before rebounding again.

Investment in a HF is primarily a bet on the manager’s skill in identifying
and exploiting profit opportunities. The number of HF management styles
and approaches is almost without limit. Collectively, HF managers cover all
asset 
classes 
and 
all 
conceivable 
investment 
approaches—from
discretionary decision making to purely systematic strategies, from punting
the market to fine-tuned relative value or risk arbitrage trades, from simple
linear exposures to highly nonlinear exposures, from superfast automated
high-frequency trading to nearly static long-term investing, from the most
liquid 
assets 
with 
transparent 
pricing 
to 
highly 
illiquid 
markets 
with
ambiguous valuations. Obviously, hedge funds do not hedge away all risks;
nor do most of them even hedge away all systematic (market) risks. Instead,
they identify attractive market opportunities, try to isolate the exposures
they want to assume, and hedge away undesired exposures.

Many different classifications of HFs exist—each index provider, many
funds of hedge funds (FoFs), and many end-users have designed their own
classification system. The obvious distinctions are between direct investing
in single-manager HFs vs. indirect investing via FoFs. Some newer vehicles
—such as investable HF indices, HF replication products, and HF beta
products—are also noteworthy.

Single-manager HFs are often classified into some asset or style bucket
and are expected to focus on investments in their area of specialization.
Funds may be classified by asset class (mainly equity vs. fixed income, but
narrower domains are also used) and styles (directional, arbitrage, event
driven, opportunistic). The most popular categories have tended to be
equity 
long–short 
and 
global 
macro/multi-strategy. 
One 
interesting
dimension 
involves 
convergent 
strategies 
(which 
benefit 
from
normalization of relative values and declining volatilities: many arbitrage
and market-neutral strategies fit this description) vs. divergent strategies
(which benefit from new trends and volatility: macro and CTA). This book
will 
not 
cover 
specific 
strategies—for 
a 
discussion 
of 
them, 
see, 
for
example, Jaeger (2008) and Anson (2006). Even within any one strategy,
there are specialists in every asset and/or trading approach, and each of
them may have proprietary expertise to fill a book.

...
11.4.2 Assessing hedge fund performance—balancing two opposite
views

I contrast two opposite readings of the HF industry’s track record as a
group. 
Positive 
spin—the 
industry’s 
marketing 
line—is 
mainly 
about
skillful alpha providers. The skeptics, in contrast, argue that high industry
Sharpe ratios reflect various reporting biases that overstate returns as well
as overlooking various risks that the Sharpe ratio does not capture well. (I
will 
later 
return 
to 
the 
quite 
different 
question 
of 
whether 
individual
managers can predictably beat the markets, and, if so, which ones.)

The positive story involves some empirical facts and some a priori reasons
for HF outperformance

Empirical facts. Standard reported results show that HFs have produced
higher net returns and higher risk-adjusted returns than traditional equity–
bond portfolios and have certainly outperformed cash, which is arguably the
right benchmark for an “absolute return” manager. For example, the Hedge
Fund Research (HFR) hedge fund index earned a compound average return
of 12.3% and a Sharpe ratio of 1.1 over 1990–2009. Even the more realistic
representation in the HFR FoF index achieved a Sharpe ratio of 0.7. In
short, HFs have produced positive net alpha after fees. Because fees are
high, 
this 
finding 
implies 
very 
high 
before-fee 
(gross) 
returns. 
Such
apparent skill stands in contrast to the well-documented finding that mutual
funds and pension funds tend to lag their benchmarks, at least in returns net
of fees and other costs. So the simple story is that alpha is transferred not
just from some smart or lucky investors to less smart or lucky ones—but
that this transfer happens systematically and persistently across sectors,
from long-only and/or retail investors to absolute return managers.
Some a priori reasons to expect HF managers to outperform include the
following:
• HF managers face fewer constraints than long-only managers. In
particular, 
they 
can 
sell 
short, 
lever 
up 
their 
positions, 
and 
use
derivatives more freely than long-only managers (even if the latter
have 
acquired 
flexibility 
on 
all 
fronts, 
as 
part 
of 
the 
two-sided
convergence 
between 
long-only 
and 
absolute 
return 
managers).
Depending on the mandate, they also have more flexibility to exploit
opportunities between asset classes or “silos” (subsets of asset classes).
And they may have lockups, side pockets, and other arrangements that
constrain investor redemptions and give managers a better chance to
extract liquidity premia from the markets.
• HF managers are more motivated and better incentivized than
long-only managers. Performance fees and managers’ personal stakes
in the funds should align their interests with those of their investors.
Indeed, HFs with “skin in the game” lost less in 2007–2008 than banks
and traditional managers.
• The most skilled and experienced traders and fund managers are
enticed to start or join HFs because there they can best exploit their
edge and extract the best rewards for it. HFs can often afford the best
employees.
• As a group, HFs provide extreme breadth. Diversification across
many hedge fund managers in a variety of asset classes and investment
styles cannot be matched even by a broad set of equity-only and bond-
only managers.
• HFs may be earning fair rewards for various economic functions
they offer: capital provision, risk sharing, liquidity provision, and
market completion (offering alternative beta exposures not otherwise
available for investors).

The negative story focuses on biases and risks

Negative stories come in two forms: biases and risks. First, recall that all
reporting to HF indices is voluntary. The high Sharpe ratios discussed
earlier partly reflect various reporting biases (survivor, backfill, etc.) that
almost surely result in overstated reported returns and understated risk
measures. FoF numbers are more realistic but they contain a double layer of
fees which could explain a good chunk of observed return difference
between HF and FoF indices. Also FoF index returns may be subject to the
same biases as indices of single funds, although to a lesser degree (FoFs
have less scope to benefit from certain biases discussed below; see Fung–
Hsieh, 2002). Second, many HFs load on various risks that the Sharpe ratio
does not capture well. Simple risk adjustment may thus be insufficient—
volatilities, correlations, and betas are understated and other risk factors are
ignored. Among these other risk factors are a large number of alternative
betas, plus illiquidity, lack of transparency, leverage-related risks, adverse
skewness and kurtosis, and related hidden tail risks (such as being short
volatility, which resembles selling financial catastrophe insurance).

Skeptics also raise counterpoints to positive a priori arguments. The
benefits of unconstrained investing and restricted redemptions were less
obvious during the 2007–2008 market turmoil. There are dark sides to the
incentive question: asymmetric payoffs may motivate excessive risk taking,
managers may hoard assets to maximize management fees, and managers
may close a fund after a large drawdown and, shortly thereafter, open a new
one. 
Being 
smart 
also 
does 
not 
necessarily 
translate 
into 
consistent
performance: LTCM is the most famous case in market history where high
IQs 
met 
with 
catastrophic 
losses, 
but 
it 
is 
only 
one 
of 
many. 
Any
outperformance HFs showed in the past decades as a group might reflect
their aggressive risk taking during a long tailwind environment. In 2008
most HFs suffered double-digit percentage losses—better than most equity
managers but not exactly capital preservation. The marketing myth of HFs
as absolute return products came back to haunt the industry.

Even if HF managers have the skill to earn positive alpha and risk-
adjusted returns, they have been able to keep much of the value-added for
themselves. HF investors have continued to tolerate exceptionally high fees
for several reasons: innate optimism and overconfidence as well as lottery
preferences; 
inability 
to 
distinguish 
luck 
from 
skill 
among 
past
outperformers; and, perhaps, underappreciation of biases and risks.

There is now consensus that HF excess returns are not purely alpha.
Some observers even argue that after adjusting for reporting biases and
various risks as well as high fees, HFs in the aggregate may not provide any
alpha to their investors. Top-quartile funds do, but these are hard to identify
ex ante. Even to the extent that some performance persistence exists,
consistent top-quartile funds may be closed to new investors, and their fees
sometimes even exceed the 2 + 20 norm; and successful managers may
capture most of the gains. Given the fact that some past successes reflect
more luck than skill, the deal is seldom compelling to end-user investors.
Critics say that the popularity of active funds reflects the triumph of hope
over reason.

Let the data speak: a study on decomposing HF index returns

Ibbotson–Chen–Zhu (2010) analyze HF returns as reported in the TASS
database (1995–2009) and adjust net returns for survivorship and backfill
biases. This is an update of an earlier study to include 2008 experience, but
the results are broadly similar to those obtained in the original study. First,
the authors explore the impact of two well-known biases discussed below:
• equally weighting all funds that were live at the end of the
sample they get a 14.3% annual return;
• including both “live” and “dead” funds removes survivorship
bias: net return falls to 11.1%;
• adjusting for backfill bias (by only including returns starting
from the date each fund first reports to the database) further reduces
equally weighted average return to 7.6%.

As Table 11.2 shows, the two biases can be summed in two ways. The
combined impact is 6.6% but it can be seen as the sum of 3.1% survivorship
and 3.5% backfill biases or as the sum of 5.2% and 1.4% (or something in
between). Given the overlap in biases, one cannot add the two higher bias
estimates together.

Results are better for a value-weighted composite, which produced an
average return of well over 10% after both bias adjustments. (Confirming
this result, over the same 15-year period, the value-weighted DJ CS index
and the equally weighted HFR index both earned a 10.2% to 10.3% annual
return, despite somewhat differing fund universes and weighting schemes.)
Large HFs dominate the value-weighted composite and it turns out that
large HFs have outperformed small ones (albeit at higher volatility). In
particular, backfill bias has been a negligible 0.2% for the value-weighted
composite, which makes sense because large funds typically have longer
histories.

Table 11.2. Equally-weighted average returns 1995–2009 for subsets of
hedge funds in the TASS database

Source: Ibbotson–Chen–Zhu (2010).

The authors then turn to risk adjustments. They add back typical fees
(1.5% + 20%) to the equally weighted 7.6% return to get an average gross
(before-fee) return of 11.4%. They regress monthly gross returns on three
factors (the S&P 500, a bond return index, and a cash return index) to
assess how much of the HF return reflects traditional beta sources. Using
this risk model they find a 3% intercept (alpha or average unexpected
return). Thus, they can decompose the bias-adjusted 11.4% gross return into
a 3.8% fee earned by the HF manager, traditional beta return of 4.6%
(including cash income), and an alpha return of 3.0%. Even after adjusting
for biases and risks, the alpha is statistically significant—apparent evidence
that, even as a group, HF managers exhibited skill over this sample period.
The authors also document positive alpha for each year in the 2000s,
including 2008, and for all HF subsectors they study. Again, the results
would be even more compelling for a value-weighted composite.

According to a more skeptical view, further bias and risk adjustments are
warranted. While this study captures survivorship and backfill bias, it is
unable to quantify selection, liquidation, and lookback biases. Moreover,
risk adjustment is deliberately simple. No alternative betas are adjusted for,
because the authors do not want to penalize HF alphas as measured for
typical alternative betas that are part of HFs’ value-added compared with
traditional 
managers. 
However, 
when 
the 
authors 
use 
the 
Fung–Hsieh
(2004) seven-factor model, which includes alternative betas, as a robustness
check, they find a higher alpha of 5.2%. This still leaves the possibility of
unaccounted liquidity premia or tail risks.
Details on return biases due to voluntary reporting

HF indices are not as comprehensive or neutral as market-cap-weighted
equity market indices. Any HF database, or a combination of them, covers
only a subset of funds—and likely a flattering subset. The main quantifiable
biases in published hedge fund returns are survivorship bias and backfill
bias. Underlying most biases is the voluntary nature of reporting to such
databases and the flexibility that database providers give to reporting funds.
Individual funds are likely to be motivated by marketing considerations
because there is plenty of evidence that fund inflows are strongly (and
unduly) influenced by past performance. These biases lead to overstated
published returns—and understated risks—for individual funds and for the
industry as a whole. Although numerous academic papers discuss and
quantify 
these 
biases, 
they 
perhaps 
are 
not 
fully 
appreciated 
by 
HF
investors.

The list of biases is long and partly overlapping:
• Survivorship bias. Funds leave the database when they die.
There is strong evidence that extinct funds in the “graveyard” module
of HF databases earned lower average returns than live (surviving)
funds.
• Backfill bias (also called incubation bias and instant history
bias). When funds submit performance histories to the database for the
first time, they can include as much of their earlier history as they
want. Given this option, funds with superior histories are more likely
to report them. It is also natural that among many incubated funds the
more 
successful 
ones 
will 
eventually 
be 
reported 
while 
poorer
performers will not. Empirically, it is clear that average returns are
lower if backfill filters are used.
• Selection bias. Funds mainly report for marketing reasons. They
may opt out not only because of poor performance but also because an
established fund is closed and has no need to attract new capital.
Because many large funds do not report to databases and are among
the most successful, the sign of the bias, net of these two effects, is
ambiguous.
• Liquidation bias. Funds often stop reporting before shutting
down. 
The 
last 
few 
months’ 
performance 
of 
liquidating 
funds 
is
typically poor and will not be captured in the HF index, even in the
graveyard module, unless a special detective effort is made.
• Lookback bias. Funds can even ask to have their entire historical
records removed. The impact could be quantified by studying all
vintages of databases, but these are rarely available. More subtly, funds
can 
delay 
reporting 
poor 
performance 
and 
keep 
the 
option 
open
whether to restart reporting.
• 
Lookahead 
bias. 
Many 
analyses 
only 
include 
funds 
that
persisted some minimum number of months. Short-lived funds that are
ignored tend to have lower returns.

Only the first two biases have been extensively quantified. Several studies
indicate that survivorship bias is between 2% and 3%. That is, using only
“live” funds at the end of the sample overstates industry returns by 2% to
3% (because there are nearly as many defunct funds as live ones, and the
defunct ones tend to have 5% to 6% lower returns than live funds). This
bias can be corrected by comparing the average return for both live and
defunct funds if such data are available.

Since HFs can backfill their whole return history (or a part of it) when
they start to report to a database, it is conceivable that backfilled histories in
databases contain only the successful half of all funds from a true universe
of fund startups. As a remedy, some studies adjust for backfill bias by
filtering out the first one to three years from each fund’s reported returns.
This adjustment may be too small (if backfilled histories are even longer) or
too large (if it leaves out successful young funds without backfilled returns).
Since many HF databases have added a “first reporting date” data field, it
has been possible to assess backfill bias more accurately (though perhaps
too aggressively, given that this date may reflect a change in the fund’s
reporting policy and may occur years after the fund launch). Overall,
adjusting for backfill bias appears to reduce (equally weighted) average HF
returns by 2% to 4%. The bias is milder for value-weighted averages
because backfilling is more often done by small young funds.

While many studies make adjustments for survivorship and backfill
biases, few studies are able to quantify selection, liquidation, lookback, and
lookahead biases.
Box 11.4. CTA performance

Commodity trading advisors (CTAs) or managed futures may be
viewed either as a subset of HFs or as a distinct but close cousin.
Unlike most HFs, CTAs tend to be systematic and focus on trend
following (diversifying across a large number of liquid assets and both
fast and slow models). Chapter 14 discusses simulated trend-following
strategies.

Bhardwaj–Gorton–Rouwenhorst (2008) present a scathing analysis
of CTA performance, titled “Fooling some of the people all the time”.
They find that adjusting for survivorship bias and backfill bias (using
the first reporting day filter), reported CTA annualized return (1994–
2007) drops from 12.6% to 4.9%, barely above the 4% Treasury bill
return. The study concludes that end-investors are not fully aware of
these biases, given their continued willingness to invest in CTAs.

Here are three caveats regarding this negative verdict: (1) backfill
bias adjustment may be excessive as a 3-year filter would only cut
returns to 7.7%; (2) value-weighted returns are clearly higher (near
8%) than reported equal-weighted returns, due to larger CTAs’
outperformance; and (3) the study ignores CTAs’ excellent
diversification properties (ironically, the study was published in 2008
when CTAs were one of the few saving graces in broad portfolios).

The authors note that CTAs as a group may exhibit skill because
their gross return was 5.4% over Treasury bills (compared with 0.9%
net); it is just that the high fees transferred most of the gross alpha to
the manager. Even CTAs’ skill is questioned because CTAs’ gross
returns underperformed simple trend-following strategies.

More investors read published HF index returns than academic studies
about biased returns. How biased are the major indices? All HF databases
capture only a subset of HFs; and HF indices capture only a subset of the
database, but the hope is that indices contain fewer systematic biases than
broader databases. At least more recent index data are of better quality. For
example, Dow Jones Credit Suisse (DJ CS) HF index data (based on the
Lipper TASS database) start in 1994, the same time that the graveyard
module became available. Moreover, since 2000, the DJ CS index has been
run on a real-time basis, so there should be little survivorship or backfill
bias after that point. The HFR index goes further back (published data start
in 1990) but at least in the early years without adjusting for survivorship
bias. One could also expect the value-weighted DJ CS index to exhibit
milder biases than equally weighted fund indices such as the HFR, so it
may not be surprising that the 1994–2009 average return of the former
index is slightly lower (9.3% vs. 9.8%). Both indices easily beat the HFR
FoF index (6.0%). Moreover, adding 1990–1993 returns to the HFR index
boosts its long-run average return from 9.8% to 12.2%; a significant part of
this increase may be due to reporting biases. Figure 11.9 shows that while
the broad contours are similar, calendar year returns of the two indices have
diverged by as much as 9%; at least the gaps have become smaller over
time.

Figure 11.9. Contrasting the annual returns of two hedge fund indices.

Sources: Bloomberg, Credit Suisse, Hedge Fund Research.

Here is one more concern that must be blamed on HF investors rather
than on HF managers. Dichev–Yu (2010) show that typical HF investors
have earned 3% to 7% lower (dollar-weighted) long-run return than buy-
and-hold investors in HFs would have done. This gap reflects HF investors’
return-chasing tendency in which they load up after good performance and
reduce allocations after bad performance. The gap is almost 7% for 1980–
2008 but 3% for the more recent and perhaps realistic (less biased) 1995–
2008. (Pre-1995 annual HF returns amidst low HF AUM averaged almost
19%, double post-1995 returns, likely boosted by various reporting biases,
which would increase the gap. Even a 3% gap is serious. To wit, the overall
HF AUM peaked in 2007, just before HFs’ worst year ever.)

Details on understated or neglected risks

Hedge funds are sometimes criticized for charging alpha fees for beta
production. In addition to any true alpha provided, HF returns reflect both
traditional betas and various alternative betas and tail risks. HFs as a group
may have higher returns because of their complex risks which warrant
significant risk and liquidity premia. Figure 11.10 shows that even when it
comes to simple equity market correlations, HF index returns are highly
market 
directional, 
in 
contrast 
to 
the 
ideals 
of 
market 
neutrality 
and
absolute returns. All single HFs do not of course share this embarrassing
characteristic. Among HF subsectors, short-sellers and trend-followers have
a negative equity market correlation; of the other subsectors, global macro
and equity market neutral funds have the lowest—but still positive—equity
correlations.

Downside beta. Simple equity market correlations may underestimate the
propensity of HFs to lose money in bad times. Looking at the worst 12
months for the HFR index between 1990 and 2009, half occurred in 2008
(October, September, January, November, July, March). The other half—
listing months in order of worst HFR index losses— included August 1998
(Russia/LTCM), 
November 
2000 
(the 
broadening 
equity 
market 
bust),
August 1990 (Kuwait invasion, recession), July 2002 (corporate scandals,
recession), 
April 
2000 
(the 
first 
down 
leg 
of 
the 
Nasdaq 
bust), 
and
September 2001 (the 9/11 attacks). All were especially bad times to lose
money; global equities were down in all of these months, often by at least—
6%. Conversely, looking at the worst 12 months for global equities over the
same period, the HFR index was down in every one of them.

Figure 11.10. Twenty-four-month rolling correlation of hedge fund indices
with global equities.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Credit 
Suisse, 
Hedge 
Fund 
Research, 
own
calculations.
Asymmetry. HF index returns are significantly related to selling variance
risk 
or 
correlation 
risk. 
It 
turns 
out 
that 
while 
diversification 
across
individual HFs reduces volatility, it boosts negative skewness and the fat
tails property. Operational risk, lack of transparency, and complexity are all
features that increase tail risks. Such tail risk enables funds to show
misleadingly long periods of solid profits at the expense of rare disastrous
losses. 
Indeed, 
many 
arbitrage-oriented 
HF 
strategies 
resemble 
selling
lottery tickets that pay off to the buyer in bad times. Such strategies can be
valid sources of long-run return but the questionable part would be in
concealing the return source and in excessive risk taking motivated by
asymmetric incentive fees.

Illiquidity. Many HFs trade in illiquid assets and/or restrict investor
redemptions via notice periods, lockups, and gates. These features represent
an 
option-like 
cost 
to 
HF 
investors 
in 
terms 
of 
reduced 
flexibility.
Moreover, illiquid assets tend to suffer during liquidity droughts. Infrequent
and/or 
stale 
pricing 
of 
illiquid 
assets 
causes 
understated 
volatilities,
correlations, and betas for these assets and for the fund. HF risks may be
better measured by incorporating lagged betas into risk models and by de-
smoothing 
autocorrelated 
returns. 
Recent 
studies 
use 
positive 
return
autocorrelation as a proxy for a fund’s illiquidity. Some studies suggest that
less liquid HFs (i.e., funds with higher autocorrelation, with lockups, and
with greater sensitivity to liquidity risk) tend to provide higher returns,
presumably reflecting illiquidity premia that investors require—but it is not
clear that this result will survive after the 2008 data are added. Investors
should not blindly demand better liquidity terms: funds that promise more
liquidity (favorable redemption terms) to investors than their asset base
truly supports are especially prone to forced selling at fire sale prices, and
thus poor performance, if liquidity evaporates and investors redeem capital.

...
11.4.3 Other topics

Selecting outperforming managers

Even if HFs as a group might not add much value after adjustments for
biases and risks, some managers do add value. Historically, there are always
some managers who did outperform (although quite long track records are
needed to statistically distinguish luck from skill, more so with HFs, given
their 
non-normal 
return 
distributions). 
A 
more 
interesting 
question 
is
whether it is possible (for anyone? for you?) to identify those outperforming
managers in advance. Manager picking can be as hard as stock picking.

Past performance is the most commonly used guide but it is useful only if
performance 
persistence 
exists. 
Fortunately, 
there 
seems 
to 
be 
more
performance persistence among alternative managers than among long-only
managers.

Can we say anything useful beyond past returns? Manager selection is
more an art than science, and avoiding big losers may be more important
than identifying the winners. Still, here are some pointers from academic
research. The literature is mixed on the impact of fund age and size but
recent 
research 
suggests 
that 
young 
and 
small 
funds 
have 
a 
slight
performance edge. The main difference is between very small and medium-
sized funds, so presumably many very small funds (“minnows”) trade
poorly 
scalable 
strategies 
(which 
hit 
capacity 
constraints 
if 
fund 
size
increases). Other favorable attributes include fund distinctiveness—funds
with low correlation to peers outperform those with high peer correlations
by 6% in the following year—as well as greater managerial incentives and
discretion.

Ammann–Huber–Schmid 
(2010) 
show 
that 
performance 
persistence
exists up to 2-to-3-year horizons (which are longer than most funds’ notice
or 
redemption 
periods). 
Beyond 
return 
and 
alpha 
persistence, 
fund
distinctiveness is the other main characteristic that helps identify superior
future performance. (The study uses fund data from 1994 to 2008.)

Sectors—no consistent patterns. Figure 11.11 shows the performance of
HFR index style subsets between 1990 and 2009. Most styles earned
double-digit returns and all styles except short-selling equities achieved a
high Sharpe ratio. Various reporting biases, together with standard concerns
about sample-specific findings, make it unclear whether this graph tells us
anything useful about future returns. (The graph also shows stock market
correlations which were positive for most style subsets. Short-sellers are the
exception—this group’s low Sharpe ratio is consistent with its superior
diversification 
ability.) 
Limited 
data 
hint 
at 
relative 
mean 
reversion
tendencies across sectors: if a style is successful over multiple years and
there are substantial inflows into it, future return potential may be reduced.
It seems likely that these sectors exhibit time-varying expected returns—
occasional tailwinds for each sector—but fund access and liquidity issues
make tactical allocation difficult in practice.

Figure 11.11. Average returns and Sharpe ratios of HFR hedge fund sector
subindices, 1990–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Hedge Fund Research.

There is limited literature on time-varying expected returns for HFs.
Tightening 
liquidity 
conditions 
and 
falling 
equity 
markets 
are 
bad
environments for most hedge funds, as seen in 2008, but these are hard to
predict. Seasonally, December has been clearly the best month for HFs as a
group. 
One 
suggestion 
is 
that 
managers 
of 
illiquid 
assets 
have 
some
flexibility in marking their assets to market; early in the year such managers
may price holdings conservatively to create some cushion for smoothing
returns, but near the year-end they want to benefit fully from performance
fees, so they use up any cushion. Whatever the reason, the pattern is hard to
exploit given limited liquidity (notice periods, penalties for short holding
periods). The most feasible approach is that investors advance their HF
investments intended for January and buy into funds already in November–
December.

Different ways to access HF returns: direct HFs vs. FoFs

The classic distinction in implementing a hedge fund investment program
was between direct investing in HFs vs. indirect investing via funds of
funds 
or 
managed 
accounts. 
(Managed 
accounts 
are 
single-investor,
separately managed portfolios of hedge funds, bearing the same relation to
FoFs that separately managed accounts in traditional asset classes bear to
mutual 
funds.) 
Newer 
vehicles 
such 
as 
investable 
HF 
indices, 
HF
replication 
products, 
and 
HF 
beta 
products 
have 
become 
further
possibilities.

FoFs have been an extremely popular way to access HFs, despite their
second layer of fees (say, 1 + 10 on top of the underlying funds’ 2 + 20).
FoFs 
provide 
diversification, 
oversight 
(due 
diligence 
. 
. 
. 
though
questioned after the Madoff scandal), and maybe access (to popular funds
that are effectively closed to new investors). They may also offer skill in
fund selection and risk management, but do not offer much active allocation
(besides lockups and costs, access concerns reduce fund turnover). FoF
indices have lagged direct HF investing due to the double layer of fees and
dispersion risk (a FoF must pay incentive fees to winning managers in its
portfolio even if net performance across all of the FoF’s holdings is flat or
negative). A more positive take is that (1) part of the apparent gap reflects
smaller reporting biases in FoF returns and that (2) FoFs as a group have
provided 
a 
respectable 
risk-adjusted 
track 
record 
since 
1990, 
with
diversification 
making 
the 
returns 
smoother 
than 
with 
single-fund 
HF
investments. The year 2008 was the first with a double-digit negative return
for the HFR FoF index.
Investable HF indices are really portfolios of HFs that perhaps tried to
take advantage of the marketing allure of the word “index”. Investable
indices offered lower costs, better transparency, and better liquidity than
non-index investments. However, top HFs had little incentive to participate,
leading 
to 
adverse 
selection 
bias, 
and 
investable 
HF 
indices 
have
consistently underperformed broader HF indices. After a brief detour I will
return to other HF alternatives.

Alphas, betas, alternative betas, and alpha–beta separation

The demarcation line between alpha and beta is quite fuzzy. It is useful to
think of the gray area between them as “alternative beta”, a catch-all term
for all common factors beyond traditional equity, term, and credit premia.

Alpha–beta separation is a concept that became popular about a decade
ago, following growing realization that traditional or “long-only” active
managers had a very large beta component in their returns and yet charged
active management fees. (This could have been accepted, had they not as a
group consistently underperformed index funds.) Lumping alpha and beta
together in a tie-in sale made sense for sellers who could add some long-run
value by providing access to the equity premium (and camouflaging any
underperformance), 
but 
not 
for 
buyers, 
who 
could 
access 
the 
equity
premium much more cheaply through index funds. Add a notion that HF
managers can provide positive alpha even after their costs and fees—unlike
traditional managers—and, voilà, alpha–beta separation is the way to go. A
barbell of very cheap index funds (beta providers) and more expensive
hedge funds (alpha providers) can be more cost-effective than investment in
a traditional long-only fund. This argument became a great defense against
institutional investors’ qualms about high HF fees: the blended fee in a
portfolio of index funds and hedge funds is arguably competitive with
traditional active long-only managers if we consider their alpha–beta mix
(both contain equity beta but HFs much less than traditional long-only) and
insist 
that 
beta 
exposure 
should 
earn 
only 
an 
index 
fund 
fee. 
Not
surprisingly, most institutional inflows after the millennium have gone into
the alpha–beta barbell—not to traditional managers.

A variation on this strategy is alpha transport (portable alpha). A beta
position is established using index derivatives, which do not tie up very
much capital. Then, a portfolio of HFs is assembled to add alpha. (HFs do
require that the investor put up capital.) This blend substitutes for the more
traditional strategy of selecting active managers with the beta position as
their benchmark.

For years, the HF industry had a wonderful marketing story, especially as
long as investors believed that all returns produced by the mythical “good”
HF manager are pure alpha. Over time and certainly by 2008, investors
learned that HF returns are a mixture of alpha and a variety of betas and that
for the industry net alpha was limited.

What exactly is alpha? Alpha is often defined as “the return from skillful
active management”. This definition is convenient for alpha producers
because it perpetuates the alpha myth (superior investors making money
irrespective of market conditions). Arguably a better definition of alpha is
“the part of (asset or fund) return that cannot be explained by common risk
factors”. This definition helps us see that alpha is always defined with
respect to a particular asset-pricing model (the model specifies which
factors drive expected returns; alpha is the intercept or average unexplained
component).

The latter definition also helps us appreciate the continuous process of
alpha sources morphing into beta over time. As academics and the industry
come up with ever more factors that explain returns, the alpha pool shrinks
and gets reclassified as beta. Berger–Kabiller–Crowell (2008) illustrate
evolution of the concept of manager value-added from the total return of a
fund (all of which was typically attributed to the manager in the days before
the CAPM, the market model, and performance measurement) to CAPM
alpha; from CAPM alpha to alpha as the intercept in Fama–French three-
factor or four-factor regressions; and thence to alpha as the intercept in even
broader models in which the factors explain even more of the return. At
each step, we commoditize return generation and put downward pressure on
fees because well-known systematic factors do not justify as high a fee as
pure 
alpha 
does. 
This 
process 
will 
help 
end-investor 
net 
returns 
and
understanding, albeit gradually.

There could be infinitely granular classifications, but the current state of
the art appears to follow the three-part classification: traditional betas,
alternative betas, alpha. Even here the boundaries are fuzzy, but I would say
that the three premia—equity risk premium, bond risk premium, credit risk
premium—accessed by static long-only holdings in traditional asset classes
belong to the category of traditional betas. Examples of alternative (or HF)
betas include the value, carry, momentum, and volatility strategies reviewed
in this book as well as mechanical merger arbitrage or convertible arbitrage
strategies.

The demarcation line between alternative beta and alpha is especially
blurry. I like a demarcation line that says that any static (average) exposure
to a non-traditional factor is alternative beta, while any dynamic factor
timing, other fine-tuning, or discretionary security selection is alpha. This
definition lumps most systematic strategies into alternative beta but not all.
One could be even tougher on systematic strategies and argue that anything
that 
can 
be 
written 
down 
as 
a 
set 
of 
rules 
or 
procedures 
may 
be
characterized as (alternative) beta—including any trading rules for factor,
market, or style timing [6].

These definitions matter because they have fee implications—very large
ones. 
Most 
observers 
agree 
with 
Asness 
(2004) 
that 
true 
alpha—that
elusive, scarce, perhaps capacity-constrained component of excess return
that is truly due to skill—deserves the highest fees; traditional betas deserve
only index fund fees; and alternative beta deserves something between the
two. The fact that systematic strategies can be written down has the
advantage of transparency and intuition but the disadvantage of being easily
replicable 
(quickly 
becoming 
subject 
to 
competitive 
pressures 
and
eventually to overcrowding risks).

HF replication strategies and HF beta products

Recall empirical findings that (1) HFs as a group appear skillful enough to
add alpha in gross returns but their high fees leave little of this alpha for
fund 
investors 
(especially 
after 
adjusting 
reported 
returns 
for 
various
biases), and (2) most excess returns are not pure alpha but reflect equity
market 
beta 
and 
other 
common 
factors, 
notably 
volatility 
selling 
and
collection of liquidity premia. Combining (1) and (2) logically makes the
business case for HF replication and HF beta products. Not surprisingly,
many firms have offered these alternative products in recent years, but no
one has yet made it a major business success or a performance success.
Investors who buy into these products will by design miss pure alpha (but it
is known to be exceedingly rare and highly priced); instead, they try to
capture the other good things HFs can offer and pay lower fees.

HF replicators try to identify HFs’ aggregate exposures to relevant
rewarded systematic factors, often identifying them with the help of multi-
factor regression models. Initial factor models explained HF returns using
only static linear exposures to major asset classes. Dynamic risk allocation
was addressed (clumsily) by regressing past 24-month HF index returns on
selected factors to find current weights. Such approaches with static asset
classes could only capture, in the rearview mirror, HFs’ recent average
exposures. To better proxy HFs’ current exposures, some studies broadened
the menu of factors to include nonlinear exposures (such as synthetic
lookback options) and/or dynamic trading strategies (such as a trend-
following proxy, merger arbitrage proxy, convertible arbitrage proxy). The
in-sample fit 
to HF index and HF sector index 
returns can often be
surprisingly good, but out-of-sample results less so. Such analyses show
that, as a group, HFs often have significant risk exposures (albeit time
varying) to equities, the small-cap premium, interest rates, and credits.

Besides 
lower 
fees, 
the 
benefits 
of 
using 
replicators 
include 
better
liquidity, capacity, and transparency; lesser single-manager risk; and greater
flexibility and granularity, which can be useful in risk budgeting and
tactical sector allocations. However, there are also disadvantages to using
replicators. Many HF replicators mainly capture equity market exposure (a
traditional beta) rather than the alternative beta exposures that investors
really desire. Jaeger (2008) argues that the latter are best captured by a
bottom-up collection of dynamic trading rules, and that simple equity
market exposure may be hedged away (or captured more cheaply with
liquid products).

HF beta investing (or rules-based investing) differs from HF replication
mainly by not trying to mimic HF returns. There is little reason to replicate
the “bad” part of HF returns (i.e., traditional beta exposures for which a HF
fee is charged). Thus the goal of HF beta investing is to create a portfolio of
alternative betas, while leaving out traditional ones.

Capturing HF betas requires skill, both in defining them (identifying
smart strategies: inclusion, weighing, rebalancing) and in implementing
them cost-effectively and with effective risk management. With HF betas
we can structure a diversified portfolio with an especially attractive reward-
to-risk ratio (e.g., combining value and momentum strategies that both have
a positive alpha but that are often negatively correlated to each other). Truly
original 
proprietary 
strategies 
have 
a 
special 
premium 
in 
today’s
competitive environment where fears of being in overcrowded trades are
not unreasonable.

Both HF replication and HF beta strategies try to capture (some of) the
predictable part of HF industry returns. Another approach to assessing time-
varying 
expected 
returns 
for 
HFs 
explores 
the 
broad 
macro-financial
environment (headwinds or tailwinds for the industry or certain subsets),
volatility level, signs of crowding, and other factors.

To convey the big picture, the stylized summary table (Table 11.3)
decomposes HF returns into building blocks. Given some risk model,
returns can be first split into the contribution of diverse betas and “the rest”.
In the messy real world, “the rest” is not only skill-based alpha but also
reflects contributions of luck (randomness), omitted (yet unmodeled) risk
factors, and reporting biases. Isolating these components of measured alpha
is extremely difficult. (We might include fees as a factor and thus also
distinguish between gross and net alpha.)

Capacity and prospective returns

Large inflows into HFs have raised questions about capacity. The simple
story is that greater competition will reduce excess profits in the sector.
That is, we should expect lower returns and lower Sharpe ratios than in the
past, merely 
due to competitive pressures. (Other critics add that the
average quality of HFs has deteriorated and that this too has reduced
industry profitability. Yet others stress that institutional investors required
lower 
volatility 
and 
accepted 
lower 
Sharpe 
ratios 
than 
traditional 
HF
investors, making single-digit returns and volatilities the new norm.) The
capacity question can be raised for HFs overall and for specific HF sectors
or strategies. Sectors involving less liquid assets appear especially capacity
constrained.

Table 11.3. Stylized decomposition of a hedge fund’s return
Returns explained by systematic factors
Equity market beta
Other traditional betas
Alternative betas
Returns not explained by systematic factors (measured alpha)
Skill
Luck
Biases

Realized HF alpha has fallen over time, in line with the stories above. It
is harder to say which mechanisms caused alpha decay. Hindsight tells us
that leverage was excessive and many strategies were overcrowded in
2006–2007. 
Reduced 
profitability 
was 
the 
first 
and 
more 
innocuous
consequence of HF inflows. The nastier consequence was evident in August
2007 and the fall of 2008 when liquidations from overcrowded positions
(everyone trying to rush through the same narrow door) caused extreme
price dislocations. Cheap assets got ever cheaper, rich assets richer (an echo
of a similar situation in the fall of 1998) and many funds imploded. After
the de-leveraging phase, opportunities were more abundant for the lucky
survivors as there were higher risk premia and larger market inefficiencies
to exploit, and less competition in capturing them. This situation did not last
long as unprecedented fiscal and monetary stimulus and bailouts worked all
too well in reviving speculative animal spirits.

Leverage constraints, whether forced by regulators or self-imposed, may
have a special impact. Low-volatility assets and relative value trades that
have low standalone volatility when not levered are likely to be shunned by
arbitrageurs, 
resulting 
in 
mispricings 
and 
illiquidity, 
but 
also 
better
investment opportunities for those able to put on these trades.
The statement, “Too much money chasing the finite dollar supply of
alpha will reduce HF Sharpe ratios”, initially sounds plausible but upon
reflection is problematic:
• There have been some attempts to estimate this finite alpha
supply; one might, for example, suppose that smart alpha hunters can
extract some fraction, say 50 bp, of the aggregate capitalization of the
global capital market each year, or directly from underperforming
long-only 
managers 
and 
retail 
investors, 
before 
hunters’ 
activity
triggers a regulatory backlash. Given a capital market of $100 trillion
at the market peak, 50 bp amount to $500 billion in alpha supply using
this method.
• A more nuanced view recognizes that the measured alpha pool
is shrinking as more factors are added (recall the process of alphas
being reclassified as betas).
• One observation is that the rising appetite for risk reduces ex
ante return premia on alternative betas. While traditional betas have
nearly limitless capacity and alpha supply is finite, alternative betas are
somewhere between these extremes. If we associate alpha with the
gains from market inefficiencies and alternative betas with rational risk
premia, the latter are less capacity constrained and more sustainable.
Market inefficiencies disappear when many investors learn about them
and more smart capital is allocated to exploiting them—a standard
“competitive pressures” story. In contrast, alternative betas related to
risk factors may well end up with a lower ex ante premium than
before, but in equilibrium the premium should remain positive (people
require some long-run compensation for bearing the risk) rather than
zero.
• Moreover, the gross alpha pool among all investors is zero, by
definition (“the arithmetic of active management” according to Sharpe,
1991). Net alpha among all active investors is negative due to trading
costs and fees. Thus, active trading is a negative sum game. Any
systematic 
gains 
the 
HF 
sector 
makes 
must 
come 
from 
a 
large
population of active investors that tolerate poor performance. Worse,
and rarely mentioned, is the unpleasant fact that your most likely
counterparty when you trade in markets is no longer a retired dentist or
an unmotivated long-only manager—it is a HF manager. Admittedly,
the zero-sum-game argument is clearest when all investors have the
same benchmark; in the real world of segmented markets and multiple
benchmarks this argument is more complicated. I am not sure how the
zero-sum-game argument works in a technical sense if all benchmarks
used by investors do not add up to the global all-asset market portfolio,
but the argument is sound conceptually in that we cannot collectively
be worth more than the sum of what we are worth individually.
• 
There 
are 
some 
superior 
HF 
managers 
with 
reasonably
consistent profits after fees and other costs. However, the profits of any
truly superior investor must imply net losses for other active investors,
where the losses for the other investors include all the trading costs
and fees for both sets of investors. Thus the capacity question really
boils down to asking about the quality of competition among active
investors. Environments where some peers are more willing or prone
to lose money are the pockets where alpha seeking can be more
fruitful. But it should always be remembered that any gains come at
the expense of other active managers.

...
11.5 PRIVATE EQUITY FUNDS

Private equity (PE) funds come in many varieties. At one end, venture
capital (VC) firms finance startup companies (hoping to eventually go
public), while at the other end, leveraged buyout funds help public firms
turn into private companies (by repurchasing all outstanding shares). In
addition, 
there 
are 
funds 
specializing 
in 
angel 
investing, 
mezzanine
financing, 
and 
distressed 
debt 
investing. 
The 
term 
“private 
equity”
sometimes covers all these types, or it may be exclusively used for buyout
funds. Many original buyout specialists have broadened into mega-funds
active in all these fields.

The typical investment vehicle or structure is a partnership where the PE
firm serves as the general partner and acts as the investment manager while
external 
investors 
provide 
funding 
as 
limited 
partners. 
Some 
large
institutional investors may also act in the capacity of co-investors with the
PE house. PE investments are made in two stages: a capital commitment
and its deployment—the general partner can make a call on the committed
capital when good investment opportunities arise. The best rewards for
deployed capital tend to come from initial public offerings (IPOs), in which
the PE firm takes the company public again, completing the cycle. Selling
the company to a strategic investor is often the next-best exit channel, but
of 
course 
not 
all 
deployments 
prove 
profitable. 
Underperforming
investments are eventually written off.

The PE asset class boomed in the 1990s and 2000s. Assets under
management grew from under $100 billion in 1990 to over $600 billion in
2000 and peaked above $2 trillion in 2007, largely driven by perceived
performance edge. The VC sector was especially popular and successful in
the 1990s; but the 2000s belonged to broader PE funds. Investor inflows
into PE funds (following well-known success by Yale University and some
other 
pioneers) 
and 
apparently 
attractive 
investment 
opportunities 
and
cheap debt financing made 2003–2007 very strong years for the sector.
U.S.-centric activity expanded fast to Europe and to the rest of the world.
The year before mid-2007 has been hailed as the golden age—one that
inevitably led to excesses and a hard landing in 2008.

The main advantage of private equity over public markets is in better
corporate governance, including closer supervision of management. PE
funds can create wealth by improving operating efficiency and exploiting
tax deductibility of interest payments through leverage—thus PE is not
subject to the zero-sum-game argument of most active managers. Yet, PE
also involves risks. PE and VC funds have especially high equity market
betas if artificially smoothed returns are adjusted for, so they offer less
diversification to an equity-dominated portfolio than do other alternatives.
The characteristics of low liquidity and long holding periods have some
advantages in enabling the PE fund to accomplish its goals with the
companies it holds, but surely warrant some premium as compensation. It is
rarely noted that when buyout funds convert liquid listed firms into illiquid
private investments, this should make the investment less attractive (create
a 
price 
discount 
for 
illiquidity). 
All 
improvements 
in 
monitoring,
operations, and financing of PE investments must first overcome this
discount before the net impact is positive.

The 
2008–2009 
experience 
painfully 
revealed 
one 
danger 
in 
PE
investing: multi-year capital commitments reduce portfolio liquidity, and
capital calls during liquidity droughts may force investors to sell other
assets at inopportune times to satisfy the calls. (An investor who does not
meet 
a 
capital 
call 
may 
lose 
his 
prior 
investment, 
or 
be 
sued.) 
This
particular 
illiquidity 
risk—commitments 
implying 
lost 
flexibility 
and
implicitly sold options—had been underestimated in good times.

Other 
risks 
include 
leverage 
for 
buyout 
funds 
and 
the 
heightened
fundamental uncertainty of immature businesses for VC funds. Underlying
fund positions tend to be concentrated and activist, implying opportunity
and 
risk. 
Finally, 
lack 
of 
transparency 
is 
a 
concern: 
although 
the
management of private firms by their PE fund owners reduces agency
problems 
and 
information 
asymmetries 
between 
the 
PE 
fund 
and 
its
investments, the misalignment of interests remains between the PE fund
(general partner, GP) and its investors (limited partners, LPs), perhaps more
so for mega-funds than for other funds.
Historical performance

PE funds are famously opaque and secretive but industry sources point to
strong reported performance in the past decades. Based on Cambridge
Associates data, PE funds earned 12.4% between 1986 and 2009 while VC
funds earned 14.5%. These results clearly exceed the 9.2% return on
publicly listed U.S. equities, and the VC edge looks even better if arithmetic
means are studied. The Leitner–Mansour–Naylor (2007) report quotes more
detailed sector data from Thomson’s Venture Economics for 1986–2006:
VC earned 21% with 45% volatility (higher returns for volatile early stage
strategies than for later stage strategies), whereas mezzanine and buyout
funds earned about 12% at much lower volatilities. These very high returns
have faded as one moves toward the present, when larger dollar amounts
were at work. Chapter 2 in this book presents attractive-looking evidence
for the 1990–2009 period, but studies that drill deeper into the data are
generally not impressed.

First, performance is typically quoted as an internal rate of return (IRR),
which is not directly comparable with total return quoted for more liquid
asset classes in this book. IRRs are used partly because regular mark-to-
market prices are not available for illiquid holdings, and partly because the
use of dollar-weighted averaging in the IRR calculation is appropriate given
that an important part of PE fund managers’ skill is choosing when to
deploy the capital investors have committed.

While practitioners clearly like what they see, given the large inflows in
recent years, academic assessment of PE fund performance is lukewarm at
best. 
In 
the 
best 
known 
study, 
Kaplan–Schoar 
(2005) 
report 
after-fee
average returns for limited partners no better than those from investing in
the S&P 500 over 1980–2001. Given the tailwind environment during those
two decades, such performance is disappointing.

Ludovic 
Phalippou’s 
research 
and 
surveys 
are 
not 
great 
marketing
material for the industry. Phalippou–Gottschalg (2009) find even worse
results after adjusting for selection biases related to voluntary reporting.
Empirical analysis reinforces the suspicion that funds not opting to report to
fund databases tend to have worse performance than reporting funds.
Adjusting for their estimate of non-reporting fund performance, the PE
sector seems to have lagged the S&P 500 by about 3% per year. High fees
largely explain this underperformance; by adding back standard fees the
authors find that gross PE returns exceed S&P returns by 3%. Apparently
PE 
managers 
are 
skillful, 
even 
on 
average, 
but 
the 
benefits 
accrue
disproportionately to themselves. PE funds charge a variety of fees that
raise the hurdle of delivering value for end-investors (limited partners); fees
on undrawn committed capital have received perhaps the most criticism. In
another recent study, Phalippou drills into PE funds’ salient and less salient
fees and costs and discusses various ambiguities in performance reporting
(e.g., widely quoted IRR performance data can be misleading if bad IRRs
last longer than good IRRs, as seems to be the case). Presenting data on
arithmetic means (which do not penalize for volatility) or gross returns
(rather than net), as is often done, further enhances the sector’s apparent
attractiveness. Unsurprisingly, most industry commentary focuses on better
reported results, as well as even more positive anecdotal evidence, rather
than on these academic studies.

Even if we ignore reporting biases and assume that PE funds matched or
even modestly exceeded S&P 500 performance, the results are hardly
exciting. Given the higher risk (high leverage, high volatility, and high
equity 
market 
betas, 
even 
before 
upward 
adjustment 
of 
the 
beta 
to
counteract IRR data smoothing) and much lower liquidity in private equity
than in public equity, significant average outperformance by PE seems
warranted. In the aforementioned study, risk adjustment doubles measured
underperformance vs. the S&P 500, from—3% to—6%.

Interpreting returns and looking beyond the average

Phalippou wonders why investors keep allocating so much money to this
asset 
class, 
despite 
the 
disappointing 
performance, 
and 
then 
proposes
several possible explanations: learning (experienced funds tend to perform
better, but to participate in them investors first need to buy into novice
funds); mispricing due to misunderstanding (investors believe the historical
track record is much better than it really is); overpricing due to investors’
lottery 
preferences 
(VC 
investors, 
especially, 
are 
enchanted 
by 
the
possibility of finding “the next Microsoft”; indeed, VC performance data is
highly right-skewed); side benefits (the LP may be motivated by a broader
commercial relationship with the GP; this may be especially relevant for
banks as LPs, which are shown to underperform other LPs); and conspiracy
theory (exaggerated reported performance could make the LP investor look
good in the near term, with the disappointment to be unraveled by one’s
successor).

Whatever the reason, the average or median PE fund does not seem able
to outperform public equities after fees. More positively, brand-name funds
can stress the distinction between average performance and top-quartile
performance. 
Empirical 
evidence 
shows 
clearly 
that 
both 
performance
dispersion and performance persistence are higher among PE funds than
among other funds. Thus, being a top-quartile fund implies a large degree of
outperformance—and 
being 
a 
top-quartile 
fund 
in 
the 
past 
makes
outperformance 
in 
the 
future 
more 
likely. 
Admittedly, 
part 
of 
this
persistence reflects illiquidity and smoothed returns, but part of it is real.

Some fund characteristics other than past performance are helpful for
manager selection. Tenure and vintage year have some predictive ability.
Investors should prefer experienced GPs and avoid funds in hot years when
too many funds are chasing the good deals. One reason for the tenure
advantage is that established funds can behave tactically and accelerate
their 
investments 
when 
investment 
conditions 
improve, 
competitive
pressures for deal flow ease, and credit market conditions loosen. Younger
funds cannot afford to be as sensitive to market conditions and they tend to
invest in riskier buyouts in order to establish a track record. Perhaps
surprisingly, smaller funds earn higher returns. Anecdotally, funds with
more focused holdings tend to outperform funds with broader holdings.

Lerner–Schoar–Wongsunwai 
(2007) 
present 
intriguing 
findings 
of
heterogeneous investor success in this field: PE funds with endowments as
limited partners outperform the average fund by nearly 14% (and this can
only partly be explained by their earlier exposures). Yale is the most famous
example 
but 
by 
no 
means 
the 
only 
successful 
PE 
investor 
among
endowments. In contrast, funds with banks as limited partners underperform
the average fund by 10%. This finding is consistent with the side-benefits
explanation above; banks may be motivated more by their broader banking
revenues with the GP than by the profits of the fund.
I am not aware of useful value indicators for PE investing. However, ex
ante returns are likely to be better at the early stages of bull markets, when
investment 
opportunities 
and 
financing 
conditions 
are 
attractive 
but
competition for deals is not yet excessive. Investors chase performance and
commit capital to PE funds after strong years, a pattern that then hampers
subsequent performance. Heavy money flows into PE around the times of
the 2000 and 2007 peaks were a warning signal; prospective returns are
lower when every fund wants to “act like Yale”. Conversely, the recession-
ending years 1991 and 2001 turned out to be good vintages; the same may
be true for 2009. The performance of the PE and VC sectors over time can
be pretty well explained by public equity market performance (positive
beta), 
cost 
of 
financing 
(low 
yields 
on 
low-grade 
bonds 
helps), 
and
competitive pressures (larger number of funds raising capital hurts).

Despite apparent predictability in fund performance, PE fund investors’
ability to exploit any regularities is limited. Access to the most attractive
funds 
requires 
personal 
contacts 
and, 
often, 
past 
participation 
in 
less
popular funds.

Overall, it seems that published PE fund returns are overstated and
published risks understated (and underappreciated). The typical PE manager
is skillful enough to outperform public indices on a gross basis but the
benefits of these skills accrue primarily to the manager and not to the
investor. The Yale Endowment’s David Swensen concludes that the only
way to justify active PE/VC investing, given risks and costs, is by an ability
to invest in top-quartile funds. Identifying them in advance is not easy but
perhaps not as difficult as in liquid markets.

...
11.6 NOTES

[1] Note that traditional (long-only) asset managers are not viewed as
distinct asset classes. Even if these managers have an active mandate, they
typically have a clear benchmark in one asset class of publicly traded
securities (equities, bonds, or a narrower subset) and are not expected to
deviate too much from benchmark performance. (Their target-tracking error
is often much lower than asset class volatility.) Thus, investors can view an
investment in S&P 500 and a traditional large-cap fund manager as nearly
equivalent from a risk-budgeting perspective.

[2] NCREIF is the National Council of Real Estate Investment Fiduciaries,
and 
constructs 
an 
appraisal-based 
(not 
transaction-based) 
index 
of
commercial properties likely to be held by institutional investors.

[3] 
Siegel–Kaplan 
(1996) 
report 
a 
volatility 
estimate 
of 
17% 
for
unleveraged real estate, using a reverse optimization method.

[4] 
The 
quality 
adjustment 
effect 
and 
different 
weighting 
schemes 
of
samples 
(notably, 
the 
MIT-CRE 
index 
equally-weights 
poperties 
while
NCREIF’s NPI value-weights them) also cause differences between the two
indices. For details on these indices and their respective return calculations,
please see websites www.ncreif.com and web.mit.edu/CRE/

[5] If we focus on specific calendar month contracts (say, for crude oil
futures) the cumulative (excess) return of the proposed strategy can be
measured by chaining the distinct returns of 12 monthly contracts. For
example, if the strategy design involves rolling into a new contract just at
each month end, we can chain the January return of the contract that expires
in February, the February return of the contract that expires in March (e.g.,
Bloomberg ticker CLH1 for the March 2011 contract), and so on. If we
instead focus on price evolution of the generic nearby contract (e.g., ticker
CL1 in Bloomberg), the cumulative annual (excess) return of this strategy
reflects price change in the generic nearby contract over the year as well as
the return impact of rolling positions each month. The main text takes the
latter approach because focusing on generic nearby contracts leads to a
convenient decomposition of excess returns into roll returns and spot price
changes. 
Both 
perspectives—chaining 
actual 
calendar 
month 
contract
returns and generic nearby contract series—give the same returns when
used correctly. However, investors sometimes mix the two approaches.
When investors want to see a longer history of crude oil prices, it is
common to plot the time series of generic nearby contract prices (CL1).
This is fine as a visual tool but I stress that price change should not be
confused with excess return of any investment strategy because this generic
price series ignores roll returns. (All serious performance analysis begins
with creating a proper excess return series that includes roll.) For example,
the nearby futures price of crude oil ended up being virtually unchanged
between mid-2007 and mid-2009 (near $71 per barrel), but realized excess
return was down—36% due to persistently negative roll return.

[6] This definition makes it easy for discretionary managers to claim that
they are alpha producers (no one can replicate what is going on in their
minds or write down their full subjective decision-making process) whereas
any systematic manager can at most create alternative beta. Despite the
transparency and replicability of their approach, systematic managers are
the ones called “black boxes”. The world is unfair!

Sources 
notes. 
For 
good 
overviews 
into 
alternative 
assets, 
see 
Anson
(2006), Leitner–Mansour–Naylor (2007), and Swensen (2009).

On real estate, Hoesli–Lizieri (2007) and Francis–Ibbotson (2009) are
excellent sources. So are the three special issues in the Journal of Portfolio
Management (2005, 2007, 2009), with many good articles, such as Conner–
Lian (2005), Ruff (2007), and Clayton et al. (2009). Some useful long data
histories are introduced in Shiller (2005), Davis–Heathcote (2007), and
Davis–Lehnert–Martin (2008). Besides the articles above, determinants of
real estate pricing are discussed in Brunnermeier–Julliard (2008), Piazzesi–
Schneider (2007), Sean Campbell et al. (2009), Plazzi–Torous–Valkanov
(2010), and Takats (2010). For infrastructure, see Mansour–Nadji (2007)
and Weisdorf (2007). For art, see Mei–Moses (2002), Rachel Campbell
(2008), and Mamarbachi (2007).
On commodities, the book Intelligent Commodity Investing (2008) is a
good starting point, especially editor Hilary Till and Joseph Eagleeye’s
surveys. Key articles include Erb–Harvey (2006), Gorton–Rouwenhorst
(2006), 
Gorton–Hayashi–Rouwenhorst 
(2007), 
Hong–Yogo 
(2010), 
and
Rallis–Miffre–Fuertes (2010).

On hedge funds, the books by Alexander Ineichen (2002, 2008), Lars
Jaeger (2005), Francois Lhabitant (2007), and Andrew Lo (2008) are all
useful. For 
a 
story 
with more flair (on 
hedge funds 
and 
hedge fund
managers), see Mallaby (2010). Adjusting HF returns for risks and biases is
a topic led by Fung–Hsieh (1997, 2002, 2004, 2009) and followed by
Malkiel–Saha 
(2005), 
Stulz 
(2007), 
Bhardwaj–Gorton–Rouwenhorst
(2008), Amenc–Goltz (2008), TerHorst–Verbeek (2007), and Ibbotson–
Chen 
(2010). 
For 
relative 
returns 
associated 
with 
different 
HF
characteristics, see Aggarwal–Jorion (2008), Agarwal–Daniel–Naik (2009),
Avramov 
et 
al. 
(2009), 
Sun–Wang–Zheng 
(2009), 
Teo 
(2009), 
and
Ammann–Huber–Schmid (2010). Liquidity-related issues are discussed in
Asness–Krail–Liew 
(2001), 
Getmansky–Lo–Makarov 
(2004), 
Aragon
(2007), Ang–Bollen (2008), Gibson–Wang (2008), Khandani–Lo (2009),
and Teo (2010). For HF investors’ returns, see Dichev–Yu (2010). For HF
replication and HF beta strategies, see Asness (2004), Jaeger (2008), Lo
(2008), and Berger–Kabiller–Crowell (2008).

On private equity funds, see Anson (2006), Leitner–Mansour–Naylor
(2007), Swensen (2009), as well as surveys by Phalippou (2007) and Schoar
(2008). Academic analyses of PE returns include Ljungqvist–Richardson
(2003), 
Cochrane 
(2005b), 
Kaplan–Schoar 
(2005), 
Lerner–Schoar–
Wongsummai (2007), Ljungqvist–Richardson–Wolfenzon (2007), Lopez de
Silanes–Phalippou–Gottschalg 
(2009), 
Kaplan–Stromberg 
(2009),
Phalippou (2009), Phalippou–Gottschalg (2009), and Franzoni–Nowak–
Phalippou (2010). On VC fund returns, see Cochrane (2005b) and Smith–
Pedace–Sathe (2009).

...