12

Value-oriented equity selection

• Value stocks with high book-to-market ratios and earnings
yields (i.e., low prices relative to their book values and earnings)
have outperformed growth stocks and the market both in the U.S.
and globally over many decades (but can underperform sharply
over short windows).
• The strategy of sector neutrality (picking stocks that are
cheap vs. industry peers) has given a better risk–reward tradeoff
than the traditional approach to value investing which uses all
stocks and allows industry bets.
• Style timing based on the current extent of the value
opportunity or on other indicators appears only mildly helpful.
• The main behavioral explanation for value stocks’ long-run
outperformance is excessive extrapolation by investors of multi-
year growth rates. In reality, earnings growth mean-reverts faster
than the market expects, making growth stocks more likely to
disappoint. Value stocks also can be dull or worse (beaten-up
stocks in depressed companies that are uncomfortable to hold).
• Various alternative rational explanations have been
proposed, but relatively complex stories are needed to support
them. It is not obvious from data that value stocks are riskier than
growth stocks (since value stocks have lower market betas and
similar performance in recessions), but some serious thinkers
have found greater risk in value stocks. Notably, value stocks
often underperform when liquidity dries up.
• Value strategies analogous to value-oriented stock selection
also work in equity country allocation and in other asset classes,
as well as in contrarian market timing and asset allocation.
• Value and momentum strategies are especially good
complements because they tend to be negatively correlated.

...
12.1 INTRODUCTION TO DYNAMIC STRATEGIES

It is time to rotate the cube to give a new perspective. The previous four
chapters describe rewards for investments that are static in concept and
nearly so in practice. In contrast, the next four chapters focus on popular
dynamic strategies that involve dynamic asset weights (changing over time)
but static exposures to a given factor or characteristic such as equity value
or currency carry. The boundary between static and dynamic strategies is
blurred because even passive equity or bond investing is not “buy and hold”
but involves portfolio adjustments to reflect changes in index composition,
and if you make a “static” allocation into hedge funds they will be trading
quite actively. (Moreover, even a buy-and-hold portfolio may leave the
asset contents relatively unchanged over time—the weights will change due
to ordinary price movements, and the names will occasionally change due
to corporate actions—but portfolio characteristics and risk exposures will
be quite unstable. This is easiest to see with bonds, whose durations shorten
and whose credit quality can change over time.)

The four relatively simple dynamic strategies covered in this and the next
three chapters are selected for their variety (across styles and asset classes)
and popularity (which is closely related to past success). The strategies are
equity value, currency carry, commodity momentum, and equity index
volatility 
selling. 
These 
are 
long–short 
strategies 
(or 
they 
are 
best
implemented as such) and, consequently, are more easily engaged in by
leveraged investors than by traditional long-only investors.

All these strategies are systematic, making them easier to describe and
replicate, more transparent, and less diverse than discretionary strategies.
One handicap is greater vulnerability to overfitting. Even evaluation of
static asset class premia involves choices regarding the asset universe,
weighting 
scheme, 
and 
sample 
period—and 
voluntary 
reporting 
of
historical 
returns 
that 
one 
can 
study 
adds 
further 
choices 
and 
biases.
Dynamic 
strategies 
give 
us 
many 
more 
degrees 
of 
freedom 
because
numerous small choices (each of which may marginally improve success in
a backtest) are made by one researcher repeatedly examining the same
dataset, or by different generations of researchers doing the same [1]. For
the four strategies below, sufficient out-of-sample evidence now exists to
convince most observers that the basic finding is “real” and not just a result
of overfitting. In contrast, some improved returns from various refinements
to the basic findings may well reflect overfitting. Finally, even if past
success is “real” it is possible that investor learning, arbitrage activity, or
structural changes will weaken regularity or even overturn it in the future.

Much of the empirical analysis below is about historical performance, so
the relevance for future investing relies on the “future-equals-past” mindset
that I criticized earlier in the context of equity premium. However, as
investors we must first be convinced that an opportunity has existed in the
past before we can meaningfully debate its sustainability. Forward-looking
assessments 
can 
be 
strategic 
(about 
the 
sustainability 
of 
a 
long-run
premium) or tactical (about timing the strategy). Despite various challenges
discussed below, in my judgment the four strategies described in Chapters
12–15 will keep delivering positive excess returns in the long run. No
strategy 
works 
well 
at 
all 
times. 
Ideally, 
investors 
mitigate 
losses 
by
successful style timing: de-allocating capital from strategies before their
performance disappoints. I give some timing tips below but I stress that
style timing is a highly inexact science.

...
12.2 EQUITY VALUE: INTRODUCTION AND
HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Value 
investing 
is 
among 
the 
oldest 
and 
best 
known 
stock 
selection
approaches. The value premium refers to the regularity with which “value
stocks” with low valuation ratios (e.g., low price/earnings, price/dividend,
and price/book ratios) tend to earn higher long-run returns than “growth
stocks” or “glamour stocks” with high valuation ratios. Value investing has
a long history—Benjamin Graham, Warren Buffett, and John Templeton are
some famous practitioners whose success preceded academic interest; the
tradition has continued with younger investors such as Gary Brinson and
Seth Klarman.

Though a few earlier studies exist, the topic really caught academic
attention 
in 
the 
early 
1990s 
with 
two 
influential 
publications—Fama–
French (1992, hereafter FF) and Lakonishok–Shleifer–Vishny (1994, LSV).
These studies broadly agreed on the empirical evidence but proposed
different interpretations—the rational and irrational forces, respectively,
behind the value premium (see Section 12.4). Later studies showed that
value strategies work in other countries and in other asset contexts. Equity
value strategies suffered during the dot.com boom but the golden days
arrived in the early 2000s. Investor interest bloomed, quantitative equity
managers (with a strong value bias) enjoyed large inflows, and books on
value investing became mini-bestsellers.

As often happens, this success sowed the seeds of its own demise. When
the turn in fortunes came in the summer of 2007, crowded positions and
synchronous 
liquidations 
caused 
a 
“quant 
meltdown”, 
which 
seemed
mysterious at first but which really just reflected the extent to which quant
managers had engaged in herd behavior by all following similar value
indicators. Value continued to underperform in 2008 when cheap finance
stocks became cheaper; even sector-neutral strategies suffered. As a result,
capital was massively redeemed from value managers and many of the
remaining players were forced to tweak their models. With some hindsight,
the equity value style itself was “overvalued” before the summer of 2007
and undervalued after 2008.

Academics were active participants in these real-world developments.
For 
example, 
Fama 
and 
French 
have 
been 
closely 
involved 
with
Dimensional Fund Advisors, and LSV opened their own eponymous asset
management firm. Other important value-oriented quant managers were run
by FF’s colleagues and former students.

Historical evidence on Fama–French portfolios

I provide empirical evidence mainly based on Ken French’s data library.
Thanks partly to easy availability, the benchmark value series in academic
finance is the Fama–French VMG (“value-minus-growth”) series, which
represents the return of a long–short portfolio of U.S. equities, specifically
one that is long high book/price stocks (“value stocks”) and short low
book/price 
stocks 
(“growth 
stocks” 
or 
“glamour 
stocks”). 
The 
data
methodology is straightforward. Each year the universe of U.S. stocks, with
some exceptions, is sorted based on each stock’s size and book/price ratio.
After a year, another sort is conducted and the portfolio is rebalanced, as
needed. Size sorting splits U.S. equities into those with market cap above or
below the median market cap of the New York Stock Exchange. The
cheapest 30% of the stocks in both the large-cap and small-cap universes
are bought and the richest 30% in the respective universes are sold. VMG is
the return difference between the long portfolio and the short portfolio.
Giving the small-cap universe a 50% weight in the VMG series admittedly
boosts the 
long-run performance of 
value because the value 
effect is
stronger among small caps. (The market cap weight of small caps is much
less than 50%.) [2]

Partly influenced by FF analyses, style investing has become big business
in the past 20 years. Institutional investment mandates are often given to
value or growth managers (perhaps further segmented into large-cap or
small-cap buckets). In FF terminology, value/growth is a one-dimensional
concept 
based 
on 
a 
valuation 
ratio 
or 
blend 
of 
valuation 
ratios. 
An
alternative 
approach 
evaluates 
stocks 
using 
a 
value 
metric 
based 
on
valuation ratios, while a distinct growth dimension is based on past multi-
year 
growth 
or 
profitability 
measures 
(so 
that, 
in 
this 
configuration,
“growth” is not the opposite of “value”). Interestingly, so-called growth
managers in the U.S. equity space appear to actually be better characterized
as momentum players than growth investors. Their positions across stocks
tend to have positive correlations with a momentum style portfolio and
negative correlations with a firm’s long-term expected growth rate (Ghayur
et al., 2010, p. 159).

The magnitude of the long-run value premium is comparable with the
long-run equity premium (over cash). Looking at U.S. data from 1926 to
2009, the compound annual value premium is 4.1% (GM), compared with
the 5.7% equity premium. Thanks to its lower volatility, the value premium
has the same Sharpe ratio (0.39) as the equity premium. Figure 12.1 shows
cumulative profits for the U.S. VMG series since 1926 and a non-U.S.
value growth composite series since 1975.

The trend line in the value premium looks quite stable over decades, with
little or no sign of decay. The non-U.S. value premium has been similarly
impressive since 1975 and its long-run Sharpe ratio is even higher due to
better diversification across many countries and the use of four different
valuation 
ratios 
to 
construct 
it. 
Over 
1975–2009, 
the 
non-US 
value
composite has had an SR of 0.78. In other chapters, I combine the U.S.
multi-value-indicator composite (SR 0.44 since 1975) with the non-U.S.
variant, using equal weights for U.S. and non-U.S. markets; the resulting
global composite (SR 0.68) is my proxy for value-based global stock
selection.

Figure 12.2 shows that in the U.S. the rolling 60-month Sharpe ratio has
been positive through most of available history, with the main exceptions
being in 1932 and 1999. The non-U.S. version has been even more robust.

Figure 
12.1. 
Value-vs.-growth 
cumulative 
outperformance 
since 
1926
(U.S.)/1975 (non-U.S.).

Sources: Ken French’s website, Bloomberg.
Figure 12.2. Sixty-month rolling Sharpe ratios of value growth long–short
portfolios.

Sources: Ken French’s website, Bloomberg.

The 
value 
premium 
has 
been 
especially 
consistent 
after 
the 
Great
Depression. Indeed, the reputation of value stocks as being riskier than
growth stocks may date back to 1930s’ experience:
• In the 1930s, value stocks had higher equity market betas than
growth stocks, making the beta of the VMG factor clearly positive in
that decade. After the 1950s the beta sign changed. Between 1980 and
2005 the VMG factor’s beta was clearly negative.
• The VMG long–short portfolio has experienced drawdowns
exceeding 30% four times in history. Three of these occurred during
the volatile 1930s and the fourth one in 1999–2000.
• The value strategy did not fare particularly poorly during the
crashes of October 1929, 1987, and 2008 (+9%, +4%,—3%). If we
consider the biggest equity market drawdowns since 1926 and VMG’s
coincident performance, it is again clear that VMG’s losing periods
coincided with broad market losses only in the 1930s and in its echo,
the liquidity crisis of 2008 (see Figure 12.3).
More Fama–French analysis

In a sequence of influential papers since their 1992 hit, Fama and French
(FF) drilled deeper on different aspects of the value premium and other
regularities. Here are some relevant nuggets from their more recent papers.

Value stocks have outperformed growth stocks reasonably consistently
since 1926 both before and after 1963 (the starting year for many empirical
studies because Compustat data files become available then). Between 1926
and 1963 the CAPM can explain value outperformance: value stocks have
higher equity market betas than growth stocks, and VMG has a significantly
positive beta of 0.35. Between 1963 and 2004 value stocks have lower betas
than growth stocks, and VMG has a significantly negative market beta of—
0.28. This sign change in value stocks’ beta may be behind the empirical
finding that high-beta stocks outperformed low-beta stocks before 1963 but
not thereafter.

A stock’s price-to-book (P/B) ratio reflects expected returns but also
expected cash flows; thus it can be a noisy measure of both. The standard
valuation equation that relates market prices to expected cash flows and
discount rates suggests that, given P/B’s two roles, other control variables
can help separate the expected cash flow component from the expected
return component. Many documented new anomaly variables (indicators
that are able to predict cross-sectional differences in average stock returns
beyond the FF three-factor model of beta, value, and size), such as net share
issuance, asset growth, accruals, profitability, and momentum, may proxy
for 
expected 
cash 
flows. 
Controlling 
for 
P/B, 
the 
standard 
valuation
equation 
suggests 
that 
higher 
expected 
net 
cash 
flows 
imply 
higher
expected stock returns (whether for rational or irrational reasons).

Figure 12.3. Value performance during major equity bear markets.

Sources: Ken French’s website.
FF dissect the value premium since the 1920s by breaking down value
growth outperformance into dividend yield advantage and three sources of
capital gains: (1) relative growth in book equity (mainly earnings retention);
(2) convergence in valuation ratios due to mean-reverting profitability and
expected returns; and (3) upward drift in valuation ratios between 1927 and
2006. The main empirical findings are
• 
Dividends 
contribute 
half 
of 
large-cap 
value 
growth
outperformance over the full sample (1.3 of 2.6%) but only a tiny
fraction of small-cap value growth outperformance (0.2 of 5.8%).
• 
The 
main 
source 
of 
value 
stocks’ 
return 
advantage 
is
convergence in valuation ratios, although its impact is partly offset by
growth stocks’ faster book growth. Value stocks earn large capital
gains over time as some of them become more profitable and their
valuations rise. Growth stocks earn high returns from fast book equity
growth but lose this advantage due to dwindling profitability in many
growth firms and shrinking valuations over time. Companies migrate
across style groups because of the investments they make and the
expected profitability of these investments, which together make their
P/B ratios converge.
• The drift term boosts the average returns of all portfolios by
about 1% so it has little impact on relative returns.

Migration dynamics across value-sorted and size-sorted portfolios can be
analyzed from another perspective. The value premium has three sources:
(1) high returns on value stocks that migrate toward growth; (2) low returns
on growth stocks that migrate toward value; and (3) slightly higher returns
for 
non-migrating 
value 
than 
non-migrating 
growth 
stocks. 
Again,
converging 
profitability 
and 
converging 
P/B 
ratios 
across 
stocks 
are
empirically the main driver of the value premium.

A proximate explanation for convergence in valuation ratios is that when
firms are sorted into value and growth portfolios based on their P/B ratios
they tend to be at opposite ends of the profitability spectrum. Growth stocks
tend to be profitable and investors expect them to keep growing rapidly
while value stocks are less profitable and expected to remain so. Market
expectations for slower growth, perhaps together with higher required
returns, explain value stocks’ lower P/B ratios. However, extremely high or
low profitability is not very persistent. Competition tends to erode growth
firms’ profitability advantage (reinforced by exercised growth options).
Consequently, the P/B ratios of growth stocks tend to fall in the year(s) after
portfolio formation while those of value stocks tend to rise.

As always, there are two interpretations for these results. The behavioral
story 
is 
that 
market 
expectations 
contain 
systematic 
forecast 
errors
(overestimating the persistence of growth, with repeated surprises). The
rational story is that predictable changes in growth and profitability are
properly incorporated into market assessments of expected returns and
risks, but that value portfolios are riskier and that market pricing reflects
this. Return decompositions such as those presented above are agnostic on
the rationality question. Interpretation depends on prior views about market
rationality and cannot be settled by data alone.

Designing value strategies

Investors who believe that value stocks outperform in the long run face
several 
open 
questions 
when 
designing 
their 
strategy. 
The 
questions,
applicable to all active strategies, include the following:
• 
Is 
the 
stock 
selection 
process 
fully 
systematic 
or 
fully
discretionary (where a discretionary investor only uses value indicators
as inputs for judgmental decisions)—or something in between? I focus
here on the systematic approach.
• Will a long–short portfolio, a long-only portfolio, or something
in between (say, 130/30) be used? I focus here on a long–short
portfolio (which in many cases can be overlaid as an active overweight
and underweight portfolio on top of a benchmark equity index).
• Which value indicators are used? Candidate valuation ratios
include 
earnings/price, 
book/price, 
dividend/price, 
cash 
flow/price,
sales/price, 
and 
others. 
There 
are 
further 
choices 
regarding 
the
numerator such as whether to use forward-looking or trailing earnings,
which historical window, and which specific earnings measure? What
all these methods have in common is that some measure of the firm’s
intrinsic value is compared with its market price. However, even the
denominator may be challenged: some observers advocate replacing
the equity market value with the enterprise value (which includes
firm’s debt and preferred shares besides its equity). It is common to
combine several value indicators into a composite measure, and there
are many ways to do this.
• How frequently is the portfolio rebalanced? Value signals are
inherently 
slow 
moving 
but 
turnover 
can 
be 
reduced 
further 
by
smoothing value indicators. Managers need to balance information
decay in value signals against the extra trading costs imposed by
frequent portfolio revisions.
• How long a publication lag should one use for accounting
measures? (The question arises because it is only “fair” to use data that
are fully available information to all investors.)
• Questions on the equity universe:
• One country or multiple countries? (In an international
context, 
it 
may 
be 
important 
to 
take 
into 
account 
differing
accounting conventions across countries. It may be better to run
parallel value strategies in several countries and/or regions than to
run one global value strategy.)
• Should one analyze all stocks together or large-cap and
small-cap stocks separately? (The value premium tends to be
stronger 
for 
small-cap 
stocks, 
at 
least 
on 
paper. 
Liquidity
considerations favor trading large-cap stocks, however.)
• Which stocks are excluded? (REITs, ADRs, ETFs, and
closed-end 
funds 
are 
typically 
dropped—as 
are, 
on 
some
occasions, financial stocks for which certain value indicators are
not available or meaningful.)
• How are value signals translated into portfolio weights? The
most common approach involves sorting stocks into groups and then
buying a value-weighted or equally weighted combination of all a
group’s constituents (e.g., top and bottom 10%, 20%, or 30% of
stocks). 
Another 
approach 
involves 
making 
active 
position 
sizes
directly proportional to value signals, perhaps with a cap.
• Should the strategy be as plain as possible, presumably making
it less overfitted and more robust, or should dynamic features (such as
tailoring value indicators to each industry sector) and other “bells and
whistles” be added if they have been historically successful?
• Few quantitative equity managers only use value indicators. For
them a key question is how value indicators are combined with other
indicators and how value strategies are applied in other asset classes
(see Sections 12.5 and 12.6). In particular, value and momentum
strategies 
tend 
to 
be 
negatively 
correlated 
and 
thus 
are 
great
complements. 
Other 
investors 
prefer 
valuation 
models 
over 
value
indicators 
because 
the 
former 
explicitly 
take 
into 
account 
firms’
growth prospects and the quality of management.
• How are risk management, liquidity considerations, and trading
cost controls incorporated into the process? Should long and short
portfolios 
have 
simply 
equal 
nominal 
amounts, 
equal 
return
volatilities, or equal betas? One crucial question is whether persistent
industry sector biases should be allowed or whether sector neutrality
should be pursued.

Sector neutrality. Practitioner studies highlight the empirical benefits of
sector-neutral 
approaches. 
Yet, 
academic 
studies 
and 
many 
popular
investment products (FF and LSV, MSCI-Barra and S&P value/growth
indices, and the RAFI fundamental index) do nothing to impose sector
neutrality. Without any such adjustments, persistent industry concentrations
are possible in the long–short portfolio. For example, in early 2008, the
long (value) portfolio heavily overweighted finance stocks while the short
(growth) portfolio overweighted energy stocks. Such sector biases may or
may not boost average returns but they pretty clearly impair value portfolio
diversification and thus raise its volatility. Indeed, empirical evidence is
mixed on whether imposing sector neutrality boosts or reduces long-run
returns, but it does seem to boost risk-adjusted returns. Tactically, it may be
worthwhile to remove sector neutrality when valuations across industry
sectors are highly dispersed.

There are no correct answers to any of these design questions. Both
simple-but-smart and complex approaches have their supporters. A broad
menu of available options makes it conceivable that value managers will
improve on the VMG’s historical performance. Given the variety of choices
made in practice, it is not surprising that different value managers can hold
very dissimilar portfolios and earn very different returns. However, there is
a common core that makes value portfolios co-move together—and, as we
learned in 2007, especially so at times of turmoil.

Fundamental index debate

Arnott–Hsu–Moore 
(2005) 
proposed 
fundamental 
indices 
as 
superior
alternatives to the market-cap-weighted indices that dominate the passive
indexing business. In a fundamental index and its relatives, stocks are
weighted by the economic scale of the company rather than by market cap.
Its proponents argue that the market cap portfolio has an inherent tendency
to 
overweight 
overpriced 
stocks 
and/or 
sectors 
and 
to 
underweight
underpriced 
ones, 
resulting 
in 
a 
“return 
drag” 
when 
pricing 
errors
normalize. 
Instead 
of 
a 
single 
measure 
of 
a 
firm’s 
intrinsic 
value 
or
economic scale, Arnott–Hsu–Moore use multiple metrics. They combine
sales, cash flow, book value, and dividends and smooth these metrics to
make 
signals 
more 
robust 
and 
to 
reduce 
turnover. 
Empirically, 
a
fundamental index has outperformed a market-cap-weighted index of large-
cap U.S. equities by about 2% over 40 years—and more in small caps and
in several non-dollar markets.

The public debate that ensued was less about the desirability of the
product and more about its marketing. Supporters of market cap indices
object to the name “fundamental index” because it is not as passive a
strategy as market cap weighting and because it is not an equilibrium
strategy that all investors could employ (the growing popularity of this
strategy would make fundamental index weights and market cap weights
gradually converge and thereby eliminate any return advantage). Other
critics 
challenge 
the 
claims 
that 
the 
approach 
is 
inherently 
novel.
Fundamental indexing is a value tilt, or systematic value strategy, although
early articles downplayed this aspect. Indeed, the approach is very typical
value investing—traditional in that no sector neutrality is imposed—except
that position sizing is more dynamic and aggressive than in common sorting
approaches. 
Active 
weights—deviations 
from market cap weights—are
proportional to value indicators such as book-to-market ratios (thus raising
position 
sizes 
amidst 
losses). 
A 
final 
strand 
of 
criticism 
debates 
the
theoretical motivation that is claimed for fundamental indexation: whether
it is appropriate to assume symmetric pricing errors centered around an
unobservable fair value, as fundamental indexers do, rather than around the
observable market price.

Fundamental indexing is just one example of market-value-indifferent
weighting methods. Equal weighting, equal volatility weighting, minimum
variance portfolios, and diversity weighting are other examples that have a
contrarian bias (their rebalancing often involves selling assets whose prices
have risen and buying assets whose prices have dropped). All appear to
empirically outperform market-cap-weighted portfolios in the long run. To
the extent that the claim about return drag in market cap weighting is
correct, any pricing-indifferent equity ranking system should avoid this
drag. A part of the advantage—but not all of it—may reflect avoiding drag
from buying new index constituents and selling excluded stocks together
with the index-tracking crowd.

...
12.3 TWEAKS INCLUDING STYLE TIMING

For 
each 
dynamic 
strategy, 
I 
will 
discuss 
some 
successful 
tweaks 
in
indicator specification as well as contexts and conditions where and when
the strategy seems to work especially well or poorly. Such evidence may
enhance our understanding of the sources behind the strategy’s success. Yet,
we should remember that such analysis is even more vulnerable to data
mining than is identification of basic regularities.

Indicator specifications can be fine-tuned. Some empirical studies show
that 
trailing 
earnings 
work 
better 
than 
forward-looking 
earnings 
in
earnings/price ratios, or that smoothed multi-year earnings work better than
one-year earnings. There are many ideas about how to adjust reported
earnings to capture the trend component or to remove nominal bias in
current earnings. Qian–Hua–Sorensen (2007) argue that the ratio of cash
flows from operations to enterprise value is the best value indicator for
predicting next quarter returns. However, such findings are often based on
one particular data sample and several auxiliary decisions, so it is hard to
judge how robust they are.

A value strategy may work especially well (or poorly) in certain sectors
or countries. So-called contextual models identify subsets of the equity
universe according to the effectiveness of certain predictors and customize
models accordingly. One finding is that stocks with the lowest institutional
ownership have the most significant value premium. This subset includes
about three-quarters of stocks but less than one-tenth of the market’s total
capitalization. It is not surprising that value premium (besides many other
regularities) is weakest in the large-cap segment, which is best covered by
analysts, most actively traded, easiest to arbitrage, and thus least prone to
relative mispricings.
Style timing/rotation. As I stress through this book, historical average
premia may be misleading when expected returns vary over time. Investors
took money away from value strategies during their underperformance in
the dot.com boom. They then piled money into value strategies during the
long good spell in the early and mid-2000s, perhaps intending to ride
through any temporary downturns with equanimity. However, the 2007–
2008 value losses resulted in de-allocations and prompted more investors to
seek ways to “time” these value strategy downturns. This quest is fraught
with overfitting risks and, at best, may only lead to modest improvement
over a static value strategy. There are no strong empirical relations but here
are some mildly promising paths:
• momentum;
• ex ante value spread;
• seasonals;
• macroeconomic and liquidity indicators.

The first indicator in many firms’ style rotation models is momentum (also
called persistence or continuation). When value works, it is reasonable to
predict further near-term success. The first two rows in Table 12.1 show
evidence 
of 
value 
performance 
persistence, 
mainly 
over 
a 
one-month
horizon.

Second, value spread measures the size of ex ante opportunity in the
value strategy. If there is a wide dispersion of valuation ratios across stocks,
the value strategy has larger profit opportunities than if this dispersion is
narrow. For example, at the early-2000 peak the earnings yields of top-
quartile (value) stocks were 8% higher than those of the bottom-quartile
(growth) stocks (12% vs. 4%). By early 2007 this spread had narrowed to
below 2% (6.8% vs. 5.2%). With hindsight, both extremes turned out to be
good style-timing signals (to buy value in 2000 and growth in 2007).

If a given implementation of a value strategy imposes sector neutrality,
then value spread should also be industry adjusted. The numbers above are
not industry adjusted. The pioneering Asness et al. (2000) style-timing
study measures value spread by the decile-10 vs. decile-1 difference for
several industry-adjusted valuation indicators. The study argues that this
spread is especially useful for style timing in conjunction with variation in
the expected growth gap between growth and value stocks. If value spread
is historically wide but cannot be justified by a historically wide growth
expectations gap, the ex ante opportunity for value strategies is especially
good.

In addition, the last row in Table 12.1 shows mild evidence of multi-year
reversal in value style returns.

Figure 
12.4 
compares 
realized 
cumulative 
outperformance 
of 
value
stocks with ex ante value spread, here measured by the B/P-based valuation
gap between value and growth stocks (data from Giuliano De Rossi at
UBS). Russell 3000 stocks are sorted based on their B/P ratios into three
groups; and value-weighted returns and median B/P ratios for each tertile
are 
then 
computed 
each 
month.) 
Figure 
12.4(a) 
shows 
returns
(outperformance of value over growth) and value spreads for the “raw”
stock universe, while Figure 12.4(b) shows the same numbers but for the
adjusted, sector-neutral stock universe. (In this sample, the sector-neutral
strategy has slightly higher average return than the raw strategy, and one-
third less volatility, giving it a clear edge in SR—0.68 vs. 0.37—but the
results can vary depending on some design choices.)

The graphs suggest that value spreads have some predictive ability. In
Figure 12.4(a), value stocks as a group were relatively expensive in 1998
and 2007 (dispersion between value and growth stock B/P ratios was
narrow) before they underperformed sharply in the following year. The
correlation between value spread and next month (next year) realized
outperformance is 0.29 (0.48) in the raw case and 0.20 (0.43) in the sector-
neutral case. Some other specifications of value spread look different, say,
making value stocks appear even cheaper in 2000 and more expensive in
2007 than in Figure 12.4. Note that cumulative gains trend higher, unlike
value spread, thanks to value stocks’ long-run advantages (yield advantage
which is nearly always positive and convergence between valuation ratios
of value and growth stocks).

Table 12.1. Correlation of past VMG returns with next month VMG return

Sources: Ken French’s website, own calculations.
Figure 12.4. Value stocks’ ex post outperformance and ex ante value
spread: (a) raw, (b) sector-neutral.

Source: Giuliano De Rossi. (UBS).
Still, style timing is not easy, especially when investors face the lingering
question as to whether a poorly performing strategy is merely temporarily
out of favor or permanently damaged. The history of quant-based equity
selection strategies is instructive. After several excellent years following
2000, 
many 
quantitative 
equity 
strategies 
suffered 
unprecedented
synchronous losses in August 2007, despite having been uncorrelated in the
past. 
The 
diagnosis 
was 
that 
quantitative 
strategies—especially 
those
following a value tilt—had become overcrowded and subject to systematic
de-leveraging risk among quant traders. There was less agreement on the
appropriate response—whether to stick with proven approaches, whether to
refine and “time” them, or whether to replace them with more proprietary
quant approaches (less crowded but less proven). Value strategies continued
to suffer in 2008, and when the value style recovered in 2009 few quant
managers benefited fully. By that time, many had re-allocated capital
toward momentum style strategies, which had their period of record losses
in spring 2009.

Third, seasonals. The value premium (VMG) exhibits a January seasonal
that is almost as strong as that of the size premium. Between 1926 and
2008, monthly VMG returns averaged 2.2% in Januaries vs. 0.24% in other
months. Asness–Moskowitz–Pedersen (2009) document a distinct January
seasonal for value premia in Japan and Continental Europe, but in the U.K.
they find a reverse pattern. (They also find a January seasonal for a value-
driven equity country allocation strategy but not for value strategies in other
asset classes.) There is no “Hallowe’en effect” seasonal for value—average
returns are similar for summer and winter.

Fourth, macroeconomic and liquidity conditions may help explain the
value 
premium 
(concurrently) 
and/or 
predict 
it 
in 
the 
near 
term.
Contemporaneous relations include positive correlation with equities in the
1930s and 1940s and negative correlation in recent decades. Some studies
identify links between short or long rate changes and the value premium. I
do not find even consistent signs for a contemporaneous (or predictive)
relation but yield curve steepening has a mild positive contemporaneous
correlation with quarterly VMG returns. Some authors argue that the value
premium is countercyclical. However, when I compute average returns of
the VMG across different stages of the business cycle (for 1926–2008), I
find almost no cyclical variation. A variety of studies claim that value tends
to 
underperform 
when 
(and 
before) 
the 
economy 
turns 
south, 
when
corporate profit growth slows, when liquidity conditions dry up, or when
credit spreads sharply widen. All are interesting but weak relations.

...
12.4 THE REASONS VALUE WORKS

I 
have 
already 
referred 
to 
two 
influential 
publications—Fama–French
(1992, FF) and Lakonishok–Shleifer–Vishny (1994, LSV). The two studies
presented broadly similar empirical results of value stock outperformance
but their interpretations were very different. The debate on rational and
irrational explanations has been repeated over and over again, and no
amount of empirical evidence can resolve it. I discuss both explanations.
This should help the reader form his or her own opinions—and perhaps
gain some respect for the opposite view. I believe that both rational and
irrational factors contribute to the value premium; the real question is which
one is more important. My take is that behavioral stories are, so far, more
persuasive.

Irrational and rational explanations for the value premium

LSV list popular errors that may give rise to mispricings that contrarian
investors can exploit. In Section 6.3.2, I list these and other explanations for
the value premium, so I won’t repeat them here. Here I only focus on the
most prominent explanation: extrapolating past earnings growth too far into
the future. Figure 12.5 shows that when U.S. stocks are sorted by their P/E
ratios, the quintiles are monotonically related to consensus forecasts of
long-term earnings growth. Moreover, a similar pattern arises when the
aggregate market’s P/E ratios and growth forecasts are compared over time
during the past quarter-century. In both cases, growth optimism at high P/E
levels has proved excessive and subsequent growth rates have disappointed.

It is true that glamour firms have grown faster than value firms and have
continued to do so for a couple of years. Yet, growth rates are mean-
reverting and the market underappreciates the true rate of mean reversion.
Indeed, firms with low past sales growth or with low analyst forecasts of
future growth tend to outperform in the future.

Figure 12.5. P/E ratios are linked to long-term growth expectations, both
across stocks and over time.

Sources: Ghayur et al. (2010), Bloomberg, Citigroup, Credit Suisse.

Glamour firm earnings tend to disappoint in the future while value firm
earnings tend to surprise on the upside. On average, glamour stocks earn
negative returns on days of future earnings announcements, while value
stocks earn positive returns. Such evidence of surprise effects makes it hard
to argue that investors had rationally expected the outperformance of value
stocks (as a reward for their greater risk compared with growth stocks).

One study sorts firms on their 5-year growth rates and finds that ending
valuations (P/B) are clearly higher for high-growth firms but beginning
valuations display, if anything, the opposite pattern. Valuations appear to
respond to the realized growth rate instead of anticipating it. Another study
finds that the market is able to identify firms with a future growth edge but
it overprices this advantage by a factor of 2.

The generic rational line is that value stocks outperform because they are
inherently riskier. The challenge is to find a meaningful risk concept that
covaries with the value premium. Ultimately, finance theory states that any
risk factor justifies a high risk premium if its losses covary with bad times.
Due 
to 
the 
joint 
hypothesis 
problem, 
the 
proponents 
of 
a 
rational
explanation can always hope that the true risk-based explanation will one
day be uncovered.

• Behaviorists counter that there is no evidence that value stocks
are riskier than growth stocks. The VMG factor has had a negative
equity market beta for the past 50 years and average VMG has been
positive in both expansions and recessions. Lakonishok has argued that
under 
any 
but 
a 
metaphysical 
definition 
of 
risk, 
value 
stocks’
outperformance cannot be attributed to risk exposures. The fact that
much of the outperformance occurs on earnings announcement days
further 
hints 
at 
disappointed 
expectations 
rather 
than 
rationally
accepted low returns.
Early 
rational 
explanations 
emphasized 
the 
evidence 
of 
systematic
covariation among value stocks and growth stocks. Value stocks covary
positively with a common risk factor (VMG). One strand of the literature
examined whether the characteristics of a stock’s low P/B ratio or its
covariance with the VMG factor better explains the cross-section of average
stock 
returns; 
characteristics 
usually 
win 
such 
horse 
races. 
However,
estimated rolling value factor betas also have significant ability to explain
the value premium.

• 
Behaviorists 
tend 
to 
interpret 
any 
evidence 
of 
systematic
covariation as sentiment-driven comovement. Value stocks are not
fundamentally similar to each other but their comovement reflects their
“out-of-favor” nature (and glamour stocks’ comovement reflects their
“in-favor” nature).
These are just examples of how both sides of the debate can always present
an alternative interpretation to the supportive evidence the other side comes
up with.

These rational stories still had little to say on why value stocks are
riskier. The first explanation that FF proposed was distress risk. Value firms
tend to be unprofitable with low past growth, often in declining industries.
Distress risk was an argument based on a stock’s standalone characteristics
rather than an argument about covariances, which are central to academic
theories about risk premium determination. Early empirical evidence gave
some support to the distress idea, but recent studies, which use firms’ debt
ratings or various bankruptcy indicators to directly quantify distress risk,
find evidence that is hard to reconcile with a rational risk story. Apparently,
distressed 
firms 
load 
positively 
on 
the 
VMG 
factor 
but 
tend 
to 
earn
exceptionally poor returns (and even poorer in bad times, which are proxied
by a rising VIX). Thus, many value investors try to weed out distressed
firms from the universe of low-multiple stocks and pick the remaining value
stocks. Using various quality, profitability, or momentum filters enhances
value portfolio returns.

Recent research suggests that the underperformance of distressed firms
may reverse over a longer horizon. Avramov et al. (2010) show that many
anomalies—including 
value 
and 
momentum—are 
concentrated 
on 
the
subset of stocks with high credit risk (ratings below investment grade,
constituting less than 10% of market cap). Moreover, losses for stocks with
negative momentum and high credit risk occur exclusively during periods
of 
deteriorating 
credit 
(a 
one-year 
window 
around 
a 
credit-rating
downgrade), whereas the value strategy is more profitable outside this
window. Predictable multi-month losses of distressed (low-rated) firms
around rating downgrades look like an underreaction effect that is hard to
exploit due to illiquidity and short-selling challenges. Delayed buying of
such firms may be a better strategy, because long positions in surviving
low-rated 
firms 
later 
earned 
relatively 
high 
subsequent 
returns, 
thus
contributing to the value effect. Parallels to the performance of fallen angel
bonds are very close.

Additional risk factors and time-varying betas have been academics’
main rational stories that hold some promise for explaining the value
premium. Novel risk factors highlighted in the literature include long-run
consumption risk, consumption of luxury goods, labor income, good vs. bad
betas, and an investment-in-new-projects factor. I briefly discuss the last
two:
• Campbell–Vuolteenaho (2004a) split the equity market beta into
two parts, the cash flow beta and the discount rate beta. The discount
rate beta is viewed as the “good beta” (bad news is more temporary
because shocks that raise required discount rates reduce current prices
but also improve future reinvestment opportunities) while the cash
flow beta is viewed as the “bad beta” (poor cash flow news has a more
permanent price impact). In theory, the bad beta should have a higher
discount rate than the good beta. Empirically, value stocks are more
exposed to “bad betas” while growth stocks load more heavily on
“good betas”. This finding could explain why a rational investor may
not want to exploit the value premium.
• Chen–Novy-Marx–Zhang (2010) present a three-factor model
that can explain the cross-section of stock returns better than the
Fama–French 
three-factor 
model. 
One 
of 
their 
novel 
factors 
is
investment 
by 
the 
firm 
in 
new 
projects. 
This 
factor 
has 
a 
0.51
correlation with VMG. Stocks with a low investment-to-assets ratio
tend to have higher future returns, lower past returns, and lower
current valuations. Moreover, the low average returns of distressed
firms may be explained by such firms having lower returns on assets
and a lower sensitivity to risk factors related to returns-on-assets
shocks.

Time-varying betas. The key idea is that while value stocks do not always
have higher betas than growth stocks, the former are riskier when it matters:
in bad times. Some empirical evidence supports this idea but it does not
jump out from the data. One study claims that value stocks have higher
equity market beta than growth stocks in recessions and when the equity
market premium is high (and lower in expansions and when the market
premium is low). However, recall my evidence of VMG’s losses in the
1930s and 2008 but not in most other recessions.

Finally, 
Asness–Moskowitz–Pedersen 
(2009) 
explore 
whether 
the
success of value (and momentum) strategies in several asset classes reflects
macroeconomic 
and 
liquidity 
risks. 
They 
document 
mild 
value
underperformance when future long-run consumption growth is falling and
the current economy is weak as well as when liquidity conditions dry up
and credit spreads widen. These empirical relations help justify the value
premium by the correlation between value strategy losses and bad times—
but they also leave most of the value premium unexplained. The authors
speculate that part of the value premium reflects mispricing—cheapness of
value assets—which may persist due to trading costs and liquidity risks that
limit 
the 
activity 
of 
arbitrageurs. 
When 
liquidity 
is 
especially 
scarce,
arbitrageurs need to de-lever, and cheap assets get even cheaper, so value
strategies fare poorly (and momentum strategies excel).
...
12.5 DOES THE VALUE STRATEGY WORK IN EQUITIES
BEYOND INDIVIDUAL STOCK SELECTION OR IN
MARKET OR SECTOR SELECTION IN OTHER ASSET
CLASSES?

The short answer is “Yes”, although the most popular application is in stock
selection. In other asset classes, carry strategies often work better than value
strategies, but quant managers often use both inputs, and they are related.
Value also works, to some extent, in timing individual asset classes and
trading across asset classes. Even discretionary investors in a variety of
areas use value anchors as one input to their decision making.

Asness–Moskowitz–Pedersen (2009) present the broadest evidence yet
published 
of 
outperformance 
by 
the 
value 
approach: 
stock 
selection
strategies in four geographic regions as well as country allocation strategies
in four asset classes. They choose deliberately naive value indicators to
avoid overfitting. Outside the U.S., sample periods start in the 1980s and
end in early 2008. For stock selection they use the price/book ratio without
imposing sector neutrality. For commodities they use the price 5 years ago
as the value anchor, for currencies the 5-year excess return, and for bonds
the real yield (10-year yield minus a consensus forecast of 12-month
inflation). 
Commodity 
and 
currency 
indicator 
choices 
highlight 
the
similarity between value strategies and long-term return reversal strategies.
If no obvious ex ante value indicator is available, multi-year average return
is often a reasonable substitute. The consistency of the results is impressive:
all strategies have positive Sharpe ratios, ranging between 0.1 and 0.9.
Value strategies worked especially well for stock selection in Japan and for
equity country allocation.
Other studies document the success of value strategies among emerging
equity markets and among corporate bonds. Many fixed income arbitrage
strategies employed in hedge funds and bank proprietary trading desks are
based 
on 
mean-reverting 
spreads 
or 
related 
value 
anchors. 
Statistical
arbitrage in equity markets—pairs trading and more complex variants—is
also based on relative value (i.e., mean reversion in the pricing relationship
between two assets). The profitability of such “arbitrage” (really: relative
value trading) strategies waned significantly in the past decade as the
technologies to exploit them became widely available. Low-hanging fruit
were eliminated years ago. In country allocation, weighting countries by
GDP rather than by market cap in a global index is one way to infuse a
value bias. This approach is gaining popularity thanks to its historical
success.

In this book, I have discussed simple value indicators for timing various
asset classes (e.g., earnings yields for the equity market, real yields for
duration 
timing, 
and 
credit 
spreads 
for 
corporate 
bonds). 
But 
value
indicators also work in global tactical asset allocation across asset classes.

In the long run, value strategies seem to work in every context we turn to,
if we find suitable value indicators. However, they certainly do not work
over all short time periods that we study:
• 
I 
highlighted 
earlier 
the 
underperformance 
of 
equity 
value
strategies in 1998–1999 and 2007–2008. I discuss some ideas for style
timing in Section 12.3, as well as the inherent difficulty of the task.
• Apparent misvaluations can be surprisingly persistent—and can
keep getting worse. In equity markets, bull markets can rise higher and
bear markets fall further than value investors can imagine. In currency
markets, 
prominent 
examples 
of 
widening 
misvaluations 
include
growing dollar strength in 1983–1985, euro weakness in 1999–2001,
and yen weakness in 2002–2007.
• In addition, financial crises involving liquidations of levered
positions often see cheap assets get cheaper. Autumn 1998 and autumn
2008 are the most extreme examples. Thus, there is some tendency for
losses to coincide with periods of high marginal utility.

By construction, mean reversion and value strategies are short a structural
break. That is, if an asset becomes secularly cheaper or richer, with no mean
reversion, value indicators point to ever larger counterpositions (e.g., these
indicators suggest shorting the asset if it becomes richer). Yet, on occasion
those 
dangerous 
words—“this 
time 
is 
different”—turn 
out 
to 
be 
true.
Accordingly, a stop-loss rule or a cap on active position size may inject an
important dose of humility into value strategies.

Because this book has a contrarian leaning, it is important to keep in
mind some blunders contrarians have made when structural changes took
place:
• Investors buying into declining industries might never see a
reversal. Railroads were the classic example where a generation of
equity-holders and debt-holders lost fortunes as the automobile won
over 
Americans. 
(Warren 
Buffett’s 
recent 
interest 
in 
the 
industry
suggests that even railroad stocks may shine once more—but the
buggy-whip industry never recovered and never will.)
• As the great investment writer Peter Bernstein often reminded
us, in 1958 the unthinkable happened: equity (dividend) yields fell
below Treasury yields. Through recorded history, bond yields had
always acted as a floor for equity yields, so it was widely believed that
this anomaly had to be temporary. Well, it took half a century for
equity yields to rise again above bond yields, and then only for a few
months 
in 
the 
winter 
of 
2008–2009. 
Many 
contrarian 
investors
stumbled 
for 
years 
after 
1958, 
underweighting 
stocks 
before
capitulating to the new reality that equity yields were going to be
lower than bond yields for a very long time but that equity total returns
would be higher. Only with hindsight did they learn the importance of
distinguishing between nominal concepts (Treasury yield) and real
concepts (dividend yield) in an inflationprone world.
• Investors who were timing their bond duration exposures based
on the real yield level chalked up losses for over two decades as global
government bond yields kept falling from their mid-1980s’ highs. In
particular, macro-traders looking for Japanese bond yields to rise have
been kept waiting for a decade or more, thus the moniker “The
Widowmaker” for this trade. Admittedly, one can make a good case
that we are now close to a secular turning point (see Section 27.3).

As a current example, if the ongoing rerating between advanced and
emerging market investments is sustained in the coming years, contrarian
investors fighting the relative richening of emerging markets will lose
money.

...
12.6 RELATIONS BETWEEN VALUE AND OTHER
INDICATORS FOR EQUITY SELECTION

Virtually all equity quant managers go beyond value and try to take
advantage of a diverse set of return sources in their stock selection and
portfolio construction algorithms [3]. The two most popular equity selection
indicators are value and momentum (I discuss the latter in Section 14.5.)
Conveniently, these two are natural opposites: one typically buys stocks
after falling prices, the other after rising prices. The complementary nature
(negative 
correlation) 
of 
value 
and 
momentum 
strategies 
means 
that
combining the two can sharply reduce portfolio volatility and boost Sharpe
ratios:
• One of my favourite clichés is “when value and momentum
clash, 
value 
almost 
always 
loses 
first.” 
This 
aphorism 
suggests
patience when responding to value signals, perhaps using them only
when they are extreme or when anti-value momentum is stalling.

Growth and profitability indicators may also be negatively correlated with
value. Such indicators can serve as control variables that extract the parts of
valuation ratios which reflect expected cash flows (and not just expected
returns). Combining value with such indicators boosts average returns by
filtering out persistent losers.

Other indicators are positively related to value, and thus are less useful
diversifiers:
• Carry indicators such as dividend yield contain overlapping
information with value.
• Long-run reversal strategies buy assets that have low current
prices compared with their own history 3 to 5 years earlier; these
strategies 
have 
an 
unsurprising 
empirical 
link 
to 
value 
strategies
(which buy assets that have low current prices compared with some
simple fundamental metric). In contrast, short-run reversal strategies
buy assets that have low current prices compared with their week-ago
or month-ago level; such strategies are more related to market making
(liquidity provision) than to long-run value. Likewise, pairs trading
strategies (which buy assets that have recently underperformed their
closely related peers) are less related to value.
• Distress and default risk are positively correlated with value but
they are associated with low returns. Thus, many value investors try to
filter out this subset of low-multiple stocks, either systematically or
discretionarily.
• Valuation models differ from value strategies in that they buy
stocks whose market prices differ from their intrinsic or “fundamental”
(fair) values after incorporating estimates of firms’ profitability and
growth prospects. (In contrast, value strategies may buy “dogs” with
obviously poor growth prospects.) The “economic value added (EVA)
model” 
created 
by 
the 
firm 
of 
Stern 
Stewart 
is 
the 
best 
known
implementation of a residual income valuation model.
• More surprisingly, the volatility puzzle overlaps empirically
with the value premium. Stocks with low return volatility tend to
outperform 
high-volatility 
stocks. 
Low-volatility 
stocks 
are 
often
boring value stocks, while high-volatility stocks are often exciting
growth stocks with high price multiples.

There are still other indicators that appear fundamentally uncorrelated with
value strategies: quality (e.g., balance sheet strength or low accounting
accruals) and net share issuance. However, there is some evidence of rising
correlations 
across 
all 
quant 
strategies, 
presumably 
due 
to 
common
positions among leveraged traders.

...
12.7 NOTES

[1] Like many others, I prefer to use economic intuition as one guard
against data mining, but the virtues of such intuition can be overstated as
our intuition is inevitably influenced by past experiences. Purely data-
driven statistical approaches are even worse, but at least then statistical
models can help assess the magnitude of data-mining bias.

[2] Here are some additional points on VMG:

—No trading costs or financing costs related to shorting are subtracted from
VMG returns. This is typical for academic studies because such costs are
trade specific and/or investor specific and, moreover, such data are not
available over long histories.

—VMG 
is 
constructed 
in 
a 
deliberately 
conservative 
(“underfitted”)
manner. 
It 
uses 
a 
simple 
sorting 
approach 
and 
long 
publication 
lags.
Virtually all U.S. stocks are included in the universe. No sector adjustments
are made, so the portfolio may have persistent industry concentrations.

—A monthly VMG series is available since 1926 and a daily series since
1963. Given its public availability, VMG has been used in thousands of
academic studies—often with its original name HML (“high minus low”).
In recent articles FF have begun to use the more revealing “value-minus-
growth” 
name. 
Ken 
French’s 
website
(http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html )
regularly updates these data and similar returns for other valuation ratios
and other cross-sectional stock selection indicators, as well as some non-
U.S. value returns since 1975. Since a composite value strategy (B/P, CF/P,
D/P, E/P) in the U.S. performs much like B/P (VMG) alone, I focus on the
latter here.

—See Appendix B on data sources for other details.
[3] Quant managers’ optimizers help them access (and smartly weight)
desired 
exposures 
and 
hedge 
away 
unwanted 
risks, 
while 
controlling
trading costs. In this book, I focus on simple portfolios constructed by
sorting 
stocks 
based 
on 
some 
indicator. 
Smarter 
approaches 
take 
into
account the interaction between indicators. For example, cross-sectional
multi-factor 
regression 
implies 
particular 
portfolio 
weights 
that 
have
desirable characteristics for return factors: each portfolio has unit beta to the
factor it mimics and is uncorrelated with other factors.

Source notes. There are plenty of practitioner books on value investing in
equity markets, from Graham–Dodd (1934) to Montier (2009). Classic
academic articles, though by no means the first ones on value investing, are
Fama–French (1992) and Lakonishok–Vishny–Shleifer (1994). A subset of
LSV subsequently co-authored important articles on value investing with
La Porta (1997), Barberis (1998, 2003), and Chan– Karceski (2003). Fama–
French later extended their analysis to global markets (1998) and to earlier
histories (with Davis, 2000), and they explored links to the CAPM (2006a),
to profitability (2006b), and to changing stock characteristics (2007a, b).

On sector neutrality, style timing, and other refinements, see Asness et al.
(2000), Barberis–Shleifer (2003), Cohen–Polk–Vuolteenraho (2003), Qian–
Hua–Sorensen (2007), Lancetti–Nordquist (2008), Phalippou (2008), and
Mezrich (2010).

On fundamental index debate, see Arnott–Hsu–Moore (2005), Arnott–
Hsu–West (2008), Arnott et al. (2010), as well as Kaplan (2007) and Perold
(2007).

These referenced studies (and this book’s Section 6.3) discuss reasons for
the value premium, but see also Barberis–Shleifer–Wurgler (2005) for
further 
behavioral 
explanations, 
and 
Campbell–Vuolteenaho 
(2004a),
Petkova–Zhang (2005), Asness–Moskowitz–Pedersen (2009), and Chen–
Novy-Marx–Zhang (2010) for rational explanations. On the link to distress
and credit risk, see Campbell–Hilscher–Szilagyi (2008) and Avramov et al.
(2010). On value strategy’s success outside equity selection, see Arnott–
Hsu–West 
(2008), 
Asness–Moskowitz–Pedersen 
(2009), 
and 
Blitz–van
Vliet (2009).

...