13

Currency carry

• Buying high-yielding currencies and shorting low-yielding
currencies has been a profitable strategy for 50+ years.
• Academic theories suggest that any initial cross-country
yield advantage should be offset by future currency depreciation.
In practice, this has not happened on average, and naive yield
seeking has paid off. Forward rates have been biased predictors of
future spot exchange rates.
• Carry strategies within G10 markets have an attractive
long-run Sharpe ratio—which is even higher in emerging markets
and higher if refinements or carry timing are used. As a result, the
strategy became very crowded before 2008.
• Success increasingly looks like compensation for the
strategy’s riskiness, however. A carry strategy resembles selling
lottery tickets that pay off in bad times. The combination of
negative skew (frequent small gains punctuated by infrequent
large losses) and terrible timing of losses warrants a large risk
premium.
• Alternative explanations include biased investor
expectations and so-called peso problems.
• Yield seeking adds value in the long run in many other
asset classes besides currencies. Yet, the reward-to-risk ratio has
been noticeably higher in cross-country carry strategies than in
other carry strategies, such as within-country credit or term carry
strategies.

...
13.1 INTRODUCTION

The second dynamic strategy I study is yield-seeking carry trading, with a
focus on FX (see cube). A currency carry trade involves investment in a
high-yielding currency such as the Australian dollar, funded by borrowing
in a low-yielding currency such as the Japanese yen [1]. This chapter
surveys 
various 
aspects 
of 
carry 
trading: 
I 
document 
the 
empirical
performance of a naive carry strategy, explore various refinements, review
alternative explanations for the historical success of the carry trade, and
compare the currency carry strategy with other carry strategies.

Currency carry strategies in developed markets have been embarrassingly
successful for over 50 years. In the past 15 years they have fared even better
in emerging markets. Despite recent losses, long-run Sharpe ratios for
currency carry strategies are higher than for equities, fixed income, or
credit.

The embarrassment partly reflects the sheer naivety of these strategies.
Academics have long argued that simply equating nominal interest rate
differentials with prospective returns fails to take into account the market’s
expectations of exchange rate changes. According to the uncovered interest
parity (UIP) hypothesis, these expectations involve currency depreciation
and capital losses for high-yielding currencies that exactly offset any initial
yield advantage. UIP implies that a yield which is 5% higher in Australia
than in Japan reveals the market’s expectation of 5% depreciation in the
AUD/JPY spot exchange rate over the next year (thus equalizing ex ante
returns across currencies, by assumption). But the academics turned out to
be wrong and the naive carry-seekers right. Empirical studies from about
1980 onwards have persistently told the story that subsequent currency
depreciation did not, on average, fully offset the carry advantage (and thus
equalize ex post currency returns). This finding is called forward rate bias.
Often, the carry advantage was even augmented by capital gains from short-
term appreciation of the higher yielding currency! Thus, the UIP hypothesis
failed empirically in an even more dramatic and consistent way than its
close 
cousin—the 
“pure 
expectations 
hypothesis”—did 
in 
interest 
rate
markets [2].

...
13.2 HISTORICAL AVERAGE RETURNS

Figure 13.1 shows that G10 currencies with the highest average yields since
1983 (NZD, AUD) also earned the highest dollar returns. For example,
NZD yields averaged 9.5% while U.S. yields averaged 5.5%; instead of the
4% 
annual 
depreciation 
that 
the 
UIP 
predicted, 
the 
NZD 
actually
appreciated mildly against the dollar between 1983 and 2009. At the other
end of the spectrum, the main low-yielding currencies (JPY, CHF) earned
the lowest dollar returns among non-U.S. deposits. At least these low-
yielders managed to strengthen so much against the USD that it more than
offset their average yield disadvantage.

Figure 13.1. Pairwise average returns for dollar pairs vs. average carry,
1983–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, own calculations.

Figure 13.2. Performance of G10 carry strategy: buy three, sell three each
week, 1983–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, own calculations.
Let us study the performance of a typical currency carry strategy. Figure
13.2 focuses on my baseline variant of a G10 carry strategy, without bells
and whistles except that simple diversification is allowed. The strategy
involves, each week, ranking G10 currencies by the level of the short-term
interest rate (thus this is called a “ranking model”), buying the top-three
currencies and selling (shorting) the bottom-three currencies using 50%,
30%, 20% weights. The full sample statistics over 1983–2009 are 6.1%
annual excess returns [3], 10.5% volatility, and a Sharpe ratio (SR) of 0.61.
Despite 
crises 
in 
every 
decade, 
performance 
consistency 
has 
been
impressive. For each of the 1980s’, 1990s’, and 2000s’ decadal subsets, the
SR is in the narrow range of 0.58 to 0.63. For more benign windows such as
1994–2006, the SR exceeded 1. I show below that some variations to the
carry indicator—and, especially, extension of the carry trades strategy to
include emerging markets—would have improved my baseline results. The
3-year rolling SR has always ranged between—0.5 and 2. Yet, drawdowns
have been deep: —36% in 2008,—28% in 1993, and—26% in 1986.

The period since 1983 coincides with the benign Great Moderation
period, suggesting that carry trades may have had exceptional tailwinds
behind them. However, performance seems to be nearly as good for the
preceding 30 years. Lustig–Verdelhan (2007) make available simulated
carry-ranked portfolio returns going back deep into the Bretton Woods
regime when most exchange rates were fixed, with occasional devaluations.
They sort a broad and growing country set into eight portfolios, with only
annual rebalancing. Applying my top-three, bottom-three weighting to their
carry-ranked portfolios, I find a 0.51 SR for 1953–1982. Other sources also
document positive carry returns for the post-Bretton Woods period before
1983. Over all these windows, currency carry provides better risk-adjusted
returns than static asset class premia in equities or fixed income.

Figure 13.3. Average excess returns of G10 carry-ranked single-currency
portfolios, 1983–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, own calculations.

How consistent is the pattern of higher long-run average returns for
higher yielding currencies? Figure 13.3 shows the performance of single-
currency portfolios where G10 currencies are ranked each week based on
their yield level. The relation is not quite monotonic but the highest yielding
portfolio earned the highest average return and the lowest yielding portfolio
earned the lowest return. Moreover, all single-currency portfolios ranking in
the top half by yield have higher returns than all portfolios ranking in the
bottom half.

The height of the columns (excess returns) in Figure 13.3 tends to exceed
the height of the triangles (interest rate differentials) because the dollar was
the worst performing G10 currency during the sample period, so dollar-
denominated average FX returns were positive. Since the gap between the
highest yielding and lowest yielding portfolios is similar, at 8% to 9%, for
both average carry and average returns, we can say that currency portfolios
pretty much earned their carry, no more, no less. There was no offset (UIP
would have predicted that all columns should have a height of zero; the
carry advantage is just offset by FX depreciation) but also no augmenting
(which would have added more capital gains to high-yield portfolios than to
low-yield portfolios).

Note that these results for currency portfolios ranked by yield also reflect
currencies’ migration across ranks over time—not just their average ranks.
Looking at the static holdings of each dollar pair individually in Figure 13.1
shows that typical high-yielders outperformed typical low-yielders but by
much less than their average yield spread implied. In contrast, a long–short
portfolio that is dynamically formed by each week re-ranking currency
holdings by their initial yields earned nearly double the return of a static
(not 
re-ranked) 
carry 
portfolio. 
The 
static 
carry 
portfolio 
captures 
an
average relation—currencies like NZD and AUD have relatively high yields
in every decade while JPY and CHF tend to have low yields—but it wholly
misses time variation in the relative yields of currencies. For example, USD
was the highest yielding currency in 2000 and the lowest yielding from
1991 
to 
1993. 
This 
is 
important; 
the 
significant 
predictive 
ability
documented in classic forward bias regressions was all about time variation
in one currency pair’s yield spread. The dynamically re-ranked portfolio
incorporates this time variation and thus offers a higher ex ante yield spread
and a higher ex post return gap than the static carry portfolio.

Comments on my baseline variant

Selection biases. Note the hindsight in picking the currently active “G10”
universe: USD–CAD–AUD–NZD–JPY–EUR–GBP–CHF–SEK–NOK. As
in most other studies, I exclude currencies that were fixed or pegged to
another currency, along with currencies that have or had significant capital
controls. Due to this selection bias, I might overstate returns by excluding
hyperinflated and/or defaulted markets that fell out of my universe. In
practice, this has not been a major issue because the past two decades have
been characterized by global disinflation and improving policy discipline.
More 
likely, 
I 
may 
understate 
returns 
by 
excluding 
many 
emerging
currencies 
(that 
performed 
especially 
well) 
as 
well 
as 
former 
EMU
currencies. (In my analysis, only the DEM proxies the euro before 1999
although there were many currencies that were combined to create the euro.
Many currencies that would later become part of the euro had higher yields
than the DEM, so that excluding them biases the result downward by
excluding 
EMU 
convergence 
trades, 
which—with 
hindsight—were
profitable.)

Diversification. Some diversification across carry pairs tends to improve
risk-adjusted 
returns 
and 
certainly 
protects 
against 
catastrophic
hyperinflation and/or a default event in one country. This is why we use a
buy-three, sell-three basket. Diversification does imply dilution away from
the strongest signals; to balance this we give higher weights to the highest
yielding 
and 
lowest 
yielding 
currencies. 
Over 
my 
full 
sample, 
an
undiversified first–tenth trade (i.e., buying the single highest yielding and
shorting the lowest yielding currency) gave a moderately higher excess
return (8%) but much higher volatility (16%), resulting in an SR of 0.51—
compared with the base case 6%/10%/0.61 noted above. In the other
extreme, a diversified portfolio that buys equal amounts of the highest
yielding five currencies and that shorts the lowest yielding five currencies
earned 4% with a low 7% volatility, resulting in an SR of 0.62. Thus, in
risk-adjusted 
terms, 
diversification 
across 
signals 
is 
somewhat 
more
beneficial than exploiting the strongest signal.

Ranking 
model 
vs. 
pairwise 
carry 
trading. 
Many 
studies 
analyze 
a
diversified basket of USD pairs instead of a ranking model. If the pairs are
simply added up, the effective portfolio of positions is similar to that
achieved with this ranking approach, especially if U.S. interest rates are
near the middle of the G10 pack. One difference is that ranking model
positions cannot be only “one-way” (say, short the USD against all other
currencies in 1991–1993).

Costs. 
In 
line 
with 
the 
literature 
I 
focus 
on 
a 
pre-cost 
estimate.
Fortunately, turnover is modest (due to slow-moving interest rate gaps) and
major currencies have very low trading costs for institutional investors.
Adjusting for the bid–ask spreads observed in the 2000s reduces the SR by
0.1 at most. Admittedly, trading costs were higher in the first decade of the
sample.

Comments on alternative variants

Other horizons. Carry trading could be implemented using different trading
horizons. Cross-country spreads are typically so slow moving that we get
broadly 
similar 
results 
using 
weekly, 
monthly, 
and 
quarterly 
trading
frequencies. When changing weekly trading frequency to a monthly trading
frequency, there is no decline in long-run performance—the SR may rise or
fall by 0.05 at most, depending on the specification.

Other maturities. In principle, it is appropriate to implement carry trades
using the same trading horizon (maturity of deposit or term of a forward
currency contract) as the trading signal. In practice, cross-country spreads
are 
so 
similar 
across 
maturities 
that 
this 
hardly 
matters. 
Historical
performance is broadly similar whether we use one-week, one-month, or 3-
month deposit rates as signals. Once we move beyond money markets for
carry signals, the results tend to deteriorate.

Other 
carry 
indicators. 
Some 
academics 
favor 
real 
interest 
rate
differentials on theoretical grounds, but using real carry instead of nominal
carry would have dropped the full sample SR from 0.60 to 0.47. The more
popular and successful variant of carry trading involves dividing carry by
some volatility measure, effectively giving us an ex ante Sharpe ratio as the
trading signal. For my full sample, selecting currencies based on the carry-
to-volatility 
ratio—dividing 
yields 
by 
the 
recent 
volatility 
of 
a 
trade-
weighted currency index—would have raised the SR from 0.61 to 0.70.

Dynamic 
portfolio 
construction. 
Scaling 
position 
sizes 
inversely 
by
recent historical or option-implied volatility tends to improve Sharpe ratios.
Using mean variance optimization in sizing carry positions is another
potential approach, but its chief benefit is to take advantage of such
volatility 
normalization. 
Scaling 
position 
sizes 
dynamically 
by 
signal
strength does not seem to help much. I don’t use any of these refinements in
my deliberately conservative baseline approach but use constant dollar sizes
each period instead.

...
13.3 IMPROVEMENTS/REFINEMENTS TO THE
BASELINE CARRY STRATEGY

The previous section considered small variations to my baseline currency
carry trading approach. Here I focus on three more intrusive ways to
improve carry trading returns:
• broadening the currency universe to emerging markets;
• combining carry with other indicators; and
• timing the carry strategy with ex ante opportunity measures,
seasonals, and various conditioners.

Broadening to emerging markets

A broader opportunity set should improve results. Instead of extending the
G10 universe to include more countries, it is common to analyze and trade
the emerging market universe separately. I have studied a similar carry
strategy among 15 emerging currencies plus USD. The sample only begins
in 1994 and covers, despite various crises, an exceptionally benign window
for emerging markets. Improving fundamentals in emerging countries and
easy 
liquidity 
conditions 
in 
developed 
countries 
gave 
markets 
huge
tailwinds and make this a biased sample. Indeed, the period since 1994 is so
benign that the only indicator that works even better than carry is inflation:
high-inflation 
currencies 
consistently 
outperformed 
low-inflation
currencies, 
because 
inflation 
rates 
fell 
in 
countries 
with 
high 
initial
inflation. Among reasonably liquid currencies without capital controls,
there 
were 
no 
cases 
of 
countries 
drifting 
into 
sharp 
devaluation 
via
hyperinflation. The 1997–1998 Asian devaluations, for example, occurred
after a period of low inflation, were followed by a spike in inflation, and
subsequently 
benefited 
from 
disinflation 
and 
real 
exchange 
rate
appreciation. (I return later to the important point that no country in my
universe suffered from hyperinflation during the period studied.)

Figure 13.4. Cumulative excess returns of emerging market and G10 carry
strategies, 1994–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, Haver Analytics, own calculations.

As Figure 13.4 shows, emerging market carry strategies earned much
higher returns than G10 carry strategies. Average excess returns over cash
were 16.4%, with 12% volatility, and a Sharpe ratio of 1.30: even including
the heavy selloff in October 2008, which was the worst drawdown during
this sample. This high SR surely is overstated by the abnormally benign
nature of the sample and cannot be seen as an unbiased guide to the future.
Moreover, trading costs are higher for emerging market currencies.

Larger profits partly reflect wider yield gaps across emerging markets.
The highest yielding emerging market portfolios have average yield spreads
over the U.S. of more than 15%, while the lowest yielding portfolios have
slightly negative yield spreads (see Figure 13.5). During this sample period,
average yield gap translated fully into outperformance on average. This is
hardly an equilibrium outcome, given very different inflation levels across
countries, but another sign of the abnormally benign sample period. As an
aside, many of the bars in Figure 13.5 are below the line because emerging
currencies tended to depreciate against the USD over this sample period.

Figure 13.5. Average excess returns of emerging market carry-ranked
portfolios, 1994–2009.
Sources: Bloomberg, Haver Analytics, own calculations.

Combining carry with other indicators

One idea is to use a broader measure of expected return than carry. As an
accounting 
identity, 
cross-country 
yield 
spreads 
(carry) 
reflect 
some
combination of the market’s expectations of future spot rate changes (EΔS)
and ex ante excess return (required currency risk premium). Conversely, ex
ante excess return reflects both carry and E(ΔS). If we can isolate the
unobservable E(ΔS) we can better capture ex ante excess return. The
random walk hypothesis states that E(ΔS) = 0, so carry equals expected
excess return. Various theoretical models imply other drivers of E(ΔS). One
shortcut is to use survey-based consensus forecasts of future exchange rates
as 
a 
direct 
proxy 
for 
E(ΔS). 
However, 
empirically 
such 
survey-based
expected returns do not predict near-term returns as well as simple carry,
perhaps due to the noise in survey data and perhaps due to irrationality in
expectations.

Formal theoretical models have had little success in explaining, let alone
predicting, exchange rate movements. Thus, systematic currency-trading
models tend to be purely atheoretical or only loosely guided by formal
models. 
Many 
such 
models 
amount 
to 
combining 
carry 
with 
other
indicators. Candidates for additional indicators include
• Carry plus value. One could proxy E(ΔS) with some expected
normalization 
toward 
a 
“fair 
value” 
exchange 
rate 
that 
can 
be
estimated based on purchasing power parity (PPP) or other valuation
models. Or one could use valuation filters that rule out carry trading
when it conflicts with extreme mispricing signals.
• Carry plus momentum. Exchange rates tend to trend, or at least
they used to; trend-following strategies within the G10 have become
much less profitable during the past decade. One could add a trend-
following signal as a proxy for E(ΔS). Using stop-loss rules can serve
the same purpose as using trend-following models.
• Carry plus yield changes. Besides the yield level, recent changes
in 
yields—especially 
at 
maturities 
beyond 
money 
markets—have
empirical predictive ability, perhaps because they reflect the market’s
evolving 
monetary 
policy 
or 
growth 
expectations. 
Delayed
overshooting models explain the apparent underreaction of currencies
to yield changes and suggest recent yield changes as yet another proxy
for E(ΔS).

Box 13.1. FX as an asset class

The debate about whether FX is an asset class remains unresolved:
• The positive view stresses that FX is a source of return
fluctuations for many assets. For unhedged bond investments,
exchange rate changes are often a greater risk than bond yield
fluctuations. Moreover, active FX trading may be a source of
return—most obviously based on carry but potentially also based
on other indicators.
• One counterargument is that FX is only a partial
investment decision; if you invest in a currency you still need to
decide which asset you buy; conversely, if you buy a foreign
asset, you can decide whether you keep or hedge FX risks.
Moreover, in the long run, FX returns appear to roughly wash out.
Even in the short run, no FX risk premium can compensate both
counterparties in an FX trade for exchange rate uncertainty. FX is
a zero-sum game in the sense that currency appreciation benefits
one side of an FX trade and hurts the other.
• However, academic theories imply that risk premia should
reflect covariances rather than standalone FX volatility. For
example, a JPY-denominated deposit may serve as a safe haven
asset for both Japanese and Australian investors because the yen
tends to appreciate during financial crises; thus all global
investors may require a lower return from yen-denominated
deposits than from some higher yielding counterparts. (I will not
dwell on small nonlinearities, such as Jensen’s inequality.)

Economists concede that their models can explain or predict fractions
of actual currency movements that are so trivial that today’s spot
exchange rate may be a better forecast of future spot rates than
anything else. Proximate determinants from order flows are much
better than any fundamental determinants at explaining FX changes.
However, over time, various predictability patterns (potentially related
to time-varying ex ante FX premia) have been documented, and certain
indicators are able to contemporaneously explain FX moves.

Inflation differentials across countries influence exchange rate
changes, but purchasing power parity holds only approximately and
even then only in the very long run. Relative interest rates (levels and
changes, short and long, nominal and real) have some impact on
exchange rates, perhaps because they are proxies for monetary policy
or economic growth. Productivity and real-growth differences, terms
of trade, and current account and/or capital flow developments also
matter. Yet, many of these statistical relations are weak and are hardly
stable over time or across countries. I will not discuss either theories or
empirical evidence on exchange rate determination further in this
book, nor will I cover the role of global and local risk factors in largely
integrated world markets, prospects for dollar, or alternatives to the
dollar as global reserve currencies.

“Timing” the carry strategy with ex ante opportunity size, seasonals, and
various conditioners

Ex ante opportunity

If carry were the only source of expected return, the evolution of ex ante
carry opportunity (signal strength) could be measured by the dispersion of
deposit rates or of carry-to-volatility ratios across G10 markets. Intuitively,
if yields range across countries between 0% in Japan and 10% in Australia,
dispersion is higher and ex ante carry opportunity is better than if all yields
are in a narrow range between 0% and 3%. Figure 13.6 shows the stable
and 
relatively 
narrow 
ex 
ante 
carry 
opportunity 
since 
the 
mid-1990s,
compared 
with 
the 
1980s 
and 
especially 
compared 
with 
1992 
when
European 
currency 
crises 
forced 
some 
central 
banks 
to 
defend 
their
currencies with sky-high interest rates.

It turns out that these ex ante measures have (only) modest ability to
identify good and bad times to load up on the carry trade. One reason is that
they only give a partial picture of ex ante opportunity.

Both 
lines 
were 
flat 
between 
2002 
and 
2007, 
despite 
the 
growing
popularity of the currency carry trade over that time period. In this case,
different inflation and growth experiences across G10 countries kept policy
rate dispersion quite wide, while dwindling ex ante opportunity for carry
trading manifested itself elsewhere, through spot exchange rate richening of
high-yielding 
currencies. 
As 
noted 
above, 
a 
broader 
expected 
return
measure would add to carry the slow expected normalization of overvalued
and undervalued currencies [E(ΔS)]. According to various simple valuation
metrics, the high-yielding AUD and NZD were about 20% undervalued
against 
the 
USD 
in 
2001–2002; 
by 
mid-2007 
they 
were 
about 
20%
overvalued. 
Meanwhile, 
the 
low-yielding 
JPY 
became 
the 
most
undervalued G10 currency. Overall, the correlation between G10 carry
ranks and value ranks shifted from positive in 2001–2002 to strongly
negative in 2006-2007—and then back to positive after the 2008 carry
crash. (Positive correlation between carry rank and value rank means that a
currency that is attractive from a carry, or relative interest rate, perspective
is also attractive from the point of view of fundamental value, typically
measured by PPP.)

Figure 13.6. Evolving ex ante carry opportunity among G10 currencies,
1983–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, own calculations.
Seasonals

FX carry strategy returns exhibit strong seasonal patterns that have not been
widely reported. They also match better known seasonals in equity markets
and in corporate credit markets. Over the past three decades, the average
monthly return of the carry strategy has been about 2% in Januaries and
about 0.5% in other months. January excess return has been negative in
only four years since 1976: in 1992, 1995, 1998, and 2008—each of which
saw much worse drawdowns from the carry strategy later in the year. This
outcome may be a coincidence but it echoes the finding that January equity
market performance has some predictive ability for rest-of-the-year returns
(further details in Chapter 25). Incorporating these two seasonal biases
would 
easily 
improve 
backtested 
FX 
carry 
strategy 
performance—for
example, doubling position sizes for January and halving sizes for the rest
of the year if the January return had been negative would have boosted the
Sharpe ratio since 1983 from 0.6 to 0.8. Any such backtest improvements
are subject to data-mining bias, so some skepticism is warranted.

Conditioners (regime indicators)

As we have seen, ex ante opportunities and seasonal effects have some
ability to predict carry returns. However, the jackpot question of carry
“timing” relates to carry crashes. Given the characteristic pattern of small
gradual gains and rare violent losses, avoiding carry crashes would be
hugely valuable. (Violent losses are often, but not always, associated with
position unwinds.) For the same reason, the task is hugely difficult.

How 
do 
investors 
approach 
this 
task? 
Slow-moving 
warning 
signs
include overvalued high-yield currencies and overcrowded carry positions.
Possible triggers include falls in other risky assets (although such contagion
or 
spillover 
effects 
tend 
to 
be 
nearly 
instantaneous, 
limiting 
their
usefulness); rising volatility and correlations; and tightening global liquidity
conditions 
(especially 
in 
low-yielding 
“funding 
currency” 
countries).
Predicting the start of a crash is nonetheless a mug’s game. Slow-moving
market-timers try to prepare for a crash when warning signals flash yellow.
Faster market players only respond to the triggers and/or actual carry losses,
knowing that they will be too late to catch the exact market turn (but they
also benefit from missing several false alarms).

Historically, carry unwind episodes have lasted long enough to make
some backward-looking indicators useful for predicting next week or next
month carry performance. Buy-side and sell-side traders and strategists
(including your author) have developed various indicators of global risk
aversion, typically (over-)fitting them to previous crash episodes. Of course,
such regime indicators are not robust. For example, the 1997–1998 carry
unwinds emanated from emerging markets while the 2007–2008 unwinds
emanated from the United States. Some crashes coincided with central bank
tightening while others occurred despite central bank easing, reflecting the
tightening of broader liquidity conditions; 2008 is an example of the latter.
Even if regime indicators (happen to) work at the right time, they will raise
numerous false alarms before a hit.

I will not delve deeper into such models but instead, in Figure 13.7, just
showcase a few of the most popular risk aversion indicators that have had
some historic success. One significant result is that when past month carry
losses are in their top (worst) decile, average return over the following week
is negative, at an annualized rate of—3%, while in “normal times” (the
remaining 90% of time) annualized next week return is 8%. Thus, carry
profits exhibit short-term persistence; historically, it has been worthwhile to
look in the rearview mirror and use a stop-loss discipline [4]. Volatility data
may also help style timing. The strongest relation is that if implied currency
volatilities have trended sharply higher during the preceding month (an up-
move ranking in the top decile), predicted carry return for the following
week is negative (—7% annualized). These risk aversion indicators often
flash red at the same time. They unambiguously reveal that we have seen a
carry crash; more tentatively, they suggest that the poor performance is
likely to continue.
Figure 13.7. Next week carry profits following recent losses or turbulence
vs. normal times, 1986–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, own calculations.

Apart from such “timing” indicators that focus on the global environment
for 
carry 
trading, 
one 
can 
also 
develop 
country-specific 
vulnerability
indices. Combining a variety of economic and financial indicators that have
been able to predict subsequent devaluations has been an especially popular
exercise in emerging markets analysis.

...
13.4 WHY DO CARRY STRATEGIES WORK?

Empirical evidence showing high historical returns or predictability of
returns 
can 
always 
be 
interpreted 
in 
different 
ways. 
Main 
proposed
explanations in the past 30 years involve currency risk premia, irrational
expectations, and peso problems. My interpretation straddles all three but is
closest to a risk premium story. I argue that currency carry strategies can be
characterized as selling lottery tickets that pay off (to the buyer) in really
bad times. This class of trading strategies performs especially well in
prolonged good times. Persistent success in turn attracts return-chasing
inflows, which improves Sharpe ratios further and results in overvaluation
and overcrowding. Until that rare disaster materializes, many investors
underestimate the risk and extrapolate from past performance (or hope that
they can jump off the bandwagon before most others).

Mainstream academic explanation for the “forward premium puzzle” in
the 
1980s 
was 
that 
the 
profitability 
of 
naive 
yield-seeking 
currency
strategies reflected a currency risk premium. However, neither the CAPM
nor any other equilibrium asset-pricing model, including those focusing on
exchange rate determination, could really explain why such a risk premium
existed. For example, the equity market beta of carry strategies seemed to
be close to zero. Proponents of a rational explanation argued that carry
gains could still represent a generic risk premium. Even if we do not know
or understand the economic reason for the risk premium in currencies (or
other markets), we do know that any positive ex ante risk premium should
imply positive carry.

Early alternative explanations based on irrational expectations were no
more compelling. The main stories involve investor underreaction to yield
changes but such underreaction needs to be quite severe because carry
strategies really exploit yield levels.
The peso problem explanation seemed plausible at first. Perhaps markets
were rationally assigning a small probability to a large depreciation—
typically in a country with a higher inflation or a current account deficit—
that simply had not (yet) happened in the observed sample. However, as
decades passed and evidence of high-yield currencies’ outperformance
across 
various 
currency 
pairs 
accumulated, 
this 
explanation, 
too, 
lost
credibility. One aspect of the rare event story did become more credible
over time. Returns on carry-seeking strategies exhibited increasing negative
skewness—an “up by the stairs, down by the elevator” pattern. Moreover,
the largest carry losses occurred during flight-to-quality episodes. This
observation led traders and strategists to develop carry-timing models based
on global risk aversion indicators [5].

Academics, too, began to pay attention. There seemed to be a whiff of
systematic risk in carry strategies, but the inherent rarity of adverse events
made it hard to conduct any serious statistical analysis. Cochrane (1999)
had the foresight to stress parallels among carry-oriented strategies in
equity, bond, and foreign exchange markets as well as volatility selling and
convergence trading. “All of these strategies can be thought of as (selling)
catastrophe insurance. Most of the time, they earn a small premium. Once
in a great while they lose a lot, and they lose a lot in times of financial
catastrophe.” The poor timing of losses is crucial because this characteristic
really warrants a high risk premium. While the fair reward for these
strategies may be high, observed outperformance before 2008 amounted to
even more than a fair reward because the previous 50 years had been a
benign sample without devastating financial panics. Thus the story had both
risk premium and peso problem elements.

A few years ago, academics began to re-explore the puzzling success of
currency carry strategies; their risk-adjusted returns appeared better than
those that motivated the literature on the equity premium puzzle and the
value puzzle. Trading costs and market frictions were among the early
“explanations” 
but 
currencies 
are 
highly 
liquid 
and 
the 
carry 
strategy
requires relatively low turnover. The focus then reverted to risk-based
explanations and to addressing the peso problem hypothesis with a new
twist—the use of options data.

Beta 
risk. 
The 
central 
idea 
in 
modern 
asset-pricing 
theory 
is 
that
investors require a high risk premium for assets that perform poorly in bad
times. Conversely, investors are willing to accept lower long-run expected
returns for safe haven assets, such as Treasury bonds or the yen, that tend to
do well in bad times. Noting that the CAPM more or less defines bad times
as a decline in the equity market, the currency carry strategy’s market beta
has become more evidently positive over time. The Consumption CAPM
associates bad times with a slowing of consumption growth (or, what is
worse, an actual decline in consumption); the currency carry strategy also
appears to have a positive Consumption CAPM beta. Intuitively, low-
yielding currencies like the yen can serve as useful recession hedges for
U.S. investors and thus justify a negative risk premium.

Looking back, carry returns are not just beta like, they have especially
ugly downside betas. Since the mid-1980s, the three worst months for the
baseline FX carry strategy described above were
• 
October 
1987 
(equity 
market 
crash: 
the 
FX 
carry 
strategy
returned—11%);
• October 2008 (virtually all markets crash: FX carry returned—
11%); and
• October 1998 (aftermath of the Russia/LTCM crash: FX carry
returned—9%).

Obviously, these were all painful times to lose money. The relation to
consumption 
data 
is 
weaker 
because, 
while 
all 
three 
months 
were
characterized by recession fears, only the 2008 episode was classified as
taking place within a recession. The relation is more obvious when “bad
times” are associated with financial crises, liquidity droughts, and equity
market selloffs. Carry returns are also linked to hedge fund returns and
(inversely) to implied volatilities in equity and currency markets, especially
when markets are distressed.

Skewness risk. As it gradually emerged that carry return distribution is
asymmetric, academics began to explore whether this negative skew could
explain high average returns and Sharpe ratios as a risk premium. The
asymmetry in realized returns could reflect (time-varying) rare disasters,
but it could also be partly endogenous, caused by carry trade activity (see
Brunnermeier–Nagel–Pedersen, 2008). Carry positions are gradually built
up while unwinds tend to be rapid and sharp when leveraged liquidity
providers hit funding constraints. “Hot money” inflows into high-yielding
countries also tend to reverse sharply during financial crises and funds get
repatriated (typically to low-yielding, current-account-surplus countries).

The study of skewness effects is enhanced by considering the potential
impact of option positions. Several studies show that investors can hedge
the “crash risk” (lefttail risk) in currency carry positions by buying short-
dated options and still be left with significantly positive returns. Unlike the
unhedged carry trade, the “crash-neutral” or “hedged” carry trade exhibits
positive skew. Yet, it has in many cases offered volatility-adjusted returns at
least as good as the unhedged carry trade, which has negative skew. Such
findings make it doubtful that a risk premium for negative skew can fully
explain the success of the carry trade.

It is even possible to compare implied skewness in option markets with
realized skewness. Risk reversals (i.e., relative implied volatilities of calls
vs. puts) reveal implied skewness in FX option markets. Implied skews
have, 
on 
average, 
patterns 
similar 
to 
realized 
skews: 
high-yielding
currencies like NZD have higher implied volatilities on the depreciation
side than on the appreciation side, while the reverse is true for the low-
yielding yen. More surprisingly, implied skewness of carry trades predicts
future realized skewness—but with the wrong sign. Following high returns
for carry trades, implied skewness is higher (the cost of crash insurance is
complacently low) while the empirical likelihood of a future crash is higher
(future realized skewness is likely to be negative). Conversely, after a
currency crash the price of crash insurance rises even though the amount of
risk (likelihood of further crash) has declined [6].

Combination of the two. While negative skewness may be important, the
timing of large losses may be even more so. The hallmark of a carry
currency crash is not so much the magnitude of losses but their coincidence
with a high market price of risk (bad times).

So we come back to central insight in asset pricing. Assets or strategies
that 
perform 
poorly 
in 
bad 
times 
warrant 
a 
high 
risk 
premium—and
currency carry strategies belong to this class. While repeated many times in
this book, neither part of the previous sentence was obvious to most
investors until recently:
1. 
Not 
recognizing 
that 
the 
timing 
of 
losses 
matters 
is 
less
forgivable because academics had preached for decades that systematic
risk drives risk premia, and diversifiable risk does not. Yet, much
investor commentary and market pricing focuses on standalone risk
(such as volatility or default losses).
2. 
Underappreciating 
the 
riskiness 
of 
carry 
trading 
is 
more
understandable since there were few observations to learn from; data
could only speak clearly after good times ended. It used to be plausible
to claim that FX carry profits represented “alpha”, but over time carry
strategies became increasingly “beta like”.

Figure 13.8 illustrates two ways in which carry, even if it did not involve
systematic risk in the past, does so now:
• The dark thick line shows the average correlation among four
distinct carry trades—the top-two carry pairs in G10 markets and the
top-two pairs in emerging markets. The rising average correlation
highlights how much more synchronous the returns of distinct carry
pairs have become.
• In addition to the correlated variability in returns from carry
trades, there is substantial correlation with broader macro-risks such as
that of equities. The other lines show that one-year rolling betas of
G10 and EMG FX carry portfolios have risen from 0.1–0.2 in the past
to about 0.5 in 2007–2009. Carry strategy systematic risk appears
higher amidst high-volatility, low-liquidity regimes.
Why has alpha morphed into beta? Growing popularity, overcrowding, and
commoditization may be the inevitable consequence of good performance
for any investment strategy. As word of the success of carry strategies got
around, 
typical 
return-chasing 
flows 
followed: 
first 
speculators, 
then
institutional investors, and eventually even retail. Because carry strategy is
very intuitive and does not require frequent trading, the threshold to entry is
low. The takeup of carry was widespread, from Icelandic and Hungarian
retail 
borrowers 
to 
Japanese 
savers 
(“Mrs. 
Watanabe”), 
and 
from
corporations that borrowed in yen but kept excess cash balances in sterling,
to trend-following CTAs who added carry to their menu and to the carry
index products that many banks began to offer. I will return to the idea of
endogenous risk (the perils of success) in Chapter 20.

Figure 13.8. Alpha morphs into beta: carry becomes ever more like a
systematic risk factor.

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, Haver Analytics, own calculations.
Time will tell if these developments are partly reversible. Carry will
likely remain a risk factor, but it will be more distinct from and less
correlated with equity markets than it is now. It is conceivable that the
carry–equity correlation peaked during an exceptionally systemic banking
crisis in 2008 and that it will weaken in more ordinary times.

Besides the positive beta, high-yielding currencies are characterized by
negative realized skew, while the reverse is true for low-yielding currencies.
In addition, return asymmetry has intensified over time. Moreover, these
empirical features—beta-like behavior and negative skewness—have been
increasingly 
priced 
into 
derivatives 
markets 
in 
recent 
years. 
Implied
correlations between carry-oriented currency pairs have risen and the skew
implied in FX risk reversals has become more prominent.

Interpreting the evidence

There is no consensus yet on the main reason for the profitability of
currency carry strategies. My money is on the view that a strategy that
resembles 
selling 
financial 
catastrophe 
insurance 
deserves 
a 
high 
risk
premium. Selling insurance against natural catastrophes is much safer;
earthquakes and floods do not tend to coincide disproportionately with
equity 
market 
meltdowns 
and 
recessions. 
In 
contrast 
to 
such 
easily
diversifiable and visible risks, carry strategies suffer from a particularly
toxic and insidious type of systematic risk.
With hindsight, it seems clear that the success of carry strategies reflected
more than the delivery of a well-understood risk premium. The dreadful
timing of large losses was not easy to detect during good times, especially
given the asymmetric nature of carry payoffs. I now elaborate how the peso
problem and irrational expectations may have contributed.

The benign sample period was doubly biased. Prolonged good times and
(by and large) abundant global liquidity during the Great Moderation meant
that rare bad events became even rarer. This benign outcome in turn
resulted 
in 
excessive 
optimism 
about 
sustainable 
carry 
returns 
and
excessive complacency about carry risks and thus additional fund flows into
the trade, making historical carry returns even more attractive. The long-run
realized Sharpe ratio above 1 for carry strategies, widely reported in the
mid-2000s, was never sustainable, as it included a period of overvaluation
and 
overcrowding 
but 
not 
its 
unwind. 
The 
rare 
bad 
event 
finally
materialized in 2007–2008. (Many investors thought that August 2007 was
that rare event, the overdue carry trade implosion; now they hope that
October 2008 was it.) The lower long-term Sharpe ratios for periods that
include the implosion are more representative of “the full cycle” and are
more unbiased guides for the future.

Part of the complacency was caused by the cost of eliminating the left tail
having been (with hindsight) too cheap. Burnside et al. (2010a) stress that
the cost of eliminating the left tail via option buying is much higher in
equity markets than in FX carry trading; annualized equity index return falls
from +7% to—5% in their sample (1987–2009), while FX carry return over
the 
same 
period 
falls 
only 
from 
3.0% 
to 
1.6% 
when 
the 
left 
tail 
is
eliminated. “Crash-o-phobia” had made hedging with equity index options
(especially out-of-the-money puts) very expensive since the 1987 crash, but
similar fears were not yet fully reflected in the pricing of other assets whose
losses 
are 
concentrated 
in 
bad 
economic 
states. 
Coval–Jurek–Stafford
(2009) present similar evidence about underpricing the risks of AAA-rated
senior tranches of CDOs, best now understood in retrospect as economic
catastrophe bonds, compared with pricing the risk involved in hedging
equities with equity index options (see Box 19.1).

This underpricing of carry risk is a sign of irrationality in investor
expectations and market pricing. An alternative, perhaps more charitable,
interpretation of this evidence is that investors were gradually learning
about structural change: morphing of the carry trade from alpha into beta.

Among 
other 
signs 
of 
irrationality, 
simple 
return 
chasing 
(i.e.,
extrapolative inflows into carry strategies) is obvious. Another feature
worth recalling is the tendency for currency crash, like most forms of crash
insurance, to be cheap in good times and richen up after a (currency or
other) crash. Implied skewness is at best contemporaneous with crashes, or
responsive to them; its ability to predict near-term carry currency returns or
realized skewness is either limited or has the wrong sign.

Other stories

While I regard the above explanations as the main drivers of the carry
strategy’s historical and future performance, I briefly highlight two other
explanations that may have some relevance.

Hyperinflation is the one rare event that can destroy carry strategy
performance even more effectively than a major unwind. A mechanical
carry strategy would always go long the highest yielding currency and
would quietly follow a hyperinflation country to its demise. Holding just
one Zimbabwe (the country with the worst recent hyperinflation) in your
portfolio would mean losing virtually the whole investment in that country
and missing any subsequent wealth recovery. Zimbabwe is not a very
realistic example given its capital controls, but Argentina is a country
without capital controls that has had hyperinflation, albeit not quite on the
Zimbabwean scale. Argentina’s devaluation in early 2002 is thus a more
plausible example, where international carry traders might have gotten their
hands burned (although even here the impending troubles were very visible
many months earlier).

I checked the impact of including Argentina in my emerging market
universe. In an extreme version of this—trading only the top-ranked market
against 
the 
bottom-ranked 
market—there 
would 
have 
been 
a 
huge
drawdown with most of one’s past accumulated wealth lost in 2002. The
Sharpe ratio of the 2000s’ decade would have been halved—but the losses
would have already been offset within two years and long-term strategy
performance still looks good with hindsight:
• 
To 
prevent 
hyperinflation-related 
currency 
losses, 
the 
first
defense 
is 
smart 
country 
selection—ruling 
out 
from 
the 
trading
universe any countries that might plausibly drift into hyperinflation.
(This task is harder than hindsight suggests but not as difficult as many
other types of market forecasting.) Other defenses include country-
specific stop-loss limits and diversification across several countries.

Irrational expectations stories come in many forms. An early conjecture
suggested that exchange rate flows and rates respond sluggishly to interest
rate news. Nonsynchronous business cycles and monetary policy cycles
across countries influence real rate and nominal rate differentials, and
exchange 
rates 
appear 
to 
respond 
to 
these 
movements 
both
contemporaneously and with a lag. Models based on this idea—sometimes
called “delayed overshooting models”—can explain why recent changes in
cross-country yield spreads are able to predict near-term currency moves
and excess returns. Behavioral models relying on investor overconfidence
on their inflation views have similar implications. However, such models
are less well suited to explaining the issue at the heart of the carry strategy:
why yield spread levels (which are more persistent than changes) can
predict near-term currency excess returns.

Survey-based 
proxies 
of 
the 
market’s 
exchange 
rate 
forecasts 
raise
questions about investor irrationality. Consensus forecasts can be used to
decompose yield spreads into expected exchange rate changes and required
currency risk premia. Empirical studies suggest that survey-based risk
premia are hardly correlated with yield differentials, suggesting that carry
returns may have more to do with systematic expectational errors. When
consensus predicts a large exchange rate move, the predicted move does not
tend to subsequently materialize (recall random walk behavior). Survey
forecasts are often influenced by some compelling fundamental story that
argues against exploiting the carry advantage. High-yielding countries tend
to have higher inflation and large current account deficits than low-yielding
countries. Perhaps excessive belief in fundamentals has contributed to carry
strategy success. Certain “unsustainable” macro-developments tend to last
longer than market participants expect—and this repeated surprise benefits
high-yielding currencies (e.g., USD in the early 1980s, NZD in the mid-
2000s).
...
13.5 CARRY HERE, CARRY THERE, CARRY
EVERYWHERE

Lastly, I look beyond currency markets and review carry trading in other
asset classes. Carry is one of the few indicators that seem to add value in
every market where it is examined. One reason carry indicators are useful
almost everywhere you look is that carry can be a generic proxy for any risk
premium or behaviorally induced undervaluation [7]. The resemblance
between all carry strategies and selling financial catastrophe insurance is
another reason. Carry indicators often line up well with our sense of
required risk premia. These considerations not only suggest that carry
strategies are risky but also that they likely will continue to produce
positive returns in the future.

In many asset classes, we can decompose carry into (1) the required risk
premium and (2) the market’s expectations of future developments (changes
in exchange rate, interest rate, credit spread, stock price, or dividend
growth). There is often some hypothesis that presumes that investors are
rational and risk neutral, and argues that expected returns are equated across
assets if any asset’s initial carry advantage is offset by expected capital
losses (which reflect the market’s expectations of future exchange rates,
interest 
rates, 
and 
so 
forth). 
Almost 
invariably, 
empirical 
evidence
discredits such a hypothesis; naive yield-seeking seems to add value in the
long run. In other words, on average over time and across strategies, simple
and popular academic theories are wrong and the yield hogs are right.
Chapter 22 delves deeper into this topic.

Figure 13.9. Cumulative excess returns of carry-seeking strategies in four
asset contexts, 1993–2009.
Sources: Bloomberg, Brevan Howard, Barclays Capital, Citigroup, J.P.
Morgan, own calculations.

Recall that positive carry is agnostic as to whether high predictable return
reflects rational risk premium or investor irrationality. Bacchetta–Mertens–
van Wincoop (2009) explore consensus forecast data in several markets to
decompose yield spreads into survey-based risk premia and expected rate
changes; they find that predictability of excess returns is closely tied to
systematic 
errors 
in 
investors’ 
exchange 
rate 
forecasts 
and 
virtually
unrelated to survey-based risk premia.

Figure 13.9 shows that carry strategies in several asset classes earned
persistent profits between 1993 and 2007 and lost a bundle in 2008. Besides
the two FX carry strategies, I show a cross-country fixed income carry
strategy (go 
long duration in countries 
with 
steep 
yield curves, 
short
duration in countries with inverted or flat yield curves) as well as a credit
carry strategy (buy various credit-risky products and sell Treasuries short).
Over the full sample, the emerging market FX strategy and cross-country FI
strategies achieved SRs near 1, the G10 FX strategy 0.7, and the credit
carry strategy only 0.3.

A 
volatility-weighted 
composite 
carry 
portfolio 
benefited 
from
diversification across strategies and earned an SR of 1.1. Some carry traders
venture into less liquid assets (municipal curve steepness, credit curve
steepness, distressed debt, etc.), while others broaden the trades to include
“cousins” of the carry strategy: stock or country selection based on dividend
yields or other valuation ratios as well as volatility selling (discussed in
Chapters 12 and 15). Also recall from Figure 11.8 how “positive carry”
commodities (those with a backwardated term structure) outperform in the
long run. However, greater diversification among yield-seeking strategies
crystallizes—rather 
than 
diversifies 
away—systematic 
carry 
exposure:
sharp losses tend to become concentrated in bad times. For example, my
composite of four carry strategies lost half its value between the peak in
2007 and the trough in 2008, before recouping most of the losses in 2009.
The best diversification to the generic carry trade comes from anti-risk
positions or from trend-following strategies. The former tend to have poor
long-run returns; they are a more expensive way to diversify but can be
very valuable as tactical investments.

One interesting question is why certain carry strategies have performed
much better than others over the past two decades. The contrast between the
empirical success of cross-country carry trading and lesser long-run profits
in within-country carry trading—notably in credits or securitized debt—is
striking. I consider the convenience of carry trading and the degree of
systematic risk as alternative explanations:
• One reason for the poor performance of credit carry is the
headwind nature of the sample period (with some net widening of
credit spreads between December 1992 and December 2009). Even if
we study performance histories ending before the 2007–2008 Credit
Crunch, however, long-run excess returns to credit carry are modest. I
conjecture that corporate bonds have been the obvious easy way to
chase yield, and as a result have tended to be structurally overpriced.
Although the currency carry strategy did become overcrowded a few
years ago, it was evident for a long time that less speculative capital
was 
allocated 
to 
cross-country 
trading 
than 
to 
within-country
opportunities.
• An alternative hypothesis is that some carry strategies have
more 
toxic 
features 
than 
others, 
notably 
a 
greater 
propensity 
to
experience large losses during “bad times”. Both the credit carry
strategy and currency carry strategy seem to share this empirical
characteristic (unlike, say, government bond carry strategies). There
seems to be little difference between the two to justify their very
different long-run success. However, it may be relevant that the same
credit strategies that offer the highest long-run SRs—buying short-
dated top-rated corporates and selling Treasuries short—also have the
highest ratios of systematic risk to diversifiable risk.
Finally, diversification helps—most of the time. Implementing carry style
strategies in many different markets improves diversification and therefore
risk-adjusted returns, though perhaps not as much as in the past. Correlation
and skewness due to technical (“positioning”) factors may arise when many
multi-strategy investors apply similar strategies, resulting in overcrowding
and synchronous attempts to rush to the exit when liquidity conditions
deteriorate. Carry strategies are so “obvious” that they may be especially
prone to fail as diversifiers during systemic events. It may be more useful to
diversify into other active indicators and into other asset classes, and,
especially, to identify opposite trading styles. For systematic traders, the
returns 
of 
momentum-oriented 
strategies 
tend 
to 
be 
lowly 
or 
even
negatively correlated with carry and value returns. For discretionary traders,
being long carry strategies is not a good diversifier for existing risk-seeking
positions (such as being long the equity market) but can diversify existing
directional anti-risk positions (long Treasuries).

...
13.6 NOTES

[1] Investors can implement the carry strategy in many ways. A common
way is to buy the AUD/ JPY one-week forward contract instead of spot.
Arbitrage activities ensure that (in normal times) the ratio of forward and
spot exchange rates—the forward premium—is proportional to the cross-
country interest rate differential. Thus, the profit and loss of the trade
reflects 
the 
(locked-in) 
one-week 
interest 
rate 
differential 
plus 
the
(uncertain) spot exchange rate change over the next week.

[2] Academics had already uncovered forward rate bias by the late 1970s,
soon after the breakup of the Bretton Woods fixed-exchange-rate regime.
Empirical studies showed that, contrary to the UIP, forward exchange rates
were not unbiased predictors of future spot rates, so that yield-seeking
strategies 
were 
surprisingly 
profitable. 
Academics 
debated 
alternative
explanations 
for 
this 
“forward 
premium 
puzzle”: 
rational 
time-varying
currency 
risk 
premia, 
some 
form 
of 
investor 
irrationality, 
or 
a 
“peso
problem” (some probability of a currency devaluation implied in the yield
although no such devaluation had occurred in the past—see Chapter 7). No
consensus 
emerged 
from 
the 
early 
debate. 
Academic 
interest 
in 
carry
strategies revived in recent years, notably with new risk-based explanations
that stressed the similarity of carry trading and selling financial catastrophe
insurance.

[3] These are self-financed long–short strategies so I naturally report excess
returns over cash interest income. The total return would also include any
investor’s local currency interest income. The denominator is the absolute
dollar size of long (or short) positions. Given the average deposit rate of
5.5% over the time sample in the U.S., total return for a dollar-based
investor would have been roughly 11.5%. For Japanese investors total
return would be only 8.5%, given the lower average yen deposit rate of
2.5%.
[4] The costs of many false alarms would have been overwhelmed by the
savings from avoiding carry crashes in autumn 1992, early 1995, and
Octobers 1998 and 2008. However, taking a multi-month horizon changes
the sign of this regularity because risk aversion episodes tend to be short-
lived.

[5] Such risk aversion indicators frustrated investors for almost a decade
because, with hindsight, it would have been better to stick with consistent
carry positions. After 1998 there were no major carry crashes until summer
2007, 
and 
there 
were 
positive 
gains 
each 
year, 
despite 
short-lived
drawdowns. Predictably, inflows followed this good performance and by
2005 
experienced 
traders 
worried 
about 
overvaluations 
and
overcrowdedness in high-yielding markets. By this time the markets’ main
interest had shifted to even higher yielding emerging market currencies.
Many professional currency managers shunned carry strategies too early—
and paid the price by losing assets under management before this anti-carry
stance paid off. In 2008, when it really mattered, carry-timing indicators
correctly kept flashing red through the year.

[6] This pattern echoes the catastrophe insurance literature: abundant capital
makes insurance cheap after good times whereas erosion of capital after an
adverse event raises the insurance cost or premium (closing the barn door
after the horses have bolted). Limited memory or attention may contribute
to this pattern. Such evidence favors a contrarian insurance strategy—buy
crash insurance when it is cheap, not just because it is more affordable at
such times but also because it is more likely to be useful then. Implied
negative skew on the carry trade became even more pronounced after the
carry crashes, first hitting record levels in August 2007 and then again in
October 2008.

[7] The generic proxy role should work better in cases where a fall in an
asset’s price influences both its carry and valuation (e.g., a steeper curve
indicates both better carry and value for long-term Treasuries, and so does a
wider credit spread for corporate bonds). In contrast, a currency carry signal
may be negatively related to an exchange rate valuation signal.

Source notes. The academic literature on currency carry had already begun
by around 1980 but the renaissance occurred in recent years with notable
papers by Lustig–Verdelhan (2007), Brunnermeier–Nagel–Pedersen (2008),
Farhi et al. (2009), Jurek (2009), and Burnside et al. (2010a). The volatility
link has been explored in Christiansen–Ranaldo–Soderlind (2010), among
others.

Among 
irrational 
explanations, 
see 
Froot–Thaler 
(1990), 
Jylha–
Lyytinen–Suominen (2008), and Burnside et al. (2010b) on the delayed
reaction story. Among practitioner work, see Bilson (1993) and Nordvig
(2007). On other predictors than carry, see Ilmanen–Sayood (2002), Yilmaz
(2009), and Ang–Chen (2010). On carry strategies in various asset classes,
see Cochrane (1999), Asness–Moskowitz–Pedersen (2009), and Bacchetta–
Mertens–van Wincoop (2009).

...