14

Commodity momentum and trend following

• Many financial return series exhibit positive short-term
momentum. Buying assets when their prices have risen and
selling assets when their prices have fallen is profitable in many
asset classes, including commodities.
• Momentum strategies can be traded on a single asset (trend
following) or across assets (long–short trading). One can use
many types of momentum signals (past returns, moving averages,
breakout, consistency, etc.) and various lookback window lengths
(to capture shorter and longer trends).
• For single commodities, the SR of trend-following
strategies is typically between 0.0 and 0.5. For a diversified
portfolio of them, the SR is between 0.5 and 1.0—at the higher
end if volatility weighting is used. However, actual CTAs
(commodity trading advisors) rarely have as good SRs as these
simulated strategies.
• Momentum patterns likely reflect behavioral factors—
investor underreaction to news and overreaction to recent returns
(extrapolating past returns). Rational risk-based explanations are
less compelling, but I highlight a link between commodity
inventories and momentum.
• Trend-following and momentum strategies have been
exceptionally good diversifiers to risky assets, performing well
amidst equity meltdowns and rising volatility.
• Momentum strategies involve greater turnover than active
carry and value strategies. Thus they are profitable only to those
able to trade with very low transaction costs.
• Buying past winners using 3-to-12-month lookback
windows tends to be profitable for most assets, not just
commodities. However, reversal patterns sometimes dominate
when shorter or longer windows are used (notably, in stock
selection).
• Trend following with many assets boosts risk-adjusted
returns, and combining momentum with value, carry, or risky
asset strategies improves diversification further.

...
14.1 INTRODUCTION

Besides value and carry strategies, momentum or trend is the third popular
strategy style (see cube). Momentum style strategies buy recent winners and
sell recent losers. This approach can be implemented on single assets using
only their own past history—trend following or on a cross-section of assets
—by creating long–short momentum portfolios based on relative recent
performance. Two simple examples: A trend-following strategy involves
buying oil futures if recent performance is positive and selling if it is
negative; the sign and size of the trading position could be based on past
quarter returns, or on the difference between the current price and its 200-
day moving average, or on some other metric. A momentum strategy
among, say, ten commodities involves buying the three with the best recent
return while selling short the three with the worst recent return [1].

“Chasing returns” has a bad name. Yet it turns out that—using suitable
window lengths to measure recent returns (3–12 months)—momentum style
strategies 
have 
been 
historically 
successful 
in 
almost 
any 
asset 
class
researchers 
and 
traders 
have 
looked 
into. 
Moreover, 
they 
may 
be
exceptional diversifiers for risky asset portfolios. There are of course
pitfalls and inconsistencies. Perhaps the main problem in return chasing is
that investors seem unduly influenced by multi-year returns—herding into
successful asset classes and strategies when they already have enjoyed a
long uptrend 
and are more likely to experience a 
reversal. Statistical
evidence suggests that many financial asset returns exhibit positive short-
term 
autocorrelation 
(momentum 
bias) 
and 
negative 
long-term
autocorrelation (mean reversion bias), as Exhibit 20.1 shows.

I focus here on momentum strategies in one asset class—commodities—
but will briefly discuss evidence on other asset classes in the last section of
this chapter.

Momentum 
vs. 
reversal. 
Published 
studies 
use 
different 
portfolio
formation 
periods 
(window 
lengths 
to 
measure 
historical 
returns) 
and
different holding periods, but they all focus on past returns. The common
empirical finding is a return continuation tendency (momentum bias) except
for very short and very long windows (a week or shorter, two to five years)
where reversal biases may dominate.

...
14.2 PERFORMANCE OF SIMPLE COMMODITY
MOMENTUM STRATEGIES

Several 
recent 
studies 
have 
presented 
evidence 
on 
commodity 
market
momentum (see “Source notes” at the end of the chapter). All of the studies
use the nearby futures contract as the proxy for the spot price, all include
both roll return and spot return but do not estimate trading costs, and all
ranking models diversify across a few commodities held long and a few
held short. Most studies use monthly data. None of the academic papers
adjusts momentum signals or position sizes for volatility, even though
natural gas has three times higher volatility than gold (48% vs. 16%). The
studies mainly differ in their historical data sample and in the details of
their momentum strategy specifications.

Does it matter whether we employ single-asset trend-following strategies
or 
multi-asset 
long–short 
strategies? 
A 
composite 
of 
trend-following
strategies often closely resembles a momentum portfolio but there are
differences. The former can be tailor-made to different assets; the latter can
neutralize a common directional risk across assets. Both customization and
hedging features can have positive and negative effects on performance.
Net benefit can only be determined empirically.

Erb–Harvey (2006) show that for their sample period, December 1982 to
May 2004, a strategy of buying each month the four best performing
commodities during the past 12 months and selling short the four worst
performing ones gives an SR of 0.55. They find an even higher SR of 0.85
if they implement a more diversified trend-following strategy: going long
all 
positive-return 
commodities 
and 
shorting 
all 
negative-return
commodities. Others study a variety of momentum specifications over even
longer sample periods and find that long–short models that exploit relative
return continuation within a one-year window perform consistently well and
that the best profits have been attained using short windows (1-to-3-month
return histories and/or holding periods). There is also some evidence of
long-term and short-term mean reversion: high past returns one to five years
ago or during the past week predict low future returns.

My data analysis below uses a shorter and more recent sample period
(1990–2009) but agrees with published research. Analyzing a composite of
monthly trend-following strategies for timing individual commodities and a
cross-sectional long–short portfolio based on ranking commodities on their
recent return, I find SRs very similar to those found by Erb–Harvey (2006):
near 0.8 for the timing composite and 0.5 for the ranking composite. Timing
models 
also 
allow 
directional 
commodity 
risk 
taking, 
say, 
if 
all
commodities are trending down (1998 and 2008) or up (2003 and 2007) at
the same time. During a sample period when all commodities were often
trending 
synchronously, 
timing 
models 
understandably 
fare 
better. 
As
shown 
below, 
trend-following 
models 
were 
profitable 
for 
most 
single
commodities.

Most academic studies use past average returns as trading signals. Trend-
followers often use a variety of measures other than return (listed below).
My experience is that none of these variants systematically outperforms the
others:
• The most common trend-following rules are based on moving
averages where current market price is compared with an average of
historical prices over some window. If current price is above (below)
the moving average—or, perhaps, the moving average plus or minus a
small band around it to avoid whipsaw trading—the rule gives a buy
(sell) signal. When thinking about the difference between a simple
return and a moving average signal, I like the following intuition: we
know that current market price is the most relevant data point but we
do not know whether the most appropriate comparison is the price a
week, month, quarter, or year ago; thus it makes sense to dilute the
choice of window 
starting point by taking a moving average. If
momentum is defined by the ratio of current price to moving average
(minus one), it corresponds to a weighted average of past one-period
returns with declining weights as you move from the present toward
the past.
• Some momentum signals (“moving average cross-over”) also
smooth the current observation with a short moving average. Others
use 
exponentially 
weighted 
averages, 
further 
raising 
the 
relative
weight of recent observations.
• Acceleration or breakout signals and filter rules focus even more
on the distinction between recent price moves and preceding market
action. These rules care most about signal strength—sharp market
moves are viewed as a stronger signal than small moves.
• In contrast, consistency and relative strength indicators ignore
and/or underweight the magnitude of market moves; instead, they
emphasize the frequency of up moves or down moves.
• In addition to entry rules, there may be specific exit rules
(specific stop-loss or takeprofit rules). Alternatively, exit takes place
when a new entry signal tells the trader to close or even reverse a
position. Whipsaw trading may be reduced by adding a no-trading
band around the signal level.

Trend-followers typically diversify not just across a large number of liquid
assets but also across a range of history window lengths and trading
frequencies. 
Slow-moving 
multi-month 
trends, 
fast-moving 
multi-day
trends, and even within-day high-frequency data trends may be exploited.
Trading costs are naturally a greater concern with faster moving signals.
The empirical success of strategies with different window lengths has
varied over time. It is rare that one specification is inherently superior,
although some new evidence points to the best information being in returns
from 6 to 12 months ago in several asset classes. Trend-followers often
optimize 
or 
calibrate 
their 
models 
dynamically, 
based 
on 
the 
recent
performance 
of 
each 
model 
specification. 
Even 
if 
some 
performance
persistence 
across 
specifications 
exists, 
there 
is 
an 
obvious 
danger 
of
overcrowding when many trend-followers make similar decisions using the
same dataset. Whatever window lengths are used, most trend-followers
rebalance their positions much more frequently than once a month.

Volatility weighting. One key decision is whether to adjust signals and/or
position sizes for different volatilities across assets or changing volatility
over time. There is some evidence that volatility targeting or mean variance
optimization (whose main benefit may be volatility weighting) enhances the
performance of commodity momentum strategies. My own examples apply
volatility weighting but this has so far rarely been done in published
studies:
• If return signals are not adjusted for volatility, natural gas
(which is highly volatile) is much more likely to be at either end of the
rankings than gold (which is three to four times less volatile). This bias
effectively reduces the breadth of a given commodity universe.
• If position sizes are not adjusted for differences in volatility
across commodities, the long–short positions in ranking models can be
quite market directional. A dollarneutral long natural gas vs. short gold
position is not empirically neutral to generally changing commodity
prices; it effectively has a long directional bias.
• Volatility weighting of positions also reduces nominal position
sizes 
when 
recent 
overall 
volatility 
is 
higher. 
Such 
volatility
stabilization and/or targeting over time appears to mildly enhance risk-
adjusted returns.
• 
An 
extreme 
form 
of 
volatility 
weighting 
is 
to 
stop 
trend
following after high recent volatility. Yet another approach is to let the
specifics of the historical window (relative weights of fast and slow
signals) be a function of volatility level. A related idea is to favor slow
signals during bull markets and fast signals during bear markets.

Figure 14.1 plots the cumulative profits of a basket of commodity trend-
following strategies. I use the commodity subset of the Mount Lucas
Management 
trend-following 
index 
(MLMCCO 
in 
Bloomberg) 
for 
the
long-term perspective and my own analyses for the past 20 years: trend
following in three energy, three metals, and three agriculture futures. We go
either 
long 
or 
short 
one 
unit 
of 
the 
nearby 
futures 
contract 
of 
each
commodity for the next month depending on whether its current value is
above or below the past 12 months’ moving average. Even with such a
simple approach, long-run performance is quite attractive: 11% average
excess return at 14% volatility and an SR of 0.8—admittedly before any
trading costs or fees are deducted. (Excess returns include both spot returns
and roll returns but not riskless interest income.)

Figure 14.1. Cumulative excess returns of 
commodity trend-following
strategies

Sources: Bloomberg, Mount Lucas Management, Brevan Howard, own
calculations.
Performance gaps over the past 20 years are worth exploring, however.
The profits of the MLMCCO have tailed off, while my variants have
remained profitable in the 2000s. It makes sense that the last variant (top
line) 
fares 
best 
because 
it 
uses 
a 
simple 
volatilityweighting 
rule 
that
improves diversification (as it makes each commodity position’s volatility
roughly equal) and slightly boosts returns (because reducing position sizes
after high volatility tends to help). However, I cannot fully account for the
performance difference between the low and middle lines [2].

Table 14.1 shows the results for each commodity. Again, a simple rule
uses just the sign of current price minus the 12-month moving average to
determine whether to go long or short a commodity for the next month.
Trend following has worked best in the energy sector and for wheat, and it
has really lost money only for one commodity (silver). In the simple
composite, natural gas is allowed to have a much higher effective weight
than gold (because of its higher volatility). Only in the weighted composite
(last row) are position sizes adjusted dynamically, based on past year
volatility. (Aside: The large gaps between arithmetic and geometric means
are due to high volatility, but diversified composites have lower volatility
and thus narrower gaps.)

How about other data windows and other momentum indicators? The
patterns are robust. Volatility weighting boosts the SR by 0.1–0.3 in all of
the variants I try. The composite strategies’ Sharpe ratios are between 0.5
and 1.0 for moving average windows of 3 months, 12 months, and anything
between. I also get broadly similar performance if I use past average returns
or consistency or breakout measures. The results are slightly better for the
12-month window than for shorter windows. In the same vein, I find that
shifting from monthly trading frequency to weekly trading frequency, or
delaying the implementation by a day or two, has little impact on average
returns even before costs. If I incorporate trading costs, slow-moving
signals look even better because they imply lower turnover. Such a win–win
outcome is convenient but does not hold for all asset classes and may not
hold for commodities in the future.

Table 14.1. Cumulative excess returns of trend-following strategies per
commodity, 1990–2009

Sources: Bloomberg, Brevan Howard, own calculations.

...
14.3 TWEAKS

Where (in which asset subsets) does momentum or trend following work
especially well? This evidence comes mainly from outside commodities but
may apply well in commodities too:
• Less liquid assets that exhibit high information uncertainty are
more likely to trend because “information travels slowly”—prices only
slowly incorporate new information (i.e., there is an underreaction
effect) and these assets are often harder to arbitrage. Such patterns may
not be exploitable in practice, however. Thus, most trend-followers
focus on highly liquid assets such as futures or currencies, to save
trading costs.
• Investor reluctance to realize small losses (disposition effect)
exacerbates momentum effects. Thus momentum and underreaction
effects are related to the difference between current price and the price
at which most investors’ bought (“capital gains overhang”).
• Poorly anchored asset prices allow greater trending, perhaps
because 
they 
give 
more 
scope 
for 
sentiment-driven 
changes. 
For
example, a lack of clear fair value anchors may have allowed energy
prices to trend strongly in the past decade. A related point is that trends
are 
less 
likely 
in 
the 
relationship 
between 
similar 
assets 
(good
substitutes).

When (in which regimes or conditions) does momentum or trend following
work especially well?

• Almost tautologically, momentum works better amidst sustained
price 
moves 
and 
suffers 
in 
range-bound 
markets. 
Macro-trend
reversals 
are 
the 
worst 
enemy 
as 
they 
influence 
many 
assets
simultaneously.
• It is perhaps ironic that, unlike many financial assets and
strategies, trend-following strategy return is the rare exception that
does not exhibit positive short-term momentum.
• Seasonally, momentum and trend-following strategies tend to
perform better in December and less well in January—in stark contrast
to 
many 
carry 
and 
risk-seeking 
strategies 
(see 
Chapter 
25). 
For
example, my active commodity momentum strategies had the highest
average excess return, 1.6% in December, compared with only 0.4%
for January. High December returns are typically explained by year
end tax loss selling and window dressing—institutions buying (selling)
assets that outperformed (underperformed)—during the year so as to
make their portfolio look better at the snapshot in time it is revealed in
reports to investors.
• Momentum and trend-following strategies tend to perform better
when volatility is rising. While the contemporaneous correlation with
volatility changes is positive, these strategies tend to perform better
following periods of low volatility. (The converse is true for reversal
strategies: they perform better after high volatility levels and during
falling volatility.) These patterns may reflect the long-volatility nature
of 
momentum 
strategies 
(to 
be 
discussed 
below), 
together 
with
empirical mean reversion in volatility levels.
• Momentum strategies tend to work well when risky asset prices
suffer and liquidity dries up. The commodity momentum strategy was
up in nine of the ten worst down months for the S&P 500 since 1990.
• 
Momentum 
and 
trend-following 
strategies 
tend 
to 
perform
especially well in the runup to predictable “events” such as economic
announcements. I have documented abnormally high Sharpe ratios for
trend following in bonds in the week ahead of payroll reports (see
Ilmanen–Byrne, 2003). I find a similar pattern for oil prices ahead of
OPEC 
meetings 
and 
for 
agricultural 
commodities 
ahead 
of 
pre-
scheduled major announcements about supply–demand conditions. My
story is twofold: (1) traders become more cautious (risk averse) ahead
of such announcements, justifiably so because these events tend to
trigger large market moves and high volatility, and (2) trader response
is asymmetric depending on their recent success; traders on the wrong
side of the recent trend (“losers”) are more likely to capitulate, thereby
accentuating the recent trend in the days before the big event.
...
14.4 WHY DOES MOMENTUM—SUCH A NAIVE
STRATEGY—WORK?

As always, strategy profits can be explained by rational or irrational stories.
For momentum, the irrational stories ring more true, so I start with them.
Several well-known behavioral models have been designed to explain the
momentum and reversal effects observed in equity markets (see Section
6.3.2), and the same ideas may apply to commodities as well. Investor
underreaction 
to 
fundamental 
news 
almost 
surely 
contributes 
to 
the
momentum effect but cannot explain long-term reversal. Underreaction may
reflect conservatism, overconfidence regarding one’s private views, or the
tendency 
to 
avoid 
realizing 
losses 
and 
to 
take 
profits 
too 
soon.
Extrapolation of past returns and overreaction to popular stories can explain
both the momentum effect and subsequent return to fundamental value.
(Herding and other social dynamics may reinforce these patterns, and even
rational traders may want to jump on the bandwagon for a while.)

Rational risk premium stories may be based on broader asset-pricing
models, 
such 
as 
time-varying 
risk 
premia 
related 
to 
business 
cycle
conditions, but the empirical relations are weak. The theoretical models
specific to commodities are the hedging pressure hypothesis and the theory
of 
storage. 
Hedging 
pressure 
explanations 
do 
not 
seem 
to 
get 
much
empirical support; certainly Commodity Futures Trading Commission data
on hedger or speculator positioning have limited ability to predict future
commodity returns. The theory of storage is more promising. This theory
highlights the role of inventories, especially for commodities that are
difficult and/or costly to store. Such commodities tend to have steeply
backwardated term structures (the futures price is well below the spot price)
due to high convenience yield of holding spot positions (inventories) that
help prevent production disruptions, etc. Convenience yield may also vary
over time and be highest when the commodity is scarce (low inventories),
resulting 
in 
an 
exceptionally 
high 
spot 
price 
and 
backwardated 
term
structure (positive roll return).

Many empirical studies show that roll returns and momentum profits are
positively correlated. For example, commodities held long in momentum
portfolios tend to have a backwardated term structure and commodities held
short 
tend 
to 
have 
contangoed 
term 
structure. 
Gorton–Hayashi–
Rouwenhorst (2007) take the interpretation one step further and argue that
both roll and momentum portfolio profits are proxies for inventory effects;
thus, 
the 
reasoning 
goes, 
the 
theory 
of 
storage 
can 
explain 
roll 
and
momentum effects. Backwardation in a commodity price term structure and
high prior commodity returns tend to predict low inventories and high
future 
returns. 
Those 
high 
returns 
are 
presumably 
compensation 
for
associated higher volatility—because low inventories make prices, rather
than changes in inventory, the primary shock absorber to demand and
supply news. Due to the uneven quality and relevance of inventory data
(also published with lags and subject to data revisions), roll and carry data
as well as momentum can be better proxies of “true” inventories than
reported 
inventory 
levels 
and/or 
changes 
themselves. 
These 
proxies
certainly predict future returns better but even normalized inventory levels
have some predictive ability. Studying the performance of three long–short
trading strategies between 1969 and 2006, Gorton–Hayashi–Rouwenhorst
report average excess returns (shown with t-statistics) of 13.4% (4.9) for
momentum, 10.2% (3.7) for roll, and 8.1% (3.2) for inventories.

Other rational stories for observed predictability patterns include data
mining, investor learning, and a peso problem (unrepresentative sample).
The 
strong 
performance 
of 
energy 
hints 
at 
the 
last 
explanation. 
It 
is
puzzling that, among all commodity sectors, energy—which offers the best
diversification 
against 
traditional 
asset 
classes 
and 
the 
best 
inflation-
hedging ability—has also tended to offer the highest ex ante and ex post
returns. 
At 
least 
a 
partial 
explanation 
for 
this 
“too-good-to-be-true
outcome” 
is 
the 
benign 
sample 
period 
when 
increasing 
scarcity 
and
growing demand (especially from China) kept surprising the markets about
supply–demand fundamentals. Thus typical backwardation in the oil term
structure may really have reflected expectations of gradual price declines or
the hedging policies of oil companies, notwithstanding the trend toward
higher prices.

These rational stories may have contributed to the observed momentum
patterns but irrational explanations are much more convincing. One reason
is that in momentum strategies long and short assets vary so fast that it is
hard to come up with rational stories that could justify such frequent sign
changes in risk premia, whereas naive extrapolation can easily justify the
patterns observed.

Moreover, it is hard to argue that momentum strategies deserve a high
rationally required risk premium when these strategies actually are great
diversifiers. During financial crises such as 1998 and 2008, these strategies
were among the few solid performers. Many empirical studies show that
momentum strategies and CTAs (managed futures funds that focus on trend
following) have negative or low correlations with equity markets and with
value, carry, and reversal strategies. These other strategies tend to be
empirically “short volatility” whereas momentum strategies and CTAs tend
to be empirically “long volatility”:
• The payoff profile of trend-followers resembles that of an
unhedged long straddle position. Trend-followers are “long volatility”
by gaining from large market moves in either direction, not by directly
benefiting from volatility increases as a delta-hedged straddle position
would. Using options jargon, trend-followers are long gamma—not
long vega.
• 
Typically, 
long 
volatility 
strategies 
have 
an 
insurance
characteristic that justifies low expected returns. This observation
makes the high historical returns of momentum and trend-following
strategies even more puzzling.
• Trend following is also closely related to stop-loss rules (“cut
your losses and let your profits run”) which many traders have found
useful counterweights to the behavioral tendency to hang on to losers.

...
14.5 MOMENTUM IN OTHER ASSET CLASSES

Momentum strategies perform well in virtually all asset classes we study. Their
ubiquity is illustrated in the title of the Asness–Moskowitz–Pedersen (2009)
article, “Value and momentum everywhere” and in the finding of Moskowitz–
Ooi–Pedersen (2010) that a simple trend-following rule appears profitable for
each of the 58 liquid investments they examine.

The best known momentum pattern involves the relative performance of
individual equities:
• Stock selection. Equities’ dependence on past performance exhibits a
strong multi-month momentum effect sandwiched between short-term and
long-term reversal effects. “Recent winners” (best performing stocks over
the past year) tend to subsequently outperform “recent losers” by roughly
1% per month.
• Industries and countries. Momentum partly reflects stock-specific
dynamics and partly industry dynamics. Unlike stock-specific momentum,
industry momentum also works over very short horizons. Trend-following
strategies using equity index futures are profitable in many countries.
Momentum works for country allocation.

Looking beyond equities, I have already shown that momentum works in
commodities. It also works in fixed income, foreign exchange, and alternative
assets, as well as across asset classes. However, momentum patterns in these
other 
asset 
classes 
do 
not 
always 
share 
the 
particular
reversal/momentum/reversal patterns observed at different window lengths in
equity selection (less than one month, one to 12 months, more than 12 months):
• Fixed income country allocation based on momentum fares least
well. 
Indeed, 
relative 
reversal 
patterns 
dominate 
in 
country 
allocation
among long-dated bonds. (This observation is consistent with carry trade
evidence in Chapter 13.) Momentum gains are more obvious in directional
trend-following positions within a country than in cross-country trades or
other spread trades.
• FX. Trend-following strategies used to be profitable in G10 markets
from the 1970s to the 1990s but less so in the past decade. In contrast,
trend-following or momentum strategies among emerging currencies have
remained highly profitable. FX also illustrates the principle that the best
window lengths can change over time (and can only be known with
hindsight). In G10 FX, relatively short windows worked better in the 1990s,
but in the 2000s trend-following based on short windows lost money while
long windows worked.
• 
Alternatives. 
Many 
alternative 
assets 
besides 
commodities—real
estate, 
hedge 
funds, 
private 
equity—exhibit 
return 
persistence. 
This
persistence may reflect some of the same influences that are seen in
traditional asset classes, but stale prices and return smoothing are also
likely to have contributed.

Figure 14.2 shows how well a simple trend-following strategy performed in four
asset classes. In each class I simulate the one-year moving average rule for about
15 liquid assets (the interest rate and bond futures are all within G10 markets;
currencies and equity indices also include a handful of countries outside the
G10). The approach is again deliberately naive except that I apply volatility
weighting. Diversification both within and across asset classes smooths returns
(I target 10% volatility for each asset class). For example, all four asset classes
have respectable SRs between 0.7 and 1.0, but the composite has a volatility of
only 6% and an impressive SR of 1.4.

Figure 14.2. Cumulative excess returns of trend-following strategies, 1993–
2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Brevan Howard, own calculations.

Figure 14.3. Contrasting Sharpe ratios for trading strategies that buy past
winners and sell recent losers based on recent and intermediate momentum (in
four equity market contexts and in two others).

Source: Novy-Marx (2009).

Note that the strategy returns I plot are self-financed, so they are already
excess returns, but trading costs, fees, and implementation slippage have not
been deducted. The impact of these costs is not large, however (turnover is
moderate 
given 
the 
12-month 
moving 
average 
window); 
hindsight 
and
overfitting are more relevant concerns. The 12-month window worked better
than either shorter or longer windows during the past decade. Still, it is puzzling
that such simple strategies could deliver a long-run SR in excess of 1. It is worth
noting that, while a few successful CTAs have a achieved a long-run SR near 1,
the actual trading performance of broad trend-follower indices reveals much
lower 
SRs 
(below 
0.5), 
despite 
reporting 
biases 
that 
may 
overstate 
such
statistics.

Novy-Marx 
(2009) 
shows 
that, 
for 
momentum 
strategies 
in 
many 
asset
classes, the most valuable predictive information is in past returns between 6 and
12 months ago—not in the most recent months (see Figure 14.3). This finding
challenges the idea that momentum reflects positive short-term autocorrelation.
In addition, there is a sharp dropoff in information in past returns beyond 12
months ago.

Box 14.1. Takeaways from the vast literature on equity momentum

• As noted above, past performance dependence across equities
includes a multi-month momentum pattern as well as short-term and
long-term reversal patterns. On paper, the strongest result is that past
month winners tend to strongly underperform past month losers over
the subsequent month. This first-month reversal effect is sometimes
attributed to market microstructure effects such as bid–ask bounce, or
to price overreaction to firm-specific news, but the most compelling
explanation is price concession caused by large trades. Liquidity
providers facing low trading costs can exploit this pattern. Return
reversals are even stronger over shorter horizons (day and week), for
less liquid stocks, when using industry-adjusted returns, and amidst
high volatility.
• Popular momentum indicators skip the most recent month to
avoid being contaminated by the short-term reversal effect. For
example, the momentum factor in Kenneth French’s data library is
based on the stock return from 12 months ago to one month ago.
• There is also a long-term reversal effect for 1-to-5-year lagged
returns, often seen as the flip side of the first-year momentum effect
(overreaction followed by a return to fair value).
• Gross momentum profits have been higher and more consistent
than profits from other cross-sectional factors. However, turnover and
trading costs can be much higher for momentum than for value
strategies with slower moving signals. Using longer window lengths to
produce momentum signals can mitigate this problem but doing so
increases the danger that positions are still held after their long-term
reversal has begun. The return series in Figure 14.4 would not be as
steep and smooth as it was between the 1940s and the 1990s if trading
costs were included.
Figure 14.4. Cumulative returns of momentum and reversal strategies
in stock selection, 1927–2009.

Source: Ken French’s website.
• Past monthly returns exhibit an interesting periodicity pattern at
quarterly and yearly cycles. When studying individual months for
forming long–short momentum portfolios, the return 12 months ago
has the strongest positive relation to the current month’s return,
followed by (comparable relations for) 6 months, 9 months, 24
months, 36 months, 48 months, and 60 months. Surprisingly, this
phenomenon is not concentrated in earnings announcement months.
• Price momentum is closely related to earnings momentum (the
observation that—as a result of many analysts recently revising their
earnings forecasts upward—equity prices tend to predictably rise in
the subsequent weeks and months). These patterns certainly are
suggestive of investor underreaction. Interestingly, both effects have
weakened since October 2000 when the SEC’s Regulation FD (Fair
Disclosure) required U.S. companies to disclose material information
to all investors at the same time.
• Lead–lag effects across markets tend to flow from liquid core
markets to less liquid periphery markets. Information travels slowly
from large-cap stocks to neglected small caps, which are hard to value
and hard to arbitrage. Trends form more easily in the absence of clear
valuation anchors, and arbitrageurs find it harder to trade against
perceived misvaluations if trading costs are high. Momentum profits
are higher in volatile credit-risky (low-grade) firms and for stocks with
high earnings estimate dispersion.
• Another interesting lead–lag relation is between the returns of
economically correlated firms—a company and its customer or
supplier firms. Given that this looks like an underreaction due to
investor inattention, it is not surprising that the patterns are stronger
for small stocks. Similar evidence is also found at the industry and
country level.
• Momentum profits appear to be larger after market gains and
when investors are optimistic. Positive sentiment can accentuate
overconfidence among stock-pickers, which (with short-selling
constraints) leads to upward momentum (and later reversals).
Momentum profits are lower after market losses, turning points, and
periods of heightened volatility (high market volatility or wide
dispersion across equities).
• After decades of apparently consistent performance—although
profitability eroded in the 2000s—equity momentum strategies
suffered a huge drawdown in spring 2009 that echoed the 1932
turnaround. As financial markets moved away from the edge of the
abyss and confidence recovered, previous year winners—typically
conservative, quality, growth stocks—sharply underperformed past
year losers—typically risky, junk, value stocks.

...
14.6 NOTES

[1] In contrast to technical analysts or chartists who analyze price patterns
in a discretionary fashion, most trend-followers and momentum-traders
follow purely systematic rule-based approaches.

[2] The correlation between monthly returns is 0.83 but since 1990 the
MLMCCO has an SR of only 0.3 compared with my strategy’s 0.6. My
simulation results are virtually the same whether or not I include a one-day
delay as MLM does. MLM apparently uses a broader set of commodities
than the nine liquid futures I include, which could explain the difference.
Perhaps MLM incorporates some costs and fees that I do not, but I estimate
that trading costs should reduce the SR by 0.1 at most.

Source notes. Many authors have in recent years analyzed commodity
momentum 
strategies: 
Erb–Harvey 
(2006), 
Ribeiro–Normand–Loeys
(2006), 
Gorton–Hayashi– 
Rouwenhorst 
(2007), 
Miffre–Rallis 
(2007),
Fuertes–Miffre–Rallis (2010), and Shen–Szakmary–Sharma (2010). For a
broad survey, see Schneeweis–Kazemi–Spurgin (2008).

On momentum or trend-following strategies in broader contexts, see
Asness–Liew–Stevens 
(1997), 
Griffin–Ji–Martin 
(2005), 
Bhojraj–
Swaminathan 
(2006), 
Ribeiro–Loeys 
(2006), 
Blitz–van 
Vliet 
(2008),
Pukthuanthong–Levich–Thomas 
(2007), 
Asness–Moskowitz–Pedersen
(2009), and Moskowitz–Ooi–Pedersen (2010). The last two studies also
review explanations of why these strategies work so well.

On momentum in stock selection, see Jegadeesh–Titman (1993, 2006),
Grinblatt–Moskowitz (2004), Grinblatt–Han (2005), Sias (2007), Figelman
(2007), Novy-Marx (2009), and Wang–Xu (2010). On lead–lag relations
across economically related firms or countries, see Cohen–Frazzini (2008)
and Rizova (2010).
...