16

Growth factor and growth premium

• The next four chapters discuss four underlying factors that
I consider most important for determining long-run returns:
growth, inflation, liquidity, and tail risks. All these factors tend to
offer larger ex ante risk premia following adverse shocks.
• The growth factor is closest to the equity market factor and
the equity premium. It captures general economic growth
prospects but is also closely related to market risk aversion.
• Long-lived risky assets reflect both secular and cyclical
growth prospects, neither of which is easy to predict.
• Overall economic growth sets some speed limits to
aggregate profit growth although the profits-to-GDP ratio can
make very large and long-lasting swings around its normal level.
However, the speed limit that is relevant for stock investors is
earnings-per-share growth—not aggregate earnings (profits)
growth. The real trend rate of growth in earnings or dividends per
share is only 0% to 2% over long periods, lagging the real GDP
growth rate and aggregate profit growth rate because of dilution
(the necessity for companies to issue more shares to raise the
capital needed for growth).
• The link between equity market returns and economic
growth is surprisingly tenuous. Even over long time windows,
countries with high economic growth have not had particularly
high equity returns. The predictive relation from growth to returns
is even worse than the contemporaneous relation because
abnormal growth appears mean-reverting. Buying the fastest
growing countries, sectors, or stocks of the preceding 5 to 10
years is often a bad investment idea. One reason is excessive
extrapolation and overpricing of growth.
• Stock market returns and yield curve steepness are the best
known predictors of future economic growth.

...
16.1 INTRODUCTION TO UNDERLYING FACTORS IN
CHAPTERS 16–19

The previous eight chapters (8–15) described a variety of expected return
drivers—static asset class premia and dynamic trading strategies. It is often
useful to shift thinking away from expected asset or strategy returns and instead
focus on their underlying return drivers (factor risk premia). Each asset or
strategy 
can 
be 
viewed 
as 
a 
bundle 
of 
relevant 
characteristics 
or 
factor
sensitivities. For example, corporate bonds are exposed to interest rate, credit,
and liquidity risks—and even more fundamentally to growth, inflation, and
volatility risks. Data for estimating such underlying exposures do not arrive
disentangled, but need to be extracted from asset market data with the help of
statistical cross-sectional or time series analysis:
• These underlying characteristics may be priced inconsistently across
assets, leading to an opportunity to “arbitrage” them in cross-asset long–
short trades, especially for HFs that can isolate, hedge, lever, and/or short
exposures.
• Sometimes a given factor sensitivity or a characteristic appears to
offer exceptionally high or low rewards in all assets exposed to it (whether
due to a risk premium or to mispricing); this circumstance leads to an
opportunity for factor timing or market timing.
What are the underlying risk factors? There is no uniquely correct answer but
here are some useful perspectives. A single story is not enough, given the
versatility 
of 
assets 
and 
their 
drivers. 
The 
factor 
choices 
are 
inherently
subjective though guided by both theory and experience. Relevant underlying
factors (1) give rise to common covariation across asset returns and (2) are
“priced” (i.e., they influence expected asset returns). I deem the four most
important factors growth, inflation, liquidity, and tail risks (where the last
consists mainly of volatility, correlation, and skew) and discuss them in this
chapter and Chapters 17–19 (see the new face of the rotated cube).

Table 16.1 shows correlations between asset and/or strategy returns and factor
proxies between 1990 and 2009. For factor proxies, I use monthly change in the
consensus forecast of next year real-GDP growth and next year inflation rate in
the U.S., change in a Bank of England composite liquidity index (which I must
extend from both ends with other proxies because the BoE series covers 1992–
2008; see Appendix B), and change in equity index volatility (the VIX index).

I will use these underlying factors to analyze and explain the returns of 15
asset classes or strategy styles:
• Four traditional asset classes: developed market equities, emerging
market equities, excess return of 10-year Treasuries over short-dated bills
(“duration”), and excess return of IG corporates over duration-matched
Treasuries (“credit”).
• Four proxies for alternative assets: the S&P GSCI commodity
futures index, the (admittedly non-tradable) HFR hedge fund index, a listed
REITs index to proxy private real estate, and a listed PE firm index to
proxy private equity investments.
• Excess returns on the four dynamic strategies I have just covered:
global stock selection based on value (combining U.S. and non-U.S. value
composites), G10 currency carry, commodity momentum, and equity index
volatility selling. (Carry and momentum results would be broadly similar if
I 
used 
the 
broader 
multi-asset-class 
carry 
and 
momentum 
proxies
introduced in Sections 13.5 and 14.5, instead of specific indices.)
Table 16.1. Correlations of various assets/strategies on four factor proxies
and the S&P 500, 1990–2009

Sources: Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, Bank of England, Citigroup,
LPX, MSCI Barra, FTSE, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Hedge Fund
Research, Barclays Capital, S&P GSCI, Ken French’s website, Brevan
Howard, own calculations.

• The three most prominent long–short strategy returns from Kenneth
French’s 
data 
library, 
proxying 
for 
size 
(SMB), 
value 
(VMG), 
and
momentum (MOM) strategies in U.S. stock selection.
In Table 16.1, I sort the 15 assets or strategies based on their in-sample market
beta (vs. the S&P 500, as shown in the rightmost column). The results make
intuitive sense, which is especially gratifying when I relate asset returns to
“pure fundamentals”—changing consensus views on GDP and CPI—instead of
other financial market series. Risky equity assets have most growth exposure,
while only trend/momentum, value, and duration are good at diversifying
growth risk. Commodities benefit understandably most from rising inflation,
while long Treasuries suffer the most. All risky assets suffer when market
illiquidity or volatility escalates—volatility selling strategies and credit-vs.-
Treasury strategies most of all—while momentum-oriented strategies tend to
serve as good diversifiers in such times as well.

I 
stress 
that 
the 
correlations 
shown 
are 
contemporaneous, 
unlike 
the
predictive correlations shown in the timing models discussed in Chapters 8
through 10. The goal here is to explain the underlying determinants of various
investments’ monthly returns—not to predict them.

Correlation statistics are admittedly a little bland. To give more color, in each
of the next four chapters I will show a bar chart that contrasts the average
returns of these 15 assets or strategies when each factor is “high” or “low”
(above or below its median). Such analysis can help identify each investment’s
role in the portfolio in terms of economic scenarios (e.g., revealing whether, and
to what extent, nominal government bonds perform in their expected role as
deflation hedges and commodity futures as inflation hedges).

Even though correlations between the four factors are not high, the way that
assets or strategies rank, based on each factor, is surprisingly similar. Assets or
strategies with high positive equity market correlations tend also to have high
growth factor correlations, negative illiquidity correlations, and negative VIX
correlations. Especially after the systemic shock of 2008, the single S&P factor
can 
explain 
a 
lot 
of 
historical 
cross-asset 
variation. 
In 
more 
ordinary
environments, a multi-factor perspective is essential. In any case, this analysis is
just an appetizer. Multiple regressions or partial correlations are needed to tease
out the distinct roles of the four underlying factors (see section “Combining
factors” on p. 326).

Other factor choices

This type of analysis on asset return drivers could be made extremely granular.
Practitioner risk models may include a long list of risk factors for equities,
another list tailor-made for bonds, maybe another for currencies, yet another for
hedge funds, and so forth. Going to the other extreme, academics try to find one
or a few common underlying risk factors that ideally apply to all assets—not
just one asset class. The CAPM and the Consumption CAPM define risk as
covariance with market return or with consumption growth, respectively. In
between, multi-factor models include macroeconomic factors (Chen–Roll–Ross,
1986 with factors related to growth and inflation), asset return factors (Fama
and French’s market, size, and value factors, expanded in Fama–French, 1993
with duration and credit factors to explain stock and bond returns), or purely
statistical 
factors. 
Other 
academics 
add 
stochastic 
volatility, 
liquidity 
risk,
investments, and human capital to their models. Purely statistical approaches,
such 
as 
principal 
components 
analysis, 
identify 
important 
common 
return
drivers without naming them; these statistical factors may then be loosely
labeled by correlating them with observable factors.

Here, I take the middle ground and try to pick four underlying risk factors
that can explain both conceptually and empirically much of the cross-sectional
variation among assets and asset classes as well as time variation in expected
returns. I doubt that rational risk factors can explain everything. My description
of the nature of the four exposures is thus deliberately ambiguous. I do not
know whether they are sensitivities to rationally priced systematic risk factors,
on the one hand, or common key characteristics related to investor irrationality
or learning about structural changes, on the other. I will focus below on risk-
based explanations but also comment on alternative interpretations related to
behavioral biases and learning.

Detour to the literature on characteristics vs. covariances. Irrationality stories
argue that an asset’s characteristics are what is priced: investors dislike value
stocks, small caps, illiquid stocks, poor diversifiers, etc.—which makes these
assets cheaper and gives them the potential for higher future returns. For
example, a stock with a high book/price ratio is deemed a value stock by this
characteristic. 
Standard 
finance 
models 
do 
not 
suggest 
that 
characteristics
should determine assets’ required returns; instead, their sensitivities to (or
covariances with) common risk factors should determine them. Stocks with a
given set of characteristics often have high sensitivities to shocks affecting a
factor that corresponds to the characteristic (value factor, size factor, liquidity
factor, or correlation factor, respectively). One aspect of a stock’s riskiness is
captured by its beta to the VMG factor (i.e., its typical covariation with excess
return of value over growth stocks). In rational multi-factor models, a risk factor
is priced if assets with higher sensitivities to it tend to earn higher long-run
returns 
as 
a 
compensation 
for 
bearing 
factor 
risk. 
In 
general, 
these
characteristics and covariances are positively related (high book/price stocks
tend to move together and be positively related to the VMG factor), but
empirical horse races suggest that the characteristic tends to carry a higher risk
premium than covariance. Such evidence seems to favor irrationality stories but
the 
rationalists 
argue 
that 
the 
characteristic 
might 
be 
a 
good 
proxy 
for
imperfectly estimated factor beta.

Risk premia applied to factors

Expected returns or risk premia for factors are no more observable than they are
for assets. In academic models, different risk factors may each have a different
market price of risk (λ
j
), reflecting their different covariances with marginal
utility (bad times). Among the four premia, the inflation premium should then
be the lowest, given inflation’s less consistent link to bad times.

Moreover, these covariances may not be constant over time, so factors have
timevarying (and maybe sign-varying) premia. Examples: (1) The BRP and
inflation premium were very high in the early 1980s, not just because inflation
was 
high 
and 
volatile 
(standalone 
risk) 
but 
because 
high 
inflation 
and
consequent bond losses coincided, during that era, with recessions and low
valuations 
of 
assets 
other 
than 
bonds 
(bad 
times). 
(2) 
The 
correlation 
of
liquidity conditions with bad times became especially noticeable during the
2007–2008 Credit Crunch and liquidity drought, resulting in sharply wider
liquidity premia. (3) The ERP and growth premium were high for decades
following the Great Depression. Maybe this is in the nature of the beast—
extreme conditions in any risk factor tend to coincide with bad times even if
normally the link is weak.

Memory effects may also contribute. It is not surprising that various risk
premia peak soon after stress events and decay gradually thereafter, albeit at
varying speeds. Stress events inherently imply an elevated amount of risk, and
such times often trigger enhanced risk aversion. Irrational feedback effects can
also 
be 
influential. 
The 
persistent 
success 
of 
any 
factor 
may 
lead 
to
extrapolation and active marketing of investment products based on the factor
feeding return-chasing fund inflows. Such dynamics were apparent with equity
value, FX carry, and volatility-selling strategies in 2006–2007, just as they were
with 
static 
asset 
classes 
(equity, 
real 
estate, 
and 
credit 
booms). 
Related
overcrowding made each selloff worse when the turn finally came. Chapter 20
will focus on such feedback effects.
Combining factors

I will not focus on ways of “putting the pieces together” to any great degree
except for introducing one workhorse financial economists often use, the multi-
factor model. The relation between expected returns and factors could be
assumed to be linear, as in equation (5.5): E(r)
i
= Σ β
ij
λ
j
. Model specification
and estimation then involves identifying relevant factors and proxies for them,
estimating asset sensitivities to them, and rewards the market offers for bearing
each risk. (Asset risk premia can be partly overlapping but the same is true for
factor risk premia. Statistical techniques exist to help avoid double-counting or
incorporating correlations across factors.)

One approach would be to use return-based factors (asset classes and strategy
styles as factors). In the spirit of Chapters 8–15, I sketch a plausible model
which proposes that expected excess return for any asset reflects the summed
product of various betas (asset sensitivity to a given factor) and corresponding
factor risk premia (market price of risk for the factor) for at least the following
six factors:
Asset expected excess return (over cash)

(16.1)

The proposed model is non-standard because such analysis tends to focus on
one asset class at a time. For an analysis to encompass multiple asset classes,
broader style proxies may be more relevant. Moreover, if we think that expected
returns reflect asset characteristics more than risk sensitivities, we can replace
the 
last 
three 
factor 
betas 
with 
some 
measures 
of 
valuation, 
carry, 
and
momentum. 
A 
cross-sectional 
regression 
could 
be 
run, 
say, 
every 
month
between many asset returns against their various betas or characteristics, to
estimate the independent market reward (premia) for each factor during this
period. 
Averaging 
these 
premia 
over 
time 
would 
show 
which 
factors 
are
consistently rewarded. More heroically, these average premia can be used to
estimate each asset’s expected excess return. Empirical analysis may focus on
short-term (say, monthly) expected returns—not on long-term expected returns.
I do not necessarily endorse this approach as practically useful. A consistent
framework across different investment types is appealing but may lose some
valuable detail in each asset class or strategy.

Instead of return-based factors, we could specify underlying risk factors, such
as growth, inflation, and illiquidity. Ideally, we could design investable proxies
but the factor proxies used in the following chapters are not investable:
Asset expected excess return (over cash)

(16.2)

A key advantage in using multi-factor models is that they can consistently
assess the expected returns of diverse assets that are influenced by multiple
drivers. However, their use requires simplifying assumptions and resulting
expected return estimates come with noise.

...
16.2 INTRODUCTION TO THE GROWTH FACTOR

I start with the factor that is closest to the equity risk premium. Equity
investments are the main way that investors participate in economic growth
and reap long-run reward for bearing uncertainty about growth. “The
growth factor” is related to aggregate wealth changes and to economic
growth. The net present value of aggregate wealth capitalizes current and
expected future cash flows in the economy, which in turn depend on growth
created by productive investments. Listed equities constitute the largest and
probably most volatile part of aggregate wealth. Moreover, equity market
returns appear positively correlated with other risky assets and with less
measurable wealth (such as human capital and privately held assets), so
these too are sensitive to the growth factor. Time variation in cash flow
forecasts and in market risk appetite or sentiment may well be procyclical
as well.

At first blush, the link between growth and risky asset returns seems
obvious, both across assets (faster growing stocks, industries, and countries
should have higher returns) and over time (faster growth should coincide
with higher risky asset returns). The empirical relations are surprisingly
ambiguous, 
perhaps 
due 
to 
overpricing 
of 
growth. 
No 
investment 
or
characteristic is attractive at any price. Furthermore, economic growth may
benefit labor and consumers more than capital owners or it may benefit new
or privately held enterprises more than listed companies.

Growth can be related to both unexpected and expected (required) asset
returns. Since equity prices are forward looking, equity returns and equity
valuation ratios should have a stronger positive relation with future growth
than with past or contemporaneous growth. But forecasting growth is not
easy.
What growth are we talking about? There are many angles to growth
(growth of wealth; GDP or consumption growth; earnings, dividends, or
profit growth; credit growth that may have links to liquidity, risk appetite,
and default prospects, etc.). The source of economic growth matters. GDP
growth reflects both productivity growth and labor force growth. Certain
types of growth are of greatest benefit to investorshareholders while other
types accrue more to consumers, labor, and private entrepreneurs. One
important empirical finding is that trend growth rates in real GDP and real
earnings per share or dividends per share have not been equal, even though
this assumption is commonly made. The latter series have historically
lagged GDP growth rate, and by substantial amounts.

It can be useful to distinguish secular (e.g., trend productivity) and
cyclical growth and their impact on asset returns:
• Secular frequency. Slow-moving or secular fluctuations are
important for long-term assets like equities. It is difficult to measure
trend productivity growth in real time but it is almost certainly of first-
order importance. Productivity growth rates and corporate profit share
in the economy appear to share common trends. Both series were high
in the 1950s and 1960s, much lower from the early 1970s to the early
1990s, and again higher from the mid-1990s until recently. Such
variation could reflect the uneven pace of technological progress; the
shifting 
pendulum 
between 
markets 
and 
the 
state; 
the 
degree 
of
globalization and financialization; inflation trends; demographic and
institutional changes; and even war vs. peace. Despite common trends,
it seems useful to distinguish (trend) GDP growth and fluctuating
profits/GDP share, and the relations of each of these to asset returns.
• Cyclical frequency. Fluctuations related to business cycles and
monetary policy cycles are surprisingly important, even for the prices
of long-term assets, although such fluctuations could conceivably wash
out over time. For example, stock returns have been historically low in
early to mid-recessionary periods while both stocks and bonds have
fared well late in recessions and near the cyclical trough. Some assets
may be more sensitive to the stage of the business cycle (and the level
of resource utilization or slack) than to the economy’s growth rate.
Chapter 26 will describe average asset returns at various stages of the
U.S. business cycle. Cyclical variation in asset returns may not only
reflect cyclical cash flow forecasts or default probabilities but also
timevarying discount rates or risk appetite.

...
16.3 THEORY AND EVIDENCE ON GROWTH

Theory associates high expected growth rates with high asset prices today,
not with high expected returns

Recall that an asset’s price reflects its expected future cash flows (in the
numerator of equation (5.1)) and a discount rate that incorporates the
riskless rate and risk premia (in the denominator). Finance theory says that,
if markets are in equilibrium and prices are fair, then expected asset returns
equal 
the 
required 
discount 
rate 
(thus 
expected 
returns 
are 
in 
the
denominator—not in the numerator). If expected cash flow growth (in the
numerator) is considered exceptionally high, this may not boost expected
asset returns at all but just raises today’s asset price. Comparing two stocks,
a firm with fast-growing future cash flows deserves a higher price than a
firm with poor growth prospects. If the firms are deemed equally risky, they
should in theory have the same discount rates [1]. In reality, future growth
is uncertain. More optimistic forecasts of future growth imply higher stock
prices and valuation multiples.

In theory, the riskless real interest rate reflects economy-wide growth
prospects—the marginal product of capital or a related number based on
consumption smoothing logic (because a high riskless real rate is needed to
smooth 
consumption 
over 
a 
high-growth 
period) 
[2]. 
Classic 
finance
theories assume constant risk premia over time (even if they state that assets
that 
tend 
to 
perform 
poorly 
in 
bad 
times 
warrant 
high 
risk 
premia).
However, some recent models contain the idea of countercyclically time-
varying risk premia.

Feasible trend output growth sets speed limits

Before turning to shorter term growth prospects and their impact on asset
returns, I stress how important long-term growth is to long-lived assets such
as equities. Any empirical analysis that involves discounting expected
future cash flows uses some concept of long-term GDP growth to anchor
cash flow growth. Most equity analysts make subjective assessments of a
firm’s ability to earn abnormal profits over the next few years but then
assume that profit growth gradually converges toward the GDP growth rate.
Thus 
it 
seems 
that 
the 
overall 
growth 
potential 
of 
an 
economy 
sets
important speed limits for all different types of growth (GDP, profits,
earnings, dividends). What is the speed limit?

• Successful firms can have real double-digit growth for some
years 
but 
not 
for 
several 
decades. 
I 
will 
not 
provide 
firm-level
evidence here. Successful countries face even tighter constraints; for
example, average real GDP-per-capita growth over 1900–2006 ranged
between 1% and 3% across 40 countries for which such data exist.
• The global economy has never, before or since, grown as fast as
the 4% annual real growth pace after World War II. (Slightly over half
of this was per-capita growth, the rest population growth which was
unsustainable and which has not been sustained.) Indeed, most of
human history has been characterized by near-zero trend growth. The
long-run real GDP-per-capita growth rate in Western economies has
been estimated by Angus Maddison (2007) at between 0% and 0.1%
p.a. for millennia until the 19th century. The Industrial Revolution and
other important developments triggered much faster growth: 1.5% for
1820–1900 and 1.9% for 1900–2000.
• The hope of new age optimists is that no speed limits apply in
the future. Besides Internet-driven optimism, such hope is based on the
idea 
of 
increasing 
returns 
from 
expanding 
knowledge 
and
technological progress. Pessimists raise questions about sustainable
growth based on climate change, environmental pollution, and scarce
natural resources. More mundane issues—the stretched finances of
consumers and the public sector after the Credit Crunch, greater
regulation and state involvement, and upcoming demographic trends—
also point to slower trend growth than that seen in the 20th century.
Many observers assume trend growth near 2%, in line with evidence
from the past century, but there are stories to justify more optimistic
and pessimistic paths. These speed limits obviously differ between
advanced (mature) and emerging economies.
How do speed limits on economic growth translate to speed limits on long-
term asset returns?

Diermeier–Ibbotson–Siegel (1984), in a classic study on speed limits, note
that the supply of total investment returns equals income returns for all
assets, plus growth in the aggregate market value of investable assets,
minus new issues. If the aggregate value of investable assets is assumed to
be a fixed proportion of social wealth, they should in the long run grow at
the same speed. The trend growth rate in real GDP, adjusted by current
yield and net new-issue data, should guide investor views of sustainable
long-run real returns. Note that stock returns can persistently outpace
economic growth because these returns include dividend income—not just
dividend growth.

In the very long run, profits cannot grow at a faster (slower) rate than the
overall 
economy. 
Otherwise, 
the 
profits/GDP 
ratio 
would 
explode
(implode). This ratio appears to be mean-reverting over time, but it can
contain quite long trends, which makes trend GDP growth a relatively weak
anchor for profit growth.

Most observers may have genuinely thought that the trend GDP growth
rate would be a floor to any estimates of trend earnings growth, but it
actually has proved to be a ceiling. Arnott–Bernstein (2002) shocked many
readers by documenting empirically that, over more than a century, the
trend earnings-per-share (EPS) growth rate (below 2% per annum) has been
well below the GDP growth rate (above 3%) and even lagged the GDP-per-
capita growth rate of 2% (see Figure 8.12 and Table 8.4). Another study
showed that real dividend growth over the 20th century averaged near 0%
across countries and lagged real GDP growth in 15 of the 16 countries
studied.

The persistent decline in the EPS/GDP ratio and evidence of a mean-
reverting (rather than declining) profits/GDP share can be reconciled by
making a distinction between aggregate earnings growth and EPS growth.
Aggregate corporate profit growth has better matched the long-run output
growth rate than has the EPS growth rate, but only the latter matters for
valuing 
the 
market. 
Aggregate 
corporate 
profits 
are 
measured 
for 
all
equities—listed and unlisted. Current shareholders only benefit from EPS
growth 
in 
listed 
shares 
and 
miss 
the 
entrepreneurial 
dynamism 
and
presumably faster profit growth in the unlisted sector. If economic growth
requires capital expenditure, this reduces current dividends or requires new
issuance; higher future earnings from these higher investments are of no
benefit to current shareholders. Ritter (2005) summarizes: “Empirically,
what matters for stock returns is how much of an economy’s growth comes
from reinvestment of earnings into positive NPV investments in existing
publicly traded companies, versus how much of it comes from personal
savings that are then invested in private companies or new issues of equity
from existing companies.” As noted in Section 8.4.3, of the 3% compound
average aggregate real earnings growth in the past 60 to 80 years, existing
investors have enjoyed only about 1% (real EPS growth), while 2% has
been diluted by new equity issuance. This fact is not widely understood,
partly because Wall Street has little incentive to highlight such findings.

Finally, speed limits are set on all investable assets—not just equities. A
given trend GDP growth rate may imply a certain feasible long-run return
for all assets (equity and debt) together, but this return could be divided
between a low real riskless rate and a high equity premium or a high real
rate 
and 
a 
low 
equity 
premium—depending 
on 
investor 
preferences
(impatience, risk aversion, consumption smoothing, and liquidity needs);
the relative sizes of different asset classes; and tax policies, laws, and
regulations.

Determinants of growth

Not surprisingly, an extensive literature studies the determinants of long-run
growth for countries or firms. This fascinating topic would take us too far
from this book’s central themes but I summarize some key observations.

Economy-wide growth is supported by good institutions (property rights,
lack of corruption, capital markets), market-oriented policies that sustain
macroeconomic 
stability 
(including 
low 
inflation), 
investing 
in
infrastructure (including a healthy and educated labor force), and expanding
knowledge 
(via 
technological 
progress 
and 
openness 
to 
the 
global
economy).

Firm-level 
earnings 
growth 
reflects 
investment 
in 
new 
assets 
and
improving the efficiency of existing assets. Not all growth is profitable;
some empire-building acquisitions and projects may be value destroying.
Exploiting a firm’s competitive advantage is the main sustainable source of
abnormal profits.

...
16.4 ASSET MARKET RELATIONS

Stock market returns and yield curve steepness are the two financial series
whose relation to economic growth has attracted the most attention. I
discuss each of these before reviewing sensitivities to growth of various
asset classes.

...
16.4.1 Relations between equity market returns and earnings or GDP
growth rates

This question can be studied from several perspectives: cross-sectional or
time 
series 
relations, 
firm-level 
or 
aggregate 
relations, 
and
contemporaneous 
or 
predictive 
relations. 
Empirical 
findings 
are 
quite
ambiguous, many relations are weak, and some relations are even negative.
The most prominent one is underperformance of growth stocks.

Cross-sectional relations across firms and countries

Growth stocks with high valuation ratios and high past earnings growth
rates have lower future returns than value stocks. The same is true for
stocks of firms with high analyst forecasts of long-term earnings growth.
After a few years, growth stocks and value stocks have similar earnings
growth rates although market P/Es and analyst forecasts had expected wide
growth rate gaps to persist. The main explanation for outperformance of
value 
stocks 
is 
overpricing 
of 
growth. 
Fast 
growth 
is 
an 
appealing
characteristic but not at any price. Past growth is not as predictive of future
growth as the market seems to believe: exceptional growth rates tend to
normalize faster than market P/E ratios imply (see Chapter 12). However,
certain other growth and profitability measures exhibit a mild positive
relation with future returns.

Another surprising cross-sectional finding is the absence of a positive
relation across countries between long-term economic growth and stock
market returns. Dimson–Marsh–Staunton (2010) find that countries whose
real GDP per capita grew faster than average over a 110-year history
(1900–2009) did not have higher real equity market returns than their
slower growing peers even during the same period. Depending on how
growth rates and returns are defined, the relation was mildly negative or
mildly positive. More tactically, stock markets in countries with especially
high or low GDP growth rates over the preceding 5 years subsequently
earned similar Sharpe ratios as markets in countries with middling past
growth.

Figure 16.1 shows similar evidence regionally over a 22-year window.
Real GDP growth in Asia ex-Japan was roughly three times faster than in
other 
regions, 
but 
equity 
market 
returns 
there 
were 
unexceptional. 
In
contrast, Latin America’s GDP growth was ordinary but equity performance
staggering (partly thanks to very cheap valuation levels in the 1980s and a
shift over time to more capital-friendly economic policies). Japan is the one
place where slow growth and poor equity returns did go hand in hand
(following decades of abnormal growth and high equity returns).

Figure 16.1. Long-run economic growth and equity returns may not go
hand in hand.

Sources: Bloomberg, International Monetary Fund, MSCI Barra.

How about that investor darling China? MSCI only has Chinese equity
return data since 1993. By the end of 2009, after wild swings, a USD-based
investor would have earned a slightly negative total return—and this during
a 17-year period when China’s real annual GDP growth averaged 10%.
Using 
slightly 
different 
units: 
China’s 
economy 
grew 
fivefold, 
plus
inflation, over 1993–2009 and equity index investors still lost money.

Speidell et al. (2005) show that shareholder dilution as a result of new
capital raising by firms is much more severe in emerging markets than in
developed markets and that the damage to investors is worst in Asia ex-
Japan. Over an 11-year period when emerging market capitalization grew,
on average, by 13.1% annually, existing shareholders enjoyed annual price
(total) returns of only 3.2% (5.4%). Remaining market cap growth was
diluted by new and secondary issuance boosting the number of shares. (The
average 
price 
dilution 
rate 
is 
thus 
almost 
10% 
in 
emerging 
markets,
compared with the 2% dilution rate in the U.S. over the same period and
over 
longer 
periods 
analyzed 
by 
Bernstein–Arnott, 
2003 
and 
Cornell,
2010.)

Confusing 
market 
cap 
growth 
with 
investor 
returns 
is 
a 
dangerous
mistake. Recall that market capitalization reflects stock price times the
number of shares (for any single firm or aggregated across all firms in a
market). The price return that shareholders experience thus equals market
cap growth minus dilution, and total return equals the price return plus
dividends. Total return for investors equals the rate of market cap growth
only if shareholders can maintain their ownership position in all companies
simply by reinvesting their total returns into share issuance (Dilution =
Dividends). This condition may be roughly satisfied in advanced economies
over the long run, but it tends to be glaringly off in fast-growing emerging
economies that have high capital needs and are investor favorites.

Box 16.1. Emerging markets as a growth thermometer

Emerging market equities have often served as a thermometer of
financial markets’ growth optimism. Critics argue that they offer
limited diversification, just a high-beta play on general risk appetite or
global growth expectations. However, emerging markets have their
own story or stories. After a bull market for emerging economies in the
early 1990s, this story turned negative amidst successive crises in
1994–1998 (Mexico, Asia, Russia), before giving way to sustained
positive developments in the 2000s. The secular rise of the developing
world, led by the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China), is a
compelling story—especially since it coincides with what could even
be an absolute decline in aging G7 economies. The growth edge of
emerging markets will be especially pronounced in the coming years
as developed economies de-lever while emerging economies benefit
from global monetary policy that is easier than they need, in addition
to a productivity boost unleashed by better economic policies and
benign demographics.

Yet, valuations matter and this is such a consensus trade that the
story may already be fully in market prices. I have already noted that a
sustained growth edge does not always translate into equity market
outperformance. Figure 16.2 offers something to both camps. It shows
that, historically, emerging markets have outperformed developed
markets when starting from cheap valuations. Late-2009 relative
valuations are high but not yet at the peak levels seen in the early
1990s. It is conceivable that emerging markets will be sustainably re-
rated so that their P/E ratios again lie above those of developed
markets. In the past, the low relative P/E ratio reflected a high risk
premium (for greater political risk, less investor protection, lower
liquidity, etc.) which more than offset emerging economies’ growth
edge. In the coming decade the additional required risk premium may
be lower and the growth edge higher. Despite my value orientation I
would not bet against emerging markets’ continued outperformance.

Figure 16.2. Relative valuations and relative performance of emerging
vs. developed market equities.

Sources: Bloomberg, Brevan Howard, own calculations.

Incidentally, most emerging market indices start in the late 1980s
when these markets were relatively cheap. Over a longer history
(1976–2009) which includes the early-1980s’ underperformance,
emerging markets have actually lagged developed markets (9.5% vs.
10.5% annual return).

Time series relations between equity returns and growth surprises/growth
rates

Perhaps the cleanest way to assess different assets’ sensitivities to economic
growth 
is 
to 
study 
the 
market’s 
reactions 
to 
surprises 
in 
economic
announcements. 
Any 
other 
approach 
involves 
almost 
insurmountable
challenges 
in 
matching 
asset 
returns 
to 
macroeconomic 
data. 
(The
challenges include temporal lining up of the series, which is ambiguous due
to publication lags and the forward-looking nature of asset prices; proxying
unobservable expectations; and dealing with data revisions.) As expected,
equity markets and other risky assets respond positively to news of strong
economic growth, while government bonds benefit from news of weak
growth [3]. Unexpected growth news influences stock prices partly through
revision of the cyclical cash flow growth outlook but also partly through
time-varying risk aversion and sentiment. Figure 16.3 shows that the U.S.
equity 
market 
has 
tracked 
cumulative 
growth 
surprises 
in 
key
macroeconomic 
announcements 
startlingly 
well. 
Several 
regular
announcements related to real activity are tracked; actual releases are
compared with consensus forecasts; a binary surprise value (+1 or—1) is
assigned to each release; and these values are summed over time. (The
graph 
uses 
an 
in-house 
growth 
surprise 
index 
but 
many 
Wall 
Street
economists offer variants of the same idea.)

Another 
strand 
of 
literature 
focuses 
on 
contemporaneous 
relations
between earnings news and equity returns. At the firm level the relation is
clearly positive: positive earnings surprises trigger significant equity price
appreciation—and 
even 
some 
postannouncement 
upward 
price 
drift
(apparent 
underreaction). 
However, 
at 
the 
aggregate 
level 
the
contemporaneous relation between earnings news (realized past quarter and
announcement quarter earnings) and stock market returns is negative. This
finding may reflect the forward-looking nature of stock prices (they reflect
cash flow news several quarters and years ahead) or the offsetting impact of
changing required returns. If analysts’ earnings forecasts are used instead of
actual earnings, the contemporaneous relation to aggregate stock returns is
positive. This positive relation may not be fully rational: in the late 1990s,
analysts’ and investors’ overoptimism about equity markets, and especially
about tech stocks, bloomed together.

Figure 16.3. U.S. equities have tracked economic surprises since the mid-
1990s well.

Sources: Bloomberg, Brevan Howard.

Figure 16.4. U.S. equity market as a growth predictor, 1926–2009.

Sources: Haver Analytics, Federal Reserve Board, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Time series relations between equity market returns and GDP growth
rates 
also 
show 
mixed 
signs. 
Dimson–Marsh–Staunton 
(2005) 
present
empirical evidence over a century in a large number of countries. The sign
of the contemporaneous relation is inconsistent across countries but tends to
be insignificantly positive. The lead–lag relation of GDP growth predicting
future 
stock 
returns 
is 
again 
inconsistent 
but 
the 
typical 
relation 
is
insignificantly negative. The most consistent relation is in equity market
returns predicting (with a positive sign) next year GDP growth (in many
countries a significant relation). For the U.S., I find a positive correlation of
0.24 since 1926 (see Figure 16.4). The pattern is broadly similar in the 19th
century (not shown)—the positive relation is pretty robust outside major
wars (the Napoleonic wars, the U.S. Civil War, World War II).

Table 
16.1 
showed 
that 
the 
contemporaneous 
correlation 
between
monthly stock market returns and the change in economists’ consensus
forecasts of next year economic growth is mildly positive (0.33) and
comparable for other risky assets.

Finally, some words on market valuation ratios’ limited ability to predict
future cash flow growth. Over the past century, dividend yields have been
much better predictors of future market returns than of future dividend
growth [4]. More generally, it is surprisingly difficult to forecast earnings or
dividend growth. New research suggests that dividend growth may be
predictable but 
that correlated variation 
between expected growth and
expected returns may conceal this predictability. For example, in a recession
dividends may be temporarily depressed and expected to grow faster in the
future, but this effect may be offset by a higher required risk premium. The
former effect reduces dividend yield while the latter raises it. Using a
control variable besides dividend yield in a regression can uncover such
cyclical 
predictability 
(e.g., 
the 
consumption/wealth 
ratio 
or 
the
consumption/dividends ratio).

...
16.4.2 Relation between yield curve shape and economic growth

One series used to be an even better growth predictor than equity market
return. Yield curve steepness has had an impressive ability to forecast GDP
growth since World War II and inverted yield curves have been the most
successful recession predictors. Many other financial series, notably credit
spreads, also track business cycles but in a more contemporaneous fashion.
The best explanation for the yield curve’s predictive ability is that it proxies
for the Fed’s monetary policy stance: a steep (flat/inverted) curve reflects
easy (tight) monetary policy. However, some evidence of flat or inverted
curves predicting recessions go back to the mid-19th century, predating the
Fed’s inception in 1913.

Most impressively, since 1960 an inversion has preceded each recession,
with no false predictions (except 1967 using some curve measures); see
Figure 16.5. The signal worked again with the 1989 and 2000 inversions
and even with the inversion in the fourth quarter of 2005 and the first
quarter of 2006; however, the lag from the last inversion to the beginning of
the recession in December 2007 was abnormally long. This empirical
relation may be stronger when Fed tightening causes recessions and Fed
easing leads the recovery, typical features of postwar business cycles. The
story may be different in balance sheet recessions caused by financial de-
leveraging, as in the 1930s and 2008, where the Fed has less power to affect
the economy. Not surprisingly, many firms have developed composite
financial conditions indices that go beyond the monetary policy stance.
Such indices have been superior predictors of real activity during the past
decade. I should also add that the zero interest rate boundary (nominal rates
cannot 
fall 
below 
zero 
or 
investors 
prefer 
their 
mattresses 
to 
banks)
complicates yield curve analysis, including the relation between curve
steepness and economic growth prospects.

Figure 16.5. Yield curve steepness as a growth predictor, 1926–2009.
Sources: Haver Analytics, Federal Reserve Board, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

A horse race between the stock market’s ability and the yield curve’s
ability to forecast next year GDP growth indicates that the curve did a better
job during most postwar business cycles (0.56 correlation over the period
from the 1950s through the 1980s), but the stock market has been the better
predictor since the 1980s (0.46 correlation vs. the curve’s 0.13). For the
whole 1926–2009 period, equities have an edge (0.24 vs. 0.18), which they
kept in the postwar period (0.35 vs. 0.31).

...
16.4.3 Many asset classes’ growth sensitivities

Figure 
16.6 
contrasts 
average 
returns 
on 
various 
financial 
assets 
and
strategies since 1990 in two time environments, corresponding to months
when the economic growth outlook is revised up or down. Assets and
strategies are sorted here by their correlation with the growth factor, which
is proxied by monthly change in the consensus forecast of next year U.S.
real GDP growth. Most investments, starting with listed private equity and
corporate-vs.-Treasury trades, are positively exposed to growth news; long
Treasury 
positions 
(shown 
as 
“duration”) 
and 
momentum-oriented
strategies are the main exceptions.

Some new derivative assets are even more directly related to investors’
growth views than the equity market index. Dividend swaps reveal the
market’s dividend growth expectations, though their pricing also reflects
risk and liquidity premia and technical supply–demand factors. Similar
interpretation problems arise when using the break-even inflation rate for
inflation-linked bonds (vs. nominal Treasuries) as a proxy for investors’
inflation expectations.

Among single stocks, Goetzmann–Watanabe–Watanabe (2009) show that
procyclical stocks earn higher long-run returns. Specifically, stocks that are
highly correlated with the consensus forecast of near-term GDP growth
have delivered higher average returns over 45 years.

Figure 16.6. Average monthly returns when the growth factor is above or
below the median, 1990–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, LPX, MSCI Barra, FTSE,
Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Hedge Fund Research, Barclays Capital,
S&P GSCI, Ken French’s website, Brevan Howard, own calculations.
...
16.5 TIME-VARYING GROWTH PREMIUM

Because the growth premium is so closely related to the equity premium,
much of the discussion about a time-varying equity premium in Chapter 8
applies here.

Let us recall the debate regarding the countercyclical pattern in risky
assets’ expected returns. Many academic studies find that risky asset returns
are predictably high (low) after business cycle troughs (peaks). These
studies identify expected returns by the ability of some countercyclical
indicator (such as yield curve steepness or consumption–wealth ratio) to
predict near-term returns—and assume that fitted realized returns in a
regression are the expected returns of a rational market. Based on this logic,
rational investors may foresee low expected returns near a cyclical peak and
accept these as fair, thanks to their higher risk tolerance amidst abundant
wealth.

However, even if predictability regressions capture objectively feasible
near-term 
returns, 
survey 
evidence 
raises 
doubts 
about 
whether 
most
investors 
subjectively 
expect 
such 
countercyclic 
patterns. 
Individual
investor surveys, especially, suggest that at the end of expansions (near
cyclical peaks), optimistic investors have subjectively high expected returns
or a high risk appetite, which boosts today’s prices for risky assets and
reduces 
their 
prospective 
feasible 
returns. 
Conversely, 
at 
the 
end 
of
recessions (near cyclical troughs), pessimistic investors extrapolate further
trouble or require especially high risk premia, hurting today’s asset prices.
Procyclical market sentiment and procyclical risk appetite are alternative
explanations 
of 
observed 
empirical 
predictability 
patterns; 
the 
former
involves investor irrationality while the latter is consistent with rational
expectations and time-varying risk premia.
...
16.6 NOTES

[1] In equilibrium (if investors are rational), the higher price today and the
related higher valuation ratio just offsets growth stock’s advantage of faster
expected earnings growth. If investors are not fully rational, then maybe
more than offsets: proponents of investor irrationality argue that hoped-for
growth is overpriced.

[2] The theories are so general that it is not clear which real rate and which
growth rate should be so tied. However, empirical support for the tie is
weak. A cursory look at the data in Tables 3.6 and 3.7 reveals no obvious
tendency for high real yields or real bond returns to coincide with decades
of fast real growth. Or simply recall that fast productivity growth in the
1950s and 1960s as well as around 2000 coincided with relatively low real
yields, while slow productivity growth in the 1980s coincided with high
real yields. Other influences seem to matter more.

[3] One exception is that the equity market impact of employment (and
more broadly growth) news varies over the business cycle. When there is
abundant slack in the economy, equity markets respond positively to news
of stronger growth or rising employment. However, when an expansion is
more mature, equity markets respond negatively. The main explanation is
that further growth is seen as inflationary amidst tight capacity utilization
and 
likely 
to 
prompt 
monetary 
policy 
tightening. 
Another, 
related
explanation (that does not involve forecasting monetary policy) is that, in
an overheated economy, the cost of scarce labor and materials is expected to
grow faster than revenues.

[4] Stock market valuation ratios reflect changing expected future cash
flows and discount rates (required returns). Early studies that documented
dividend yields’ ability to predict future equity returns prompted several
papers that highlighted econometric flaws in the analysis. However, as John
Cochrane notes in the aptly titled “The dog that did not bark” (2008a),
under reasonable assumptions dividend yields must forecast either future
returns or dividend growth—the only question is how much of each. Thus,
dividend yields’ inability to predict future dividend growth implied new
evidence about their ability to predict future market returns. Paraphrasing
Sherlock Holmes, the curious incident that dividend yields do not predict
future dividend growth is strong evidence in favor of return predictability.
Yet, Chen (2008) provides evidence to challenge these results in different
sample periods.

Source notes. Probably the best known multi-factor models are Chen–Roll–
Ross 
(1986) 
with 
macro-factors 
and 
Fama–French 
(1992, 
1993) 
with
financial factors. On multi-factor models in general and on links between
financial assets and real economy, see Ferson–Harvey (1991), Cochrane
(2005, 2006), and Melas–Suryanarayanan–Cavaglia (2010). On the speed
limits of economic growth, see Diermeyer–Ibbotson–Siegel (1984), Arnott–
Bernstein 
(2002), 
Bernstein–Arnott 
(2003), 
Ibbotson–Chen 
(2003),
Maddison (2007), and Barro–Ursua (2008).

On the muted relations between equity market returns and economic
growth, 
see 
Bernstein–Arnott 
(2003), 
Dimson–Marsh–Staunton 
(2005,
2010), Ritter (2005), Speidell et al. (2005), Cornell (2010); also see Section
8.4.3. On the relation between curve steepness and business cycles, see
Harvey (1989), Fama–French (1989), and Estrella (2005). On the average
returns of procyclical stocks, see Goetzmann–Watanabe–Watanabe (2009).
On the relation between dividend yield and future growth, see Lettau–
Ludvigson (2005), Santos–Veronesi (2006), Chen (2008), and Cochrane
(2008a).

...