18

Liquidity factor and illiquidity premium

• Liquidity is a nebulous, multi-faceted concept which the
events of 2007–2008 brought to the attention of all market
players.
• Privately traded assets tend to be less liquid than publicly
traded assets, alternatives less liquid than traditional assets, small-
cap stocks less liquid than large-cap stocks, and non-government
bonds less liquid than Treasuries.
• It is clear that liquidity-related premia have a significant
impact on expected asset returns. Both the illiquidity
characteristic and an asset’s tendency to underperform amid
liquidity droughts warrant higher required returns.
• These pricing effects are hard to empirically disentangle
from each other—or from other asset premia. Yet, long-run
average returns appear consistently higher for less liquid assets.
The flip side is that liquidity droughts tend to coincide with other
aspects of bad times, such as equity meltdowns and recessions.
• Liquidity premia vary over time—a fact that became
abundantly clear in recent years. Many ex ante liquidity premia
were driven through competition to record-low levels in 2006–
2007, and then they widened to record-wide levels in 2008 when
the demand for liquidity rose and the supply for it plummeted.
The reward for liquidity provision over time is empirically related
to measures of illiquidity and to market volatility.
• True long-horizon investors have a natural edge in
harvesting illiquidity premia, and they should exploit this edge.
Yet, they too should take into account time variation in these
premia and act in a contrarian fashion.
Macro-oriented growth and inflation factors do not capture the liquidity
differences across investments or changing liquidity conditions over time.
This chapter focuses on the liquidity-related factors that drive expected
returns (see cube).

...
18.1 INTRODUCTION

What is liquidity and how does it vary across assets?

The term “liquidity” is used differently in at least four distinct (albeit
loosely related) contexts: (1) the overall monetary environment; (2) the
condition of balance sheets of corporations and other sectors; (3) funding
liquidity (i.e., the ability of traders to finance their levered positions); and
(4) financial market liquidity or ease of trading. I focus on the last context
and note that it can be assessed at asset, sector, and market levels.

Market liquidity refers to the ability to trade an asset at low cost and with
minimal price impact. Liquidity gives asset holders the flexibility to sell
their holdings when needed, akin to a put option. Liquidity is more valuable
to an active short-horizon trader than to a passive investor. Even long-
horizon 
investors 
value 
liquidity 
because 
it 
gives 
them 
the 
option 
to
rebalance their portfolios, or to modify their portfolios as market prices and
prospects change. Large illiquid holdings in bad times, such as 2008, may
force investors to sell their more liquid holdings at poor prices and to forego
attractive buying opportunities.
Elusiveness is reinforced as a result of the many facets to financial market
liquidity:
• tightness (how wide bid–ask spreads are);
• depth (the degree to which one can execute immediately with
little market impact);
• resilience (how fast prices recover to “equilibrium” levels after a
trading shock)

Alternative 
empirical 
liquidity 
measures 
reflect 
these 
different 
facets.
Measures related to trading costs include bid–ask spreads, commissions,
and price impact proxies. (Such proxies include absolute return to volume
ratio, return reversal induced by order flow, and “effective cost” or gap
between the execution price and the midpoint between bid and ask quotes.)
For large institutional investors, the price impact of their trading is often the
largest cost. Measures related to trading activity include dollar volume,
turnover 
ratio, 
proportion 
of 
zero 
daily 
returns, 
and 
short-term 
return
autocorrelation.

Market liquidity can vary by asset type, size of the position, need for
immediacy in the transaction, and market environment. Funding liquidity is
more trader specific.

Across asset classes, privately held assets are deemed much less liquid
than publicly traded securities. Actively traded financial futures, major
government bonds, and currencies compete for the honor of being the most
liquid assets in the world—even more than blue-chip stocks. Within major
asset classes, small-cap stocks are less liquid than large-caps, emerging
markets are less liquid than developed markets, and corporate or securitized
bonds 
are 
less 
liquid 
than 
government 
bonds. 
Most 
alternative 
assets
(private equity, direct real estate, other real assets, and many hedge funds)
are much less liquid than traditional asset classes.

Fundamentally, 
market 
liquidity 
reflects 
the 
ease 
of 
finding
counterparties 
to 
trade 
with. 
Higher 
search 
costs 
for 
counterparties—
whether those naturally needing to take the opposite position, or financial
intermediaries or arbitrage capital looking for attractive opportunities—
raise the cost of trading. Liquidity differences can often be explained by
varying degrees of information asymmetry—a key determinant of illiquidity
that can in extreme situations cause market breakdowns. At such times, the
credibility of information about market prices—which comes from markets
being continuously traded with transparent pricing—can influence asset
valuations as much as information about economic fundamentals. General
confidence in the financial system and in the health of counterparties
supports the liquidity of all assets but especially that of more complex and
opaque 
assets; 
the 
loss 
of 
such 
confidence 
raises 
concerns 
about
information asymmetry and can result in virtual closing of more fragile
markets.

What is the (il-)liquidity premium?

The illiquidity premium, often called the liquidity premium, is an asset’s ex
ante excess return over a (more liquid) benchmark asset. I use the terms
interchangeably.

If liquidity is valued as a characteristic and assets vary cross-sectionally
in how liquid they are, expected returns will vary across assets due to an
illiquidity premium. Investors in less liquid assets need first a break-even
cushion just to offset expected extra trading costs and to provide equal
after-cost (net) expected returns, and then they may well require a premium
beyond this. The desire of some investors to avoid marking assets to market
may reduce the required premium but is unlikely to fully offset it.

If assets experience liquidity shocks in common, investors may further
require a liquidity risk premium for an asset with a higher liquidity beta
(sensitivity to a systematic liquidity factor). Academic studies show that the
liquidity premium may not just be compensation for the characteristic of
being illiquid but also for an asset’s sensitivity to fluctuations in aggregate
liquidity conditions (i.e., it is a premium for a risk factor). The two features
(which come from viewing illiquidity as both a cost and a risk) appear
closely related and are hard to disentangle.

Most empirical studies to date compare historical average ex post returns
across assets to estimate liquidity premia (effectively assuming that premia
are constant over time). If market-wide liquidity conditions or liquidity
needs and/or liquidity aversion vary over time, then these liquidity premia
also vary over time (globally or in specific sectors or asset classes). Given
what appears to be time variation in liquidity conditions and liquidity
premia, ex ante measures or regime-switching models would be preferable
over historical average returns. Market compensation for illiquidity will be
lower 
when 
liquidity 
suppliers 
are 
abundant 
and 
there 
is 
widespread
appetite for harvesting presumed liquidity premia or for holding illiquid
assets so as to avoid the mark-to-market volatility of liquid assets. Of
course, liquid assets only appear to be more volatile, because of the price
transparency that allows them to be marked to market. If one could know
the prices at which illiquid assets could be sold, they would probably be just
as volatile, or more so.

Illiquidity is an undesirable characteristic but exposure to time-varying
liquidity 
conditions 
is 
particularly 
insidious. 
Assets 
that 
only 
provide
“good-times 
liquidity” 
can 
mislead 
investors 
until 
a 
liquidity 
crisis
materializes and both the asset’s performance and liquidity plummet [1].

Why is liquidity so hard to estimate?

Difficulty of isolating. Liquidity premia and other risk premia are not
directly observable; empirically, it is hard to disentangle them. Ex ante
valuation measures (such as the spreads of corporate bonds over Treasuries)
and ex post excess returns (such as the realized size premium for small-cap
stocks) include the impact of liquidity premia as well as other premia. To
compound the problem, liquidity is multi-dimensional; any premium may
be a reward for illiquidity or for liquidity risk that are not the same; many
liquidity proxies may be used; and any premium reflects the amount and
price of liquidity.

Time-varying nature. Aggregate liquidity itself is not constant over time,
nor is the relative liquidity of different assets or asset classes, nor is the
market price of liquidity. Yet, the literature has only recently turned to the
topic of time-varying liquidity premia. However, more work on this topic
will surely follow, thanks to the experience of 2007–2008.

...
18.2 FACTOR HISTORY: HOW DOES LIQUIDITY ITSELF
VARY OVER TIME?

Empirically, many measures of liquidity (trading costs, turnover) vary over
time and are related to
• 
a 
time 
trend: 
Often 
positive 
for 
(successful) 
asset 
classes
reflecting 
innovations 
(e.g., 
securitization, 
electronic 
trading,
decimalization) 
and 
growing 
investor 
acceptance 
(e.g., 
cross-over
buying 
of 
emerging 
market 
assets, 
disappearance 
of 
the
novelty/illiquidity premium after the early years of TIPS);
• market direction (better liquidity in bull markets and economic
expansions);
• supplied liquidity (easy monetary policy and abundant leverage
boost liquidity);
• volatility and correlation (stable markets and low correlations
coincide with good liquidity);
• confidence in financial system and counterparties.

As usual, the longest data histories are available for U.S. equity markets.
Annual turnover in major stock exchanges exceeded 100% in the late
1920s, fell to about 10% between 1940 and 1970, and then began to recover
with the sharp fall in commissions and other trading costs after May Day
(1975) and various technological innovations. Eventually, decimalization
and electronic trading helped push turnover to new highs, over 200% in
2007, even as liquidity migrated outside exchanges as well.

Among 
the 
many 
trading 
cost 
studies, 
I 
highlight 
in 
Figure 
18.1
Hasbrouck’s (2009) 
econometric estimates of 
effective costs based on
closing 
price 
data 
between 
1926 
and 
2005. 
Small-cap 
stocks 
have
consistently higher trading costs than large-caps; all costs peaked during the
Great Depression; and costs have more than halved since the mid-1970s.
Other studies analyze within-day data, commissions, etc., and indicate even
sharper declines in trading costs—a fourfold to fivefold drop since the mid-
1970s.

An even more popular academic measure of market liquidity is the price
impact proxy, ILLIQ, developed by Amihud (2002): average absolute daily
return over a month divided by dollar volume. My intuition is that a given
trading volume causes a larger price move for a less liquid asset. ILLIQ is
market wide and adds up each stock’s ILLIQ measure. The series shown
below is de-trended to offset its trend decline due to sharply rising turnover.
Shocks to this level series have frequently been used in empirical studies as
the main liquidity proxy for individual assets or for the market. The de-
trended ILLIQ level shown in Figure 18.2 is clearly countercyclical. Naes–
Skjeltorp–Odegaard (2011) document rising illiquidity in the U.S. equity
market before virtually every postwar NBER recession and improvement in
liquidity conditions before each recession ends. The slight lead could reflect
the impact of the Fed’s monetary policy on market liquidity.

Figure 18.1. Effective trading cost estimates (Joel Hasbrouck) for small-
cap to large-cap U.S. stocks, 1925–2005.

Source: 
Joel 
Hasbrouck 
(2009), 
“Trading 
costs 
and 
returns 
for 
U.S.
equities: Estimating effective costs from daily data,” Journal of Finance
64(3), 1445–1477, published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Reproduced by
permission of John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Figure 18.2. De-trended market-wide illiquidity, 1947–2008.
Source: Randi Naes, Johannes Skjeltorp, and Bernt Arne Odegaard (2011),
“Stock market liquidity and the business cycle,” forthcoming in the Journal
of Finance 
in 
February 2011, published by John Wiley 
& Sons 
Ltd.
Reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Figure 18.3 goes beyond the U.S. equity market. The Bank of England’s
Financial Stability Review tracks a composite measure of financial market
liquidity in equity, debt, and currency markets, based on a variety of bid–
ask spreads, return-to-volume ratios (price impact proxies like ILLIQ), and
liquidity-related yield spreads. Details are in Appendix B. Each of the nine
constituent 
series 
is 
normalized 
based 
on 
1999–2004 
data, 
and 
the
composite series shows how many volatility units each series deviates from
its mean, on average, smoothed over time. I flip the sign to show illiquidity
as a positive number. When the Bank of England began to track this index
in early 2007, it flashed a warning sign of exceptionally abundant liquidity.
The picture soon changed, and in late 2008 we saw truly unprecedented
levels of illiquidity. The Bank of England website only has data until
2009H1 but, based on the Citi Liquidity index—another index that uses a
narrower 
information 
set, 
namely 
market 
volatilities 
and 
debt 
market
spreads—it appears that liquidity conditions had normalized to near-average
levels by the end of 2009.

Figure 18.3. Bank of England and Citi (Il-)Liquidity indices, 1992–2009.

Sources: Bank of England, Citigroup, Bloomberg, own calculations.
The 
evaporation 
of 
liquidity 
in 
many 
markets 
in 
2007–2008 
has
justifiably 
attracted 
much 
attention, 
not 
only 
among 
investors 
and
policymakers but also in academia. Brunnermeier–Pedersen (2009) link the
ease 
with 
which 
an 
asset 
is 
traded 
to 
the 
ease 
with 
which 
financial
intermediaries and levered traders can obtain funding (borrowing by using
the asset as collateral). The two features can reinforce each other, causing
liquidity 
spirals. 
The 
vicious 
circles 
involving 
simultaneously 
falling
market liquidity and funding liquidity, lower market prices, de-leveraging,
and higher volatility all contributed to the drying up of liquidity in 2007–
2008. Such dynamics make liquidity inherently procyclical and raise the
risk that liquidations from overcrowded levered positions take place at fire
sale prices.

Other lessons from the period include the fragility of liquidity as well as
the importance of trust and confidence (at the level of the whole market and
specific sectors). In some cases liquidity conditions could be described with
an extreme two-regime model—liquidity is either flush or nonexistent. In
2008 and in other liquidity crises, equity markets and other exchange-traded
assets exhibited more robust liquidity than various debt instruments traded
over the counter. Complex securities whose contents, risks, and prices were
opaque saw exceptionally sharp price falls, consistent with the asymmetric
information stories noted above.
...
18.3 HISTORICAL EVIDENCE ON AVERAGE LIQUIDITY-
RELATED PREMIA

Average liquidity premia across global markets

Before turning again to U.S. equities where most studies have focused, I
present some informal analysis of long-run average returns across asset
classes. Simply looking at realized average returns for the past 20 years in
various 
asset 
classes, 
it 
appears 
that 
liquidity 
premia 
have 
been 
an
important 
determinant 
of 
required 
returns. 
Admittedly, 
the 
return
differences across assets in Figure 18.4 may also reflect risk factors other
than liquidity as well as survivorship and other reporting biases among
actively managed funds. (Figure 2.2 shows a similar scatterplot but Sharpe
ratio on the y-axis.)

The above scatter plot includes some illiquid asset classes for which only
quarterly data exist. To study the impact of monthly variation in liquidity
conditions on average asset returns, I need to focus on relatively liquid
assets where monthly data are available. The illiquidity factor is calculated
as monthly change in the BoE liquidity index, where that index has been
sign-flipped (multiplied by—1). (Due to data limitations, I extend the series
to both 1990–1991 and 2009 using a narrower set of market illiquidity
proxies.) The assets and strategies in Figure 18.5 are sorted 
by 
their
correlation with the illiquidity factor. Now illiquidity-sensitive assets are on
the right, and good diversifiers—those that fare well when markets turn
illiquid—are on the left.

Figure 
18.4. 
Scatterplotting 
average 
asset 
returns 
1990–2009 
on
(subjective) illiquidity estimates.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
MSCI 
Barra, 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Citigroup,
Barclays Capital, J.P. Morgan, Band of America Merrill Lynch, S&P GSCI,
MIT-CRE, FTSE, Global Property Research, UBS, NCREIF, Hedge Fund
Research, Cambridge Associates, own calculations.

Figure 18.5. Average monthly returns when the illiquidity factor is above
or below its median, 1990–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Bank 
of 
England, 
Citigroup, 
LPX, 
MSCI 
Barra,
FTSE, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Hedge Fund Research, Barclays
Capital, 
S&P 
GSCI, 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Brevan 
Howard, 
own
calculations.

Illiquidity premium across stocks

A pioneering study by Amihud–Mendelson (1986) showed that liquidity is
priced as a characteristic: less liquid stocks have higher expected gross
returns (price discount). The authors argue that investors price assets based
on their expected net (after-cost) returns. Heterogeneous trading horizons
and limited capital lead to clientele effects in which short-horizon traders
focus on the most liquid assets while long-horizon investors focus on less
liquid assets. Long-horizon investors can earn rents because patient capital
is in short supply. Empirical evidence on U.S. equities is consistent with the
authors’ predictions: stocks with wider bid–ask spreads earn higher average
returns.

Turnover or volume can be used to proxy for liquidity. Chen–Ibbotson–
Hu (2010) show that stocks with low past turnover earn consistently higher
average returns than high-turnover stocks. (Yet, small-cap stocks with high
turnover perform especially poorly, perhaps because they are the proverbial
overpriced lottery tickets.) However, some liquidity crises coincide with
high turnover (position unwinds despite high trading costs) whereas a
persistent market decline tends to coincide with lower turnover. Thus,
quoted or effective bid–ask spreads and estimated price impact measures
have become more popular proxies of liquidity in academic studies.

Reasonable 
counterexamples 
argue 
against 
illiquid 
assets 
being
systematically cheap. Short-selling constraints may be more binding for less
liquid stocks, keeping them overpriced. Meanwhile, more liquid assets may
be shorted more easily (e.g., in the context of futures), keeping them
structurally cheap or at least keeping them from remaining overpriced.

Figure 18.6. Cumulative profits of a long–short decile portfolio of high-
liquidity-beta-vs.-low 
liquidity-beta 
stocks 
based 
on 
Pastor–Stambaugh
(1968–2008), as well as cumulative small-cap return advantage (F-F SMB,
1968–2009).

Sources: Lubos Pastor’s website and Ken French’s website.
Liquidity risk premium across stocks

Liquidity 
conditions 
vary 
over 
time 
and 
liquidity 
shocks 
exhibit
commonality across assets, suggesting that liquidity may be a priced risk
factor. That is, expected returns may be related to stocks’ sensitivity to
shifts in aggregate liquidity—and not just to the liquidity of the stock per
se.

Pastor–Stambaugh 
(2003) 
focus 
on 
one 
measure 
of 
market-wide
liquidity: temporary price fluctuations (return reversals) induced by order
flow. They study stocks’ sensitivities to this liquidity factor and document
that stocks with high liquidity betas outperform stocks with low liquidity
betas by 7.5% per annum (adjusted for a four-factor model of market, size,
value, and momentum). Moreover, liquidity betas appear to partly explain
the small-cap effect—and offer a superior reward. Figure 18.6 shows that
the profits from buying high-liquidity-beta stocks against low-liquidity-beta
stocks were especially consistent in the decade before 2008, but that year
saw moderately large losses for the strategy.

Disentangling illiquidity premia and liquidity risk premia

Acharya–Pedersen (2005) examine separate channels for liquidity-related
premia. In a liquidity-adjusted CAPM an asset’s expected return depends on
the illiquidity characteristic (expected liquidity differences across stocks)
and diverse beta exposures (the various ways that asset-specific returns and
liquidity comove with market returns and liquidity).

The study uses surprises in the market-wide ILLIQ series to measure
liquidity shocks among U.S. equities and estimates that expected liquidity
differences 
contribute 
to 
a 
3.5% 
per 
year 
expected 
return 
difference
between liquid and illiquid stocks. In addition, the various liquidity betas
contribute 
about 
1.1% 
difference. 
But 
since 
illiquid 
stocks 
have 
high
liquidity betas in all dimensions, it is hard to disentangle these effects.

Further evidence on average liquidity premia in U.S. stock markets

Other 
studies 
use 
numerous 
liquidity 
proxies 
or 
their 
composites 
and
typically find positive premia for illiquidity and liquidity risk. Illiquid
stocks tend to be small-cap value stocks with low prices and high liquidity
betas. Such stocks are especially prone to underreactions and valuation
uncertainty 
and 
are 
harder 
to 
arbitrage 
(exhibiting 
apparent 
return
predictability). 
Finally, 
sell-side 
(brokers’) 
illiquidity 
appears 
more
important for asset pricing than buy-side (money managers’) illiquidity,
consistent with the greater demand for immediacy and the relevance of
funding constraints.

Yet another strand of literature focuses on short-term reversal strategies
that are effectively a way of supplying liquidity to the marketplace. Trading
gains from exploiting temporary price concessions, caused by supply–
demand imbalances, can be viewed as a fair reward for such liquidity
provision. More on this in Section 18.4.

Evidence from other asset classes

Government debt (without default risk)

Several studies identify positive ex ante liquidity spreads among securities
with identical credit risk but different liquidity: the T-bill vs. maturing T-
note spread in money markets; the on-the-run vs. off-the-run Treasury
spread; 
and 
the 
government-guaranteed 
Refcorp 
bond 
spread 
over
Treasuries.
Corporate bonds

Recall the evidence that average corporate credit spreads exceed average
default and downgrading losses. Such evidence is interpreted as a sign of
long-run credit, liquidity, and/or tax premia. Several studies have tried to
disentangle these effects by using some observable proxies for liquidity
effects or by using structural credit models and/or rating agencies’ default
data histories.

One study measures illiquidity in three ways including quoted bid–ask
spreads, the frequency of zero daily returns in a year, and a model-based
indicator. Controlling for default risk and tax effects, this study shows that
illiquidity characteristics have a significant positive effect on yield spreads.

Another study decomposes corporate yield spreads, explaining them with
various credit-related factors, and interpreting the residual as compensation
for illiquidity. The residual is an especially large part of the yield of highly
rated bonds and decays between 2004 and 2006.

Yet another study estimates liquidity betas by regressing U.S. corporate
bond portfolio returns on market factors and liquidity factors (where ILLIQ
proxies for equity market liquidity and the quoted bid–ask spread on U.S.
Treasury proxies for bond market liquidity). Then they study whether
liquidity factors are cross-sectionally priced. They estimate that liquidity
premia explain a significant part of observed average return differences
across bond portfolios, more than is explained by market risk premia. The
total liquidity premium averages about 45 bp for long-dated IG bonds and
about 100 bp for high-yield bonds.

Active value and momentum strategies

Asness–Moskowitz–Pedersen (2009) show that systematic value strategies
in many asset classes tend to perform poorly amidst liquidity droughts
while systematic momentum strategies perform well. This pattern became
stronger since the 1998 LTCM liquidity crisis and presumably again in the
2007–2009 crisis as investors were harshly reminded of the importance of
liquidity. Specifically, the authors analyze composite value and momentum
strategies’ 
sensitivity 
to 
individual 
illiquidity 
measures 
(TED 
spreads,
market impact proxies, etc.) and to their composites; they find a clear
positive 
(negative) 
relation 
between 
value 
(momentum) 
strategies 
and
liquidity conditions. This finding can partly explain the observed value
premium but it makes long-run profits of momentum strategies even more
puzzling.

Alternative assets and privately held assets

Khandani–Lo (2009) show that positive autocorrelation is a good proxy for
illiquidity 
among 
hedge 
funds 
and 
that 
higher 
autocorrelations 
are
associated 
with 
higher 
average 
returns—presumably 
reflecting 
higher
required illiquidity premia. Another study shows that hedge funds with
lockups earn higher long-run returns.

Part of the long-run return premium of private equity funds as well as
real estate and other real assets is likely compensation for the illiquidity
characteristic. 
Many 
investors 
in 
private 
equity 
funds 
only 
came 
to
understand the cost of such illiquidity in 2008 as their rebalancing needs,
spending needs, and private equity capital calls forced them to sell large
portions 
of 
their public equity and bond holdings (see 
Siegel, 
2008).
However, disentangling the liquidity-related component from other premia
is even more challenging than for traditional assets, given data limitations.
Franzoni–Nowak–Phalippou (2010) find that PE fund annualized returns
are 7% to 12% higher during periods of improving aggregate liquidity
(based on Pastor–Stambaugh or Amihud measures) than during normal
times. A liquidity risk premium—compensation for funds’ sensitivity to
aggregate liquidity fluctuations rather than for the illiquidity of investments
—can explain 3% of an average PE fund’s long-term average return.

For assessing the price of illiquidity outside publicly traded markets,
studies 
of 
restricted 
stock 
may 
provide 
the 
most 
relevant 
evidence.
Restricted stocks in private placements have traded at, on average, a 20% to
30% discount, but this figure has edged lower over time. More generally,
privately held assets tend to trade at large valuation discounts compared
with publicly traded assets. But again, empirical evidence is limited, and
some 
conflicting 
evidence 
suggests 
that 
private 
entrepreneurs 
earn
surprisingly low long-run returns for their poorly diversified holdings.
...
18.4 TIME-VARYING ILLIQUIDITY PREMIA

Time-varying illiquidity premia across assets

To estimate liquidity-related premia, it is sufficient to focus on historical
average returns if such premia are constant over time. Yet, the Jekyll-and-
Hyde-like behavior of liquidity in various debt markets in 2007H1 vs.
2007H2 makes it clear that illiquidity premia vary over time. Academics
have only recently turned to this topic.

Watanabe–Watanabe (2008) analyze the pricing of U.S. equities using the
ILLIQ illiquidity proxy and a two-state regime-switching model. They find
that liquidity betas vary across two distinct states: a short-lived “abnormal”
high-beta state and a more persistent “normal” low-beta state. High-beta
states 
are 
characterized 
by 
rising 
turnover, 
high 
volatility, 
and 
cross-
sectionally dispersed liquidity betas; they are preceded by rising expected
market illiquidity. These states are not only liquidity crises as they include
both positive and negative liquidity developments. The estimated liquidity
premium is very high (5% per month) in the high-beta state (which occurs
less than 10% of the time, but disproportionately often in Januaries) and
near zero in the low-beta state. Also recall that small-cap stocks and
corporate bonds tend to outperform in January, consistent with wide year
end liquidity premia. However, many other measures of liquidity conditions
or liquidity-related premia do not exhibit a January seasonal.

Perhaps related to the business cycle pattern highlighted in Figure 18.2,
liquidity also varies with monetary policy conditions. Jensen–Moorman
(2010) show that easy Fed policy tends to improve equity market liquidity
conditions—as measured by ILLIQ or effective cost estimates—and boosts
the relative pricing of illiquid vs. liquid stocks. When stocks are sorted
based on the ILLIQ measure, the least liquid quintile has an average
monthly return 0.9% higher than the most liquid quintile. This average
outperformance is 2.3% when Fed policy is expansive and 0.3% when it is
restrictive. However, I suspect that this relation is weaker when credit
conditions tighten despite Fed policy rather than because of it, as happened
in 2008.

Acharya–Amihud–Bharath 
(2010) 
estimate 
liquidity 
betas 
for 
U.S.
corporate bond portfolio returns regressed on bond market factors and
liquidity factors (ILLIQ and the Treasury bid–ask spread). They find only
mild pricing of liquidity factors on average—worth about 10 bp for IG
bonds and 30 bp for high-yield bonds. However, when they specify a
regime-switching model, they find that liquidity betas vary sharply between
normal and stress regimes for high-yield bonds—but not for IG bonds. The
stress regime probability was often high between 1973 and 1981 as well as
in 1989–1990 and 2002–2003 (loosely coinciding with recessions and
equity bear markets). Estimated risk premia for liquidity factors are much
higher in stress regimes (about 100 bp for high-yield bonds) while premia
for 
bond 
market 
factors 
are 
stable 
across 
regimes. 
These 
results 
are
consistent with episodic liquidity premia.

The clearest evidence for time-varying illiquidity premia comes from
“off-the-run vs. on-the-run” Treasury spreads, government-guaranteed bond
spreads, and interest rate swap spreads over Treasuries (swaps involve
negligible default risk) (see Figure 8.7). Such spreads widen especially
sharply during flight-to-liquidity episodes and during Treasury scarcity.
Also 
recall, 
from 
Figure 
17.9, 
how 
inflation-linked 
Treasuries 
(TIPS)
remained structurally cheap for several years after their inception in 1997,
until the initial illiquidity premium wore off.

This may all sound too academic, but if disentangling illiquidity premia
is difficult, then quantifying time-varying premia is doubly challenging.
The 2007–2009 liquidity crisis will provide a treasure trove of empirical
data for analyzing time-varying illiquidity premia, but academics are only
gradually getting their hands on such data.

Another 
strand 
of 
literature 
analyzes 
gains 
of 
short-term 
liquidity
providers over time. Instead of holding illiquid or high-liquidity-beta assets,
these liquidity providers supply liquidity to the marketplace by trading a
short-term reversal strategy. My intuition is that recent laggard stocks may
have underperformed because of selling pressure, while recent winners may
have benefited from buying pressure. Thus a classic “stat arb” (statistical
arbitrage) 
strategy 
of 
buying 
recent 
laggards 
and 
selling 
recent
outperformers 
attenuates 
the 
temporary 
supply–demand 
imbalance 
and
should be rewarded. Technological progress has changed market structures
and liquidity sources. For example, the New York Stock Exchange has lost
market share in U.S. equity turnover to various electronic platforms and
dark pools. Market-makers used to be the only explicit liquidity providers
but they have increasingly been superseded by hedge funds and other stat
arb traders. High-frequency traders are important suppliers of short-term
liquidity, but they are accused of being “fair-weather liquidity providers”
who leave the market when problems arise (witness the Flash Crash in May
2010).

Figure 18.7 plots the histories of an illiquidity proxy and the gross annual
profits of a liquidity provision strategy from a study by Rinne–Suominen
(2010). (The illiquidity proxy is based on the idea that frequent return
reversals are indicative of an asset’s illiquidity as buying or selling demand
causes a larger temporary price concession for less liquid assets. Estimates
of return reversal tendencies for single stocks are then aggregated to get a
proxy of market-wide illiquidity.) Both series are positively related to
market turnover and negatively related to equity market returns, but they
are especially related to stock market volatility. All series peak during the
Great Depression but also exhibit similar contours in postwar data. Nagel
(2009) documents a higher frequency linkage between reversal strategy
profits and the VIX index, while others emphasize the role of financial
intermediaries’ 
funding 
constraints. 
High 
volatility 
makes 
liquidity
providers more conservative while often raising demand for liquidity, and
scarce liquidity in turn boosts the reward for liquidity provision. Figure 18.7
shows that liquidity provider profits (before costs!) have declined over time
—so that only highly cost-effective stat arb players can still turn a net
profit.

Consistent with decaying rewards for liquidity provision, Ben-Rephael–
Kadan–Wohl (2009) document decay over time in the reward earned for
holding 
illiquid 
stocks 
(as 
measured 
by 
Amihud’s 
ILLIQ 
measure 
or
volume). In contrast, the reward for bearing liquidity risk may not have
declined, at least based on eyeballing the steady gains of the Pastor–
Stambaugh strategy between 1997 and 2007 in Figure 18.6.
Time-varying illiquidity premia in market returns

Some time series evidence that aggregate liquidity measures predict future
market returns is consistent with time-varying liquidity premia. The relation
is weak when illiquidity measures are the only predictors but more clearly
positive when liquidity measures are combined with volatility or value
indicators. High illiquidity coincides with bearish market environments
(causality can go both ways) and mildly predicts high medium-term future
returns. This effect is stronger for small-cap firms.

Figure 
18.7. 
Rescaled 
market 
illiquidity 
proxy 
and 
estimated 
annual
liquidity provider profits from Rinne–Suominen (2010) plotted with annual
stock market volatility, 1926–2008.

Source: Rinne–Suominen (2010), Ken French’s website, own calculations.

Furthermore, 
forward-looking 
yield 
spreads 
and 
market 
valuation
multiples may reflect illiquidity premia in addition to other risk premia.
Such indicators appear to have some market-timing ability over longer
horizons. Even if expected returns vary over time for reasons unrelated to
liquidity, only liquid assets enable investors to take advantage of timing
opportunities. If, say, the aggregate market or certain asset classes vary
between overvaluation and undervaluation, investors with market-timing
skills can improve long-run returns only if they are not locked into illiquid
investments.

On liquidity crises

Liquidity crises are important both because they are, in part, the reason for
the existence of liquidity risk premia and because they may be the most
opportune times to harvest liquidity premia. Flight-to-liquidity episodes can
push liquidity spreads to wide levels. Systemic liquidity crises coincide
with 
the 
worst 
market 
distress, 
as 
in 
the 
crash 
of 
1987, 
the 
1998
Russia/LTCM crisis, and the 2007–2008 credit and liquidity crunch. The
procyclicality of leverage, confidence, and liquidity are key influences. It
was easy to predict some normalization in early 2007 from abnormally low
credit and liquidity spreads—but the severity of the liquidity crunch took
even most Cassandras by surprise. Once confidence turned, liquidity dried
up 
in 
many 
markets 
and 
the 
crisis 
became 
self-reinforcing. 
Traders’
deteriorating funding liquidity reinforced lower market liquidity and a
vicious circle ensued. Forced selling—one hallmark of a financial crisis—
became prevalent, to the extent it was even possible to sell. Previous short-
term liquidity suppliers turned into liquidity demanders (they had to de-
lever), while long-term liquidity suppliers held off from buying. In another
feedback loop, position liquidations contributed to rising asset volatilities
and correlations, and further raised required risk premia. In good times,
liquidity differences were hardly priced; during this crunch only liquidity
seemed to matter.

Box 18.1. Opportunities and pitfalls in harvesting liquidity premia

Having a long time horizon gives certain investors a natural edge in
harvesting liquidity premia; they get rewarded for sacrificing liquidity
that they simply do not need. However, in good times investors may
underestimate their liquidity needs just as they may overestimate their
loss tolerance. Even long-horizon investors can benefit from the
flexibility that liquid assets provide when expected returns vary over
time.
Yale’s David Swensen used to argue that most investors pay too
much for liquidity. But the price of liquidity depends on the scarcity or
abundance of liquidity provision—and this varies over time. Liquidity
suppliers were scarce in the fall of 1998 and in 2008. The opposite was
true in 2005–2007 when an ever growing number of endowments,
pension funds, and sovereign wealth funds want(ed) to “be like Yale”
and they had to compete with “long-horizon wannabes”—private
equity funds and hedge funds—in reaping ever slimmer liquidity
premia. My one criticism of Swensen’s wonderful books is that they
understate the time-varying nature of illiquidity premia (and generally
rule out the benefits of market timing). Quoting p. 84 of Swensen
(2009): “Even in times of normalcy, investors receive unreasonably
large incremental returns in illiquid securities.” And on pp. 82–83, he
makes a strong case for illiquid assets: “Serious managers who attempt
to identify inefficiencies frequently gravitate toward relatively illiquid
markets, since rewarding investments tend to reside in the dark
corners, not in the glare of floodlights . . . Illiquidity induces
appropriate, long-term behavior. Rather than relying on liquid markets
to trade out of mistakes, investors in illiquid securities enter into long-
term arrangements, purchasing part ownership in a business with
which they have to live. As a consequence, increased care,
thoroughness, and discipline represent hallmarks of successful
investors in less liquid markets.” To me, these are good normative
statements but hardly descriptive of institutional behavior during the
boom–bust cycle of 2003–2009—nor do they constitute easy advice
for average or even above-average investors to follow. Rather, they are
the self-description of someone who is widely recognized as a truly
superior investor, an attribute we should be extremely cautious about
finding in ourselves.

After the traumatic events of 2008, asset valuations were low and
various ex ante liquidity premia exceptionally wide. Indeed, it seemed
likely that ex ante liquidity premia would remain wide for years to
come, giving a sustained edge to natural long-horizon investors.
However, global policymakers’ aggressive stimulus and liquidity
support programs have boosted risky asset valuations and sharply
narrowed various yield spreads in 2009, and many “long-horizon
wannabes” are already on the mend. The easy pickings are already
gone.

The time-varying nature of liquidity premia suggests that it is best to
be an opportunistic liquidity provider. One way is to enter new or
alternative asset classes when they are still relatively illiquid and
unpopular. Another way is to buy illiquid traditional assets when
liquidity is scarce and markets distressed. My recommendation for true
long-horizon investors is contrarian. Save ammunition in good times
and gradually take advantage of episodes when liquidity and other
premia widen out, while recognizing that nobody can be a perfect
market-timer.

...
18.5 NOTE

[1] Illiquid assets’ risk-adjusted returns are especially misleading because
these assets not only warrant some compensation for their illiquidity (a
“risk cost” that is neither deducted from the return in the numerator nor
added to the risk measure in the denominator), but their measured risk is
understated due to stale prices and smoothed returns.

Source notes. Given the growing interest on liquidity, an excellent survey
by Amihud–Mendelson–Pedersen (2005) is gradually becoming outdated.
On the reward for illiquidity and liquidity risk among U.S. stocks, see
Amihud–Mendelson (1986), Amihud (2002), Pastor–Stambaugh (2003),
Acharya–Pedersen (2005), Chen–Ibbotson–Hu

(2010), 
Chollete–Naes–Skjeltorp 
(2008), 
Hasbrouck 
(2009), 
Goyenko–
Holden–Trczinka (2009), and Ben-Rephael–Kadan–Wohl (2009). On the
relation of liquidity premia with business and monetary cycles, see Jensen–
Moorman (2010) and Naes–Skjeltorp–Odegaard (2011). On time-varying
liquidity premia, see Watanabe–Watanabe (2008). On buy-side vs. sell-side
liquidity, see Brennan–Chordia–Subrahmanyam (2009). On market timing
using liquidity indicators, see Guo et al. (2010). On the profits of liquidity
provision strategies, see Nagel (2009) and Rinne–Suominen (2010).

On liquidity-related premia in bond markets, see Amihud–Mendelson
(1991), Krishnamurthy (2002) and Longstaff (2004) for default-free debt
and 
Churm–Panigirtzoglou 
(2005), 
Chen–Lesmond–Wei 
(2007), 
and
Acharya–Amihud–Bharath (2010) for credit-risky debt. On private equity
funds, 
see 
Siegel 
(2008) 
and 
Franzoni–Nowak–Phalippou 
(2010). 
On
valuation 
of 
illiquid 
assets, 
see 
Ma–MacNamara 
(2009) 
and 
Swensen
(2009).

On liquidity droughts, see Brunnermeier (2009), Brunnermeier–Pedersen
(2009), Garleanu–Pedersen (2009a), Nagel (2009), Pedersen (2009), and
Duffie (2010).

...