19

Tail risks (volatility, correlation, skewness)

• Tail risks refer to volatility as well as other higher
moments, such as correlation and skewness.
• The empirical relation between volatility and future returns
is ambiguous.
• Selling equity index volatility and overweighting volatile
asset classes appear to offer positive long-run rewards. However,
stocks with the highest recent volatility tend to underperform
other stocks. Also, among Treasuries and credit-risky bonds, the
most volatile securities within the asset class have disappointingly
low long-run returns. Over time, and contrary to intuition, higher
market volatility does not predict higher near-term market returns.
• One explanation is that correlation risk is more consistently
priced than volatility risk. This could explain the fact that for
equity index options, implied volatility exceeds realized volatility
most of the time, but the same is not true for single-stock options.
In the same vein, and again contrary to intuition, high correlation
across stocks is a bullish stock-market-timing indicator whereas
high average volatility across stocks, or high market volatility, is
not.
• There is some debate as to whether investors prefer
positive or negative skewness. Market prices seem consistent with
liking positive skewness or lottery seeking. Many indicators
related to skewness and volatility suggest that the most lottery-
ticket-like stocks are overpriced—their average near-term returns
lag those of other stocks in a distinct hockey stick shape. Also, in
option markets, the relative richness of OTM single-stock calls
and OTM index puts seems consistent with skewness seeking.
• My two preferred explanations for empirically observed
volatility-pricing and skewness-pricing patterns are that (1)
investors prefer asymmetric (lottery-ticket-like) return payoffs
and (2) leveraged constraints make the highest bang-for-thebuck
securities within each asset class systematically overpriced.
• While selling stock index volatility and levering up low-
beta or low-volatility assets are very different investment
approaches, both of them offer high long-run returns and Sharpe
ratios at the expense of losing money in bad times. The same
features are observed for carry trading and harvesting illiquidity
premia.
• The rewards for tail risks appear time varying—extra high
in the aftermath of an adverse event.

...
19.1 INTRODUCTION

The last underlying factor I focus on actually involves several interrelated
sources of risk and return, which I call together “tail risks” (see cube). I
already discussed the volatility selling strategy in Chapter 15, focusing on
equity index options. Here I extend the analysis beyond option trading and
analyze aspects of tail risks, or higher moment risks, other than volatility.
Chapter 15 concluded that pure volatility risk may not be well rewarded
because, while index option selling has been profitable, single-stock option
selling has not. A correlation risk premium seems better than a volatility
risk premium at explaining index option richness.

Given the tradeoff between reward and risk, what would be more natural
than to find a positive relation between expected volatility and expected
returns?

• While a positive risk–return relation tends to work in long-run
average returns across asset classes (recall Figure 2.1), cross-sectional
relations within asset classes, surprisingly, have the opposite pattern.
High-volatility 
stocks 
underperform 
low-volatility 
stocks, 
long-
duration bonds underperform shorter ones, and credit risk taking at
long maturities likewise may earn a negative reward. There are several
possible explanations. In general, not all volatility is equal—some
volatility 
may 
even 
be 
liked. 
Lottery-ticket-like 
assets 
are 
often
overpriced, and leverage constraints may push return-seeking investors
toward the riskiest assets in each asset class.
• In addition, the time series relation between market volatility
and subsequent market returns is ambiguous. If volatility varies over
time and investors react gradually to such changes, the instantaneous
volatility feedback effect (higher volatility reduces today’s market
prices so as to raise prospective returns) may be partly delayed, thus
deferring the positive relation. Evidence of underreaction between
option and stock markets supports this explanation.
• Academics would hasten to remind the reader that no standard
theories imply that volatility is a sufficient risk measure.
In this chapter I first turn to cash equity markets for evidence—both time
series 
and 
cross-sectional—and 
confirm 
that 
the 
conditional 
relation
between volatility and expected returns is either ambiguous or negative.
Correlation risk appears to be more consistently priced than volatility risk.
Looking beyond cash equity markets, I also present evidence from option
markets and other asset classes.

This 
chapter’s 
topic 
could 
be 
more 
accurately 
(and 
geekily) 
called
“higher moment risks” than “tail risks”. Recall that the first four moments
of a distribution are mean (what is the average return?), variance (how
variable are returns around the average?), skewness (how asymmetric are
returns?), and kurtosis (how fat are the tails?). (Correlation measures the
part of an asset’s volatility that is shared by a second asset and is thus part
of the second moment.) Normal distributions are fully characterized by their
first two moments. Tail risks refer to non-normal market moves such as
abnormally large price changes or correlations spiking higher during crises.

I focus on evidence for skewness preferences. Investors appear both to
like 
positive 
skewness 
in 
lottery-ticket-type 
assets 
and 
fear 
negative
skewness in volatility selling and related strategies—though the latter point
has been challenged. Asymmetry may be less important than the timing of
rare large losses. One of this book’s unifying themes is that if a strategy
resembles selling lottery tickets that pay off to the buyer in bad times, its
double-negative characteristics (asymmetric returns and poor timing of
losses) justify especially high risk premia.

Not all volatility is equal

Practitioners often forget (at their peril) a point that is fundamental to
academics’ understanding of markets: only systematic risks should be
rewarded. Diversifiable standalone volatility should not carry any risk
premium.

Of 
course, 
the 
CAPM 
does 
not 
imply 
a 
positive 
relation 
between
volatility and average returns; it implies a positive cross-sectional relation
between beta (the market-correlated part of volatility) and average returns.
However, since the 1960s, high-beta stocks have not outperformed low-beta
stocks. Various stories have been proposed to explain this lack of a beta-
pricing relation—anti-value, lottery ticket, or “good beta” characteristics
may 
have 
reduced 
the 
returns 
of 
high-beta 
stocks 
(see 
Box 
8.1).
Interestingly, downside betas and other measures of downside risk appear to
be positively related to average returns. Beyond the CAPM, finance theory
says that different systematic risk factors can carry different market prices
of risk, depending on the covariance of losses with bad times.

Since volatility is an insufficient risk measure, reasonable investors may
accept a lower portfolio Sharpe ratio if they can trade it off against better
diversification characteristics, more attractive asymmetry, higher liquidity,
and lesser tail risks. These themes are covered through this book (especially
Section 28.23). Here I just make some observations:
• Higher moment tradeoffs include peso problems and the greater
likelihood, with asymmetric payoff strategies, that the historical track
record is biased—overstating returns and understating risks when the
rare bad event has not yet materialized in the sample.
• The combination of (apparent) high returns and low volatility is
often 
indicative 
of 
hidden 
blowup 
risks. 
Low 
volatility 
may 
be
achieved 
by 
questionable 
or 
fraudulent 
return 
smoothing 
(Bernie
Madoff’s Ponzi scheme did not offer fantastically high returns but the
returns were suspiciously consistent), by holding illiquid assets which
are rarely if ever marked to market, or by selling various forms of tail
risk insurance.
• Even at the asset class level, low volatility in good times may
conceal 
growing 
imbalances, 
excessive 
leverage, 
stretched 
market
valuations, and vulnerability to regime change. Critics noted that many
measured risks—including realized volatilities and implied volatilities
—were at their lowest in 2007 when the true risk of loss was at its
highest.
• 
Some 
researchers 
distinguish 
measurable 
volatility 
from
ambiguity, 
unquantifiable 
(“Knightian”) 
uncertainty, 
structural
uncertainty, and “unknown unknowns”. The latter concepts can be
difficult to tell apart in practice, but the concept is simple: if you know
the range of outcomes that can happen, but don’t know which one will
happen, as in a baseball game (one of two teams will win), that is a
“known unknown”; if you don’t know the range of possible outcomes,
as in the stock market (we simply have no idea how far the market can
fall in one day), that is an “unknown unknown” and represents a
qualitatively greater degree of uncertainty.

...
19.2 FACTOR HISTORY

Chapter 15 presented evidence on implied volatilities. Figure 19.1 gives a
long 
perspective 
on 
realized 
market 
volatilities. 
More 
frequent 
data
sampling makes volatility estimates sharper, so here I use daily return data
to estimate rolling stock and bond market volatilities. I will not discuss
more elaborate volatility estimation and/ or forecasting approaches in this
book. The clustering of periods of high and low stock market volatility is
evident. Peak stock market volatilities clearly coincide with economic and
financial bad times, however defined. The highest volatility levels were
reached during the bear markets or crashes of 1929, 1931–1932, 1987, and
2008. 
Other 
periods 
of 
heightened 
volatility 
tended 
to 
coincide 
with
recessions (e.g., 1938, 1970, 1974, 2001). Bond markets almost always
exhibited less volatility than stocks. The main exception occurred during
bonds’ peak volatility near the 1980–1982 inflation peak.

As is well known, market volatility and market returns are negatively
correlated. Figure 19.2 shows that volatility spikes tend to coincide with the
worst market meltdowns.

Figure 19.3 is a stylized graph that makes three points about option skew
(implied volatility levels across strike prices):
• Index options have much lower implied volatilities than typical
single-stock options, thanks to diversification, but their skew is much
more pronounced.
• At least this was the case after the 1987 crash. Before the crash,
the implied volatilities of index options exhibited a symmetric smile
rather than a one-side smirk as both OTM calls and puts had higher
volatilities than ATM options. After the crash, realized fluctuations of
the index have been reasonably symmetric but implied volatilities
disagree: they implicitly forecast a much higher probability of a large
downside move than of a large upside move.
Figure 19.1. Rolling historical (3-month) stock and bond volatility,
1928/1962–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, own calculations.

Figure 19.2. Implied volatility and recent (inverse) market returns,
1986–2009.

Source: Bloomberg.

Figure 19.3. Contrasting volatility skews: Stylized patterns of implied
volatilities across option moneyness.
• All volatilities shot up in 2008 amidst the market meltdown.
The 
graph 
does 
not 
show 
the 
relations 
between 
implied 
and 
realized
volatilities or between put and call volatilities, but any such comparison
reveals that OTM index put options are particularly expensive.

...
19.3 HISTORICAL EVIDENCE ON AVERAGE ASSET
RETURNS VS. VOLATILITY AND CORRELATION

I first review the empirical relations between average returns and volatility
in 
cash 
equity 
markets, 
covering 
both 
cross-sectional 
and 
time 
series
patterns. Then I turn to options and other assets and drill deeper into the
relation between average returns and correlation or skewness.

Recall from Figure 2.1 that average returns and volatility are mildly
positively related across asset classes. Figure 8.4 documents the positive
relation between average returns and betas for stocks vs. bonds but not
across stocks.

Cross-sectional relation between recent volatility and future single-stock
returns

Counterintuitively, stocks with high recent volatility have lower average
returns than stocks with low volatility. Some earlier studies had hinted at this
pattern, 
but 
academic 
interest 
really 
swelled 
after 
Ang 
et 
al. 
(2006)
documented high-volatility stocks’ underperformance (with broadly similar
results whether total volatility or idiosyncratic volatility measured by Fama–
French three-factor model residuals is used). When stocks are sorted into
quintile portfolios based on these volatility measures, next month average
gap between returns of the fifth quintile minus the first quintile is around —
1%. The average alpha gap is even wider:—1.2% to 1.4% per month,
whether CAPM or three-factor model alphas are calculated. A follow-up
study by the same authors (2009) shows that the finding is robust to the
inclusion of many control factors and that it works in all G7 markets.
Importantly, Ang et al. (2006, 2009) measured volatility using daily
returns over the past month (but showed similar results with longer time
windows). 
Some 
critics 
questioned 
the 
robustness 
of 
their 
findings.
However, other studies also found a similar inverse relation when they used
a much longer time window (3 years) with weekly or daily returns to
calculate volatility. The most consistent opposite result is that several studies
measuring past volatility using a 3-year or longer data or time window, and
monthly (not daily or weekly) returns, tend to find a positive relation
between past volatility and future returns. Cao–Xu (2010) split volatility into
short-run and long-run components and find a consistently negative cross-
sectional reward for short-run volatility and a consistently positive reward
for long-run volatility.

This regularity, like so many others, is stronger for small-cap stocks.
Thus, trading costs may eat up much of the apparent gains from exploiting
the poor performance of high-volatility stocks, especially in specifications
that 
imply 
high 
turnover. 
New 
commercial 
indices—such 
as 
minimum
variance portfolios or equal risk portfolios—can try to mitigate trading costs
while inversely weighting stocks with high recent volatility.

Notwithstanding questions about how exploitable this regularity is, we
should ask why it exists even on paper. My preferred explanation is that the
volatility effect is related to investors’ skewness preferences. Volatile small-
cap stocks are the proverbial lottery tickets that may be systematically
overpriced. Several studies point in this direction and can largely “explain
away” the volatility–return relation:
• Frieder–Jiang (2008) show that when stocks are separately sorted
by their upside volatility and downside volatility, they find no relation
between downside volatility and future returns. However, stocks with
high recent upside volatility have significantly lower future returns.
• Bali–Cakici–Whitelaw (2010) show that when stocks are sorted
based on their highest daily return over the past month, the highest
ranking portfolios underperform (more below).
• 
Boyer–Mitton–Vorkink 
(2009) 
rank 
stocks 
based 
on 
their
measure of expected skewness and find especially low returns for high-
skew portfolios (more below).

All these studies reveal an interesting hockey stick shape between when the
ranks of portfolios sorted by a volatility-related variable are graphed against
subsequent returns (see Figure 19.4). When stocks are sorted on recent
volatility, upside volatility, maximum daily return within the last month, or
expected skewness, the top (most volatile) quintile has a much lower return
while other quintiles have broadly similar returns. In contrast, many other
asset-pricing regularities have a relatively linear return pattern when assets
are sorted into quintiles. This evidence seems consistent with lottery ticket
preferences (see Section 19.4)

Intriguingly, Doran–Jiang–Peterson (2009) show that while high-volatility
stocks and high-skewness stocks underperform in the long run and during
the rest of the year, they outperform other stocks in January when risk
appetite 
is 
seasonally 
high 
and 
skewness 
seeking 
especially 
prevalent.
However, others find that high-volatility stocks underperform more when
general investor sentiment is bullish; presumably overconfidence makes
overpricing worse.

Figure 19.5(a) documents the consistent outperformance of low-volatility
stocks over high-volatility stocks in the Ang et al. (2006) study, based on a
broad cross-section of U.S. stocks from 1963 to 2000. Figure 19.5(b) shows
the returns of high-volatility and low-volatility quintiles separately and adds
more recent evidence from Robeco’s David Blitz and UBS’s Giuliano De
Rossi. Blitz’s data are on the large-cap universe since 1986; the results are
weaker but low-volatility stocks still outperform. De Rossi’s data are for a
broad universe (Russell 3000 stocks) and cover the period from 2000
through 2009; over this period, high-volatility stocks outperform (especially
high-volatility 
small 
caps, 
which 
rallied 
during 
the 
2003 
and 
2009
recoveries). The inferences appear sensitive to research design issues; high-
volatility stocks’ relative performance in the 2000s would be clearly worse if
we 
exclude 
small 
caps, 
use 
value-weighted 
rather 
than 
equal-weighted
quintile portfolios, or control for other factors including size. As noted,
trading costs and other limits to arbitrage may make this regularity hard to
exploit in practice.

Figure 19.4. Hockey stick shape in many studies: Poor average returns for
highest volume, highest skew stocks.
Figure 
19.5(a). 
Cumulative 
outperformance 
of 
low-volatility 
vs. 
high-
volatility stocks, Figure 19.5(b) cumulative returns of high-volatility and
low-volatility quintiles, 1963–2000 and 2000–2009 (broad universe) and
1986–2009 (large caps).

Sources: 
Ang 
et 
al. 
(2006) 
and 
Blitz–van 
Vliet/Robeco 
(2010
correspondence), De Rossi/UBS (2010 correspondence).
Diverse findings from other studies. The inverse cross-equity relation
between recent volatility and subsequent returns also existed in the 1926–
1962 period preceding the Ang et al. (2006) sample period. The inverse
relation is stronger in the segment of the market that is dominated by
individual 
investors 
(arguably 
lottery-seekers); 
in 
the 
segment 
where
institutions dominate, the relation is positive. The relation can be explained
by high-volatility stocks’ tendency to have low subsequent earnings; once
this relation is accounted for, the volatility–return relation is insignificant.
Likewise, the relation appears related to the short-term return reversal effect.
Pure microstructure effects, such as the bid–ask bounce, can artificially
create a positive contemporaneous relation between volatility and returns as
well as a negative lead–lag relation. Finally, stocks whose options have high
implied volatilities appear to have higher near-term returns.
In another line of study, Ang–Bali–Cakici (2010) document evidence that
information moves slowly between option and stock markets, and in both
directions. Monthly changes in implied volatilities predict relative future
returns: stocks with rising call volatilities outperform stocks with falling call
volatilities by about 1% over the next month, on average. Conversely, stocks
with high returns over the past month tend to see rising implied call option
volatilities 
over 
the 
next 
month. 
(In 
the 
same 
vein, 
rising 
put 
option
volatilities are linked to subsequent and preceding underperformance of
stocks.) Given monthly lead–lag relations in both directions, it seems that
informed traders may use either stock or option markets for their initial
trading 
and 
that 
prices 
in 
the 
other 
market 
underreact 
(information
dissemination is surprisingly gradual).

Volatility factor risk premium

While volatility as a characteristic appears to be negatively rewarded across
equities, the reward for volatility sensitivity is empirically positive. That is,
stock portfolios that have larger (negative) sensitivity to rising equity market
volatility warrant higher long-run returns. This advantage is of smaller
magnitude 
than 
the 
return 
difference 
between 
low-volatility 
and 
high-
volatility stocks. Moise (2007) suggests that small-cap value stocks have
especially 
large 
negative 
volatility 
betas 
and 
earn 
an 
especially 
high
volatility premium (0.5% per month). Large-cap and growth stocks perform
relatively better when volatility spikes, a fact that partly explains their lower
long-run returns.

Moise’s analysis covers realized volatility data since 1927. Using my
shorter 20-year history, this story is less clear. Figure 19.6 sorts assets by
their correlation with the volatility factor (i.e., the monthly change in the
VIX index—implied equity market volatility). The patterns resemble those
of the illiquidity factor and mirror those of the growth factor. Risky assets
are on the right and diversifiers—those that perform well when volatility
rises—are on the left.

Almost all stocks—as well as most other risky assets and carry strategies
with positive equity market betas—suffer when market volatility spikes.
Based on the past decade’s experience it would seem that the big difference
is between stocks in general and Treasuries. Treasuries were often the only
asset class to benefit in flight-to-quality episodes, and this safe haven feature
partly justifies Treasuries’ low required returns. Interestingly, Figure 19.6
suggests that this feature was not strong for Treasuries over the 20-year
window (Treasuries became negatively correlated with VIX changes only
around 1998), whereas both momentum and value strategies served such a
safe haven role (although value worked as a safe haven mainly in the early
2000s, but not in the late 2000s). Statistical arbitrage strategies (pairs trading
or exploiting short-term return reversals) may work even better in high-
volatility regimes.

Figure 19.6. Average monthly returns when the volatility factor is above or
below its median, 1990–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, LPX, MSCI Barra, FTSE, Bank of America Merrill
Lynch, Hedge Fund Research, Barclays Capital, S&P GSCI, Ken French’s
website, Brevan Howard, own calculations.

Market volatility exhibits a strong negative correlation with equity market
direction, but it still turns out that the volatility factor can significantly
explain asset returns in a two-factor or three-factor model including market
and value factors.

Market timing: Conditional time series relation between volatility and future
stock market returns

Empirical 
evidence 
regarding 
the 
conditional 
relation 
between 
market
volatility and expected return is notably weak. As Table 19.1 shows, the
contemporaneous 
relation 
between 
realized 
volatility—both 
level 
and
change—and realized return is clearly negative, and even stronger with
implied volatility data (last row) [1]. (Realized one-month volatility is
measured as the standard deviation of daily returns during the month.)
However, the predictive relation is not strongly positive; some published
studies even find a negative sign between expected volatility and next month
returns.

Lack of a positive relation between recent and/or expected volatility and
near-term returns could only be temporary. If the contemporaneous volatility
feedback 
effect 
is 
partially 
delayed, 
due 
to 
underreaction 
(investors
perceiving volatility change to be more temporary than it normally is) or
gradual learning about time-varying risk (e.g., due to structural uncertainty),
this delay can contaminate the positive conditional risk–reward relation.
Then volatility feedback not only instantaneously reduces returns but also
spills over to give a negative sign to early lead–lag relations. Time series
correlations are broadly consistent with this story: in Table 19.1, volatility
has a more positive relation with 2-month-ahead returns than with next
month 
returns. 
Volatility 
feedback 
might 
also 
contribute 
to 
the 
cross-
sectional findings discussed above; recall that the negative relation between
volatility and subsequent returns across stocks is consistent over short
horizons but tends to flip its sign over longer horizons.

Pollet–Wilson (2008) note that historical market variance can be proxied
by average variance of individual stocks and average correlation across
stocks. This average correlation turns out to have a significantly positive
relation to next quarter equity market returns, while average variance has
virtually no relation (and indeed a negative one once the correlation’s
predictive 
ability 
is 
controlled 
for). 
Apparently, 
the 
average 
variance
component offsets and conceals the market-timing ability of correlation,
leaving stock market variance unable to predict market returns.

Table 
19.1. 
Correlations 
between 
monthly 
S&P 
500 
returns 
and
contemporaneous and lagged realized one-month volatility levels (Vol) and
changes (dVol), 1928–2009 (and VIX 1986–2009)

Sources: Bloomberg.
Bollerslev–Zhou 
(2007) 
present 
the 
most 
positive 
evidence 
for 
a
conditional risk–reward relation so far. Their ex ante variance risk premium
proxy—the gap between implied and realized variances, using model-free
implied variance and realized variance measures based on high-frequency
intraday 
data—gives 
positive-signed 
and 
significant 
predictions 
of 
next
quarter equity market returns. Implied and realized variance, each taken
alone 
as 
predictors, 
have 
positive 
coefficients, 
but 
only 
the 
former 
is
statistically 
significant. 
Looking 
at the gap clearly improves 
predictive
performance, giving a 15% R
2
. Using Black–Scholes implied variance or
realized variance based on daily returns results in clearly worse performance
—but the coefficients are still positive. The authors provide theoretical
arguments on how this variance risk premium can be linked to timevarying
market risk aversion.

Also, 
looking 
beyond 
equities, 
it 
is 
common 
to 
find 
that 
near-term
expected returns do not rise (at least instantly) when volatility rises. Even if
expected returns were unchanged, such a rise would imply lower ex ante
Sharpe ratios and thus discourage investment. In many cases (e.g., duration
timing and many carry and trend-following strategies), higher volatility
predicts mildly lower returns in the near future.

Option strategies

As a reminder, the most interesting results in Chapter 15 about profitable
option-trading strategies are that
• Equity index options tend to be expensive (implied volatilities
higher than realized volatilities), especially OTM puts (with a more
pronounced skew than for single-stock options):
• index volatility selling can be profitable, with high, but
volatile returns and terrible timing of losses;
• index skew trading (or volatility selling with OTM puts)
may be even more profitable;
• correlation/dispersion trading (selling volatility on an
index while buying volatility on its constituent assets) can give
more consistent profits as some volatility risk is hedged.
• For single-stock options, implied volatilities do not consistently
exceed 
realized 
volatilities, 
but 
OTM 
calls 
have 
especially 
large
negative average returns (perhaps because skewness-seeking investors
prefer them as speculative vehicles), and volatility selling is more
profitable when done with stocks that have higher volatility or a higher
gap between implied and realized volatilities.

Correlation premium in equities and a lesson in the CDO market

Arguably the best place to study a correlation risk premium is in the relative
pricing of index and single-stock options. Index volatilities are lower than
single-stock volatilities, thanks to diversification, but index options are more
expensive investments. Several studies show that the average gap between
implied and realized equity index volatilities is between 2% and 4%, while
for single stocks the average gap is nearer zero, statistically insignificant,
and sometimes even negative. Table 19.2 shows representative evidence
from one recent study.

This regularity can be converted into a profitable trading strategy, namely
correlation or dispersion trading, where volatility risk is hedged by selling
index volatility and buying single-stock volatility. The ex ante attractiveness
and ex post performance of the dispersion strategy can be proxied by the gap
between implied and realized correlations (i.e., the correlation premium).
The economic argument for this premium is that higher correlations hurt
diversification opportunities and thus worsen the investment opportunity set
—a systematic risk factor that should be priced. Heightened correlations
tend to coincide with bear markets and elevated volatility. Thus, correlation
sellers lost money in times like the fall of 2008. Compensation appears
abundant since implied correlations average almost 50%, while realized
correlations across stocks average about 30%. Figure 19.7 shows correlation
estimates by Buraschi–Kosowski–Trojani (2010) using synthetic correlation
swaps or market quotes. The correlation risk factor in this study is the return
of a strategy whose payoff depends on the gap between implied and realized
correlations. Before costs, the reward for selling correlation risk is 14% per
month, with an annualized SR of 3.3, over the sample period 1996 to 2008.
The opportunity is attractive but actual trading profits are not as consistent as
the graph suggests; trading costs and other market frictions could eat up
much 
of 
the 
gains. 
Moreover, 
the 
plotted 
correlations 
are 
smoothed
averages; shorter dated realized correlations spiked above 75% in October
2008, well above implied correlations, thus resulting in sharp losses.

Table 19.2. Mean implied and realized volatilities of the S&P 100 index and
the mean of its constituents, 1996–2007

Source: Buraschi–Trojani–Vedolin (2009).

Figure 19.7. Implied and realized correlations in the S&P 500, 1996–2008.

Source: Andrea Buraschi, Robert Kosowski, and Fabio Trojani (2010),
“When there is no place to hide—Correlation risk and the cross-section of
hedge fund returns,” working paper. Reproduced by permission of Professor
Andrea Buraschi.

Other studies show that correlation risk is priced in the cross-section of
equity returns (stocks with higher sensitivity to rising correlation need to
offer higher long-run returns) and in time series (the aggregate market has
higher returns following higher average correlations).

There is a large literature that goes beyond equities and focuses on
implied default correlations based on collateralized debt obligation (CDO)
tranche 
prices 
in 
liquid 
credit 
default 
swap 
(CDS) 
indices. 
The
manufacturing of CDOs involves two steps: first, many securities are pooled
into 
a 
diversified portfolio (special 
purpose 
vehicle 
or 
SPV), 
then 
the
resulting cash flows are redistributed to tranches of varying seniority within
the CDO. Tranches are typically assigned credit ratings from AAA to BBB,
except for the unrated, most junior (equity) tranche, which takes the first
default losses; higher yield spreads compensate lower seniorities. Although
the equity tranche is sometimes called “toxic waste” its losses are of a
relatively benign nature—diversifiable and not concentrated in the most
distressed economic scenarios. In contrast, the most senior tranches only lose
money in particularly severe economic crises when default correlations are
very high. Correlations across defaults are central to CDO pricing. Increase
in the perceived default correlations of constituents of a CDS index lowers
the price of senior tranches and raises, at least in relative terms, the price of
the junior (equity) tranche. Thus, for a given default probability a rise in
correlation redistributes value from senior to junior tranches:
• In the 2000s it became common market practice to quote a single
estimate of implied correlation where the estimate was based on relative
tranche prices and an assumed Gaussian copula model. This implied
correlation was low during good times, except at the time of the Ford
and General Motors debt downgrade in 2005, but became ever wider
during 
2007–2008. 
Estimating 
a 
single 
correlation 
number 
was
convenient but dangerous, because it ignored the diversity of possible
correlation shocks and other problems (“model risk”).
• Standard models underestimated the risk of correlated defaults,
thereby compounding problems caused by investors and rating agencies
using overoptimistic inputs regarding the probability of default by
single issuers (they were essentially extrapolating the continuation of
good times).
• Some studies decompose CDS index spreads into parts driven by
idiosyncratic, sectorwide, and systemic default correlation risks. These
distinct drivers will not have a proportionate impact across different
tranches. Indeed, simple hedge ratios led to disasters when positions
across tranches were hedged using naive single-correlation measures.
The first spike in implied correlations in the spring of 2005 was mainly
idiosyncratic and sector wide, related to downgrades of automobile
company debt into speculative grade, while 2007–2008 correlation rises
were increasingly systemic. The systemic nature of the crisis partly
explains the terrible performance of the top tranches of CDOs in 2007–
2008, although de-levering and the liquidity drought also contributed to
their meltdown.

Box 19.1. An investor lesson (mispriced CDO tranches)

Better understanding of risk premium drivers could have saved
investors a lot of money: the timing of losses matters. In general,
defaults of senior claims tend to be associated with progressively worse
economic outcomes. The typical economic state where an AA-rated
bond defaults is much worse than one where a BBB-rated bond
defaults. For top-rated bonds, most of the yield spread over Treasuries
may be compensation for systemic risks rather than for expected default
losses. This observation partly explains the wide yield spreads observed
for top-rated bonds given their low default probability. CDOs
exacerbate this phenomenon: due to tranching, the risk of default gets
further concentrated into adverse economic states, substantially
increasing the fair risk premium of senior tranches relative to rating-
matched bonds or to junior tranches. Bearing systemic risk in the senior
tranche warrants an extremely high market price of risk (because losses
materialize disproportionately under terrible economic conditions),
while idiosyncratic risk in the equity tranche deserves hardly any risk
premium beyond expected default losses (because such losses are more
diversifiable). CDO ratings completely ignored this feature because
ratings only deal with standalone default prospects and not with the
(economic) “states of the world” in which defaults occur.

With hindsight, default correlation risk was massively underpriced
before mid-2007, especially in AAA tranches. Coval–Jurek–Stafford
(2009) highlighted these issues in Harvard working papers before the
Credit Crunch, but many investors learned the lesson too late. Of
course, so many errors were made by rating agencies and by investors
relying on ratings that it is hard to judge where this error ranks in
importance. (This story is not really about correlation risk, but I tell it
because it highlights the occasional usefulness of academic advice to
investors and because it speaks so well to my theme that selling
financial catastrophe insurance warrants a large risk premium.)
Hedge funds

Several studies highlight hedge funds’ exposures to equity market risk, to
illiquidity, to alternative betas (such as the carry factor) and to higher
moments (such as variance, skewness, kurtosis, and correlation). These
systematic exposures can explain much of hedge funds’ return variation and
high average returns. Thus, as noted in Section 11.3, most of the apparent
hedge fund alpha may be beta in disguise.

Bondarenko (2004) shows that many hedge fund styles are negatively
exposed to variance risk. Agarwal–Bakshi–Huij (2007) sort hedge funds
based on their exposure to higher moments (changing variance, skewness,
and kurtosis) and estimate significant risk prices for these exposures. Given
typical fund exposures, hedge funds can earn 4%, 1%, and 2% per annum,
respectively, from these premia. The data sample ends in 2003, however.
Buraschi–Kosowski–Trojani (2010) show that high correlation risk explains
a significant portion of hedge funds’ returns, especially in certain style
groups. Hedge funds’ strategy of combining and levering up many long–
short positions makes them more vulnerable to unexpected correlation spikes
than most other investors. Including the correlation factor influences hedge
fund performance evaluation, in that some funds and/or styles appear to earn
an insurance premium for selling correlation risk. Implicit correlation sellers
often include market-neutral and convergence-oriented long–short funds that
rely 
on 
stable 
correlations. 
Such 
funds 
benefit 
in 
normal 
times 
but
underperform when correlation spikes.

...
19.4 THEORY AND EVIDENCE ON THE SKEWNESS
PREMIUM

Skewness preferences: Which sign?

Skewness preferences appear to influence the relative pricing (expected
returns) of various assets. At first blush, it may seem obvious that investors
prefer positive skewness and dislike large negative jumps—they especially
like lottery tickets and fear crashes. However, a plausible counterargument
exists. Taleb (2004) argues for negative skewness preferences, saying that
delegated asset managers may prefer frequent small gains and rare blowup
losses; they prefer “blowups” over “bleeding”. To underperform peers
consistently in normal times is bad for business, while outperforming, even
by 
small 
amounts, 
helps 
greatly 
to 
gather 
or 
maintain 
assets 
under
management [2].

What do the data say? I show below that empirical evidence seems more
consistent 
with 
positive 
skewness 
preferences. 
I 
discuss 
the 
possible
reasons below and dwell on new academic research on this hot topic. The
focus here is on positive skewness driven by the desire for exceptional
upside rather than downside protection. Investors appear willing to overpay
for assets that have an asymmetrically large upside, echoing the way actual
lottery buyers overpay more when the jackpot is outsized (compared with
other rewards) and racetrack punters overpay for long shots. Downside
protection is perhaps better reflected in volatility, correlation, or jump
premia [3].

By 
expanding 
many 
standard 
utility 
functions 
to 
higher 
moments
(beyond mean and variance), one can see that investors whose utility
conforms 
to 
those 
functions 
should 
like 
positive 
skewness 
(the 
third
moment) and be averse to kurtosis (the fourth moment). Three-moment
versions of the CAPM, in which investors prefer positive skewness, imply a
premium for coskewness (also called systematic skewness, and defined as
the sensitivity of stock returns to market variance) but not for standalone or
idiosyncratic 
skewness 
(analogous 
to 
the 
statement 
that 
only 
non-
diversifiable risk is priced). Harvey–Siddique (2000) show empirically that
low-coskewness portfolios outperform highcoskewness portfolios by 3.6%
per annum.

The best ideas for explaining a premium for standalone skewness appear
related to lottery-seeking preferences:
1. Mitton–Vorkink (2007) develop a model in which a subset of
investors, whom they call “lotto investors”, display a direct preference
for positive skewness. These lotto investors are willing to sacrifice
Sharpe ratio (mean variance efficiency) to get higher skewness. They
are deliberately underdiversified because diversification reduces the
skewness they seek. The authors document that a meaningful segment
of retail investors is underdiversified and exhibits “lotto” preferences
(favoring highly skewed stocks and holding portfolios with positive
skewness). Such investors do not tend to outperform but they are more
likely to be among jackpot winners.
• 
Another 
study 
identifies 
the 
socioeconomic
characteristics of state lottery players (poor, young, urban, male,
less educated) and finds that the same groups are more likely to
prefer 
lottery-type 
stocks—and 
underperform 
as 
a 
result.
Individual investors are generally more inclined to have lottery-
type preferences than institutional investors and their demand for
lottery-type stocks increases in economic bad times. My one
qualm is that it is hard to see how this poor clientele could include
the marginal investor who sets the market price in any given
situation.
2. In a paper titled “Stocks as lotteries,” Barberis–Huang (2008)
develop a model in which investors overvalue (“overweight”) low-
probability events (an idea originating from Kahneman and Tversky’s
prospect theory) and then overpay for assets with positively skewed, or
lottery-type, 
return 
distributions. 
As 
a 
result 
of 
such 
overpaying,
positively skewed securities may have negative expected returns.
• Neuroscience research confirms that large payoff size
attracts more attention than the (naturally) low probability of the
payoff. The “reflexive brain” is much more responsive to the
amount of reward at stake than to the likelihood of receiving the
reward.
3. Cornell (2009) argues that investors who are overconfident in
their stock-picking skills want the most bang for the buck in their
investments and often prefer high-volatility, high-skewness stocks,
making them overpriced. (I will argue that leverage aversion has
similar implications, causing high-volatility stocks to be overpriced
and have below-par expected returns.)

Empirical evidence on the skewness premium

The stories above are consistent with the hockey stick shape across sorted
portfolio returns in Figure 19.4. I now give some further detail on the stock
market, followed by evidence from the option market.

Bali–Cakici–Whitelaw (2010) analyze the cross-section of U.S. stock
returns 
between 
1962 
and 
2005. 
They 
back 
up 
their 
assumption 
that
investors have lottery-like preferences with a variety of empirical evidence,
including 
long-shot 
bias 
in 
betting, 
popularity 
of 
lotteries 
and 
other
gambling despite negative expected returns, and, increasingly, financial
market data (poor long-run performance of small growth stocks and IPOs).
Their proxy for a lottery-like characteristic in a stock is exceptionally high
recent daily return. When they sort the cross-section of equities each month
based on previous month highest daily return, the decile with the highest
previous month daily return (which they call MAX return) underperforms
the decile with the lowest MAX return by about 1% per month (statistically
significant and robust to a battery of tests). The authors stress the nonlinear
(hockey stick) pattern across portfolio returns. Securities with the highest
MAX returns tend to be illiquid small-cap stocks with low prices and high
idiosyncratic volatility. The MAX effect subsumes idiosyncratic volatility
and skewness effects (although MAX could be just a proxy for expected
skewness 
that 
is 
hard 
to 
measure). 
Controlling 
for 
beta, 
size, 
value,
momentum, reversal, and illiquidity factors even boosts the average slope
coefficient and its statistical significance. The intuition behind this last,
surprising finding is that being an illiquid small-cap stock should boost the
lottery-like stock’s required return, so adding these controls makes its low
return even more exceptional.
Boyer–Mitton–Vorkink (2009) present empirical evidence on expected
idiosyncratic skewness. Due to the rarity of large events, past historical
skew is not a very good predictor of future skew. Thus, several firm-
specific 
variables 
are 
used 
to 
predict 
idiosyncratic 
skewness. 
Lagged
skewness has some persistence but past idiosyncratic volatility is a better
predictor; 
small-cap 
and 
negative 
momentum 
also 
predict 
positive
skewness; and industry dummies can be helpful. Skew is predicted over the
next 60 months (but the results are similar if a 6-month horizon is used);
this data requirement conservatively rules out young firms in hot industries,
often deemed to be overpriced lottery tickets. As shown above, stock
portfolios with high expected skewness tend to underperform peers (a
0.67% gap between monthly average raw returns of quintile 1 and quintile
5, and a 1% gap when three-factor alphas are used in place of raw returns).
Expected skewness can explain most of the underperformance of high-
volatility stocks, and intuitively it is clear that investors are more likely to
seek positive skewness than volatility.

Other studies suggest that many lottery-like stocks are distressed and that
their debt has high default risk. Again, skewness preference could explain
the puzzling pattern that such apparently risky stocks tend to have low
future returns.

Some empirical evidence from option markets is consistent with the
hockey stick shape. Sophie Ni’s (2006) analysis of single-stock call option
portfolios shows that ITM and ATM calls have on average mildly positive
returns 
(+2% 
per 
month 
for 
the 
three 
lowest 
quintiles 
of 
option
“moneyness”), while portfolios of high-strike and high-skew OTM call
options—the proverbial lottery tickets—have large negative returns (—28%
per month for the top quintile). Doran–Jiang–Peterson (2009) show that the
richness of OTM call options relative to ATM options is especially high in
January when lottery seeking is seasonally prevalent.

Studies 
that 
use 
option 
skew 
data 
to 
predict 
cross-sectional 
return
patterns in underlying equities come up with mixed evidence. Cremers–
Weinbaum (2010) show that deviations from put–call parity are able to
predict near-term stock returns in a way that is inconsistent with a negative
skewness premium. Stocks for which associated ATM calls are relatively
expensive outperform stocks for which associated ATM puts are relatively
expensive by 50 bp per week. That is, stocks where markets apparently
expect especially high upside volatility (reflected in relatively expensive
call options) tend to subsequently outperform. Conversely, stocks where
markets expect especially high downside volatility (reflected in relatively
expensive put options) tend to subsequently lag. The authors link this
evidence to gradual information dissemination. As a result of slow-moving
information, option prices thus contain information that is not yet fully
incorporated into stock prices, which makes near-term relative stock price
moves predictable if the needed option-pricing data are available. Such
predictability 
is 
empirically 
stronger 
for 
firms 
that 
face 
an 
especially
asymmetric information environment. This apparent underreaction in stock
prices to option market information could partly reflect insider trading;
users of superior information may prefer to trade options than underlying
assets so as to maximize their profits.

Doran–Krieger (2010) dissect the ability of several measures of option
skew to predict future cross-sectional equity returns. They confirm the
Cremers and Weinbaum result that future returns are higher for stocks
whose ATM call options have higher volatilities than ATM put options.
However, when comparing option volatilities across strike prices, negative
skew predicts higher future equity returns. In particular, stocks with higher
volatility 
for 
OTM 
put 
options 
than 
ATM 
put 
options 
have 
higher
subsequent returns, consistent with a negative skewness premium. Some
studies mix the two features (call vs. put and moneyness) and therefore get
conflicting results.

...
19.5 VERDICT ON WHY HIGH-VOLATILITY ASSETS
FARE SO POORLY

I have already noted that high-volatility stocks and options perform poorly
in the long run. Figure 19.8 reveals similar patterns in fixed income markets
and Falkenstein (2009) presents further examples of this phenomenon in
several other contexts. In government bond markets, extending duration to
the longest bonds gives a much less consistent return advantage than
duration extension at short maturities. In credits, the reward for bearing
credit risk is much less consistent at long than short maturities. Also, in the
rating quality dimension, long-run reward for taking credit risk is worst for
lowest rated CCC bonds.

Figure 19.8. Inferior long-run reward for volatility for the most volatile
segment within each asset class.

Sources: Ang et al. (2006), Bloomberg, Bank of America Merrill Lynch,
Barclays Capital.
My main explanations for the low returns of the most volatile assets
within each asset class are lottery preferences and leverage aversion or
constraints. Lottery preferences are reviewed in the previous section. What
is the leverage story?

Leverage. Figure 19.8 indicates that levering up low-risk opportunities
would 
have 
achieved 
much 
higher 
returns 
than 
buying 
high-volatility
securities. 
Leverage 
aversion 
may 
have 
made 
return-seeking 
investors
overpay for the riskiest segment in each asset class.

Theory can help us here: according to the classic two-fund theorem and
capital market line, utility-maximizing investors select the most attractive
portfolio of risky assets (with the maximum Sharpe ratio) and then lever
this portfolio up or down by borrowing or lending, if needed, to reach their
volatility target (or the optimal portfolio that is tangent to their indifference
curve). However, this theory requires unlimited ability to borrow at the
riskless rate.

In reality, if exceptionally risk-tolerant investors want high long-term
expected returns but cannot lever, they need to hold a greater weight in
inherently volatile assets than the weight at which they are held in the
market portfolio. Thus, leverage constraints or leverage aversion can make
investors reach for volatility to get the most bang for the buck that they can
for their unlevered outlays. Overconfident active investors may also prefer
to buy the most volatile assets for similar reasons. Such tendencies can
make the most volatile assets in each asset class structurally overpriced, and
the same is true for assets or funds that embed high leverage. Moreover, any
leverage 
constraints 
are 
likely 
to 
restrict 
short 
selling, 
which 
could
otherwise mitigate overpricing effects.

The story is not new: Fischer Black (1972) pointed out that the empirical
security 
market 
line 
is 
too 
flat—high-beta 
(low-beta) 
stocks 
have
surprisingly low (high) average returns compared with their betas—and
suggested borrowing restrictions as the explanation: aggressive investors
use high-beta stocks as a substitute for a levered market portfolio.

While I emphasize the value or potential alpha in levering up low-
volatility opportunities, it is important to remember that leverage does raise
the risk of all investments, especially procyclical ones, and may increase
any existing need to de-lever with the crowd. The 2007–2008 experience
highlighted the time-varying cost and availability of leverage. Any impact
of leverage constraints on market prices may become more pronounced in
the coming years, because various regulatory reforms seem likely to limit
leverage.

Baker–Bradley–Wurgler 
(2010) 
combine 
the 
stories 
of 
lottery
preferences and leverage constraints in typical delegated asset management
contracts (where the manager tries to beat the benchmark by stock selection
and 
cannot 
lever 
up 
low-volatility 
opportunities). 
Besides 
updating
evidence for the long-run underperformance of high-volatility stocks, they
note that these stocks have higher transaction costs and greater risk than
low-volatility 
stocks 
(higher 
volatility, 
higher 
betas, 
and 
lagging
performance especially in bad times such as 1973–1974, 1987, 2000–2002,
and 2008). A high price to pay for the upside, indeed.

BAB Sharpe ratios by asset class

This figure shows annualized Sharpe ratios of BAB factors across
asset classes. To construct the BAB factor, all instruments are assigned
to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Instruments are
weighted by ranked betas and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar
month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of one at portfolio
formation. The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-
beta portfolio and short the high-beta portfolio (Sharpe ratios are
annualized).

Figure 19.9. Betting against beta (BAB) pays off in virtually all asset
classes.

Source: Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen (2010), “Betting
against beta,” working paper. Reproduced by permission of Professor
Lasse Heje Pedersen.
Stop the press! Just as I am about to submit my final manuscript, I find a
new study by Andrea Frazzini and Lasse Pedersen (2010): “Betting against
beta”. The study presents a model with two types of investors—those who
cannot lever (and overpay for high-beta assets) and those who can lever but
face margin constraints (and must de-lever when these constraints become
binding). The model predicts high Sharpe ratios for portfolios that are long
low-beta and short high-beta assets, scaled to similar beta levels. Moreover,
long-run profits of such levered “betting-against-beta” portfolios are higher
the more prevalent the leverage constraints. However, these profits are not
riskless because the levered portfolio tends to underperform when margin
constraints tighten—which usually coincides with “bad times”. (Tighter
funding conditions imply short-term losses for levered portfolios, but higher
required returns also imply better ex ante opportunities.) The empirical
results—highlighted 
in 
Figure 
19.9—show 
that 
betting-against-beta
portfolios have indeed been profitable in several asset classes. The evidence
is similar to mine above but more comprehensive. The prevalence of this
regularity 
appears 
as 
strong 
as 
those 
of 
value, 
carry, 
and 
momentum
discussed in Chapters 12 to 14. Portfolio turnover is comparable with that
of equity value strategies and much lower than, say, when trading is based
on past month volatility signals. Moreover, the authors show that such
betting-against-beta portfolios tend to lose money when the TED spread
widens, presumably because tightening funding conditions lead to de-
levering these levered portfolios.

It is interesting that both index volatility selling and the betting-against-
beta strategy (levering up low-volatility assets) provide positive long-run
returns, but at the cost of ill-timed losses. Thus, both strategies resemble
buying carry and harvesting illiquidity premia in that at least part of the
profitability reflects the tendency to lose money in bad times.

Status seeking. Eric Falkenstein’s book, Finding Alpha (2009), highlights
empirical evidence similar to what I have presented and also emphasizes the
story of lottery preferences. He argues that average returns are unrelated to
volatility except in two extreme cases: people overpay for certainty (least
volatile assets) and for hopes and dreams (most volatile assets). Falkenstein
adds another story with his claim that volatility does not affect required
returns because investors maximize status rather than wealth (people are
more envious than greedy). For status-seekers who care about their relative
wealth and compare themselves with a peer benchmark, underperformance
is equally painful whether caused by long or short positioning relative to a
benchmark. Such symmetry makes relative risks unpriced in the same way
diversifiable risk is unpriced in standard models. This unorthodox but
intriguing idea is related to the “keeping up with the Joneses” utility
function 
(see 
Note 
9 
in 
Chapter 
5) 
and 
could 
explain 
the 
“Easterlin
paradox” that average happiness as measured by surveys has not increased
over decades-long periods when material wealth has grown many-fold.

...
19.6 TIME-VARYING PREMIA FOR TAIL RISK
EXPOSURES

Since the literature on tail risk or higher moment premia is young and
limited data histories are available, it is hard to say much about the time-
varying nature of these premia. Tail risks are diverse, but heightened
volatility and correlation disproportionately occur in bad times (recessions,
financial 
crises), 
so 
these 
factors 
clearly 
warrant 
high-risk 
premia. 
In
principle, these premia could be constant over time but empirical evidence
suggests that they are not.

On one hand, investor tendency to overvalue low-probability events
points to high premia on tail risks. On the other hand, overconfidence can
lead to disaster myopia—the tendency to underestimate the probability of
rare disasters—and underpricing of blackswan-like risks. How can these
Kahneman and Taleb effects be reconciled? The balance may be decided by
salience and recency. The result is outsized ex ante premia for asymmetric
risk strategies just after losses have materialized, gradually receding premia
(apparently as investor memories of the disaster decay), and exceptionally
low premia after a long period in a benign disaster-free environment.
Implied volatilities, correlations, and skews may have some ability to
predict future realizations, but they certainly have a tendency to lag or
“shadow” these realizations. Following a spike in realized volatilities or
correlations, implied volatilities and correlations can remain elevated for
months or even years. The implied skews for equity index options only
became distinctly asymmetric—emphasizing greater downside risk—after
the 
crash 
materialized 
in 
1987 
(and 
the 
same 
happened 
to 
FX 
carry
strategies in 2007–2008).
These historical developments partly reflect market learning (“we did not
deem it possible for such a risk to exist”) but I may generalize and claim
that tail risks are particularly well rewarded after realization of pertinent tail
risk events. One reason is the scarcity of speculative capital following such
adverse events, because capital tends to be de-allocated from loss-making,
insurance-providing, or liquidity-providing strategies. I do not claim such
timing is easy. Many speculators who began to buy implied volatility in
2005, already then at historically low levels, bled money for two years and
may have gone out of business before volatility finally rose in 2007 and
then soared in 2008. Conversely, some large, well-capitalized institutions
that recognized the exceptional reward from volatility selling after the late-
2008 losses decided to bypass this opportunity, as the ride had simply been
too wild.

...
19.7 NOTES

[1] 
The 
main 
explanations 
for 
the 
negative 
contemporaneous 
relation
between equity return and volatility are the leverage effect (lower price
raises the debt/equity ratio and riskiness of the equity part of the firm) and
the 
volatility 
feedback 
effect 
(higher 
volatility 
raises 
required 
returns;
higher expected returns can be achieved by lower prices today).

[2] Note that we should not confuse skewness preferences with the obvious
investor preference for higher mean returns. Skewness preferences refer to
preferring a more positively asymmetric return distribution for a given
mean. In jargon, this is a mean-preserving tradeoff between frequent small
gains and rare blowup losses.

[3] The richness of OTM put options for equity indices, perhaps a sign of
“crash-o-phobia”, 
was 
highlighted 
in 
Chapter 
15. 
Jump 
risk 
has 
also
attracted much academic attention for explaining implied volatility skew,
time-varying volatility, and fat-tailed return distributions. Some studies
estimate jump risk premia, but I leave the topic aside.

Source notes. Tail risk is a diverse topic that overlaps volatility selling, so
see the “Source notes” of Chapter 15 as well.

On the relative returns of more volatile and less volatile stocks, see Ang
et 
al. 
(2006, 
2009), 
Blitz–van 
Vliet 
(2007), 
De 
Rossi–Jessop 
(2008),
Doran–Diavatopoulos–Peterson (2008), Frieder–Jiang (2008), Fu (2008),
Falkenstein (2009), Cao–Xu (2010), Clarke–de Silva–Thorley (2010), and
Huang et al. (2010); as well as closely related studies by Ang–Bali–Cakici
(2010) and Moise (2007). On the time series relation between volatility and
future market returns, see French–Schwert–Stambaugh (1987), Glosten–
Jagannathan–Runkle 
(1993), 
Whitelaw 
(1994), 
Ghysels–Santa-Clara–
Valkanov (2005), and Bollerslev–Zhou (2006).
On skew-related patterns, see Harvey–Siddique (2000), Ni (2006), Pan–
Poteshman (2006), Cremers–Weinbaum (2010), Xing–Zhang–Zhao (2010),
Boyer–Mitton–Vorkink (2009), Bali–Cakici–Whitelaw (2010), and Doran–
Krieger (2010). Stories related to skewness preferences include Mitton–
Vorkink (2007), Barberis–Huang (2008), Doran–Jiang–Peterson (2009), and
Kumar (2009).

On leverage constraints and the relative performance of low-beta and
high-beta assets, see Black (1972), Baker–Bradley–Wurgler (2010), and
Frazzini–Pedersen (2010).

On other influences on skewness pricing, see Taleb (2004) on delegated
asset 
managers; 
Doran–Jiang–Peterson 
(2009) 
on 
gambling 
seasonals;
Cornell (2009) on overconfident stock-pickers; and Falkenstein (2009) on
status seeking.

On correlation-related patterns, see Deng (2007), Driessen–Maenhout–
Vilkov (2009), Krishnan–Petkova–Ritchken (2008), Pollet–Wilson (2008)
for equity markets and Bhansali–Gingrich–Longstaff (2008), Longstaff–
Rajan (2008), Coval–Jurek–Stafford (2009) for debt markets. On hedge
fund sensitivities to higher moments, see Bondarenko (2004), Agarwal–
Bakshi–Huij (2007), Lo (2008), and Buraschi–Kosowski–Trojani (2010).
On time-varying rewards due to learning, see Benzoni–Collin-Dufresne–
Goldstein (2010).

...