20

Endogenous return and risk: Feedback effects on expected
returns

• Feedback loops can amplify market movements if market
participants respond to past performance. Irrational extrapolation
may have evolutionary origins. Virtuous and vicious cycles may
also reflect rational forces, such as wealth-dependent risk
aversion, leverage cycles, and liquidity spirals.
• Such dynamics are especially powerful when applied to
market direction (booms and busts) but they can also be overlaid
on the performance of any asset or strategy. Presumably, they
contribute to both short-term momentum and long-term reversal
patterns observed for many assets.
• Recent success can make any asset or strategy more
popular over time and thereby also more risky (beta like),
especially when a number of years pass between realization of
negative risk events. Crowdedness raises liquidation risks and
makes the return stream more negatively skewed. Currency carry
strategies and the August 2007 quant crisis are good illustrations.

The 
12 
case 
studies 
above 
contain 
limited 
discussion 
about 
market
dynamics. However, an important feature of financial market regularities is
that market participants tend to respond to past performance, often herding
into recently successful strategies. Imitating success, or learning, may have
been 
an 
evolutionarily 
useful 
approach 
for 
our 
ancestors, 
and 
thus
hardwired into us, but in modern financial markets this tendency may be
unhealthy, even dangerous. Such feedback effects make asset returns and
risks endogenous. That is, the market’s expected returns at least partly come
from within: the subject is not independent of the observer. When market
participants observe realized asset returns it influences their actions and
thereby market prices—thus also affecting future returns and risks. As the
market’s expected returns are unobservable, many investors overextrapolate
past realized returns, missing the notion that higher past returns can be
indicative of lower future returns.

...
20.1 FEEDBACK LOOPS ON THE DIRECTION OF RISKY
ASSETS

The partially endogenous nature of returns is especially important at the
aggregate market level because, even if wealth gains do not make investors
more optimistic about future cash flows, they can make investors more risk
tolerant and lenders more willing to offer leverage. As discussed in the
context of market bubbles in Section 6.3.1, such feedback loops amplify
market moves even if they eventually prove self-defeating. These ideas
echo Soros’ reflexivity principle, which states that market prices not only
reflect expectations of future outcomes but also shape economic outcomes
through a feedback loop (see Section 6.3). When the boom turns into a bust,
virtuous cycles turn vicious. Lawrence Summers has noted that, when
multiple vicious cycles operate simultaneously and reinforce each other,
normal self-stabilizing mechanisms in the market economy (“the genius of
capitalism”) may be overwhelmed. This is clearly what happened in 2007–
2008. Besides irrational sentiment (animal spirits, the cycle of fear and
greed) and extrapolation of recent performance, as well as feedback loops
between the real economy and financial markets, here are several rational
and purely financial mechanisms that boost procyclicality:
• time-varying risk premia due to wealth-dependent risk aversion
or risk (falling wealth, and rising volatilities and/or correlations, raise
required returns with the result that today’s asset prices need to fall);
• 
leverage/loss/margin 
spirals 
(losses 
prompt 
financial
intermediaries to shrink their own balance sheets, while margin calls
due to losses, higher “haircuts”, and investor redemptions force hedge
funds and other levered customers to reduce positions, with the result
that selling pressure pushes risky assets even lower);
• liquidity spirals (waning trust and worsening funding conditions
cause forced liquidations; a synchronous rush for the exit causes
market liquidity to potentially dry up);
• 
risk 
control 
spirals 
(VaR-based 
risk 
management, 
stop-loss
rules, portfolio insurance strategies, and mark-to-market accounting
combined with regulatory and rating pressures lead to risk reduction
when market prices fall and measured volatilities and/or correlations
rise).

Recent 
research 
emphasizes 
the 
interactions 
between 
these 
various
mechanisms as well as the central role of financial intermediaries and their
funding constraints. Higher volatility pushes haircuts higher and thereby
hurts funding liquidity. The wealth effect makes the demand responses of
leveraged 
investors 
for 
risky 
assets 
upward 
sloping 
and 
their 
supply
responses amidst meltdowns downward sloping. Higher leverage expands
the economy’s risk-bearing capacity, procyclicality, and systemic risks.
Position unwinds can suddenly transform stabilizing arbitrageurs (liquidity
suppliers) into destabilizing liquidators (liquidity demanders). Combining
leverage and illiquid assets is particularly dangerous because, when credit
conditions tighten, distressed selling of crowded positions is more likely to
occur at fire sale prices.

While the procyclical responses listed above can make sense individually
for each institution, collectively such actions exacerbate market moves and
make most investors worse off. In general, a heterogeneous ecology of
investment approaches would make financial markets more balanced and
robust than what we have seen in recent years. Perold–Sharpe (1988)
discussed two mirroring dynamic investment approaches—buying risky
assets as they fall (and selling them as they rise) vs. selling risky assets as
they fall (and buying them when they rise). Today we call these approaches
contrarian 
(reversal) 
and 
momentum 
(trend-following) 
strategies.
Contrarian strategies are inherently market stabilizing while momentum
strategies are destabilizing. The balance between the sizes of the two groups
is essential for market behavior. We saw this in 2008 when falling wealth
and rising risk aversion prompted most investors to reduce risky asset
holdings—and value-oriented buyers failed to appear to the scene.

Perold and Sharpe stressed that when contrarian strategies succeed for a
while, they attract followers and markets may become too stable (too slow
to 
adjust 
to 
economic 
developments). 
Conversely, 
when 
momentum
strategies succeed for a while, they attract new followers and markets may
become too volatile (overreacting to economic news). In the post-crisis
environment of 2010 we clearly are in the latter situation where “everyone
is a risk manager” and stop-loss approaches are popular (stop-loss limits
imply selling into weakness). However, as the authors emphasized, excess
popularity 
of 
one 
approach 
eventually 
results 
in 
excess 
gains 
for 
the
opposite style, a process which over time should drive the relative sizes of
the two groups toward a balance.

At the time of writing (mid-2010), a less momentum-oriented approach
also seems consistent with the other lesson of the past decade: contrarian
market timing can add value over long horizons—especially if regulators
are more keen than before to create countercyclic buffers and central
bankers to lean against the wind. I suspect that investors will turn to this
second lesson only if we see very large market moves and glaring value
opportunities. The “buy on dips” mentality has been discredited in the
current investor generation’s mind, unless the dip is very deep.

...
20.2 FEEDBACK LOOPS ON LESS DIRECTIONAL
POSITIONS

Feedback loops also matter beyond market-directional exposures. Similar
return-chasing dynamics can be overlaid on the performance of any return
source. Fluctuating fortunes and fashionability may explain the prevalence
of short-term momentum and long-term reversal patterns observed in the
return series of many financial assets and trading strategies (see Figure
20.1). These dynamics may also make any successful strategy more beta
like and its return more asymmetric (“up the stairs, down the escalator”),
with scant fundamental reason.

Figure 20.1. Similar speculative dynamics (Momentum + Reversal) in
many financial strategies, 1990–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
LPX, 
Bank 
of 
America 
Merrill 
Lynch, 
Barclays
Capital, Hedge Fund Research, Ken French’s website, S&P GSCI, MSCI
Barra, FTSE, own calculations.
The first bar shows the (auto)correlation between adjacent month returns
for each major asset class or strategy that I cover in this book (i.e., short-
term momentum of the asset class or strategy). The second bar shows the
correlation between the latest 6-month return and the 6-month return 18
months earlier, measuring “long-term” reversal. I present evidence only for
the 1990s and 2000s because data availability is better for a broad set of
assets during this period and because this period gives us pure out-of-
sample results compared with the first studies reporting such speculative
dynamics (Cutler–Poterba–Summers, 1991) [1]. Across the investments in
Figure 20.1, average short-term momentum is +0.20 and average long-term
reversal is—0.11. The evidence on short-term momentum is especially
compelling 
although 
a 
part 
of 
it 
may 
reflect 
illiquidity 
and 
return
smoothing. (Even the two exceptions with mild negative autocorrelations
here—commodity trend following and the size effect in U.S. equities—have
mild positive autocorrelations over longer sample periods.)

More fundamentally, analysts’ earnings forecasts exhibit similar short-
term momentum and long-term reversal patterns. Ghayur et al. (2010) argue
that this is the main reason for the success of momentum and value
strategies.

For illustration, let us consider the evolution of a profitable investment
strategy—say, FX carry or harvesting illiquidity premia. Figure 20.2 shows
a stylized lifecycle of the ex ante Sharpe ratio. Once the strategy’s past
success 
attracts 
widespread 
attention, 
it 
triggers 
profit-seeking 
inflows
through 
extrapolation 
or 
learning. 
Inflows 
may 
temporarily 
boost
profitability 
but 
growing 
competition 
gradually 
eats 
up 
the 
ex 
ante
opportunity, while the realized return remains deceivingly good. In the
absence of good forward-looking anchors, the expected return may even
become negative, due to overvaluation and overcrowded positions. The
liquidation phase is likely to wait until broader bad times, correlating the
strategy’s fortunes with the equity market. When bad times do arrive, even
though 
plummeting 
performance 
revives 
the 
strategy’s 
ex 
ante
attractiveness, speculative capital gets removed from the losing strategy. If
the regularity that caused the strategy to be profitable in the first place
reflects a (time-varying) risk premium, the new equilibrium should involve
a sustainably positive Sharpe ratio, albeit lower than before the regularity
was widely known. If the regularity reflects market inefficiency, the Sharpe
ratio should converge toward zero once markets have learned about it.

Figure 20.2. Stylized lifecycle of a regularity’s ex ante Sharpe ratio.

As 
discussed 
in 
the 
context 
of 
FX 
carry, 
this 
evolution 
can 
be
characterized as alpha morphing into beta—and not just into any beta but
into 
a 
bad, 
insidious 
variety. 
The 
strategy’s 
riskiness 
is 
not 
easily
recognized in good times, and losses tend to materialize in bad times.

Strategies with inherently asymmetric payoffs are especially dangerous.
Because rare disasters happen rarely, benign conditions can last longer, and
more and more investors get sucked into the strategies. FX carry, index
volatility selling, front-end credit trading, and harvesting illiquidity premia
are examples where the time span between disasters could be a decade or
more. Worse, the losses do not materialize at random points in time but in
environments like 1998 and 2008 when they are least welcome. Market
dynamics are different in those rare occasions: for example, losses become
more synchronous when funding conditions become binding and levered
traders unwind previously successful positions.

Other 
profitable 
strategies 
do 
not 
inherently 
have 
negative-skew 
or
positive-beta characteristics but may acquire them largely because their past
success—if 
persistent 
enough—makes 
them 
popular, 
crowded 
among
leveraged traders, and more likely to fail sharply during financial crises.

Another real-world example: Khandani–Lo (2007) and Pedersen (2009)
discuss the quant strategy meltdown in August 2007, when fundamentally
and historically uncorrelated equity long–short strategies began temporarily
to 
move 
in 
lock 
step. 
The 
combination 
of 
common 
positions 
and
deterioration in liquidity conditions triggered a joint rush for the exit,
leading to unprecedented losses over a few days. A particular feedback loop
is 
that 
liquidations 
made 
mispricings 
worse 
in 
popular 
relative 
value
positions, causing losses to widen and spreading to systematic strategies in
other asset classes.

The lesson was that common holdings among hedge funds give rise to a
new type of risk which is purely “technical” (in the sense of reflecting the
supply and demand for assets, rather than their fundamental values) and
which we might call crowded trade risk (“we have found a new risk factor
—it is us”). The risk is that when a popular strategy becomes unpopular,
would-be sellers will demand liquidity but there is no one buying. That
these dangers were not specific to quant investing became abundantly clear
during the following year. Arguably, any historically successful strategy has
a tendency to become popular among speculative traders. The holdings of
leveraged traders and intermediaries are especially important because they
may be forced to unwind their positions.

...
20.3 AGENDA FOR MARKET-TIMERS AND
RESEARCHERS

Endogeneity contributes to momentum and value effects (see Chapters 14
and 12), and maybe also to carry and liquidity premia (Chapters 13 and 18).
Here is one angle. Financial folklore is filled with wise but conflicting
clichés, such as “The trend is your friend” and “Avoid the crowds”. Both
contain a seed of truth but cannot be right in every context. Likewise, the
empirical lesson that “hanging on to losers” is a common, costly investment
error is hard to reconcile with evidence that “return chasing” or “excessive
firing and hiring of managers” hurts long-run performance. Different time
horizons 
can 
help 
resolve 
these 
apparent 
contradictions 
(though 
other
distinguishing contexts may also be relevant). Selling winners and keeping
losers 
over 
a 
multi-month 
horizon 
hurts 
if 
returns 
exhibit 
short-term
momentum. The opposite action—return chasing—hurts when done over a
multi-year horizon if long-term reversals exist, and generally they do.
Indeed, Figure 20.1 suggests that market participants’ collective actions
create a short-term momentum bias and a mild long-term reversal bias [2].

These 
patterns 
encourage 
“market 
timing” 
any 
return 
source 
by
exploiting short-term momentum (joining the bandwagon) or by resisting
market excesses (contrarian positioning). Yet, easy opportunities exist only
with hindsight. In real-world risk taking, contrarian trading will lose money
if no reversal occurs (outsized returns reflect true structural change or a
sustained risk premium) or if the reversal positions are entered too early.

Investment practitioners have rightly become wary of consensus trades
and 
de-leveraging risks. They 
have learned to 
monitor, 
on one hand,
excessive 
crowding 
and 
stretched 
market 
valuations 
to 
identify 
future
trouble 
spots, 
and, 
on 
the 
other 
hand, 
any 
signs 
that 
could 
trigger
liquidations—tightening 
financial 
conditions 
or 
heightened 
market
turbulence and risk aversion.

The topic of endogeneity provides a fertile field for research. It has
broadened from its behavioral origins, in researching bubbles and positive-
feedback 
trading 
(Shiller, 
Summers, 
Shleifer, 
and 
others), 
to 
rational
analyses that have proved useful in explaining the 2007–2008 credit and
liquidity crunch. Markus Brunnermeier, Lasse Pedersen, Hyun Song Shin,
John Geanakoplos, and others have led the academic work, forming a new
school of thought sometimes called the liquidity movement. In addition,
policymakers 
are 
keen 
to 
develop 
macro-prudential 
regulation 
and
economic 
policies 
that 
counter 
various 
feedback 
loops 
and 
related
procyclicality.

Andrew Lo’s adaptive markets hypothesis (see Section 5.3) spearheads
one interesting strand of this literature. It is not a single well-developed
model 
but 
a 
collection 
of 
insights 
based 
on 
evolutionary 
principles.
Competition should drive alpha toward zero but not in a linear fashion. The
degree of market efficiency and the attractiveness of trading strategies can
wax and wane depending on the environment. Relative populations in
market ecology will evolve over time: there will be more momentum
traders after contrarian value strategies fail, louder and better respected
market bears after a large selloff, etc. The ability to adapt to changing
environments through innovation and flexibility is the key to investment
success, just as it is to evolutionary success.

Stein (2009) addresses an interesting question in the same spirit: “Do
smarter investors make markets more efficient?” He notes that typical
market participants have likely become more sophisticated over time (more
professional 
investment, 
more 
quantitative 
analysis, 
more 
leveraged
players). This tendency should make any simple regularities less profitable.
However, data mining, especially quant investors’ repeated use of the same
empirical history and similar models and ideas to develop strategies, gives
rise to new problems, such as overcrowding, and subsequent liquidations at
fire sale prices. Thus, it is not clear whether financial markets have really
become more efficient.

...
20.4 NOTES

[1] The reversal measure seems arbitrary (contrasting the most recent 6-
month vs. 18-to-24-month-ago returns). Results are broadly similar for any
past 6-month window beyond the first year; during the first year, the
momentum effect still dominates. The reversal indicator I use is not really
multi-year, but with a 20-year data window I have too few independent
observations 
to 
study 
truly 
long-horizon 
reversals. 
Looking 
at 
longer
histories, 3-to-5-year stock returns appear to be negatively autocorrelated in
both the 19th and 20th centuries, but the same is not true for real bond
returns. In any case, such mean reversion evidence is relatively weak and
plagued with econometric problems. Mean-reverting deviations from some
fundamental value anchor often give better trading signals than simple past
returns. Finally, relative mean reversion across assets may well be stronger
than absolute mean reversion if general risk appetite exhibits multi-year
trends.

[2] The disposition effect (tendency of individuals to sell winners rather
than losers from the existing portfolio) can cause momentum through
underreaction effects (resistant flows delay information dissemination into
market prices). Moreover, the success of any asset or strategy tends to
attract net inflows, which generate short-term momentum. The widespread
selling of an asset class after a couple of years of underperformance may
create temporary undervaluation and give rise to later reversal.

Source notes. On feedback effects that create endogenous return and risk,
see Shiller (2000), Lo (2004), Soros (2008), Brunnermeier–Nagel–Pedersen
(2008), Brunnermeier–Pedersen (2009), Danielsson–Shin–Zigrand (2009),
Geanakoplos 
(2009), 
Summers 
(2009), 
and 
Shin 
(2010). 
On 
crowded
trades, see Perold–Sharpe (1988), Khandani–Lo
(2007), Pedersen (2009), and Stein (2009). On short-term momentum and
long-term reversals, see Cutler–Poterba–Summers (1991) and Ghayur et al.
(2010).

...