21

Forward-looking measures of asset returns

• Value and carry indicators can be useful predictors of
future asset returns, especially over longer horizons, even if we
do not know the underlying reason for the generic cheapness.
• Popular indicators include earnings yields and dividend
yields for equities, real yields and yield curve steepness for
Treasuries, and various credit spreads for non-government bonds.
• Prospective real long-term returns can be compared across
asset classes (apples with apples).
• In a building block approach, each asset’s or strategy’s
prospective return is expressed as a sum of carry, expected cash
flow growth, and expected valuation change. This framework
could be useful for assessing the prospects of several asset classes
in a consistent manner.

Forward-looking return signals are surprisingly good indicators of long-
term return outlook. Here, I review popular value and carry measures for
major asset classes. They have their shortcomings but these are partly
compensated by their simplicity and real-time observability. More complex
value 
indicators 
exist 
but 
involve 
more 
specific 
assumptions 
(model
specification risk), more elaborate statistical estimation (estimation risk),
and often more hindsight bias. Carry and value indicators can usefully (if
noisily) predict future returns even when we don’t understand the reason for
the risk premium and even when we don’t know whether the source of
predictability is a rational risk premium or irrational mispricing. This
generic nature of carry and value indicators is a clear advantage, given our
inherently limited understanding of the ultimate drivers of expected asset
returns.

If expected returns vary over time, how can we know the current level of
expected returns? In most cases we cannot. Sadly, the market’s expected
returns are unobservable. The best we can do is estimate them, by hook or
crook. The simplest and more popular approaches involve relating current
market prices to some value anchors. If current market prices are low
compared with such anchors (which can be as simple as historical average
price, yield or spread, or something more complex), expected returns are
deemed to be above average. Such value indicators do not reveal whether
high current expected returns reflect irrational underpricing or rationally
high risk premia. Moreover, these value indicators can be poor short-term
predictors. They may fail even over longer horizons if structural change
shifts the long-run mean.

Carry indicators are often related to value indicators but details differ.
Carry captures an asset’s income return over time. Besides cash income,
broader carry measures include other returns earned under conditions of
stable or unchanged markets (e.g., if the term structure of interest rates or of
commodity futures prices stays unchanged). If the yield curve is upward
sloping and remains unchanged, bonds earn capital gains simply by aging
and rolling down the yield curve. Similarly, if, say, a backwardated crude
oil futures price curve remains unchanged over a quarter, a futures contract
earns roll gains as its maturity shrinks and it rolls up the futures price curve.

Value and carry, discussed in this chapter, are objective, ex ante return
indicators based on market prices. Chapter 23, in contrast, tackles survey-
based (subjective) measures of ex ante returns. Chapter 24 reviews tactical
approaches to predicting returns based on multiple indicators, in contrast to
the 
slow-moving 
strategic 
signals 
provided 
by 
the 
value 
and 
carry
approaches treated in the current chapter.

...
21.1 POPULAR VALUE AND CARRY INDICATORS AND
THEIR PITFALLS

Equities

For equities, the earnings yield or earnings per share (E/P)—the inverse of
the 
price/ 
earnings 
(P/E) 
ratio—is 
the 
most 
popular 
value 
indicator,
especially since the growing popularity of share buybacks reduced dividend
yield’s information content. Under rather restrictive assumptions, a stock’s
earnings 
yield 
equals 
its 
expected 
real 
return. 
Experts 
debate 
which
earnings measure and which time window or horizon to use. Firms and sell-
side 
analysts 
tend 
to 
focus 
on 
“operating 
earnings” 
that 
ignore 
non-
recurring items, such as writeoffs, which may distort the general picture of
earnings trends. Such data have been available since the 1980s. However,
since non-recurring items typically are negative, operating earnings are
regularly higher than reported earnings. Advocates of using reported instead
of operating earnings point out that, while any particular writeoff is non-
recurring, 
writeoffs 
are 
the 
way 
that 
companies 
report 
the 
results 
of
business decisions that did not work out. Such decisions are commonplace,
so a certain level of writeoff activity should be expected, on average, each
year in the future.

Moreover, the operating earnings number that is usually cited by sell-side
analysts is the forward-looking consensus analyst estimate of next year
earnings, rather than trailing earnings. Forward earnings are invariably
higher 
than 
trailing 
earnings, 
partly 
reflecting 
the 
normal 
uptrend 
in
earnings, and partly analyst overoptimism that is related to their incentives.
Reported earnings have made a comeback after the equity bubble years;
other alternatives have been developed but none has a history as long as that
available for reported earnings yields. If one is going to use trailing
earnings, how many years’ trailing earnings should be used? One-year
trailing earnings are common but can exhibit cyclical fluctuations that are
too strong (e.g., giving rise to the high P/E ratios in the 1932, 2002, and
2009 bear markets). For this reason, smoother long-term earnings—up to a
10-year window—may be preferred.

Note that E/P is an absolute value indicator—it relates a firm’s current
E/P level to its own history. E/P and other value measures can also be
compared across individual equities or equity market sectors and countries,
thus making them relative value indicators.

Equity risk premium measures based on the dividend discount model
(DDM) directly incorporate some estimate of future cash flow growth.
However, the DDM is an accounting identity and not a fully developed
model. Under the assumption that current market valuations will not change
over time, the expected return on an equity investment reflects just dividend
income plus the expected growth rate of dividends, where dividend growth
is 
achieved 
through 
retention 
of 
earnings 
(i.e., 
reinvestment 
into 
the
company of that part of earnings not paid out as dividends). (Analysts may
substitute, in place of dividends, a broader measure of cash flow to the
investor.) The DDM can be expressed in either nominal or real terms; the
real version says that expected real equity return equals dividend yield plus
expected real dividend growth. The equity premium over bonds is thus the
difference between expected real equity return and real Treasury yield [1].

The classic carry proxy, dividend yield (D/P), has become too narrow a
measure of carry because firms increasingly use means other than dividends
to 
distribute 
cash 
to 
investors, 
including 
share 
repurchases 
and 
cash
acquisitions. 
In 
particular, 
share 
repurchases 
have 
substituted 
dividend
payments. I discussed broader payout yields in Section 8.4.

Government bonds

Yield 
to 
maturity 
(YTM) 
is 
a 
bond’s 
internal 
rate 
of 
return 
and 
the
traditional value measure in fixed income markets. YTM measures an
asset’s expected return over its lifetime if it is held to maturity and if cash
flows can be reinvested at the same YTM rate. (Whenever yield curves are
not 
exactly 
flat, 
it 
follows 
that 
different 
reinvestment 
rates 
are
inconsistently assumed for different bonds.) Over short horizons, YTM
equals expected return if a bond can be sold exactly at the yield at which it
was bought. These assumptions are of course highly restrictive but, for
straight (non-optionable) bonds, YTM can be a decent proxy for expected
return. YTM clearly captures the yield income (carry) component, and the
yield spread between two bonds may also predict capital gains if the spread
is mean-reverting.

Bond yields reflect the market’s rate expectations and the required bond
risk premium (BRP). If we have an observable proxy of the market’s rate
expectations, we can isolate the two components of the yield curve and thus
get a cleaner BRP proxy. Some analysts use term structure models or
econometric analyses to isolate the two components but I prefer to use
survey data. The survey-based BRP is simply the difference between 10-
year 
Treasury 
yield 
and 
the 
consensus 
forecast 
of 
average 
short-term
Treasury bill rates over the next decade.

Expected real bond yield is another useful value indicator (and more
easily available); it is the difference between bond yield and some deflator.
Real yields may use as deflators either the trailing inflation rate, a market-
based 
inflation 
estimate, 
survey-based 
expected 
inflation, 
or 
some
econometric estimate of expected inflation. I prefer to use maturity-matched
consensus forecasts of long-term inflation, which have been available since
the late 1970s (statistical estimates of expected inflation can be used before
this). The introduction of inflation-linked bond markets (in 1981 in the U.K.
and in 1997 in the U.S.) gave us a market-based alternative for assessing
real yields; however, linker yield clearly differs from the expected real yield
of nominal bonds due to time-varying inflation and liquidity premia.

Non-government bonds

YTM is the constant discount rate which, when applied to expected cash
flows, produces the prices of the bond. Raw YTM spreads involve some
unreasonable assumptions and maturity mismatches. In the olden days,
YTW or yield to worst (i.e., “worst call” or call date least favorable to the
investor) was an improvement over raw YTM, which simply ignored
embedded options in, say, callable corporate bonds. To incorporate the
value of embedded options, YTW computed the bond’s yield to maturity
and to various potential call dates, and then used the lowest of the resulting
yields. The option-adjusted spread (OAS) was developed in the 1980s as a
more consistent measure of a bond’s probability-weighted yield spread or
advantage over a reference curve (often Treasuries or interest rate swaps).

The OAS was originally developed for bonds with embedded options but
it is also used for “bullet” bonds with known cash flows. For such bonds,
the OAS is the size of parallel shift in the reference curve needed to make
the bond’s present value using the adjusted curve to match the bond’s
market price. The OAS takes all bond cash flows into account so that a
corporate bond is effectively duration-matched to reference curve assets.
For bonds with uncertain cash flows, the OAS is calculated using some
term structure model and some volatility assumption. OAS estimates can
differ widely across data providers, depending on model specification and
on the assumed level of interest rate volatility. The OAS is closely related to
credit default swap (CDS) spreads (when both use swaps as the reference
curve), but exact calculations differ. Only the CDS spread incorporates non-
zero recovery values, which are important for high-yield debt.

So does the OAS or the yield spread between a higher yielding bond and
a lower yielding Treasury properly capture the expected return advantage of
the former? The OAS incorporates the fact that the investor has effectively
written an option (or many) to the issuer/borrower. A simple yield spread
misses 
this 
optionality 
and 
thereby 
overstates 
the 
expected 
return
advantage. But both measures are overstated because the yield spread also
reflects expected losses due to defaults or downgradings (see Chapter 10).

Carry and financing rates. If the corporate bond and government bond
had the same financing costs, the OAS or yield spread would not only
measure the value but also the carry of the long-corporate, short-Treasury
position. 
However, 
these 
financing 
costs 
do 
differ. 
As 
a 
good
approximation, corporates can be financed at deposit rates (such as LIBOR)
while government bonds can be financed at repo rates, which are lower:
either the general collateral (GC) rate or the even lower special repo rate.
Thus, a proper carry measure for levered credit investors also includes a
financing spread; carry is positive only if the asset’s credit spread (corporate
minus Treasury) exceeds the financing spread (LIBOR minus GC). An
unlevered investor simply considering where to allocate his capital may
ignore the financing rate difference; for such an institution, yield spread
also measures carry advantage. More generally, financing costs vary not
only across assets but also across investors for the same asset: margins or
haircuts may be larger and bid–ask spreads wider for lower rated investors
and for smaller customers.

For 
money 
market 
spreads, 
a 
particular 
pitfall 
is 
that 
quotation
conventions 
vary 
across 
assets, 
typically 
for 
historical 
reasons. 
For
example, compounding frequencies or day-count practices can differ, and
some assets (Treasury bills and commercial paper) are quoted as discount
rates whereas others (deposits and CDs) are quoted as money market rates.
Any meaningful analysis starts by making different quotations comparable.

Figures 21.1 and 21.2 give a flavor of forward-looking expected return
measures 
in 
several 
asset 
classes. 
The 
first 
graph 
shows 
reasonably
comparable measures (ex ante real yields) while the second graph shows
more typical but less comparable ex ante indicators for equities and bonds.
Also see Figure 2.7 for a century-long history.

...
21.2 BUILDING BLOCKS OF EXPECTED RETURNS

The toolkits investors use to assess future return prospects often differ
across asset classes, reflecting dissimilarities between asset types as well as
investor specialization. This book emphasizes the similarities between these
toolkits (e.g., by highlighting parallel value and carry indicators in different
contexts). Still, subtle or less subtle differences in indicators can lead to
misleading comparisons across asset classes. In this section, I sketch a
building block approach that can give a consistent framework for evaluating
multiple investment types.

Recall the building blocks for prospective equity market returns in Figure
8.3: Yield income (carry) + Expected cash flow growth (inflation plus real
growth) + Expected valuation change. A similar analysis using building
blocks may be useful for assessing the long-term returns of all asset classes
and strategy styles. Carry and value indicators have key roles in such a
building block analysis:
• Carry captures the first building block. It can refer to income or,
more broadly, to return in an unchanged capital market scenario,
including some rolldown effects and fee or cost effects. (Roll effects
are discussed in Sections 9.2, 11.3, and 22.2.)
• Value indicators are key for determining the third building block
if we expect any reversal tendency toward a value anchor. Valuation
changes are important in accounting for realized returns, but the
impact on return predictions is often modest because mean reversion
tendencies can be weak. It is often sensible to assume unchanged
valuations even if valuations differ somewhat from their long-run
averages (this makes the third term zero, by assumption). It is more
reasonable to assume some mean reversion if prevailing valuations are
exceptionally high or low. Even then, other evidence may point to
structural changes in valuation ratios, such as the recent persistent
upward 
shift 
in 
the 
relative 
valuations 
of 
emerging 
markets 
vs.
developed markets.
• Expected nominal cash flow growth is the second building
block. Stocks also benefit from expected cash flow growth, although
the growth rate that one can reasonably expect is more modest than
many 
investors 
believe. 
Similarly, 
real 
estate 
benefits 
from 
rent
growth. In contrast, Treasuries have fixed cash flows, and credit-risky
bonds can expect some default losses. One can debate where to
classify fees, trading style costs, trading profits or losses of hedge
funds, and trend-following strategies; my choices are shown in Table
21.1.

The boundaries between building blocks can be fuzzy. Note that expected
inflation is captured in the first building block for bonds (as well as for
commodity futures and hedge funds), but in the second block for stocks and
real estate. For long–short strategies (the last four rows), inflation or short
rates wash out in the long and short legs. For comparability with the first
four rows, these rates would have to be added back when adding them to
total expected returns.

Figure 
21.1. 
Forward-looking 
real 
yields 
for 
U.S. 
equities, 
credits,
Treasuries, and housing, 1970–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Robert 
Shiller’s 
website, 
Moody’s, 
Ibbotson
Associates (Morningstar), Federal Reserve Board, Davis–Lehnert–Martin
(2008)/Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
Figure 
21.2. 
Forward-looking 
asset 
premia 
for 
equities, 
credits, 
and
Treasuries, 1970–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
Robert 
Shiller’s 
website, 
Moody’s, 
Ibbotson
Associates (Morningstar), Federal Reserve Board, Blue Chip Economic
Indicators.

Table 
21.1. 
Three 
building 
blocks 
of 
expected 
returns 
for 
diverse
investments
Value and carry indicators are reviewed above for stocks and bonds.
Value and carry indicators for real estate, commodities, and currencies are
discussed in Sections 11.2, 11.3, and 13.3. Value is typically based on
deviation of current market price from some valuation anchor (such as
purchasing power parity for currencies or rental income for real estate). In
the absence of better value anchors, investors may use average real market
price over the past few years to capture any mean reversion tendency.

Natural value indicators exist for some systematic strategies (e.g., the
dispersion of valuation ratios between value and growth stocks, or the
implied-vs.-realized volatility gap for volatility selling). For FX carry, the
combination of carry dispersion and expected spot rate changes from value
dispersion across currencies capture ex ante opportunity. Useful measures
of ex ante opportunity also exist for certain hedge fund strategies, such as
merger arbitrage or convertible arbitrage. However, for trend following and
for general hedge fund investing there are no obvious value anchors.

The 
relative 
importance 
of 
the 
three 
components 
varies 
across
investments, often by construction. For example, the currency carry strategy
earns nearly all of its long-run profits by being systematically long carry
(buying 
high-yield 
currencies 
against 
selling 
low-yield 
currencies). 
In
contrast, the commodity momentum strategy has ambiguous and incidental
carry because recent winners can just as well have higher or lower carry
than recent losers. Most of this strategy’s profits come from the tendency of
recent multi-month performance to persist. I classify the associated trading
profits as cash flow growth. Given the limited guidance from carry or value
indicators, it is hard to assess the prospective return of the commodity
momentum strategy beyond assuming that “future equals past” for its long-
run track record.

The 
advantage 
of 
Table 
21.1 
is 
that 
it 
enables 
apples-to-apples
comparisons between asset classes and strategies, thereby giving a useful
framework for multi-asset-class investors. The sum of the three components
is total nominal return (when cash income is added to long–short strategy
returns). If real or excess returns are studied, inflation rates or financing
costs should be subtracted in a consistent way from all investments.

Admittedly, many inputs require significant judgment and can be debated
even if we agree on the building block framework. Moreover, the exhibit is
very coarse. I will not fill the table with numbers because they can differ
widely within each group. Stocks include markets as diverse as those of the
U.S., 
Japan, 
and 
emerging 
countries. 
Government 
securities 
include
nominal and inflation-linked bonds and these are issued by countries with
varying credit qualities and currency situations. The spectrum of exposures
to credit is so wide that it cannot be briefly described. Real estate includes
(at 
the 
time 
of 
writing) 
hot 
China, 
cold 
Florida, 
and 
dull 
Germany.
Commodity futures include materials as different as oil, gold, and corn.
Hedge funds include equity market neutral, global macro, fixed income
arbitrage, and just about every other strategy that has ever been devised.
The 
proposed 
approach 
is 
simpler 
and 
more 
arbitrary 
than 
the
econometric multi-factor model discussed in Section 16.1, which also offers
a consistent tool for multi-asset-class investors. In practice, different types
and frequencies of data as well as different return drivers across asset
classes may make this building block approach a more practical tool.
Moreover, one could conceivably use econometric tools to forecast the
different components of investment returns—such as their mean reversion
tendencies—and do this consistently across asset classes or strategies.

The ideas developed in this section are obviously work in progress.
Readers can feel free to take them further.

...
21.3 NOTES

[1] The DDM assumes a constant discount rate and a constant dividend (or
other cash flow) growth rate. It is pretty straightforward to modify the
constant growth rate assumption so as to move from a single-stage DDM to
a multi-stage DDM (e.g., one can use analyst forecasts in the early years
and then assume a gradual decay towards some “normal” long-run growth
rate). It is harder to modify the assumption of a constant discount rate but
Campbell–Shiller 
(1988) 
develop 
an 
approximate 
(linearized) 
dynamic
DDM that allows time-varying expected returns.

Source 
notes. 
On 
the 
terminology 
of 
equity 
valuation 
measures, 
see
Ilmanen (2003a), of bond valuation measures, see Ilmanen (1996), and of
credit yield spreads, see O’Kane–Sen (2004) and Pedersen (2006).

...