22

Interpreting carry or non-zero yield spreads

• Non-zero yield spreads can reflect the market’s
expectations about future rate changes or growth, or they can
reflect higher yielding assets’ prospective return advantage. In all
asset markets we can identify interpretations analogous to these
two. The two alternative interpretations can be called risk-neutral
hypotheses and risk premium hypotheses.
• The uncovered interest parity hypothesis for currencies, the
pure expectations hypothesis for interest rates, and analogous
risk-neutral investor hypotheses for other asset classes presume
that all assets have the same expected returns as the riskless asset.
For consistency, market expectations must then imply price
movements that cause capital losses just sufficient to offset any
initial yield advantage.
• Risk premium hypotheses make the polar opposite claim:
yield spreads only reveal required return differentials and reveal
nothing about market expectations on future rates.
• Empirical “horse races” show that yield spreads have been
better predictors of future returns than of “offsetting” market rate
or growth changes. Over long histories, yield-seeking (positive-
carry) strategies have been profitable in all asset classes studied.
Such evidence contradicts risk-neutral hypotheses and supports
risk premium hypotheses. (Even if carry losses are rare, their size
and timing can justify large risk premia.)
• However, empirical evidence does not speak to the
rationality of high prospective returns when carry is high. Survey
evidence suggests that biased (irrational) expectations, in addition
to or instead of rational risk premia, may have contributed to the
historical success of yield-seeking strategies.

...
22.1 INTRODUCTION

This section discusses two opposite interpretations of why prospective
yields differ across assets and presents empirical evidence to help assess
which interpretation is more consistent with reality. Interestingly, this same
question is raised in virtually all asset classes. Here are a few examples:
• If you see higher short-term nominal interest rates, say, in the
U.S. than in Japan, does the U.S. yield advantage tell us that the
market expects the dollar to depreciate against the yen or does it say
that global investors require a higher near-term return for U.S. deposits
than for unhedged Japanese deposits?
• If you see an upward-sloping yield curve, does it mean that the
market expects rising yields in the future or that investors require
higher returns for holding longer term bonds?
• If you see higher earnings yields (i.e., lower P/E ratios) for
finance 
stocks 
than 
for 
energy 
stocks, 
does 
this 
yield 
difference
indicate that the market expects slower future earnings growth (and
thus more gradual capital gains) for finance stocks, or does it mean
that investors currently require higher returns for finance stocks than
for energy stocks because finance stocks are riskier?
• If you see a steeply backwardated (i.e., downward sloping) term
structure of crude oil futures prices, is it a sign that the market expects
oil prices to fall in the near term (maybe reflecting expectations of
mean reversion after a sharp runup) or does it mean that investors
require a high-return premium for owning the oil futures (earned if the
futures price rolls up toward the higher spot price)?

Do you see the symmetry? In each case, the first interpretation says that
yield spreads represent the market’s expectation of future rate or price
changes just sufficient to cause capital losses that exactly offset any initial
carry advantage. It is thus assumed that all assets, regardless of their risk,
have 
the 
same 
ex 
ante 
return, 
that 
of 
the 
riskless 
asset. 
The 
second
interpretation says WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get), at least on
average: a positive yield spread represents a required ex ante risk premium
that tends to be subsequently realized, on average.

The above interpretations are alternatives within the rational paradigm:
one extreme is associated with risk-neutral investors (all assets have the
same expected return), the other with risk-averse investors and time-varying
risk 
premia. 
The 
empirical 
analysis 
discussed 
below 
can 
distinguish
whether wide yield spreads tend to predict “offsetting” future changes in
rates (or prices) or, instead, high near-term returns, but they leave the
question of rationality open.

...
22.2 FUTURE EXCESS RETURNS OR MARKET
EXPECTATIONS?

To gain algebraic intuition to the information in yield spreads (forward
rates), it is useful to decompose the realized return on any investment into
two parts:
(22.1)

where 
“carry” 
refers 
to 
income 
return 
(more 
broadly: 
return 
in 
an
unchanged capital market scenario) and capital gains refer to percentage
price changes due to changing capital market conditions. Loosely speaking,
the two components reflect expected and unexpected returns. (However, for
equities, 
it 
is 
important 
to 
recall 
that 
expected 
returns 
also 
include
prospective capital gains related to cash flow growth; see Table 21.1.)
For currencies, carry reflects the short-rate differential while capital gains
reflect spot exchange rate changes. For government bonds, carry is yield
income while capital gains are well proxied by duration times yield decline.
For equities, carry reflects dividend yield while capital gains reflect stock
price changes. For commodity futures, carry reflects the so-called roll effect
(as well as the riskless rate on the futures margin).

FX example. Any pair of assets earns the same total realized returns (over
some holding period) only if one asset’s initial carry advantage is exactly
offset by capital losses caused by subsequent rate/price moves. This is a
logical statement and an accounting identity—not a hypothesis. Starting
with a currency example, if one-year U.S. deposits offer an interest rate 3%
higher than that offered by Japanese deposits, the dollar–yen exchange rate
must depreciate by 3% over the next year to make both deposits earn the
same 
return 
(and 
their 
long–short 
position 
to 
break 
even). 
Forward
exchange rates are break-even future exchange rates; in this example the
one-year forward rate is 3% weaker than the spot dollar–yen rate.

The break-even concept is useful for investors but may be abused—when
forward 
break-even 
rates 
are 
uncritically 
treated 
as 
the 
market’s 
rate
expectations. The problem is apparent when we solve (22.1) for carry, and
restate the equation in expectational form: carry reflects expected near-term
asset returns (including required risk premia) as well as expected capital
losses due to the market’s rate expectations:
(22.2)

For the currency example, let us study the relation between log spot and
forward exchange rates S and F. (Certain mathematical and statistical
analyses are easier when we use log exchange rates. We can deal with
additive relations rather than ratios and multiplicative relations. The same is
true for expressing bond yields as continuously compounded or log rates.)
Covered 
interest 
arbitrage 
ensures 
that 
the 
forward 
premium 
F—S 
is
proportional to the cross-country deposit rate differential (carry). However,
it does not follow that the break-even forward rate equals the market
expected future spot rate. The latter statement is only a hypothesis—
uncovered interest parity (UIP)—which is valid in a risk-neutral world
where expected returns on deposits are equal in all countries. (I ignore here
a small nonlinear effect called Siegel’s paradox or Jensen’s inequality.)

Macroeconomists embraced the UIP hypothesis for decades, despite
contradictory 
empirical 
evidence 
that 
high-yielding 
currencies 
tend 
to
outperform low-yielding currencies. These UIP violations were dubbed the
forward premium puzzle (see Chapter 13). Another classic finding, that spot
exchange rates behave empirically like a random walk, actually supports a
carry-oriented alternative hypothesis to UIP. If spot exchange rate changes
are unpredictable (so that the best forecast of the future spot rate is the
current one), then any initial yield advantage will be retained, on average,
and will not tend to be offset by future depreciation.

Conceptually, 
we 
can 
add 
and 
subtract 
the 
unobservable 
market
expectation of the future spot rate, E (S), to and from the currency carry
measure (F—S). Equation (22.3) then shows that, as in (22.2), carry reflects
two components: expected excess return [F—E(S)] and expected future
change in the spot rate [E(ΔS)]:
(22.3)

In Section 22.3, I review the literature and run empirical tests (“horse
races”) to see whether positive carry predicts high future excess returns (as
the random walk hypothesis implies) or large future spot rate changes (as
the UIP hypothesis implies).

IR example. For government bonds (and interest rate swaps), the implied
forward curve next year shows how much the yield curve has to shift to
make all bonds earn the same return as a one-year bond (presumably
deemed riskless by an investor with a one-year time horizon). Thus, if such
a curve is realized in a year’s time, all bond positions financed at the one-
year rate will exactly break even. If the yield curve is upward sloping,
longer bonds have an initial yield advantage over the riskless bond, which
gives them some cushion against capital losses caused by rising yields.
Forward yield quantifies the size of this break-even cushion. If actual bond
yields one year hence turn out to be higher than those implied by today’s
forward rates, then longer bonds will underperform the one-year bond.

Here, too, we often hear observers say that “the market expects rising
rates” when forwards imply rising rates. I repeat: break-even forward
curves represent the market’s rate expectations only if risk premia are zero.
The pure expectations hypothesis (PEH) is a close cousin of the UIP
hypothesis. It presumes that investors are risk neutral, with the result that all
bonds have the same near-term expected return, regardless of their maturity.
In the assumed absence of risk premia, yield differentials across the curve
only reflect market expectations of future yield changes (so that expected
capital gains or losses exactly offset the impact of initial yield differences)
[1]. However, it is a mistake to assume the absence of risk premia.

Equation 
(22.4) 
shows 
an 
approximate 
accounting 
identity 
that
decomposes curve steepness into rate change expectation and risk premium
components (cf. equation 9.7), analogous to the components in the two
previous equations:
Curve steepness ≈ Required bond risk premium
(22.4)

An identity is not a theory. The ex post counterpart of the ex ante statement
in (22.4) is a tautology. It simply says that if the yield curve is upward
sloping, either bond yields rise enough to cause capital losses that offset
their positive carry or longer bonds earn higher realized returns than short
bonds. 
If 
it 
is 
not 
one 
(with 
future 
rate 
changes 
“offsetting” 
yield
advantage), it must be the other (realized return advantage). The economic
content 
of 
the 
identity 
in 
(22.4) 
comes 
from 
assuming 
that 
investor
expectations are rational and consistent: given an upward-sloping yield
curve, investors in the aggregate either expect rising yields to offset positive
carry or they expect (and presumably require) a return advantage for longer
bonds.

In reality, forward rates (curve steepness) likely contain a mixture of two
components—the market’s expectations of rate changes and required risk
premia. Yet, studying the extremes—the PEH and the risk premium (or
random walk) hypothesis—is informative because each argues that only one
component matters (see Table 22.1), enabling us to focus on that component
and understand it more deeply.

Detour into roll

The distinction between carry as running yield income and capital gains as
price changes in (22.1) is muddled whenever price changes are highly
predictable. One obvious example is a short-term Treasury bill that is issued
at a discount; the bill earns its fully predictable return through price
appreciation, accruing toward par. Similarly, any discount or premium
coupon bond earns part of its return (the part in addition to coupon income)
via the “pull-to-par” effect as the bond ages. A bond’s yield to maturity
captures this feature despite its other shortcomings. Thus for bonds it is
often reasonable to use yield to maturity for carry and “duration times yield
decline” for capital gains. There are obviously more sophisticated ways to
analyze any asset but these back-of-theenvelope calculations are useful
shortcuts.

Table 22.1. The implications of two hypotheses about yield curve behavior

Pure
expectations
hypothesis
Risk premium hypothesis
What is the information in
forward rates (yield curve
steepness)?
Market’s rate
expectations
Required bond risk premia
What future events should
forward rates forecast?
Future interest
rate changes
Near-term return differentials
across bonds
What is the best predictor
of a 5-year zero-coupon
bond’s 1-year return?
The 1-year
riskless spot
rate
The 5-year zero’s “rolling
yield” (which is also the 1-year
forward rate after 4 years)
What is the best predictor
of next year’s spot yield
curve?
Implied spot
yield curve one
year forward
Current spot yield curve

Roll or slide is another nuanced aspect of carry. The random walk
hypothesis assumes that the current yield curve is the best predictor of the
future yield curve. If an upward-sloping yield curve remains unchanged
over the next year, a long-term bond’s yield income advantage over the one-
year bond will be augmented by capital gains through a “rolldown” effect.
For example, if the current 4-year rate is 20 bp lower than the current 5-year
rate, the assumption of an unexpected yield curve implies that the bond’s
yield will fall by 20 bp simply as a result of aging and rolling down the
yield curve. The consequent “rolldown return” gives roughly a 0.8% capital
gain (a 4-year duration times a 20 bp yield decline) even if the constant
maturity 
yield 
curve 
is 
unchanged. 
We 
can 
calculate 
a 
broader 
carry
measure that incorporates both yield income and rolldown return; it is
called “rolling yield” and reflects return in an unchanged curve scenario.
(All I have done here is to describe mechanically how expected returns are
realized in a random walk world, but the empirical analyses in Section 22.3
will show that a random walk is not a bad base assumption.)

Rolling yield indicates the return of a government bond in an unchanged
capital markets environment, specifically one in which the yield curve is
unchanged. There are other examples where an asset’s own characteristics
change over time in an unchanged capital markets environment, resulting in
yield or price changes merely due to the passage of time:
• Credit spread curves are often mildly upward sloping. Under
such conditions, a corporate bond can outperform the government
bond beyond its yield spread by “rolling down the spread curve”. This
feature boosts the corporate bond’s expected return in excess of the
duration-matched Treasury; in addition, both bonds can benefit from
the “rolling down the yield curve” effect if the Treasury curve is
upward sloping.
• When the term structure of commodity futures prices is in
backwardation (downward sloping), commodity futures tend to “roll
up the curve” as they approach expiration. (Note that both rolling
down the yield curve and rolling up the price curve imply rolldown
price gains.)
• Options losing their time value have a similar characteristic:
prices change simply due to the passage of time. This time decay
makes long option positions “a wasting asset”. Short option positions
make money if markets are stable and lose money in large market
moves.

Let us go back to equation (22.1) and approximate the “Carry + Capital
gains” expression with “Expected return + Unexpected return”. Rolling
yield is a broad measure of carry that includes expected return from highly
predictable price changes. Under the risk premium hypothesis, unexpected
returns reflect capital gains or losses from unexpected rate changes. To
break even, any position with a positive expected return must suffer exactly
offsetting unexpected capital losses (same size, opposite sign) during the
evaluation period. If subsequent market moves tend to be smaller than the
break-even analysis implies, positive-carry strategies add value in the long
run. This question can only be addressed empirically, and I turn to it next.

...
22.3 EMPIRICAL HORSE RACES FOR VARIOUS ASSETS

Do forwards reflect the market’s rate expectations, required risk premia, or
both? Are forward rates or current spot rates better forecasts of future spot
rates? Are expected returns equal across assets or do yield spreads predict
near-term differences in returns? I now evaluate these questions empirically.
The UIP and the PEH are mere hypotheses, and pretty extreme at that, with
the truth almost certainly between these extremes, on the one hand, and the
opposite extreme risk premium hypotheses, on the other hand. The evidence
I present below contradicts the extreme assumption of equal expected
returns across assets. I stress how analogous questions can be evaluated in
virtually all asset markets, with some modifications.

Where 
possible, 
I 
use 
so-called 
complementary 
regressions 
that
effectively split the predictive ability in ex ante yield differentials (forward–
spot 
premia) 
into 
future 
rate 
or 
price 
changes 
and 
near-term 
return
differentials (see Fama–Bliss, 1987). I regress future realized asset price or
rate changes on the changes implied by forward rates and I regress future
excess asset returns on forward–spot premia. In these “complementary
regressions” the regression slopes must sum to one.

Currencies

I discussed UIP and its violations in Section 22.2, while Chapter 13 focused
on the long-run success of the FX carry strategy, so I will be brief here.
Table 22.2 shows the slope coefficients of complementary regressions for
several dollar pairs, using monthly data over 32 years. As numerous studies
since 
the 
1980s 
have 
shown, 
when 
future 
exchange 
rate 
changes 
are
regressed 
on 
forward-implied 
changes, 
slope 
coefficients 
tend 
to 
be
negative, thereby contradicting the UIP (which predicts a slope of 1 in the
first column). The “wrong” (negative) sign implies that, on average, the
carry advantage of a higher yielding currency has been augmented by
subsequent currency appreciation instead of being offset by subsequent
depreciation. It follows that slope coefficients in the second regression type
—future excess returns on yield differentials—exceed one.

The complementary regressions presume that the split between the yield
spread’s ability to forecast future rate changes and its ability to predict near-
term returns is constant. Unpublished subperiod analysis suggests some
time variation although this might reflect sampling variability. Rolling 10-
year slope coefficients when regressing excess currency returns on carry do
consistently exceed zero and even one, suggesting that the assumption of
the risk premium hypothesis (or random walk hypothesis, slope = 1) has
been quite conservative. Empirically, the horse race is not really between
the UIP and random walk hypotheses (slopes 0 and 1) but between the latter
hypothesis and some more aggressive pro-carry story; the UIP is rejected.

Table 22.2. Regression coefficients when predicting future–spot exchange
rate 
changes 
and 
excess 
currency 
returns 
on 
initial 
carry 
advantage
(exchange rate forward–spot premium), 1978–2009

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, own calculations.

dFX excFXret
EUR —0.7
1.7
GBP —2.2
3.2
CHF —1.2
2.2
JPY —2.6
3.6
CAD —0.8
1.8

Interest rates
I now turn to complementary regressions in the Treasury market using
monthly data over 1972–2009. The PEH implies slope coefficients of 1 and
0 
in 
the 
two 
regressions 
while 
the 
risk 
premium 
hypothesis 
implies
coefficients 0 and 1. Leibowitz–Bader–Kogelman (1995) label the slope
coefficient on the regression of excess return on carry as the persistence
factor (PF). The idea is that if the current yield curve has a strong tendency
to persist (remain unchanged), carry tends to be earned, and PF=1. If,
instead, the current yield curve gives way to the forward curve, there are no
predictable excess returns, and PF = 0.

The results in Table 22.3 are almost as devastating for the PEH as they
were for the UIP in the currency markets. Yield change regressions have the
“wrong” sign—a pattern Frederick Macaulay noted as early as 1938—in
that upward-sloping yield curves tend to be followed by subsequent yield
declines. 
Since 
consequent 
capital 
gains 
augment 
any 
rolling 
yield
advantage that long bonds have, the PFs exceed 1. For the 10-year maturity,
the PF is +2.5. The correlation between curve steepness (or, in jargon, the
forward-implied yield change) and next quarter change in the 10-year yield
is—0.13, while the correlation between curve steepness and next quarter
excess bond return is + 0.21. Shorter maturity bonds have lower PFs. Other
studies show that long-term changes in short-dated assets behave more in
line with the PEH than short-term changes in long-dated assets.

Again, complementary regressions presume that there is a constant split
between the yield curve’s ability to forecast future rate changes and its
ability to forecast near-term returns. Subperiod analysis suggests some time
variation, a tendency of coefficients to decline over time. Coefficients have
almost always been positive, fluctuating around PF = 1, a finding broadly
consistent with the risk premium hypothesis.

Table 22.3. Regression coefficients when predicting future Treasury yield
changes and excess bond returns on initial carry advantage (interest rate
forward–spot premium), 1972–2009

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, Federal Reserve Board, own calculations.
dY excBondRet
U.S. 2 year
—0.2
1.2
U.S. 5 year
—0.6
1.6
U.S. 10 year —1.5
2.5

In 
unpublished 
analysis, 
I 
find 
that 
the 
results 
for 
German 
Bunds
(government bonds) are comparable with those for U.S. Treasuries. Curve
steepness has over time become a less effective predictor of future returns
in duration-timing models and curve-trading models. Yet, carry-oriented
strategies across G10 bond markets (overweighting currency-hedged bonds
in countries with steep curves and underweighting them in countries with
inverted or flat yield curves) have achieved good long-run SRs.

Corporate credits and interest rate swaps

For credit spreads, I ask whether the (option-adjusted) spread reflects
expected future default losses and expected spread widening (which, when
combined, would exactly offset the initial carry advantage) or, instead, a
true expected return advantage for bearing default and liquidity risks. There
is again the PEH-like proposition in which risk-neutral investors bid down
all assets’ expected returns to the same level. According to this story, the
credit spread shows how large the combined effects of defaults and spread
widening are expected by the market to be, and it tells nothing about future
return differentials across assets. The opposite hypothesis is that all of the
credit 
spread 
reflects 
default 
and 
liquidity 
premia—an 
ex 
ante 
return
advantage that investors should get to hold, on average; this hypothesis
cannot be literally true if there are any losses from default.

For 
reasons 
I 
have 
already 
suggested, 
neither 
of 
these 
extreme
hypotheses is likely to be true in practice. First, historical average default
losses are much lower than historical average yield spreads, suggesting that
part of the spread reflects an ex ante premium. Second, there is evidence of
time 
variation 
in 
credit 
premia. 
The 
correlation 
between 
the 
Lehman
corporate credit index spread and subsequent excess return of credits over
Treasuries is +0.12 using monthly data and +0.48 using annual data (both
covering 1973–2009). The rolling 10-year correlation has been positive
virtually throughout the sample period.

Equities

Here the two polar hypotheses are that high equity “yields” reflect either
market expectations of slower future growth rates or higher required risk
premia. Yields and matching growth rates can refer to dividends or a
broader measure of cash payouts, but any of these measures, if it is to be
useful, ultimately translates to the growth rate of the stock price. In a risk-
neutral environment, any asset with an income advantage should have lower
expected capital gains (growth) so that total expected returns are equalized
across assets.

In a market-timing context, we can evaluate equity market yields as they
vary over time. Complementary regressions then ask, for example, whether
high dividend yields (i.e., low market valuations) predict a low future
dividend growth rate or high future equity returns. As Cochrane (2008a)
stresses, the assumptions needed to imply that dividend yields must forecast
either of them are quite weak. Since there is little evidence of dividend
growth predictability, he concludes that dividend yields must primarily
predict future returns. Evidence from the pre-World War II period and from
outside the U.S. is more equivocal on the information content of dividend
yield, however.

In a cross-sectional context, we can compare dividend yield, earnings
yield, or other valuation multiples between individual stocks (or between
sectors or countries). The polar hypotheses are whether the yield gap
between “value” and “growth” stocks primarily reflects different expected
earnings growth rates (and ultimately different price appreciation rates that
offset any initial yield advantage) or different required returns. Empirically,
it is clear that value stocks tend to earn higher long-run returns. It is also
true that growth stocks tend to grow faster than value stocks in the early
years—but the growth gap is not as strong or as persistent as the valuation
gap implies. Thus the data are more supportive of the value managers’ story
that 
cheap 
stocks 
outperform 
in 
the 
long 
run, 
than 
with 
the 
growth
managers’ story that the fast future appreciation of growth stocks justifies
their high valuations.

Commodities

The term structure of commodity futures prices can be in backwardation
(downward sloping) or in contango (upward sloping). Backwardation, in
which the spot price exceeds the futures price, S > F, implies that the
convenience yield for holding the spot commodity exceeds storage and
financing costs. Steeply inverted price curves tend to coincide with low
inventories, 
as 
scarcity 
temporarily 
boosts 
the 
spot 
price. 
Conversely,
upward-sloping 
price 
curves 
tend 
to 
coincide 
with 
high 
inventories,
abundant supply, and a historically low spot price.

In parallel with the twin hypotheses above, the shape of the commodity
term structure may reflect expected changes in the spot price or risk premia.
Scarcity-induced spikes in the spot price may well be deemed temporary,
causing an expectation of price decline. However, if the term structure
remains unchanged as time passes, an exceptionally large gap between the
spot price and the nearby futures price implies that the futures contract will
earn high returns simply because its price drifts (rolls up) toward the high
spot price.

Several empirical studies show that backwardated commodities tend to
have higher subsequent returns than commodities in contango. Recall from
Figure 11.8 that average long-run returns of commodity futures are largely
explained by their average roll returns. In addition, I ran some historical
regressions using WTI Crude Oil futures since 1987. The data seem split
between 
the 
expectations 
and 
risk 
premium 
hypotheses. 
Steep
backwardation predicts falling spot prices (to offset the roll advantage of
longer futures); when the subsequent spot price change is regressed on the
roll 
(futures-implied 
price 
change), 
the 
coefficient 
is 
0.5. 
Steep
backwardation also predicts future excess returns; when next month excess
return is regressed on the roll, the slope coefficient (PF) is also 0.5. Some
agricultural futures may exhibit even greater predictability of spot price
changes, given the seasonally steep backwardation associated with scarcity
(low inventories) and short-lived spot price spikes.
Housing

Rental yield is the most common carry measure in real estate markets. The
analogue to the twin hypotheses above is that relatively low rental yield
may reflect either market expectations of faster price appreciation or lower
required total returns. Some empirical studies suggest that low rental yields
(say, in “hot” cities) coincide with persistently and predictably faster house
price appreciation. Other evidence links low rental yields with low future
returns.

Volatility

Comparing options with different maturities, an inverted volatility term
structure 
may 
not 
only 
predict 
falling 
volatility 
(typically 
market
expectations of mean reversion from high volatility levels) but may also
signal abnormally 
high rewards for 
volatility selling. Carr–Wu (2009)
regress future realized variances on variance swap rates (separately for
various stock indices and some individual stocks), testing the expectations
hypothesis. Coefficient values are typically below one, suggesting that a
time-varying volatility premium also plays a role. High prices for variance
swaps predict high future realized volatilities but also an abnormally high
reward for volatility selling. I find a similar split between PEH-like and risk
premium hypotheses in the FX market when I study implied volatilities for
the EUR/USD exchange rate.

...
22.4 CONCLUSIONS

Empirical 
evidence 
clearly 
shows 
that 
carry 
measures 
are 
better 
at
predicting near-term asset returns than at forecasting future rate or price
changes that would offset initial yield advantage. Yield-seeking strategies
have 
been 
profitable 
in 
all 
asset 
classes 
studied. 
Thus, 
risk 
premium
hypotheses are pretty well supported by data, while hypotheses relying on
risk-neutral investors (UIP, PEH, and other expectations hypotheses) fare
poorly.

However, this verdict may be too critical of expectations hypotheses. In
many cases, the data partly support an expectations hypothesis. Even when
they do not—recall the empirical violations of the PEH in interest rate
markets—the outcome could reflect investor irrationality and expectational
errors. As stressed above, empirical evidence of return predictability cannot
distinguish between rational and irrational explanations. When we use
information 
from 
consensus 
forecasts 
to 
proxy 
for 
the 
market’s 
rate
expectations, near-term return predictability appears to be due more to
biased investor expectations than to time-varying risk premia (see Chapter
23). In addition, my analysis of yield curve behavior in Section 9.4 suggests
that mean-reverting rate expectations are a key driver of the changing yield
curve shape over time. Overall, I conclude that carry reflects both required
risk premia and the market’s rate and/or price expectations.

Investors should not seek yield too blindly. One reason is that yield-
seekers often move in a crowd and thus are vulnerable to crowding and de-
leveraging risks. Another pitfall is that if a country gradually drifts toward
hyperinflation, and market expectations capture this prospect, mechanical
yield-seeking investors will maintain long currency or interest rate positions
until they have lost all their purchasing power. Finally, naive yield-seekers
are prey to abuse by ruthless sellers. Some products have high notional
yields and yet low prospective returns, due to high default risk, embedded
options, or other complex features that conceal elevated risks and costs.

...
22.5 NOTES

[1] In theory, expected returns may be equal across assets if risk premia are
bid to zero and assets are fairly priced. In a risk-neutral world, all assets
have the same expected return, and that return is the riskless rate (expected
return on the riskless asset). Not all investors need to be risk neutral; it is
sufficient to assume that there are some risk-neutral arbitrageurs who are
both extremely smart (can correctly identify any ex ante opportunities) and
rich (have infinitely deep pockets so that they won’t be stopped out if trades
go temporarily against them). Such arbitrageurs would take advantage of
any expected return differentials and remove them. In reality, even the most
risk-tolerant investors—hedge funds, private equity funds, and sovereign
wealth funds—are risk averse (just less so than other investors), make
mistakes, and face capital constraints. These investor groups’ profit-seeking
activities have narrowed expected return differentials across assets—but
they have not fully eliminated them.

The risk neutrality assumption is central in derivatives-pricing literature.
Relative-pricing models, starting from the Black–Scholes–Merton option-
pricing model, rely on arbitrage arguments and do not concern themselves
with the level of expected asset returns. It is convenient to assume risk-
neutral pricing even if risk neutrality is a poor description of the real world.
There is no contradiction because derivative-pricing formulas do not rely on
the risk neutrality of real-world investors. Using arbitrage arguments and
certain assumptions, it is possible to show that derivative instruments,
traded together with underlying assets, give riskless payoffs and thus should
earn 
the 
same 
return 
as 
the 
riskless 
asset. 
One 
can 
compute 
relative
derivatives prices in a risk-neutral world and expect these “arbitragefree”
prices to hold even in the real world. The beauty of the Black–Scholes–
Merton model and its descendants is that no information on expected
returns of underlying assets (stocks, bonds) is needed for pricing and
hedging derivatives. Conversely, these models tell us nothing about those
expected returns.

[2] The irrational paradigm allows a third alternative interpretation: that
spread 
reflects 
the 
market’s 
rate 
expectations 
but 
that 
these 
are
systematically biased. The stories of biased expectations and time-varying
risk premia have the same empirical implications: high yields tend to
predict high near-term returns. Because expectations and risk premia are not
directly observable, we cannot empirically distinguish between these two
stories. Thus, even if historical analysis shows that yield spreads predict
near-term returns, it cannot tell whether the time variation in expected
returns is caused by irrational market expectations or by required risk
premia. (We can address this question only if we take survey consensus
forecasts as a proxy for the market’s rate expectations.)

[3] I discuss these issues in Section 7.1 and in Ilmanen (1996). Given the
broader audience for this book, I focus here on the loose concept of curve
steepness (or term spread). I leave out various details, including a more
exact treatment of forward rates.

Source notes. For interpreting yield spreads, see Fama (1984) and Fama–
Bliss 
(1987) 
who 
pioneered 
complementary 
regressions 
that 
explore
whether yield spreads better predict future rate changes or excess returns
(also see Ilmanen, 1996). For comparable empirical analyses in equities and
volatilities, see Cochrane (2008a) and Carr–Wu (2009). It was Leibowitz–
Bader–Kogelman (1995) who came up with the term “persistence factor”.

...