23

Survey-based subjective expected returns

• Survey-based expected returns provide useful real-time
information about investor views.
• Representativeness and timeliness problems can cause
survey forecasts to be noisy proxies of the market’s expectations.
• Consensus forecasts may not be great predictors of the
future and may not even be rational. This would not preclude a
survey from being unbiased and representative, as the same
criticism can apply to market forecasts.
• If survey evidence is taken at face value, it can help
distinguish between rational and irrational interpretations of
return predictability.
• Retail survey views of prospective equity returns tend to be
procyclical, in contrast to countercyclical estimates from market
valuation indicators.

The 
market’s 
expected 
returns 
and 
rate 
expectations 
are 
not 
directly
observable (with the exception of the prospective return of a horizon-
matching default-free bond). Under the rational paradigm, any evidence that
econometric forecasting models or valuation measures can predict future
returns is interpreted as time variation in the market’s reasoned return
expectations. 
Empirical 
forecasting 
and/or 
valuation 
signals 
typically
indicate that objectively feasible future equity market returns are low after
several years of high realized returns and rising valuation ratios. This could
reflect rational investors accepting lower expected returns due to lower
perceived risk or it could reflect risk aversion in good times. However, an
irrational alternative explanation is that systematic forecasting error or time-
varying sentiment causes return predictability. Consensus forecasts are one
way to proxy market expectations; retail surveys, especially, suggest that
subjective investor expectations are irrationally high after extended booms
and low following downturns. Hence the tension between objective and
subjective 
expected 
return 
concepts: 
many 
academic 
studies 
see
(objectively) 
high 
expected 
returns 
when 
investors 
are 
at 
their 
most
pessimistic while most laypeople associate (subjectively) high expected
returns with bull market peaks.

I 
take 
surveys 
more 
seriously 
than 
most 
academics 
have 
done;
fortunately, there is growing interest in this area. Given the importance of
time-varying expected returns I think that survey-based premia are often the
most honest measures of subjective real-time ex ante premia. Surveys are
likely to be roughly right because they are timely, simple, and intuitive—
evidence “straight from the horse’s mouth”. In contrast, more complex and
formal approaches—inferring market expectations based on theoretical or
statistical models—are sometimes unrealistic and use hindsight that was not
available to investors in real time [1].

Note that surveys may be poor predictors of future asset price moves or
future 
economic 
developments 
because 
forecasting 
such 
events 
is
inherently difficult. Professional forecasters are an easy target for critics
such as Nassim Taleb and James Montier. Others criticize survey forecasts
for being inefficient and irrational. Even if this is true, the same criticism
may apply to markets. Thus, even if their predictive record is no better than
that of a coin toss, survey-based consensus forecasts may still be unbiased
and representative proxies of market views.

Box 23.1. Problems with survey data

• Unbiasedness/Representativeness. Some economists ignore
survey data because talk is cheap, while market prices reflect
people putting their money where their mouth is. Gaming and
dishonest responses are possible, but inattentiveness seems a
greater incentive problem to me. How unbiased or representative
are surveys of the views they are supposed to be reflecting? Most
individual biases wash out in the consensus view. Some surveys
are systematically biased for a reason: analysts’ overoptimistic
earnings forecasts reflect incentive or agency issues, and
corporations’ overoptimistic pension return assumptions make it
possible to manipulate earnings. Such forecasts have been rightly
criticized in the past decade. Many other surveys may be unbiased
but may not be representative. I think economist polls are
representative for predicting macro-fundamentals and short-term
rates but less so for predicting long-term yields, let alone equities
and other risky assets. It is conceptually not even clear what
survey would be representative of the equity market—certainly
not a democratic poll of the whole population, but perhaps a
wealth-weighted poll of professional investors.
• Timeliness/Staleness problems. Many surveys ask about
future market prices and/ or yields. To translate these point
forecasts into predicted returns, survey forecasts need to be
compared with market prices or yields at the time of the survey.
Such date matching is inexact because institutional forecasters
often use the institution’s latest published forecast, which can be
stale by the survey date.
• Mean/Median/Mode. Outlier responses in surveys often
reflect data errors or ignorant participants. The simplest remedy is
to use the median response among survey participants, instead of
the mean, as the consensus forecast. Another problem is that
many survey participants report their base case scenario (the
mode, or most likely outcome) instead of a probability-weighted
average of many scenarios. If most respondents agree on the base
scenario and on the most important asymmetric risk scenario, the
survey may not capture this asymmetry. For example, U.S. long-
run inflation forecasts have been well-anchored near 2.5% since
the late 1990s but the stability in published forecasts may conceal
how the main risk has shifted over time between deflation and
inflation concerns. New European data show a positive relation
between the inflation risk premium and the skewness of inflation
forecasts.

The Philadelphia Fed has published annually (since 1992) a survey of
expected 10-year returns of Treasury bills, bonds, and stocks, as well as 10-
year inflation. From these series we can also infer estimates of the bond risk
premium over bills (BRP) and the equity risk premium over bonds (ERP).
The narrowing gap between the middle two lines in Figure 23.1 suggests a
decline in BRP from 2.5% to a low of 0.5% in 2007, followed by a rebound
(one that is not evident in the blue-chip surveys discussed below). The ERP
has been more stable but only around 2%, except for a spike in 1994. This
is an exceptional survey in that it polls respondents directly about the
expected returns of each asset class. The professional forecasters that are
surveyed are typically economists; I would think that they are reasonably
representative of fixed income investors but less representative of equity
investors.

Figure 23.1. Long-term expected asset returns: Median forecasts in the
Survey of Professional Forecasters.

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Section 8.5 reviews evidence regarding professional and retail investors’
subjective equity return forecasts. Retail investors’ return forecasts appear
to be overly extrapolative and optimistic (especially after bull markets). The
three retail surveys discussed in Section 8.5 used different investment
horizons and covered different periods between 1998 and 2006. In the
University of Michigan survey of wealthy investors, return forecasts are
higher 
following 
strong 
market 
returns 
and 
during 
perceived 
good
economic 
times, 
and 
lower 
following 
equity 
downturns 
and 
during
recessions. 
This 
procyclical 
pattern 
contrasts 
with 
the 
countercyclical
pattern found in rational return expectations that are based on econometric
forecasting models and valuation ratios. Another study finds revealing
differences across investors around the turn of the millennium: younger
investors, less experienced investors, and those with better investment
success were more optimistic. Professional investors and CFOs have given
forecasts more in line with forward-looking market valuation indicators.
Notably, survey forecasts of the long-term equity premium rose between
2007 and 2008 as markets sold off.

Unlike the ERP, the survey-based BRP introduced in Chapter 9 is not
directly queried in surveys but is the difference between market yield and
the consensus forecast of future interest rates. My main data source for the
BRP is the Blue Chip Economic Indicators survey, published semiannually
since 1983, which unfortunately only covers decades with falling inflation
and yields. To complement the BRP for the 10-year Treasury, Figure 23.2
also shows BRPs from money markets, contrasting three different survey
forecasts—the first of which (Goldsmith—Nagan) dates back to 1969—
with matching Treasury bill forward rates [2]. Although details vary, all of
the series share similar contours. BRPs trended higher during the 1970s,
peaked between 1979 and 1985, and then trended lower for 20 years. The
10-year BRP is the series I highlighted in Chapter 9 as my favorite measure
of ex ante reward for bearing duration risk.

Figure 23.2. Various survey-based bond risk premia, 1969–2009.

Sources: Goldsmith–Nagan (GN) Bond and Money Market Letter (courtesy
Kenneth Froot), Wall Street Journal (WSJ), Consensus Economics (CE),
Blue Chip (BC) Economic Indicators, Citigroup, Federal Reserve Board,
own calculations.
The above exercise takes survey-based consensus forecasts at face value
as if they exactly represented market expectations at the survey time. In
reality, there are measurement errors (depending of the representativeness
and timeliness of the survey) but these can be lessened. Other methods to
extract expected returns also involve noise (as well as hindsight not present
in survey data). The noise in theoretical or empirical model-based expected
returns is related to the empirical validity of the particular assumptions
behind the model. The tradeoff between measurement errors in surveys, on
the 
one 
hand, 
and 
specification 
and 
estimation 
errors 
in 
model-based
approaches, on the other hand, is an under-researched topic. Perhaps the
best approach is to combine both types of data as Kim–Orphanides (2007)
do when studying term premia: using a theoretical term structure model but
using survey data as one admittedly noisy input—an input that is not
available if one is restricted to using only market yield data.

Besides 
consensus 
forecasts, 
survey 
evidence 
about 
uncertainty,
disagreement, and asymmetric views may contain information about future
asset returns.

Survey 
evidence—if 
taken 
seriously—can 
help 
distinguish 
between
rational and irrational explanations for asset return predictability. New
studies by Bacchetta–Mertens–van Wincoop (2009) and Piazzesi–Schneider
(2008) suggest that much of the observed asset return predictability in
classic predictive regressions is not related to ex ante (survey-based) risk
premia 
but 
rather 
to 
systematic 
forecasting 
errors—or 
perhaps 
just 
to
overfitting/hindsight by the econometrician running the classic predictive
regressions.

Finally, I mention one important set of long-run expected returns: expert
views on multiple asset classes. I am not aware of efforts to collect these
views from several contributors, but here are two famous examples that are
regularly published. The Yale Endowment (2009) assumes 6% long-run real
returns for developed market stocks (8% for emerging markets), 2% for
fixed income, 6% for real assets, and 11% for private equity (incorporating
an assumption that Yale can pick good managers). These forecasts are very
slow moving and do not appear very sensitive to market valuations. In
contrast, the GMO Quarterly Letter’s seven-year asset class forecasts are
highly dependent on perceived valuations: the latest forecasts in Grantham
(2010) predict 2.9% annual real returns for U.S. large-cap stocks, 4.9% for
non-U.S. large-caps, and 6.6% for emerging market stocks. Small-cap
stocks 
are 
predicted 
to 
fare 
less 
well 
and 
high-quality 
stocks 
better.
Government bonds are expected to deliver near 0% annual real returns, but
2.2% for emerging market bonds.

...
23.1 NOTES

[1] Overall, I want to encourage central banks, sell-side firms, and other
financial institutions to conduct and publish more investor surveys. Time
series of such surveys—standalone or linked to market data—can help us
better analyze and understand asset market movements and valuations. In
my old sell-side strategist role, each quarter I polled 100+ global investors
on their long-term inflation and interest rate views.

[2] Specifically, the Blue Chip forecast of next decade average Treasury bill
rate is compared with the 10-year Treasury yield. Goldsmith–Nagan survey
forecasts of 3-month rates three months hence are compared each quarter
with 
3-month-forward 
3-month 
Treasury 
bill 
rates 
implied 
in 
market
pricing. Likewise, the Wall Street Journal’s semiannual survey forecasts of
6-month Treasury bill rates six months hence are compared with 6-month-
forward 6-month Treasury bill rates. Finally, Consensus Economics survey
forecasts of 3-month rates three and 12 months hence are used to estimate
the expected average money market rate for the year beyond the first three
months. This expectation is then compared with the matching forward rate.
The advantage of the last approach is that the results are less sensitive to the
assumed timing of the survey, when the survey forecast is compared with
market forward rates from a particular day. While current yield levels can
vary quite a bit day to day, spreads among different maturity rates are more
stable. I use term structure data from the Federal Reserve Board and from
Citigroup to estimate forward rates for Treasury bills.

Source notes. Survey data are used for polling equity premium views in
Welch (2000, 2009), Vissing–Jorgensen (2003), Amromin–Sharpe (2008),
and 
Graham–Harvey 
(2010), 
and 
for 
extracting 
better 
bond 
premium
estimates in Best–Byrne–Ilmanen
(1998), 
Kim–Orphanides 
(2005), 
and 
Garcia–Werner 
(2010). 
Also 
see
Beber–Breedon–Buraschi 
(2010) 
and 
Bacchetta–Mertens–van 
Wincoop
(2009). On expert surveys, see Yale (2009) and Grantham (2010).

...