24

Tactical return forecasting models

• Systematic forecasting models may focus on (1) timing a
single asset or an asset pair or (2) selecting a portfolio across a
cross-section of assets.
• Such models often use multiple indicators, such as value,
carry, and momentum.
• The trading horizon can vary from within-day to a year. A
monthly or weekly trading frequency is common.
• Numerous techniques have been applied to return
forecasting. In out-of-sample evaluations, simple models often
perform just as well as more complex ones.
• Data mining and crowding problems are inevitable. They
can be mitigated but not fully avoided.

...
24.1 INTRODUCTION

Valuation indicators are effective in providing a long-horizon (multi-year)
view on an asset’s prospects. In this chapter, I turn to dynamic trading
strategies and forecasting models that have a shorter horizon (one week,
month, or quarter). I first describe the generics—model types, assets traded,
indicators—and then comment on possible improvements and pitfalls for
the systematic trading style. I keep this chapter brief so as to retain some of
my proprietary trade secrets, but Chapters 8 through 10 review several
publicly known market-timing indicators for equities, duration, and credit,
while 
Chapters 
12 
through 
15 
review 
four 
popular 
dynamic 
trading
strategies: equity value, foreign exchange carry, commodity momentum,
and volatility selling.

What types of models are used? Single-trade timing models and multi-
asset selection models are the two main classes. Dynamic strategies may
focus on (1) timing a single asset (say, market timing Treasury bonds) or a
single asset pair (say, sector timing the yield spread between corporate
credits and Treasuries) or (2) selecting a portfolio of assets from a broader
universe. Leveraged investors often construct a long–short portfolio that
may be superior to a long-only portfolio because the former hedges away
some directional risks.

Which assets are typically traded? Any liquid assets can be traded on a
standalone basis (directionally) or on a relative value basis. Liquidity and
low trading costs are more important the shorter the trading horizon.

What kind of predictive indicators are used? Both timing models and
selection models can use a multitude of indicators. The best known are
related to value, carry, and momentum. I discuss various types of models.

...
24.2 WHAT TYPE OF MODEL?

Timing models

The simplest timing model is a binary trend-following model that goes long
or short an asset based on its recent price trend. But there is no need to rely
only on the price of the asset itself as an indicator, or for that matter on any
single indicator. I illustrate these ideas with a bond market (duration) timing
model. One possible single-indicator model is to go long one unit of
Treasuries if equity markets have performed poorly in recent months but to
sell short one unit if equity markets have been strong. (This model may be
called “1/—1” in Treasury bond units held long/units held short. Another
variant—the “1/0” trading model—might never sell Treasury bonds short
but only invest in cash when faced with a bond-bearish signal.)

Multiple indicators can be used, and each can be expressed as a simple
binary (bullish/ bearish) signal, as above, or each can be scaled by current
signal strength and/or perceived predictive ability.

There are a number of ways to aggregate multiple indicators into a
composite market-timing signal. The simplest approach involves averaging
individual indicators using equally weighted binary signals. For example,
Figure 24.1 shows the monthly signals and cumulative profits of a duration-
timing model whose composite signal (and thus active Treasury position) is
an average of three 1/—1 trading signals—bullish if equities have lost
money in the past six months, if bond market momentum is positive, or if
bond carry is positive. This particular duration-timing strategy achieved an
SR of 0.66 and a hit rate of 60% (i.e., the correct sign in 60% of months).

Figure 24.1. Signals and performance of a bond-market-timing strategy,
1978–2009.

Sources: Bloomberg, Citigroup, own calculations.
A slightly smarter timing model is based on a straightforward linear
regression approach. We can identify a set of predictive indicators with
which we forecast the next period (say, next month) excess return of
Treasuries over cash. Predicting excess returns makes sense because timing
trades often involve a self-financed long or short position in an underlying
asset or an equivalent derivatives position [1]. Mechanically, we just regress
monthly excess Treasury returns on a set of indicators that are available at
the beginning of the month—preferably using at least five years of monthly
data. The fitted value in this regression is predicted excess Treasury return
for next month. One approach is to size the position each month according
to this fitted value. To evaluate the model’s past track record, we can study
the correlation of these fitted values with actual monthly excess returns;
alternatively, we can compute the hit rate (how often the model predicted
the correct sign of next month market direction) or, most practically, the
Sharpe ratio of a trading rule based on the model’s prescribed positions.

We 
can 
strengthen 
our 
understanding 
of 
the 
regression 
model’s
mechanics if we normalize all indicators before running the forecasting
regression. (Normalizing or “Z-scoring” involves subtracting the sample
mean from each series and then dividing by sample standard deviation.)
Such a modified regression has the same fitted values as before but now the
contribution of each predictor is in units that are quite intuitive. The
regression coefficient (multiple regression beta) of each predictor now
equals the partial correlation between the predictor and next month excess
Treasury return—a pure statistical measure of predictive ability [2]. Thus,
the contribution of each indicator to predicted excess bond return is a
product of the “β” and “Z” terms (i.e., the indicator’s past predictive ability
and 
its 
current 
signal 
strength). 
Total 
predicted 
excess 
return 
can 
be
conveniently decomposed into the sum of these contributions plus the
regression intercept. Table 24.1 shows a stylized example.

In this modified regression, the intercept reflects the sample mean of
excess bond return. If this sample mean appears too high and misleading for
the future—arguably reflecting the strong bond rally that occurred in the
past—we can easily constrain this mean to be a lower number and thus
reduce “neutral” future excess return (the return forecast that would make
us indifferent between bonds and cash). I emphasize that these convenient
interpretations of the regression model are possible only after all predictive
indicators 
have 
been 
normalized. 
One 
interesting 
extension 
involves
incorporating economic priors into the regression. If there is a strong case
for, say, only a positive relation between an indicator (say, curve steepness)
and future returns, one can constrain the relevant regression coefficient to
be non-negative.

More 
complex 
variants 
of 
a 
market-timing 
model 
exist, 
including
nonlinear models and data-intensive learning models. Yet complexity does
not necessarily enhance performance, and these two approaches—summing
up binary signals and using a normalized regression model—are among the
most popular in practice. It is worth contrasting how differently the two
approaches use the same information set. The first approach only sums up
the signs of various predictors; it thus ignores information about each
indicator’s signal strength, predictive ability, and diversification ability
which the regression model captures by incorporating signal strengths and
partial correlations. However, the simplicity of the first approach can make
it 
more 
robust, 
not 
an 
insignificant 
advantage. 
Indeed, 
in 
real-world
comparisons, 
simple 
approaches 
are 
often 
competitive 
with 
any
theoretically superior approaches.

Table 24.1. A stylized example of a predictive regression where positive
predicted excess bond return mainly reflects prevailing equity weakness,
while rising bond yields give a bearish signal
Cross-asset selection models

Timing models can be extended to analyze pre-selected asset pairs or sector
decisions. Typically, a correlated pair is identified and tracked over time;
once excessive deviation from historical relations occurs, a mean-reverting
long–short trade may be put on to benefit from expected normalization.
Many fixed income arbitrage strategies and equity pairs trading strategies
(the latter being original statistical arbitrage) were based on this idea, which
was implemented using some simple spread analysis or more complex
statistical models (e.g., co-integration and error correction) or mathematical
models (such as term structure models). Again, it often makes sense to use
multiple predictors, and this is commonly done when timing the relative
performance of corporate vs. government debt or of growth stocks vs. value
stocks.

The above examples involve favoring one of two pre-selected assets. It is
of course restrictive to pre-select just two candidate assets. More open asset
selection models study a whole cross-section of assets—say, the largest
1,000 stocks in the U.S. equity market, or the G10 currencies—and identify
the most and least attractive assets in this universe based on some criteria
[3].

If we only use one criterion, we can just sort or rank all assets each
period based on that criterion. Two popular approaches—due to their
empirical success in recent decades—rank U.S. equities based on some
value measure, or the G10 currencies based on carry (see Chapters 12–13).
A leveraged long–short strategy would then select some top-ranked assets
to buy and some bottom-ranked assets to sell. (A constrained long-only
investor may only be able to use the information about the top half. This
fact gives a key advantage to unconstrained investors such as hedge funds,
and has recently prompted relaxation of the long-only constraint among
many previously constrained investors; it has also aided introduction of so-
called 130/30 funds.)
Cross-sectional strategies, too, are often based on multiple indicators, and
this again complicates analysis. How should the various inputs (criteria) be
combined? In practice, there are two common approaches: composite-
ranking models and cross-sectional regressions.

A composite-ranking model can be as simple as sorting assets along a set
of indicators and then taking an average of an asset’s ranks across the
various indicators as its “total score”. A low total score implies an attractive
average rank in many dimensions. For example, G10 currencies may be
traded based on their average ranks along carry, momentum, and value
criteria. I have used this approach in Ilmanen–Sayood (2002) and noted that
it works surprisingly well.

Analogous to the discussion about simple binary models vs. regression
models 
for 
single-asset 
timing, 
this 
simple 
ranking 
approach 
misses
information about signal strength, past predictive ability, and diversification
ability in different indicators that would be captured by a more formal
optimization model.

Cross-sectional regressions help disentangle many correlated influences
on asset returns and identify their distinct rewards. Consider cross-sectional
regression of U.S. equity excess returns on various risk factors and other
characteristics (say, estimated market beta, market capitalization, book-to-
market ratio, and recent price momentum). By construction, the estimated
slope coefficients in such cross-sectional regressions reflect the reward for
each factor or characteristic while keeping the others constant. That is, the
slope coefficient represents the return of a “factor-mimicking portfolio” that
has maximal correlation with one factor and zero correlations with all other
factors. Such cross-sectional regressions are run each period and then the
slope coefficient of each factor or characteristic is averaged over time to
give an estimated “pure” premium for the factor or characteristic. Past
average factor premia can be used as inputs into portfolio construction—or
the expected premia may be forecast using an econometric model. If the
model is taken at face value, it gives the expected returns of each asset as a
function of the asset’s factor exposures or characteristics and estimated
expected 
factor 
premia. 
However, 
these 
estimates 
are 
subject 
to
measurement errors (even if we ignore likely time variation in these premia,
many factor exposures are estimated with noise), and to specification errors
(the model may omit important factors, the assumption of linear relations
may be faulty, etc.).

Combining models

While I will not review portfolio construction issues in this book beyond
the 
discussion 
in 
Chapter 
28, 
I 
note 
that 
so-called 
Black–Litterman
optimizers are particularly well suited for combining information from
systematic trading models. Black–Litterman optimizers enable (i) blending
historical 
experience 
with 
anchoring 
priors 
(such 
as 
perceived 
market
equilibrium returns) and/or with active views; (ii) inputting expected return
views on particular trades (instead of on each asset separately); and (iii)
incorporating a measure of uncertainty for each view. Both inputs from
trading model backtests (quality of trading performance, current signal
strength) and the user’s subjective assessments of model reliability can be
included. New studies have extended the classic model beyond the mean
variance world.

...
24.3 WHICH ASSETS/TRADES?

Active 
trading 
requires 
liquidity, 
the 
more 
so 
the 
higher 
the 
trading
frequency. It is important to assess the tradeoff between higher gross gains
in any dynamic trading strategy and the associated increase in trading costs.
High-turnover strategies (fast signals) implemented at high frequencies
require either very high gross Sharpe ratios or low trading costs, preferably
both. Low-turnover strategies (slow signals) can afford lower gross Sharpe
ratios or higher trading costs. For a given rate of turnover, less liquid assets
have higher trading costs.

Equities may be traded directionally (market timing) or on a relative
value basis (stock selection). Between these two extremes, we can take
active positions across countries, across industry sectors, or across styles.
Fixed income can likewise be traded directionally (duration timing), on a
relative value basis (issue selection) and on a sector basis along many
dimensions (maturities, countries, sectors, credit ratings—and mixing these
dimensions by, say, boxing government curve flatteners with credit curve
steepeners). Commodities are mostly traded directionally but specialists can
put on active positions along the futures term structure, across commodities,
or between commodity futures and commodity-related stocks or currencies.

While I discuss systematic strategies here, it is important to remember
that most investors and traders are discretionary, and there are diverse paths
to success. Some hedge funds focus on one market niche (say, emerging
markets, distressed debt, or merger arbitrage), while other funds take a
broader view and trade across asset classes (global tactical asset allocation,
capital structure arbitrage, or convertible arbitrage). Some of the all-time
great investors were generalists, but the majority of successful traders are
probably discretionary specialists in one area.
...
24.4 WHICH INDICATOR TYPES?

Investors use a large variety of trading signals and there is no consensus
how these could best be classified. The most popular themes are value,
carry, and momentum, but many other indicators do not belong to these
styles. 
Table 
24.2 
suggests 
one 
plausible 
classification 
scheme—price
patterns, seasonals, other indicators—and presents examples of each for
both time series and cross-sectional trading.

Price patterns (information discernible from the asset’s own price). Short-
term and/or medium-term momentum as well as long-term reversal are
common 
tendencies 
of 
many 
asset 
return 
series—and 
even 
of 
many
dynamic strategies. Yet, the exact patterns observed for cross-sectional
equity trading do not travel well. That is, few other asset classes share the
exact timing observed in equities: relative reversal patterns for the first
month, followed by a medium-term momentum effect, and a long-term
reversal effect beyond 12 months.

Table 24.2. One simple taxonomy of financial market regularities
Time-series predictability Cross-sectional predictability
Price
patterns
Short-term momentum
Short-term and long-term reversal
Long-term mean
reversion
Intermediate momentum
Seasonals
January, Hallowe’en, turn
of month
Carry-strong and momentum-poor in
January, etc.
Other
indicators
Value and carry
indicators
Value and carry indicators
Cyclical and inflation
indicators
Underreactions (profitability,
management actions, etc.)
Supply–demand factors
Sentiment, liquidity, and
risk indicators
Supply–demand (net issuance,
inventories, etc)
Sentiment, liquidity, and risk
indicators

Seasonal regularities will be discussed in Chapter 25 but few are strong
enough to be exploited.

“Other 
indicators” 
include 
the 
kitchen 
sink. 
Carry 
and 
value 
are
important, but the list also includes macroeconomic indicators, supply–
demand 
factors, 
sentiment, 
liquidity 
and 
risk 
indicators, 
and 
others.
Underreactions to news and lead–lag effects across asset markets are close
cousins to (own price) momentum, but are included here.

An alternative classification scheme contrasts convergent and divergent
strategies. Convergent strategies rely on relationships in markets moving
toward their long-term averages and include carry seeking, relative value,
mean reversion, and volatility selling. Divergent strategies rely on market
relationships 
moving 
further 
away 
from 
their 
long-term 
averages 
and
include trend following, momentum, and volatility buying.

Yet another scheme focuses on the investment time horizon and the speed
of information decay in indicators. As a classic example, the information in
value indicators decays slowly while that in short-term momentum or
reversal indicators decays fast. This book focuses on strategies traded at
relatively low frequencies. High-frequency trading strategies—especially
active within-day trading—are seldom based on economic intuition and are
feasible only for traders facing the lowest trading costs anyway. Such
strategies often exploit short-term price reversals and effectively act as
liquidity suppliers.

...
24.5 ENHANCEMENTS AND PITFALLS

Enhancements

The 
strategies 
above 
imply 
stable 
relations 
between 
asset 
returns 
and
predictors, as they involve market timing one asset or trading long–short
pairs or portfolios across assets “in any weather”. It seems plausible that
style timing can refine these strategies by identifying conditions when these
strategies are more likely to excel or fail. These conditions may reflect the
general market environment (e.g., carry trading is known to underperform
amidst heightened volatility and tightening liquidity). Style timing may also
be based on the strategy’s own history—many strategies’ returns exhibit a
mild version of well-known short-run momentum and long-run reversal
patterns—as well as on seasonal patterns. Contextual models give the cross-
sectional equivalent to style timing: they identify subsets of the asset
universe where a given strategy is more likely to excel or fail. For example,
trend following works better for poorly anchored macrotrades than for well-
anchored micro-trades, while many stock selection strategies work better
for small-cap than for large-cap stocks, at least on paper. Chapters 12
through 14 provide examples of such enhancements.

Improvements can come in other areas. Many investment managers put
as much effort into smart portfolio construction, risk management, and
implementation efficiency (cheaper and/or faster execution, and other cost
saving) as they do on alpha generation through return forecasts. Quants use
data-intensive 
learning 
algorithms 
for 
model 
selection, 
Kalman 
filter
methods for dynamic parameter estimation, regime-switching models to
capture instability in predictive relations, Bayesian or robust optimizers to
replace standard mean variance optimizers, and other methods.

Pitfalls
Data mining. In-sample regressions exaggerate a model’s predictive ability.
Since regression coefficients may evolve over time, it is more realistic to
run rolling “outof-sample” regressions over time, estimating coefficients
each month using only the data available to investors in real time. Even this
approach does involve some lookahead bias because a model’s indicator
selections 
are 
likely 
motivated, 
in 
part, 
by 
information 
gathered 
in
hindsight. Chapter 7 discusses data mining further and argues that it is an
inevitable feature of systematic trading models. The use of nonstationary
(highly persistent) time series as predictors and applying long-horizon
regressions are especially likely to result in econometric problems and
spurious findings.

Overcrowding. Another shortcoming in systematic strategies is that their
transparency makes them easy to replicate and therefore more exposed than
discretionary strategies to consensus positioning or crowding risk. The 1998
and 2007–2008 experiences suggest that all systematic strategies—not just
risk-seeking carry strategies—may be subject to de-leveraging risks when
financial conditions tighten. Moreover, technological advances and greater
data availability have made any observed regularities ever more fleeting as
they quickly attract profit-seeking competition. Taming these endogenous
risks is a new but central challenge for systematic investors (see Chapter
20).

...
24.6 NOTES

1. Every long position is assumed to be financed by a cash money
market rate and every short position involves re-investing the proceeds
in the cash market. Cash returns for a long–short position naturally
wash out. In reality, short selling is not quite so easy in equity markets
but in Treasury, currency, and futures markets these approximations
are reasonable.
2. 
Partial 
correlation 
is 
simple 
correlation 
adjusted 
for 
the
influence of other predictors. This is the same distinction as between a
multiple regression beta and a simple regression beta. If different
predictors are uncorrelated with each other, there is no difference
between simple and partial correlations. High overlap between any two
predictors raises the 
gap 
between simple 
and partial 
correlations;
intuitively, their predictive impact should not be doublecounted. Raw
regression 
betas—without 
normalization—would 
also 
reflect 
the
different relative volatilities of predictors as well as their correlations.
3. Cross-sectional asset selection strategies are seen to benefit
from a broader opportunity set and are better diversified than market-
timing 
models. 
It 
is 
true 
that 
timing 
the 
whole 
market 
involves
particularly concentrated risk. However, if we combine long–short
timing models for several assets, the resulting composite portfolio may
not differ much from that of a cross-sectional long–short strategy.
Source notes. For examples of simple forecasting models in the bond
market context, see Ilmanen (1997), Ilmanen–Sayood (2002), and Naik–
Balakrishnan–Devarajan (2009). For an example of fair value models, see
Panigirtzoglou–Loeys (2005). There are hundreds, if not thousands, of
practitioner books on trading models and academic articles on forecasting
asset returns. For books on quantitative forecasting models and trading
approaches, all with equity orientation, see Grinold–Kahn (1999), Qian–
Hua–Sorensen 
(2007), 
and 
Fabozzi–Focardi–Kolm 
(2010). 
On 
factor-
mimicking 
portfolios, 
see 
Melas–Suryanarayanan–Cavaglia 
(2010). 
On
econometric issues that get a short shrift in my book, see Campbell–Lo–
McKinlay (1996) and Cochrane (2005a).

...