25

Seasonal regularities

• Seasonal patterns in average returns are often weak,
possibly spurious, and costly to exploit.
• The best known seasonal pattern is the January effect. Not
just small-cap stocks but also the most volatile stocks and high-
yield credits earn much of their outperformance in January.
• The January effect and other regularities that appear related
—the January barometer and the Hallowe’en effect—may be due
to seasonally high investor risk appetite at the beginning of the
year. This story is closer to the traditional window-dressing
explanation than to the tax-loss-selling explanation. Other
evidence on heightened gambling preferences around New Year’s
Day support this story.
• For commodity prices, seasonals can be pronounced for
sound economic reasons (supply and demand).

...
25.1 SEASONAL, CYCLICAL, AND SECULAR PATTERNS
IN ASSET RETURNS

This chapter and the next two cover seasonal, cyclical, and secular patterns
in historical returns. Calendar seasonals can be within day, day of week, day
of month, or month of year. Other seasonals cover patterns as diverse as
announcement day, pre-holiday, lunar cycle, harvesting season, and political
cycle. I focus on monthly seasonals and especially the most robust seasonal:
January-related effects.

Most published seasonal studies deal with equity market regularities. I
review empirical evidence in both equity and other markets. Historically,
average equity market returns have been high in December–January and
negative in September–October. In contrast, government bonds have earned
low returns early in the year and high returns in the autumn. So what? How
much of these patterns are spurious and sample specific?

The health warnings I make throughout the book may be especially
important for seasonal regularities. It is easy to data-mine the one financial
markets history which we have experienced that the danger of overfitting is
huge. 
In 
addition, 
seasonal 
regularities 
are 
vulnerable 
to 
competitive
speculators trying to anticipate and exploit them and thereby eroding them.
For example, the famous January effect has been known to work in late
December, and the turn-of-the-month effect has also shifted earlier. Many
other seasonalities weakened or even disappeared after they became widely
known. Finally, many patterns are so mild that trading costs eat most, if not
all, of the paper profits for strategies that try to exploit them. One practical
cost-effective approach may be to delay or avoid executing trades (that are
motivated by broader reasons) when seasonal indicators give a clearly
opposite short-term signal.
...
25.2 MONTHLY SEASONALS AND THE JANUARY
EFFECT

The pattern that really stands out from Figure 25.1 is the January effect.
This 
seasonal 
is 
apparent 
in 
many 
kinds 
of 
risk-taking 
strategies 
but
especially strong for carry seeking (including credit carry, FX carry, and
long U.S. dollar) and for small-cap stock and value stock overweights. The
exception 
is 
that 
momentum 
and 
trend-following 
strategies 
tend 
to
outperform in December and underperform (reverse) in January.

Why such seasonality? It is baffling that a large part of the long-term
return advantage of one asset over another is earned in just one month of a
year. The classic explanations are tax-loss selling and institutional window
dressing. In addition, I review seasonal variations in investor risk appetite
and in the market’s liquidity conditions.

Tax-loss selling puts general pressure on asset prices before the year end,
perhaps especially on past losers and on less liquid assets.

Institutional window dressing refers to the desire to show safe, liquid,
and successful investments in the books when holdings are revealed at year
end (and subject to greater scrutiny and publicity in annual reports). Such
window-dressing motives prompt institutions to buy more government debt
and recently-outperforming assets in November and December, so as to
make the portfolio look as though it had been better all along.

It seems plausible that general investor risk appetite peaks early in the
calendar year as investors “start afresh” in January, and then gradually
recedes during the year. Institutional desire to show conservative portfolios
at year end may not be the only reason for such a seasonal change in risk
appetite: many traders and fund managers earn their bonuses for a calendar
year and get their drawdown limits refreshed every New Year.
Figure 25.1. Average calendar month returns for various assets/strategies,
1927–2009 and 1970–2009.

Sources: 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Ibbotson 
Associates 
(Morningstar),
Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Citigroup, J.P. Morgan, Brevan Howard, own
calculations.

Figure 25.2. Average U.S. strategy returns in Januaries vs. other months,
1970–2009 and 1927–1969.

Sources: 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Ibbotson 
Associates 
(Morningstar),
Bloomberg, Barclays Capital, Citigroup, own calculations.

New empirical research supports the idea of seasonally high risk appetite
—or gambling preference, lottery seeking—at the beginning of the year.
Doran–Jiang–Peterson (2009) show that lottery-type stocks (low price, high
volatility, high skewness) outperform in Januaries and underperform the
rest of the year. They also document more exuberant gambling in Las Vegas
and the greater relative richness of OTM call options vs. ATM options in
January than in other months. Interestingly, Chinese lottery-type stocks
outperform around the Chinese New Year rather than in January.

If trading costs are high enough, even modest systematic valuation
differences between late December and early January can explain these
patterns. Little actual trading may occur when quoted prices fall before the
year end and rebound thereafter. Lower liquidity and high trading costs may
thus explain why this seasonal is so strong for small-cap stocks and
corporate bonds.

Figure 25.2 drills into the January seasonality of long U.S. time series
over the past 40 years and over the preceding 43 years. The patterns look
consistent across the two subperiods: a moderately stronger equity premium
in January than in other months; much higher small-cap, value, and reversal
premia in January; and negative momentum in Januaries. However, to avoid
getting carried away, I note that for both the equity premium and the value
premium the sign flipped for the past 20 years: January returns were below
average, perhaps reflecting the fact that the seasonal had been discovered.

Turning to a broader set of investments, Figure 25.3 presents evidence
for only the 1970–2009 period. The contrast is most striking for the
performance of high-volatility stocks relative to low-volatility stocks. High-
yield debt, FX carry, and the U.S. dollar also tend to make money in
January and fare much less well in other months. Oil and long-duration
bonds have the opposite pattern, while broad equity markets and trend-
following strategies do not have exceptional January returns.

More detailed studies show that the bulk of the January effect comes in
the first few days of the year. The pattern is also found in many other
countries, though not in all. In some cases, cross-country differences may
be explained by different tax years (in the U.S. the tax year coincides with
the calendar year).

Figure 25.3. Average returns for various investments in Januaries vs. other
months, 1970–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
MSCI 
Barra, 
Barclays 
Capital, 
Citigroup, 
J.P.
Morgan, S&P GSCI, Lubos Pastor’s website, Ken French’s website, Ang et
al. 
(2006), 
David 
Blitz, 
Ibbotson 
Associates 
(Morningstar), 
Bank 
of
America 
Merrill 
Lynch, 
Hedge 
Fund 
Research, 
Brevan 
Howard, 
own
calculations.

Certain seasonal patterns appear surprisingly robust over time. Figure
25.4 shows that equity, value, and carry premia are earned both during
January and in other months, but more consistently in January. Small-cap
stock premia have by and large only been earned during Januaries, while
the bond term premium has only been earned outside Januaries. Most
remarkably, the realized credit premium has been positive in January and
net 
negative 
in 
other 
months, 
and 
high-volatility 
stocks 
have 
only
outperformed in January and underperformed in other months. Conversely,
the equity momentum strategy has lost money in Januaries but more than
made up for it in other months. Meanwhile, both short-term and long-term
reversal strategies shine in January (not shown). The abrupt shift from high
risk aversion to high risk appetite at New Year is one way to explain the
January 
success 
of 
reversal 
strategies 
and 
losses 
in 
momentumlike
strategies.

Evidence on the seasonality of liquidity effects is more mixed. Liquidity
conditions tend to be low in the holiday season before the New Year and
quickly improve after it. Money market credit spreads exhibited a strong
“turn” effect (spreads widening into the year end) until central banks began
to tackle year end liquidity shortage with aggressive liquidity provision. A
recent study by Watanabe–Watanabe (2008) highlights the strong time
variation in equity market liquidity conditions and premia, with a distinct
January seasonality. Stocks’ liquidity betas are shown to vary across two
distinct states: a short-lived, abnormal high-beta state (high liquidity needs,
high volatility, wide dispersion in liquidity betas across single stocks, high
reward for bearing liquidity risk) and a more persistent, normal low-beta
state. The high-liquidity-beta state occurs in 59% of Januaries but only in
14% of other months. This evidence is in line with January outperformance
of small-cap stocks and corporate bonds—which may reflect these assets’
inferior liquidity as much as their greater riskiness. However, illiquidity
shocks based on the Amihud measure are only mildly negative in January,
and the Pastor–Stambaugh portfolio of high-liquidity-risk vs. low-liquidity-
risk beta stocks actually makes its net profits outside January (the third pair
of bars in Figure 25.3).

Note: Each panel sums up over time the monthly excess return of a given
investment separately for Januaries and for non-January months between
1927 and 2009. Excess return is the difference between the monthly return
of a long portfolio and a short portfolio: thus it is expressed as a percentage
of the long position’s size. The eight panels cover three pages and include
(a) the equity premium, (b) value (stock) premium, (c) carry premium
(since 
1970), 
(d) 
small-cap 
(stock) 
premium, 
(e) 
credit-vs.-Treasury
premium, (f) high-volatility (stock) premium (since 1963), (g) bond (term)
premium, and (h) momentum (stock) premium. Note that there are 11 “non-
January” months for each “January”, so if both cumulative return series
reach similar levels—see panel (b)—it implies much higher average returns
in Januaries than in other months.

Figure 25.4. Cumulative (not compounded) returns in Januaries vs. other
months, 1927–2009.

Sources: 
Bloomberg, 
MSCI 
Barra, 
Barclays 
Capital, 
Citigroup, 
J.P.
Morgan, Ken French’s website, Ang et al. (2006), David Blitz, Ibbotson
Associates (Morningstar), Brevan Howard, own calculations.


Figure 25.5. January barometer: Average rest-of-the-year returns after up or
down Januaries, 1927–2009.
Sources: 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Ibbotson 
Associates 
(Morningstar),
Bloomberg, MSCI Barra, Barclays Capital, Citigroup, J.P. Morgan, S&P
GSCI, Ang et al. (2006), David Blitz, Brevan Howard, own calculations.

January barometer

“The other January effect”, or the January barometer, refers to the finding
that equity market performance in January has some predictive ability for
the next 11 months’ returns: “As goes January, so goes the rest of the year.”
As I mentioned earlier, one intuitive explanation for the first January effect
—high 
returns 
for 
risky 
assets—applies 
if 
there 
is 
seasonally 
strong
investor risk appetite at the beginning of a new year. The logic for the
January barometer follows from the same intuition: if the general risk
appetite is already fragile in the benign January environment, it spells
trouble for the rest of the year.

The success of the January barometer has been surprisingly consistent
across risky assets (as shown in Figure 25.5). This evidence is consistent
with an especially strong risk appetite at the beginning of the year, and a
bearish view for the rest of the year if investor risk appetite is not healthy in
January. Incidentally, this barometer worked very well in 2008 but poorly in
2009.

Hallowe’en indicator

Equity market returns in the U.S. and many other countries have been high
in the half-year between November and April, and low in the half-year
between May and October. The Hallowe’en indicator is thus named because
a good time to buy risky assets begins near Hallowe’en. Several famous
October crashes have occurred just days or weeks before Hallowe’en,
which 
some 
observers 
might 
take 
as 
supportive 
evidence 
of 
seasonal
sentiment variation, while skeptics might view this as a coincidence or data-
mined result.

The evidence is also consistent with the old Wall Street adage, “Sell in
May and go away.” The period during which the market is not held covers
the summer doldrums and the autumn gloom (sometimes linked to seasonal
affective eisorder, SAD), while the period when the market is held includes
the New Year with heightened risk appetite as well as its anticipation.

Figure 25.6. Hallowe’en effect: Average monthly returns in November–
May and April–October, 1927–2009.

Sources: 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Ibbotson 
Associates 
(Morningstar),
Bloomberg, MSCI Barra, Barclays Capital, Citigroup, J.P. Morgan, S&P
GSCI, Ang et al. (2006), David Blitz, Brevan Howard, own calculations.

Figure 25.6 shows that the Hallowe’en effect in equity markets is echoed
in the outperformance of small-cap stocks, high-volatility stocks, and long-
run reversals as well as credit and carry strategies.

If the bar charts in Figures 25.3, 25.5, and 25.6 resemble each other, there
is a reason. The January effect, the January barometer, and the Hallowe’en
effect appear related; the patterns are similar and strong for various risky
assets and weak for other assets. While other reasons exist, the core story is
seasonally high investor risk appetite at the beginning of a new year.

...
25.3 OTHER SEASONALS

While the January seasonal has plausible rational explanations, many other
seasonals do not. However, most seasonal patterns are so weak that trading
costs prevent exploiting them—except for modifying the timing of planned
buying or selling. Moreover, the possibility of data-mined results is evident.

Within-day regularities are only a curiosity for most investors, and any
tradable patterns are weak. In equity markets, average returns do not vary
significantly across the day but volatility is clearly higher at the beginning
and end of the trading day, and, unsurprisingly, at times of major data
announcements. In FX markets there is even some evidence of within-day
average return variation. Major currencies tend to weaken during the main
trading hours of their own time zone—perhaps reflecting diversification
flows from local markets into global assets.

The day-of-the week effect was one of the first documented anomalies. In
the 
past, 
average 
equity 
market 
returns 
were 
negative 
on 
Mondays.
However, this regularity disappeared soon after it became widely known in
the 1970s.

Turn of the month. Equity market returns tend to be higher at the turn of
the month, both during the week before and after. McConnell–Xu (2008)
show that all U.S. equity market excess returns between 1926 and 2005
were earned over a 4-day window (the last business day of the month and
the first three business days); average long-run gain on other days was
slightly negative. This pattern is not exclusive to the year end, quarter ends,
or to the United States. Investors “putting money to work” (i.e., transferring
money from the labor market to the capital markets) in a lumpy fashion
near the month end seems like an appealing explanation but mutual fund
inflows do not show such a regularity.
Holiday effect. Equity market returns tend to be high on the day before
major U.S. holidays (as well as on some subsequent days, such as the day
after Thanksgiving and after Christmas Day). Similar patterns are found in
most other markets, including holidays not on the U.S. calendar (Chinese
New Year, Japanese Golden Week).

Grimbacher–Swinkels–Van Vliet (2010) study interactions between the
three previous anomalies, the January effect, and the Hallowe’en effect on
U.S. equity market returns between 1963 and 2008. They find that the
Hallowe’en effect and the turn-of-the-month effect are the strongest, even
subsuming the holiday effect. The turn-of-the-month effect looks especially
consistent: 
in 
each 
decade 
between 
the 
1960s 
and 
2000s, 
annualized
average returns on the five business days starting from the last day of the
month are 17–37 percentage points higher than on other days.

Lunar cycle. Average equity market returns are higher in the fortnight
around the new moon than in the fortnight around the full moon.

Announcement days. It is not surprising that market volatility is higher
on days of major economic announcements, and single-stock volatility is
higher on earnings announcement days. More surprisingly, average asset
returns tend to be higher on those days—perhaps reflecting compensation
for uncertainty and gains from the resolution of uncertainty. Finally, many
assets exhibit exceptional momentum in the runup to such announcement
days (government bonds before payroll data announcement dates and other
key economic announcements, stocks before earnings announcements, oil
futures before OPEC meetings, and agricultural commodities before major
supply and demand reports).

Periodicity. One curious momentum effect in equity markets is 12-month
periodicity. Individual stocks tend to outperform or underperform in the
same 
months 
each 
year—and 
these 
do 
not 
necessarily 
coincide 
with
earnings announcement months.

Supply–demand seasonals. Certain commodity markets exhibit especially
strong seasonal patterns. Indeed, such seasonals are often already “in the
price”. Many agricultural commodity prices tend to be higher before the
harvesting period (amidst seasonal scarcity) and lower after the harvest
(amidst abundant supply). In the case of heating or cooling energy, it is
demand rather than supply that exhibits regular seasonal patterns. Such
predictable price variation may provide no exploitable opportunities if it is
fully built into futures prices; contract roll losses just offset expected price
gains. However, in many cases these patterns are only partly built into
futures prices, so seasonal excess returns may be predictable.

Longer cycles. One example is the presidential cycle, in which U.S.
equity markets tend to fare better in the last two years than the first two
years 
of 
presidential 
terms 
in 
office—presumably 
due 
to 
government
largesse in the runup to the new election. Like many other documented
patterns, this one has partly broken down. The relation between monetary
policy cycles and equity market returns has also become weaker since the
1990s. Business cycles remain important and I turn to them next.

Source notes. On the January effect, see Keim (1983), Haugen–Lakonishok
(1988), and Doran–Jiang–Peterson (2009). On the January barometer, see
Cooper–McConnell– Ovtchinnikov (2006) and Stivers–Sun–Sun (2009).
On the Hallowe’en effect, see Jacobsen–Bouman (2002). On the within-day
effect in FX markets, see Breedon–Ranaldo (2008). On the day-of-the-
month 
effect, 
see 
McConnell–Xu 
(2008). 
On 
multiple 
seasonals, 
see
Grimbacher–Swinkels–Van Vliet (2010). On the recent performance of
seasonals, see Dzhabarov–Ziemba (2010). On lunar cycles, see Dichev–
Janes (2003). On exceptional momentum before event days, see Ilmanen–
Byrne (2003). On return periodicity, see Heston–Sadka (2008).

...