26

Cyclical variation in asset returns

• Data gathered over business cycles show that, on average,
excess returns on risky assets are especially high near cyclical
troughs and low near cyclical peaks.
• Forward-looking value indicators (dividend yield, credit
spread, curve steepness) tend to decline through expansions and
rise through contractions.
• Observing how the growth environment intersects with the
inflation or volatility environment gives further insights into asset
class behavior. Equity returns have depended on volatility and
inflation conditions more than on growth; they excel in
disinflationary and stable environments. Bonds have primarily
depended on inflation conditions (benefiting from disinflation),
while commodities and housing returns have varied most with the
growth environment (benefiting from strong growth).

This chapter reviews the way realized returns—and some ex ante carry and
value 
indicators—vary 
through 
the 
business 
cycle 
or 
across 
different
macroeconomic environments. Long data histories are needed for such
assessments, which restricts this empirical analysis to core asset classes.

Unlike most of the book, this chapter focuses 
on 
contemporaneous
empirical relations. The observed relationship between the business cycle
and asset returns may be more reflective of unexpected returns (data
surprises) than of expected returns. When interpreting the relationship of
asset returns to the prevailing macroeconomic environment, we must also
keep in mind financial assets’ forward-looking nature. Aligning the timing
of 
macroeconomic 
data 
series 
and 
financial 
time 
series 
is 
further
complicated by the fact that macroeconomic data suffer from publication
lags and data revisions (and are measured using noise). Finally, if returns
vary predictably over time, it is more useful to study cyclical patterns in ex
ante indicators than in realized returns (I document both).

If an investor can predict the economic outlook (not easy!) and if the
return regularities documented below are persistent, understanding these
relations are essential for a discretionary macro-investor (and indeed are
coded in his or her mind). However, the superior macro-investor goes
beyond historical regularities and instead asks what is unique in the current
situation, how policymaker and investor responses break past patterns, and
what relevant structural changes are molding the world. All of which is well
beyond the scope of this book.

The evidence in this chapter may also help in understanding rational risk
premia or procyclical sentiment, and it may give some clues for market
timing, 
style 
timing, 
or 
factor 
timing—suggesting 
good 
and 
bad
environments for various asset classes and dynamic strategies.

...
26.1 TYPICAL BEHAVIOR OF REALIZED RETURNS AND
EX ANTE INDICATORS THROUGH THE BUSINESS
CYCLE

Business cycles describe broad fluctuations in aggregate economic activity.
The U.S. government considers the National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER) to be the final arbiter of the U.S. business cycle. Evaluating a
variety 
of 
economic 
series, 
the 
NBER’s 
Business 
Cycle 
Committee
officially dates—often after a significant delay—the peaks and troughs of
economic activity. (I assume that the last recession ended in July 2009.) The
periods 
between 
these 
are 
called 
expansions 
(or 
recoveries) 
and
contractions (or recessions). Among more journalistic definitions, the most
popular is to call two consecutive quarters of negative real GDP growth a
recession. Business cycles in other countries are even more loosely defined.
Business 
cycles 
are 
not 
regular 
(e.g., 
recessions 
became 
shorter 
and
shallower after World War II). Yet they share common features (e.g.,
expansions almost always last longer than contractions).

Why do business cycles exist at all? We know that they have existed for
millennia—recall the seven fat years and seven lean years in the Old
Testament. 
In 
an 
agricultural 
society, 
such 
cycles 
may 
have 
reflected
weather and harvest fortunes; in an industrial society, business cycles may
be caused by technology shocks or by demand fluctuations, which are often
related to changes in credit conditions. The underlying behavioral story is
that humans by nature are prone to fits of optimism and pessimism, high
and low animal spirits, fear and greed.

Asset returns and valuations turn out to share some of this cyclicality.
Arguably. one should not expect large cyclical patterns in the returns of
forward-looking, long-lived assets which should “see through” many cycles
[1]. Cyclical patterns may thus be more reflective of time variation and
wealth dependence in required risk premia than of the market’s growth
expectations. 
The 
monetary 
policy 
cycle 
is 
a 
related 
explanation 
for
financial assets’ procyclical behavior. These assets serve as one part of the
monetary transmission mechanism when a central bank eases or tightens
policy.

Figures 26.1 through 26.4 give a visual perspective to the business cycle
pattern in various asset returns and ex ante indicators. I treat each month
between January 1927 and December 2009 as being in either the first,
second, or last third of each NBER expansion or contraction (recession); in
addition, I assign five months around each NBER-defined business cycle
turning point to special categories called peak and trough. I then compute
the average value of each series within each subperiod. I leave a space
between each expansion phase to visually remind the reader that the U.S.
economy expanded in 80% of the 996 months and contracted only 20% of
the time. I display the cyclical trough—a crucial turning point—at both the
left and right extremes of the figure.

Figure 26.1 shows that equities perform well in expansions and poorly in
the early and middle phases of contractions. However, equities’ forward-
looking nature and/or countercyclical risk premium are highlighted by the
fact that the stock market’s realized returns are high around business cycle
troughs and low around business cycle peaks. Although this is not visible,
the CRP has a cyclical pattern similar to that of the ERP, although an order
of magnitude smaller. In addition, the BRP is low near business cycle peaks
but realized bond returns are already very high in the middle of the
recession.

In Figure 26.2, I turn to other popular equity market factors for which
data have been available since 1927. Size exhibits broadly the same cyclical
pattern as ERP and CRP. That is, small-cap stocks tend to outperform near
cyclical troughs and early expansions, and underperform near peaks and
early 
contractions. 
Value 
exhibits 
almost 
no 
cyclical 
patterns, 
except
slightly lower returns in mid-contractions and late contractions. However,
this pattern mostly reflects the 1930s’ experience. Using only postwar data,
value works a bit better in contractions than in expansions. Momentum has
been a good diversifier near cyclical peaks and in mid-recessions when
most risky assets suffer. However, market turnaround in the last third of
contractions, and near cyclical troughs, often involves a sharp handover
from defensive stocks to aggressive cyclicals, which is a bad environment
for momentum.

Figure 26.1. Mean excess returns of equities, government bonds, and
credits over business cycle expansion and contraction phases, 1927–2009.

Sources: 
Ken 
French’s 
website, 
Ibbotson 
Associates 
(Morningstar),
Bloomberg, Citigroup, Barclays Capital, National Bureau of Economic
Analysis, own calculations.

Figure 26.2. More mean excess returns of U.S. equity styles over business
cycle expansion and contraction phases, 1927–2009.

Sources: Ken French’s website, National Bureau of Economic Analysis,
own calculations.

Realized returns are noisy proxies of expected returns. They can be
especially misleading whenever realized returns are persistently high (low)
because of a gradual fall (rise) in the market’s expected or required returns;
this is sometimes called the “repricing effect” or “discount rate effect”. For
example, peak realized excess returns for equities and credits around the
business cycle trough hint at high and falling required returns. It is useful to
study 
forward-looking 
valuation 
indicators 
more 
directly. 
Figure 
26.3
shows that key ex ante indicators of asset risk premia share a similar
countercyclical pattern. All three series fall throughout an expansion and
rise fast during a contraction, but dividend yield (D/P) and credit spread
turn before the cyclical trough. Smoothed earnings yield (not shown) and
credit spread (shown) exhibit a pattern similar to D/P. Of the variables,
curve steepness (YC) is the best matched to the business cycle in terms of
timing. While average dividend yield near cyclical peaks is only slightly
lower than that near troughs, the yield curve is typically at its flattest at the
business cycle trough and steepest near the business cycle peak.

Figure 26.3. Mean spreads and valuation ratios across the business cycle,
1927–2009.

Sources: Robert Shiller’s website, Haver Analytics, Federal Reserve Board,
Moody’s, 
Ibbotson 
Associates 
(Morningstar), 
Bloomberg, 
Citigroup,
Barclays Capital, National Bureau of Economic Analysis, own calculations.

Figure 26.4. Mean rates across the business cycle, 1927–2009.

Sources: Robert Shiller’s website, Federal Reserve Board, Bloomberg,
National Bureau of Economic Analysis, own calculations.
Finally, Figure 26.4 shows that while the long Treasury yield level
exhibits almost no cyclical variation, the short rate and the inflation rate
clearly vary with the business cycle. Traditionally, the monetary policy
cycle and the business cycle were closely related. As capacity utilization
and demand-driven inflation pressures rose in a mature expansion, the
central bank responded to overheating by raising short-term rates until it
killed 
the 
boom. 
When 
economic 
growth 
became 
anemic, 
slack 
and
disinflation ensued, and the central bank could again cut rates to revive the
economy.

Most documented cyclical patterns are similar if empirical analysis is
started after the Great Depression and World War II instead of 1927. One
exception is that postwar inflation rates have been higher in contractions
than in expansions (see Figure 17.3). Expected inflation and ex ante real
bond yield have not exhibited much cyclicality.

...
26.2 TYPICAL BEHAVIOR OF REALIZED RETURNS AND
EX ANTE INDICATORS ACROSS DIFFERENT ECONOMIC
REGIMES

Business cycles differ in their depth and duration. The most important
contrast is between typical post-World War II recessions, arguably caused
by Fed tightening, and balance sheet recessions, caused by de-leveraging
after financial excesses (as in the 1930s and 2000s); the latter are more
severe.

It is also interesting to observe how the cyclical growth environment
intersects with other key drivers of asset returns, such as inflation and
volatility. I create three composite dummy series—real growth, inflation,
and volatility—and document average realized asset returns and proxies for
ex ante returns in relevant data subsets. I assign each calendar quarter to
one of the following four growth-and-inflation quadrants (and I do the same
for growth and volatility):

Disinflationary boom
Inflationary boom
Disinflationary stagnation Inflationary stagnation

There are numerous ways to create and combine such composite series; my
approach is by no means unique. The real growth proxy is an equally
weighted average of (up to) six normalized series: expected next year real
GDP growth, realized past year real GDP growth, real earnings growth, the
CFNAI index (a composite of a large number of real activity indicators), the
ISM measure of business confidence, and the Conference Board measure of
consumer confidence. Two of the six series start only in the mid-1960s.
Most negative values coincide with NBER recessions. The inflation proxy
reflects both the inflation level and its annual changes (averaging data for
headline and core CPI, the GDP deflator, and a consensus forecast inflation
rate). The volatility proxy reflects the average of realized stock and bond
market volatilities based on daily returns over the past quarter. Figure 26.5
shows the history of the three dummies and indicates in which quadrant the
economy is functioning in a given quarter. For example, in early 2009,
when both growth and inflation dummies had negative values, the regime
was clearly “disinflationary stagnation”.

Figure 26.5. Growth, inflation, and volatility dummies used in regime
analysis, 1960–2009.

Sources: Haver Analytics, Federal Reserve Board, Bloomberg. Federal
Reserve Banks of Chicago and Philadelphia, own calculations.

My quadrant classification is simply based on the sign of each dummy.
For example, boom and stagnation are periods of fast and slow real activity;
stagnation does not imply outright recession. The four quadrants will not be
equally populated, due to some asymmetry in each dummy series and to
interactions between dimensions (a boom is more often associated with
disinflation than with inflation, for example). The first columns in Tables
26.1 and 26.2 show the observed frequency of each quadrant during the
1960–2009 period.

Tables 26.1 and 26.2 show 1960–2009 average real quarterly returns in
each growth/ inflation quadrant and growth/volatility quadrant. The best
(worst) performer in each regime is shown in boldface (italics). There is
surprisingly little difference in average returns for risky assets between
boom and stagnation regimes. Adding either the inflation or the volatility
dimension gives clearer patterns. Indeed, both dimensions discriminate
equity 
returns 
better 
than 
real 
activity. 
Equities 
fare 
better 
during
disinflationary periods than during inflationary periods. (This finding might
not hold up if my study period included the Great Depression.) Equities also
fare better during stable market conditions than during volatile episodes.
Small-cap stocks and value stocks outperform the equity market in most
regimes (based on this classification and sample period), but especially
amidst inflation. All bonds fare best in a disinflationary or stable stagnation,
while commodities and housing fare best in an inflationary boom.

The volatility dimension is most critical for all types of stocks; equities
perform best under stable conditions. The inflation dimension is critical for
bonds; they lose under inflationary conditions. The growth dimension is
critical for commodities and housing; they excel in any kind of strong-
growth environment.

Table 26.1. Intersecting real activity and inflation dimensions, average real
quarterly returns of various investments, 1960–2009

Sources: Haver Analytics, Federal Reserve Board, Bloomberg. Federal
Reserve 
Banks 
of 
Chicago 
and 
Philadelphia, 
Ken 
French’s 
website,
Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar), Citigroup, Barclays Capital, Lincoln
Institute of Land Policy, own calculations.
Table 26.2. Intersecting real activity and volatility dimensions, average real
quarterly returns of various investments, 1960–2009

Sources: Haver Analytics, Federal Reserve Board, Bloomberg, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, Ken French’s website, Ibbotson Associates
(Morningstar), 
Citigroup, 
Barclays 
Capital, 
Lincoln 
Institute 
of 
Land
Policy, own calculations.

Looking across columns, the stock market outperforms all bonds in most
regimes but especially in a disinflationary boom and in the two stable
regimes. Bonds mainly outperform stocks in a volatile or disinflationary
stagnation, 
presumably 
including 
flight-to-quality 
and 
deflationary
episodes.

It may be surprising that average real equity market returns are lowest,
even 
negative, 
during 
inflationary 
booms. 
The 
counterintuitively 
poor
performance during inflationary booms reflects monetary policy tightening
while 
the 
counterintuitively 
strong 
performance 
during 
disinflationary
stagnations reflects monetary policy easing. (Average short-rate moves
during these quarters were respectively +32 bp and—45 bp, while they
averaged about zero for the other two quadrants.) These patterns are just
averages: in the last two monetary policy cycles, equities have actually lost
money during Fed easing and made money during Fed tightening, perhaps
due to recent changes in the timing of Fed policy. Nonetheless, high-
frequency data on unexpected Fed moves make it unambiguously clear that
the equity market reacts positively to unexpectedly large rate cuts and
negatively to rate hikes.

Beyond these exhibits, I also studied the profitability of several strategy
styles across these regimes. Highlights from this study reveal that
• Small-cap stocks outperform most in inflationary and/or volatile
stagnations 
and 
only 
underperform 
in 
disinflationary 
or 
volatile
booms.
• For equity value strategies, the growth dimension is also critical
—but, interestingly, with an opposite sign from small-caps. Value
stands out in all boom regimes and only loses money in the stable
stagnation regime.
• Equity momentum strategies are profitable in all eight regimes
but really shine in inflationary booms. Inflation seems to be the
strongest discriminator.
• 
Trend-following 
strategies 
also 
make 
money 
in 
all 
eight
regimes. They fare best in volatile or inflationary booms and seem to
benefit from high growth, high inflation, and high volatility.
• 
Both 
the 
carry 
composite 
and 
the 
FX 
carry 
strategy 
are
profitable in all eight regimes (on average). Both credit carry and FX
carry fare better in disinflationary regimes. Credit carry fares best in
stable or disinflationary booms, but the evidence for FX carry is
mixed.

This type of descriptive analysis is fun but suffers from many limitations.
My classification is judgmental as are my regime proxies. Moreover, asset
class behavior may vary within each regime (stocks may be more sensitive
to growth at the beginning of a boom than at the end) and change over time
(bonds’ relation to volatility conditions flipped sign after the 1980s). For
the results to have investment value, the patterns documented must be
reasonably 
robust 
and 
investors 
need 
to 
be 
able 
to 
predict 
future
macroeconomic regimes.

Finally, since realized returns can be misleading proxies of expected
returns, we need to study ex ante returns too. Tables 26.3 and 26.4 track the
behavior of various ex ante indicators across regimes. This analysis does
not show how valuations evolve during each regime, but it reveals that
average 
equity 
market 
yields 
are 
low 
during 
booms 
and 
high 
during
stagnations—especially during inflationary and volatile stagnations. Yield
curve steepness mainly depends on inflation conditions and is steepest in
disinflationary 
stagnations. 
Credit 
spreads 
mainly 
depend 
on 
growth
conditions and are widest in volatile stagnations. The last columns show
that average bond yields and inflation levels were highest in inflationary
stagnation regimes, reflecting stagflationary conditions during the two oil
crises 
of 
the 
1970s. 
As 
expected, 
monetary 
policy 
easing 
was 
most
prominent (short rates fell and the yield curve was steep) in disinflationary
stagnations.

Table 26.3. Ex ante indicators in four real activity and inflation regimes,
average quarterly values, 1960–2009

Sources: Haver Analytics, Federal Reserve Board, Bloomberg. Federal
Reserve Banks of Chicago and Philadelphia, Robert Shiller’s website, Ken
French’s website, Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar), Citigroup, Barclays
Capital, own calculations.

Table 26.4. Ex ante indicators in four real activity and volatility regimes,
average quarterly values, 1960–2009

Sources: Haver Analytics, Federal Reserve Board, Bloomberg. Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, Robert Shiller’s website, Ken French’s website,
Ibbotson 
Associates 
(Morningstar), 
Citigroup, 
Barclays 
Capital, 
own
calculations.
...
26.3 NOTES

[1] 
Stock 
prices 
discount 
expected 
cash 
flows 
until 
perpetuity. 
The
estimated duration of stocks may be longer than 30 years. Such a long
period includes several expansions and contractions. Realistically, markets
can only have some ability to forecast cash flow growth during the current
business cycle, and such near-term cash flows constitute only a small part
of a stock’s value. The cyclical fluctuations in cash flows beyond the
current cycle should largely wash out, leaving a stable anchor for stock
prices if markets are rational and discount rates constant.

Source notes. For examples of similar business cycle analysis, see Naik–
Devarajan 
(2009) 
and 
Lustig–Verdelhan 
(2010). 
See 
Kaya–Lee–
Pornrojnangkool 
(2010) 
and 
Ang–Bekaert 
(2002) 
for 
applications 
of
regime-switching models.

...