29

Takeaways for long-horizon investors

• There are many ways to improve investment practices to
enhance long-run returns. Several can be pursued in parallel:
collect risk premia from diverse sources; benefit (in moderation)
from illiquidity premia, leverage, contrarian timing, and view-
driven active management; be aware of risks and costs as well as
own natural edges and limitations.
• Equity and illiquidity premia are good return sources but
should not dominate the portfolio, especially when their ex ante
rewards are slim. Entry and exit valuations matter.
• Returns may be enhanced by exploiting value, carry, and
momentum tilts; valuation-based timing of any return source; and
view-based alpha seeking.
• Prudent leverage enables effective diversification and helps
investors avoid overpriced high-volatility assets.
• Do not seek comfort by avoiding leverage or headline risk
while buying popular assets or lottery tickets. These errors hurt
long-run performance.
• Long-horizon investors have certain comparative
advantages that they should fully exploit.

In this “takeaways” chapter, I summarize theories about expected return
determination, list which plausible sources of expected returns have and
have not worked in practice, and address several relevant debates among
investors. Institutional practices have already evolved from 60/40 local
market 
stock/bond 
portfolios 
to 
globally 
diversified 
portfolios, 
often
including 
emerging 
markets 
and 
alternative 
assets. 
The 
“Yale” 
or
endowment model became increasingly popular in the 2000s. This model
seeks high returns by holding equity-like asset classes, harvesting illiquidity
premia from alternatives, and avoiding market timing. Large endowment
losses in 2008 raised many questions about the wisdom of this strategy,
however. Maybe market timing and drawdown control are not such bad
ideas, after all, and maybe illiquidity is not such a great return source?
Should equity orientation be replaced by more balanced portfolios, even if
earning 
an 
acceptable 
return 
from 
a 
more 
balanced 
portfolio 
requires
leverage? If valuations matter, shouldn’t value tilts be cemented into asset
allocation and security selection processes? Could it be more effective to
diversify across underlying risk factors than across asset classes? Here, I
review all the ideas in which I see merit, but I also note their shortcomings.

The next generation of best practice for enhancing returns involves
pursuing several paths in parallel, instead of embracing one idea. It is up to
every institution to decide, based on its goals, constraints, resources, and
inclinations, what its priorities are. Diversity in choices is a good outcome
for markets where investment approaches that are too homogeneous can
lead to systemic problems. The same diversity also helps investors avoid
overcrowded positions.

...
29.1 KEY TAKEAWAYS FROM THEORY

Not all volatility is equal. Investment returns reflect multiple factors, both
rational risk premia and investor irrationality. Different 
return sources
deserve different long-run rewards. An investment’s typical timing of losses
matters more than its standalone risk. Investors assessing risk and returns
should therefore look beyond the Sharpe ratio and penalize investments that
perform poorly in bad times. The key insight in modern finance theory is
that such investments warrant high required risk premia, while valuable safe
haven assets can justify negative risk premia.

The ex ante reward for each factor can vary over time and is often higher
after poor medium-term performance. If return predictability reflects time-
varying 
risk 
premia, 
exceptionally 
good 
market 
opportunities 
tend 
to
materialize just when investor risk aversion and liquidity needs are high.
Thus, contrarian market timing may be of greatest benefit to truly long-
horizon investors whose risk tolerance is more stable and liquidity needs
less than those of the average investor.

...
29.2 EMPIRICAL RETURN SOURCES

Here is my take on 10 potentially important sources of investment returns.
Do you get rewarded with higher long-run returns for . . . ?

1. High volatility and high beta? Not within asset classes. The
most volatile assets tend to be overpriced due to skewness preferences
or 
leverage 
constraints 
(“overpaying 
for 
lottery 
characteristics 
or
getting bang for the buck”). Across asset classes, the riskier ones tend
to outperform the safe ones in the long run.
2. Illiquidity? Yes. Less liquid assets do compensate for their
illiquidity and tendency to lose money amidst liquidity droughts. This
compensation, like others, is not constant over time.
3. Fast growth? Not unless you can predict future growth better
than the market can. One of the most common errors of investors is
over-extrapolating the past growth rate of a firm, sector, or country
(“overpaying 
for 
the 
hope 
of 
growth”), 
leading 
to 
subsequent
disappointments.
4. Cheap assets? Yes. The flipside of the above growth story is
that value stocks (which sell at a price that is cheap relative to some
fundamental metric) tend to outperform in the long run. The reason for
low valuation ratios among stocks and other assets may be irrationality
or rational compensation for risk. Both give rise to higher future
returns.
5. Positive carry? Yes. Long-run reward has been especially good
in cross-country trades and less compelling in within-country trades.
Poor timing of large losses makes the strategy risky, but this riskiness
should sustain long-run reward. Exception: When carry seeking is
implemented through complex structured products, fees and risks often
overwhelm any yield advantage.
6. Recent distress? Not in equity markets where low-rated and
distressed 
stocks 
often 
keep 
underperforming 
for 
several 
months.
(Over longer horizons, however, surviving stocks rebound smartly and
contribute to the value effect.) Among corporate bonds, “fallen angels”
recently 
downgraded 
from 
investment-grade 
rating 
offer 
high
subsequent returns following forced selling by institutional investors.
7. Recent success? Yes. A positive trend, or momentum, does
tend to persist in most asset classes, but the historical window matters.
The best information regarding momentum is often in 6-to-12-month
histories. A common error involves chasing returns over a multi-year
horizon when reversal is more likely than continuation of the existing
trend.
8. Leverage? Yes. Higher leverage boosts expected returns but
also 
risks, 
sometimes 
substantially. 
Enhanced 
risk 
controls 
and
differentiation between more and less risky leverage are important.
9. Diversification? Yes, if you are able and willing to use leverage
to monetize the risk reduction benefits of diversification. Combining
negatively correlated return sources is especially valuable and is often
best done via alternative assets. Even long-horizon investors should
not waste the complementary nature of value and momentum or carry
and trend exposures.
10. Timing? Yes. The rewards for most of the above items vary
over time in a partly predictable way. For example, fast growth and
high liquidity are appealing features, but only at the right price. Yet,
market timing, factor timing, and style timing are not easy and should
be done in moderation.
One of my key recommendations is harvesting excess returns from a broad
range of sources, not only relying on the equity premium. Admittedly, there
is no consensus as to which other premia give a sustainable edge. The
equity premium has the most compelling theoretical underpinning and it is
larger (on an unlevered basis) than most other premia. No source of excess
return can guarantee profits each year, but the diverse sources I highlight—
illiquidity, value, carry, momentum—have given investors a solid long-run
edge and deserve the benefit of the doubt. Beating the market is hard
enough that it would seem wasteful not to use the tailwinds that these return
sources give to long-run performance.
Box 29.1. How going for comfort reduces long-run returns

Conventional or comfortable approaches to boosting expected returns
tend to become overpriced and offer poor reward for risk, maybe even
detracting from expected return. Common bad habits include
• to avoid (explicit) leverage, overweighting asset classes or
strategies with embedded or non-recourse leverage;
• to avoid leverage, overweighting the highest volatility
assets within an asset class;
• to avoid leverage, staying with equity-centric portfolios
instead of monetizing gains from diversification into fixed
income and other asset classes;
• to earn a possible illiquidity premium and avoid mark-to-
market volatility, hoarding illiquid asset classes irrespective of
valuations;
• to boost portfolio yield, buying corporate bonds and
structures with embedded options.

Other conventional or comfortable choices that give rise to poor
expected returns include return chasing and buying popular assets
(hence the existence of profits for contrarian or value strategies),
avoiding well-rewarded pockets in credit markets (BB-rated fallen
angels and levered short-dated top-rated debt), and avoiding
investments with headline risk (e.g., providing “insurance” after large
losses when capital is scarce).

...
29.3 MY TAKE ON KEY DEBATES

...
29.3.1 Passive betas vs. active alpha seeking

One camp argues that all investing should be done passively by holding
cheap betas—perhaps allocating 60% to stock indices and 40% to bond
indices, with market cap weights within the asset classes and no market
timing. Another extreme advocates only active investing, targeting absolute
returns, with virtually no investment constraints nor benchmarks. There is a
whole spectrum of views between these extremes.

Beliefs are crucial: the less investors believe in market efficiency and the
more faith they have in their own ability to beat the markets or to select
winning managers, the more they will favor active management. Ability
should be judged objectively (to resist overconfidence); and resources and
governance matter. A large, resource-rich institution may have a better
chance of being among those rare consistent outperformers (although small,
nimble funds may have an edge in activities that cannot be easily scaled
up). Casual attempts to beat the market are likely to fail because active
management is a zero-sum game even before costs and fees, and only
players with well-above-average skill are likely to win. If an institution
knows that it cannot be nimble and has historically acted procyclically, it
should outsource market-timing efforts or else give them up. If it cannot
incentivize its in-house managers well but believes that it is able to pick
superior external managers, it should outsource all alpha efforts.

All else equal, lower fees and trading costs should encourage more active
management. The choice between external and internal management also
depends on relative costs, among other considerations.

The decision of where an institution should harvest risk premia depends
on its assessment of where risks are rewarded. This book should help
investors make better judgments when they allocate capital dynamically
across various traditional and alternative beta sources. Flexible investors
can cast the net out wide across multiple factors. Investors looking for high
raw returns, if they are unable or unwilling to use leverage, must focus on
inherently volatile asset classes such as equities.

The decision of where an investor should try to hunt for alpha depends on
its views on relative market efficiency in different market segments—as
well as on the manager’s own relative advantages, skills, and costs. Fund
size is one source of relative strength or weakness. Very large AUM may
give 
an 
investor 
special 
opportunities 
to 
make 
capital 
infusions 
at
preferential terms. However, large AUM also implies capacity constraints in
smaller markets. Contrarian market timing may be less capacity-constrained
than security selection.

A common view states that inefficiencies and alpha are most readily
available 
in 
less 
liquid 
markets—small-cap 
stocks, 
frontier 
countries,
unlisted assets—on which fewer investors and analysts shine light. One
counterargument notes that non-economic actors and behavioral biases
create macro-inefficiencies in liquid markets and that low transaction costs
make it more realistic to exploit such opportunities. Moreover, in liquid
markets it is more feasible to distinguish alpha gains from beta gains and to
exit from disappointing investments. Net of all these considerations, I
suspect 
that 
asset 
selection, 
relative 
value 
opportunities, 
and 
micro-
inefficiencies are more lucrative in less liquid markets, while the reverse
may be true for timing and macro-inefficiencies.

Alpha–beta barbells make sense. Most of the risk budget should be
accessed cheaply (bulk betas, alternative betas, in-house timing). Being
simple and cheap with at least the core portfolio prevents active fee paying
with all the AUM. The more costly active risk budget should be the smaller
part, in which investors ideally only pay alpha fees for true alpha efforts—
judged as much by ex ante qualities as by ex post performance. Alternative
betas and other systematic approaches deserve fees between those that
apply to bulk beta and to alpha, and may be brought in house in large
organizations that have ample resources.

...
29.3.2 Lottery/Insurance selling or buying?

Lottery or insurance selling in financial markets is a blatantly risky strategy,
but at least it tends to make money over long periods. It sure beats lottery
buying as a long-run strategy. If investors want to counterbalance their
exposures to pro-risk and shortvolatility strategies, trend and momentum
styles offer surprisingly appealing long-run returns given that they also have
favorable risk-diversifying characteristics. In contrast, lottery-type small
growth 
stocks 
and 
high-volatility 
segments 
in 
each 
asset 
class 
offer
surprisingly 
poor 
long-run 
returns 
and 
unexceptional 
diversifying
characteristics. As a rule, investors should stay away from lottery assets,
except as needed to implement tactical views. Lottery buyers—or tail risk
hedgers—need to pick their battles, either through smart timing or trade
selection.

...
29.3.3 Leverage: Not all bad

Leverage 
has 
a 
bad 
name, 
and 
especially 
so 
after 
2008. 
Real-money
investors have preferred non-recourse leverage to explicit leverage, and
such preferences may now be even more pronounced than in the past. It is
true that leverage can increase blowup risk for a given investor and it can
also amplify systemic risks overall; moreover, the need for forced de-
levering is greater during financial crises and liquidity droughts if one has
explicit leverage. But it is also true that prudent leverage can boost long-run
returns by enabling effective diversification and avoiding overpriced high-
volatility assets.

My most controversial recommendation is for institutions to accept some
leverage as one way of enhancing returns, as long as it is not precluded by
regulations. Differentiating between more and less risky leverage, rather
than by explicit leverage and embedded non-recourse leverage, may be
useful. Risky leverage includes boosting leverage to offset falling risk
premia or falling volatility (as in 2006–2007), or levering up illiquid or
inherently risky assets, or leveraging via borrowing in ways that are more
likely to need to be unwound during financial crises or amidst capital
scarcity. Less risky leverage includes levering up low-volatility assets to
improve 
diversification, 
especially 
when 
done 
using 
liquid 
assets 
and
vehicles that are less likely to cause forced liquidations or to involve
counterparty risk (e.g., exchange-traded short-dated options and futures).
Even the less risky approaches to leverage raise the standards needed in risk
management and governance. Like derivatives, leverage can be abused.

Even without the benefit of avoiding overpriced assets, leverage can
enhance long-run returns by monetizing the diversification benefits of better
balanced, less equity-centric portfolios. Low-volatility asset classes tend to
improve diversification and risk-adjusted returns. These improvements can
be converted into higher expected returns by applying moderate leverage.
Yet many real-money investors reject the use of leverage and instead opt for
equity-centric risk budgets and/or (overpriced) high-volatility assets or
investments offering non-recourse leverage.

Leverage aversion and leverage constraints made low-volatility assets
relatively attractive on a risk-adjusted basis even in recent decades, when
use of leverage was more widespread. In the coming years, with many
investors newly shy of using leverage, the benefits of moderate amounts of
explicit leverage seem likely to increase further.

...
29.3.4 Liquidity—overvalued or undervalued?

The standard argument in the endowment model is that illiquid assets offer
a premium both for illiquidity and for the fact that systematic liquidity risk
materializes mostly in bad times. By holding liquid assets investors forfeit
these premia, thereby reducing long-run average returns. For long-horizon
investors who do not need short-term liquidity, harvesting illiquidity premia
seems to be the most obvious natural edge. Long-horizon investors’ demand
for illiquid asset classes arguably went too far in the mid-2000s. Illiquidity
is not worth bearing if it is not properly rewarded. Although ex ante
illiquidity premia are not directly observable, it is evident that institutional
interest drove these premia to levels that were too thin.

Critics 
of 
the 
endowment 
model 
argue 
that 
real-money 
investors
undervalue liquidity and ignore(d) the time-varying nature of liquidity
premia. Liquidity gives you several benefits. Effectively, an investor in
liquid assets is long an option that gives him or her flexibility to sell and to
adjust the portfolio at will. Liquid holdings ensure that you must never rely
on forced selling in bad times and instead can take advantage of exceptional
opportunities in those times. To get this reward, you must pay a (tail)
insurance premium in good times by holding cash and other low-earning
liquid and safe haven assets (keeping your powder dry), or by explicitly
purchasing insurance in the options market.

I stress that, even for long-horizon investors investing in illiquid assets,
starting valuations can matter greatly. A contrarian timing approach may
even boost long-run returns, as investors provide liquidity opportunistically
only when it is well rewarded—not at all times. At least it should help
reduce drawdowns in those bad times when the value of one extra dollar is
especially high, when even long-horizon investors see their investment
horizons shrink, and when even capital-rich investors feel the scarcity of
capital.
...
29.3.5 To time or not to time?

Until 
recently, 
the 
consensus 
view 
among 
academics 
and 
institutional
investors was negative on market timing. Successful timing is hard, the risk
is undiversified, and staying in cash involves forfeiting a positive long-run
premium. 
Being 
“correct 
but 
early” 
in 
calling 
a 
market 
turn 
exposes
investors to serious career risk. The experience of the two boom–bust
cycles in the 2000s has changed many minds, however.

Not only equity market risk but also most return sources have time-
varying ex ante rewards. Static allocations to rewarded factors give useful
average tilts but it is wasteful to keep the same exposures when estimated
ex ante rewards are exceptionally small or large (as in credit investments in
2006 and 2008, respectively).

Contrarian timing signals are a natural starting point. Simple valuation
signals 
possess 
some 
ability 
to 
predict 
medium-term 
returns. 
Other
indicators can complement these value signals. Most return sources exhibit
short-term momentum and long-term reversal tendencies, in part reflecting
their fluctuating popularity. (I do not quantify here the gains from timing
because overfitting and uncertain trading costs make any estimates highly
uncertain.)

Even discretionary market-timers use systematic signals as one input to
their decision making, but often their market views are driven more by their
macroeconomic forecasts or perceived structural changes. Investors with
ample resources should study valuations and market conditions, and then
consider dynamic adjustments on either a discretionary or a systematic
basis. 
If 
they 
lack 
expertise 
or 
nimbleness 
in 
house, 
they 
may 
also
outsource the task to experts—say, by allocating mandates to global macro-
funds.

Thus, I endorse moderate market timing, factor timing, and style timing.
However, timing is not easy, so humility is warranted. Many organizations
may not tolerate sustained underperformance—say, when a manager sells
an overpriced market too early. Also, in active investing, the first rule
should be “Do no harm”. Some thoughtful institutions may find that in their
organization—given an unclear mandate or other governance problems—
any timing activity attempted would be likely to turn out to be of the
common procyclical and return-chasing variety. In that case, they are better
off resisting the siren songs of past performance by “tying themselves to the
mast” and sticking to constant weight asset class allocations. At least over
time they would gain discipline and modest profits from rebalancing.

...
29.3.6 Effective diversification

A key challenge to achieving diversification is reducing the dominance of
equity risk. More balanced portfolios diversify better—notwithstanding the
2008 experience. However, balanced risk budgets often require leverage to
achieve high returns, while unlevered diversification “only” achieves high
risk-adjusted returns (i.e., low returns but with even lower volatility). If
correlations 
spike, 
the 
well-diversified 
but 
levered 
portfolio 
may
underperform an equity-centric unlevered portfolio. Even if diversification
tends to fail in systemic crises, it can still be useful in the long run—which
matters more for long-horizon investors who face less liquidation pressure
during crises.

Most investments have positive exposures to the equity market and to
economic growth. This directional risk is difficult to diversify away, making
the elusive negative beta a valuable characteristic. The challenge is to find
safe haven investments that are not too costly and work reliably. Of course,
effective growth risk diversifiers are either very expensive (buying the VIX)
or unstable (gold and oil worked well 30 years ago, Treasuries and the yen
in 2008). It is not clear what will work in the 2010s; I stress the possibility
that government bonds will lose their safe haven status.

Diversification should not ignore valuations. Especially if many asset
classes are overpriced in good times, it seems likely that they may suffer
together when bad times hit. The best results arise by combining the general
goal of broad diversification with the underweighting of expensive and
overcrowded asset classes or strategies.

Diversification 
across 
strategy 
styles 
or 
risk 
factors 
is 
often 
more
effective 
than 
diversification 
across 
asset 
classes 
(recall 
the 
three-
dimensional cube in Figure 1.2). Enabling purer style and factor exposures
is therefore a key underappreciated benefit of investing in alternative assets
(albeit not exclusive to them).
Style diversification. Combining value and momentum tilts (or related
carry and trend tilts), which often are negatively correlated, provides more
effective diversification than most static asset classes. A value or contrarian
approach is a more natural style for long-horizon investors, but even they
should add a dose of momentum or trend tilts that are complementary to
their core (pro-risk, pro-reversal) positions. Negative correlation is simply
too valuable a trait to ignore. At least momentum implies that long-horizon
investors can be patient when apparent value opportunities arise, delaying
part of their intended trading until the short-term momentum signal agrees
with the long-run value signal. They can leg into contrarian positions
gradually, keeping some ammunition until the market has turned.

However, even diversifying across negatively related styles can fail. For
example, both value and momentum had a bad decade in the 1930s and
both suffered sharp losses in August 2007. The latter episode reminds us of
overcrowding risk, which can make any strategy hurt—typically, following
persistent successes and excesses.

Box 29.2. Style diversification vs. asset class derivatives

As a simple exercise, I study combinations of four asset classes (U.S.
stocks, bonds, real estate, and funds of hedge funds) and the four
strategy styles reviewed in Chapters 12–15 (equity value, currency
carry, commodity trends, and volatility selling). Each composite is
rebalanced to equal weights every month between 1990 and 2009. The
asset class composite has greater market-directional risk: its
correlation with global equities is 0.80, compared with 0.27 for the
strategy style composite. The asset class composite also has average
correlation among its four components (0.30) than does the strategy
style composite (—0.05). Thanks to its superior diversification, the
strategy style composite has a double Sharpe ratio compared with its
constituents’ average Sharpe ratio (1.2 vs. 0.6). This simply reflects
the fact that with four uncorrelated strategies, portfolio volatility is
about half the constituents’ average volatility, consistent with the
fundamental law of active management (see Section 28.2.4). In
contrast, the asset class composite sees a much more modest volatility
reduction and Sharpe ratio increase.
This example focuses on diversification and deliberately steers away
from average returns (which happen to be higher for the strategy style
composite). Performance differences could reflect period-specific
tailwinds or headwinds as well as differing volatilities. More
importantly, the paper performance of strategy styles is more prone to
being overstated (due to overfitting or selection biases as well as
ignored or understated trading costs) than the paper performance of
asset classes.

Risk factor diversification. The standard approach to asset allocation,
which is to determine the nominal weights of asset classes, is gradually
giving way to risk budgeting, or allocating risk weights (contributions to
portfolio volatility). A more dramatic change will be to shift from allocating
nominal or risk weights across assets to allocating risk across underlying
risk factors.

The expected return and risk of a large portfolio is dominated by some
key risk factors. Even if the investment approach involves fundamental
bottom-up management (e.g., stock picking), or absolute return strategies
(e.g., hedge funds), total risk is often driven by top-down factor exposures.
Thus it is important to understand these exposures and to know whether
they are well rewarded and well diversified. I have argued that underlying
risk factors really determine the risk–reward tradeoff. The risk factors are
then 
mapped 
into 
asset 
and/or 
strategy 
weights. 
For 
example, 
both 
a
corporate bond and a small-cap stock reflect some exposures to growth,
inflation, illiquidity, and volatility—as well as to the premia associated with
these risks and characteristics.

I select these four factors, but stress that there is little consensus on the
number and identity of factors. Open questions also remain on mapping
between assets and risk factors (how one can best estimate the risk factor
exposures of a given asset, how stable the relations are, etc.). The factor
allocation approach has several advantages: it enables one to focus on the
primary return drivers, more effective diversification, and more effective
extraction of risk premia. Yet, it is less intuitive and less familiar to most
investors 
than 
traditional 
asset 
class 
allocation, 
raising 
meaningful
communication challenges. Thus, uptake of the risk factor approach may be
slow and may begin with only the most sophisticated investors.

...
29.3.7 Diversification vs. drawdown control

Even though the endowment model made alternative assets more popular
among institutional investors, some absolute return managers have been
critical of the model. One strand of criticism against the endowment model
is that it focuses excessively on equity-like asset classes and relies too
heavily on an illiquidity premium as a source of returns. Another strand
criticizes the model for having diversification as the only risk management
tool and for avoiding market timing. All these features contributed to sharp
drawdowns in endowment portfolios in 2008—though most absolute return
managers lost money as well.

More generally, absolute return managers argue that benchmark-oriented
managers pay too little heed to drawdown control. While benchmarks serve
useful roles for ex ante guidance (the neutral “viewless” portfolio) and are
the basis of ex post performance evaluation, they make it too easy to accept
large absolute losses that hamper long-run return compounding. In contrast,
absolute return investing centers on taking active market views while
managing risk to preserve capital. The absolute return approach may be
especially attractive when the world is in flux and facing structural changes,
with macro-uncertainty and regulatory upheavals.

Admittedly, controlling drawdowns by stop-loss rules or by lower risk
profiles 
comes 
at 
the 
expense 
of 
lower 
expected 
returns—unless 
the
manager exhibits skill in market timing or in creating cheap tail risk
insurance.

I find risk consciousness as important for active investors as return
seeking 
and 
cost 
consciousness. 
Drawdown 
control 
may 
be 
done
proactively or imposed from the outside (through regulatory calls or margin
calls); the former seems preferable. Institutions that reduced risks before the
fall of 2008 looked smart while those that did the same a few months later,
near the market bottom, now look foolish with hindsight. Yet, I would not
draw too broad a lesson from this experience because there was a real
chance of further market declines, which might have forced many holdouts
to capitulate later at even worse levels.

...
29.4 KNOW THYSELF: LARGE LONG-HORIZON
INVESTORS’ NATURAL EDGES

Investors should take into account their relative strengths and weaknesses.
Here are some specific suggestions for exploiting the long investment
horizon:
• harvesting illiquidity premia (e.g., infrastructure, non-city land);
• opportunistic insurance selling (against financial and natural
catastrophes);
• contrarian market timing and asset allocation;
• contracts designed to mitigate agency problems—among the
desired outcomes are making sure a delegated manager shares your
long horizon and making sure you get compensated for long lockups.

The above apply for pure asset portfolios. Liabilities have obvious horizon
implications: duration or cash flow matching between assets and liabilities.

Very large investors cannot be too active given their big footprint in the
market, nor can they make much difference to their bottom line by investing
in small, novel asset classes. For such investors, it is essential to get the
major asset class decisions right and to implement core beta portfolios in a
cost-effective manner:
• Being cost-effective does not necessarily mean market cap
weighting if non-cap weights are deemed to give a return advantage
sufficient to offset higher trading costs. But the larger weight an
investor has in the marketplace, the larger the market impact cost its
activity generates. It may be harder for large funds to deviate from
market cap weights.
• A clearly contrarian active timing or allocation strategy may be
possible, though, as there will be many investors on the other side.
Large AUM funds with a long horizon thus have a natural edge in
being opportunistic liquidity providers when capital is scarce.
• Despite capacity constraints, the largest and most resource-rich
institutions should diversify very broadly across asset classes and
strategies. This includes developing in-house competence in smaller
market segments that may grow, to give the investor the edge that
pioneers can have in growing markets.
• Large funds may have greater potential to be winners in the
active management game. Successful in-house management is feasible
but requires proper resources, governance, and incentivization.
• A smaller capital base has its benefits, and not just because it
enables exploiting opportunities in smaller markets without capacity
problems. Moreover, smaller funds can more easily lever up their
capital base and benefit from superior opportunities in low-volatility
assets, whereas super-sized funds may have to restrict themselves to
seeking excess returns from markets that are inherently volatile.
• For the largest investors, it is especially important to avoid
activities that are synchronous with those of other large players. One
way this can be accomplished is to use customized benchmarks. It is
also important for these investors to prevent their large flows from
being gamed by counterparties or by other market participants.
• A prerequisite for successful investment management in any
organization 
is 
getting 
the 
investment 
culture 
and 
governance
structures right. Without these, investing may yield substandard results
as well as organizational instability.

...
29.5 INSTITUTIONAL PRACTICES

As is well known, a typical U.S. pension fund assumes an 8% long-run
return for its portfolio. If bond yields are near 5%, and the portfolio is split
60/40 between stocks and bonds, the implicit expected return on equities is
10%. Many critics (rightly) point out that this long-run expectation is
unrealistic and we have not seen 5% yields in a while. Cynics argue that
expected returns are deliberately overstated because higher expected return
assumptions reduce the apparent present value of pension obligations (using
the dubious, but often legally mandated or at least accepted, practice of
using expected asset return as the discount rate for an associated liability).
Aggressive return assumptions improve pension plans’ funding ratio and
can help pension-sponsoring firms publish higher top-line earnings and
justify lower pension contributions.

Such pension accounting shenanigans were already under discussion a
decade ago when typical return assumptions were even more aggressive
(near 10%). Practices have thus improved, albeit slowly. Private pension
plans 
are 
hardly 
alone 
in 
engaging 
in 
such 
mischief. 
Overoptimistic
assumptions have long enabled public pension plans to avoid facing their
dire fiscal conditions [1].

Any fixed return targets for long-term returns can be criticized for
ignoring some of the most basic market realities, such as time variation in
inflation and ex ante real yields. For example, if investment portfolios over
the past 30 or 40 years have achieved an 8% average nominal return amidst
a 5% to 6% average realized inflation rate, it hardly follows that we can
extrapolate 
nominal 
returns 
further, 
given 
current 
expected 
long-run
inflation in the 2% to 3% range. Nominal targets are especially naive
because of the obviously time-varying nature of inflation, but even real
return targets should be reviewed occasionally because real rates and risk
premia also change over time. In any case, the problems caused by missed
real return targets are trivial compared with those caused by nominal
guarantees. More generally, a sense that “we need X% returns” irrespective
of market reality typically leads to excessive and ill-informed risk taking.

Institutional investors cannot analyze their assets’ expected returns and
risks in isolation. In reality, their decision making must take into account
their liabilities and regulatory constraints, as well as more nebulous issues:
peer comparisons and competitive pressures, prospects for bailouts and
regulatory 
forbearance, 
own 
governance 
structure, 
and 
non-financial
considerations 
(such 
as 
social 
responsibility 
and 
sustainability, 
or 
a
country’s desire to hedge its core revenue source or to ensure access to
strategically important resources). These topics require a book of their own
and are best left for future research, even if they can influence investor
behavior and thereby expected asset returns.

...
29.6 NOTES

[1] Separately, current U.S. law can be criticized on many grounds. The
discount rates for pension liabilities should not vary across institutions. In
fact, if pension liabilities are ironclad, they should be discounted using the
Treasury rate (assuming we still assign riskless status to Treasuries despite
the fiscal troubles). A lower discount rate would push many overfunded
pension plans to underfunded status—arguably making them face the reality
and, more generally, forcing society to deal with the pension time bomb.

Source 
notes. 
On 
investment 
lessons, 
see 
Swensen 
(2009), 
Ang–
Goetzmann–Schaefer (2009), Asness–Kabiller–Mendelson (2010), Drobny
(2010), and Leibowitz–Bova–Hammond (2010).

...
Appendix A

World wealth

This appendix reviews evidence on the relative sizes of various parts of
world wealth. A market’s size may indirectly influence its expected return;
smaller markets can be less liquid and create capacity concerns for large
investors, thus implying higher required returns. Any assessment of global
wealth is plagued by problems of definitions (which wealth categories to
include) and measurement (how to quantify values, how to treat leverage).
Let’s start with a simple story from major indices. At the end of 2009, the
size of global equity markets was $45 trillion and the size of global bond
markets was $40 trillion. But what about non-public equity and debt, cash
and money market instruments, real estate and infrastructure, durable goods
and other personal holdings, commodities and other resources, art and other
collectibles, 
convertibles 
and 
other 
hybrids, 
derivatives 
and 
structured
products? Most importantly, what about human capital? The challenges are
immense, as already highlighted in Ibbotson–Siegel–Love (1985), though
more manageable than when assessing the amount of capital allocated to
strategy styles:
• Investability is an important qualification. (i) Many important
parts of wealth are not included in this analysis because they are not
investable 
(or 
are 
illiquid 
and 
poorly 
measured). 
Some 
estimates
suggest that natural resources (e.g., oil underground), privately held
firms, and owner-occupied housing can each be worth tens of trillions
of dollars, and thus comparable in size with public equity or debt
markets. (ii) Securitization has in past decades made many previously
illiquid assets or income streams investable and liquid. Yet, for many
novel types of securitized debt this improvement proved ephemeral, as
“good-times liquidity” vanished in 2007–2008.
• What counts as net wealth? Among publicly traded assets, only
equity is unambiguously net wealth. Derivatives and debt are arguably
not net wealth but side bets that cancel out. Bonds and other debt
contracts are one party’s asset and another party’s liability. According
to Ricardian equivalence, even government bonds are net wealth only
if their value exceeds the present value of future tax liabilities. Larger
public debts do not make citizens wealthier as prospective taxes rise.
Along a similar line of thought, rising house prices may not raise a
society’s net wealth because the houseowners’ gain is offset by the
higher future cost of non-owners’ housing services.
• Performance vs. net issuance. I will not try to track world wealth
over time, but I remind the reader that any time series of market
capitalization evolves over time both due to asset returns and to net
issuance. For example, the fast growth of securitized assets or the
Chinese stock market capitalization in the past 20 years reflects more
new issuance than high returns. For equity investors it is important to
understand that existing investors of listed shares only benefit from
growth in current firms; historically, this includes less than half of
aggregate real earnings growth (see Sections 8.4.3 and 16.4.1).
• 
Some 
wealth 
classifications 
add 
up 
management 
vehicles
instead of assets: pension assets, insurance assets, mutual fund assets,
private equity, and hedge funds. How do SWFs (sovereign wealth
funds) 
and 
HNWIs 
(high-net-worth 
individuals) 
fit 
these
classifications? And should we treat PE, HF, and structured products as
wealth classes or management vehicles; the former choice may imply
double-counting?
Without being pedantic about definitions, I quote here some interesting
classifications and quantifications.
...
A.1 GLOBAL TOTAL

• McKinsey Global Institute (2009) reports the size of global
financial assets at $178 trillion ($194 trillion) at end-2008 (end-2007).
The main three parts are equities $34 trillion ($62 trillion), debt $83
trillion ($77 trillion)—of which $51 trillion is private debt and $32
trillion 
is 
government 
debt—and 
bank 
deposits 
$61 
trillion 
($56
trillion). The total had grown from $48 trillion in 1990 to $112 trillion
in 2000 and $155 trillion in 2005. Separarely, McKinsey estimates
global residential real estate market size to be $87 trillion at end-2008.
• For comparison, International Monetary Fund (2009) estimates
end-2008 financial assets at $214 trillion. This total comprised equities
$34 trillion, debt $84 trillion (private/public $52 trillion/$32 trillion),
and bank assets $98 trillion.
• Some assessments focus on the asset management vehicle rather
than final investments. Boston Consulting Group (2010) estimates
global (long-only) assets under professional management in 2009 at
$53 trillion, of which $32 trillion were institutional and $21 trillion
retail assets [1]. Alternative managers held much smaller AUM—HFs
near $2 trillion and PE funds a little less. SWFs held comparable
amounts, though the size would multiply if central bank reserves were
included.
• Yet other comparisons quantify the ultimate owner. Capgemini
(2010) estimates the wealth of HNWIs at $39 trillion in 2009, after $41
trillion in 2007 and $33 trillion in 2008. HNWI assets were split into
29% equities, 31% FI, 17% cash/deposits, 18% real estate, and 6%
alternatives. (Privately held enterprises and collectibles are excluded.)
• Many estimates involve double-counting (e.g., estimates of real
estate, infrastructure, or resources involve listed equities, while HFs
are net long equities). Most major equity indices nowadays adjust for
cross-holdings.
• 
Such 
estimates 
typically 
exclude 
derivative 
instruments.
Derivatives market notionals can be huge but misleading. Real risk
exposures 
and 
cash 
outlays 
are 
orders 
of 
magnitudes 
smaller,
especially 
after 
netting. 
Of 
the 
$532 
trillion 
notional 
amount 
of
financial 
instruments 
covered 
by 
OTC 
derivatives 
in 
June 
2008,
potential exposures to counterparties are estimated to be only $2.7
trillion. These exposures are further reduced by collateral held against
counterparty risk. Derivatives are best thought of as side bets.
...
A.2 ASSET CLASS DETAIL

• Publicly listed equities are arguably the most important part of
world wealth, least debatable, and most easily measured. (Even here
questions exist about cross-holdings, free float, and investability.) The
global market cap rose steadily from $30 trillion at end-2003, crossing
$50 trillion at end-2006, and peaking at $62 trillion in October 2007.
The market cap then halved over the next year, troughed at $26 trillion
in March 2009, before recovering to $45 trillion by the year end. (For
comparison, global GDP was $50 trillion to $60 trillion, but this
comparison mixes stock and flow variables.) The U.S. had about 30%
of world market cap, followed by 6% to 8% in each of Japan, China,
and the U.K.
• The share of emerging markets in global market capitalization
had risen from 2% in 1980 to 12% by end-2009. This share excluded
many 
emerging 
market 
stocks 
that 
remain 
inaccessible 
to 
global
investors and remains well below the 30% share of emerging countries
in global GDP.
• Privately held enterprises may, on aggregate, be as valuable as
publicly traded stocks. Vissing-Jorgensen–Moskowitz (2002) estimate
that in the 1990s nonpublicly held equity by U.S. entrepreneurs was
similar in size to the public equity market. Asian family enterprises,
German “Mittelstand”, and sovereign assets are global examples of
wealth not captured in listed equities, but I have not seen good
estimates. The values could be very high, but in any case these are not
investable.
• Combining major fixed income market indices, the global bond
markets amounted to $40.3 trillion in December 2009. Over half was
government or government-related debt; this share will likely increase
in coming years. The market value of all investment-grade bonds in
the BarCap Global Aggregate index was $35.2 trillion: $17.4 trillion
government, $5.3 trillion government related, $5.8 trillion corporates,
$6.7 trillion securitized (of which $5 trillion U.S. MBS). To this I add
smaller 
BarCap 
indices: 
global 
inflation-linked 
debt 
(mainly
government) $1.5 trillion, global high yield (mainly corporates) $1.1
trillion, and global emerging market debt $2.5 trillion (hard currency
debt $0.5 trillion and emerging local currency debt $2.0 trillion—much
of which may not be investable for foreigners).
• Other estimates of fixed income markets were twice as high,
$80 trillion to 90 trillion. The above BarCap indices do not include
money markets (debt with maximum maturity of 12 months), floating
rate debt, municipal bonds, or convertible bonds ($2 trillion and $0.2
trillion markets just in the U.S.), let alone the still huge segment of
unsecuritized bank loans.
• Real estate markets are huge but only a small segment is
investable. The most liquid segment—listed REITs and global property
stocks—amounted to less than $1 trillion, while the U.S. real estate
market alone totaled $34 trillion. Francis–Ibbotson (2009) estimate
$18 trillion residential and $16 trillion commercial real estate in the
U.S. McKinsey Global Institute (2009) estimates higher numbers,
likely using a different classification: the U.S. residential real estate
market peaked at over $30 trillion in 2006 and the global market
peaked at $91 trillion in 2007 (doubling in size since 1996, losing
“only” $3.4 trillion in 2008).
• Some estimate the global infrastructure market at $8 trillion, but
this presumably is largely listed equities. Among other alternative
assets, the hedge fund and private equity fund markets were largest
(near $2 trillion each). Commodity funds have grown fast but their
assets amounted to only about $0.25 trillion, a fraction of the size of
listed natural resource companies or of privately held or sovereign-
held natural resources.
...
A.3 NOTES

[1] The largest groups in the institutional category were $17 trillion pension
assets and $8 trillion insurance assets. Assets managed for retail included
mutual 
funds 
($10 
trillion), 
unit-linked 
pensions 
and 
insurance 
($6.5
trillion), and private banking ($4.5 trillion). Ineichen (2008) quotes higher
estimates: $62 trillion managed by traditional long-only institutions, of
which $23 trillion managed by pension funds, $22 trillion by mutual funds,
and $17 trillion by insurance firms.
Source 
notes. 
On 
estimating 
world 
wealth, 
see 
Ibbotson–Siegel–Love
(1985) 
and 
Ibbotson–Brinson 
(1993) 
for 
earlier 
efforts 
and 
McKinsey
Global Institute (2009) for a recent one.
...
Appendix B

Data sources and data-series construction

This appendix discusses the sources and construction of the various time
series used in this book. In the main text, I list sources briefly beneath
figure and table captions.
Most underlying data series are extracted from Bloomberg, including
MSCI Barra’s equity indices, Barclays Capital and other banks’ bond
indices, and S&P GSCI commodity futures indices. Other key sources
include 
Kenneth 
French’s 
website 
(visit
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html),
Robert Shiller’s website (visit http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm),
Arnott–Bernstein 
(2002), 
Dimson–Marsh–Staunton 
(2002, 
2010), 
and
Ibbotson Associates (Morningstar) yearbooks.
To create long data histories for major asset classes, I sometimes splice
best quality recent data and best available older data series. Most exhibits
display total returns denominated in U.S. dollars; but some exhibits show
real 
(inflation-adjusted) 
returns 
or 
excess 
returns 
over 
cash 
or 
over
maturity/duration-matched Treasuries.
I especially thank Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton for the
use of their 110-year-long return histories and Robert Arnott for even older
data used in Arnott–Bernstein (2002). I am grateful to Michael Afreh
(Nomura), Andrew Ang, David Blitz (Robeco), Giuliano de Rossi (UBS),
Eric Falkenstein, Kenneth Froot, Robin Greenwood, Campbell Harvey,
Sharon Kozicki, Carmen Reinhart, Matti Suominen, Arthur Warga, and
Mungo Wilson for sending me some of their research data. I also thank
Professors 
Kenneth 
French, 
Morris 
Davis, 
Amit 
Goyal, 
Lubos 
Pastor,
Robert Shiller, Stephen Wilcox, and Jeffrey Wurgler for data available on
their websites. Finally, a few graphs are directly extracted from other works,
as credited below them: Figures 9.8 Rosenberg–Maurer, 17.4 Reinhart–
Rogoff, 18.1 Hasbrouck, 18.2 Naes–Skjeltorp–Odegaard, 19.7 Buraschi–
Kosowski–Trojani, 19.9 Frazzini–Pedersen, 27.6 Reinhart–Rogoff.
...
B.1 ASSET CLASS AND SECTOR RETURNS

For global equity market returns, I use MSCI Barra monthly data for
developed markets since 1970 and for emerging markets since 1988. For
longer histories, I use Dimson–Marsh–Staunton (2002, 2010) annual returns
dating back to 1900 for developed markets and to 1976 for emerging
markets.
For U.S. equity returns (i.e., value-weighted market index; value, size,
momentum, and other style portfolios; as well as industry portfolios) I use
data from Kenneth French’s website, dating back to 1926. This is also the
source for global value style portfolios and the one-month Treasury bill
rate. For certain analyses I use stock price, dividend yield, and earnings
yield series since 1871 from Robert Shiller’s website. For the longest
histories (U.S. market returns back to 1802), I use Arnott–Bernstein (2002)
data, which in turn is a composite of data from Professor G.W. Schwert
(pre-1871 data), Ibbotson Associates, and First Quadrant; I extend 2000s’
data using S&P 500 total returns. Some volatility and correlation analyses
are based on S&P 500 daily returns.
For U.S. Treasury returns and yields, I combine data from the Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP) since 1952 and Bank of America
Merrill Lynch (ML) Treasury index subsector data since 1978. (Since
maturity 
subsectors 
differ 
somewhat 
between 
CRSP 
and 
ML, 
some
interpolation is needed. Given the very high correlations between adjacent
maturity Treasury returns, this should not distort the results.) I also use
Ibbotson Associates’ long (20-year) Treasury return and yield as well as the
one-month Treasury bill rate since 1926. For earlier histories, I use data
from Arnott–Bernstein (2002) and my own compilations. Data series before
1926 are almost always based on Homer–Sylla’s (1991) yield histories, and
often 
are 
based 
on 
high-grade 
municipal 
bond, 
corporate 
bond, 
or
commercial paper series, given the absence of default-free Treasury yield
histories. More recent daily yield histories are from Bloomberg.
For global government bond returns, I use Dimson–Marsh–Staunton
(2002, 2010) data for currency-unhedged returns since 1900 and Citigroup
(formerly 
Salomon 
Brothers) 
world 
government 
bond 
index 
data 
for
currency-hedged returns since 1985.
For other fixed income returns and yields, the main source is Barclays
Capital (BarCap, formerly Lehman Brothers) indices: investment-grade,
Treasury, credit, and other sectors since the 1970s, as well as the high-yield
index since the 1980s. These data are partly sourced via Bloomberg, partly
via the Barclays Capital website. In early years only total returns and yield-
to-worst measures are available (much of it based on Arthur Warga’s
pioneering research on early Lehman index data); they are linked to roughly
maturity-matched Treasury subsectors to compute ex post excess returns
and ex ante credit spreads. Since 1988–1989, I use better quality duration-
adjusted excess returns and option-adjusted spreads (both over Treasuries).
For certain rating/maturity subsector portfolios I use Citigroup and Merrill
Lynch index data, but broad results are similar to BarCap/Lehman index
data. Before Lehman indices became available, I use Ibbotson Associates’
corporate bond returns (AAA/AA-rated long-dated bonds) for investment-
grade bonds (since 1926). To proxy for high-yield bond returns from 1953
to the 1970s, I use a time series of low-quality (Baa and lower) bond returns
that I got in grad school 20 years ago, which apparently was compiled by
Roger Ibbotson in 1979 (no surprise!). For old corporate yields I use
Moody’s yields of seasoned, long-dated non-financial corporate bonds since
1919.
For emerging market debt, I use J.P. Morgan’s “EMBI Global” index
returns since 1994, extending the series to 1990–1993 by using Citigroup’s
Brady bond index data.
Sovereign CDS spreads are from Bloomberg.
For convertible bonds, I use Merrill Lynch’s U.S. convertible bond index
returns since the late-1980s.
For direct real estate in the U.S., my preferred index is the MIT-CRE
“transactionsbased” index since 1984 which uses NCREIF data but in a
smarter way. The NCREIF index and its sector subsets date back to 1978.
For listed real estate, I use the FTSE NAREIT composite index since 1972
and 
Global 
Property 
Research’s 
global 
property 
stocks 
index 
(and 
its
regional subsets) since 1984. For longer histories, I use the house price
series compiled by Robert Shiller (annual data back to 1890 on his website),
house price and rental yield data (back to 1960) collected by Davis–
Lehnert–Martin (2008), data are located at Land and Property Values in the
U.S. 
(Lincoln 
Institute 
of 
Land 
Policy, 
visit
http://www.lincolninst.edu/resources/). (The latter series may not subtract
lumpy capex-form net rents and thus may overstate investor returns.) In
Chapter 3, I use estimates of 1960s’ and 1970s’ annual real estate returns
from Dimson (2004): 6.5% and 10.1 %, respectively.
For infrastructure, I use the UBS Global Infrastructure and Utilities
(listed stock) index since 1990 as a proxy.
For timber, I use quarterly data since 1987 from the NCREIF website.
For art price indices, I use Art Market Research data since 1976 and
artprice.com data since 1990.
For commodity futures returns, I mainly use the S&P GSCI commodity
index and its subsectors, dating back to the 1970s. For longer spot price
histories I use oil price data from Knut Kjaer (1900), gold price data from
Bloomberg (1920), and the Commodity Research Bureau’s (CRB) index
data (1957). In Chapter 3, I approximate 1960s’ commodity returns by the
sum of CRB spot index changes and Treasury bill returns. I also use self-
collected total returns and roll return series for single-commodity futures.
For hedge fund returns (and funds of funds, and subsectors), I mainly use
indices from Hedge Fund Research since 1990 but also compare it with
indices from Dow Jones Credit Suisse since 1994.
For private equity and venture capital fund returns, I use Cambridge
Associates’ benchmark indices dating back to the 1980s. Quarterly indices
are based on internal rates of returns. For listed private equity firms’
performance I use the LPX 50 index since 1994.
...
B.2 STRATEGY STYLE RETURNS

Value. Simulated long–short equity portfolio returns based on sorting stocks
by 
the 
book/price 
(as 
well 
as 
cash 
flow/price, 
dividend/price, 
and
earnings/price) ratios. Data are from Professor Kenneth French’s website.
Some analysis focuses on the U.S. book/ price factor portfolio, called
“value minus growth” (VMG) or “high minus low” (HML), others on a
four-indicator composite. A global composite is the broadest value proxy I
use, based on four U.S. indicators (since 1926, some start only in 1952) and
four non-U.S. indicators (since 1975, extended with MSCI Barra data for
2008–2009). The ex post value outperformance and ex ante value spread in
Figure 12.4 for raw and sector-neutral strategies since 1990 are from
Giuliano De Rossi at UBS, who uses high-minuslow spreads after sorting
U.S. Russell 3000 stocks each month into three tritiles.
Other equity trading style factors from Kenneth French’s website include
the size premium SMB (outperformance of small-cap vs. large-cap stocks),
the momentum proxy MOM (outperformance of stocks with relatively high
returns 
over 
the 
past 
year, 
excluding 
last 
month), 
short-term 
reversal
STREV (outperformance of stocks with relatively low returns during the
past month), and long-term reversal LTREV (outperformance of stocks with
relatively low returns between 12 and 60 months ago). All of these style
factors are based on long–short portfolios across a broad universe of U.S.
stocks. Details on these factors as well as on style and industry portfolios
are available on Kenneth French’s website. I use the popular FF factors and
sorted 
portfolio 
returns 
near 
the 
top 
of 
the 
page 
(visit
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/ data_library.html).
Professor French advised using these “research returns” instead of the
“historical benchmark returns” near the bottom of the page, which are
constructed in a somewhat different fashion.)
Carry. 
Simulated 
currency 
carry 
strategies 
are 
based 
on 
my 
own
compilations using G10 spot exchange rates and one-month deposit rates
(and extending back to other available money market rates in the 1970s).
The base case strategy each week buys the top-three G10 currencies with
the highest yields and sells the bottom-three with the lowest yields. The
composite carry index also includes an emerging currency carry strategy, a
fixed income carry strategy across G10 markets based on relative curve
steepness, and a credit carry basket. Data are mainly from Bloomberg.
Trend. Simulated commodity momentum strategies are based on self-
collected commodity futures return series since 1990 and earlier on the
Mount Lucas Management Commodities trend index. This composite trend
style index applies a simple trend-following rule each week on commodity
futures, equity country futures, bond/rate futures, and foreign exchange
forwards: go long (short) if the current price is above (below) the 12-month
moving average. Data are mainly from Bloomberg.
Volatility. Volatility-selling returns are based on the simulated Merrill
Lynch Equity Volatility Arbitrage Index since 1989, which tries to gain
from 
the 
typically 
positive 
gap 
between 
market-implied 
volatility 
and
subsequent realized volatility of the S&P 500 index’s Bloomberg ticker
MLHFEV1 index. Chapter 15 also analyzes the simulated covered-call-
writing indices and put-writing indices (BXM, BXY, PUT in Bloomberg)
on the S&P 500 index from the Chicago Board of Exchange, dating back to
the 1980s. These indices are not delta neutral so their returns reflect market-
directional exposures as much as volatility exposures.
Data 
on 
volatility-sorted 
stock 
portfolios 
are 
from 
Andrew 
Ang
(Columbia 
University), 
David 
Blitz 
(Robeco), 
and 
Giuliano 
De 
Rossi
(UBS).
Importantly, no trading costs have been subtracted from any of the
strategy style returns.
...
B.3 FACTOR PROXIES

Growth. Monthly change in the consensus forecast of U.S. real GDP growth
over the next year, based on a survey by Consensus Economics.
Inflation. Monthly change in the consensus forecast of U.S. consumer
price inflation rate over the next year, based on a survey by Consensus
Economics.
Illiquidity. Monthly change in the Bank of England Liquidity Index, with
sign flipped, and extended by proxy series in 1990–1991 and 2009 (Citi
liquidity index). The Bank of England index is a composite based on
several normalized liquidity-related series: bid–ask spreads in bond, FX and
stock markets, return-to-volume ratios for individual stocks as well as for
bond and stock markets, and yield spreads in corporate bond and money
markets. Bank of England (2007) states: “The liquidity index shows the
number of standard deviations from the mean. It is a simple unweighted
average of nine liquidity measures, normalised on the period 1999–2004.
The 
series 
shown 
is 
an 
exponentially 
weighted 
moving 
average. 
The
indicator is more reliable after 1997 as it is based on a greater number of
underlying measures.”
Volatility. Monthly change in the VIX index of implied volatilities in
S&P 500 equity index options.
...
B.4 FORWARD-LOOKING YIELDS AND SPREADS

The main equity market yields I use are the smoothed real earnings yield
(10-year average earnings divided by price, adjusted for inflation), standard
trailing earnings yield, and dividend yield from Robert Shiller’s website.
The operating 
earnings yield 
is from 
Standard & Poor’s 
website, 
the
adjusted earnings yield in Wilcox (2007) is from Stephen Wilcox’s website.
Net buyback yields and M&A yields are from Nomura Securities.
Rental yields for U.S. housing are from Davis–Lehnert–Martin (2008);
data are located at Land and Property Values in the U.S. (Lincoln Institute
of Land Policy, visit http://www.lincolninst.edu/resources/). The cap rate
series for U.S. commercial real estate is from the NCREIF.
I have already described bond yield sources above under “Asset class and
sector returns”. In particular, the real yields in Figure 2.7 are Moody’s long-
dated Baa yield and Ibbotson Associates’ 20-year Treasury yield minus the
expected long-term inflation rate described below. Liquidity spreads in
Figure 10.8 are from J.P. Morgan and Bloomberg. Ex ante value spreads for
equity long–short value strategy in Figure 12.4 are from Giuliano De Rossi
(UBS). 
Money 
market 
rates 
in 
Figure 
3.12 
and 
Table 
3.5 
are 
from
Bloomberg and the St. Louis Fed website, while some yield curve analysis
is based on data from the Federal Reserve Board website.
The ex ante equity premium is equity yield (measured by some variant of
market earnings yield) and Treasury yield (long-dated or short-dated). The
survey-based 
bond 
risk 
premium 
is 
the 
market 
yield 
(of 
the 
10-year
Treasury) minus the consensus forecast of short-term rates over the life of
the bond. Credit spread is the difference between corporate bond yield and
the somehow matching Treasury yield, preferably adjusted for embedded
options. The break-even inflation rate (BEI) is the difference between
nominal Treasury yield and a matching inflation-linked bond (TIPs) yield.
The “net illiquidity premium vs. inflation premium” in Figure 17.9 is the
difference between the survey-based long-term inflation forecast and the
BEI.
...
B.5 SURVEY DATA AND EXPECTED INFLATION

Consensus forecast returns on asset returns are from several survey sources:
UBS Gallup poll, Duke University CFO survey, University of Michigan
consumer confidence survey, Merrill Lynch fund manager poll, Survey of
Professional Investors, and academic surveys by Ivo Welch and Pablo
Fernandez. 
Analysts’ 
earnings 
forecasts 
are 
from 
Credit 
Suisse.
Economists’ forecasts of future growth are from Blue Chip Economic
Indicators.
Economists’ forecasts of future U.S. inflation rates, to construct ex ante
real yield series, are based on several survey sources (see below). Forecasts
of inflation outside the U.S. are from Consensus Economics and private
compilations.
Economists’ forecasts of future Treasury bill rates, to construct survey-
based bond risk premium series, are mainly based on Blue Chip Economic
Indicators, but also Goldsmith–Nagan (courtesy Kenneth Froot), Wall Street
Journal, and Consensus Economics.
The expected long-term inflation series, which is displayed in Figure
17.5 and used in various places, is a spliced series and the most reasonable
history I could come up with. Obviously, sources get better over time;
distant histories can only be estimated statistically. I describe my series
construction in some detail.
Actual survey data on long-term inflation start in 1978, with Hoey
(private collection later passed to the Fed), the Livingston survey and the
Survey of Professional Investors (both available at the Philly Fed website),
Blue Chip Economic Indicators, and Consensus Economics who conduct
surveys at different times. I take an average of two to three available
surveys over the past 30 years.
Between 
1955 
and 
1978 
I 
use 
the 
statistical 
estimate 
of 
long-term
inflation 
expectations 
by 
Kozicki–Tinsley 
(2006). 
Their 
“Survey-based
estimates of the term structure of expected U.S. inflation” goes beyond an
exponentially weighted average of past inflation rates because it also uses
information 
in 
consensus 
forecasts 
of 
next 
year 
inflation. 
Short-term
inflation forecasts in the 
Livingston survey date back 
to about 
1950.
(Fortunately, the contours of these statistical estimates nicely match those of
available long-term consensus forecasts during the overlapping period after
1978.)
Before 1955 I use my own statistical estimates, combining two simple
methodologies:
• One just takes a weighted average of past 10-year inflation rates,
with gradually declining weights. Until the U.S. abandoned the gold
standard in 1933 I average this time series estimate with zero (thereby
anchoring the inflation forecast), based on the idea that during the gold
standard inflations and deflations were equally likely to occur and not
likely to become sustained.
• Another regresses next decade inflation on past decade inflation
and 
uses 
the 
fitted 
value 
as 
the 
expected 
inflation 
estimate.
Coefficients 
are 
re-estimated 
each 
year 
with 
new 
data 
using 
an
expanding window that begins in 1871. This approach has very few
independent observations; so I only start it in the 1930s.
Both approaches give broadly similar contours for inflation expectations.
Later 
evidence 
suggests 
that 
survey 
expectations 
tend 
to 
be 
adaptive
(reflecting past inflation experience, with declining weights). However, it
seems reasonable that knowledge of the gold standard and experience of
near-zero inflation over very long histories anchored expectations better at
zero until the gold standard was abandoned.
...
B.6 MISCELLANEOUS OTHER

The illiquidity estimates in Table 2.1, Figure 2.2, and Figure 18.4 are based
on subjective assessments for each asset class on a scale from 1 to 5. When
making these assessments I got some help from multi-asset-class experts at
the giant Dutch pension fund asset manager APG.
Consumer price inflation (CPI) histories are from Bloomberg and Haver
Analytics. Longer histories are from Robert Shiller’s website and Arnott–
Bernstein (2002). In Figure 3.10, Table 3.6, and Table 3.7 all asset returns
are deflated using the CPI, except for ex ante 10-year real Treasury yield,
which is based on expected long-term inflation.
Real 
GDP 
growth 
(and 
GDP-per-capita 
growth) 
series 
are 
from
Bloomberg and Haver Analytics. Longest histories—U.S. data going back
to 1802—are from Arnott–Bernstein (2002).
Most stock market predictors in Table 8.6 are sourced from the Haver
Analytics, Amit Goyal, and Robert Shiller websites, as well as from Mungo
Wilson. Bond market predictors in Tables 9.3 and 10.4 are from Cochrane–
Piazzesi 
(bond 
risk 
premium), 
Kim–Wright 
(bond 
risk 
premium),
Greenwood–Vayanos (debt maturity share), the Chicago Fed (CFNAI or
Chicago Fed National Activity Index), Consensus Economics (expected
fiscal balance), Bloomberg (VIX and MOVE implied volatility indices for
stocks and Treasuries), and other macro-data from Haver Analytics.
The default rates in Chapter 10 are from Moody’s (2010).
...
Bibliography

Acharya, 
Viral 
V.; 
Yakov 
Amihud; 
and 
Sreedhar 
T. 
Bharath 
(2010),
“Liquidity risk of corporate bond returns,” New York University Stern
School 
of 
Business 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1612287

Acharya, Viral; and Lasse H. Pedersen (2005), “Asset pricing with liquidity
risk,” Journal of Financial Economics 77, 375–410.

Adrian, Tobias; Emanuel Moench; and Hyun Song Shin (2010), “Financial
intermediation, 
asset 
prices 
and 
macroeconomic 
dynamics,” 
Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report 422.

Agarwal, Vikas; Gurdip S. Bakshi; and Joop Huij (2007), “Do higher-
moment equity risks explain hedge fund returns?” Robert H. Smith School,
Research 
Paper 
06-066 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1108635

Agarwal, Vikas; Naveen Daniel; and Narayan Y. Naik (2009) “Role of
managerial incentives and discretion in hedge fund performance,” Journal
of Finance 64, 2221–2256.

Aggarwal, Rajesh K.; and Philippe Jorion (2008), “The performance of
emerging 
hedge 
fund 
managers,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1103215

AIMR (2002), “Proceedings of equity risk premium forum,” Association
for 
Investment 
Management 
and 
Research 
(AIMR) 
and 
TIAA-CREF,
available at http://www.cfapubs.org/toc/cp.1/2002/7/

Akerlof, George A.; and Robert J. Shiller (2009), Animal Spirits: How
Human Psychology Drives the Economy, and Why It Matters for Global
Capitalism, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Allen, Franklin; and Roni Michaely (2003), “Payout policy,” in Handbook
of the Economics of Finance (G. M. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. M.
Stulz, Eds., First Edition, Vol. 1(7), pp. 337–429), Elsevier.
Amenc, Noel; and Felix Goltz (2008), “Revisiting the limits of hedge fund
indices: 
A 
comparative 
approach,” 
Journal 
of 
Alternative 
Investments
10(4), 50–63.

Amenc, Noel; Lionel Martellini; and Volker Ziemann (2009), “Inflation-
hedging 
properties 
of 
real 
assets 
and 
implications 
for 
asset–liability
management decisions,” Journal of Portfolio Management 35(4), 94–110.

Amihud, Yakov (2002), “Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and
time-series effects,” Journal of Financial Markets 5(1), 31–56.

Amihud, 
Yakov; 
and 
Ruslan 
Goyenko 
(2010), 
“Mutual 
fund’s 
R
2

as
predictor of performance,” New York University working paper FIN-08-
046, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/ abstract = 1354533

Amihud, Yakov; and Heim Mendelson (1986), “Asset pricing and the bid–
ask spread,” Journal of Financial Economics 17(2), 223–249.

Amihud, Yakov; and Haim Mendelson (1991), “Liquidity, maturity, and the
yields on U.S. Treasury securities,” Journal of Finance 46, 141–125.

Amihud, 
Yakov; 
Haim 
Mendelson; 
and 
Lasse 
H. 
Pedersen 
(2005),
“Liquidity and asset prices,” Foundations and Trends in Finance 1(4), 269–
364.

Ammann, Manuel; Otto R. Huber; and Markus M. Schmid (2010), “Hedge
fund characteristics and performance persistence,” working paper, available
at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/ abstract = 1650232.

Amromin, Gene; and Steven A. Sharpe (2009), “Expectations of risk and
return among household investors: Are their Sharpe ratios countercyclical?”
working paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1327134

Ang, Andrew; Turan G. Bali; and Nusret Cakici (2010), “The joint cross
section 
of 
stocks 
and 
options 
(March 
1, 
2010),” 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1533089

Ang, Andrew; and Geert Bekart (2002), “International asset allocation with
regime shifts,” Review of Financial Studies 15, 1137–1187.

Ang, Andrew; and Nicolas P.B. Bollen (2008), “Locked up by a lockup:
Valuing liquidity as a real option,” working paper, available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1291842
Ang, Andrew; and Joseph S. Chen (2010), “Yield curve predictors of
foreign 
exchange 
returns,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1542342

Ang, Andrew; William N. Goetzmann; and Stephen M. Schaefer (2009),
“Evaluation of active management of the Norwegian Government Pension
Fund—Global,” report, available at http://www.regjeringen.no

Ang, 
Andrew; 
and 
Monika 
Piazzesi 
(2003), 
“A 
no-arbitrage 
vector
autoregression of term structure dynamics with macroeconomic and latent
variables,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(4), 745–787.

Ang, Andrew; Robert Hodrick; Yuhang Xing; and Xiaoyan Zhang (2006),
“The cross-section of volatility and expected returns,” Journal of Finance
61, 259–299.

Ang, Andrew; Robert Hodrick; Yuhang Xing; and Xiaoyan Zhang (2009),
“High idiosyncratic volatility and low returns: International and further U.S.
evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics 91, 1–23.

Anson, Mark J.P. (2006), Handbook of Alternative Assets (2nd Edition),
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Aragon, George O. (2007), “Share restrictions and asset pricing: Evidence
from the hedge fund industry,” Journal of Financial Economics 83, 33–58.

Arnott, Robert D.; and Peter L. Bernstein (2002), “What risk premium is
‘normal’?” Financial Analysts Journal 58(2), 64–85.

Arnott, Robert D.; Jason C. Hsu; and Philip Moore (2005), “Fundamental
indexation,” Financial Analysts Journal, 61(2), 83–99.

Arnott, 
Robert 
D.; 
Jason 
C. 
Hsu; 
and 
John 
M. 
West 
(2008), 
The
Fundamental Index: A Better Way to Invest, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.

Arnott, Robert; Vitali Kalesnik; Paul Moghtader; and Craig Scholl (2010),
“Beyond cap weight: The empirical evidence for a diversified beta,” Journal
of Indexes (January/February).

Arora, Amitabh; David K. Heike; and Ravi K. Mattu (2000), “Risk and
return in the mortgage market: Review and outlook,” Journal of Fixed
Income 10(1), 5–18.
Asness, Clifford S. (2000), “Stocks vs. bonds: Explaining the equity risk
premium,” Financial Analysts Journal 56(2), 96–113.

Asness, Clifford S. (2003), “Fight the Fed model: The relationship between
stock market yields, bond market yields, and future returns,” Journal of
Portfolio Management 30(1), 11–24.

Asness, Clifford S. (2004), “An alternative future: An exploration of the
role of hedge funds,” Journal of Portfolio Management 30th Anniversary
Issue 30(5), 94–103.

Asness, Clifford S.; David Kabiller; and Michael Mendelson (2010), “Using
derivatives and leverage to improve portfolio performance,” Institutional
Investor (May 13, 2010).

Asness, Clifford S.; Robert Krail; and John M. Liew (2001), “Do hedge
funds hedge?” Journal of Portfolio Management 28, 6–19.

Asness, Clifford S.; John M. Liew; and Ross L. Stevens (1997), “Parallels
between the cross-sectional predictability of stock and country returns,”
Journal of Portfolio Management 23, 79–87.

Asness, Clifford S.; Tobias J. Moskowitz; and Lasse H. Pedersen, (2009),
“Value and momentum everywhere,” AQR Capital Management working
paper.

Asness, Clifford S.; Jacques A. Friedman; Robert J. Krail; and John M.
Liew (2000), “Style timing: Value versus growth,” Journal of Portfolio
Management 26(3), 50–60.

Avramov, Doron; Robert Kosowski; Narayan Y. Naik; and Melvyn Teo
(2009), “Hedge funds, managerial skill, and macroeconomic variables,”
forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.

Avramov, Doron; Tarun Chordia; Gergana Jostova; and Alexander Philipov
(2010), “Anomalies and financial distress,” working paper, available at
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1593728

Bacchetta, 
Philippe; 
Elmar 
Mertens; 
and 
Eric 
van 
Wincoop 
(2009),
“Predictability in financial markets: What do survey expectations tell us?”
Journal of International Money and Finance 28(3), 406–426.
Backus, David; and Jonathan Wright (2007), “Cracking the conundrum,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 293–316.

Baker, 
Malcolm; 
Brendan 
Bradley; 
and 
Jeffrey 
Wurgler 
(2010),
“Benchmarks 
as 
limits 
to 
arbitrage: 
Understanding 
the 
low 
volatility
anomaly,” forthcoming in the Financial Analysts Journal.

Baker, Malcolm; and Jeffrey Wurgler (2006), “Investor sentiment and the
cross-section of stock returns,” Journal of Finance 61, 1645–1680.

Baldacci, Emanuele; and Manmothan S. Kumar (2010), “Fiscal deficits,
public debt, and sovereign bond yields,” IMF working paper 10/184.

Bali, Turan G.; Nusret Cakici; and Robert F. Whitelaw (2010), “Maxing
out: 
Stocks 
as 
lotteries 
and 
the 
cross-section 
of 
expected 
returns,”
forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.

Ball, Ray (2009), “The global financial crisis and the efficient market
hypothesis: What have we learned?” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance,
21(4), 8–16.

Bank Credit Analyst (2009), “More thoughts on the debt supercycle: The
final inning?” Bank Credit Analyst 60(9), 21–31.

Bank of England (2007), “Financial market liquidity,” Bank of England
Financial Stability Report 21, April 2007 (Box 2).

Bansal, Ravi; and Amir Yaron (2004), “Risks for the long run: A potential
resolution of asset pricing puzzles,” Journal of Finance 59(4), 1481–1509.

Barberis, Nicholas; and Ming Huang (2001), “Mental accounting, loss
aversion, and individual stock returns,” Journal of Finance 56, 1247–1292.

Barberis, Nicholas; and Ming Huang (2008), “Stocks as lotteries: The
implications 
of 
probability 
weighting 
for 
security 
prices,” 
American
Economic Review 98 (December), 2066–2100.

Barberis, Nicholas; Ming Huang; and Tano Santos (2001), “Prospect theory
and asset prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1–53.

Barberis, Nicholas; and Andrei Shleifer (2003), “Style investing,” Journal
of Financial Economics 68, 161–199.
Barberis, Nicholas; Andrei Shleifer; and Robert Vishny (1998), “A model
of investor sentiment,” Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307–345.

Barberis, 
Nicholas; 
Andrei 
Shleifer; 
and 
Jeffrey 
Wurgler 
(2005),
“Comovement,” Journal of Financial Economics 75, 283–317.

Barberis, Nicholas; and Richard H. Thaler (2003), “A survey of behavioral
finance,” in Handbook of the Economics of Finance (G. Constantinides, R.
Stulz, M. Harris, Eds.), Amsterdam: North Holland.

Barro, Robert J. (1995), “Inflation and economic growth,” NBER working
paper 5326.

Barro, Robert J. (2006), “Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth
century,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(3), 823–866.

Barro, Robert J.; and José F. Ursúa (2008), “Macroeconomic crises since
1870,” NBER working paper, 13940.

Beber, 
Alessandro; 
Francis 
Breedon; 
and 
Andrea 
Buraschi 
(2010),
“Differences in beliefs and currency risk premia,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 98, 415–438.

Bekaert, Geert; and Eric C. Engstrom (2010), “Inflation and the stock
market: Understanding the ‘Fed model’,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
57(3), 278–294.

Bekaert, 
Geert; 
and 
Xiaozheng 
Wang 
(2010), 
“Inflation 
risk 
and 
the
inflation risk premium,” Economic Policy, 25, 755–806.

Benartzi, Shlomo; and Richard Thaler (1995), “Myopic loss aversion and
the equity premium puzzle,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 75–92.

Benzoni, Luca; Pierre Collin-Dufresne; and Robert S. Goldstein (2010),
“Explaining asset pricing puzzles associated with the 1987 market crash,”
working paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1543467

Ben-Rephael, Azi; Ohad Kadan; and Avi Wohl (2009) “The diminishing
liquidity 
premium,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract = 1099829

Berge, Klaus; Giorgio Consigli; and William T. Ziemba (2008), “The
predictive ability of the bond stock earnings yield differential,” Journal of
Portfolio Management 34(3), 63–80.
Berger, Adam; David Kabiller; and Brian Crowell (2008), “Is alpha just
beta waiting to be discovered?” AQR Capital Management Whitepaper,
Summer 2008.

Berk, Jonathan B.; and Richard C. Green (2004), “Mutual fund flows and
performance in rational markets,” Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269–
1295.

Bernstein, 
Peter 
L. 
(1991), 
Capital 
Ideas: 
The 
Improbable 
Origins 
of
Modern Wall Street, New York: Free Press.

Bernstein, Peter L. (2007), Capital Ideas Evolving, Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Bernstein, William J. (2002), The Four Pillars of Investing: Lessons for
Building a Winning Portfolio, New York: McGraw Hill.

Bernstein, William J. (2009), The Investor’s Manifesto: Preparing 
for
Prosperity, Armageddon, and Everything Between, Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Bernstein, William J.; and Robert D. Arnott (2003), “Earnings growth: The
two percent dilution,” Financial Analysts Journal 59(5), 47–55.

Bernstein, William J.; and David J. Wilkinson (1997), “Diversification,
rebalancing, and the geometric mean frontier,” working paper.

Best, 
Peter; 
Alistair 
Byrne; 
and 
Antti 
Ilmanen 
(1998), 
“What 
really
happened 
to 
U.S. 
bond 
yields?” 
Financial 
Analysts 
Journal, 
54(3),
May/June, 41–49.

Bhansali, 
Vineer; 
Robert 
Gingrich; 
and 
Francis 
A. 
Longstaff 
(2008),
“Systemic credit risk: What is the market telling us?” Financial Analysts
Journal 64 (July/August), 16–24.

Bhardwaj, Geetesh; Gary B. Gorton; and K. Geert Rouwenhorst (2008),
“Fooling some of the people all of the time: The inefficient performance
and persistence of commodity trading advisors,” ICF working paper 08-21,
Yale University.

Bhojraj, Sanjeev; and Bhaskaran Swaminathan (2006), “Macromomentum:
Returns predictability in international equity indices,” Journal of Business
79(1), 429–451.
Bilson, John (1993), “Value, yield and trend: A composite forecasting
approach to FX trading,” in Strategic Currency Investing (Andrew Gitlin,
Ed.), Chicago, IL: Probus Publishing.

Black, 
Fischer 
(1972), 
“Capital 
market 
equilibrium 
with 
restricted
borrowing,” Journal of Business 45(3), July, 444–455.

Black, Fischer; and Myron S. Scholes (1973), “The pricing of options and
corporate liabilities,” Journal of Political Economy 81, 637–654.

Blitz, David; and Pim van Vliet (2007), “The volatility effect: Lower risk
without lower return,” Journal of Portfolio Management 34(1), 102–113.

Blitz, 
David; 
and 
Pim 
van 
Vliet 
(2008), 
“Global 
tactical 
cross-asset
allocation: Applying value and momentum across asset classes,” Journal of
Portfolio Management 35(1), 23–38.

Bodie, Zvi; Alex Kane; and Alan J. Marcus (2008), Investments (Eighth
Edition), New York: McGraw Hill.

Bodie, Zvi; Robert C. Merton; and William Samuelson (1992), “Labor
supply flexibility and portfolio choice in a life-cycle model,” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 15.

Bodie, Zvi; Laurence B. Siegel; and Rodney N. Sullivan (2009), The Future
of 
Life-Cycle 
Saving 
and 
Investing: 
The 
Retirement 
Phase, 
Research
Foundation of CFA Institute Monograph.

Bogle, John (1994), Bogle on Mutual Funds, New York: Irwin.

Bollerslev, 
Tim; 
and 
Hao 
Zhou 
(2007), 
“Expected 
stock 
returns 
and
variance risk premia,” Finance and Economics Discussion (FEDS) paper
2007-11.

Bondarenko, Oleg (2004), “Market price of variance risk and performance
of hedge funds,” University of Illinois working paper.

Bondarenko, Oleg (2007), “Variance trading and market price of variance,”
University of Illinois working paper.

Booth, David G.; and Eugene F. Fama (1992), “Diversification returns and
asset contributions,” Financial Analysts Journal (May/June), 26–32.
Bordalo, Pedro; Nicola Gennaioli; and Andrei Shleifer (2010), “Salience
theory of choice under risk,” Harvard University working paper.

Boston Consulting Group (2010), In Search of Stable Growth: Global Asset
Management 
2010, 
annual 
report, 
available 
at
http://www.bcg.com/documents/file53448.pdf

Boudoukh, Jacob; Roni Michaely; Matthew Richardson; and Michael R.
Roberts 
(2007), 
“On 
the 
importance 
of 
measuring 
payout 
yield:
Implications for empirical asset pricing,” Journal of Finance 62, 877–916.

Boudoukh, Jacob; and Matthew Richardson (1993), “Stock returns and
inflation: 
A 
long-horizon 
perspective,” 
American 
Economic 
Review
(December), 1346–1355.

Boyer, 
Brian 
H.; 
Todd 
Mitton; 
and 
Keith 
Vorkink 
(2009), 
“Expected
idiosyncratic skewness,” Review of Financial Studies 23(1), 169–202.

Brav, Alon; and John B. Heaton (2002), “Competing theories of financial
anomalies,” Review of Financial Studies 15(2).

Braverman, Oded; 
Shmuel Kandel; and Avi 
Wohl (2007), “Aggregate
mutual 
fund 
flows 
and 
subsequent 
market 
returns,” 
working 
paper,
available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=795146

Breedon, Francis; and Angelo Ranaldo (2008), “Intraday patterns in FX
returns and order flow,” Imperial College working paper.

Brennan, Michael J.; Tarun Chordia; Avanidhar Subrahmanyam; and Qing
Tong (2009), “Sellside illiquidity and the cross-section of expected stock
returns,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1396328

Briere, Marie; and Ombretta Signori (2009), “Inflation-hedging portfolios
in different regimes,” Centre Emile Bernheim working paper 09/047.

Broadie, 
Mark; 
Michael 
S. 
Chernov; 
and 
Mikhail 
Johannes 
(2009),
“Understanding index option returns,” Review of Financial Studies 22(11),
4493–4529.

Brunnermeier, Markus K. (2009), “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit
Crunch 2007–2008,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1), 77–100.
Brunnermeier, Markus K.; and Christian Julliard (2008), “Money illusion
and housing frenzies,” Review of Financial Studies 21(1), 135–180.

Brunnermeier, Markus K.; Stefan Nagel; and Lasse H. Pedersen (2008),
“Carry trades and currency crashes,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol.
23, pp. 313–348.

Brunnermeier, Markus K.; and Lasse H. Pedersen (2009), “Market liquidity
and funding liquidity,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201–2238.

Buraschi, Andrea; Robert Kosowski; and Fabio Trojani (2010), “When
there is no place to hide—Correlation risk and the cross-section of hedge
fund returns,” Imperial College working paper.

Buraschi, 
Andrea; 
Fabio 
Trojani; 
and 
Andres 
Vedolin 
(2009), 
“When
uncertainty blows in the orchard: Comovement and equilibrium volatility
risk premia,” Imperial College working paper.

Burnside, 
Craig; 
Martin 
Eichenbaum; 
Isaac 
Kleshchelski; 
and 
Sergio
Rebelo (2010a), “Do peso problems explain the returns to the carry trade?”
NBER working paper 14054.

Burnside, 
Craig; 
Bing 
Han; 
David 
Hirshleifer; 
and 
Tracy 
Yue 
Wang
(2010b), 
“Investor 
overconfidence 
and 
the 
forward 
premium 
puzzle,”
NBER working paper 15866.

Campbell, John Y. (1999), “Asset prices, consumption and the business
cycle,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics (John Taylor and Mark Woodford,
Eds., pp. 1231–1303), Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Campbell, John Y. (2000), “Asset pricing at the millennium,” Journal of
Finance 55, 1515–1567.

Campbell, John Y.; and John H. Cochrane (1999), “By force of habit: A
consumption-based 
explanation 
of 
aggregate 
stock 
market 
behavior,”
Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.

Campbell, John Y.; Jens Hilscher; and Jan Szilagyi (2008), “In search of
distress risk,” Journal of Finance 63, 2899–2939.

Campbell, John Y.; Andrew W. Lo; and A. Craig MacKinlay (1997), The
Econometrics of Financial Markets, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Campbell, John Y.; and Robert J. Shiller (1988), “Stock prices, earnings and
expected dividends,” Journal of Finance 43(3), 661–676.

Campbell, John Y.; and Robert J. Shiller (1991), “Yield spreads and interest
rate movements: A bird’s eye view,” Review of Economic Studies 58, 495–
514.

Campbell, John Y.; and Robert J. Shiller (1998), “Valuation ratios and the
long-run stock market outlook,” Journal of Portfolio Management 24(2),
11–26.

Campbell, 
John 
Y.; 
Robert 
J. 
Shiller; 
and 
Luis 
M. 
Viceira 
(2009),
“Understanding 
inflation-indexed 
bond 
markets,” 
Brookings 
Papers 
on
Economic Activity (Spring), 79–120.

Campbell, John Y.; Adi Sunderam; and Luis M. Viceira (2010), “Inflation
bets or deflation hedges? The changing risks of nominal bonds,” Harvard
University working paper.

Campbell, John Y.; and Samuel B. Thompson (2008), “Predicting excess
stock returns out of sample: Can anything beat the historical average?”
Review of Financial Studies 21, 1509–1531.

Campbell, John Y.; and Luis M. Viceira (2002), Strategic Asset Allocation:
Portfolio Choice for Long-Term Investors, New York: Oxford University
Press.

Campbell, John Y.; and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2004a), “Bad beta, good
beta,” American Economic Review 94, 1249–1275.

Campbell, John Y.; and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2004b), “Inflation illusion and
stock prices,” NBER working paper 10263.

Campbell, 
Rachel 
(2008), 
“Art 
as 
a 
financial 
investment,” 
Journal 
of
Alternative Investments 10(4), 64–81.

Campbell, Sean; Morris Davis; Joshua Gallin; and Robert F. Martin (2009),
“What moves housing markets: A variance decomposition of the rent–price
ratio,” Journal of Urban Economics 35(3), 245–266.

Cao, Jie; and Bing Han (2009), “Cross-section of stock option returns and
stock volatility risk premium,” McCombs Research Paper Series FIN-15-
09, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1446143
Cao, Xuying; and Yexiao Xu (2010), “Long-run idiosyncratic volatilities
and 
cross-sectional 
stock 
returns,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract = 1569945

Capgemini (2010), World Wealth Report 2010, annual report by Capgemini
and Merrill Lynch Wealth Management.

Carr, Peter; and Liuren Wu (2009), “Variance risk premia,” Review of
Financial Studies 22, 1311–1341.

Chan, Louis K.C.; Jason Karceski; and Josef Lakonishok (2003), “The level
and persistence of growth rates,” Journal of Finance 58(2), 643–684.

Chava, Sudheer; Heungju Park; and Michael F. Gallmeyer (2010), “Credit
conditions and expected stock returns,” working paper, available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract = 1571958

Chen, 
Long 
(2008), 
“On 
the 
reversal 
of 
return 
and 
dividend 
growth
predictability: 
A 
tale 
of 
two 
periods,” 
forthcoming 
in 
the 
Journal 
of
Financial Economics.

Chen, Long; Pierre Collin-Dufresne; and Robert S. Goldstein (2009), “On
the relation between the credit spread puzzle and the equity premium
puzzle,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(9), 3367–3409.

Chen, Long; David Lesmond; and Jason Zhansun Wei, (2007), “Corporate
yield spreads and bond liquidity,” Journal of Finance 62, 119–149.

Chen, Long; Robert Novy-Marx; and Lu Zhang (2010), “An alternative
three-factor 
model,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1418117

Chen, Nai-Fu; Richard Roll; and Stephen A. Ross (1986), “Economic
forces and the stock market,” Journal of Business 59, 383–403.

Chen, Zhiwu; Roger G. Ibbotson, and Wendy Hu (2010), “Liquidity as an
investment style,” Yale School of Management working paper.

Chollete, Lorán; Randi Naes; and Johannes Skjeltorp (2008), “The risk
components 
of 
liquidity,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1102205
Christiansen, Charlotte; Angelo Ranaldo; and Paul Soderlind (2010), “The
time-varying systematic risk of carry trade strategies,” forthcoming in the
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.

Churm, Rohan; and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou (2005), “Decomposing credit
spreads,” Bank of England working paper 253.

Clarke, Roger; Harindra de Silva; and Steven Thorley (2010), “Know your
VMS score,” Journal of Portfolio Management 36(2), 52–59.

Clayton, Jim; S. Michael Giliberto; Jacques N. Gordon; Susan Hudson-
Wilson; 
Frank 
J. 
Fabozzi; 
and 
Youguo 
Liang 
(2009), 
“Real 
estate’s
evolution as an asset class,” Journal of Portfolio Management Special Real
Estate Issue 35(5), 10–22.

Cochrane, John H. (1999), “New facts in finance,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago Economic Perspectives 23(3).

Cochrane, John H. (2005a), Asset Pricing (Revised Edition), Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Cochrane, John H. (2005b), “The risk and return of venture capital,”
Journal of Financial Economics 75, 3–52.

Cochrane, 
John 
H. 
(2006), 
“Financial 
markets 
and 
real 
economy,”
International Library of Critical Writings in Financial Economics (Vol. 18),
London: Edward Elgar.

Cochrane, John H. (2007), “Efficient markets today,” talk at the Conference
on Chicago Economics in November 2007.

Cochrane, John H. (2008a), “The dog that did not bark: A defense of return
predictability,” Review of Financial Studies 21(4), 1533–1575.

Cochrane, John H. (2008b), “Comments on ‘Risk and regimes in the bond
market’ by Andrew Atkeson and Patrick Kehoe,” Macroeconomics Annual
2008, NBER.

Cochrane, John H.; and Monika Piazzesi (2005), “Bond risk premia,”
American Economic Review 95, 138–160.

Cochrane, John H.; and Monika Piazzesi (2008), “Decomposing the yield
curve,” University of Chicago working paper.
Cogley, Timothy; and Thomas J. Sargent (2008), “The market price of risk
and the equity premium: A legacy of the Great Depression?” Journal of
Monetary Economics 55(3), 454–476.

Cohen, 
Lauren; 
and 
Andrea 
Frazzini 
(2008), 
“Economic 
links 
and
predictable returns,” Journal of Finance 63, 1977–2011.

Cohen, Randolph B.; Christopher K. Polk; and Bernhard Silli (2010), “Best
ideas,” 
working 
paper 
available 
at 
SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=
1364827

Cohen, Randolph B.; Christopher K. Polk; and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2003),
“The value spread,” Journal of Finance 58, 609–641.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre; and Bruno Solnik (2001), “On the term structure of
default premia in the swap and LIBOR markets,” Journal of Finance 56(3),
1095–1115.

Conner, Philip; and Youguo Liang (2005), “Income and cap rate effects on
property appreciation,” Journal of Portfolio Management, Special Real
Estate Issue 31(5), 70–79.

Connolly, Robert; Chris Stivers; and Licheng Sun (2005), “Stock market
uncertainty and the stock–bond return relation,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 40, 161–194.

Cooper, Ilan; and Richard Priestley (2009), “Time varying risk premia and
the output gap,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(7), 2801–2833.

Cooper, Michael J.; John J. McConnell; and Alexei V. Ovtchinnikov (2006),
“The other January effect,” Journal of Financial Economics 82, 315–341.

Cornell, Bradford (1999), The Equity Risk Premium, New York: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Cornell, Bradford (2009), “The pricing of volatility and skewness: A new
interpretation,” Journal of Investing 18(3), 27–30.

Cornell, 
Bradford 
(2010), 
“Economic 
growth 
and 
equity 
investing,”
Financial Analysts Journal 66(1), 54–64.

Coval, Joshua D.; Jakub W. Jurek; and Erik Stafford (2009), “Economic
catastrophe bonds,” American Economic Review 99(3), 628–666.
Coval, Joshua D.; and Tyler Shumway (2001), “Expected option returns,”
Journal of Finance 56, 983–1009.

Cremers, Martin; Joost Driessen; and Pascal Maenhout (2008), “Explaining
the level of credit spreads: Option-implied jump risk premia in a firm value
model,” Review of Financial Studies 21(5), 2209–2242.

Cremers, Martin; and Antti Petäjistä (2009), “How active is your fund
manager? A new measure that predicts performance,” Review of Financial
Studies 22(9), 3329–3365.

Cremers, Martin; and David Weinbaum (2010), “Deviations from put–call
parity and stock return predictability,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 45(2), 335–367.

Cutler, David M.; James M. Poterba; and Lawrence H. Summers (1991),
“Speculative dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies 58, 529–546.

Dalio, Ray (2005), “Engineering targeted returns and risks,” Investments &
Pensions Europe 01/11/2004 (updated 31/12/2005).

Dalio, Ray (2009), “A template for understanding what is going on,” in
Insights 
into 
the 
Global 
Financial 
Crisis 
(L.B. 
Siegel, 
Ed.), 
Research
Foundation of the CFA Institute.

D’Amico, Stefania; Don H. Kim; and Min Wei (2010), “Tips from TIPS:
The informational content of treasury inflation-protected security prices,”
Finance 
and 
Economics 
Discussion 
Series, 
paper 
2010-19, 
Board 
of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

D’Amico, Stefania; and Athanasios Orphanides (2008), “Uncertainty and
disagreement in economic forecasting,” Finance and Economics Discussion
Series, paper 2008-56, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Damodaran, Aswath (2010), “Equity risk premiums (ERP): Determinants,
estimation and implications—the 2010 edition,” working paper, available at
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1556382

Daniel, Kent D.; David Hirshleifer; and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam (1998),
“Investor 
psychology 
and 
security 
market 
under- 
and 
overreactions,”
Journal of Finance 53, 1839–1885.
Daniel, 
Kent 
D.; 
and 
Sheridan 
Titman 
(1997), 
“Evidence 
on 
the
characteristics of cross-sectional variation in stock returns,” Journal of
Finance 52(1), 1–33.

Danielsson, Jon; Hyun Song Shin; and Jean-Pierre Zigrand (2009), “Risk
appetite and endogenous risk,” LSE working paper.

Davis, 
James 
L.; 
Eugene 
F. 
Fama; 
and 
Kenneth 
R. 
French 
(2000),
“Characteristics, covariances, and average returns: 1929 to 1997,” Journal
of Finance 55, 389–406.

Davis, Morris A.; and Jonathan Heathcote (2007), “The price and quantity
of residential land in the United States,” Journal of Monetary Economics
54(8), 2595–2620.

Davis, Morris A.; Andreas Lehnert; and Robert F. Martin (2008), “The
rent–price 
ratio 
for 
the 
aggregate 
stock 
of 
owner-occupied 
housing,”
Review of Income and Wealth, 54(2), 279–284.

Davis, Ned (2003), The Triumph of Contrarian Investing, New York:
McGraw Hill.

DeBondt, Werner F.M.; and Richard Thaler (1985), “Does the stock market
overreact?” Journal of Finance 40(3), 793–805.

De Long, J. Bradford; Andrei Shleifer; Lawrence H. Summers; and Robert
J. 
Waldmann 
(1990), 
“Positive 
feedback 
investment 
strategies 
and
destabilizing rational speculation,” Journal of Finance 45, 375–395.

De Rossi, Giuliano; and David Jessop (2008), “Less pain, more gain,”
Global 
Quantitative 
Research 
Monograph, 
UBS 
Investment 
Research,
September 23, 2008.

Deng, Qian (2008), “Volatility dispersion trading,” University of Illinois
working paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1156620

Derwall, Jeroen; Kees C. G. Koedijk; and Jenke R. Ter Horst (2010), “A
tale of values-driven and profit-seeking social investors,” working paper,
available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1641131

Dichev, Ilia D. (2007) “What are stock investors’ actual historical returns?
Evidence from dollar-weighted returns,” American Economic Review 97,
386–401.
Dichev, Ilia; and Troy Janes (2003), “Lunar cycle effects in stock returns,”
Journal of Private Equity 6, 8–29.

Dichev, Ilia D.; and Gwen Yu (2010), “Higher risk, lower returns: What
hedge fund investors really earn?” forthcoming in the Journal of Financial
Economics.

Diermeier, Jeffrey J.; Roger G. Ibbotson; and Laurence B. Siegel (1984),
“The 
supply 
of 
capital 
market 
returns,” 
Financial 
Analysts 
Journal
(March/April).

Dimson, Elroy (2004), “A perspective on long-term real estate returns:
United States,” Brandes Institute Journal 2004(1), 72–89

Dimson, Elroy; Paul Marsh; and Mike Staunton (2002), Triumph of the
Optimists: 
101 
Years 
of 
Global 
Investment 
Returns, 
Princeton, 
NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Dimson, Elroy; Paul Marsh; and Mike Staunton (2005), Global Investment
Returns Yearbook 2005, ABN.

Dimson, Elroy; Paul Marsh; and Mike Staunton (2010), Credit Suisse
Global Investment Returns Yearbook 2010, Credit Suisse.

Doran, James S.; Dean Diavatopoulos; and David R. Peterson (2008), “The
information content in implied idiosyncratic volatility and the cross-section
of stock returns: Evidence from the option markets,” Journal of Futures
Markets 28, 1013–1039.

Doran, James S.; Danling Jiang; and David R. Peterson (2009), “Gambling
preference and the New Year effect of assets with lottery features,” working
paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1089562

Doran, James S.; and Kevin Krieger (2010), “Implications for asset returns
in the implied volatility skew,” Financial Analysts Journal 66(1), 65–76.

Driessen, Joost; Pascal J. Maenhout; and Grigory Vilkov (2009), “The price
of correlation risk: Evidence from equity options,” Journal of Finance
64(3), 1377–1406.

Drobny, Steven (2010), The Invisible Hands: Hedge Funds Off the Record
—Rethinking Real Money, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Duarte, Jefferson; Francis A. Longstaff; and Fan Yu (2007), “Risk and
return in fixed income arbitrage: Nickels in front of a steamroller?” Review
of Financial Studies 20, 769–811.

Duffie, Darrell (2010), “Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with
slow-moving capital,” Journal of Finance 65(4), 1237–1267.

Dzhabarov, 
Constantin; 
and 
William 
T. 
Ziemba 
(2010), 
“Do 
seasonal
anomalies still work?” Journal of Portfolio Management 36(3), 93–104.

Edelen, Roger M.; Alan J. Marcus; and Hassan Tehranian (2010), “Relative
sentiment and stock returns,” Financial Analysts Journal 66(4), 20–32.

El-Erian, Mohamed (2008), When Markets Collide: Investment Strategies
for the Age of Global Economic Change, New York: McGraw Hill.

El-Erian, Mohamed (2009), “A new normal,” PIMCO Economic Outlook,
May.

Ellsberg, 
Daniel 
(1961), 
“Risk, 
ambiguity, 
and 
the 
savage 
axioms,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 75, 643–669.

Elton, Edwin J.; Martin J. Gruber; Deepak Agrawal; and Christopher Mann
(2001), “Explaining the rate spread on corporate bonds,” Journal of Finance
56, 247–277.

Erb, Claude B.; and Campbell R. Harvey (2006), “The tactical and strategic
value of commodity futures,” Financial Analysts Journal, 62(2), 69–97.

Estrella, Arturo (2005), “The yield curve as a leading indicator: Frequently
asked questions,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York working paper,
available at http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/capital_markets/ycfaq.pdf

Fabozzi, 
Frank 
J.; 
Sergio 
M. 
Focardi; 
and 
Petter 
N. 
Kolm 
(2010),
Quantitative Equity Investing: Techniques and Strategies (The Frank J.
Fabozzi Series), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Falkenstein, Eric (2009), Finding Alpha: The Search for Alpha When Risk
and Return Break Down, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Fama, Eugene F. (1984), “Forward and spot exchange rates,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 14, 319–338.
Fama, Eugene F. (1970), “Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and
empirical work,” Journal of Finance 25, 383–417.

Fama, Eugene F. (1991), “Efficient capital markets: II,” Journal of Finance
46, 1575–1617.

Fama, 
Eugene 
F. 
(1998), 
“Market 
efficiency, 
long-term 
returns, 
and
behavioral finance,” Journal of Financial Economics 49(3), 283–306.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Robert R. Bliss (1987), “The information in long
maturity forward rates,” American Economic Review 77, 680–692.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French (1989), “Business conditions and
expected returns on stocks and bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 25,
23–49.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French (1992), “The cross-section of
expected stock returns,” Journal of Finance 47, 427–465.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French, (1993), “Common risk factors in
the returns on stocks and bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French, (1998), “Value versus growth:
The international evidence,” Journal of Finance 53(6), 1975–1999.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French (2001), “Disappearing dividends:
Changing 
firm 
characteristics 
or 
lower 
propensity 
to 
pay,” 
Journal 
of
Financial Economics 60, 3–43.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French (2002), “The equity premium,”
Journal of Finance 57 (April), 637–659.

Fama, 
Eugene 
F.; 
and 
Kenneth 
R. 
French, 
(2006a), 
“Profitability,
investment, and average returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 82, 491–
518.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French, (2006b), “The value premium
and the CAPM,” Journal of Finance 61, 2163–2185.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French, (2007a), “Migration,” Financial
Analysts Journal 63(3), 48–58.

Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French, (2007b), “The anatomy of value
and growth stock returns,” Financial Analysts Journal 63(6), 44–54.
Fama, Eugene F.; and Kenneth R. French (2009), “Luck versus skill in the
cross section of mutual fund returns,” Chicago Booth School of Business
research paper, forthcoming in the Journal of Finance.

Fama, Eugene F.; and G. William Schwert (1979), “Inflation, interest, and
relative prices,” Journal of Business 52(2), 183–209.

Farhi, Emmanuel; Samuel P. Fraiberger; Xavier Gabaix; Romain Ranciere;
and Adrien Verdelhan (2009), “Crash risk in currency markets,” Harvard
University working paper.

Favero, Carlo A.; Arie Eskenazi Gozluku; and Andrea Tamoni (2010),
“Demographic trends, the dividend–price ratio and the predictability of
long-run stock 
market returns,” 
Centre for 
Economic Policy Research
discussion paper 7734.

Ferguson, Niall (2007), The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the
World, London: Penguin/ Allen Lane.

Fernandez, Pablo (2007), “Equity premium: Historical, expected, required
and implied,” IESE Business School working paper.

Fernandez, 
Pablo 
(2009), 
“Market 
risk 
premium 
used 
in 
2008 
by
professors: A survey with 1,400 answers,” IESE Business School working
paper.

Fernandez, Pablo; Javier Aguirremalloa; and Heinrich Liechtenstein (2008),
“The equity premium puzzle: High required premium, undervaluation and
self fulfilling prophecy,” IESE Business School working paper.

Ferson, Wayne E.; and Campbell R. Harvey (1991), “The variation of
economic risk premiums,” Journal of Political Economy 99, 385–415.

Figelman, Ilya (2007), “Stock return momentum and reversal,” Journal of
Portfolio Management 34(1), 51–67.

Figelman, Ilya (2008), “Expected return and risk of covered call strategies,”
Journal of Portfolio Management 34(4), 81–97.

Foresi, Silverio; and Lauren Wu (2005), “CrashOPhobia: A domestic fear
or a worldwide concern?” Journal of Derivatives 13(2), 8–21.
Fox, Justin (2009), The Myth of the Rational Market: A History of Risk,
Reward, and Delusion on Wall Street, HarperBusiness.

Francis, Jack Clark; and Roger G. Ibbotson (2009), “Contrasting real estate
with 
comparable 
investments, 
1978 
to 
2008,” 
Journal 
of 
Portfolio
Management 36(1), 141–155.

Franzoni, 
Francesco 
A.; 
Eric 
Nowak; 
and 
Ludovic 
Phalippou 
(2010),
“Private equity and liquidity risk,” Swiss Finance Institute working paper.

Frazzini, 
Andrea 
(2006), 
“The 
disposition 
effect 
and 
underreaction 
to
news,” Journal of Finance 61(4), 2017–2046.

Frazzini, Andrea; and Owen A. Lamont (2008), “Dumb money: Mutual
fund flows and the cross-section of stock returns,” Journal of Financial
Economics 88, 299–322.

Frazzini, Andrea; and Lasse H. Pedersen (2010), “Betting against beta,”
AQR Capital Management working paper.

French, 
Kenneth 
R. 
(2008), 
“Presidential 
address: 
The 
cost 
of 
active
investing,” Journal of Finance 63, 1537–1573.

French, Kenneth R. et al. (2010), The Squam Lake Report, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

French, Kenneth R.; G. William Schwert; and Robert F. Stambaugh (1987),
“Expected stock returns and volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics,
19(1), 3–29.

Frieder, Laura; and George J. Jiang (2008), “Separating up from down:
New 
evidence 
on 
the 
idiosyncratic 
volatility-return 
relation,” 
working
paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/ abstract = 970875

Friedman, Milton (1953), “The case for flexible exchange rates,” in Essays
in Positive Economics, University of Chicago Press.

Friesen, Geoffrey; and Travis Sapp (2007), “Mutual fund flows and investor
returns: An empirical examination of fund investor timing ability,” Journal
of Banking & Finance 31, 2796–2816.

Froot, Kenneth A. (1989), “New hope for the expectations hypothesis of the
term structure of interest rates,” Journal of Finance 44, 283–305.
Froot, Kenneth A.; and Richard H. Thaler (1990), “Anomalies: Foreign
exchange,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 4(3), 179–192.

Fu, Fangjian (2009), “Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected
stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 91, 24–37.

Fuertes, Ana; Joelle Miffre; and Giorgios Rallis (2010), “Tactical allocation
in commodity futures markets: Combining momentum and term structure
signals,” forthcoming in the Journal of Banking and Finance.

Fung, William; and David A. Hsieh (1997), “Empirical characteristics of
dynamic trading strategies: The case of hedge funds,” Review of Financial
Studies 10, 275–302.

Fung, William; and David A. Hsieh (2002), “Hedge-fund benchmarks:
Information content and biases,” Financial Analysts Journal 58(1), 22–34.

Fung, William; and David A. Hsieh (2004), “Hedge fund benchmarks: A
risk-based approach,” Financial Analysts Journal 60, 60–80.

Fung, William; and David A. Hsieh (2009), “Measurement biases in hedge
fund performance data: An update,” Financial Analysts Journal 65(3), 36–
38.

Gabaix, 
Xavier 
(2008), 
“Variable 
rare 
disasters: 
An 
exactly 
solved
framework for ten puzzles in macro-finance,” NBER working paper 13724.

Gabaix, 
Xavier; 
Arvind 
Krishnamurthy; 
and 
Olivier 
Vigneron 
(2007),
“Limits 
of 
arbitrage: 
Theory 
and 
evidence 
from 
the 
mortgage-backed
securities market,” NBER working paper 11851.

Gagnon, Joseph E.; Matthew Raskin; Julie Remache; and Brian P. Sack
(2010), 
“Large-scale 
asset 
purchases 
by 
the 
federal 
reserve: 
Did 
they
work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report 441.

Garcia, Juan A.; and Thomas Werner (2010), “Inflation risks and inflation
risk premia,” European Central Bank working paper 1162.

Garleanu, Nicolae; and Lasse H. Pedersen (2009a), “Margin-based asset
pricing and deviations from the law of one price,” New York University
working paper.

Garleanu, Nicolae; and Lasse H. Pedersen (2009b), “Dynamic trading with
predictable returns and transaction costs,” New York University working
paper.

Garleanu, Nicolae; Lasse H. Pedersen; and Allen M. Poteshman (2009),
“Demand-based option pricing,” Review of Financial Studies 22(10), 4259–
4299.

Geanakoplos, 
John 
(2010), 
“The 
leverage 
cycle,” 
Cowles 
Foundation
discussion paper 1715R.

Getmansky, 
Mila; 
Andrew 
W. 
Lo; 
and 
Igor 
Makarov 
(2004), 
“An
econometric 
model 
of 
serial 
correlation 
and 
illiquidity 
in 
hedge-fund
returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 74, 529–609.

Ghayur, Khalid; Ronan G. Heaney; Stephen A. Komon; and Stephen C.
Platt (2010), Active Beta Indexes: Capturing Systematic Sources of Active
Equity Returns, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Ghysels, Eric; Pedro Santa-Clara; and Rossen Valkanov (2005), “There is a
risk–return tradeoff after all,” Journal of Financial Economics 76, 509–548.

Gibson, Rajna; and Songtao Wang (2010), “Hedge fund alphas: Do they
reflect managerial skills or mere compensation for liquidity risk bearing?”
Swiss Finance Institute research paper 08-37.

Giesecke, Kay; Francis A. Longstaff; Stephen Schaefer; and Ilya Strebulaev
(2010), “Corporate bond default risk: A 150-year perspective,” UCLA
working paper.

Glosten, Lawrence R.; Ravi Jagannathan; and David E. Runkle (1993), “On
the relation between the expected value and the volatility of the nominal
excess return on stocks,” Journal of Finance 48(5), 1779–1801.

Goetzmann, 
William 
N.; 
and 
Roger 
G. 
Ibbotson 
(2006), 
The 
Equity
Premium: Essays and Explorations, Oxford University Press.

Goetzmann, William N.; Akiko Watanabe; and Masahiro Watanabe (2009),
“Investor 
expectations, 
business 
conditions, 
and 
the 
pricing 
of 
beta-
instability 
risk,” 
Yale 
ICF 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1108711

Gordon, Myron J. (1962), The Investment, Financing, and Valuation of the
Corporation, Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Gorton, Gary B. (2010), Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007,
Oxford University Press.

Gorton, Gary B.; Fumio Hayashi; and K. Geert Rouwenhorst (2007), “The
fundamentals of commodity futures returns,” University of Pennsylvania
working paper.

Gorton, Gary B.; and K. Geert Rouwenhorst (2006), “Facts and fantasies
about commodity futures,” Financial Analysts Journal 62, 86–93.

Goyal, 
Amit 
(2004), 
“Demographics, 
stock 
market 
flows, 
and 
stock
returns,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39(1), 115–142.

Goyal, Amit; and Sunil Wahal (2008), “The selection and termination of
investment management firms by plan sponsors,” Journal of Finance 63,
1805–1847.

Goyenko, Ruslan; Craig W. Holden; and Charles Trzcinka (2009), “Do
measures of liquidity measure liquidity?” Journal of Financial Economics
92, 153–181.

Graham, Benjamin; and David L. Dodd, (1934), Security Analysis, New
York: McGraw Hill.

Graham, 
John 
R.; 
and 
Campbell 
R. 
Harvey 
(2010), 
“The 
equity 
risk
premium 
in 
2010,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1654026

Grantham, Jeremy (2010), GMO Quarterly Letter, July 2010.

Greenspan, Alan (2007), The Age of Turbulence: Adventures in the New
World, London: Penguin/ Allen Lane.

Greenwood, Robin M.; and Dimitri Vayanos (2010), “Bond supply and
excess 
bond 
returns,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1012607

Griffin, Dale; and Amos Tversky (1992), “The weighting of evidence and
the determinants of confidence,” Cognitive Psychology 24, 411–435.

Griffin, 
John 
M.; 
Xiuqing 
Ji; 
and 
J. 
Spencer 
Martin 
(2005), 
“Global
momentum 
strategies: 
A 
portfolio 
perspective,” 
Journal 
of 
Portfolio
Management 31(2), 23–39.
Grimbacher, Stefan Benjamin; Laurens A.P. Swinkels; and Pim Van Vliet
(2010), “An anatomy of calendar effects,” working paper, available at
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1593770

Grinblatt, Mark; and Bing Han (2005), “Prospect theory, mental accounting,
and momentum,” Journal of Financial Economics 78(2), 311–339.

Grinblatt, Mark; and Tobias J. Moskowitz (2004), “Predicting stock price
movements from past returns: The role of consistency and tax-loss selling,”
Journal of Financial Economics 71, 541–579.

Grinold, Richard C. (1989), “The fundamental law of active management,”
Journal of Portfolio Management 15(3), 30–37.

Grinold, 
Richard 
C.; 
and 
Ronald 
Kahn 
(1999), 
Active 
Portfolio
Management: A Quantitative Approach for Providing Superior Returns and
Controlling Risk, New York: McGraw Hill.

Grossman, Sanford J.; and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1980), “On the impossibility
of informationally efficient markets,” American Economic Review 70(3),
393–408.

Guo, Hui; Sandra Mortal; Robert Savickas; and Robert A. Wood (2010),
“Uncovering the relation between aggregate stock illiquidity and expected
excess 
market 
returns,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1540557

Gurkaynak, Refet S.; Brian Sack; and Jonathan H. Wright (2007), “The
U.S. Treasury yield curve: 1961 to the present,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 54, 2291–2304.

Gurkaynak, Refet S.; Brian Sack; and Jonathan H. Wright (2008), “The
TIPS yield curve and inflation compensation,” FEDS working paper 2008-
05, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Han, Bing (2008), “Investor sentiment and option prices,” Review of
Financial Studies 21(1), 387–414.

Harvey, Campbell R. (1989), “Forecasts of economic growth from the bond
and stock markets,” Financial Analysts Journal 45, 38–45.

Harvey, Campbell R.; and Akhtar Siddique (2000), “Conditional skewness
in asset pricing tests,” Journal of Finance 55, 1263–1295.
Hasbrouck, 
Joel 
(2009), 
“Trading 
costs 
and 
returns 
for 
U.S. 
equities:
Estimating effective costs from daily data,” Journal of Finance 64(3), 1445–
1477.

Haugen, Robert A.; and Josef Lakonishok (1988), The Incredible January
Effect, Homewood, IL: Business One.

He, Hua (2000), “Modeling term structures of swap spreads,” Yale School
of 
Management 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=233963

Heston, Steven L.; and Ronnie Sadka (2008), “Seasonality in the cross-
section of expected stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 87, 418–
445.

Hill, Joanne M.; Venkatesh Balasubramanian; Ingrid C.L. Tierens; and Krag
(Buzz) 
Gregory 
(2006), 
“Finding 
alpha 
via 
covered 
index 
writing,”
Financial Analysts Journal 62(5), 29–46.

Hirshleifer, David (2001), “Investor psychology and asset pricing,” Journal
of Finance 56, 1533–1597.

Hoesli, Martin; and Colin Lizieri (2007), “Real estate in the investment
portfolio,” report prepared for the Investment Strategy Council of the Royal
Ministry of Finance, available at Norway’s Ministry of Finance website:
http://www.regjeringen.no/upload/FIN/Statens%20
pensjonsfond/Norway%20Real%20Estate%20Final%20Report%20Revised
%20May%2031.pdf

Homer, Sidney; and Richard Sylla (1991), A History of Interest Rates
(Third Edition), Rutgers University Press.

Hong, 
Harrison; 
and 
Jeremy 
Stein 
(1999), 
“A 
unified 
theory 
of
underreaction, 
momentum 
trading, 
and 
overreaction 
in 
asset 
markets,”
Journal of Finance 54, 2143–2184.

Hong, Harrison; and Jeremy Stein (2007), “Disagreement and the stock
market,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 109–128.

Hong, 
Harrison 
G.; 
and 
Motohiro 
Yogo 
(2010), 
“Commodity 
market
interest and asset return predictability,” working paper, available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1364674
Huang, Wei; Qianqiu Liu; S. Ghon Rhee; and Liang Zhang (2010), “Return
reversals, idiosyncratic risk, and expected returns,” Review of Financial
Studies 23(1), 147–168.

Hudson, Robert (2009), “Comparing security returns is harder than you
think: Problems with logarithmic returns,” working paper, available at
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1549328

Ibbotson, Roger G.; and Gary P. Brinson (1993), Global Investing: The
Professional’s Guide to the World Capital Markets, New York: McGraw
Hill.

Ibbotson, Roger G.; and Peng Chen (2003), “Stock market returns in the
long run: Participating in the real economy,” Financial Analysts Journal
59(1), 88–98.

Ibbotson, Roger G.; Peng Chen; and Kevin X. Zhu (2010), “The ABCs of
hedge funds: Alphas, betas, and costs,” working paper, available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1581559

Ibbotson, Roger G.; Laurence B. Siegel; and Kathryn S. Love (1985),
“World 
wealth: 
Market 
values 
and 
returns,” 
Journal 
of 
Portfolio
Management 12, 4–23.

Ibbotson, Roger G.; and Rex A. Sinquefield (1976), “Stocks, bonds, bills
and 
inflation: 
Year-by-year 
historical 
returns 
(1926–1974),” 
Journal 
of
Business 49, 11–47.

Ibbotson, Roger G.; Peng Chen; Moshe Milevksy; and Kevin Zhu (2007),
Lifetime 
Financial 
Advice: 
Human 
Capital, 
Asset 
Allocation, 
and
Insurance, Research Foundation of CFA Institute Monograph.

Ilmanen, Antti (1994), “Time-varying expected returns in international
bond 
markets,” 
unpublished 
Ph.D. 
dissertation, 
Graduate 
School 
of
Business, University of Chicago.

Ilmanen, Antti (1995), “Time varying expected bond returns in international
bond markets,” Journal of Finance 50, 481–506.

Ilmanen, 
Antti 
(1996), 
“Market 
rate 
expectations 
and 
forward 
rates,”
Journal of Fixed Income 6(2), 8–22 (originally published as part of a
Salomon Brothers research paper series titled “Understanding the Yield
Curve”).

Ilmanen, Antti (1997), “Forecasting U.S. bond returns,” Journal of Fixed
Income 7(1), 22–37 (originally published as part of a Salomon Brothers
research paper series titled “Understanding the Yield Curve”).

Ilmanen, Antti (2003a), “Expected returns on stocks and bonds,” Journal of
Portfolio Management 29(2), 7–27.

Ilmanen, 
Antti 
(2003b), 
“Stock–bond 
correlations,” 
Journal 
of 
Fixed
Income 13(2), 55–66.

Ilmanen, Antti; and Rory Byrne (2003), “Pronounced momentum patterns
ahead of major events,” Journal of Fixed Income 12(4), 73-80.

Ilmanen, Antti; Rory Byrne; Heinz Gunasekera; and Robert Minikin (2003),
“Which risks have been best rewarded?” Journal of Portfolio Management
30(2), 53–57.

Ilmanen, 
Antti; 
and 
Roberto 
Fumagalli 
(2003), 
“Consistency 
of 
carry
strategies 
in 
Europe,” 
in 
Professional 
Perspectives 
on 
Fixed 
Income
Portfolio Management, Volume 4 (Frank J. Fabozzi, Ed.), Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Ilmanen, Antti; and Rafey Sayood (2002), “Quantitative forecasting models
and active diversification for international bonds,” Journal of Fixed Income
12(3), 40–51.

International Monetary Fund (IMF) (2009), “Statistical appendix,” Global
Financial Stability Report (September).

Ineichen, 
Alexander 
M. 
(2002), 
Absolute 
Returns: 
The 
Risk 
and
Opportunities of Hedge Fund Investing, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.

Ineichen, Alexander M. (2008), “AIMA’s roadmap to hedge funds,” report
available at the Alternative Investment Management Association website:
http://www.aima.org/en/knowledge_centre/education/aimas-roadmap-to-
hedge-funds.cfm

Israelov, 
Roni; 
and 
Michael 
Katz 
(2010), 
“To 
trade 
or 
not 
to 
trade?
Informed trading with high-frequency signals for long-term investors,”
AQR 
Capital 
Management 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1585816

Jacobsen, Ben; and Sven Bouman (2002), “The Halloween indicator, ‘sell
in May and go away’: Another puzzle,” American Economic Review 92(5),
1618–1635.

Jacquier, Eric; Alex Kane; and Alan J. Marcus (2003), “Geometric or
arithmetic mean: A reconsideration,” Financial Analysts Journal 59(6), 46–
53.

Jaeger, 
Lars 
(2008), 
Alternative 
Beta 
Strategies 
and 
Hedge 
Fund
Replication, Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan; and Sheridan Titman (1993), “Returns to buying
winners 
and 
selling 
losers: 
Implications 
for 
stock 
market 
efficiency,”
Journal of Finance 48(1), 65–91.

Jegadeesh, 
Narasimhan; 
and 
Sheridan 
Titman 
(2005), 
“Momentum: 
A
review,” in Advances on Behavioral Finance, Volume II (Richard H. Thaler,
Ed.), Russell Sage Foundation and Princeton University Press.

Jensen, Gerald R.; and Theodore C. Moorman (2010), “Inter-temporal
variation 
in 
the 
illiquidity 
premium,” 
forthcoming 
in 
the 
Journal 
of
Financial Economics.

Jung, Jeeman; and Robert J. Shiller (2005), “Samuelson’s dictum and the
stock market,” Economic Inquiry 43(2), 221–228.

Jurek, Jakub W. (2009), “Crash-neutral currency carry trades,” Princeton
University working paper.

Jylha, Petri; Jussi-Pekka Lyytinen; and Matti Suominen (2008), “Arbitrage
capital and currency carry trade returns,” Helsinki School of Economics
working paper.

Kahneman, 
Daniel; 
and 
Amos 
Tversky 
(1979), 
“Prospect 
theory: 
An
analysis of decision under risk,” Econometrica 47(2), 263–291.

Kahneman, Daniel; and Amos Tversky, Eds. (2000), Choices, Values and
Frames, Cambridge University Press.

Kao, Duen-Li (2000), “Estimating and pricing credit risk: An overview,”
Financial Analysts Journal 56(4), 50–66.
Kaplan, Paul D. (2008), “Why fundamental indexation might—or might not
—work?” Financial Analysts Journal 64(1), 32–39.

Kaplan, 
Steven 
N.; 
and 
Antoinette 
Schoar 
(2005), 
“Private 
equity
performance: Returns, persistence, and capital flows,” Journal of Finance
60, 1791–1823.

Kaplan, Steven N.; and Per Stromberg (2009), “Leveraged buyouts and
private equity,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1), 121–146.

Kay, John (2009), The Long and Short of It: Finance and Investment for
Normally Intelligent People Who Are Not in the Industry, Erasmus Press.

Kaya, Hakan; Wai Lee; and Bobby Pornrojnangkool (2010), “Regimes:
Nonparametric 
identification 
and 
forecasting,” 
Journal 
of 
Portfolio
Management 36(2), 94–105.

Kealhofer, Stephen (2003), “Quantifying credit risk I: Default prediction,”
Financial Analysts Journal 59(1), 30–44.

Keim, 
Donald 
B. 
(1983), 
“Size-related 
anomalies 
and 
stock 
return
seasonality: Further empirical evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics
12(1), 13–32.

Keynes, 
John 
Maynard 
(1936), 
The 
General 
Theory 
of 
Employment,
Interest and Money, London: Macmillan.

Khandani, Amir E.; and Andrew W. Lo (2007), “What happened to the
quants in August 2007?” Journal of Investment Management 5(4), 29–78.

Khandani, Amir E.; and Andrew W. Lo (2009), “Illiquidity premia in asset
returns: An empirical analysis of hedge funds, mutual funds, and U.S.
equity 
portfolios,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1425494

Kim, 
Don 
H. 
(2008), 
“Challenges 
in 
macro-finance 
modeling,” 
BIS
working paper 240.

Kim, 
Don 
H.; 
and 
Athanasios 
Orphanides 
(2005), 
“Term 
structure
estimation with survey data on interest rate forecasts,” FEDS working paper
2005-48, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Kim, Don H.; and Athanasios Orphanides (2007), “The bond market term
premium: What is it, and how can we measure it?” BIS Quarterly Review
(June).

Kim, Don H.; and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), “An arbitrage-free three-
factor term structure model and the recent behavior of long-term yields and
distant-horizon forward rates,” FEDS working paper 2005-33, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Kosowski, Robert; Narayan Y. Naik; and Melvin Teo (2007), “Do hedge
funds 
deliver 
alpha? 
A 
Bayesian 
and 
bootstrap 
analysis,” 
Journal 
of
Financial Economics 84, 229–264.

Kozhemiakin, 
Alexander 
V. 
(2007), 
“The 
risk 
premium 
of 
corporate
bonds,” Journal of Portfolio Management 33(2), 101–109.

Kozicki, Sharon; and Peter A. Tinsley (2006), “Survey-based estimates of
the term structure of expected U.S. inflation,” Bank of Canada working
paper 06-46.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind (2002), “The bond/old-bond spread,” Journal of
Financial Economics 66, 463–506.

Krishnamurthy, 
Arvind; 
and 
Annette 
Vissing-Jorgensen 
(2010), 
“The
aggregate demand for Treasury debt,” Northwestern University working
paper.

Krishnan, 
C.N.V.; 
Ralitsa 
Petkova; 
and 
Peter 
H. 
Ritchken 
(2008),
“Correlation 
risk,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1027479

Kritzman, Mark P. (2000), Puzzles of Finance: Six Practical Problems and
Their Remarkable Solutions, John Wiley & Sons.

Kumar, Alok (2009), “Who gambles in the stock market?” Journal of
Finance 64(4), 1889–1933.

Lakonishok, 
Josef; 
Andrei 
Shleifer; 
and 
Robert 
W. 
Vishny 
(1994),
“Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and risk,” Journal of Finance 49(5),
1541–1578.

Lamont, Owen A.; and Richard H. Thaler (2003), “Can the market add and
subtract? 
Mispricing 
in 
tech 
stock 
carve-outs,” 
Journal 
of 
Political
Economy 111, 227–268.

Lancetti, 
Sebastian; 
and 
David 
Nordquist 
(2008), 
“29 
years 
of 
style
investing 
in 
the 
US: 
The 
importance 
of 
sectors,” 
Global 
Quantitative
Research Monograph, UBS Investment Research, July 9, 2008.

La Porta, Rafael; Josef Lakonishok; Andrei Shleifer; and Robert Vishny
(1997), 
“Good 
news 
for 
value 
stocks: 
Further 
evidence 
on 
market
efficiency,” Journal of Finance 49, 1541–1578.

Laubach, Thomas (2007), “New evidence on the interest rate effects of
budget 
deficits 
and 
debt,” 
FEDS 
working 
paper 
2003-12, 
Board 
of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Lee, Bong-Soo (2009), “Stock returns and inflation revisited,” working
paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1326501

Lei, Qin (2006), “Cash distributions and returns,” working paper, available
at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=687276

Leibowitz, Martin L.; Lawrence N. Bader; and Stanley Kogelman (1995),
“Global 
fixed-income 
investments: 
The 
persistence 
effect,” 
Financial
Analysts Journal 51(2), 5–41.

Leibowitz, 
Martin 
L.; 
and 
Anthony 
Bova 
(2010a), 
“Portfolio 
level
leverage,” Portfolio Strategy, Morgan Stanley Research, June 17.

Leibowitz, Martin L.; and Anthony Bova (2010b), “Reversals, trends, and
slow rebalancing,” Portfolio Strategy, Morgan Stanley Research, July 29.

Leibowitz, Martin L.; Anthony Bova; and P. Brett Hammond (2010), The
Endowment 
Model 
of 
Investing: 
Return, 
Risk, 
and 
Diversification,
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Leitner, Chuck; Asieh Mansour; and Sandy Naylor (2007), Alternative
Investments in Perspective, RREEF Research.

Leland, Hayne (2006), “Structural models in corporate finance,” 2006
Princeton Lectures in Finance.

Lemmon, Michael L.; and Sophie X. Ni (2009), “The effects of investor
sentiment on speculative trading and prices of stock and index options,”
working paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1572427
Lerner, Josh; Antoinette Schoar; and Wan Wongsunwai (2007), “Smart
institutions, foolish choices? The limited partner performance puzzle,”
Journal of Finance, 62(2), 731–764. Lettau, Martin; and Sydney Ludvigson
(2001), 
“Consumption, 
aggregate 
wealth 
and 
expected 
stock 
returns,”
Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.

Lettau, 
Martin; 
and 
Sydney 
Ludvigson 
(2005), 
“Expected 
returns 
and
expected dividend growth,” Journal of Financial Economics 76, 583–626.

Lhabitant, Francois-Serge (2007), Handbook of Hedge Funds, Chichester,
UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Li, Lingfeng (2002), “Macroeconomic factors and the correlation of stock
and bond returns,” Yale International Center for Finance working paper.

Litterman, Bob (2004), “The active risk puzzle: Implications for the asset
management industry,” Goldman Sachs Asset Management Perspectives.

Litterman, Bob; and the Quantitative Resources Group of Goldman Sachs
Asset 
Management 
(2003), 
Modern 
Investment 
Management: 
An
Equilibrium Approach, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Liu, Jun; Francis A. Longstaff; and Ravit Mandell (2006), “The market
price of risk in interest rate swaps: The roles of default and liquidity risks,”
Journal of Business 79(5), 2337–2360.

Ljungqvist, 
Alexander; 
and 
Matthew 
P. 
Richardson 
(2003), 
“The
investment 
behavior 
of 
private 
equity 
fund 
managers,” 
New 
York
University Stern School of Business working paper 03-29.

Ljungqvist, Alexander; Matthew P. Richardson; and Daniel Wolfenzon
(2007), “The investment behavior of buyout funds: Theory and evidence,”
European Corporate Governance Institute working paper.

Lo, 
Andrew 
W. 
(2004), 
“The 
adaptive 
markets 
hypothesis: 
Market
efficiency 
from 
an 
evolutionary 
perspective,” 
Journal 
of 
Portfolio
Management 30, 15–29.

Lo, Andrew W. (2008), Hedge Funds: An Analytic Perspective, Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

Longstaff, Francis A. (2004), “The flight to liquidity premium in U.S.
Treasury bond prices,” Journal of Business 77, 511–526.
Longstaff, Francis A.; Sanjay Mithal; and Eric Neis (2005), “Corporate
yield spreads: Default risk or liquidity? New evidence from the credit-
default swap market,” Journal of Finance 60, 2213–2253.

Longstaff, Francis A.; and Arvind Rajan (2008), “An empirical analysis of
the pricing of collateralized debt obligations,” Journal of Finance 63, 509–
563.

Longstaff, Francis A.; and Jiang Wang (2008), “Asset pricing and the credit
market,” UCLA working paper.

Lopez de Silanes, Florencio; Ludovic Phalippou; and Oliver Gottschalg
(2009), “Giants at the gate: Diseconomies of scale in private equity,”
working paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1363883

Lustig, Hanno; and Adrien Verdelhan (2007), “The cross-section of foreign
currency 
risk 
premia 
and 
US 
consumption 
growth 
risk,” 
American
Economic Review 97(1), 89–117.

Lustig, Hanno; and Adrien Verdelhan (2010), “Business cycle variation in
the risk–return tradeoff,” UCLA working paper.

Ma, Cindy; and Andrew MacNamara, (2009), “The price of illiquidity:
Valuation approaches across asset classes,” Houlihan Lokey research report.

Macaulay, Frederick (1938), The Movements of Interest Rates, Bond Yields
and Stock Prices in the United States since 1856, New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Maddison, 
Angus 
(2007), 
The 
World 
Economy: 
A 
Millennial
Perspective/Historical Statistics, OECD.

Malkiel, Burton G.; and Charles D. Ellis (2010), The Elements of Investing,
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Malkiel, Burton G.; and Atanu Saha (2005), “Hedge funds: Risks and
return,” Financial Analysts Journal 61, 80–88.

Mallaby, Sebastian (2010), More Money than God: Hedge Funds and the
Making of a New Elite, Penguin Press.

Malmendier, Ulrike; and Stefan Nagel (2010), “Depression babies: Do
macroeconomic 
experiences 
affect 
risk-taking?” 
forthcoming 
in 
the
Quarterly 
Journal 
of 
Economics. 
Available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1369049

Mamarbachi, Raya; Marc Day; and Giampiero Favato (2009), “Art as an
alternative 
investment 
asset,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1112630

Mansour, Asief; and Hope Nadji (2007), “Performance characteristics of
infrastructure investments,” RREEF Research.

Martin, George A. (2010), “The long-horizon benefits of traditional and
new 
real 
assets 
in 
the 
institutional 
portfolio,” 
Journal 
of 
Alternative
Investments 13(1), 6–29.

McConnell, John; and Wei Xu (2008), “Equity returns at the turn of the
month,” Financial Analysts Journal 64(2), 49–64.

McCulley, Paul (2009), “The shadow banking system and Hyman Minsky’s
economic journey,” in Insights into the Global Financial Crisis (L.B. Siegel,
Ed.), Research Foundation of the CFA Institute.

McKinsey Global Institute (2009), Global Capital Markets: Entering a New
Era, annual report.

Mehra, 
Rajnish, 
Ed. 
(2007), 
Handbook 
of 
the 
Equity 
Risk 
Premium,
Elsevier Science.

Mehra, Rajnish; and Edward C. Prescott (1985), “The equity premium: A
puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 145–161.

Mei, Jianping; and Michael Moses (2002), “Art as an investment and the
underperformance of masterpieces,” American Economic Review 92(5),
1656–1668.

Melas, 
Dimitris; 
Raghu 
Suryanarayanan; 
and 
Stefan 
Cavaglia 
(2010),
“Efficient replication of factor returns,” Journal of Portfolio Management
36(2), 39–51.

Merton, Robert C. (1974), “On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk
structure of interest rates,” Journal of Finance, 29, 449–470.

Mezrich, Joseph J. (2010), “The value-momentum conundrum,” Nomura
Securities International, Global Quantitative Research report, February 2,
2010.
Miffre, 
Joelle; 
and 
Georgios 
Rallis 
(2007), 
“Momentum 
strategies 
in
commodity futures markets,” Journal of Banking and Finance 31, 1863–
1886.

Minsky, Hyman (1986), Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.

Mitton, Todd; and Keith Vorkink (2007), “Equilibrium underdiversification
and the preference for skewness,” Review of Financial Studies 20(4), 1255–
1288.

Modigliani, Franco; and Richard Cohn (1979), “Inflation, rational valuation
and the market,” Financial Analysts Journal 35(2), 24–44.

Moise, Claudia E. (2007), “Stochastic volatility risk and the size anomaly,”
working paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=826244

Montier, James (2007), Behavioural Investing: A Practitioner’s Guide to
Applying Behavioural Finance, Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Montier, 
James 
(2009), 
Value 
Investing: 
Tools 
and 
Techniques 
for
Intelligent Investment, Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Morningstar (2008): Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation Yearbook 2008,
Chicago, IL: Morningstar.

Moody’s 
(2010), 
Corporate 
Default 
and 
Recovery 
Rates, 
1920–2009,
annual default study from Moody’s Investor Service.

Moskowitz, Tobias; Hua Ooi Yao; and Lasse H. Pedersen (2010), “Time
series momentum,” AQR Capital Management working paper.

MSCI Barra (2010), “What drives long-term equity returns,” MSCI Barra
research 
paper 
2010-04, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1552125

Naes, Randi; Johannes Skjeltorp; and Bernt Arne Odegaard (2011), “Stock
market liquidity and the business cycle,” forthcoming in the Journal of
Finance.

Nagel, Stefan (2009), “Evaporating liquidity,” Stanford University working
paper.
Naik, Vasant; Srivatha Balakrishnan; and Mukundan Devarajan (2009),
Nomura Quantitative Duration Scorecard: A Simple Framework for Global
Duration Positioning, Nomura International Quantitative Strategies.

Naik, 
Vasant; 
and 
Mukundan 
Devarajan 
(2009), 
Nomura 
Quantitative
Credit Scorecard: A Framework for Macro Positioning in Global Credit
Markets, Nomura International Quantitative Strategies.

Nelken, Israel, Ed. (2007), Volatility as an Asset Class: A Guide to Buying,
Selling and Trading Third-Generation Volatility Products, London: Risk
Books.

New York University Stern School of Business (2009), Restoring Financial
Stability: How to Repair a Failed System (Viral Acharya and Matthew
Richardson, Eds.), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Ng, 
Kwok 
Yuen; 
and 
Bruce 
Phelps 
(2010), 
“Capturing 
credit 
spread
premium: Alternative benchmarks for credit investors,” Barclays Capital
Quantitative Portfolio Strategy report, June 3, 2010.

Ni, Sophie X. (2006), “Stock option returns: A puzzle,” working paper,
available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1259703

Nordvig, Jens (2007), “Can the carry trade carry on?” Goldman Sachs
Global Economics paper.

Normand, John (2006), “Hedging inflation with real assets,” Investment
Strategies 23, J.P. Morgan Securities.

Novy-Marx, 
Robert 
(2009), 
“Is 
momentum 
really 
momentum?”
forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.

Odean, Terrance (1998), “Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?”
Journal of Finance 53, 1775–1798.

O’Kane, Dominic; and Saurav Sen (2004), “Credit spreads explained,”
Quantitative Credit Research Quarterly, Lehman Brothers, March 15, 2004.

Pan, Jun; and Allen M. Poteshman (2006), “The information in option
volume for future stock prices,” Review of Financial Studies 19, 871–908.

Panigirtzoglou, Nikolaos; and Jan Loeys (2005), “A fair-value model for
US bonds, credits and equities,” Investment Strategies 11, J.P. Morgan
Securities.
Pastor, 
Lubos; 
and 
Robert 
F. 
Stambaugh 
(2003), 
“Liquidity 
risk 
and
expected stock returns,” Journal of Political Economy 111(3), 642–685.

Pastor, Lubos; and Robert F. Stambaugh (2009), “Are stocks really less
volatile in the long run?” NBER working paper 14757.

Pastor, Lubos; and Pietro Veronesi (2009), “Learning in financial markets,”
NBER working paper 14646.

Pedersen, 
Claus 
M. 
(2006), 
Explaining 
the 
Lehman 
Brothers 
Option
Adjusted Spread of a Corporate Bond, report from Quantitative Credit
Research, Lehman Brothers, February 27, 2006.

Pedersen, Lasse H. (2009), “When everyone runs for the exit,” International
Journal of Central Banking 5(4), 177–199.

Perold, 
Andre 
F. 
(2007), 
“Fundamentally 
flawed 
indexing,” 
Financial
Analysts Journal 63(6), 31–37.

Perold, Andre F.; and William F. Sharpe (1988), “Dynamic strategies for
asset allocation,” Financial Analysts Journal 44(1), 16–27.

Petajisto, Antti (2010), “The index premium and its hidden cost for index
funds,” working paper, forthcoming in the Journal of Empirical Finance.

Petkova, Ralitsa; and Lu Zhang (2005), “Is value riskier than growth?”
Journal of Financial Economics 78(1), 187–202.

Phalippou, Ludovic (2007), Investing in Private Equity Funds: A Survey,
CFA Institute literature survey series.

Phalippou, Ludovic (2008), “Where is the value premium?” Financial
Analysts Journal 64(2), 41–48.

Phalippou, Ludovic (2009), “Beware when venturing into private equity,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1), 147–166.

Phalippou, Ludovic; and Olivier Gottschalg (2009), “The performance of
private equity funds,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 1747–1776.

Piazzesi, Monika; and Martin Schneider (2007), “Inflation illusion, credit,
and asset pricing,” NBER working paper 12957.

Piazzesi, 
Monika; 
and 
Martin 
Schneider 
(2008), 
“Bond 
positions,
expectations, 
and 
the 
yield 
curve,” 
Federal 
Reserve 
Bank 
of 
Atlanta
working paper 2008-02.

Plazzi, Alberto; Walter Torous; and Rossen Valkanov (2010), “Expected
returns and the expected growth in rents of commercial real estate,” Review
of Financial Studies, 23(9), 3469–3519.

Polk, Christopher; Samuel Thompson; and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2006),
“Cross-sectional forecasts of the equity premium,” Journal of Financial
Economics 81, 101–141.

Pollet, Joshua; and Mungo Wilson (2008), “Average correlation and stock
market returns,” forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.

Poterba, James M.; and Lawrence H. Summers (1988), “Mean reversion in
stock prices: Evidence and implications,” Journal of Financial Economics
22, 27–59.

Pukthuanthong, Kuntara; Richard M. Levich; and Lee R. Thomas (2007),
“Do 
foreign 
exchange 
markets 
still 
trend,” 
Journal 
of 
Portfolio
Management (Fall), 114–118.

Qian, 
Edward 
E.; 
Ronald 
H. 
Hua; 
and 
Eric 
H. 
Sorensen 
(2007),
Quantitative 
Equity 
Portfolio 
Management: 
Modern 
Techniques 
and
Applications, London: Chapman & Hall/CRC.

Rajan, Raghuram G. (2010), Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still
Threaten the World Economy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Rallis, 
Georgios; 
Joelle 
Miffre; 
and 
Ana-Maria 
Fuertes 
(2010), 
“The
strategic and tactical roles of enhanced-commodity indices,” working paper,
available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1648816

Rapach, David; Jack Strauss; and Guofu Zhou (2009), “Out-of-sample
equity premium prediction: Combination forecasts and links to the real
economy,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1257858

Rebonato, Riccardo (2007), Plight of the Fortune Tellers: Why We Need to
Manage Financial Risk Differently, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.

Reid, Jim; Mahesh Bhimalingam; and Nick Burns (2010), Default Study
2010, Deutsche Bank Global Markets Research.
Reid, Jim; and Nick Burns (2010): Long-Term Asset Return Study: From
the Golden to the Grey Age, Deutsche Bank Global Markets Research.

Reinhart, Carmen M. (2010), “This time is different chartbook: Country
histories on debt, default, and financial crises,” NBER working paper
15815.

Reinhart, 
Carmen 
M.; 
and 
Kenneth 
S. 
Rogoff 
(2008), 
“This 
time 
is
different: A panoramic view of eight centuries of financial crises,” NBER
working paper 13882.

Reinhart, 
Carmen 
M.; 
and 
Kenneth 
S. 
Rogoff 
(2009), 
This 
Time 
is
Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Reinhart, Carmen M.; and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2010), “From financial crash
to debt crisis,” NBER working paper 15795, forthcoming in American
Economic Review.

Ribeiro, Ruy; and Jan Loeys (2006), “Exploiting cross-market momentum,”
Investment Strategies 14, J.P. Morgan Securities.

Ribeiro, 
Ruy; 
John 
Normand; 
and 
Jan 
Loeys 
(2006), 
“Momentum 
in
commodities,” Investment Strategies 25, J.P. Morgan Securities.

Rietz, Thomas A. (1988), “The equity risk premium: A solution,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 22(1), 117–131.

Rinne, Kalle; and Suominen, Matti J. (2010), “Short-term reversals, returns
to liquidity provision and the costs of immediacy,” working paper, available
at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/ abstract = 1537923

Ritter, Jay R. (2005), “Economic growth and equity returns,” Pacific-Basin
Finance Journal 13(5), 489–503.

Ritter, Jay R.; and Richard S. Warr (2002), “The decline of inflation and the
bull market of 1982–1999,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
37 (March), 29–61.

Rizova, 
Savina 
(2010), 
“Predictable 
returns 
of 
economically 
linked
countries: Evidence and explanations,” University of Chicago Booth School
of 
Business 
research 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1562697
Robertson, Donald; and Stephen Wright (2006), “Dividends, total cash flow
to shareholders, and predictive return regressions,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 88(1), 91–99.

Rogoff, Kenneth S. (1980), “Essays on expectations and exchange rate
volatility,” MIT doctoral dissertation.

Rosenberg, 
Joshua 
V.; 
and 
Samuel 
Maurer 
(2008), 
“Signal 
or 
noise?
Implications 
of 
the 
term 
premium 
for 
recession 
forecasting,” 
Federal
Reserve Bank of New York—Economic Policy Review 14(1), July.

Rubinstein, Mark (2001), “Rational markets: Yes or no? The affirmative
case,” Financial Analysts Journal (May/June), 15–29.

Rubinstein, Mark (2006), A History of the Theory of Investments: My
Annotated Bibliography, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2010), “Macro-finance models of interest rates and
the economy,” Manchester School 78(1), 25–52.

Ruff, Jon (2007), “Commercial real estate: New paradigm or old story?”
Journal of Portfolio Management Special Real Estate Issue, 27–36.

Santos, Jesus (Tano); and Pietro Veronesi (2006), “Labor income and
predictable stock returns,” Review of Financial Studies 19(1), 1–44.

Scherer, Bernd (2010), Portfolio Construction and Risk Budgeting (Fourth
Edition), London: Risk Books.

Schneeweis, Thomas; Hossein Kazemi; and Richard B. Spurgin (2008),
“Momentum and asset returns: Are commodities a special case?” Journal of
Alternative Investments 10(4), 23–36.

Schneeweis, Thomas; Garry B. Crowder; and Hossein Kazemi (2010), The
New 
Science 
of 
Asset 
Allocation: 
Risk 
Management 
in 
a 
Multi-asset
World, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Schoar, Antoinette (2008), “Capital flows and the returns to private equity,”
presentation to the Institute for Quantitative Research in Finance (“Q
Group”).

Scholes, Myron S. (1972), “The market for securities: Substitution versus
price pressure and the effects of information on share prices,” Journal of
Business 45(2) 179–211.

Serbin, Vitaly; Peter M. Bull; and Howard Zhu (2009), “The capacity of
liquidity-demanding equity strategies,” Journal of Portfolio Management
36(1), 78–89.

Sharpe, 
William 
F. 
(1991), 
“The 
arithmetic 
of 
active 
management,”
Financial Analysts Journal 47(1), 7–9.

Shefrin, Hersh (2002), Beyond Greed and Fear: Understanding Behavioral
Finance and the Psychology of Investing, Oxford University Press.

Shefrin, Hersh; and Meir Statman (1985), “The disposition to sell winners
too early and ride losers too long,” Journal of Finance 40, 777–791.

Shen, Qian; Andrew C. Szakmary; and Subhash C. Sharma (2010), “Trend-
following 
trading 
strategies 
in 
commodity 
futures: 
A 
re-examination,”
Journal of Banking and Finance 34, 409–426.

Shiller, Robert J. (1981), “Do stock prices move too much to be justified by
subsequent changes in dividends?” American Economic Review 71(3),
June, 421–436.

Shiller, Robert J. (2000), Irrational Exuberance (First Edition), Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

Shiller, Robert J. (2005), Irrational Exuberance (Second Edition), Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

Shin, 
Hyun 
Song 
(2010), 
Risk 
and 
Liquidity 
(Clarendon 
Lectures 
in
Finance), Oxford University Press.

Shleifer, Andrei (1986), “Do demand curves for stocks slope down?”
Journal of Finance 41(3), 579–590.

Shleifer, Andrei (2000), Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral
Finance, Oxford University Press.

Shleifer, Andrei; and Robert W. Vishny (1997), “The limits of arbitrage,”
Journal of Finance 52(1), 35–55.

Sias, 
Richard 
(2007), 
“Causes 
and 
seasonality 
of 
momentum 
profits,”
Financial Analysts Journal 63(2), 48–54.
Siegel, Jeremy J. (2002), Stocks for the Long Run (Third Edition), New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Siegel, 
Laurence 
B. 
(2008), 
“Alternatives 
and 
liquidity,” 
Journal 
of
Portfolio Management 35(1), 103–114.

Siegel, Laurence B. (2009), “A riskless society is unattainable and infinitely
expensive,” in Insights into the Global Financial Crisis (L.B. Siegel, Ed.),
Research Foundation of the CFA Institute.

Siegel, Laurence B.; and Paul D. Kaplan (1996), “Measuring the risk of real
estate,” speech at the Chicago Quantitative Alliance, April.

Smith, Richard L.; Roberto Pedace; and Vijay Sathe (2009), “Venture
capital: Performance, persistence, and reputation,” working paper, available
at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1432858

Soros, George (2003), The Alchemy of Finance (Wiley Investment Classics
Edition), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Soros, George (2008), The Crash of 2008 and What It Means: The New
Paradigm for Financial Markets, New York: Public Affairs.

Speidell, Larry; Greg Stein; Kate Owsley; and Ingrid Kreuter (2005),
“Dilution is a drag . . . The impact of financings in emerging markets,”
Journal of Investing 14(4), 17–22.

Stein, Jeremy (2009), “Presidential address: Sophisticated investors and
market efficiency,” Journal of Finance 64(4), 1517–1548.

Stewart, Scott D.; John J. Neumann; Christopher R. Knittel; and Jeffrey
Heisler (2009), “Absence of value: An analysis of investment allocation
decisions by institutional plan sponsors,” Financial Analysts Journal 65, 1–
17.

Stivers, Christopher T.; Licheng Sun; and Yong Sun (2009), “The other
January effect: International, style, and subperiod evidence,” Journal of
Financial Markets, 12, 521–546. Stulz, Rene M. (2007), “Hedge funds:
Past, present and future,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 175–
194.

Stutzer, Michael J.; Chris Yung; and Eric N. Hughson (2006), “The misuse
of expected returns,” Financial Analysts Journal 62(6), 88–96.
Summers, 
Lawrence 
H. 
(2009), 
“Economic 
recovery,” 
speech 
at 
the
Brookings Institution, March 13, 2009.

Sun, Zheng; Ashley Wang; and Lu Zheng (2009), “The road less traveled:
Strategy 
distinctiveness 
and 
hedge 
fund 
performance,” 
working 
paper,
available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/ abstract = 1337424

Swensen, 
David 
F. 
(2009), 
Pioneering 
Portfolio 
Management: 
An
Unconventional Approach to Institutional Investment (Revised Edition),
New York: Free Press.

Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (2001), Fooled by Randomness: The Hidden Role
of Chance in the Markets and Life, New York: Texere.

Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (2004), “Bleed or blowup? What does empirical
psychology tell us about the preference for negative skewness?” Journal of
Behavioral Finance 5(1), 2–7.

Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (2007), The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly
Improbable, New York: Penguin Books.

Takats, Elod (2010), “Ageing and asset prices,” BIS working paper 318.

Teo, Melvyn (2009), 
“Does 
size 
matter in 
the 
hedge fund industry?”
working paper, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1331754

Teo, Melvyn (2010), “How liquid are liquid hedge funds?” working paper,
available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1571287

Ter Horst, Jenke; and Marno Verbeek (2007), “Fund liquidation, self-
selection, and look-ahead bias in the hedge fund industry,” Review of
Finance 11, 605–632.

Thaler, Richard H., Ed. (1993), Advances in Behavioral Finance, Russell
Sage Foundation.

Thaler, Richard H., Ed. (2005), Advances in Behavioral Finance (Volume
II), Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univrsity Press.

Thaler, Richard H.; and Eric J. Johnson (1990), “Gambling with the house
money and trying to break even: The effects of prior outcomes on risky
choice,” Management Science 36, 643–660.
Thorley, 
Steven 
R. 
(1995), 
“The 
time-diversification 
controversy,”
Financial Analysts Journal 51(3), 68–76.

Till, Hilary; and Joseph Eagleeye, Eds. (2007), Intelligent Commodity
Investing: New Strategies and Practical Insights for Informed Decision
Making, London: Risk Books.

Trim 
Tabs 
(2010), 
Using 
Equity 
ETF 
Flows 
as 
a 
Contrary 
Leading
Indicator, Trim Tabs research note.

Trolle, Anders B.; and Schwartz, Eduardo S. (2008), “Variance risk premia
in 
energy 
commodities,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1160195

Ulrich, Maxim (2008), “Inflation ambiguity and the term structure of
arbitrage-free U.S. government bonds,” working paper, available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=963971

Vayanos, Dimitri; and Paul Woolley (2010), “An institutional theory of
momentum 
and 
reversal,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1305671

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette (2003), “Perspectives on behavioral finance:
Does ‘irrationality’ disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and
actions,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette; and Moskowitz, Tobias J. (2002), “The returns
to 
entrepreneurial 
investment: 
A 
private 
equity 
premium 
puzzle?”
American Economic Review 92(4), 745–778.

Wallison, 
Peter 
J. 
(2009), 
“Not 
a 
failure 
of 
capitalism, 
a 
failure 
of
government,” in Insights into the Global Financial Crisis (L.B. Siegel, Ed.),
Research Foundation of the CFA Institute.

Wang, 
Kevin 
Q.; 
and 
Jianguo 
Xu 
(2010), 
“Time-varying 
momentum
profitability,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1534325

Warnock, Francis E.; and Veronica Cacdac Warnock (2009), “International
capital flows and U.S. interest rates,” Journal of International Money and
Finance 28, 903–919.
Watanabe, Akiko; and Masahiro Watanabe (2008), “Time-varying liquidity
risk and the cross section of stock returns,” Review of Financial Studies
21(6), 2449–2486.

Weisdorf, Mark A. (2007), “Infrastructure: A growing real return asset
class,” CFA Institute Conference Proceedings Quarterly (September), 17–
27.

Weitzman, Martin L. (2007), “Subjective expectations and asset-return
puzzles,” American Economic Review 97(4), 1102–1130.

Welch, Ivo (2000), “Views of financial economists on the equity risk
premium and on financial controversies,” Journal of Business, 73(4), 501–
537.

Welch, Ivo (2009), “The results of the equity premium January 2009
survey,” 
working 
paper, 
available 
at 
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1519544

Welch, 
Ivo; 
and 
Goyal, 
Amit 
(2008), 
“A 
comprehensive 
look 
at 
the
empirical performance of equity premium prediction,” Review of Financial
Studies 21, 1455–1508.

Wermers, 
Russ 
(2000), 
“Mutual 
fund 
performance: 
An 
empirical
decomposition 
into 
stock-picking 
talent, 
style, 
transaction 
costs, 
and
expenses,” Journal of Finance 55, 1655–1695.

Whitelaw, 
Robert 
(1994), 
“Time 
variations 
and 
covariations 
in 
the
expectation and volatility of stock market returns,” Journal of Finance
49(2), 515–541.

Wilcox, 
Stephen 
E. 
(2007), 
“The 
adjusted 
earnings 
yield,” 
Financial
Analysts Journal 63(5), 54–68.

Wilcox, Jarrod W. (1999), Investing by the Numbers (Frank J. Fabozzi
Series), John Wiley & Sons.

Wilcox, Jarrod W.; and Frank J. Fabozzi (2009), “A discretionary approach
for investment policy,” Journal of Portfolio Management 36(1), 46–59.

Wright, Jonathan H. (2008), “Term premiums and inflation uncertainty:
Empirical 
evidence 
from 
an 
international 
panel 
dataset,” 
Finance 
and
Economics Discussion Series paper 2008-25, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.

Wurgler, Jeffrey; and Ekaterina V. Zhuravskaya (2002), “Does arbitrage
flatten demand curves for stocks?” Journal of Business 75(4), 583–608.

Xing, 
Yuhang; 
Xiaoyan 
Zhang; 
and 
Rui 
Zhao 
(2010), 
“What 
does
individual option volatility smirk tell us about future equity returns?”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 45, 641–662.

Yale 
(2009), 
“The 
Yale 
Endowment 
Update 
2009,” 
available 
at
http://www.yale.edu/investments/

Yilmaz, Fatih (2009), Quantitative FX Notes, Bank of America Merrill
Lynch research report, Fall 2009.

Zweig, Jason (2008): Your Money and Your Brain: How the Science of
Neuroeconomics Can Help Make You Rich, Simon & Schuster.

...
Index

...
AAA/AA/A-rated bonds

absolute valuation

academic investors

active investing

active risk puzzle (Litterman)

active strategies

adaptive markets hypothesis (Lo)

advisors, CTAs

agriculture

alpha—beta barbell

alpha—beta separation

alphas

CAPM

currency carry

hedge funds

long horizon investors

portable alpha

alternative assets

assets list

commodities

hedge funds

liquidity

momentum strategies

PE funds

premia

real estate

risk factors

alternative betas

AM see arithmetic mean

ambiguity aversion

Amihud, Yakov
announcement days

arbitrage

behavioral finance

CRP front-end trading

equity value strategies

term structure models

Argentina

arithmetic mean (AM)

art investing

asset classes 1990—2009

alternative assets

“bad times” performance

currency carry

derivatives

foreign exchange

forward-looking indicators

growth sensitivities

historical returns

inflation

long history

momentum strategies

performance 1990—2009

profitable strategies

risk factors

style diversification

traditional

trend following

understanding returns

value strategies

volatility selling

world wealth

assets

1968—2007

asset richening
AUM

Berk—Green management model

cyclical variation

empirical “horse races”

ERPC

feedback loops

forward-looking measures

growth

illiquidity

liquidity

long-horizon investors

market relations

multiple asset classes

prices/pricing

privately held

real assets

risky assets

seasonal regularities

survey-based returns

tactical forecasting

tail risks

time-varying illiquidity premia

volatility

see also asset classes

assets under management (AUM)

asymmetric information

asymmetric returns

asymmetric risk

at-the-money (ATM) options seasonal regularities

tail risks

volatility selling

attention bias

AUM see assets under management
...
BAB see betting against beta

backfill bias

backwardation

“bad times”

carry strategies

catastrophes

crashes

crises

inflation

rare disasters

bank credibility

Bank of England

Barcap Index

BBB-rated bonds

behavioral finance

applications

arbitrage

biases

cross-sectional trading

heuristics

historical aspects

macro-inefficiencies

micro-inefficiencies

momentum

over/underreaction

preferences

prospect theory

psychology

rational learning

reversal effects

speculative bubbles
value stocks

BEI see break-even inflation

benchmarks, view-based expected returns

Berk—Green asset management model

Bernstein, Peter

betas

alpha—beta barbell

BAB

currency carry

equity

hedge funds

long-horizon investors

risk

time-varying

betting against beta (BAB)

biases

attention

behavioral finance

confirmation

conservatism

currency carry

downgrading

extrapolation

forward rate

hedge funds

heuristic simplifications

high equity premium

hindsight

historical returns

learning limits

memory

momentum

overconfidence

overfitting
overoptimism

reporting

representativeness

reversal tendencies

self-attribution

self-deception

survey data

terminology

volatility selling

binary timing model

Black—Litterman optimizers

Black—Scholes (BS) option-pricing formula

Black—Scholes—Merton (BSM) world

blind men and elephant poem (Saxe)

bond risk premium (BRP)

approximate identities

bond yield

business cycles

covariance risk

cyclical factors

decomposed-year Treasury yield

drivers

ex ante measures

historical returns

inflation

interpreting BRP

IRP

macro-finance models

nominal bonds

realized/excess return

safe haven premium

supply—demand

survey-based returns

tactical forecasting
targets

terminology

theories

YC

bonds

AAA/AA/A-rated

balanced portfolios

BBB-rated

credit spreads

ERPB

government

historical records

HY bonds

IG bonds

inflation-linked

long-term

nominal

non-government

relative valuation

stock—bond correlation

top-rated

yields

see also bond risk premium; corporate bonds

booms

break-even inflation (BEI)

Bretton Woods system

BRIC countries

BRP see bond risk premium

BSM see Black—Scholes—Merton

bubbles

absolute valuation

memory bias

money illusion

real estate
Shiller’s four elements

speculative

Buffet, Warren

building block approach

business cycles

asset returns

economic regime analysis

ex ante indicators

realized returns

buybacks

B-S see Black—Scholes option-pricing formula

C-P BRP see Cochrane—Piazzesi BRP forward rate curve

calls

seasonal regularities

tail risks

volatility selling

Campbell, John

Campbell—Cochrane habit formation model

Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)

alphas

carry strategies

Consumption CAPM

covariance with “bad times”

disagreement models

ERP

Intertemporal CAPM

liquidity-adjusted

market frictions

market price equation

multiple risk factors

risk factors

risk-adjusted returns
risk-based models

skewness

stock—bond correlation

supply—demand

volatility

Capital Ideas (Bernstein)

capitalism

capitalization (cap) rate

CAPM see Capital Asset Pricing Model

carry strategies

1990—2009

active investing

asset classes

business cycles

credit carry

currency

ERP

financing rates

foreign exchange

forward-looking indicators

forward-looking measures

generic proxy role

historical returns

long-horizon investors

non-zero yield spreads

real asset investing

roll

Sharpe ratios 2008

slide

tactical forecasting

cash, ERPC

cash flow

catastrophes

see also “bad times”
CAY see consumption/wealth ratio

CCW see covered call writing

CDOs see collateralized debt obligations

CDSs see credit default swaps

central banks

Chen three-factor stock returns model

China

Citi (Il—)Liquidity indices

Cochrane—Piazzesi BRP (C-P BRP) forward rate curve

see also Campbell—Cochrane

collateral return

collateralized debt obligations (CDOs)

comfortable approaches

commodities

characteristics

equity value strategies

excess returns

expected returns

expected risk premia

futures

historical returns

inflation

momentum

return decomposition

returns 1984—2009

supply—demand seasonals

term structure

trading advisors

value indicators

...
commodity momentum

performance

rational stories

simple strategies

trend following

tweaks

when it works well

why it works

see also momentum strategies

commodity trading advisors (CTAs)

composite ranking cross-asset selection models

compound returns

conditioners

confirmation bias

conservatism

constant expected returns

constant relative risk aversion (CRRA)

Consumption CAPM

consumption/wealth ratio (CAY)

contemporaneous correlation

contrarian strategies

blunders

feedback loops

forward indication approach

see also reversal

convenience yield

corporate bonds

credit spreads

CRP

forward-looking indicators

front-end trading
IG bonds

liquidity

sample-specific valuation

tactical forecasting

correlation

asset returns

correlation premium

correlation risk

default correlations

equities

implied

risk factors

tail risks

costs

control

currency carry

enhancing returns

taxes

trading costs

country-specific vulnerability indices

covariance

with “bad times”

covariance risk

risk factors

covered call writing (CCW)

crashes

markets

see also “bad times”

credit default swaps (CDSs)

credit-pricing models

credit risk

credit risk premium (CRP)

analytical models

attractive opportunities
business cycles

credit default swaps

credit spreads

decomposing credit spread

default correlations

emerging markets debt

front-end trading

historical excess returns

IG bonds

low ex post premia

mortgage-backed securities

non-government debt

portfolio risk

reduced-form credit-pricing models

reward—risk

single-name risk

swap—Treasury spreads

tactical forecasting

terminology

theory

credit spreads

AAA/AA/A-rated bonds

BBB-rated bonds

business cycles

CRP

cyclical effects

decomposition

empirical “horse races”

forward-looking indicators

high-yield bonds

rolling yield

top-rated bonds

volatility

yield-level dependence
credit and tactical forecasting

creditworthiness

crises

2007—2008 crisis

currency carry

liquidity

money markets

see also “bad times”

cross-asset selection forecasting models

cross-sectional market relations

cross-sectional trading

CRP see credit risk premium

CRRA see constant relative risk aversion

CTAs see commodity trading advisors

currency

base of returns

carry

empirical “horse races”

equity value strategies

inflation

see also foreign exchange

currency carry

baseline variants

combining carry

conditioners

costs

diversification

emerging markets

ex ante opportunity

financial crashes

foreign exchange

historical returns

hyperinflation

indicators
interpreting evidence

maturities

pairwise carry trading

portfolio construction

ranking models

regime indicators

seasonals

selection biases

strategy improvements

“timing” the strategy

trading horizons

unwind episodes

why strategies work

cyclical effects

credit spreads

growth

seasonal regularities

see also business cycles

...
D/P see dividend yield

data mining see also overfitting; selection bias

data sources of time series

data series construction

day-of-the-week effect

DDM see dividend discount model

debt supercycle

default correlations, CDOs

default rates, HY bonds

deflation

delta hedging

demand see supply—demand

demographics

derivatives

Dimson, Elroy

direct hedge funds

disagreement models

discount rates

discounted cash flows

discretionary managers

disinflation

disposition effect

distress

diversification

currency carry

drawdown control

long-horizon investors

return

risk factors

style

diversification return (DR)
dividend discount model (DDM)

equities

ERP

forward-looking indicators

growth rate debates

dividend growth

dividend yield (D/P)

DJCS HF index

dollars

base of returns

cost averaging

currency carry

foreign exchange

downgrading bias

downside beta

DR see diversification return

drawdown control

duration risk

duration timing

dynamic strategies

equity value strategies

portfolio construction

risk factors

...
E/P see earnings/price ratio

earnings

E/P ratio

EPS

equity returns

forecasts

growth rates

yield

see also earnings/price ratio

earnings-per-share (EPS)

earnings/price (E/P) ratio

absolute valuation

drivers

forward-looking indicators

measures choices

relative valuation

value measures

economic growth

see also growth

efficiency

behavioral finance

macro-inefficiencies

market inefficiency

micro-inefficiencies

efficient markets hypothesis (EMH)

elephant and blind men poem (Saxe)

EMBI indices

emerging markets

carry strategies

currency carry

debt
equity returns

future trends

growth

EMH see efficient markets hypothesis

empirical multi-factor finance models

endogenous return and risk

feedback loops

market timing

research

endowments

energy sector

commodity momentum

trend following

volatility selling

enhancing returns

costs

horizon

investors

risk management

skill

EPS see earnings per share

equilibrium accounting

equilibrium model

equities

1990—2009

business cycles

carry strategies

correlation premium

empirical “horse races”

forward-looking indicators

inflation

long history

momentum

sample-specific valuation
tactical forecasting

ten-year rolling averages

value strategies

see also stock . . .

equity index options

equity indices

equity market returns

cross-sectional relations

earnings

economic surprises

emerging markets

GDP growth rates

long-term growth

time series

valuation

equity momentum

equity premium puzzle

equity risk premium (ERP)

business cycles

DDM

equity betas

equity premium puzzle

ERPB/C

ex ante premia

forward-looking measures

global evidence

growth

high market valuations

historical premium

lower premium

market timing

subjective expectations

survey-based expectations
survey-based returns

tactical forecasting

terminology

theories

windfall gains

equity risk premium over bond (ERPB)

equity risk premium over cash (ERPC)

equity value strategies

asset classes

contrarian blunders

designing strategies

dynamic strategies

Fama—French portfolios

fundamental indices

historical performance

questions about design

sector neutrality

short term

style timing

tweaks

value vs. other indicators

why value works

ERP see equity risk premium

ERPB see equity risk premium over bond

ERPC see equity risk premium over cash

errors in forecasting

euros

excess returns

expected cash flow growth

extrapolation by investors
...
Fama, Eugene F.

see also Fama—French . . .

Fama—French (FF)

portfolios

rational theories

three-factor model

Fama—French (FF) portfolios

analysis

equity value strategies

migration dynamics

style investing

valuation ratios

value growth outperformance

VMG series

Fed Model

Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia

feedback effects

contrarian strategies

endogenous return and risk

momentum strategies

procyclical responses

risky assets

feelings and moods, PT

fees

FF see Fama—French

financial theories

asset-pricing theory

average realized returns

complexity of reality

costs equaling benefits

evolving theories
historical aspects

return variation with time

timing of losses

volatility

financialization

fixed income

FoF see fund of funds

forecasts/forecasting

analyst’s long-term earnings

economist’s GDP

errors

see also prediction; tactical forecasting

foreign exchange (FX)

as an asset class

carry strategies

momentum strategies

returns terminology

seasonals

see also currency . . .

forward premium puzzle

forward rate bias

forward rate curve (C-P BRP)

forward-looking asset return measures

building block approaches

carry strategies

value strategies

forward-looking indicators

asset class real yields

carry strategies

contrarian approach

historical records

market mispricing

shortcomings

time-varying risk premia
value strategies

forward-looking measures

asset returns

carry strategies

DDM

ERP

long-term returns

value measures

framing effects, PT

French, Kenneth R.

see also Fama—French

front-end trading

fund of funds (FoF)

fundamental indices

funding liquidity

funding rate spreads, CRP

future trends

rise of China

deflation

effect of 2007—2008 crisis

emerging markets

inflation

nextyears

risky assets

sovereign creditworthiness

futures, commodity

FX see foreign exchange

G10 currencies

cross-asset selection models

currency carry

FX markets

see also currency . . .

GARCH models
GDP see gross domestic product

generalized 
autoregressive 
conditional 
heteroskedasticity 
models 
see
GARCH models

geometric mean (GM)

German Bunds

glamour firms

global assets since 1900

global world wealth total

GM see geometric mean

gold standard

government bonds

government debt

Great Moderation

Greenspan, Alan

Grinold, Richard

gross domestic product (GDP)

growth

asset class sensitivities

asset market relations

business cycles

determinants

emerging markets

evidence for

GDP

inflation

long-horizon investors

long-term growth

as risk factor

risk premia

speed limits

theory

time-varying premium

yield curve steepness

habit formation
Hallowe’en indicator

Hasbrouck, Joel

hedge funds (HFs)

accessing returns

alphas

betas

biases

capacity

characteristics

cost control

CTA performance

decomposed index returns

direct HFs

empirical facts

FoFs

leverage

managers

negative factors

neglected risks

outperformance

performance assessment

positive factors

prospective returns

replication strategies

return biases

returns 1984—2009

risks

sector performance

Sharpe ratios 2008

skilled investors

tail risks

voluntary reporting

hedged global government bonds

hedging currency
HFR index

HFs see hedge funds

high-yield (HY) bonds

hindsight bias

historical averages

1990—2009

endpoint year change

illiquidity

pre-1990

sample-specific results

volatility

historical records

active investing

bonds

BRP average returns

foreign exchange

G10 markets

global assets since 1900

high returns

longer perspective

money markets

real assets

real returns

stocks

hockey-stick-shaped graph

holiday effect

horizon

compound returns

enhancing returns

long horizon

retail investors

tactical forecasting

time diversification

house money effect
house price appreciation (HPA)

housingsee also real estate

HPA see house price appreciation

HY see high-yield bonds

hyperinflation

...
Ibbotson Associates

Ibbotson index

Ibbotson, Roger

IG see investment-grade bonds

ILLIQ price impact proxy

illiquidity

assets

average returns

hedge funds

long-horizon investors

market frictions

premium

reward—risk ratios

see also liquidity

illiquidity premium

definition

liquidity risk premium

stocks

time-varying

implied correlation

implied volatility

tail risks

volatility selling

incubation bias

index OTM puts

indices

CCW strategies

equity

fundamental

market cap weighted

real estate
vulnerability

see also individual indices

industry

inefficiency see efficiency

inflation asset class sensitivity

BEI

BRP

business cycles

commodities

currencies

deflation

determinants

disinflation

drivers

earnings yield

equities

expectations

future trends

growth rates

history

hyperinflation

linkers

persistence

premium

process

real estate

returns 1990—2009

as risk factor

secular trends

stagflation

tactical forecasting

time-varying premium

uncertainty

US growth rates 1814—2009
inflation risk premium (IRP)

asset sensitivities

BRP

inflation process

uncertainty

inflation-linked bonds (linkers)

information asymmetry

infrastructure investment

instant history bias

institutional window dressing

insurance selling/buying

interest, UIP

interest rate swaps

interest rates

internal rate of return (IRR)

Intertemporal CAPM

inverse of the price-to-rent ratio

investment perspectives

investment-grade (IG) bonds

corporate

CRP

downgrading bias

historical CRP

trading activities

investors

academics

CDOs

commodity momentum

cost control

enhancing returns

extrapolation

long horizon

professionals

rational theories
retail investors

risk management

skill benefits

underreaction

IRP see inflation risk premium

IRR see internal rate of return

irrationality

commodity momentum

currency carry

investors

survey-based returns

terminology

value premium

volatility selling

...
January barometer

January effects

Jensen’s alpha

...
Keynes, John Maynard

Kim—Wright model (K-W BRP)

KMV credit risk model

KW BRP see Kim—Wright model

...
lead—lag effects

learning

Lehman Brothers index see Barcap index

leverage

hedge funds

long-horizon investors

risk reduction

secular trends

volatility

lifecycle investing

linkers see inflation-linked bonds

liquidation bias, HFs

liquidity

alternative assets

average premia

corporate bonds

costs

crises

definition

equity value strategies

estimation difficulties

fragility

global markets

government debt

harvesting premia

historical evidence

long-horizon investors

momentum strategies

privately held assets

as risk factor

risk premium
seasonal regularities

SRs

time varying

trading cost study

value strategies

varying across assets

see also illiquidity

Litterman, Robert see also Black—Litterman

Lo, Andrew

long-horizon investors

active alpha vs. passive beta

comfortable approaches

diversification

empirical return sources

in-house management

institutional practices

insurance selling/buying

key debates

large investors

leverage

liquidity

lottery selling/buying

market timing

recent success

takeaways

theory

lookahead bias

lookback bias

loss

loss aversion models

lottery approaches

LTCM HF management

lunar cycle
macro-finance models, BRP

managers

hedge funds

PE funds

skill

styles

marginal utility (MU)

market-cap-weighted indices

market frictions

market inefficiency

market liquidity

market mispricing

market price equations

market timing

endogenous return and risk

long-horizon investors

tactical forecasting

volatility

markets

adaptive markets hypothesis

assets and growth

economic surprises

EMH

equity market valuations

expectations

money markets

secular trends

time-varying illiquidity premia

volatility

see also emerging markets; market . . .

Marsh, Paul

MAX returns

MBS see mortgage-backed securities
mean

mean reversion

median

Mei—Moses art price index

memory bias

memory effects

Merton, Robertsee also Black—Scholes—Merton

Merton structural model

Minsky, Hyman

MIT-CRE real estate index

MLMCCO see Mount Lucas Management trend-following index

mode

momentum

1990—2009

active/real asset investing

asset classes

based on past returns

bias

business cycles

commodities

currency carry

equities

feedback loops

liquidity

real estate

risk factors

stocks

style rotation models

tactical forecasting

see also commodity momentum

monetary policy cycle, BRP

money

illusion
markets

tactical forecasting

moods and feelings, PT

Moody’s

mortgage-backed securities (MBS)

Moses see Mei—Moses

Mount Lucas Management (MLMCCO)

trend-following index

MU see marginal utility

multi-factor models

myopic loss aversion model

...
narrow framing, PT

National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)

NCREIF real estate index

noise traders

nominal bonds

non-government bonds

non-zero yield spreads

carry strategies

empirical “horse races”

future excess returns

market expectations

yield curve behavior

...
OASs see option-adjusted spreads

option-adjusted spreads (OASs)

options

buying/selling

equity index

OASs

rolling yield

single-stock

tail risks

trading strategies

volatility

see also at-the-money options; calls; puts

out-of-the-money (OTM) options seasonal regularities

tail risks

volatility selling

overconfidence

overcrowding

overfittingsee also data mining; selection bias

overoptimism

overreaction

...
P/B ratio see price-to-book ratio

P/E ratio see price/earnings ratio

pairwise carry trading

PE see private equity funds

PEH see pure expectations hypothesis

pensions

performance

1990—2009

in “bad times”

commodity momentum

equity value

Fama—French portfolios

hedge funds

historical returns

PE funds

real estate

volatility selling

periodicity

Perold, Andre F.

persistence factor (PF)

perspectives on investments

peso problem

carry strategies

ERP

return predictability

volatility selling

PF see persistence factor

Phalippou, Ludovic

Phillips curve model

portable alpha

portfolios
balanced stock—bond

construction

CRP

currency carry

Fama—French portfolios

risk

prediction

YC

see also forecasting; return predictability

preferences

presidential cycle

price-to-book (P/B) ratio

price/earnings (P/E) ratio

price/pricing

assets

commodity momentum

credit-pricing models

E/P ratio

equity momentum

growth

historic real prices

ILLIQ price impact proxy

inverse of price-to-rent ratio

liquidity

market price equations

Mei—Moses art index

options

P/E ratio

repricing effects

sample-specific valuation

spot prices

tactical forecasting

temporary fluctuations

trend following
see also Capital Asset Pricing Model

private equity (PE) funds characteristics

historical performance

interpreting returns

liquidity

looking beyond average

manager selection

returns 1984—2009

venture capital

professional investors

profit

profitability

prospect theory (PT)

psychology of behavioral finance

PT see prospect theory

pure expectations hypothesis (PEH)

puts

tail risks

volatility selling

...
quant (quantitative) equity management

...
random walk hypothesis (RWH)

ranking models

rare disasterssee also “bad times”; peso problems

rational expectations

rational explanations

commodity momentum

survey-based returns

value premium

volatility selling

rational learning

rational theories

asymmetric information

covariance with “bad times”

disagreement models

EMH

illiquidity premia

investor irrationality

marginal utility

market frictions

market price equations

multiple risk factors

the “new world”

the “old world”

rational learning

skewness preferences

supply—demand

time-varying risk premia

RE see real estate

real assets

real estate investment trusts (REITs)

real estate (RE)
art investing

characteristics

empirical “horse races”

ex ante value measures

forward-looking indicators

historical performance

historical records

house prices

indices

inflation

infrastructure investment

main determinants

problematic data

REITs

returns 1984—2009

value indicators

real returns

realized bond returns

rebalancing asset classes

recession 2008—2009

reduced-form credit-pricing models

reflexivity theory (Soros)

regression

regret aversion, PT

REITs see real estate investment trusts

relative valuation, ERP

rental yield

replication strategies

reporting bias

representativeness

repricing effect

required returns

retail investors

return biases
return predictability

alternative interpretations

changing world

data mining

market frictions

market inefficiency

peso problems

rational learning

risk premia

return reversal

return and risk, endogenous

return-based risk factors

reversal

behavioral finance

commodity momentum

equity momentum

feedback loops

models

real estate

return reversal

theorists

see also contrarian strategies

reward—risk

bonds

CRP

illiquid assets

sample-specific results

Treasuries

risk

arbitrage

beta risk

correlation

covariance risk

CRP
currency carry

distress

duration risk

endogenous return and risk

equity premium puzzle

equity value strategies

hedge funds

neglected risks

PE funds

portfolios

skewness

systematic risk

tactical forecasting

volatility

see also reward—risk; tail risks

risk-adjusted returns

risk aversion

risk-based models

risk factors

characteristics

choice of factors

combining factors

covariances

diversification

four factors

growth

inflation

liquidity

multi-factor model

perspectives on investments

rational theories

return-based factors

risk premia

tail risks
riskless returns

risk management

arithmetic mean

bearing more risk

diversification return

enhancing returns

geometric mean

monetizing risk reduction

rebalancing

risk adjustment

risk reduction

Sharpe ratios

smart risk taking

volatility targeting

risk-neutral default probabilities

risk preferences

risk premia

growth

return predictability

risk premium hypothesis

volatility

see also bond risk premium; credit risk premium; equity risk premium;
inflation risk premium; time-varying risk premia

risk reduction

risk-taking advice

risky assets

roll

RWH see random walk hypothesis

...
S&Pindex

S&P GSCI commodity futures index

safe haven

sample-specific averaging results

1990—2009

changing end/startpoint years

pre-1990

subperiod analysis

valuation adjustments

Samuelson, Paul

Saxe, J.G.

Scholes see Black—Scholes

SDF see stochastic discount factor

seasonals

announcement days

asset returns

currency carry

cyclical patterns

day-of-the-week effect

equity value strategies

Hallowe’en indicator

holiday effect

January barometer

January effects

long cycles

lunar cycle

monthly seasonals

presidential cycle

secular patterns

supply—demand

tactical forecasting
turn of the month

twelve-month periodicity

within-day regularities

sector neutrality

secular growth

secular patterns in returns

secular trends

1988—2007 vs. 1968—1987

asset richening

disinflation

financialization

future trends

Great Moderation

leveraging

market vs. state

nextyears

recession 2008—2009

reversible

sustainable

ten trends

securities see also TIPS

selection bias see also data mining; overfitting

self-attribution

self-deception

selling volatility

sentiment indicators

share buybacks

Sharpe ratios (SRs)

active investing

BAB

balancing stock—bond portfolios

BRP

commodity momentum

CRP
currency carry

emerging markets

feedback loops

fixed income

front-end trading

hedge funds

historical records—

illiquidity

momentum strategies

plummeting in 2008

real asset investing

risk adjustment

Treasuries

VGM series

Sharpe, William F.

Shiller, Robert

Siegel, Jeremy

single-name risk

single-stock options

single-stock returns

skewness

currency carry

empirical evidence

evidence on

lottery preferences

options

positive/negative

preferences

premium

rational theories

risk

standalone skewness

tail risks

theory
skill

applying skills

benefit to investors

enhancing returns

finding skills

slide

small-cap stocks

smart investing

smart traders

smirks

Soros, George

sovereign creditworthiness see also Treasuries

spot prices

spreads

funding rate

industry-adjusted value spread

non-zero yield

OASs

“spread products”

swap Treasury

see also credit spreads

8, SRs see Sharpe Ratios

stagflation

stagnation

standalone skewness

state regulation

static strategies

status seeking

Staunton, Mike

stochastic discount factor (SDF)

stock markets

stocks

balanced portfolios

Chen three-factor model
covariance risk

equity value strategies

growth sensitivities

historical records

liquidity

momentum

P/B ratio

P/E ratios

seasonals

single stocks

small-cap

stock—bond correlation

volatility

see also equities; equity . . .

Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation (Ibbotson)

storage theory

straddles

strategy styles

structural credit risk models

structural uncertainty

style diversification

style rotation models

style timing

subjective ex ante equity returns

Summers, Lawrence

supply—demand

BRP

energy sector

fiscal effects

foreign flows

pension funds

rational theories

regulatory effects

seasonals
tactical forecasting

volatility selling

survey-based BRP measures

survey-based returns

consensus forecasts

criticisms

data problems

multiple asset classes

rational/irrational explanations

stale data

subjective returns

timeliness of data

use of averages

survivorship bias

swap—Treasury spreads

swaps

CDSs

interest rate

variance

Swensen, David

systematic managers

systematic risk

...
tactical forecasting

assets

BRP

combining models

corporate bonds

cross-asset selection models

CRP

cyclical factors

data mining

duration timing

enhancements

ERP

generic proxies

indicators

inflation uncertainty

models

overcrowding

pitfalls

real activities

safe haven influences

short/long horizon

supply—demand

technical indicators

timing models

trading

types of models

tail risks

assets faring poorly

average asset returns

CDOs

correlation
hedge funds

historical aspects

as risk factor

skewness premium

SRs

time-varying premia

volatility

tax-loss selling

taxes

term structure

BRP

commodities

models

terminology

biased returns

BRP

constant expected returns

CRP

currency of returns

ERP

irrational expectations

measurement of returns

rational expectations

risk-adjusted returns

time-varying expected returns

theory of storage

timber

time and retail investors

time diversification

time series

time varying

betas

expected returns

growth premium
illiquidity premium

inflation premium

liquidity

risk premia

tail risk premia

timing

currency carry

long-horizon investors

losses

markets

style timing

tactical forecasting

TIPS see Treasury inflation-protected securities

trading costs

traditional asset classes

Treasuries

1952—2009

attractive opportunities

bills

BRP

business cycles

creditworthiness

ERPB

foreign exchange

forward-looking indicators

front-end richness

interest rates

sample-specific valuation

survey-based returns

swap—Treasury spreads

timevarying illiquidity premia

timing models

TIPS

volatility
Treasury bills

Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS)

trend following

business cycles

four-asset classes

measures of

sectors

simple commodity strategies

volatility

when it works well

see also commodity momentum

Triumph of the Optimists (Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton)

turn-of-the-month effect

twelve-month periodicity

...
UIP see uncovered interest parity

uncertainty

equity premium puzzle

inflation

structural

volatility

uncovered interest parity (UIP)

underreaction

United States (U.S.)

1988—2007 vs. 1968—1987

bonds

equity growth

ERP

historical records

inflation and growth

liquidity

money markets

real assets

stocks

see also Treasuries

upward-biased returns

U.S. see United States

...
valuation

absolute

emerging markets

equity markets

real returns

relative

see also earnings/price ratio

value effect

value indicators

commodities

forward looking

real estate

value measures

absolute valuation

E/P

earnings yield

ERP

Fed Model

forward looking

inflation

real estate

relative valuation

yield ratio

value minus growth see VMG

value premium

equity value strategies

irrational explanations

rational explanations

style timing

value spread, industry adjusted

value strategies
1990—2009

active investing

business cycles

currency carry

forward-looking asset returns

liquidity

real assets

risk factors

stocks

tactical forecasting

see also equity value strategies

variance risk premium

variance-selling strategies

variance swaps

venture capital (VC)

view-based expected returns

VMG (value minus growth)

volatility

asset returns

assets faring poorly

average returns

business cycles

commodity momentum

credit spreads

cross-sectional relations

E/P ratio

empirical “horse races”

equity value strategies

financial theories

high-volatility assets

historical returns

leverage

long-horizon investors

market timing
risk management

risk premium

secular trends

selling

single-stock returns

status seeking

stock market returns

tail risks

targeting

time series

trend following

uncertainty

volatility risk

see also implied volatility

volatility selling

asset classes

biases

correlation premium

equity indices

historical averages

historical performance

implied volatilities

irrational explanations

options

profitability

rational explanations

skewness premium

timing

trading options

trading strategies

tweaks

vulnerability indices

...
WDRA see wealth-dependent risk aversion

wealth

wealth-dependent risk aversion (WDRA)

windfall gains

window dressing

world wealth

Wright see Kim—Wright

...
Yale Endowment

YC see yield curve steepness

yen

yield

asset class real yields

bonds

BRP historical averages

convenience yield

credit spreads

currency carry

D/P

earnings

HY bonds

non-zero yield spreads

relative valuation

rental yield

rolling yield

YTM

see also non-zero yield spreads

yield curve steepness (YC)

bond yield

BRP

cyclical factors

economic growth

forward-looking indicators

future bond returns

non-zero yield spreads

poor prediction
secular prediction

yield to maturity (YTM)

...
zero sum game argument

Zimbabwe

...