arXiv:cond-mat/0210710v1  31 Oct 2002
More statistical properties of order
books and price impact
Marc Potters∗, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud†,∗
November 26, 2024
† Commissariat `a l’Energie Atomique, Orme des Merisiers
91191 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France
∗Science & Finance, CFM, 109-111 rue Victor Hugo
92 353 Levallois cedex, France
November 26, 2024
Abstract
We investigate present some new statistical properties of order books.
We analyse data from the Nasdaq and investigate (a) the statistics of in-
coming limit order prices, (b) the shape of the average order book, and (c)
the typical life time of a limit order as a function of the distance from the
best price. We also determine the ‘price impact’ function using French and
British stocks, and ﬁnd a logarithmic, rather than a power-law, dependence
of the price response on the volume. The weak time dependence of the re-
sponse function shows that the impact is, surprisingly, quasi-permanent,
and suggests that trading itself is interpreted by the market as new infor-
mation.
Many statistical properties of ﬁnancial markets have already been explored,
and have revealed striking similarities between very diﬀerent markets (diﬀerent
traded assets, diﬀerent geographical zones, diﬀerent epochs) [1, 2, 3]. More re-
cently, the statistics of the ‘order book’, which is the ultimate ‘microscopic’ level
of description of ﬁnancial markets, has attracted considerable attention, both
from an empirical [4, 5, 6, 8, 7] and theoretical [9, 10, 5, 11, 12, 13, 8, 14, 15]
point of view.
The order book is the list of all buy and sell limit orders, with their correspond-
ing price and volume, at a given instant of time. We will call a(t) the ask price
(best sell price) at time t and b(t) the bid price (best buy price) at time t. The
midpoint m(t) is the average between the bid and the ask: m(t) = [a(t)+b(t)]/2.
1

When a new order appears (say a buy order), it either adds to the book if it is
below the ask price, or generates a trade at the ask if it is above (or equal to)
the ask price (we call these ‘market orders’). The price dynamics is therefore the
result of the interplay between the order book and the order ﬂow. The study of
the order book is very interesting both for academic and practical reasons. It
provides intimate information on the processes of trading and price formation,
and reveals a non trivial structure of the agents expectations: as such, it is of
importance to test some basic notions of economics. The practical motivations
are also obvious: issues such as the market impact or the relative merit of limit
versus market orders are determined by the structure and dynamics of the order
book.
The main results of our investigation of some major French stocks were as
follows [8]: (a) the price at which new limit orders are placed is, somewhat
surprisingly, very broadly (power-law) distributed around the current bid/ask;
(b) the average order book has a maximum away from the current bid/ask, and a
tail reﬂecting the statistics of the incoming orders. We studied numerically a ‘zero
intelligence’ model of order book which reproduces most of the empirical results,
and proposed a simple approximation to compute analytically the characteristic
humped shape of the average order book (see also [13]).
In this paper, we give the results concerning some of the Nasdaq order books,
as observed on the Island ECN (see www.island.com), and discuss the similarities
and diﬀerences with the French data. Second, we give some results on the price
impact function that quantiﬁes how a transaction of a given volume aﬀects the
price (on average).
1
Results on Nasdaq stocks
We denote by b(t) −∆the price of a new buy limit order, and a(t) + ∆the price
of a new sell limit order. A ﬁrst interesting question concerns the distribution
density of ∆, i.e. the distance between the current price and the incoming limit
order. We found that P(∆) for French stocks was identical for buy and sell orders
(up to statistical ﬂuctuations); and very well ﬁtted by a single power-law:
P(∆) ∝
∆µ
0
(1 + ∆)1+µ,
(1)
with an exponent µ ≃0.6. This power-law was conﬁrmed in [7] for British stocks,
albeit with a diﬀerent exponent µ ≃1.5. Note however that all the volume is
electronic in Paris, which is not the case in London.
When repeating this analysis for some of the Nasdaq stocks, we found results
that signiﬁcantly depend on the studied asset (see Fig. 1), but that all reveal the
very slowly decaying tail discovered in the case of French stocks. As emphasized
in [8, 7], this tail suggests that market participants believe that large jumps in
2

1
10
100
1000
10000
∆+∆1
10
-2
10
0
10
2
10
4
10
6
Ρ(∆)
QQQ
SPY
MSFT
Power-law, µ=1
Figure 1: Cumulative distribution of the position ∆of incoming orders, as a function
of 1 + ∆(in ticks), for QQQ, SPY and MSFT. The dashed lines correspond to µ = 1.
the price of stocks are always possible, and place orders very far from the current
price in order to take advantage of these large potential ﬂuctuations.
More precisely, we have studied QQQ and SPY, which are exchange traded
funds that track, respectively, the Nasdaq and the S&P500, and MSFT (Mi-
crosoft). The data corresponds to the period June 1st to July 15th, 2002. At
variance with the Paris Bourse, where all the volume is traded on a centralized
electronic market, the Nasdaq is in fact a myriad of electronic platforms. Island
is one of them, which only gathers a fraction of the total volume (roughly 40 %
for QQQ and 20 % for SPY and MSFT). Therefore, unfortunately, the statistics
that we report here only contains a partial information on the order ﬂow and on
the order book. This is why this data is less representative than that on French
stocks. In the case of QQQ however, the Island ECN is considered to be the
‘dominant’ market, which drives all other platforms; the data reported below is
therefore probably signiﬁcative in this case. Fig. 1 shows that for all three assets,
the tail index µ of P(∆) is in the same ballpark as the values found for the French
and British stocks. One can notice that the value of µ for MSFT is smaller than
that for QQQ, itself smaller than gor SPY. This is expected, since large jumps
are more probable for individual stocks than it is for the Nasdaq index, itself
more volatile than the S&P500.
We now turn to the shape of the order book. The order ﬂow is maximum
around the current price, but an order very near to the current price has a larger
probability to be executed or cancelled (see below) and disappear from the book.
It is thus not a priori clear what will be the shape of the average order book.
We ﬁnd that in the case of QQQ the (time-averaged) size of the queue in order
book is symmetrical, and has a maximum away from the current bid (ask), as
was found for French stocks: see Fig. 2. For SPY (and for MSFT, not shown),
3

1
10
100
distance from best_bid (best_ask) in ticks
0
10000
20000
30000
average nb shares
1
10
100
1000
10000
1
100
10000
QQQ
SPY (rescaled)
Figure 2: Average order book for QQQ and SPY, as a function of the distance ∆from
the current bid (or ask). The axis have been rescaled in the case of SPY.
on the other hand, the size of the queue is maximum at the bid (or ask). The
diﬀerence might be due to the fact that, as explained above, the Island ECN is
not the dominant player for SPY or MSFT, and often behaves as a ‘mirror’ of
other platforms.
In our previous paper [8], we have analysed a simple model that explains the
humped shape of the book of the type observed on QQQ. The basic ingredients of
this model is (a) the non uniform, power-law like, ﬂow of incoming orders (b) the
diﬀusive like dynamics of the price that eats up the nearby limit orders and (c)
the ﬁnite life-time of the limit orders. For simplicity, this life-time was assumed
in [8] to be constant, independent of the distance form the best price ∆. We have
investigated empirically this question using the Nasdaq data (the French data
unfortunately does not provide the time at which a limit order is cancelled). As
a proxy for the cancel rate, we have computed the number of shares cancelled
per unit time as a function of ∆, and divided the result by the average number
of shares in the order book at distance ∆. The results for QQQ and MSFT are
shown in Fig. 3. One sees that the life-time of a given order increases as one
moves away from the bid-ask. This is, again, expected from the arguments given
in [8, 7]: far away orders are typically put in the market by patient investors
that want to take proﬁt of important swings in the medium term. Orders at
and around the bid and ask prices, on the other hand, correspond to very active
market participants that observe the market price all the time and readjust their
orders at a very high frequency. Our results suggest that any quantitative theory
of the order book should include this non uniform cancel rate.
4

1
10
100
1000
distance from bid/ask +1 (in ticks)
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
cancel rate (min
-1)
QQQ
MSFT
Figure 3: Cancel rate for QQQ and MSFT, as a function of the distance ∆from
the current bid (or ask). Note that the cancel rate at the bid/ask is very high (10
per minute), which suggests that most of the orders are automated. Note that the
execution rate is only 22% of the cancel rate for QQQ, and 40% for MSFT.
2
The price impact function
Recently, several studies have tried to determine quantitatively how a market or-
der of a given volume aﬀects the price. This information is extremely important
for many purposes. First, for model building: many agent based models of mar-
kets use as a starting point a phenomenological relation between price changes
and order imbalance [16, 18, 17, 19]. Second, as far as trading is concerned, the
control of market impact is crucial whan one wants to manage large volumes.
The most naive idea, inspired from physical systems, is that of linear response:
prices should move proportionally to volumes. However, some recent work [20,
21, 22] show that the average price change ∆p is a sublinear function of the
volume imbalance ∆V . A square-root dependence ∆p ∝∆V α with α = 1/2
was advocated on theoretical grounds [23, 19]. An exhaustive study of all US
stocks [22] however suggests a smaller exponent α but a log-log plot of ∆p vs.
∆V reveals a systematic downward bend, which indicates that a power-law might
not be appropriate. Here, we want to argue that this relation might in fact be
logarithmic.
More precisely, let us deﬁne the time dependent response function R(V, τ)
as the average mid-point variation between times t and t + τ, conditioned to a
transaction of volume V taking place at time t at the ask (buyer initiated trade,
ε(t) = +1) or at the bid (seller initiated trade, ε(t) = −1). The response function
is given by:
R(V, τ) = ⟨ε(t) · [m(t + τ) −m(t)] |V ⟩.
(2)
[We have actually studied the full distribution of ε(t) [m(t + τ) −m(t)] and checked
that the above average is not dominated by a few market ‘jumps’.] The results
5

0
2
4
6
8
10
 ln(V)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
 Barclays
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.5
1
R(V,τ=100s) (ticks)
 Vivendi
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
 Total
Figure 4: Price response function R(V, τ) as a function of ln V for three stocks (Bar-
clays, Vivendi and Total). The period corresponds to February 2002 for the French
stocks and to May-June 2002 for Barclays. The time delay τ is equal to 100 seconds.
The y-axis is in ticks.
we ﬁnd (see Fig. 4) can be expressed as:
R(V, τ) ≈R(τ) ln V,
(3)
where, surprisingly, R(τ) is only weakly dependent on τ: R(τ) ﬁrst increases from
τ = 10 seconds to a few hundred seconds, and then appears to decrease back to a
ﬁnite value, with a total amplitude of variation of at most 50%. This means that
(i) as found in previous investigations, the impact of small trades on the price is,
in relative terms, much larger (statistically) than that of large trades, (ii) that the
impact of trading on the price is quasi-permanent, and (iii) the (weak) temporal
structure of R(τ) is compatible with the observed price dynamics, which is found
to be (weakly) super-diﬀusive at very short times and (weakly) sub-diﬀusive on
intermediate time scales.
Point (i) is perhaps not as surprising as it ﬁrst seems: as emphasized above,
the average queue in the order book is an increasing function of ∆. This means
that price changes experience a stronger resistance from the book for large vol-
umes than for small volumes. In other words, since the most probable volume at
the bid (or at the ask) is one share, a small transaction is capable of changing
the mid-price by eating up the bid (or ask). The next tick (bid minus one or
ask plus one) has typically a larger volume waiting, and oﬀers therefore more
resistance to further price changes. The humped shape of the order book in itself
6

is, as recently emphasized in [22], enough to give a downward bend to R(V, τ)
vs. V . However, this eﬀect is not suﬃcient to account for the very slow ln V
behaviour reported above.
The interpretation is that, most probably, market
orders of large volumes are only submitted when the order book on the opposite
side of the trade is capable of absorbing this incoming volume. We have indeed
found some positive correlation between the volume at bid/ask before the trade
and the volume of the following trade.
Point (ii) is in fact quite intriguing, in particular in the context of the eﬃcient
market hypothesis. One might have expected that, in the absence of any new
information, there should be a restoring force driving back the new mid-point
towards a local ‘equilibrium’ price. The near-absence of temporal structure in
R(τ) suggests that each new trade is in fact interpreted by the market as new
information, and the new mid-point is immediately adopted as the new reference
price, around which the ﬂow of incoming orders readapts. (This is actually the
hypothesis made in the models investigated in [13, 8]) This reverts the usual logic:
most of the time, prices move not because of new information, but rather new
information is generated by the mere changes of prices. Although there seems
to be a small resilience on intermediate time scales, the prices are much more
aﬀected by trading itself than expected from the theory of eﬃcient market. This
observation might explain the tremendous ‘excess’ volatility of ﬁnancial prices.
Acknowledgements: We thank Jean-Pierre Aguilar, Jelle Boersma, Damien Chal-
let, J. Doyne Farmer, Xavier Gabaix, Andrew Matacz, Rosario Mantegna, Marc
M´ezard and Matthieu Wyart for stimulating and useful discussions.
References
[1] for a recent review, see: R. Cont, Empirical properties of asset returns:
stylized facts and statistical issues, Quantitative Finance, 1, 223 (2001), and
refs. therein.
[2] R. Mantegna & H. E. Stanley, An Introduction to Econophysics, Cambridge
University Press, 1999.
[3] J.-P. Bouchaud and M. Potters, Th´eorie des Risques Financiers, Al´ea-Saclay,
1997; Theory of Financial Risks, Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[4] B. Biais, P. Hilton, C. Spatt, An empirical analysis of the limit order book
and the order ﬂow in the Paris Bourse, Journal of Finance, 50, 1655 (1995)
[5] S. Maslov, Simple model of a limit order-driven market, Physica A 278,
571 (2000); S. Maslov, M. Millis, Price ﬂuctuations from the order book
perspective – empirical facts and a simple model, Physica A 299, 234 (2001)
7

[6] D. Challet, R. Stinchcombe, Analyzing and modelling 1+1d markets, Physica
A 300, 285 (2001)
[7] I. Zovko, J. D. Farmer, The power of patience: A behavioral regularity in
limit order placement, e-print cond-mat/0206280.
[8] J.P. Bouchaud, M. M´ezard, M. Potters, Statistical properties of stock order
books: empirical results and models, Quantitative Finance 2, 251 (2002).
[9] P. Bak, M. Paczuski, and M. Shubik, Price variations in a stock market with
many agents, Physica A 246, 430 (1997)
[10] David L.C. Chan, David Eliezer, Ian I. Kogan, Numerical analysis of the
Minimal and Two-Liquid models of the Market Microstructure, preprint
cond-mat/0101474
[11] H. Luckock, A statistical model of a limit order market, Sidney University
preprint (September 2001).
[12] F. Slanina, Mean-ﬁeld approximation for a limit order driven market model,
Phys. Rev. E 64, 056136 (2001).
[13] M. G. Daniels, J. D. Farmer, G. Iori, E. Smith, How storing supply and
demand aﬀects price diﬀusion, e-print cond-mat/0112422; E. Smith, J. D.
Farmer, L. Gillemot, S. Krishnamurthy, Statistical theory of the continuous
double auction, e-print cond-mat/0210475
[14] D. Challet, R. Stinchcomb, Exclusion particle models of limit order ﬁnancial
markets, e-print cond-mat/0208025
[15] R.D. Willmann, G. M. Schuetz, D. Challet, Exact Hurst exponent and
crossover behavior in a limit order market model, to appear in Physica A.
[16] A. Beja, M. B. Goldman, The dynamic behavior of prices in disequilibrium,
Journal of Finance 35, 235 (1980).
[17] J.-P. Bouchaud, R. Cont, A Langevin approach to stock market ﬂuctuations
and crashes, European Journal of Physics, B 6, 543 (1998).
[18] J.D.
Farmer,
Market
Force,
Ecology
and
Evolution,
e-print
adap-
org/9812005, Int. J. Theo. Appl. Fin. 3, 425 (2000).
[19] X. Gabaix, P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, H. E. Stanley, A Simple Theory of
the ’cubic’ Laws of Financial Fluctuations, working paper (2002).
[20] A. Kempf, O. Korn, Market Depth and Order Size, Journal of Financial
Markets, 2, 29 (1999).
8

[21] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, X. Gabaix, H. E. Stanley, Quantifying Stock
Price Response to Demand Fluctuations, e-print cond-mat/0106657.
[22] F. Lillo, R. Mantegna, J. D. Farmer,Single Curve Collapse of the Price Im-
pact Function for the New York Stock Exchange, e-print cond-mat/0207428.
[23] Y.C. Zhang, Towards a Theory of Marginally Eﬃcient Markets, Physica
A269 30 (1999).
9
