
...
MORE PRAISE FOR
Making Sense of Chaos
“This is the book I’ve been waiting for. It reinvents economics in terms of
computerized agent-based modeling and complex adaptive systems theory
developed over four decades. In many situations, ‘complexity economics’ is
more predictive than classical economics and therefore provides a better
basis for public policy. Doyne Farmer’s life work with Santa Fe Institute is
embodied here.”
Stewart Brand, founder of the Long Now Foundation and editor of The
Whole Earth Catalog
“It can seem daunting to try to understand the globally connected, fast-
moving, technology-driven, financialized economy of today; but there
could be no better guide to this complex landscape than Doyne Farmer. This
is a compelling book for anybody concerned about our economic future.”
Dame Diane Coyle, author of Cogs and Monsters
“After 2008, everybody except conventional economists seemed to realise
that conventional economics is failing us. I applaud this bold and exciting
new approach, born out of the 21st century rather than the 19th. It’s about
time!”
Brian Eno
“In this riveting book, Doyne Farmer profoundly unravels the role played
by complex systems in our economy. From the time he was living in a tent
while working on climate models on the American west, to his more recent
years in the hallowed halls of Oxford University, Farmer’s lifelong journey
is a testament to the creativity and perseverance needed to succeed in the
rugged landscapes of multidisciplinary science.”
César Hidalgo, author of Why Information Grows
“I can’t think of a better person to help us make sense of chaos than one of
the founders of the field of chaos theory, J. Doyne Farmer. A physicist by
training, but with plenty of financial and economic street cred, Farmer takes
on the formidable task of making complexity economics understandable,
fascinating, and fun. And he succeeds!”
Andrew W. Lo, author of Adaptive Markets
“Doyne Farmer condenses a lifetime’s worth of seminal contributions to
chaos theory within this captivating book, and describes an ongoing
paradigm shift within economics that can better address the problems facing
our world by acknowledging and harnessing complexity. His genius is
indisputable!”
Scott Page, author of The Model Thinker
“Standard economics has failed us when it comes to the challenge of
climate change, and in this remarkable book Doyne Farmer explains why—
and shows that a more complex understanding of how economies work
yields insights that can help us see, and build, a workable future. Farmer’s
insights are more general, extending to all kinds of realms; indeed, it’s
exciting to sense the intellectual ground being broken here. But it’s also of
the highest practical importance; heeding his thoughtful counsel offers a
path out of the box canyon where we’re currently stuck as a species.”
Bill McKibben, author of The End of Nature
“Our greatest challenges, such as climate change, force us to move beyond
linear thinking to grapple with their complexities. Doyne Farmer’s book
shows us how to do so, bringing some clarity to the chaos. I gobbled it up—
I hope it gets into the hands (and heads) of those who want to understand
our most pressing problems and work towards solving them.”
Hannah Ritchie, author of Not the End of the World
“Doyne Farmer is the world’s leading thinker on technological change. For
decades he has focused on the question of how we can make sense of the
data of today to see where the world is going tomorrow. This wonderful
book applies these insights to economics, addressing the big global issues
of environmental sustainability, and the well-being and prosperity of people
around the world.”
Max Roser, Founder of Our World in Data
“This book is a real achievement from which I learned a great deal. The
economics profession should be much more open to Farmer-type
complexity approaches. I hope this book is an inspiration to young scholars
from many disciplines concerned with economic questions.”
Lawrence Summers, former US Secretary of the Treasury
“Mainstream economics achieved an impressive level of mathematical
rigor, but at the expense of grossly simplified assumptions and an exclusive
focus on the equilibrium, making it ineffective in helping us solve real-
world problems. Is ‘predictive economics’ even possible? In this remarkable
book, Doyne Farmer, a cofounder of the modern science of chaos, shows
that it is. He convincingly argues that we need to build realistic agent-based
models, grounded in data, that will enable us to find effective ways to run
our economy and navigate societal challenges. A must-read.”
Peter Turchin, author of End Times: Elites, Counter-Elites, and the Path of
Political Disintegration
...
Making Sense of Chaos
...
Making Sense of Chaos
A Better Economics for a Better World
J. DOYNE FARMER
...
First published in 2024 in the United Kingdom by Allen Lane, a division of Penguin Random House
UK, and in the United States by Yale University Press.
Copyright © J. Doyne Farmer, 2024.
All rights reserved.
This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, including illustrations, in any form (beyond
that copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and except by reviewers
for the public press), without written permission from the publishers.
Yale University Press books may be purchased in quantity for educational, business, or promotional
use. For information, please e-mail sales.press@yale.edu (U.S. office) or sales@yaleup.co.uk (U.K.
office).
Typeset in 12/14.75 pt Dante MT Std by Jouve (UK), Milton Keynes.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2024931693
ISBN 978-0-300-27377-9 (hardcover : alk. paper)
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
...
This book is dedicated to my childhood mentor, Thomas Edward Ingerson (1938–2019).
...
Contents
Acknowledgments
List of Illustrations
Prologue
Introduction
PART I: WHAT IS COMPLEXITY ECONOMICS?
1. What is a Complex System?
2. The Economy is a Complex System
3. Understanding the Metabolism of Civilization
4. How Simulations Help us Understand the Economy
PART II: STANDARD ECONOMICS 
⇔
COMPLEXITY ECONOMICS
5. A Lightning Summary of Standard Economics
6. Modeling an Uncertain and Complicated Economy
7. Why Is the Economy Always Changing?
PART III: THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
8. Inefficient Markets
9. The Self-Referential Market
10. Ecology and Evolution in Finance
11. How Credit Causes Financial Turbulence
PART IV: CLIMATE ECONOMICS
12. How we Learned to Predict Weather and Climate
13. Climate Economics and Technological Progress
PART V: MODELING FOR A BETTER FUTURE
14. Guidance to Solve Some of Our Big Problems
15. Removing the Roadblocks
16. Becoming a Conscious Civilization
Bibliography
Notes
Index
...
Acknowledgments
During the ten years it took me to write this book, I often felt like a monkey
with a typewriter; without extensive help from my friends, colleagues and
editors, it would have been incomprehensible garbage. I should first thank
my agent, John Brockman, who nagged me to write this book for thirty
years, and my other agent, his son Max Brockman, who helped push it over
the finish line. On the editorial front, I would like to thank Vince Bielski,
Seth Ditchik, Edward Kastenmeier, Sienna Latham, Dorothy Nicholas and
Andrew Weber for valuable suggestions. Kurt Vonnegut once said that
when he wrote, he always imagined he was talking to his sister; Shanny
Peer played that role for me, but much more: She encouraged me, forced
me to be clear, made insightful suggestions and spent innumerable hours
editing every line. Sara Lippincott did a superb edit from front to back,
further streamlining my rambling thoughts. I was lucky to get Keith
Mansfield as my editor at Penguin, who made creative, thoughtful
suggestions and empowered me to make the book lively and fun. I was
similarly lucky to have Alba Ziegler-Bailey as my copyeditor, who
painstakingly read every word, improved my phrasing, added hundreds of
needed commas and then generously let me take some of them out. Luca
Mungo wrestled my motley collection of crude figures into a consistent and
well-rendered form, and David Mackintosh produced a richly ironic
visualization of the wilderness of bounded rationality. My fellow
complexity economists Brian Arthur, Rob Axtell, Peter Barbrouck-Johnson,
Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Maria del Rio-Chanona, Alissa Kleinnijenhuis,
François Lafond, James McNerney, Penny Mealy, Jose Moran, Scott Page,
Marco Pangallo and Anton Pichler helped create the substantive material
for the book, guided me in its articulation and gave important feedback. My
open-minded, mostly mainstream colleagues John Geanakoplos, Jeremy
Large, Andrew Lo, Larry Summers and Alex Teytelboym had the courage to
engage with me, read the book and correct many errors (but those that
remain are all mine). Meanwhile, my friends Sander Bais, Kingsmill Bond,
Chris Magee, Fotini Markopoulou and Peter Turchin helped me debug my
explanations to make them clear, and my friends Karen Lawrence, Steve
Lawton and Robb Lentz even went above and beyond the call of duty and
read the manuscript twice! (Giving very useful feedback each time.) My
friend and musical partner Tim Palmer improved my description of how we
predict the weather. I would particularly like to thank Eric Beinhocker and
Cameron Hepburn at Oxford for their years of collaboration and support.
Finally, the underlying research presented here would not have been
possible without the people and organizations who have funded it through
the years, with special mention for Jack Mezaros, Leslie Haroun, George
Soros, Baillie Gifford and most of all Gerald Smith, whose generous no-
strings-attached contribution allowed the complexity economics group at
Oxford to thrive, and Dorothy Nicholas, whose organizational skills keep us
from falling into chaos.
...
List of Illustrations
1. The Lorenz attractor
2. Supply chain of a laptop
3. Comparison of the trophic structure of the US and Chinese economies
4. A network view of the job space for the United States in 2016 (from
Mealy, del Rio-Chanona and Farmer, 2018)
5. The Beveridge curve (from del Rio-Chanona et al., 2021)
6. Our model for the epidemics’ effect on sickness and the economy (from
Pangallo et al., 2023).
7. Housing market simulation for Washington DC
8. The wilderness of bounded rationality (illustration by David
Mackintosh)
9. An endogenous business cycle from a simple agent-based model (from
Asano et al., 2021)
10. The clustered volatility of price movements
11. Does news explain clustered volatility? (from Cutler, Poterba and
Summers, 1989)
12. Comparison of the U.S. stock market, broker-dealer leverage and
volatility (from Aymanns et al., 2016)
13. Comparison of two agent-based simulations of the stock market (from
Aymanns and Farmer, 2015)
14. A simple schematic diagram of the Basel leverage-cycle model (from
Aymanns et al., 2016)
15. Intermittency in fluid turbulence
16. Differences in the price of some goods in the US from 1998–2022
17. Prediction made in 2013 of the likely cost of solar photovoltaic modules
18. Historical global cost and deployment of energy technologies (from
Way et al., 2022)
19. Track record of projections for PV costs and floor costs (from Way et
al., 2022)
20. The Climate Policy Laboratory
...
Prologue
There has always been a strand of thought [. . .] that holds that we cannot
hope to understand the major events in the life of an economy, and perhaps
also its everyday behavior, without entertaining principles of
disequilibrium.
Edmund S. Phelps (1991)
1
On March 16, 2020, I mobilized a team of some of my best Oxford
students, postdocs and former-students, and we began a crash program to
build a model to predict how the economy would respond to the COVID-19
pandemic. It was clearly only a matter of time before the disease would
become widespread and many governments would instigate lockdowns,
with an enormous economic impact. But there are many ways to implement
public health measures. Governments would need to decide what
restrictions to impose and which industries should be closed. Was there a
sweet spot that might provide a reasonable compromise between preventing
the suffering that would be caused by infection and mitigating the suffering
from economic stress? Could we predict the economic impact of COVID?
(At the risk of spoiling the punchline, the answer is yes.)
COVID was going to shock the economy from both sides. On the
demand side, with or without government-imposed lockdowns, consumers
would curtail many of their former activities; on the supply side, non-
essential industries where workers were in danger of infection were likely
to be forced to cut back or shut down completely. To understand the
economic impact, we needed to forecast the shocks in advance and
understand how they might be amplified as they propagated through the
economy.
Our first task was predicting the shocks. To do this on the demand side,
we used a study compiled by the US Congressional Budget Office in 2006,
which predicted what would happen to demand for the products of different
industries during a flu epidemic.
2
Although the study took the SARS flu
virus as the disease template, and there are some differences between SARS
and COVID, it provided a reasonable guess at how consumers would
respond. As it turns out, they got a few things wrong, such as anticipating
that demand for health care would go up (it went down, because of deferral
of routine treatments), but in general their predictions were sound.
Predicting the supply shocks was harder, and we had nothing to guide us.
Two remarkable scientists and former graduate students of mine, Penny
Mealy and Maria del Rio-Chanona, led the effort to assemble this piece of
the puzzle. When the pandemic broke out, Penny had already left Oxford
and returned to her hometown of Melbourne, Australia, where she was a
postdoctoral fellow at Monash University. She had to be awake late at night
to make our daily Zoom calls, but this arrangement had the advantage that
she and Maria could hand problems back and forth, so someone was
working on the model twenty-four hours a day.
Maria and Penny took advantage of a remarkable data set compiled by
the US Department of Labor that goes by the acronym O*NET, and
provides detailed information about almost 800 different occupations.
3
It
includes key facts we needed, such as the typical proximity of workers to
each other, which we used to estimate which kinds of workers would be
exposed to infection. It also provided information about the number of
employees who work in each industry. O*NET enabled Maria and Penny to
construct a remote-labor index that predicted which occupations would be
able to work from home.
To help us understand which industries governments might shut down,
another of my former students, Marco Pangallo (who you will hear a lot
about later), found an Italian government list of non-essential industries.
4
The combination of Maria and Penny’s remote-labor index and Marco’s list
of non-essential industries allowed us to predict the drop in the labor force
in each industry. By assuming that output would drop proportionally to the
number of workers removed from the labor force, we were able to predict
the direct economic impact the pandemic shutdown would have on each
industry.
Our paper predicting the supply and demand shocks for the second
quarter of 2020 was publicly released one month later, on April 14, 2020.
5
For reasons of data convenience, our paper only addressed the US
economy.
6
Compared to the pre-COVID period, we predicted that the direct
shocks would reduce US GDP by about 20 per cent, jeopardize 23 per cent
of jobs, and lower total wage income by 16 per cent. (These numbers are
quarterly, so if the shock lasted for only three months, the annual effects
would be proportionally smaller.) We also predicted that there would be a
relatively small effect on high-wage occupations (a 6 per cent job loss) and
a large effect (41 per cent) on low-wage occupations. Low-income workers
also had a much higher probability of becoming infected.
In hindsight, these predictions were broadly right. Nonetheless, we knew
they were missing a key effect that would make the impact even bigger:
These were only the direct shocks, which would be amplified as they
reverberated around the economy. Understanding how this would unfold is
complicated because supply and demand shocks flow in opposite directions.
Goods and services flow downstream from supply to demand, whereas
demand shocks flow upstream: If the demand for a consumer product – say,
bicycles – drops, the demand for bicycle tires drops, which means the
demand for synthetic rubber drops. Conversely, supply shocks move
downstream: If there’s a shortage of workers to make synthetic rubber, this
creates a shortage of tires, which creates a shortage of bicycles. Supply and
demand shocks interact as they move downstream and upstream, colliding
with one another and amplifying the initial shocks. This can reduce
economic output even further.
The economic impact of the COVID pandemic combined three
exceptional features that made standard models inadequate: First, the
shocks were highly industry-specific, making it essential to model the
economy with a high degree of resolution; second, the shocks affected
supply and demand simultaneously; and, third, the shocks were huge and
happened really fast.
Standard economic models assume equilibrium, which means that
supply and demand are always equal. The COVID shocks hit the economy
so hard and so quickly that they knocked it far out of equilibrium, making
standard models unsuitable. We needed a model that could track the
dynamics of the shocks without assuming equilibrium, and we needed to
build it very quickly. The fact that there were no well-recorded historical
examples of similar pandemics made this particularly challenging.
Because we were based in England, and because we knew the British
government was actively considering its options, we decided to shift our
focus to the UK. The effort to build our model of COVID shock dynamics
was led by my Austrian graduate student Anton (Toni) Pichler, who had just
completed his DPhil (what Oxford calls a PhD) in mathematics. We needed
to track the factors that would lower economic output and understand their
impact. On the demand side, consumers might reject a good or service for
fear of infection; for example, even though airlines and other modes of
transportation were deemed essential, their customers largely abandoned
them. On the supply side, an industry might not have the workers and
material inputs needed to produce its product, or it might be deemed
inessential and be forced to shut down.
To understand how all these factors would affect each industry we
needed what is called a production function in economics. A production
function is a kind of recipe that tells how much can be produced with a
given amount of each input. Making steel, for example, requires iron, coke,
coal and labor, all in the right proportion. Unfortunately, there was no
standard economic model of the production function that was sufficiently
well grounded in data to be useful. The key issue was substitutions: Which
inputs could be substituted, and to what extent? We needed to know this
industry by industry. The steel industry also has inputs from the
management consultant industry and the restaurant industry (to run
cafeterias), but it can get by without these if it needs to. Neither of the
standard choices for production functions worked – either they allowed too
many substitutions or none at all. We needed something more realistic.
Luckily, we managed to convince a company called IHS Markit to perform
a survey of their industry analysts pro bono, which they did in only two
weeks, identifying the critical inputs for each of fifty-two different
industries.
7
We modeled each industry as if it were a single firm; this is a crude
approximation, but it was good enough for our purposes. We assumed that
each industry began the pandemic with a normal level of inventory. As
problems occurred, inventories dropped; if an industry ran low on a critical
input, its output dropped. Similarly, if the demand for the industry’s output
dropped, or if it didn’t have enough workers because of COVID
restrictions, its output would drop. Bear in mind that one industry’s outputs
are often another industry’s inputs. Our model tracked the demand shocks
as they flowed upstream and the supply shocks as they flowed downstream,
colliding with one another and lowering the overall output of the economy.
It also allowed us to feed in the shocks we predicted in our first paper
(adjusted for the UK), watch them propagate, and forecast the overall hit to
Britain’s GDP, unemployment and other economic indicators under
different lockdown scenarios.
In early May 2020, the UK had already been in a severe lockdown for
more than a month, and the government was considering what to do next.
We ran our model for several different scenarios and evaluated their
economic impact. For each scenario, we also estimated the expected
number of COVID infections, using standard methods from epidemiology.
Extending the severe lockdown would reduce the number of infections but
increase the economic hit, while relaxing it entirely would cause a lot of
deaths, but with less economic stress. There were no good choices, but we
found a ‘least bad’ choice, leaving all upstream industries open while
banning person-to-person participation in consumer-facing industries.
Under this scenario, infections were only a little worse than under a total
lockdown, but the economy suffered much less. On May 8, completely
exhausted from our marathon effort, we sent our paper to UK government
officials.
8
A few days later they relaxed the lockdown along the lines we
recommended.
A post-mortem analysis shows that we did extremely well. We predicted
a 21.5 per cent contraction of GDP in the UK economy in the second
quarter, with respect to the last quarter of 2019, which was remarkably
close to the actual contraction of 22.1 per cent. To put this in perspective,
the median forecast by several institutions and financial firms was 16.6 per
cent and the forecast by the Bank of England was 30 per cent. Of course,
it’s easy to get lucky forecasting a single event, but, because we had made
forecasts for every industry sector, we actually made fifty-two forecasts,
and most of those were pretty good too. Our post-mortem analysis
confirmed that we succeeded because our model had what I call
verisimilitude – it rendered the most important mechanisms affecting the
economy with enough realism to provide accurate predictions. Our model
has since been used by another group, who (retrospectively) used it to
predict the shocks to the Belgian economy, where it performed similarly
well, and it has been used to forecast the consequences of the Ukraine War
for the Austrian economy.
9
Our effort provides a proof of principle for the usefulness of complexity
economics, which is the topic of this book. Complexity economics is an
interdisciplinary movement of rebellious economists and other scientists
who aim to better understand the economy using principles that are
completely different than those of standard economics. Our COVID model
was the first to use complexity-economics methods to make an accurate
prediction of an important economic event, outperforming the standard
models. This was done in real-time – meaning before it happened – so no
one can accuse us of cheating. Complexity economics is a movement that
has been a long time coming, but it is now taking off – complementing and
competing with the standard methods that have dominated mainstream
economics for more than a century.
In my career I have had the good fortune to participate in three major
scientific revolutions in the understanding of chaos, complex systems and
machine learning. Each of these movements began on the fringe of the
scientific establishment and slowly – then suddenly – moved into the
mainstream. Complexity economics, which applies complex-systems ideas
to economics, is a revolution-in-progress whose moment is about to come.
Here I explain what complexity economics is, what it has already done,
why its time is ripe and how it can make the world a better place. This is a
story of scientific discovery, which is the best adventure available in the
modern world.
10
This book is simultaneously a reflection on what the
economy is, an account of how complexity economics can better guide it, a
chronicle of a scientific revolution, a story about the evolution of science
and the scientific method, and a memoir. I hope you enjoy it.
...
Introduction
Being an optimist, I have hope that the profession [of economics] will
someday get into a scientific mode, based on anthropological observation
of behavior and computer simulation of interaction.
Barbara Bergmann, pioneer of micro-simulation (1980)
1
We live in an age of increasing complexity – an era of accelerating
technology and global interconnection that arguably holds more promise,
and more peril, than any other in human history. New means of flourishing
lie tantalizingly at our fingertips, but Armageddon is all too easy to
imagine. The fossil fuels that power the global economy have generated
remarkable wealth, but they threaten to destroy it through climate change,
an immense tsunami rolling toward us from the future. Automation and
artificial intelligence are creating prosperity for some and unemployment
for others. Financial crises and growing inequality have contributed to
global polarization and the retreat of democracy.
Many of these problems are rooted in the economy.
2
Climate change is
caused by economic activity, automation is intended to increase economic
productivity, and financial crises and inequality are the result of poor
management of the economy. Public policymaking for guiding the economy
relies on theories and models that frame government debates, refine
options, and provide arguments for and against proposed changes. Just as
important, economic models and theories shape our intuition and affect how
we think about the world and the decisions we make.
Unfortunately, the guidance provided by existing economic models has
often failed. The 2008 global economic crisis offers a good example. A
couple of years before the crisis started, top economists at the New York
Federal Reserve Bank became concerned about the possible dangers of a
crash in the housing market. They asked the Federal Reserve Bank US
model (FRB/US), one of the most well-developed economic models in the
world, what would happen to the national economy if the average house
price dropped by 20 per cent.
3
‘Not much,’ was the answer.
4
The economists’ concerns were remarkably prescient: Between January
2007 and January 2009, the average price of a house sold in the US dropped
by about 23 per cent. The FRB/US model’s prediction had been horribly
wrong, underestimating the effect on the US economy by a factor of 20. At
the time, the financial crisis of 2008 was the worst period of global
economic decline since the Great Depression of the 1930s. In the United
States alone, five million people lost their jobs, unemployment rose to 10
per cent and the economy lost some $10 trillion – and the effect on the rest
of the world was even bigger. The failure of economic models was
universal. The President of the European Central Bank, Jean-Claude
Trichet, later confessed to his colleagues, ‘As a policymaker during the
crisis, I found the available models of limited help. In fact, I would go
further: In the face of the crisis, we felt abandoned by conventional tools.’
5
Contemporary science and technology can help us understand and solve
the world’s problems in ways that differ dramatically from those offered by
the ‘conventional tools’ of economics. We are now able to collect data on
economic activity at an unprecedented scale. Modern computers are capable
of modeling the global economy with a remarkable level of fidelity and
detail, and could be used to guide us through crises and help create an
economy that is sustainable, fair and prosperous.
This is not happening, at least within mainstream economics. There have
been improvements to the conventional tools, but they don’t go nearly far
enough. The problems are inherent in the conceptual framework that
dominates the profession. While this framework is useful for well-specified
problems, like designing a more efficient auction or understanding the
strategy of labor negotiations, it is ill-suited to addressing big, messy,
complicated, real-world problems. The core assumptions of mainstream
economics don’t match reality, and the methods based on them don’t scale
well from small problems to big problems and are unable to take full
advantage of the huge advances in data and technology. For important
global issues, such as climate change, standard economic theory’s wrong
answers have provided a rationale for inaction, leading us to the brink of
global catastrophe. Nobel Prizes have been given to economists whose
theories were based on idealized arguments with no empirical support,
providing fodder for neoliberal policies that led to extreme inequality and
fueled sociopolitical polarization.
This book is not about criticizing economics – there are plenty of books
doing that already. It is about how to do economics differently to take proper
advantage of big data and computer power, to create economic models that
make better predictions and to give better policy advice about the hard
problems facing the world. To be clear, this book is mostly about
macroeconomics – the branch of economics that focuses on large-scale
phenomena like inflation and unemployment – and finance, which is about
money and investments. We will focus exclusively on economic theory,
rather than economic data analysis using statistical methods. This is called
econometrics in economics and machine learning in the field of artificial
intelligence. (In both cases, models are formed simply by fitting functions
to data – economists tend to favor linear functions, while computer
scientists prefer neural nets.)
By theory, I mean building models of the world based on assumptions
about how it works. Newton’s laws of gravity and motion, for example,
make it possible to predict the motion of comets and planets and explain
why the planets move as they do. Statistical methods, in contrast, illuminate
regularities in data and exploit them for prediction without making
underlying assumptions. Econometrics has begun to analyze large data sets
and is currently yielding many important results, while machine learning is
exploding. Nonetheless, though statistical analysis is extremely useful, there
are fundamental limits to what it can do.
6
Statistical analysis can help us
build a picture of the world as it is, but it can make inferences about the
future only if the underlying behavior remains the same. In a genuinely new
situation, statistical regularities may shift. A more reliable way to anticipate
what will happen when the world changes is with a theory – as long as it is
based on mechanisms that do not change. A famous example of why this is
so important in economics is the Lucas critique, which I describe in Chapter
5.
Economics is fundamentally harder than physics because, unlike planets,
people can think, and their behavior can change as a result. Economic
theory has to explain the behavior of agents, like households or firms, who
make decisions, such as what to consume, where to work, how much to
work, where to invest, what to produce, how much to produce, what price to
charge and how to innovate. There is a standard template for building
economic theories that incorporate agents’ ability to reason, which evolved
over the last 150 years and gelled into its present form in the 1970s. This
template, which I will call standard economic theory, assigns each agent a
utility function describing her preferences. For example, in standard
macroeconomic models, households get utility from consumption and firms
get utility from making profits while minimizing risk. Under standard
economic theory, each agent makes decisions that make her own utility as
large as possible. To find these decisions and understand their economic
consequences, economists write down and solve equations that express this
in mathematical terms. This is the basis of all economic theories that are
taught in textbooks, and all the theoretical models that economists use to
evaluate new policies and provide guidance to the economy.
The science of complexity economics offers a completely different
alternative. Complexity economics uses ideas and methods from the science
of complex systems, an interdisciplinary movement I helped found in the
1980s that spans the physical, biological and social sciences.
7
Complex
systems is the study of emergent phenomena. These occur when the
behavior of a system as a whole is qualitatively different from that of its
individual parts. A good example is the brain: An individual neuron is a
relatively simple device that takes in stimuli from other neurons and
produces new stimuli. An individual neuron is not conscious, but somehow
the 85 billion neurons in the human brain work together to produce
consciousness and thought.
The economy is a wonderful example of a complex system, with many
different emergent phenomena. The economy allows us to support each
other by specializing – concentrating our effort on what we do best, while
letting others do what they do best. By coordinating our efforts, it allows us
to build things like rocket ships or laptops that no individual could ever
build on her own.
While standard economic theory can sometimes provide valuable insight
about emergence, this is not its strength – it was built for other purposes. In
contrast, complex-systems scientists have identified and developed a
standard toolkit of concepts and methods that they use to understand
emergent phenomena such as brains, ant colonies, the internet or cities.
Complexity economists like me are rebels who have adapted the complex-
systems toolkit to study economics. I’m part of a band of some fifty-or-so
complexity economists worldwide (the term was coined by Stanford
economist W. Brian Arthur, one of its pioneers).
8
Complexity economists
are a loose-knit group who often have divergent views. Some aspects of the
perspective I present in this book are held in common; many are my own.
Complexity economics is completely different from standard economic
theory. To begin, standard economic theory and complexity economics use
very different models for how agents reason and make decisions. Standard
economics usually assumes forward-looking agents who are intelligent
enough to reason their way through any problem. These hypothetical
rational agents are a bit like Star Trek’s Mr Spock: They use all available
information to make the best possible decision – the one that yields highest
utility. While the now-mainstream field of behavioral economics draws on
facts from psychology and sociology to challenge this view, derisively
referring to rational agents as ‘Homo economicus’, there is still no widely
used workable substitute. Although behavioral economics is now almost
universally accepted, the economic models that continue to influence public
policy are still largely based on Homo economicus. This is because it is hard
to incorporate the way real people reason into standard economic theory.
The elements of standard economic theory were designed to work together
as a whole, and when some are modified the others become inappropriate.
Creating economic models that effectively incorporate behavioral realism to
make useful predictions may be the most important problem in economics
today.
Complexity economics, conversely, assumes from the outset that agents
are boundedly rational, meaning they make imperfect decisions and have
limited ability to reason. Our models for boundedly rational agents are less
prescribed – they can be based on psychology experiments, census data,
expert opinions or a variety of other sources (see Chapter 6). Agents can
learn to achieve goals, but they typically only partially achieve them.
The tools of the trade are very different. Standard economics models are
written in terms of equations, and standard economists solve them by hand,
if they can, or with computers if they can’t. Though we use equations too,
computer simulation is the workhorse of complexity economics. Digital
technology enables us to create analogs of the real world inside the
computer, sometimes called digital twins. Essential events in the real world
have their counterparts in a simulated world. Scientists now use computer
simulations to study just about everything – galaxy formation, protein-
folding, the brain, epidemics, battle tactics and traffic jams. While
mainstream economists use computers to solve equations, this is not
simulation in the usual sense because there is no attempt to create analogs
for how things actually happen in the real world.
The simulations used in complexity economics are called agent-based
models.
9
As the name emphasizes, the individual building blocks of these
models – such as households, firms or governments – make decisions; they
have agency.
10
Algorithms describing how each agent makes decisions are
programmed into the computer. As the agents gather information and make
their decisions, their actions change the state of the economy, which in turn
generates new information, causing the agents to make new decisions, and
so on. The simulations can be repeated indefinitely, to study the interactions
of individual agents over time. In agent-based models, economic
phenomena emerge from the bottom up, just as they do in the real world.
The algorithms programmed into the computer to model decision-making
might consist of simple behavioral rules that social scientists have
uncovered, like ‘imitate your neighbors’ or obvious rules of thumb that
everyone follows, like ‘buy undervalued assets’. Or they might be learning
algorithms that capture how agents adapt their decisions over time to
improve their effectiveness. Computers can easily deal with complicated,
messy facts, enabling us to model decision-making with as much realism as
we wish. And there are additional benefits of this realism: In the presence of
uncertainty, simple rules of thumb can be surprisingly effective –
sometimes more effective than complicated reasoning.
11
There are many advantages to using simulations rather than
mathematical equations, but one of the most important is the ability to
model the diversity of the actors in the world – what economists call
heterogeneity.
12
Modeling heterogeneity is a hot topic in mainstream
macroeconomics, but it is very hard to fit this into the standard framework.
Computers, in contrast, easily keep track of diverse agents, making it
possible to do this as realistically as needed.
The theoretical frameworks of standard economics and complexity
economics are also very different. Standard economics draws heavily on
mathematical methods from the theory of optimization. This is like finding
the highest peak in a landscape (except that here it is an abstract landscape
representing utility). Standard economists like to prove theorems about their
models whenever they can. We complexity economists also use
mathematics, but usually do so to understand something observed in
simulations. The mathematical tools are taken from a much broader palette,
using methods and concepts from fields as diverse as dynamical systems,
statistical physics, ecology and evolutionary biology.
Last but not least, standard economic theory assumes from the outset that
transactions only take place when supply equals demand, a state that is
called equilibrium. Complexity-economics models, in contrast, do not
necessarily assume equilibrium, but regard it as an emergent property when
it happens.
Taken together, all these elements lead to a very different way of dealing
with change. Change in the economy can come from without: Think of the
COVID pandemic, which was an outside force affecting the economy.
Change can also come from within, like the financial crisis of 2008, which
arose via the economy acting on itself. Standard economics has a difficult
time dealing with changes that arise from within the economy. The leading
mainstream models of the financial crisis, for example, have to postulate the
existence of outside ‘shocks’ to generate the necessary change.
13
It is
obvious that is not how it really happened, but standard models can only
explain it ‘as if’ it happened this way. In contrast, agent-based models are
inherently dynamical, making it natural to explain how the economy
changes from within. We will see examples in Chapters 3, 7 and 11
illustrating how complexity economics replaces ‘as-if’ reasoning with ‘as-
is’ reasoning, providing more sensible explanations for how the economy
changes from within itself.
Perhaps the biggest advantage of complexity economics is its ability to
solve hard problems. A model is tractable if it is easy to build and use to
answer questions. Standard economic theory yields tractable models in
simple settings, but this breaks down as things get complicated – it becomes
too hard to solve the equations, and it becomes increasingly difficult to add
new features to a pre-existing model. As a result, when a problem gets
complicated, mainstream economists are forced to oversimplify by leaving
things out.
The financial crisis of 2008 is a good example where this leads to
problems.
14
All the models at the time ignored the possibility that
homeowners and businesses might default on their loans. Economists knew
that default was important, but including it in their models was difficult, so
they left it out. As it happened, default played a central role in the crisis.
The traditional models, updated since the crisis, now include default, but
only in a simplified fashion – the revised models still omit many essential
economic factors that may well figure in future crises.
15
There is no model
based on standard economic theory that comes close to including all the
facets of the economy that could potentially lead us into trouble again.
16
Making realistic models requires good data. Agent-based models are
naturally suited to make use of the vast quantities of data currently
available. Worldwide, tens of millions of firms and billions of households
make trillions of transactions annually. It would be extraordinarily useful to
build a detailed map of the global economy, but, remarkably, no such map
exists. If we built one, it would show us the structure of the economy in
detail and enable us to track its changes over time. We are now developing
agent-based economic models at the level of individual firms and
households that can use such data. These models study the economy from
the bottom up: Macroeconomics emerges from microeconomics.
The choice between standard economic theory and agent-based models
reflects a broader debate in social science. Milton Friedman, a prominent
twentieth-century economist, argued that models should be evaluated solely
on how good their predictions are, rather than on the plausibility of their
assumptions.
17
Even if the assumptions of a model are far-fetched, he wrote,
the economy may behave ‘as if’ they are true. He used the example of
expert billiards players, who may not understand the laws of physics but
play billiards as if they did. Behavioral economics has made it abundantly
clear that people don’t make decisions in the way that standard economic
models assume they do. Nonetheless, to justify their models, economic
theorists continue to assert that the economy behaves ‘as if’ people did.
There is universal agreement that models should be judged based on
their ability to predict empirical facts. The debate is whether this should be
the only criterion. In social science, models often fit the facts loosely and no
model fits them tightly. We should be very suspicious of models that require
implausible ‘as-if’ arguments. Instead, I believe we should follow what I
call the principle of verisimilitude: Models should fit the facts and their
assumptions should be plausible. Assumptions that seem wrong from the
outset are more likely to lead to false conclusions than plausible
assumptions. We need to replace ‘as-if’ reasoning with ‘as-is’ reasoning.
The principle of verisimilitude recognizes that models need to contain
the key features of the phenomena they attempt to explain, but they needn’t
be literal representations of the world; models are abstractions, and we
don’t need to capture every detail. When we talk about building
simulations, we aren’t trying to create The Matrix. Verisimilitude just means
capturing the essential components as realistically as we can. Good models
should be as simple as possible, but no simpler. Agent-based models can be
complicated or simple; computers easily keep track of details that are
complicated to state mathematically, so we can include as many features as
we need to. Most important, we can easily add new features without
changing existing features, incrementally increasing the verisimilitude of
our models of the world.
There is more to complexity economics than just simulations. As already
noted, it draws on conceptual frameworks that have been developed in other
fields. We will see examples where it is useful to start by modeling
economic agents ‘as if’ they make decisions at random, and then add
enough intelligence to make a model with more verisimilitude that fits the
facts. For this purpose, methods from statistical physics – which were built
to cope with the random behavior of atoms – are very useful.
The insight that the economy allows workers to be specialists goes back
to Adam Smith’s 1776 book The Wealth of Nations.
18
The theory of ecology,
which was developed in the middle of the twentieth century, is essentially a
theory about specialists. Grass is a specialist at the job of converting
sunlight, soil and water into grass. Zebras are specialists at the job of eating
grass and turning it into zebras, and lions are specialists in eating zebras and
turning them into lions. Homo economicus, who can solve any problem,
does not need to specialize. In contrast, the boundedly rational agents of
complexity economics are specialists who use their limited abilities for
what they do best. In Chapter 3 we will develop the analogy between
ecosystems and economies and show how it can be used to explain an
important aspect of economic growth. And in Chapters 10 and 11 we will
show how it can be used to explain market malfunction, providing tools for
regulators to anticipate and prevent (or at least ameliorate) financial crises.
Many of the ideas for complexity economics were articulated in the
1950s by Herbert Simon, a remarkable polymath and a key innovator in the
fields of economics, artificial intelligence, cognitive psychology,
management, public administration and political science. Even though
Simon won the 1978 Nobel Prize in economics, the mainstream never
followed his lead, and complexity economics has so far remained at the
periphery of the economics profession. You might ask, ‘If complexity
economics has been around so long, why didn’t it already take over the
mainstream?’ The short answer is that in Simons’s day we lacked the
computer power, data and understanding of human decision-making
necessary to execute his vision. Fortunately for us, computers are now
roughly a billion times faster than they were then, and our data capabilities
are similarly greater. Just as computer scientists have used this new power
to make great leaps forward in artificial intelligence and machine learning,
complexity economists are beginning to take advantage of it as well. In the
past five years or so this has allowed complexity economics to transition
from a qualitative to a quantitative science, and we are in the process of
moving from the conceptual to the practical phase of model deployment.
While we complexity economists sit on the fringe of academic
economics, our models are beginning to be used for commercial purposes.
Some of our ideas are beginning to inform models used by central banks to
monitor financial markets in order to avert the next meltdown. In other
applications under development, our models could help deal with rising
inequality or find the best paths for developing countries. They can predict
responses to such major transitions as automation or the switch to green
energy and help us make those transitions more smoothly.
A concrete example where complexity economics can make a big
difference is climate change, which is perhaps the most urgent problem the
world faces right now. The source of the problem is the economy, which
produces and uses the fossil fuels that create greenhouse gases. We have
good models for why the global climate is warming – models that are
convincing to almost all scientists. In contrast, economic models for
preventing climate change are highly controversial, yielding remarkably
divergent answers. The 2018 Nobelist William Nordhaus, using a standard
macroeconomic model, has argued that the economic cost of climate-
change mitigation is so high that we should make changes relatively slowly
and allow the Earth to eventually warm by 3.4°C (about 6°F).
19
In contrast,
my colleagues and I have shown that rapidly converting to renewable
energy within a couple of decades will help keep global warming closer to
1.5°C, while likely saving us many trillions of dollars (see Chapter 13).
Resolving this controversy, and doing so quickly, is essential to our future!
The new science of complexity economics involves a radical change in
how economics is done. The fact that the intellectual framework is so
different means a complete makeover of tools, skills and knowledge base –
a cultural sea change. Not surprisingly, such a momentous shift is strongly
opposed by the academic mainstream, as revolutions always are. For
example, even though it is both innovative and useful, the model for the
COVID pandemic described in the prologue could never be published in a
‘top’ economics journal. Why? Because it cannot be solved mathematically
and, most importantly, it lacks utility maximizing agents, and thus violates
the central dogma of standard economic theory. The academic departments
where complexity economists work are typically not economics
departments, but rather have names like Computational Social Science or,
in my case, Geography and the Environment.
20
Despite these barriers, complexity economics is beginning to get support
from institutions that are unhappy with the conventional tools, including a
few avant-garde central banks. Commercial applications are under
development. With modern technology we can now accomplish things that
early pioneers like Herb Simon could only dream of. The time is ripe for
complexity economics to take off.
Bringing complexity economics to fruition will require substantial time
and resources. Many challenging problems still have to be solved.
Nonetheless, the chances of success are high and the payoff could be
enormous. We need to make this revolution happen as soon as possible; the
fate of the world hangs in the balance.
...
PART I:
What is Complexity Economics?
I should admit that I have very little formal education in economics. I was a
physics major as an undergraduate at Stanford. My only encounter with
economics was in 1971, during spring of my sophomore year, when I took
Economics 1, a large lecture class with hundreds of students. The professor,
John Gurley, was a prominent economist who was an expert on the Chinese
and Soviet economies. His lectures were clear, he was a good teacher and
the math was easy, but I found many of the ideas that he stated as facts hard
to believe. For example, he drew two curves on the board, one for price vs
supply and another for price vs demand, and stated that the price was the
point where they intersected.
Because I was borrowing my way through college, I wanted to get my
money’s worth, and I always sat in the first row and asked questions.
1
I
raised my hand and asked him how the price arrived there. If the demand
curve suddenly shifted, how would the price adjust? How quickly could it
move? Didn’t we need to worry that it might under or overshoot? If things
changed really quickly, maybe the price couldn’t track at all? Professor
Gurley couldn’t provide convincing answers.
When I looked into this question thirty years later, I discovered that
several prominent economists had worked hard to answer the same
questions, without much success.
2
Economists generally simply assume that
prices are at equilibrium, defined as the point where supply equals demand.
The idea of equilibrium originated in the latter half of the nineteenth
century with the work of the French economist Leon Walras. He justified
how the price could get to the intersection of supply and demand via a
procedure called tatonnement (French for ‘trial and error’) that was used in
the Paris stock market at the time.
3
Because this process is cumbersome and
time consuming it is no longer used in modern stock markets. In fact, in
most modern markets transactions are made at prices where supply does not
equal demand, and in some markets – like housing markets – they can be
very different. As we will see, one of the contributions of complexity
economics (my own work included) is in understanding how prices move
when markets operate out of equilibrium, and demonstrating that this can be
important.
My next encounter with economics came in the summer of 1987, at a
conference called ‘The Economy as an Evolving Complex System’ at the
Santa Fe Institute (SFI), an interdisciplinary home for the study of
complexity, where I was an external professor.
4
SFI has grown since then,
but it is still a small place, with about eight residential faculty members,
though it has a much larger external faculty and a steady stream of visitors.
Talks are given almost every day, on topics ranging across all of science,
from anthropology to physics to zoology. At lunchtime or tea there are
typically people from many different disciplines, and the discussions are
often wide ranging, stimulating and fun.
This particular meeting was organized by two Nobel Prize winners –
Stanford economist Kenneth Arrow and condensed-matter physicist Philip
Anderson – who had invited ten economists and ten scientists from other
disciplines (physics, biology and computer science) to participate. We met
for two weeks in the former Christo Rey convent, which the Institute had
just rented – its first physical location after two years as a virtual institution.
The meeting took place in the chapel, which retained its stained-glass
windows, but with the altar and cross removed and replaced by the
speakers’ lectern. At the time, I was a staff scientist at the Center for
Nonlinear Studies at Los Alamos, and economics was not a particular
concern. However, I was curious, and I was honored by the invitation, so I
accepted.
In the first week, the economists gave us a fascinating crash course in
economics. My impression was that they assumed that, since physicists are
good at mathematics, we would team up and help them solve their math
problems. This was not what happened. We physicists were fine with their
mathematics and didn’t have much to add, but we were skeptical of their
assumptions. At that point in time, the theory of rational expectations still
dominated economics. Then, as now, all standard economic theories
assumed some sort of equilibrium. The physicists had a reflexive reaction
against both notions. To us, economic equilibrium was a potentially
dangerous approximation and rational expectations seemed completely
unrealistic. Our view was that people are not consistently rational and that
economic theory needed to take human psychology into account. The
nascent field of behavioral economics was attempting to do just that, but at
that time it was still off the radar of the economists at the conference. There
was consequently a great deal of arguing. Physicists tend to view
themselves as the kings of the physical sciences, and economists view
themselves as the kings of the social sciences, and they can both be
arrogant. (At one point, Phil Anderson, who was famous for being
shockingly blunt, exclaimed to the economists, ‘You don’t really believe
that, do you?!’ and Harvard economist Lawrence Summers weighed in with
‘You physicists all have a Tarzan complex.’) Despite the tensions at the
meeting, I learned an enormous amount and came away with a renewed
interest in economics. It was obviously a field full of contradictions and bad
assumptions, suggesting that it could be a rewarding place to pursue
innovative research.
My interest in economics grew even more after meeting the Yale
economist John Geanakoplos, whose friends all call him John G., when he
directed the economics program at SFI in 1990–1991. In those days, there
was a weekly SFI basketball game at a nearby park, and John G. and I were
both regulars, which helped us get to know each other. One of our favorite
pursuits was to argue about the pros and cons of the founding principles of
economics. John taught me an enormous amount, and our dialogue
eventually led to a 2009 paper called ‘The Virtues and Vices of Equilibrium
and the Future of Financial Economics’, which presents a synthesis of our
converging view that ‘economics needs to move in new directions if it is to
continue to make progress’.
5
...
1.
What is a Complex System?
Complex consequences can arise from simple causes, especially when you
allow the system you are looking at to be at a different scale from the
elementary entities from which it is made.
Phil Anderson (2000)
1
The nature of complexity
Complexity economics is the application of ideas from complex systems to
economics. But what is a complex system?
2
In my physics courses at Stanford, I learned a great deal about motion,
force and energy. My courses took a reductionist approach: The goal was to
understand the fundamental rules that determine the interactions of simple
things – like masses on springs or elementary particles – and study them in
simple contexts. In celestial mechanics, for example, we learned how to
calculate the orbits of two bodies, such as a single planet and the Sun, but
more complicated situations, such as the orbits of three such bodies, were
omitted, because the equations couldn’t be solved.
I couldn’t help but ponder the big questions that my courses were not
addressing. I wanted something that was the opposite of reductionism.
Given that all the fundamental forces of nature are simple interactions
between relatively simple physical things, how can this lead to phenomena
such as life and intelligence? How did matter spontaneously organize itself
in the origin of life? How did evolution create such a remarkable thing as
the human brain?
When I was in graduate school at UC Santa Cruz, I discovered
cybernetics, which was the precursor of complex-systems theory. My
friends and I read and discussed Norbert Wiener’s ideas about feedback and
control, Claude Shannon’s theory of information, John von Neumann’s self-
reproducing automaton and Erwin Schrödinger’s reflections about life and
the mind.
3
The big question we pondered more than all others was the
mystery of self-organization: How can disorganized configurations of
matter spontaneously become organized?
Later, at Los Alamos, I organized conferences and workshops on
‘Cellular Automata’, ‘Evolution, Games and Learning’ and similar topics,
and invited leading scholars who were thinking about these things to visit,
creating a hub of activity.
4
The senior fellows at Los Alamos decided that
this kind of work needed its own institution, free from the taint of a
weapons laboratory. So, in 1984, the Los Alamos physical chemist George
Cowan co-founded (with theoretical physicist Murray Gell-Mann) the Santa
Fe Institute, and shortly afterward the phrase complex systems entered our
vocabulary. I became affiliated with the Institute, and, in 1988, I started the
Complex Systems Group at Los Alamos and recruited several outstanding
postdoctoral researchers who later became leaders in the field. There are
now thousands of scientists devoted to the study of complex systems,
scattered across almost every discipline in the physical, natural and social
sciences, including economics.
What is a complex system? By definition, a system is complex if it has
emergent properties.
5
I’ve already mentioned the example of the brain. We
humans don’t just think – we are conscious, with a sophisticated model of
ourselves, the world around us and how we fit into it. Consciousness isn’t
present in the individual building blocks – it emerges from the interaction of
billions of neurons. In human brains and other complex systems, emergence
happens when building blocks are connected together to give rise to
behavior qualitatively different from what any of the building blocks can do
alone. Ant colonies are another classic example.
6
Individual ants are simple
creatures with only about 250,000 neurons, so the reasoning power of
individual ants is extremely limited. But ants communicate through
chemical signals and touch. This gives a colony of ants computational
powers that individual ants lack, and through their collective interactions
with one another they can do surprisingly sophisticated things. Ant colonies
cultivate fungi, raise aphids, fight wars and take slaves. Individual ants
can’t do these things. There is no Super Ant directing the colony – the
queen is just an egg factory. Instead, these sophisticated collective
behaviors emerge from the interactions of many ants.
Emergent behavior can be counterintuitive. The idea that thought and
consciousness are purely mechanical processes, that can be explained from
the bottom up, is so radical and difficult to fathom that it was not widely
accepted until the twentieth century. Given that farming was not invented
by Homo sapiens until what we term the agricultural revolution of about
10,000 years ago, how could simple creatures like ants have been doing
something similar for millions of years?
Complex systems like the brain or an ant colony are called adaptive
complex systems. They are distinguished from ordinary complex systems
with simpler emergent behaviors by the fact that their properties have
evolved over time, through a process of selection. Consciousness doesn’t
emerge by simply hooking up neurons at random; they have to be connected
in just the right way. It took evolution billions of years of trial and error to
invent the human brain. Thinking in evolutionary terms is essential for
understanding adaptive complex systems. And evolution is not just about
biology; it applies to a broad range of adaptive complex systems, including
economics and the other social sciences. Firms, for example, have to make
profits or they quickly go out of business, illustrating that selection
underlies the essence of how capitalist economies function. The study of
adaptive complex systems has helped clarify the basic principles of
evolution so that they can be applied more generally outside of biology.
Can we make better economic predictions?
Through science, things that appear to be random can be rendered
predictable. Prediction is enormously useful because it allows us to make
sensible decisions. We tend to take for granted the myriad ways that science
has fundamentally changed our view of the world. The Trojan War from
Greek mythology provides an example: After Agamemnon has gathered his
troops to fight Troy, the wind refuses to blow, so his fleet cannot set sail. He
consults Calchas, the seer, who tells him that he must sacrifice his beloved
daughter Iphigenia to appease the goddess Artemis. He has his daughter
killed, and the winds begin to blow.
Modern science casts a different light on this story. Unlike the ancient
Greeks, we see no conceivable causal connection between Iphigenia’s
sacrifice and whether or not the wind blows. Today, a father who acted as
Agamemnon did would be regarded as utterly mad. A modern Agamemnon
would simply consult the weather forecast, note the high-pressure zone
hovering over Argos and tell his men to wait a few days until the wind
started to blow again. Physics has transformed something formerly believed
to depend on the whims of the gods into a predictable event whose causal
mechanisms are well understood.
Fast forward to contemporary Greece, where an example shows that we
still lack broad agreement about essential cause-and-effect relationships in
economics. Since 2008, the Greeks have suffered one of the worst
depressions in modern times. Greek GDP dipped by 30 per cent from its
peak, unemployment reached 27 per cent, and in 2021 almost half of Greek
young people (aged 15–24) were still out of work. Paul Krugman and many
others have argued that all this suffering could have been avoided if only
Germany had not forced Greece to adopt a policy of austerity (budgetary
belt-tightening) just when economic stimulus was most needed.
7
In contrast,
Wolfgang Schäuble, the German finance minister, along with a host of
prominent economists, insisted that austerity was unavoidable and the only
way for Greece to become solvent again.
Who was right? There is no widely agreed-upon economic model that
can answer that question. This is not unusual: While the majority of
economists agree on some things, in many cases an array of different
models make divergent predictions, leaving people free to choose the model
they like best, based on ideology, politics and self-interest.
8
We can break
out of this stalemate only by finding models whose predictions are
consistently good enough to gain a wide level of credibility.
My goal in this book is to set out a vision for how we can build models
that make better economic predictions. Surprisingly, many economists do
not agree on the importance of this goal. To quote two prominent Harvard
economists, David Laibson and Xavier Gabaix,
Predictive precision is infrequently emphasized in economics research [. . .] In this sense,
economic research differs from research in the natural sciences, particularly physics. We
hope that economists will close this gap. Models that make weak predictions (or no
predictions) are limited in their ability to advance economic understanding of the world.
9
When I emphasize this in my talks, economists often respond that the
central goal of economics is to provide a conceptual framework for thinking
about the world and evaluating policy choices. I wholeheartedly agree that
having a conceptual framework is central, but, in my view, this only makes
the quest for better predictions even more important. If we can’t make
reliable predictions, then how do we know if the conceptual framework is
correct?
It is easy to forget that prediction is interwoven into everything we do.
To pick up a glass of water, your brain has to predict how your muscles
need to be stimulated to get your hand to move to the glass and grasp it,
then predict how to compensate for the weight of the glass as you bring it to
your lips to drink. Similarly, every policy decision represents a prediction
that the economy is likely to do better if that choice is made.
I should be clear about what I mean by the word prediction. Niels Bohr
is said to have declared that ‘prediction is very difficult, especially if it’s
about the future’. This remark seems ironic; aren’t all predictions about the
future? Actually, no, not at all. Consider Boyle’s Law: In 1662, Robert
Boyle invented a device that allowed him to control the volume of air inside
a container and showed that the air pressure is inversely proportional to the
volume. In other words, if you know the volume, you can predict the
pressure, and vice versa. This is scientific prediction, true at any point in
time – present, past or future.
Of course, many predictions are explicitly about the future. For instance,
central banks and treasury departments use models to make predictions
about GDP and unemployment. Models provide a sandbox where they can
test policy options to understand how well they work and how they might
be revised to work better. What happens if we raise interest rates? What
happens if we require banks to hold more capital? What happens if we raise
the minimum wage? Implement a universal basic income? Decrease taxes?
Leave everything as it is? Bad models lead to bad decisions.
Predictions are also important because they test models and tell us
whether we can trust them. Does the model we’re using capture cause-and-
effect relationships well enough? If the model fails to make accurate
predictions about the world as it is now, we can’t trust it to correctly answer
the ‘what-if’ questions we need to pose when contemplating a change in
policy. Unfortunately, even after decades of hard work by several
generations of macroeconomists, Nobel Laureates in economics like Paul
Romer question whether the effectiveness of macroeconomic forecasting
has improved at all.
10
Can we do better? Many argue that this is impossible for several reasons:
As I’ve already explained, economics is about people, and, because people
can think, their behavior is hard to predict. Or there may be fundamental
limits: The economy may have intrinsic properties, such as market
efficiency or chaos, that defy accurate prediction by any model, no matter
how good.
We will never be able to predict the economy perfectly – far from it – but
we can do much better than we are doing now. To return to Niels Bohr: Yes,
prediction is difficult. But there are plenty of examples of good predicting,
even of the future. Here’s one from my own experience, which has
contributed to my belief that, if we change our approach, we can make
much better predictions in economics.
The Project: Using physics to beat the house
My journey to complexity economics began more than four decades ago in
an unlikely way – by using physics to beat the game of roulette.
11
How this
came to happen is a good example of ‘sensitive dependence on initial
conditions’, a concept we will explore in more detail later. I grew up in
Silver City, New Mexico, which was once the home of the infamous
gunslinger Billy the Kid. When I was twelve years old, due to a
complicated chain of circumstances involving Joe McCarthy, Frank
Oppenheimer and a mythical gold mine in west Texas, an idiosyncratic
young genius named Tom Ingerson moved to Silver City and became the
sole member of the physics faculty at Western New Mexico University.
12
Tom also started Explorer Post 114 – a branch of the Boy Scouts for
teenagers – which I joined, along with my friend Norman Packard, who was
the other science kid in Silver City. In addition to inspiring Norman and me
to become physicists, Tom had entrepreneurial aspirations that infected us
as well. Norman’s name will appear many times in this book – he is a
remarkably creative person, and I have had the good fortune to have him as
my partner in several endeavors.
Fast forward to the summer of 1975, when I was starting my third year
of graduate school at the University of California at Santa Cruz,
specializing in cosmology and doing research on galaxy formation. I spent
the summer working for the Forest Service in Libby, Montana, where poker
had just been legalized. I read The Complete Guide to Winning at Poker,
began playing in the evenings and soon discovered that I was making more
money gambling than I was in my day job. Meanwhile, Norman was
spending the summer playing blackjack in Las Vegas; in our letters we
debated whether poker or blackjack was the best way to supplement our
incomes. When I met Norman at the end of the summer at the Greyhound
bus station in Portland, Oregon, where he was finishing his undergraduate
degree at Reed College, he convinced me that we could make our fortune
using physics to beat roulette.
‘How is that possible?’ you might ask. A roulette wheel is designed to be
a random-number generator. The croupier sets the central rotor spinning in
one direction and the ball in the other. Initially the ball spins so fast that it
runs along the outside of the beveled track, but eventually it slows and
spirals into the center and bounces around on the numbered cups until it
comes to rest in one. Because the relationship between the motion of the
wheel and the motion of the ball seems unpredictable, the final number also
seems unpredictable, making the sequence of numbers generated by a
roulette wheel effectively random.
13
Or is it? From the point of view of a physicist, roulette is a simple
exercise in classical mechanics. According to Newton’s laws, the forces
acting on an object, together with a measurement of its position and
velocity, allow us to predict the object’s future motion. The main force
acting on the ball is air resistance.
14
About ten or fifteen seconds elapse
between when the croupier releases the ball and when she closes the bets.
This provides an opportunity to measure the position and velocity of the
ball in one direction and the wheel in the other, use physics to make a
prediction about where the ball will land and place bets.
15
Doing this gave
rise to a five-year undertaking we called The Project, which over its history
enlisted the efforts of about thirty people. We organized a front company,
Eudaemonic Enterprises, to buy sophisticated electronic parts. (Eudaemonia
is an Aristotelian notion, which our ancient Webster’s Dictionary defined as
‘a state of felicity or bliss obtained through a life lived in accordance with
reason’.) Our dream was that the fortune we would win at roulette would
allow us to be independent of the system, so that we could start a
eudaemonic science commune and do research on what has now come to be
called complex-systems science.
Norman joined me at UC Santa Cruz to do his graduate work in physics.
We bought a roulette wheel and installed it in the living room of our
communal home, a sprawling California-style bungalow, where our work
was punctuated by shared meals, intense intellectual discussions and wild
parties. We solved the equations of motion, made thousands of
measurements and confirmed that it was possible to predict roughly where
the ball would land on the wheel. The subsequent bouncing motion was too
complicated to predict, but after careful study we determined that when the
ball leaves the track, it is unlikely to come to rest on the opposite side of the
wheel. Our predictions were far from perfect, but they were still much
better than random, giving us a substantial edge over the house.
But how would we cash in on these predictions in a casino? We needed
to make our calculations in secret and quickly enough to place bets, but in
1976 there was no such thing as a personal computer, much less a
smartphone. Following some insightful suggestions from our mentor Tom
Ingerson, we designed and built the world’s first wearable digital computer.
It was based on the 6502 microprocessor, the same one used to build the
original Apple computer.
16
With the technology available at the time, there
was barely enough space to fit 3,000 bytes of program memory into the
biggest box we could hide. I painstakingly hand-coded the program in
machine language; this included an operating system (with perhaps the
shortest floating-point arithmetic package ever written) and all the logic
needed to perform the calculations and output the results. Our first wearable
computer was named Harry, the middle name of its builder, Norman H.
Packard. Finished in 1977, it was concealed under the armpit. The other
armpit concealed a pack of a dozen AA batteries, which allowed the device
to run for about an hour and a half. The user wore a complex body-harness
carrying the computer, battery pack, wires, switches and antenna, along
with vibrators that tapped out the outputs. Our second version was called
The Sandwich because it had two PC boards, like two pieces of bread,
glued together with a filling of microcrystalline wax. It was finished three
years later and built into a shoe, which held the batteries, switches, antenna
and vibrators. (Only users like me with large feet could operate it.)
At the roulette table, one teammate, usually me, measured the velocity of
the ball and wheel by clicking switches embedded in his shoes and operated
by his big toes. I drew on some aspects of my brief experience as a
professional poker player, using the pseudonym Clem, acting stupid and
betting small stakes. My computer calculated its prediction and transmitted
a signal to an accomplice wearing a second computer – this one named
Renata, in honor of its builder, Ingrid R. Hoermann. The computer and its
vibrator were built into the armpit area of her bra (which provided a
convenient strap to mount things on, and which we thought had security
advantages); she then placed bets on numbers near where the ball was most
likely to land. We consistently beat the house, achieving a 20 per cent edge,
but due to chronic hardware failures and fear of broken kneecaps, we never
managed to play for really high stakes and didn’t get very rich as a result.
However, I learned many valuable lessons. The Project taught me the
scientific method, drilling it deep into my soul in a way that graduate school
never could. We developed the theory, designed the experiment, executed
some difficult engineering and tested our hypotheses both in the lab and in
the casino. It also taught me that randomness is a subjective concept that
depends on one’s state of understanding. Better science and better
technology can make something that seems random become predictable.
The economy appears remarkably unpredictable, but might this just
reflect our current state of misunderstanding? Economic variables – like
GDP, unemployment and inflation – change all the time, in seemingly
random ways. But maybe the economy is like a roulette wheel – perhaps its
changes only seem random because we aren’t thinking about their causes in
the right way. If we built better models, using new ideas and making better
use of computers and big data, could we gain a new understanding that
would allow us to make better predictions?
Could chaos explain business cycles?
The major changes in the economy are called business cycles. During
expansionary periods, GDP grows quickly and unemployment is low;
during recessions, GDP falls and unemployment is high. These oscillations
are irregular both in their timing and their intensity; in the United States, the
average span of a cycle is about seven to ten years, though there is a great
deal of variation. A central goal of macroeconomics is to understand what
causes business cycles and how to avoid or at least reduce the intensity of
recessions.
Remarkably, the underlying causes of business cycles remain
controversial. As noted in the Introduction, changes in the economy fall into
two basic categories: those that come from outside the economic system,
and those that are generated within. The explanation offered by standard
economic models is that changes in the economy are initiated by outside
influences, which economists call shocks. To me, this word evokes the
image of Zeus sitting on Mount Olympus, hurling lightning bolts at the
Earth and disturbing the mortals below. Zeus is unpredictable, and the
shocks arrive at random. The COVID pandemic provides an uncontroversial
example where a huge economic change was caused by an outside shock.
The alternative explanation is that change comes from within, or, in
more technical jargon, motion is endogenous: The economy changes on its
own due to internal factors. In reality, it is a mixture of the two – sometimes
the economy responds to outside factors, sometimes changes arise from
within, and sometimes both types of causes act at the same time. Standard
models, however, generally attribute all economic change to outside
influences. According to these models, absent outside shocks, the economy
would settle into a state of rest. It changes only because Zeus keeps
shocking it, knocking it away from equilibrium. Shocks are random events
from outside the economy that are by definition unpredictable. All that
standard economic models aspire to do is to predict how the economy will
respond to the shocks once they happen. This places a strong limit on their
usefulness.
Yet there is a perfectly plausible explanation for how the economy can
change from within. This is the beautiful mathematical concept now known
as chaos, which is an important component of complex-systems theory.
Economists in the 1980s and 1990s briefly experimented with the idea that
chaos caused endogenous economic change and then they dropped it. To my
mind, it was dropped for the wrong reasons, and it’s time to bring it back.
What is chaos?
One evening in 1977, Robert Shaw, a fellow physics graduate student at
Santa Cruz, appeared at our usual communal dinner in a state of excitement.
He had just been introduced to meteorologist Edward Lorenz’s
mathematical model, which featured a system of three simple equations and
contained something called a strange attractor.
17
Rob had programmed the
equations on the computer – did we want to take a look? Rob tried to
explain why he was so excited to Norman’s girlfriend, Lorna, who was not
a physicist. The explanation went like this:
Models that describe how things change over time are known as
dynamical systems. The basic idea goes back to Newton, who showed that
you can predict the movement of any physical system if you know the state
of the system and the forces acting on it. In physics, the state of the system
is the positions and velocities of its components, which could be planets or
roulette balls. We say the dynamical system is deterministic if no
randomness is involved; that is, if the state at a given instant in time
precisely determines the state at the next instant. As the state evolves, it
traces out a curve, called the trajectory.
Most dynamical systems have what are called attractors that determine
their long-term behavior. For example, due to air resistance, a pendulum
will eventually come to a state of rest. This type of attractor is called a fixed
point, for obvious reasons. For a slightly richer example, consider a
grandfather clock, whose pendulum has a spring that keeps it moving. As
long as the spring is wound, the pendulum swings back and forth at a
consistent frequency; the attractor here is a pattern of oscillation, called a
limit cycle, which looks like a closed loop: as the pendulum swings back
and forth, a plot of its position vs velocity traces out a circle, which it goes
around again and again.
As a physics graduate student, I had encountered quite a few
deterministic dynamical systems in my textbooks. My view at the time was
that the words deterministic and predictable were almost synonyms. But my
experience with roulette had caused some doubts to tickle the back of my
brain: How could a system like a roulette wheel – which, as a physical
system, is by definition deterministic – also be a random-number generator?
What was it about roulette that made it so much harder to predict than
planetary motion?
As soon as dinner was over, we got in Rob’s 1957 Ford station wagon
and drove to the university, so that we could use the physics department’s
analog computer. Rob had programmed the Lorenz equations, which are a
highly simplified model of atmospheric convection. They form a simple
dynamical system with three equations relating three variables – three
numbers labeled x, y and z representing the current state of the atmosphere.
Its state can be visualized as a point with coordinates (x, y, z) in a three-
dimensional space. We could see the action of the dynamical system by
projecting this point on an oscilloscope screen and watching it move. Rob
picked some initial values for x, y and z, pushed the Start button, and we
watched the trajectory of the Lorenz equations unfold as x, y and z changed
over time. What we saw was completely different from anything we had
ever encountered in our textbooks. The trajectory traced out a beautiful
pattern, like a butterfly whose wings fold back into each other, as shown in
Figure 1.
The motion never stopped, and the pattern never repeated itself exactly.
The pattern was an attractor – Rob made this clear by starting from several
different initial conditions and showing that the trajectory always settled
into the same shape – but the nature of this attractor was very different from
the fixed points and limit cycles we were used to. It was appropriately
named a strange attractor.
An attractor of this type is now called a chaotic attractor, and the motion
it produces has come to be called chaos.
18
Chaos is characterized by two
essential properties: The first is sensitive dependence on initial conditions,
and the second is endogenous motion, meaning that, even though there are
no external shocks, the system never settles down to rest. That said, the
word chaos can be misleading, because chaos in the mathematical sense
does not imply chaos in the same sense that we use the word in everyday
English. My PhD thesis was titled ‘Order Within Chaos’, and there are
many circumstances in which order and chaos coexist. In fact, this is typical
and will become important later when I argue that if we understand the
chaotic properties of the economy, we can make better predictions.
Figure 1. The Lorenz attractor. What is shown is a single trajectory.
The concept of chaos was anticipated by the brilliant French
mathematician Henri Poincaré at the end of the nineteenth century. His
inspiration came from studies of the three-body problem in celestial
mechanics (for example, the motion of the Earth, the Moon and the Sun).
He used sensitive dependence on initial conditions as a metaphor to explain
how ‘fortuitous phenomena’ can have such a huge effect on our lives.
19
But
he was working in the days before computers, which made chaos almost
impossible to study, so he couldn’t get very far. The concept of chaos was
virtually forgotten until computers were invented and Lorenz rediscovered
it.
To demonstrate sensitive dependence on initial conditions, Rob did a
series of experiments. As before, he picked initial values for the state (x, y,
z), hit Start to trace out a trajectory, then stopped the computer, freezing the
pattern on the screen. Then he set the computer to approximately the
original starting values of (x, y, z) and repeated the experiment. At first, the
trajectory retraced itself, apparently exactly as before, but after a while it
began to drift away and then diverged completely from the original
trajectory. Remarkably, the experiment was not reproducible; that is, even
though the initial values were almost the same, the outcome was very
different – the final state ended up in a completely different place. This was
really surprising, because the Lorenz equations are deterministic; the initial
conditions should exactly determine all future values. So why wasn’t the
experiment repeatable?
The difference arises because of the combination of uncertainty in the
initial conditions and the unusual geometry of the Lorenz equations (and
other systems with strange attractors). It is never possible to specify initial
states with perfect precision. Every time Rob reset the computer, the initial
state was a little bit different, even if this difference was imperceptible to
us. For regular motion, where the attractor is a fixed point or a limit cycle,
this difference doesn’t really matter: Even after a long time, the initial
differences in the states remain imperceptible and the simulation is
repeatable far into the future. But when the dynamics are chaotic, the
geometry of the dynamical system stretches and folds the trajectories,
amplifying these small differences exponentially, so that the final outcome
eventually differs dramatically.
Rob also gave us a visceral illustration of the difference between regular
motion and chaos. The computer output was put into a speaker, so that we
could listen to the motion of the Lorenz equations in addition to watching it.
For a fixed-point attractor, the computer was silent. For a limit-cycle
attractor, the sound was a pure tone, like someone whistling a single note.
But for a chaotic attractor, the sound was white noise, like the roar of a
windstorm, suggesting its connection to fluid turbulence, which I will
explain in a moment.
I had been wrestling with the difficulty of predicting roulette for more
than a year, and seeing the Lorenz attractor caused an explosion to go off in
my head. Because the ball eventually comes to rest, the motion of the ball
has a fixed-point attractor. Nonetheless, on its way to its resting point, it
displays sensitive dependence on initial conditions, which is why the final
resting point is so hard to predict. While the ball is rolling on the track, the
motion is reasonably predictable, but as soon as the ball falls onto the
wheel, small differences in initial conditions can make a huge difference in
its final resting point. When the ball hits the wheel, it might strike a cup
head on and bounce backward, but if it hits just a millimeter farther, it
might bounce forward and land in a different place. Tiny changes are
greatly amplified. The roulette wheel is a good example of sensitive
dependence on initial conditions. The sensitivity wasn’t strong enough to
take away our advantage, but it didn’t make our job easy.
After Rob showed us the Lorenz equations, Norman and I were eager to
get to work researching chaos as soon as possible. After eleven trips to
Nevada, building and fixing roulette computers and taking heat in the
casinos, we were burned out. While I loved cosmology, the problems to be
solved were well known and had all been worked on by very smart people.
In contrast, back then, many basic aspects of chaos were not yet
understood; it was a wilderness waiting to be explored. I had always been
interested in what causes order as opposed to disorder. Chaos is a
mechanism for creating disorder in an orderly way, and it gave me the
entrée I had been searching for.
Norman and I teamed up with Rob and a brilliant undergraduate named
Jim Crutchfield and formed our own research group, which we called the
UCSC Dynamical Systems Collective. Strange attractors were far from
what other physicists were thinking about at the time. Although a few
supportive faculty members thought the idea was interesting, no one knew
enough to supervise our PhD work. We went ahead nonetheless, sharing
authorship on all our papers and co-supervising each other.
We set out to prove Lorenz’s hypothesis that turbulence is caused by
chaos. Most of us have experienced turbulence directly on plane flights – or
in hurricanes, which are an example of fully developed turbulence. Or
perhaps you have sat by a mountain stream, watching the water as it burbles
and gyrates and spills over the fixed rocks in the stream-bed, moving by
itself, as if the water had a will of its own. Changes in weather are also
caused by turbulence; even though the continents and oceans are heated and
cooled in a regular seasonal manner, the weather is irregular and difficult to
predict.
In 1978, when we began our research, the prevailing theory was that
turbulence happened because ‘things are really complicated’. Lorenz
proposed the alternate theory that turbulence is caused by chaos. Though
this is now well-accepted, it was far from obvious at the time. While his
equations were derived to explain fluid flow (the motion of gases, like air,
as well as liquids), they were based on extreme approximations. Most
researchers studying turbulence at the time had never heard of chaos, and
when they did, they were skeptical.
There is a broader lesson here. Although complex systems can be
complicated, they don’t need to be complicated. The words complicated and
complex are not synonyms! Complicated means that something has many
moving parts, whereas complex means it exhibits emergent behavior – that
is, it does things that are not easily predicted a priori. The Lorenz equations
provide an excellent example of how a very simple set of equations, with
only a few terms, can give rise to a complicated geometric object (the
attractor) with complicated motion. The attractor is complicated but its
underlying cause is simple. Even though the equations are simple, there is
no formula that gives the answer – it is only possible to solve them by
simulating them on a computer.
We of the Dynamical Systems Collective set out to invent new
mathematical methods that could be used to identify and characterize chaos
in the real world. In 1980, we wrote a paper titled ‘Geometry from a Time
Series’, with Norman as the lead author, which took the first step toward
accomplishing this.
20
Experiments are rarely able to observe all the
variables needed to fully determine the state of their underlying dynamical
system. We found a way to reconstruct the missing information. For
example, in fluid-flow experiments the data often consisted of the velocity
of the fluid in a given direction at a given point in space. We showed how to
use this kind of limited data to calculate key statistics about chaos and draw
pictures of the underlying chaotic attractors. A couple of years after the
publication of our paper, our methods were used to demonstrate the
existence of chaos in chemical reactions and weakly turbulent fluid flows,
and since then they have been employed thousands of times to show that
chaos exists in many different phenomena, ranging from dripping faucets to
heart arrhythmias to imperfect electronic control systems.
Is the economy chaotic?
If you hit a rocking horse with a stick, the movement of the horse will be
very different from the stick. The hits are the cause of the movement, but the
system’s own equilibrium laws condition the form of movement.
Knut Wicksell (1918)
21
A problem with prevailing macroeconomic models is that they have only
fixed-point attractors, so if the model economy is left alone it settles into a
state of rest and stays there forever. This implies that all changes in the
economy are driven by events outside the economy. To explain why the
economy changes, economists have to postulate the existence of shocks that
knock the model away from equilibrium. They cannot predict the shocks,
they can only predict how the economy relaxes back to equilibrium. The
Swedish economist Knut Wicksell, quoted above, uses the analogy of a
rocking horse being struck by a stick: The rocking horse is like the
economy and the blows from the stick are like the shocks. Absent further
shocks, the economy would settle into a static equilibrium, but the blows
from the stick keep coming, and the horse continues to rock as a result.
There have long been dissenters who felt that a substantial component of
the economy’s changes come from within. In the 1960s and 1970s, several
prominent economists proposed theories for business cycles based on
deterministic models with limit cycles.
22
In these models, the economy is
like a rocking horse ridden by a child, who pumps it back and forth and
keeps it going indefinitely – like the spring powering the pendulum in a
grandfather clock. The problem with limit cycle-based models is that their
business cycles are too regular. These models produce limit cycles that are
perfectly periodic, like the motion of a rocking horse, whereas real business
cycles are highly irregular; the intervals between cycles can range from
several decades to only a few years. Models with limit cycles can be made
less regular by adding shocks, but it’s still hard to produce behavior
irregular enough to be plausible (though this point has recently been
contested).
23
As the idea of chaos became better known, a few economists asked
whether the irregular oscillations of the economy might be due to chaotic
dynamics. If it’s true for the weather, they reasoned, why not the economy?
Unlike limit cycle–based explanations, chaos automatically generates
irregular behavior, and it’s easy to find examples of simple chaotic
dynamical systems whose output resembles business cycles. In 1981
Richard Day proposed a modification of an economic-growth model with
chaotic dynamics, and in 1986 Michele Boldrin and Luigi Montrucchio
gave another example.
24
These models were highly simplified and required
unrealistic parameters to generate chaos, but they at least suggested that the
idea was plausible. But did chaotic dynamics figure in real economies?
This question led the economists William ‘Buz’ Brock, Blake LeBaron
and José Scheinkman to formulate a test for identifying chaos in economic
data, building on methods we had developed in the Dynamical Systems
Collective. They applied their test to a long historical record of daily
changes in the Dow Jones Index and showed that there were no convincing
signs of it.
25
A few other papers examined different economic data and got
similar results. From the point of view of mainstream economists, this
closed the case: Since there was no empirical evidence for chaotic dynamics
in the data, chaos must be irrelevant for economics.
26
I like Brock, LeBaron and Scheinkman’s method – in fact my
collaborators and I later built on it to debunk the idea that simple chaos
explains fluctuations in brainwaves.
27
However, I think the interpretation of
their results was wrong. They don’t rule out the possibility that chaotic
dynamics underlies economic dynamics.
This misinterpretation stems from a subtle but profound point that is not
widely understood: Chaos can be simple or complicated. Simple chaos and
complicated chaos lie at two ends of the same spectrum, but their behavior
is quite different. In simple chaos (like the Lorenz equations), the motion
can be described using only a few variables. For complicated chaos, like the
weather, many factors act independently, and many variables are required to
describe the motion. For instance, models for predicting the weather depend
on the air temperature, pressure, humidity, cloud cover, wind speed and
direction, not to mention the local topography, the height and type of the
clouds, the current amount of rain, the temperature of the land, and so on.
Because the list of numbers needed to describe the current state of the
weather is long, we say it has many degrees of freedom. While the Lorenz
equations were meant to describe something about fluid turbulence, they do
not even begin to describe all the complicated features of real weather.
There is a continuum between simple models like the Lorenz equations
(which have only three degrees of freedom) and the very complicated
models used to predict real weather (which have billions of degrees of
freedom). In my PhD thesis, I was the first to study the progression from
simple chaos to complicated chaos and show how chaotic behavior changes
and becomes more turbulent as the number of degrees of freedom increases.
The standard economics ‘rocking horse’ model is an example of a family
of models widely used throughout applied science and engineering called a
random process (in other fields, the shocks are usually called noise). In a
random process, the noisy inputs are modified by deterministic components
of the process – just as the rocking horse responds to the blows by the stick
that shape the resulting behavior. Like complicated chaos, random
processes have many degrees of freedom. This can make the two very
difficult to tell apart.
The test that Brock, LeBaron and Scheinkman applied to the Dow Jones
index was essentially a measurement of the number of degrees of freedom.
If they had found few degrees of freedom, they would have been able to
claim they had found chaos, which is the only way to generate random-
looking behavior with low degrees of freedom. But they found high degrees
of freedom, indicating that either the behavior of the Dow Jones index is a
random process or it is complicated chaos – they couldn’t distinguish
between the two because, based on historical data alone, complicated chaos
is impossible to distinguish from a random process. However, their results
were not interpreted this way, but were instead taken to mean that chaos
was not present, period. If they had applied their test to the weather, it
would have yielded the same answer, even though we know that the
weather is chaotic, for two reasons. First, we can do experiments with fluids
and study the transition to turbulence. At the transition point, the motion has
only a few degrees of freedom, and it becomes possible for tests like that of
Brock, LeBaron and Scheinkman to show this. Second, we can simulate the
equations that describe the weather on digital computers and show that
chaos is present, like Lorenz did. It’s far easier to demonstrate the presence
of chaos in a model than it is for real data, and this is particularly true for
complicated chaos.
In fact, it would have been really surprising to see simple chaos at work
in economic data. The economy is inherently complicated, with many
different interacting factors. Even if much of economic change is
endogenous, much is not. Moreover, because the economy changes slowly,
in timescales measured in years, there is effectively very little data to
analyze. There have been only about ten or twelve business cycles since
World War II, whereas methods for detecting even the simplest kind of
chaos require thousands of cycles.
There is another strong argument for the presence of chaos in economics
– one that few economists are aware of. David Ruelle and Floris Takens,
who were part of a community of mathematicians in the 1970s who built on
Poincaré’s early insights and rediscovered Lorenz’s work, proved a
remarkable theorem which says that chaos is the likely explanation of
complex-looking behavior.
28
The theorem is too technical to describe here,
but it basically says that when dynamical systems cause endogenous motion
(like limit cycles), as this motion gets complicated, it inevitably becomes
chaotic (meaning that it has sensitive dependence on initial conditions).
29
The same argument applies to the economy. If the economy produces
endogenous motion that isn’t a simple limit cycle or a combination of limit
cycles, it must be due to chaos – there’s really no other option. As noted, the
models showing chaos that were proposed in the early 1980s were
unrealistic to start with. In models based on more plausible behavioral
assumptions – i.e., complexity-economics models – chaos becomes more
common.
In 1981 I finished my PhD in physics at Santa Cruz and began looking
for a job. But my specialty was now chaos. Even though our work on
dynamical systems was getting a lot of attention, I didn’t fit neatly into any
of the academic boxes for physicists, so there were essentially no academic
jobs for which I was a viable contender. Academia is, unfortunately, a world
of disciplinary silos. Our research fell between the cracks – or more
accurately, the chasms – that exist between disciplines. Physicists thought
what we were doing was interesting, but it was utterly different from what
any of them did, and there were no other disciplines doing this kind of
work.
I found my job by chance: I happened to be reading a biography of J.
Robert Oppenheimer when I saw a poster advertising the J. Robert
Oppenheimer Fellowship at Los Alamos National Laboratory. I had grown
up in New Mexico and was eager to return. Despite my misgivings about
the fact that Los Alamos is, among other things, a weapons-research
laboratory, I decided to apply. During the interview, they told me I didn’t
have to do any military research and could work on anything I wanted, and
I became an Oppenheimer Fellow at the newly formed Center for Nonlinear
Studies.
The intellectual environment I found myself in was remarkable. There
were no disciplinary boundaries. The only questions people asked about
your work were, ‘Is it interesting?’ and ‘Is it useful?’ It’s no coincidence
that many of the best papers in nonlinear dynamics (the broader field that
chaos belongs to) were written there. The Manhattan Project had enlisted
the best mathematicians and physicists in the world, and some of my heroes
from that era, such as Stanislaw Ulam and Nicholas Metropolis, were still
there. I had regular conversations with the mathematical physicist Mitchell
Feigenbaum, a pioneer of chaos theory. Los Alamos was perhaps the only
place in the United States where working on chaos was considered a
perfectly normal thing to do, and with my help and that of others it became
one of the places that the science of complex systems emerged from.
Chaos, which explains how randomness emerges from order, is only a
small subfield within complex systems. Let’s now zoom out to discuss the
bigger picture.
...
2.
The Economy is a Complex System
In the last few years the concept of self-organizing systems – of complex
systems in which randomness and chaos seem spontaneously to evolve into
unexpected order – has become an increasingly influential idea that links
together researchers in many fields, from artificial intelligence to chemistry,
from evolution to geology. For whatever reason, however, this movement
has largely passed economic theory by. It is time to see how the new ideas
can be applied to that immensely complex, but indisputably self-organizing
system we call the economy.
Paul Krugman (1996)
1
Twenty-five years ago, the distinguished economist Paul Krugman joined
the complexity enconomics pioneers, and proposed that the time had come
to study the economy as a complex system. Unfortunately, like many before
him, this largely went unheeded by the mainstream, whose conceptual
models and mathematical toolkit were not well suited to take advantage of
complexity theory, and Krugman himself went on to pursue other things,
such as becoming a columnist for the New York Times.
The remarkable evolution of civilization, from the early days of Homo
sapiens until now, is a dramatic illustration of Krugman’s point that the
economy is a self-organizing complex system.
2
The economy is just a name
for the process of specialization, cooperation and competition that supports
us.
3
The sustainable human population has grown by several orders of
magnitude due to technological progress and advances in social
organization, which underpin our evolving economy – without it, most of us
would not exist. Because of the emergent properties of the economy, most
of our lives are far more prosperous and secure than they would be if we
were Robin Crusoes acting on our own. The economy’s organization of our
collective behavior enables us to create vaccines, predict the weather, go to
the Moon, and do all sorts of other things that none of us could ever
accomplish alone.
Because the economy is an adaptive complex system, biological
concepts, such as metabolism, ecology and evolution, are very useful for
thinking about it. These are more than just metaphors – they contain general
principles that help us understand how the economy is organized and how it
works.
How concepts from biology help us understand the economy
The idea that economics could profit from concepts in biology has been
around a long time.
4
In 1890, in his Principles of Economics, Alfred
Marshall, a key founder of neoclassical economics, famously wrote, ‘The
Mecca of the economist lies in economic biology.’
5
Writing in the 1940s,
the Austrian-American political economist Joseph Schumpeter emphasized
that capitalism can be understood only as an evolutionary process of
continuous innovation and creative destruction.
6
In 1982, Richard Nelson
and Sidney Winter’s An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change made a
compelling argument that the evolutionary perspective is essential for
understanding how innovation drives economic growth and alters the
structure of the economy over time. But Nelson and Winter were prescient
when they wrote, ‘We expect, however, that many of our economist
colleagues will be reluctant to accept the second premise of our work – that
a major reconstruction of the theoretical foundations of our discipline is a
precondition for significant growth in our understanding of economic
change.’
7
Ideas from biology have not, so far, led to quantitative theories
making useful, falsifiable predictions. Complexity economics is starting to
change this.
Adam Smith’s 1776 book The Wealth of Nations, widely regarded as the
foundation of economics, describes the economy as a complex system: ‘In
the lone houses and very small villages which are scattered about in so
desert a country as the Highlands of Scotland,’ he wrote, ‘every farmer must
be butcher, baker and brewer for his own family.’
8
In towns and cities,
however, it was far more efficient for butchers to sell meat, brewers to make
beer and bakers to bake bread than for each citizen to make all their own
provisions. Trade enabled people to specialize in what each did best, and
the promise of a good income motivated them not only to do things well but
also to innovate. Smith understood that the economy as a whole behaves
very differently from the individuals who comprise it. Stated in modern
terms, he saw the economy as an emergent phenomenon.
We can restate Smith’s key insight in ecological terms: The economy is
organized as an ecosystem of specialists. In biology, the word ecosystem
refers to a collection of species who interact with and affect each other.
Each is a specialist, with its own unique strategy for extracting energy from
the environment in order to survive and reproduce.
Species eat each other, compete with each other, cooperate with each
other and collectively alter the environment. Understanding the interactions
between species is essential: As mentioned earlier, if you want to
understand grass, you must also think about lions. Lions protect grass: If the
lions go extinct, the zebra population will rise and grass will decline. To
make sense of the biosphere, it’s not enough to study species in isolation;
we must understand how they affect each other and alter their shared
environment.
Similarly, the economy is a complex ecosystem of specialized
organizations populated by workers who belong to households, whose
members are consumers. In developed countries, consumption choices vary
enormously – many of the products I consume are likely substantially
different from those you consume. There are thousands of different kinds of
firms making products, which can either be goods, like Pop Tarts or
screwdrivers, or services, like legal advice and care-giving. Each firm tends
to be highly specialized, because the production of most of the goods and
services in the modern economy requires specific knowledge that takes a
great deal of time and effort to acquire, and it is more useful and rewarding
to specialize than to try doing many different things. The know-how
embodied in firms and other organizations is the result of specialized
occupations, each with its own unique knowledge and set of skills. Other
types of organizations, such as governments and schools, play an important
role in the economy. Understanding this ecosystem means thinking about
the economy in terms of networks, which provide a universal language
describing the operations of complex systems.
Economics = accounting + behavior
Networks are one of the core ideas in complex systems. For example, your
extended social network describes your friends, your friends’ friends and so
on. You can visualize your extended social network by thinking of the
people in it as nodes, which you can represent by dots, with links between
friends, which you can represent by lines. If you want to be introduced to
someone you don’t already know, knowledge of your extended social
network allows you to understand who could introduce you, or who could
introduce you to someone who could introduce you. As famously shown by
Stanley Milgram, we can reach almost anyone with only six degrees of
separation.
Networks identify the essential building blocks of a complex system and
supply a schematic view of their interactions. In a transportation network,
the nodes might be cities and highways might be links. In a schematic of the
financial system, the nodes might be banks and the links might be loans or
investments. I say ‘might’ because there are usually many possible choices
for nodes and links, depending on what one wants to understand. For
example, the links between cities could also be based on trade, and the links
between banks could be based on their common asset holdings.
The skeleton of the modern economy is a vast network of balance
sheets.
9
Each balance sheet is a list of assets and liabilities, which can be
physical goods and services or contracts (money, for example, is a
contract). The nodes in the network correspond to organizations –
households, corporations, governments or any organization that might have
a balance sheet either explicitly or implicitly. Since contracts are by
definition agreements between two or more parties, they link balance sheets
together. My home-insurance policy is an asset on my balance sheet, but it
is a liability for the company that issued it. Balance sheets are also linked
by transactions, which cause goods and contracts to flow from one balance
sheet to another.
The network of balance sheets underlying the modern economy is truly
vast: Globally there are roughly 2 billion households and 200 million firms,
as well as governments and other types of organizations that are consumers
and suppliers of goods and services. Members of households are employed
by firms, governments and other non-profit organizations. And households
(especially in developed countries) consume thousands of different
products, creating many trillions of links between households and firms; in
addition, there are trillions of active contracts – so many it is difficult to
count.
The global network of balance sheets is constantly in flux. Every
transaction causes something to leave one balance sheet and appear on
another. There is constant turnover, causing some nodes to disappear and
new nodes to be added. Innovation creates new types of goods and new
contracts. The network of balance sheets in the modern world is vastly more
complicated and interconnected than it was 10,000 years ago.
We can think about the economy schematically as an interaction of
accounting and human decision-making. Accounting is represented by the
network of balance sheets, which continually changes as people make
economic decisions. These decisions take many forms: What product to
consume? What product to offer? Whom to hire? When to borrow? How
much and from whom? All these decisions constitute economic activity. To
understand the economy, we have to understand human behavior as it
relates to economic decision-making, and we need to understand how this
interacts with the underlying network of balance sheets.
Accounting and decision-making both pose difficult problems but in
very different ways. Accounting is complicated but well-understood,
whereas decision-making requires an understanding of human nature that is
still incomplete.
Accounting consists of a mechanical set of rules that measure economic
activity. Accounting has a central conservation law, ‘equity equals assets
minus liabilities’, much like the conservation laws for energy, momentum
and other quantities that play a central role in physics. Tracking and
understanding the vast, complicated, interconnected balance sheets of the
real global economy is challenging. We now have enough computer power
that this is possible, but we aren’t taking full advantage of this capability.
Because people don’t follow simple mechanical rules, modeling human
decision-making is an even bigger challenge. Understanding how people
make decisions, both as individuals and in groups, is an important goal of
the disciplines of psychology, sociology, anthropology and political science.
As noted, the last fifty years have seen the emergence of behavioral
economics, which draws on insights from other social sciences to study
how we make decisions that affect balance sheets, but we still lack a
comprehensive theory of economic decision-making.
The network of global balance sheets can’t be studied in literal detail – it
is too huge and complicated, and much of the necessary information is
opaque due to confidentiality. We have to simplify the problem by dividing
the network of balance sheets up into pieces and aggregating each piece. We
take averages for countries or regions and study their interactions. GDP, for
example, is a measure of economic activity. Macroeconomics studies the
interactions of aggregate quantities, like GDP, unemployment, inflation and
interest rates, within and between nations; microeconomics studies the
interactions of balance sheets on a finer scale, but without trying to look at
the whole economy. In Chapters 5 and 6 we will discuss how traditional
economics understands the network of balance sheets from the top down,
while complexity economics understands it from the bottom up.
...
3.
Understanding the Metabolism of
Civilization
The labour process [. . .] is purposeful activity aimed at the production of
use-values. It is an appropriation on what exists in nature for the
requirements of man. It is the universal condition for the metabolic
interaction between man and nature [. . .] common to all forms of society in
which human beings live.
Karl Marx (1867)
1
Back in the 1980s, in the early days of complex-systems science, the main
focus was on the problem of self-organization.
2
How do organized
configurations of matter, like life or the brain, spontaneously emerge from
the disorganized background following the creation of the universe? While
important and fascinating, this is a problem that will likely take centuries if
not millennia to solve, and so far we have made only incremental progress.
As the science of complex systems matured, it branched out to tackle easier
problems with more immediate practical applications. Some of the most
important early successes involved networks.
3
The pioneering sociologist
Mark Granovetter introduced the concept of social networks, as discussed
earlier, in which the nodes are people or firms and the links between them
can take many different forms. He showed how the economic relationships
between people or firms are ‘embedded’ in social networks, making them
behave differently than they would in an abstract market setting.
Complex-systems scientists such as Mark Newman, my colleague at SFI,
embraced the idea of networks and developed new mathematical methods
for applications to data.
4
They showed how networks could be used to
understand and improve many different real-world systems, such as how to
structure connections between internet hubs to make them more reliable and
less prone to sabotage, or how to allocate vaccines to ensure the maximum
effect in reducing the spread of disease.
Network modeling is one of the few complex-systems ideas that has
made its way into mainstream economics. Stanford economist Matthew
Jackson (like me, an external faculty member of SFI) has produced a body
of insightful work on the role of networks in economics, showing, for
example, how social networks influence employment and inequality.
5
Representing a system as a network begins by identifying its building
blocks and their interactions: asking, ‘What are the most important nodes?’
and ‘Are there communities? If so, what are they?’ (Mathematically
speaking, a community is a set of nodes that interact with each other much
more strongly than they do with other nodes.) Websites provide a good
example. The most important websites are not necessarily those with the
most traffic or those that are linked to the largest number of other websites.
Rather, they are the websites that are linked to the largest number of other
important websites. Although this sounds circular, network theory provides
a way to unravel this conundrum and identify the websites that are the most
important. To see how the algorithm works, imagine a ‘random walker’ that
starts at a random node (website) in the network. The walker then randomly
jumps to one of the websites that the starting website is linked to. This
process is repeated many times as the walker wanders through all the nodes.
The importance of any one of these websites is proportional to the
frequency with which it is visited. This algorithm, which is called
PageRank, was patented by Larry Page and Sergey Brin and is used in the
Google search engine.
6
Network analysis is also useful for understanding lending between
banks. In the interbank-lending network, banks are nodes and loans
between banks are links. If a bank cannot pay back its lenders, this may
cause the lenders to default as well, setting off a chain reaction. Suppose
you’re a regulator and want to keep the financial system from collapsing.
Which banks are most important? If you can prop up only a few, which
should you choose? The biggest banks? The banks that lend to the largest
number of other banks? In fact, the answer turns out to be similar to the
story for websites: The most important banks are those connected to the
largest number of other important banks.
7
The same PageRank algorithm
that was invented for web pages can be used to identify the banks whose
collapse would cause the most harm. This makes it possible to identify the
best banks to support during a financial crisis, and has been used by
organizations such as the European Central Bank to identify Systemically
Important Financial Institutions. That the same basic idea can be used to
understand systems as different as banks and the internet (and many others)
illustrates the value of complex-systems thinking. We’ll say more about the
important applications to the financial system in Part III.
Network theory offers a conceptual framework that helps us analyze
ecologies of specialists in the economy. This approach has practical
applications, like making better predictions about economic growth or
understanding how quickly the job force can adapt to technological change.
In this chapter, I present a static network model for production networks
that was developed in mainstream economics, and discuss how my
collaborators and I modified it to successfully predict economic growth.
This was a key step in constructing the model that successfully predicted
the economic impact of the COVID pandemic discussed in the Prologue.
The economy is like a metabolism
My introduction to networks came about because of my interest in the
origin of life. My early papers on networks, in the mid 1980s, were written
in collaboration with Norman Packard.
8
We developed the concept of meta-
dynamical systems – networks that could change in response to their
environment and also evolve over time. In one of the papers, we teamed up
with Stuart Kauffman, a remarkably creative medical doctor and
developmental biologist who joined SFI’s faculty a few years later, to make
a model for the prebiotic origin of life. We used networks to ask whether
metabolisms might have existed even before the origin of life as we know it
on the Earth now. In other words, we posited the existence of a possible
simpler form of life that you might call proto-life, which might have been a
precursor to prokaryotes, the earliest of Earth’s life forms.
9
Richard Bagley, a chemistry graduate student at UC San Diego, came to
Los Alamos to work with me and wrote his thesis there, under my
supervision. Rick’s thesis was a model for the origin of proto-life. It built on
the abstract chemical networks that Stuart, Norman and I had developed,
going beyond our schematic efforts and explicitly simulating polymer nodes
and the chemical reactions linking them.
10
His work showed that our
hypothesis of the spontaneous emergence of a prebiotic metabolism was
indeed plausible.
The simulated metabolism that Rick built is closely analogous to the way
goods and services are produced in the economy. But before I can explain
why this analogy holds, it’s helpful to describe the way the economy
produces things in network terms. Economic activity in the modern
economy is highly specialized. The production network reflects the division
of labor in producing goods and services. The nodes are companies that
provide those goods and services, and the links are the transactions among
companies or between companies and households; households can be
thought of as a special kind of industry that consumes the products of the
other industries and provides them with labor. Although we often take it for
granted, the production network forms the backbone of the economy. It is
the delocalized engine that creates the goods and services that populate and
flow through the network of balance sheets.
To see how the production network functions, let’s examine how it
produces a laptop. A schematic view of the supply chain of a laptop is
shown in Figure 2. Many different specialized products are needed to
manufacture a laptop. The nodes in the network are these products and the
links connect each product to its constituents.
Figure 2. Supply chain of a laptop. The nodes correspond to products, which are shown as circles.
These are connected by links that show which products are inputs to other products.
To produce a laptop, raw materials are extracted from every continent
except Antarctica, transported to other locations and processed to make
composite materials. These in turn are used to make the individual parts that
are then combined and assembled elsewhere to create the laptop. The
process involves many firms in different industries. Each industry makes its
product and sells it to another industry further downstream. The final
product, the laptop, is both a consumer good and an intermediate item used
to make other products: Engineers use laptops to design many things,
including new laptops. This is one of many loops in the production network.
Though we often refer to pieces of the production network as supply chains,
this is a bad metaphor: The production network is full of branches and is
more like a tangled web than a chain.
The physical inputs for laptop production are only part of the story. A
laptop is designed by engineers, who work for companies that get started by
raising capital, which comes from investors, including bankers and other
financiers. Once it’s made, a laptop must be transported, distributed and
marketed. The engineers, fabrication facilities and computer stores are all
housed in buildings, so we must include the construction industry among
the inputs. The buildings sit on land, so we must include real-estate
companies. Manufacturing requires energy, so we have to include that, too,
not to mention the janitors, cooks in the company cafeterias, accountants
and lawyers, the occasional plumber to unclog a toilet – the list is long.
Every industry is connected to many other industries, and the connections
loop back on themselves: Accountants, real-estate agents and engineers all
use laptops to do their jobs.
The making of a laptop illustrates how the economy operates like a big
metabolism. The production network has a structure similar to the proto-life
model described earlier. Their definitions are the same except for a change
in noun phrases:
A metabolism is a network of chemical reactions that transforms a food set of chemical
inputs into other chemicals that provide energy and raw materials for living cells.
A production network is a network of firms that transforms natural resources and labor
into goods and services for consumers.
The economy coordinates the labor of billions of people, so that each
network component is available when and where it is needed.
There is an essential difference between production networks and biological
metabolisms: In biology, metabolisms are localized within each organism
and ecologies are built from the interactions between organisms. But the
economy is structured as if it were one big superorganism, with a single
metabolism. The metabolism of this superorganism operates through the
actions of an ecology of specialists, each of whom the metabolism supports.
This remarkable circular process thrives on the specialization of its goods
and services and the specialization of the labor required to produce them.
An early pioneer of complexity economics
By 1925, post-revolutionary Russia was becoming increasingly dangerous
for Wassily Wassilyevich Leontief. A man from a wealthy family, he’d
already been arrested several times by the Cheka secret-police because of
his campaigning in support of academic autonomy and freedom of speech.
With the net closing ever tighter, he feigned an untreatable terminal illness
that led the authorities to take pity on him and allow him to spend his final
months in the West. Having escaped the Soviet Union, he eventually made
his way to Harvard where he carried out groundbreaking work on
production networks.
Leontif took seriously Adam Smith’s observation that specialization is an
essential feature of an economy and made a mathematical model for how
individual industries in specialized roles interact to create economic
output.
11
He was one of the first economists to embrace the digital age: In
1949 he used an early computer, the Harvard Mark II, to solve a system of
linear input-output equations that divided the economy into 500 industries.
This was quite a feat at the time. (Since then, the field has in a sense gone
backwards – typical models now only use between 40 and 100 industries.)
His systems of equations were effectively network models of the economy.
Though no one used the term while he was alive, and he was part of the
mainstream, I consider Leontief a pioneer of complexity economics.
The nodes of Leontief’s production network are industries, comprising
different firms that make a family of products (like automobiles) that can be
lumped together and treated as if they were a single product. The products
can be physical goods (like screws) or services (like pizza delivery). Each
industry buys products from other industries, converts them to make a new
product, and sells them, in turn, to households or other industries. The links
between the nodes are the inputs required to produce each product. Money
flows in the opposite direction to products: Physical goods flow from
suppliers to customers; customers pay their suppliers.
12
Leontief’s model assumes that each product is produced via a ‘recipe’
(called a production function in economics) that specifies how much of
each input is needed to make the output. This can be measured in monetary
terms as the value of the products that companies buy and sell. Leontief’s
original model makes some strong assumptions, such as setting markups
(the difference between revenues and costs) to zero and assuming that the
economy exists in a steady-state equilibrium. Neither of these assumptions
is true, but they provide a crude approximation that makes it possible to
solve the resulting equations for the prices of all the products. These
equations closely resemble those that Rick and I used (and that biochemists
use) to understand metabolisms.
Given his status as a defector, it is ironic that the Soviets were perhaps
the biggest beneficiaries of Leontief’s equations, which they used to make
the pieces of a planned economy fit together. Leontief’s equations solve the
chicken-and-egg problem caused by the many positive-feedback loops in
the production network. For example, the Soviets desperately wanted to
increase steel production. To do this, they had to build up the industries that
provide inputs to the steel industry, such as iron, coal and railways. But
building railways requires steel, as do the machines for extracting iron and
coal. Thus, to increase steel production, you need to increase steel
production. Leontief’s methods helped solve this conundrum and allowed
the Soviet planners to invest in each industry so as to increase production as
quickly as possible.
13
In economics, models of the production network with multiple industrial
sectors are usually called input-output models. The mainstream interest in
input-output models has ebbed and flowed over the last seventy years. For
two decades following Leontief’s pioneering work, there was a major effort
to predict the behavior of the economy using input-output models with
hundreds of industrial sectors. This was not very successful, and, as we will
discuss in Chapter 5, in the 1970s macroeconomics took off in a very
different direction. Detailed models of the production network were
abandoned, and by the turn of the millennium they had become a footnote
in macroeconomics textbooks.
Meanwhile, in the 1990s, my colleague H. Eugene Stanley from Boston
University and some other physicists started a new movement they called
econophysics, promoting a physics-style approach to understanding the
financial system and the economy. One of the early econophysics papers
from Gene’s group pointed out that the year-to-year fluctuations in the
growth of large companies behave in a very peculiar manner.
14
The ‘law of
large numbers’ suggests that fluctuations in output should average out when
we consider the economy as a whole, but this is not what happens – the
fluctuations are much larger than one would normally expect. The French-
American economist Xavier Gabaix postulated that this is due to the
extreme variation in the size of companies, and he used input-output models
to develop his theory.
15
Gabaix’s work led to a rekindling of interest in
inputoutput models, which have now branched out in other directions.
Static models of production networks are one of the branches of
economics where mainstream economics and complexity economics
overlap. The model I am about to describe has much in common with
models that are currently popular in the mainstream. Nonetheless, because
my colleagues and I started in a different place, taking our inspiration from
ecology, we came at the problem in a different way and found ways to
apply Leontief’s model that mainstream economists missed.
The ecology of production networks
The second graduate student who played an important role in my work on
production networks is James McNerney. James, a physics student, wanted
to work on something relating to economics and was particularly interested
in the economics of climate change. He came from Boston University to the
Santa Fe Institute in 2008 and spent several years there working with me.
Ecology was always well represented at SFI, and this led James and me to
think about whether we could apply concepts from ecology to economic
production networks.
We were particularly interested in how technological improvement in
one product might cascade through the production network and result in
technological improvements in other products. James extended Leontief’s
equations by adding a simple model for technological progress, assuming
that the net result of progress is that the same output is made with less of
each input. The links in the production network remain the same, but their
weight decreases in response to each industry’s progress, and as inputs go
down, so do product prices.
16
(In reality technological progress has many
other effects, but it is often useful to start simple.)
Our idea was based on the ecological concept of a food chain. Imagine a
simplified ecology consisting of lions, zebras and grass, and assign each
species a trophic level – a numerical rating based on their place in the food
chain. Since grass gets its energy directly from the Sun and the atmosphere,
it is usually assigned a trophic level of 1. Zebras eat grass, so they get a
trophic level of 2. Lions eat zebras, so they get a trophic level of 3.
The real world is more complicated. Organisms like humans and pigs are
omnivorous, eating at multiple levels in the food chain, and decomposers
(like worms eating a lion’s corpse) create loops. In reality, the food chain is
actually a food network. Nonetheless, it’s possible to assign trophic levels,
even in such messy situations, through a set of equations stating that the
trophic level of each species in an ecology is one more than the weighted
average of the trophic levels of the things it eats. The resulting trophic
levels are no longer whole numbers, but they’re still helpful in
understanding how a disturbance – for example, the removal of a top
predator by overfishing – affects other species.
We saw that we could compute trophic levels for industries in the same
way. The production network is analogous to a food web. In a food web, the
nodes are species and the links correspond to what they eat; in the
production network, the nodes are industries and the links correspond to
their inputs. While households can be viewed as an ‘industry’, they play a
special role – they are the end-users of the economy.
17
James and I made
households the reference point (like the Sun in a food web) and assigned
them a trophic level of zero.
In economics, the trophic level of an industry can be thought of as the
depth of its supply chain. It measures the number of steps required to make
an industry’s product.
18
An industry whose only input is labor has a trophic
level of 1, because its only input comes from households, which by
definition have a trophic level of zero. An industry with inputs from
industries other than labor automatically has a trophic level greater than 1.
An industry has a high trophic level if the fraction of its inputs from labor
are small and if its other inputs have high trophic levels. Service industries
tend to have low trophic levels and manufacturing industries tend to have
high trophic levels. (Note that the trophic level is essentially the same as
what is called an output multiplier in economics, though we used the
concept here differently than in earlier work.
19
)
Figure 3. Comparison of the trophic structure of the US and Chinese economies. The industries are
arranged horizontally based on industry type. The vertical axis shows the trophic level for each
industry. The size of the circles (nodes) corresponds to the revenues of each industry. The arrows
(links) correspond to the largest inputs for each industry.
Figure 3 compares the production networks for the United States and
Chinese economies. The trophic level of each industry is plotted along the
vertical axis, while the horizontal axis places industries according to a
standard industrial classification scheme. Plotting the data this way makes
some key differences between the two economies obvious at a glance.
One of the most striking differences evident in Figure 3 is that on
average the trophic levels of Chinese industries are higher than those of US
industries. There are two reasons for this. One is that the Chinese economy
is much more heavily concentrated in manufacturing industries. In China,
manufacturing industries such as Electrical Equipment or Metallurgy play a
big role in the economy; they tend to have high trophic levels because there
are many steps in their production. In contrast, the United States
concentrates heavily on industries with shallow supply chains such as
Miscellaneous Services or Health.
The second reason trophic levels of Chinese industries are higher is that
they pay their workers lower wages. Since labor is a smaller fraction of the
cost of the inputs, the contribution of the household sector is lower. This
means that the relative amount paid for manufactured inputs is higher,
which raises the trophic level of industries in China.
It is also interesting to compare specific industries: American agriculture,
for example, has a high trophic level, reflecting a high degree of
mechanization. The US industry with the highest trophic level is Food,
because Agriculture, by far its biggest input, already has a high trophic
level. In China, Agriculture is highly labor intensive, giving it a lower
trophic level, like that of service industries.
But what does trophic level have to do with technological innovation and
economic growth? Economic growth depends on technological innovation.
What James realized is that, since innovations are passed along the supply
chain, products made by industries with high trophic levels will tend to
improve faster than products made by industries with low trophic levels.
Think about laptops: The cost of making a laptop depends on the whole
industrial ecosystem that supports it from below. If the tantalum-mining
industry becomes more efficient, this will drive the cost of tantalum down,
so memorychip manufacturers pay less for tantalum, which lowers the cost
of memory chips. If the manufacturers improve the chip-manufacturing
process, this lowers costs even more, and so on, all the way up the supply
chain. We showed that this causes an amplification effect: Improvements
combine multiplicatively as one moves up the supply chain. In contrast, for
a service-intensive industry whose only input is labor, there are no
improvements passed on from the rest of the economy. Any improvements
must come from that industry itself – the only way to innovate is to use
labor more efficiently.
The typical industry improves more due to the effort of its suppliers than
it does due to its own effort. James showed that 65 per cent of
improvements in a given industry come from other industries – or,
alternatively, only 35 per cent of the improvements in a typical industry
come from within the industry itself. Thus, if all industries innovate at the
same rate, and if all else is equal, industries with a higher trophic level will
improve faster than industries with a lower trophic level. This is because an
industry with a deeper supply chain has more industries below it to provide
it with innovations.
We tested our hypothesis on data for thirty-five industries in forty
countries from 1995 to 2009. This database computed a price index for the
products made by each industry in a given country, which gave us an
overall measure of improvement based on lower prices to buy the same
thing, adjusted for changes in quality. For example, if laptops get faster and
have more memory but sell for the same price, the price index will drop, to
account for the improved quality. When the price index drops, this means
that the product has either become cheaper, or better, or some combination
of the two, but in any case it signifies the overall level of improvement.
We tested our hypothesis by forecasting changes in the price index,
taking advantage of the fact that trophic levels change very slowly – so
slowly that they can be treated as constant over the fourteen years between
1995 and 2009. We showed that the trophic level of a given industry in a
given country in 1995 predicts how much its products will have improved
fourteen years later. Since there are other factors influencing improvement,
the individual predictions are by no means perfect, but they worked
extremely well: The average improvement for a given industry in a given
country increases proportional to trophic level, as we predicted, and our
hypothesis is strongly confirmed with extraordinarily high levels of
statistical significance. This helps explain some well-established economic
facts, such as why manufacturing industries tend to improve faster than
service industries, as originally noted by NYU economist William
Baumol.
20
Trophic levels also predict the growth rates of countries. Let’s call the
average trophic level of the industries of a given country the trophic level of
that country. According to our model, the growth in GDP of a country
should be proportional to its trophic level. (As before, it is necessary to add
‘if all else is equal’, because there are many other factors that influence
GDP growth.) When we tested our hypothesis at the country level on the
same data set, countries with higher trophic levels in 1995 tended to have
higher GDP growth over the next fourteen years, just as predicted. From
1995 to 2009, US GDP grew by about 1.5 per cent annually, while Chinese
GDP grew by 8.7 per cent annually. How much of this difference can be
explained by trophic level? According to our model, about 30 per cent of
China’s growth advantage over the US between 1995 and 2009 is due to its
higher trophic level in the global economy, and the rest is explained by
other factors.
21
Thinking in terms of trophic levels leads to an interesting hypothesis
about development paths. Although trophic levels change slowly, over
many decades, they change in economically important ways. In his PhD
thesis, one of my other students, Charles Savoie, estimated how the trophic
level of the US economy had changed over time from 1790 to the present.
22
Bearing in mind that data from earlier years is limited and unreliable, the
story goes like this: In 1790, the trophic level of the US economy was about
3.2, with trophic level and per-capita GDP roughly equivalent to that of
present-day Bulgaria. By 1900, the trophic level had increased to about 4 as
the manufacturing sector grew. The trophic level then remained more or less
constant until roughly 1950, while per-capita GDP grew, and then began to
steadily decline to its current value of 2.5, as manufacturing was
increasingly replaced by services.
Will modern-day developing countries on the industrial growth path
evolve in the same way? China’s current per-capita GDP is a bit lower and
its trophic level a bit higher than those of the United States in 1900. At
present, China’s high trophic level helps the Chinese economy grow
rapidly, but if it follows in our footsteps, GDP will eventually grow more
slowly as the country’s trophic level drops due to higher wages and the
replacement of manufacturing by services.
One of the most striking aspects of our predictions is that they don’t
depend on human behavior, at least directly.
23
The trophic level is a
structural property of the economy. Our theory assumes the structure of the
network is given. Because our predictions are independent of any
assumptions about decision-making, they are robust.
24
In contrast, standard
models require an assumption that firms maximize their utility, which must
take a particular mathematical form, and assume a particular mathematical
formula for the production function.
25
Adam Smith argued that specialization makes the economy work better.
Our work here shows that specialization also boosts the rate of innovation
in the economy. This happens automatically: Each industry in the
production network can count on the rest of the economy to improve its
inputs and provide it with new technologies that will allow improvements in
its own processes. Improvements in an industry with a higher trophic level
automatically happen faster, even if innovations in that industry happen at
the same rate as in other industries.
Our extension of Leontief’s model assumes that the rate of improvement
for each technology is constant in time, so the result is, like his, a static
model. In the next chapter, we’ll discuss the development of a dynamic,
agent-based model, using principles very different from those that govern
equilibrium-based models. (An example was already given in the Prologue.)
The evolution of the ecology of work
In 2012, I was invited by Eric Beinhocker to come to the University of
Oxford. Eric had been a regular visitor at the Santa Fe Institute, and his
2007 book, The Origin of Wealth, described the problems of mainstream
economics and included a discussion of work by me and others in
complexity economics.
26
He had received a grant from George Soros to start
a research group that would take a new approach to economics, and he
wanted me to join him and lead a program on complexity economics. My
original appointment was as Director of Complexity Economics at the
Institute for New Economic Thinking at the Oxford Martin School, which is
a cross-disciplinary organization devoted to funding science to help solve
the big problems of society. But it’s not an academic department, and before
I could be appointed I had to become attached to a university department.
Somehow, I ended up in Oxford’s mathematics department, even though
I’ve never published anything in the field of mathematics, but I have since
moved to the Smith School for Enterprise and the Environment, where my
title is the Baillie Gifford Professor of Complex Systems Science. I
eventually got an offer to be a Senior Research Fellow in Christ Church
College, where one of the fun perks is wearing a black gown and sitting at
‘high table’ in the dining hall that the Harry Potter movies used as a
template. Oxford is a long way from Santa Fe, in many respects.
Because my position at the Oxford Martin School is supported with
outside funding, I don’t have teaching responsibilities, which gives me
more time for research. However, I do advise graduate students, which suits
me perfectly. Oxford attracts excellent students from all over the world; I
enjoy collaborating with them, and my productivity has soared as a result.
Since my arrival, I have been steadily building up my group, and I now
have about fifteen graduate students from a variety of disciplines. Most of
them approached me because they wanted to do economics but weren’t
happy with the approach of traditional economics departments.
The work that two of my best students, Penny Mealy and Maria del Rio-
Chanona, have done on understanding labor transitions provides a good
example of complexity economics. Penny, who now works at the World
Bank, was my graduate student and postdoc at Oxford, where she was
based in the geography department. Maria originally studied physics at
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, but moved to mathematics
when she came to Oxford to do her graduate work with me.
In the coming decades, we will experience two major economic
transitions – automation (including artificial intelligence) and the green-
energy transition – which are unfolding in parallel. In addition to changing
the way we produce things, they are also causing seismic shifts in the
workplace that will dramatically alter the occupational landscape and
determine the future of work for the next generation. We have developed
economic models to help navigate these transitions.
Consider the dilemma faced by coal miners. As coal mines close, miners
need to find new jobs. You might think the simple solution would be to train
them to operate solar farms, but the best sites for solar farms are usually far
from coal mines, and the required job skills are different, so this seemingly
easy solution doesn’t make sense. Instead, data on labor transitions tells us
that coal miners are more likely to become construction-equipment
operators or truck drivers, and workers for solar farms are more likely to
come from power plants or structural iron and steel mills. As these
transitions happen, they alter the supply and demand for labor in each
profession, causing changes that propagate through the workforce. Because
everything depends on everything else, nothing can be understood in
isolation. To understand how the occupational-labor network will evolve
with automation and the green-energy transition, we need a more holistic
view.
We have built an agent-based model that tracks the supply and demand
for labor within individual occupations, showing how the labor ecosystem
adapts to changes in the economy. The model helps answer questions such
as, ‘Which occupations will be most affected?’ or ‘How much
unemployment will this cause?’ or ‘What kind of workforce training would
be most effective?’ It also suggests how the lack of skilled labor for
particular industries might affect production. For example, to minimize
climate change, we need to make the green-energy transition as fast as
possible. Can the workforce adapt quickly enough without slowing down
the greenenergy transition? Penny managed an initial effort to get the lay of
the land, and Maria headed the model’s development.
We began by taking snapshots in time, constructing a static network in
which the nodes were occupations and the links were relationships between
them. The links were based on the similarity of work activities – designing,
say, or recruiting and hiring. This network, which we call the job space, is
shown in Figure 4.
27
The nodes are arranged so that occupations that share
many work activities are close together. The similarity of work activities
predicts the likelihood of job transitions between occupations better than
methods previously proposed.
Figure 4. A network view of the job space for the United States in 2016. Nodes (circles) are
occupations, and links are for changes of occupations that occur frequently. Black indicates an
occupation with high unemployment, white indicates low unemployment, with shades of grey in
between. The labels indicate broad occupational categories.
In Figure 4, the nodes in the job space are shaded based on the average
unemployment associated with each occupation. This makes some patterns
self-evident: For example, occupations in the technology or health care
parts of the space have low unemployment rates, while jobs in the
construction and mining part of the space have high unemployment rates.
The diversity is striking: The unemployment rate for nurses is 0.1 per cent;
for boilermakers it’s 25 per cent. The clustering of unemployment in the job
space occurs because occupations that are close to each other share work
activities, which means the supply and demand for their labor tend to be
similar.
Static network plots provide a useful snapshot at any given point in time,
but we wanted to be able to predict how the landscape would change. To do
this, Maria built an agent-based model for the labor market.
28
It simulates
all the steps that workers take when they look for jobs. We start with a static
network, but the model is dynamic: As before, each node represents an
occupation, but the model also includes information attached to each node
that describes the state of each occupation – number of workers, job
vacancies – and calculates what happens month by month as workers are
fired and new job vacancies are created based on that occupation’s current
labor demand. Links are based on the frequency with which workers have
changed occupations in the past.
29
Workers apply for new jobs both in their
current occupation and in other occupations. The relative rate that they
apply for jobs in new occupations is based on data from the US census. To
keep things simple, we assume that all workers applying for a position are
equally likely to be hired. Workers in occupations with little competition
find new employment quickly, but, if competition is stronger, finding a new
job may take many months or even years. Whenever there are changes in
labor demand in our model, the effects ripple through the job space, as each
occupation affects its neighbors. The beauty of the dynamic model is that it
allows us to keep track of interactions among occupations across the entire
job space and understand how everything affects everything else.
To study how automation will affect occupations in the job space, we
used predictions by our Oxford colleagues Carl Frey and Mike Osborne on
the types of jobs that computerization will eliminate.
30
It’s important to keep
in mind that, historically, automation has not resulted in higher
unemployment; instead, it has shifted employment from one occupation to
another. For simplicity, we assumed that the Frey and Osborne predictions
changed the relative demand for occupational labor without affecting the
total demand for labor. We took their predictions as given and then studied
how workers migrate across the job space as old jobs are eliminated and
new jobs are created.
The simulations of the occupational-mobility model indicate that the
transition will be far from uniform: There are regions of the network where
workers easily find new jobs and others where jobless workers get trapped
because there are no suitable alternatives, causing a substantial and
persistent boost to average unemployment. In the model, average
unemployment rises from about 5.3 per cent before the automation shock to
6.7 per cent at the peak of the transition. We compared our results to those
based on a hypothetical ‘complete network’, which assumes workers can
freely transition from any occupation to any other. In the hypothetical
complete network, the unemployment bump is much smaller than our more
realistic model predicts, starting at 4.1 per cent before the shock and
peaking at only 4.7 per cent. This difference in predicted unemployment
rates makes it clear that limits on occupational mobility in the real world
amplify overall unemployment and help determine how long shifts in
unemployment will last during a transition.
Our occupational-transition model predicts some counterintuitive effects.
Dispatchers (like people who coordinate taxis
31
) and pharmacy aides both
face the same high (72 per cent) probability of automation in their jobs, but
the shifts in their long-term unemployment rates are quite different. The
automation shock causes a 19 per cent increase in the long-term
unemployment for dispatchers, while the pharmacy aides’ long-term
unemployment decreases by roughly the same ratio. This is because, after
the transition, there is more competition with workers from other
occupations seeking jobs as dispatchers than for pharmacy aides
(presumably because dispatchers require less training). The influx of new
workers from other professions seeking jobs makes the job market for
dispatchers more competitive. Similarly, even though child-care workers
are directly unaffected by automation, their long-term unemployment
increases by 6 per cent, because workers from many occupations
undergoing automation can easily become child-care workers. These effects
make sense once you think about them, but to get their magnitudes right
requires a model like ours that takes all occupations into account at once.
Figure 5. The Beveridge curve shows the movements of the job-vacancy rate against the
unemployment rate at different times. The top panel shows the Beveridge curve for the US from
January 2000 to September 2018. The bottom panel superimposes the observed Beveridge curve with
that predicted by our model.
We also got an unexpected bonus: Even though we didn’t build it to do
this, our model provides a quantitative explanation for an important
economic phenomenon called the Beveridge curve, which describes one of
the ways in which it’s easier to fall into a recession than to recover from it.
The Beveridge curve plots the jobvacancy rate against the unemployment
rate. As we enter a recession, job vacancies go down and unemployment
goes up, and when we recover from a recession, the opposite happens.
However, there’s a difference between the trip down and the trip up: At the
same level of vacancies, the unemployment rate as we enter a recession is
lower than it is as we recover from the recession. For example, as the US
economy collapsed in December 2007, the vacancy rate was about 3 per
cent and the unemployment rate was about 5 per cent. The vacancy rate
kept falling, dropping below 2 per cent. When the vacancy rate began to
rise again in the recovery phase, increasing to the 3 per cent level by March
2014, the unemployment rate remained at 6.7 per cent. Because of this
difference, the path when we fall into a recession is different than the
recovery path, and a plot of vacancies vs unemployment for the 2008
recession looks a bit like a teardrop, as shown in Figure 5.
The Beveridge curve is a good example of an emergent phenomenon:
We didn’t build the model to understand it, so we were pleasantly surprised
when we discovered that our model could explain it. In fact, Figure 5 shows
that the Beveridge curve that our model makes when we simulate the
business cycle for the 2008 financial crisis has a similar size and shape, and
the same direction of movement, as the real thing. This is encouraging
because a good model should explain as many different phenomena as
possible. In sharp contrast to the mainstream work on this subject, which
assumes the Beveridge curve is an equilibrium phenomenon, our model
predicts that it is a disequilibrium phenomenon – that is, a transient
response to changing conditions in the economy. According to our model,
more sudden recessions should cause ‘fatter’ Beveridge curves or, in other
words, a bigger gap between the path up and the path down. We are in the
process of testing our predictions empirically by looking at past recessions.
In contrast to standard theories, our model predicts that the area inside the
Beveridge curve is proportional to the suddenness of the recession.
There are also practical policy applications. To recover from a recession
quickly, one would like to make the Beveridge curve as ‘thin’ as possible:
For a given level of job vacancies, one would like to make unemployment
on the trip up (the recovery) as close as possible to where it was on the trip
down. Our model provides insight into how to accomplish this. For
example, if we artificially make it easier to move between occupations, the
Beveridge curve gets thinner.
Our occupational-transition model is a work in progress, and we are just
beginning to explore all the things it can do, but we believe it will
ultimately allow a more quantitative understanding of the dynamics of
occupational unemployment. At a policy level, it could increase the
effectiveness of job-retraining efforts by targeting the right occupations and
reducing the problems created by shifting demand for labor across different
occupations in response to factors like automation. We are designing a new
version of this model using detailed microdata from Brazil to calibrate it
more precisely. To study the green-energy transition, which is happening in
parallel with automation, we are also developing a model for how the
production network will shift as we move from fossil fuels to renewables.
We are then using the production-network model discussed earlier in
tandem with the occupational-transition model to predict how the job
landscape will be altered by the transition and whether bottlenecks are
likely to develop that might slow the green-energy transition down. We are
also incorporating geographical, as well as occupational, mobility. This will
allow us to anticipate such bottlenecks, so that policymakers can plan ahead
and focus retraining efforts on the occupations that will be most needed to
keep the green-energy transition on track.
...
4.
How Simulations Help us Understand the
Economy
For most problems found in mathematics textbooks, mathematical
reasoning is quite useful. But how often do people find textbook problems in
real life?
Lynn Steen
1
What is a simulation?
Computers allow us to mimic just about anything. Boeing creates a full-
blown virtual-reality simulacrum of every plane it designs. Pilots fly
simulated planes whose controls and responses look and feel much like
those of a real plane, and virtual flight attendants walk down the aisles and
serve drinks to simulated passengers to make sure the seats and trays are
well placed. Although there are still limits to their capabilities, computer
simulations now enable us to create digital twins of countless real-world
systems, and they play an important role in almost every branch of science,
including the social sciences – except for mainstream economics!
A simulation is often preceded by building a network model. You can
think of the network as the skeleton, and the simulation as the living tissue
filling out the skeleton and enabling the body to function. A simulation goes
beyond a network model by capturing the dynamics: How do the nodes and
links, and their properties, change over time? Simulation is a bottom-up
approach, acting at the level of the individual building blocks, letting the
collective behavior of the system emerge. By definition, emergent behavior
is bottom-up, and simulation is often the only method for understanding it.
Simulation in the social sciences is more challenging than it is in the
physical sciences. Atoms don’t think or make choices, while stars obey the
laws of gravity, which are precise, inviolable and well understood. But there
are no laws that can reliably tell us how people will behave in any possible
situation. People have agency; they make decisions, which are much more
difficult to predict than physical processes. There is now a huge body of
work in psychology and sociology that helps us understand how people
behave; nonetheless, our models for human behavior are still imprecise and
controversial, and, most important, they don’t cover all aspects of economic
decision-making.
Agent-based models have been very successful for problems where
decision-making is reasonably simple. A good example is traffic modeling,
in which drivers are the agents.
2
In a traffic simulation, each simulated
driver interacts with simulated drivers in nearby cars, speeding up and
slowing down as needed. Traffic jams are a simple example of an emergent
phenomenon: As soon as one driver slows down on a crowded road, those
behind must slow down too. Cars begin to pile up, which causes even more
slowing down, until the traffic comes to a near-halt. Agent-based models do
a good job of predicting the conditions that can lead to traffic jams, and
they help city planners design transportation systems. Some cities, such as
Portland, Oregon, have built hyper-realistic simulations, with a one-to-one
representation of every road, building and almost every car, and there are
now several competing companies that provide traffic simulation for hire.
3
These simulations accurately predict travel times under different conditions,
allowing planners to ask ‘what-if’ questions and experiment with adding or
closing lanes or building bridges to see how such changes would affect
traffic. One of the reasons traffic modeling works well is that the decision-
making isn’t very complicated and is easily captured by simple rules of
thumb, involving factors like the typical minimum spacing between cars
and the typical reaction time for braking.
Agent-based models have also become essential tools in epidemiology.
Epidemic simulations track the movements and interactions of individual
people, who can be healthy, infected or immune. Such models can
incorporate transportation routes and flight schedules connecting cities and
the locations of hospitals and schools. Simulations can investigate ‘what-if’
scenarios and, in some cases, they have accurately forecast the likely effect
of vaccination protocols or other public-health measures, helping to achieve
the best possible outcomes with the least effort.
The COVID pandemic presented a challenge to epidemic simulations for
two reasons. At the onset, there was a great deal of uncertainty about how
the virus was transmitted and whether or not it could be transmitted by
people who were asymptomatic. Disease propagation depends crucially on
these parameters, which threw off the predictions of the models in the early
stages of the pandemic. As data poured in, these parameters became more
certain, but another problem appeared: People began to change their
behavior. In some places, people were careful about wearing masks and
following social-distancing protocols, and in other places they weren’t. As
time wore on, in some places there was a backlash against masks and
vaccinations, sometimes fueled by politics – circumstances difficult to
predict in advance. Despite these problems, the best models provided useful
predictions that helped policymakers make better decisions.
4
Simulation models are never perfect, but they can be good enough to be
useful.
5
We’ll discuss the controversies about models based on human
behavior in Chapters 5 and 6. But, before we delve into that, we need to
understand an essential advantage of agent-based models, which is the
graceful and effortless way they incorporate nonlinearity.
Nonlinearity, emergence and the need for simulation
Nonlinearity is a necessary condition for emergence; without nonlinearity,
there would be no emergence and thus no such thing as a complex system.
Nonlinearity underpins almost all the big, interesting open questions – such
as the origins of intelligence, consciousness and life – as well as the recent
huge advances in machine learning. It also plays important roles in the
economy – roles that have yet to be properly explored and can be fully
understood only through simulation.
By definition, a system is nonlinear if the whole is different from the
sum of its parts. In contrast, a system is linear if the whole is equal to the
sum of its parts. Nonlinearity is the norm in the real world and economics is
no exception. For example, as already mentioned, production functions
describe how much a firm or industry can produce with a given set of
inputs. A production function is like a basic recipe with a list of possible
variations. In some cases a single input may be absolutely essential, or in
other cases substitutions may be allowed. The amount that is produced is
not simply the sum of the inputs, but rather depends on the inputs in a more
complicated way, which means that the formula relating the inputs to the
outputs is a nonlinear function.
6
In Chapter 7 we’ll see how the
nonlinearities of the production function can give rise to oscillations in the
economy that look like business cycles, and in Chapter 11 we’ll see how the
nonlinear behavior of loan repayment can cause the financial system to
crash.
It is often tempting to avoid nonlinearities because they complicate
mathematical analysis. Economists greatly prefer equations with what are
called closed-form solutions – that is, formulas that can be used to simply
plug in numbers and get the answer. All scientists like closed-form
solutions, because they’re convenient and easy to understand. But the quest
for closed-form solutions often distracts economists from solving the most
important problems. Economists love mathematics and eschew simulations.
Our understanding of economics has suffered as a result.
Before the advent of the computer, the mathematical arsenal for
scientists was limited to what they could solve with pencil and paper. This
put an enormous premium on finding closed-form solutions. Because linear
equations always have closed-form solutions and nonlinear equations rarely
do, expedience dictated that almost all models in science were based on
linear mathematics. The world of nonlinear mathematics remained largely
unexplored.
When I was a graduate student at UC Santa Cruz, in 1975, I was inspired
by a lecture by Stan Ulam, one of the greatest twentieth-century
mathematicians.
7
He began by apologizing for the title of his lecture, which
was ‘Nonlinear Mathematics’. Since almost everything is nonlinear, he said,
calling mathematics nonlinear was like referring to ‘nonelephant’ animals.
To illustrate his point, Ulam told a standard joke about a mathematician
who is found searching for something under a lamppost. A passerby asks,
‘What did you lose?’ and he replies, ‘My keys.’ Trying to be helpful, the
passerby responds, ‘Can I help you look for them?’ The embarrassed
mathematician responds, ‘Well, actually, I didn’t drop them here, I dropped
them over there in the dark somewhere. But at least I can see here.’
Until digital computers arrived, most of science suffered because we
couldn’t solve most of the equations we needed to solve to understand the
world. All we could do was look under lampposts. The linear ground under
the lampposts got thoroughly explored, while the nonlinear areas outside
the circle of available light were neglected. Ulam was one of the earliest
mathematicians to use computers to explore nonlinear mathematics, and
one of the first to demonstrate emergent behavior in complex systems.
8
The fact that almost all equations are nonlinear doesn’t mean that almost
all equations lead to emergent phenomena. The presence of nonlinearity per
se doesn’t imply emergent behavior. In fact, usually it doesn’t. Complex
systems are special. We cannot say in advance whether or not a set of
nonlinear equations will give rise to emergent phenomena; this almost
always requires simulating them on a computer. Restated in logical terms,
nonlinearity is necessary but not sufficient for emergent behavior. In a
world where almost everything is nonlinear, computer simulations are an
essential tool for science. Simulation via agent-based modeling provides us
with a laboratory to explore the economic world – to boldly go where no
one has gone before, and to study the world ‘as is’ rather than ‘as if’ it were
something else.
When macroeconomists are confronted by nonlinear equations, because
they are hard to work with, they often simplify them to make them linear.
But because nonlinear dynamics is a prerequisite for endogenous dynamics
– that is, motion from within – linearizing the equations makes it impossible
for dynamics to emerge. If you want to understand a business cycle,
linearizing guarantees that the (model) economy won’t move by itself.
Agent-based models liberate us from these kinds of assumptions.
The COVID pandemic, revisited
In the prologue I described the model we built at the beginning of the
COVID pandemic that accurately predicted the hit to the UK economy. As
the pandemic wore on, far longer than we imagined it would, it became
clearer and clearer how the pandemic, the economy and the actions of
governments around the world were intricately interlinked. While we could
do the economics well, to make a proper model we needed to team up with
epidemiologists. (We did not aspire to predict what the governments would
do, only to advise them on what was likely to happen, conditional on their
decisions.) To build a better model we teamed up with a group including
Alessandro Vespignani, from Northeastern University in Boston.
Alessandro is a leading figure in network science and agent-based modeling
of pandemics, and his group made some of the most accurate and
informative predictions during the pandemic.
9
In an effort led by Marco Pangallo on our side, and Alberto Aleta from
the epidemic side, we did something new: We built a model that simulated
both the epidemiology and the economics of the pandemic in tandem (see
Figure 6).
10
This model was for the New York metropolitan area and gave
predictions for the economic and epidemic impacts on a day-by-day basis.
Both models used a synthetic population of 416,442 individuals grouped
into 153,457 households.
11
These numbers were picked to match a database
of volunteers who consented to have their mobile phones tracked (though
their identities were confidential). As shown in the figure, the synthetic
population matched key demographic features of the real population,
including age, income, employment, industry sector of employment,
occupation and ability to work from home. The movements of the tracked
volunteers allowed us to see how much they moved around the city, and
therefore how likely they were to infect or be infected by others, and to
determine whether they went to work. The models were coupled: If
someone becomes unemployed, they cease to go to work and can no longer
get infected in the workplace, whereas if someone who is previously
unemployed becomes employed their danger of infection increases. The
epidemic and economic models send signals to each other every day, which
are incorporated into their forecasts for the following day.
Figure 6. Our model for the epidemic’s effect on sickness and the economy.
Marco took advantage of data on the types of economic activity in each
census tract to build a very fine-grained geographic model of the economics
of the pandemic. This made it possible to predict how the pandemic would
affect the economy geographically, enabling predictions conditional on
poverty, race and age. It allowed us to study different policies to search for
those that were ‘least bad’. We first demonstrated that the model did a good
job of predicting the onset of the pandemic in 2020 (though in this case we
had the benefit of hindsight, so we were really fitting to the data rather than
making a true prediction).
Once we were confident in the model, we investigated a variety of
different ‘what-if’ scenarios. For example, we showed that if the first New
York lockdown had only been imposed a couple of weeks earlier, there
would have been both far fewer deaths and much less economic suffering.
We also showed that the tradeoff between economic suffering and epidemic
deaths is similar whether outcomes change due to fear of infection or non-
pharmaceutical inventions. In either case, low-income workers experience
much higher infections and much worse economic harm.
Our model is innovative because it couples together two agent-based
models, one for economics and one for epidemics, to provide useful policy
analysis. This could be valuable during future pandemics in guiding
policymakers to understand the tradeoff between different sources of harm.
It also provides a proof of principle for how agent-based models from
different disciplines can work together to provide better policy advice.
A housing bubble from the bottom up
Shortly after the 2008 financial crisis, we built an agent-based model of the
Washington DC housing market.
12
There are several reasons why housing
markets are an ideal candidate for agent-based modeling. First, as we
learned the hard way in the crisis, housing markets are really important to
the entire economy. Second, the way houses are bought and sold makes
housing markets hard to model using standard theory (more on this in a
moment). In contrast, our agent-based model simply mimics the
institutional structures for buying and selling houses in the real world and
employs rules of thumb that people actually use to make decisions. The
model involves a lot of computer programming and data but the way it
works will be familiar to anyone who has ever bought a house.
Using detailed data on real-estate transactions and mortgages, and
information from the IRS and the US census, our model reproduced all the
steps of buying or selling a house. We simulated the decisions of
households to rent or buy and their interactions with banks and real-estate
agents in taking out loans and buying and selling houses. Although this
might sound like an obvious way to do things, it’s completely different from
any existing mainstream economic model. The result provides useful insight
into what drove the housing bubble that peaked in 2006, and how the next
one can be avoided.
The housing bubble played a major role in the ensuing financial crisis. In
real terms, between 1997 and 2006, US housing prices increased by almost
a factor of 3 and then dropped by 30 per cent over the next four years.
13
This had a significant effect on the economy for several reasons.
First, in the United States and many other countries, housing is the
biggest repository of household savings. When housing prices drop,
everyone who owns a house becomes poorer – so people spend less, which
means that companies lower production and unemployment goes up. This
means fewer people buy houses, which lowers housing prices further and
makes people even poorer, creating a vicious cycle. This happens when any
housing bubble bursts.
What made this bubble special, and made the bursting of the bubble
particularly painful, is that banks had heavily invested in a recent financial
innovation called mortgage-backed securities, which are bundles of
mortgages. When the housing bubble burst, the value of mortgage-backed
securities dropped substantially. Because they had been viewed as a safe
investment, the biggest financial institutions throughout the world held lots
of mortgage-backed securities. When their value dropped, this created a
global credit crisis; the financial system abruptly switched from easy credit
to no credit at all. As a result, many businesses couldn’t borrow the money
they needed to operate, increasing unemployment, causing less
consumption and depressing global economic output. Unfortunately, as
noted in the Introduction, when it was consulted about the possible effect of
a decline in housing prices in 2006, the Federal Reserve Bank model vastly
underestimated how this would affect the economy.
But what caused the housing bubble? Possible explanations include
lending practices, high interest rates and demographic shifts. How big a role
did each of these play?
My collaborators and I were empowered to address these questions
through a grant we received in 2010 from the Institute for New Economic
Thinking, which was created with a large donation from George Soros.
(This is the global Institute for New Economic Thinking, not the one at
Oxford, which was founded two years later.) At the time, I was still at the
Santa Fe Institute, where my fellow external-faculty member Rob Axtell
was visiting. Rob is one of the pioneers of agent-based modeling (he was
doing it long before I was), and he ran the Computational Social Science
Program at George Mason University.
14
To complete the roster of senior
people on the team for this project, we enlisted the already-mentioned John
Geanakoplos, who is, among other things, an expert on mortgage-backed
securities and housing markets. Finally, we recruited Peter Howitt, then a
professor at Brown and perhaps the only prominent mainstream economist
who does agent-based modeling on the side.
Housing markets are a local phenomenon, so we decided to make our
model on the scale of a typical American city. The housing bubble did not
move in lockstep throughout the United States – there was a huge bubble in
Las Vegas, for example, while the market stayed nearly flat in Dallas.
Washington DC was somewhere in the middle, so it seemed like a good
choice.
Data collection was a major challenge: We gathered extensive data sets
on home prices, lending practices, income, wealth and demographics for the
period 1997–2010, including several data sets specific to Washington. (It
helped that Rob was based in Washington; his personal connections gave us
access to data we would never otherwise have gotten.)
Our goal was to make the most realistic possible simulation of how
houses are bought and sold. This meant modeling details like how people
got loans from banks and how real-estate agents helped them find the right
house. The agents in our model were households, who could be
homeowners or renters. We simulated the behavior of 10,000 households in
small runs and up to 100,000 in larger runs – fewer than the actual number
of households in Washington but enough to provide a good sample. We
created artificial households with different levels of income and wealth, so
that they were representative of the actual households in the Washington
DC area in roughly the right proportions.
The central question that each of our households faced was, ‘Should I
rent or buy?’ Buying might result in a higher monthly payment, but in
contrast to renting, some of it goes to pay off the principal (the amount
borrowed). The decision of whether to rent or buy is strongly influenced by
whether or not you expect prices to rise. If your neighbors own their houses
and you don’t own yours, and housing prices go up, you’ll likely regret not
buying. But if you expect prices to fall, then buying may not be wise. We
built a model of the decision-making of prospective buyers. Each household
estimated future house prices based on the recent trend; if house prices were
currently going up, the households assumed they would keep going up, at
least for a while. The fact that people make house-buying decisions this
way is well supported by the data and is an example of what economists
call backward-looking expectations. At the same time, our households
thought about how future prices would affect them. Thus, our model for
prospective buyers used a mixture of forward- and backward-looking
expectations, based on research supported by data and common sense.
The fact that most people take out a mortgage when they buy a house
raises the stakes. This leverages the investment, amplifying gains or losses.
If you put 20 per cent down and prices go up by 20 per cent, you double
your money, making 100 per cent on your investment, and you’re a happy
camper. But if prices drop by 20 per cent, you lose your entire investment.
The collapse of housing prices in 2007 caught many people by surprise, and
the fact that many of them were strongly leveraged left them in dire straits.
Lending policy affects who has access to credit, something we
hypothesized had a huge effect on house prices. To test this hypothesis, we
simulated the process of taking out a housing loan. When our simulated
households decided to buy a house, unless they were rich enough to buy the
house outright, they went to a simulated bank to ask for a loan. The bank
would consider each loan application, consider the household’s income and
wealth, and accept or reject the application accordingly. The simulated bank
offered several kinds of loans, ranging from simple, old-fashioned fixed-
rate thirty-year mortgages to complicated, newfangled loans with variable
rates and balloon payments. In the build-up to the actual crisis, lending
policy became more liberal: It was easier to get a loan and the terms were
more generous, often with higher leverage and a higher proportion of
complicated loans. We were able to acquire a detailed data set with a record
of almost all mortgages in Washington, so we could adjust our bank
algorithm on a year-by-year basis to match the types of mortgages that were
actually issued. We could also run counterfactual scenarios, for example
holding the types of loans constant. Similarly, the interest rates at which
loans are given could be adjusted to match historical rates, or we could
make up hypothetical interest rates to assess their importance in driving the
bubble.
Demography also plays an important role in determining house prices. If
more people move to a city than move out of it, they will increase demand
and drive prices up. We were able to acquire data based on tax returns that
told us how many people in a given age and income range entered or left
Washington each year.
15
In the course of our simulation, for each year, we
could introduce new households (who needed to buy or rent new houses) or
put new houses on the market when they moved away from Washington.
We also knew how many people put their houses up for sale and remained
within Washington.
At the beginning of the simulation, we assigned households diverse
incomes and wealth to match the real data in 1997. Then, for each
household, we simulated subsequent savings and consumption behavior
using the best economic models available.
16
Most households’ incomes
tended to slowly increase, but unlucky households could become
unemployed and default on their mortgages.
Standard models in economics assume that supply equals demand. This
is a reasonable approximation for the stock market on timescales of more
than a day, but it is a terrible approximation for housing markets. The
supply of houses available for sale at any point in time can be very far from
the demand, so that at any given moment there can be a substantial
mismatch between the number of houses on the market and the number of
people looking for a house. As a result, housing prices often change
sluggishly in response to changes in supply and demand, and the inventory
of unsold houses varies significantly, based on the state of the housing
market.
This meant we had to be more realistic in the way we set housing prices.
Once again, we closely mimicked the way this actually happens. We were
fortunate to obtain data from the association of real-estate agencies in the
Washington area that recorded all the quoted asking prices for every house
sold through an agency, as well as the final sale price. We analyzed this data
and determined that housing prices are set like this: When a house is put on
the market, the seller looks for recent sales of comparable houses and marks
his or her own house up by a small amount, typically about 5 per cent. Then
if the house doesn’t sell after a month, the seller marks it down by about 10
per cent, and continues marking it down until either the house sells or is
taken off the market. (This will be familiar to anyone who has bought or
sold a house, but remarkably, no other economic models set prices this
way.)
We also modeled the rental market. This meant we had to model
landlords, who buy houses to rent to others. This part of our model was less
accurate, because we couldn’t get good data on rental prices.
We simulated the model on a monthly timescale. We began by
initializing the model to match conditions at the beginning of 1997. Each
month, the model would run through a series of steps like this:
1. Demography is updated, so that new households enter and leave the
area to match the historical record.
2. The banks survey all their existing loans and make foreclosure
decisions.
3. Households are updated. This requires a long list of possible actions
and decisions for each household, including: receive income;
consume; make a rental or mortgage payment; decide whether or not
to buy a new house; decide whether or not to sell, list or delist a house
that is already on the market; apply for a loan or refinance an existing
loan.
4. The banks consider loan applications and offer terms for mortgages.
5. Houses and buyers enter the market, and houses are bought and sold.
Models always have parameters, which are like knobs that need to be
adjusted to specify exactly what the model is. Some of the parameters are
easy to pin down, like a tax rate, which you simply look up. Other
parameters may not be so straightforward to set; we call these free
parameters. Our model had quite a few of them. An example is the number
of years households use for guessing trends in housing prices: Do people
think a rise in house prices last year implies a rise next year? Or do they
consider the last four years? Another parameter determines how much the
household weights the need for housing relative to other forms of
consumption. We could adjust the parameters to closely match the data.
However, this didn’t necessarily show that the model was good – with
enough free parameters, you can fit almost anything to historical data – and
we wanted to be sure we were on solid ground.
To address this problem, we set the parameters for each part of the model
separately, using microdata. For example, we adjusted the parameters for
how the households set their housing budgets by looking at census data
(which recorded how much individual households actually spent), and the
parameters for their strategies for selling houses by looking at real-estate
quotes, and so on. This was a lot of work – even more than constructing the
original model. Then we put all the modules together and pushed Run. We
started the model in 1997 and let it run without any intervention until 2010.
The last value in the simulation was, in a sense, a thirteen-year-ahead
prediction.
17
To test the validity of our model, we then compared our
simulation’s prediction to what actually happened in the Washington
housing market during those thirteen years. The results are shown in Figure
7.
The plots shown in Figure 7 consider nine different features of the
housing market. The match is by no means perfect; for example, the
simulated bubble peaks before the real bubble and prices go a little higher.
The model doesn’t fit every feature perfectly, but most of the time it’s in the
ballpark. It is important to look at the scales on the plots – for home
ownership rates, for example, we predicted rates around 60 per cent,
whereas in reality they varied between 65 and 70 per cent. So we weren’t
doing badly given that we were missing the data needed to calibrate some
of the features, such as the rental market.
In addition to trying to match reality, we also did some counterfactual
experiments. When we held interest rates constant at the initial (high) value,
for example, the bubble in our simulation was damped. This was expected;
low interest rates reduce monthly payments and so create more demand for
housing. We also experimented with holding lending policy constant, with
banks continuing to issue the same type of loans they were making in 1997,
which were mostly fixed-rate with down payments of 20 per cent or more.
The result was that the housing bubble almost disappeared, which
confirmed our hypothesis that shifts in lending policy played a bigger role
in causing the housing bubble than other factors, such as interest rates. The
important role of lending policy is understood now, but it was by no means
well established at the time we developed our model.
Figure 7. Housing market simulation for Washington DC. We compare predictions to data for nine
different features of the housing market. Solid lines are model outputs, dashed lines are data. The
Case-Shiller index is an indicator of how much housing prices have changed; ‘1’ indicates not at all,
‘2’ indicates that prices have doubled, etc.
17
‘OLP’ is ‘Original Listing Price’. Note the scale of the
plots; for example, it looks like homeownership rates are substantially wrong, but the difference is
only about 5 percent.
At this point in the project, we ran out of funds and had to quit.
However, this work was continued in a collaboration between my group at
Oxford and the Bank of England. We constructed a simpler model based on
the same principles, making heavy use of what was learned from modeling
the Washington DC market. The Bank of England model was calibrated on
British data and used to study lending policies in the UK.
19
Housing prices
in the London area had been climbing for two decades, and in 2016 they
were extremely high and still rising. With a few caveats, our model was
able to reproduce this behavior.
To keep housing prices in the London area from rising even further, the
Bank of England was contemplating restricting lending so that 85 per cent
of bank loans would have a loan-to-income ratio less than 3.5. In other
words, they proposed that, in most cases, to get a loan for £350,000, the
borrower would have to have an annual income of at least £100,000. The
goal was to dampen the bubble (though the Bank of England forbade us
from using the word bubble), but not so strongly that the market crashed.
We tested this policy in our model by simulating a bubble and then
suddenly implementing the proposed policy as prices were climbing. When
we did this, prices stopped climbing but didn’t crash, which was the desired
behavior. Our results were presented to the UK Financial Policy Committee
and shortly thereafter they implemented the policy. (We were not privy to
the committee’s deliberations and don’t know whether our model
influenced their decision.) After the policy was implemented, the bubble
flattened out, essentially as our model predicted it would.
This work shows the potential of large-scale modeling of the housing
market. With today’s computing power, it is possible to simulate markets
with hundreds of millions of houses. There exists detailed data about
housing transactions and mortgages for the entire United States, which
could be used to make a realistic and quantitatively accurate model. Cities
like Washington or London can be modeled at one-to-one scale, including
the characteristics of each house in its geographic location, to understand
how local factors like transportation networks and neighborhoods affect
housing prices.
Models like this are now being pursued by at least seven different central
banks and could help prevent future housing bubbles.
20
The Bank of
Hungary, for example, has an agent-based model that maps the Hungarian
housing market at one-to-one scale – each person and each house is
represented. They are using this model to predict how government policy
levers will affect housing prices and formulate policies to reduce defaults
and damp bubbles. Such models are also potentially very helpful to city
planners who want to implement policies for affordable housing.
...
PART II:
Standard Economics 
⇔
Complexity
Economics
We have so far focused on introducing complexity economics, providing
some motivation and a few examples. It may seem that complexity
economics is just common sense – it follows a literal, bottom-up approach
to modeling the economy that is used in many other fields of science. If you
are not an economist, you may be thinking, ‘What’s the big deal? This
seems like the obvious way to do things.’ If you are an economist, however,
you will recognize that complexity economics is heresy – it violates
principles that have been the foundation of the field of economics for more
than a century. To put things in perspective, we will now briefly discuss
how standard economic theory works.
...
5.
A Lightning Summary of Standard
Economics
To understand why complexity economics is revolutionary, it needs to be
compared to standard economic theory, which is built on a set of very
different assumptions that developed over the last two centuries. The core
concepts were formed before computers were widely used, and when
empirical data from the social sciences about human behavior was still
scant. To cope with these limitations, economists made bold assumptions.
They took a top-down approach, developing a mathematical theory about
how people make decisions and how this affects the economy. While
economics has evolved substantially over the last fifty years to include such
new developments as behavioral economics, the central ideas remain much
the same. There is not room here to provide a proper exposition of standard
economic theory, but I will present a succinct summary of the main ideas.
Foundational assumptions of standard economic theory
I think of the key assumptions of standard economic theory as three pillars:
utility maximization, equilibrium and agent beliefs. These three ideas are
taught in all economics textbooks and form the basis for all mainstream
theory.
The central pillar is utility maximization. Utility is like a scorecard:
Given a set of choices, utility measures the relative desirability of each one,
so that you can decide which you prefer. Mainstream economists assume
that any choice can be given a utility score and that we choose the best
option. The idea of utility grew out of the mid-nineteenth-century school of
thought called Utilitarianism, which posited that we all seek to be happy, at
least in some sense, and that happiness can be measured.
1
The notion of
utility used in contemporary economics has evolved since then. It no longer
represents happiness, but is instead simply a mathematical device for
expressing agents’ preferences. Each agent is assigned a utility function that
represents the relative desirability of her possible choices. Economic
theories are built by assuming that agents make choices that maximize their
expected utility – that is, the utility they will get on average given their
beliefs about the future.
To understand how this works, imagine you’re about to go on a picnic,
and you’re in the supermarket wondering whether to buy a disposable
umbrella or a fancy dessert, which both cost $10. To make a good choice
you need to compare your loss of utility from getting wet against your gain
in utility from eating the fancy dessert. To do this you need to understand
your preferences. You might think, ‘If it rains, I would pay $100 to stay
dry.’ To rephrase this in economics jargon, let’s say your baseline utility for
being dry is 0, your (dis)utility for getting wet is –100, and your utility from
eating the fancy dessert is 10.
To make your decision, for each choice and each possible outcome, you
multiply the utility for the outcome by its probability in order to find the
decision that results in higher utility. There are four possible outcomes:
• You buy the umbrella and it rains. No dessert but you stay dry whether
or not it rains, so you get your baseline utility = 0.
• You buy the umbrella and it doesn’t rain. No dessert and you stay dry,
so this is the same as above: Your utility = 0.
• You buy the dessert and it rains. The yummy dessert gives you a utility
of 10 but you experience a disutility of –100 from getting wet, so
overall your utility = –90.
• You buy the dessert and it doesn’t rain. The yummy desert gives you a
utility of 10 and you stay dry, so your utility = 10.
If you buy the umbrella then your expected utility is zero whether or not it
rains. But your expected utility if you don’t buy the umbrella depends on
how likely you think it is to rain. If you think that there is a 20 per cent
chance of rain then your expected utility is –90 x 0.2 + 10 x (1 – 0.2) = –10.
Zero is larger than –10, so you buy the umbrella and forgo the dessert. (But
if you think the probability of rain is less than 10 per cent you will instead
buy the dessert.)
Standard economic models assume that agents go through calculations
like this to determine their expected utility for each possible decision, and
choose the decisions with the highest utility. In a macroeconomic model an
agent might be a firm, whose utility is based on maximizing profits, or a
household, whose utility is based on maximizing consumption. Utility
maximization is the starting point for virtually every mainstream economic
model. Economists like it because it provides a way to model people’s goals
and infer their decisions.
The second pillar of mainstream economic theory is equilibrium. This
idea’s long history stems from the nineteenth-century French mathematical
economist Léon Walras, who developed a theory for price formation based
on the way stocks used to be traded in the Paris Bourse. In those days an
auctioneer would propose a price for a stock and poll the traders in the
room to see how many shares were offered to buy or sell at that price. If
there was excess demand the auctioneer would raise the price, and if there
was excess supply he would lower it. The auctioneer kept polling the
traders until demand matched the supply, at which point he would stop and
transactions would take place at the final price. By analogy to physics,
Walras called the state where supply matches demand equilibrium. The
concept of equilibrium was independently developed by others, including
the great British economist Alfred Marshall, and is a centerpiece of
economic theory.
Marshall put the first two pillars together by showing how equilibrium
prices and quantities can be derived from utility maximization, building on
earlier work by the British logician William Stanley Jevons. Marshall
assumed that the price an agent is willing to pay for a good (like an
umbrella) is determined by her utility score for that good. He showed how
to use this to compute supply- and-demand curves and find the equilibrium
where supply meets demand, making it possible to compute the price of the
good and the quantity traded. Because of its convenience and power, the
equilibrium assumption soon became standard in economic theory. By the
middle of the twentieth century, economists like Paul Samuelson, Kenneth
Arrow and Robert Solow (and many others) developed Marshall’s approach
and applied it to problems such as international trade, market regulation and
economic growth.
However, something important was still missing. Up until that point,
economic models had assumed a world of perfect certainty. Most models
were either set in the present, where the utility of each choice is known, or
they assumed a deterministic world where the future was perfectly known
by every agent. But in the real world, the future is unknown. How could
economists construct models with agents who make decisions about an
unknown future?
This caused more careful thinking about how agents form their beliefs
about the future. Each agent in an economic model needs a model of their
own to evaluate the likelihood of future events. This allows them to
calculate the expected utility associated with each possible decision by
weighting the utility of each choice according to its likelihood, as we did in
the umbrella example. The modeling of agents’ beliefs about the future,
which is used to assign probabilities to events, constitutes the third pillar.
The umbrella example is simple because there is just one agent. But in
more interesting settings agents need to take other agents into account. A
store selling umbrellas can make higher profits by understanding its
customers: If the patrons of the store think rain is likely, they may be able to
charge more for umbrellas, but if rain is unlikely, they may need to charge
less. To set prices correctly this way, they need to understand how their
customers make decisions. This requires a model for agents’ beliefs that
takes into account agents’ abilities to form models for their own beliefs and
the beliefs of others.
The most widely used model of beliefs is called rational expectations,
and was introduced in 1961 by American economist John Muth.
2
Under
rational expectations, agents use the information available to them to make
the best decisions possible based on expectations that are consistent with
their underlying model of the world. This is the most common way
economists make models for agents who need to take each other into
account.
A study of students’ decisions in buying textbooks provides a simple
illustration.
3
Publishers like to issue new editions of a textbook frequently,
forcing students to buy the new edition. But students have a choice to buy a
textbook new or used, or not buy it at all. Unsurprisingly, when publishers
issue new editions too frequently, students become reluctant to buy new
textbooks because they might go out of date before they can be resold.
Publishers recognize that students behave this way, and adjust the frequency
of new editions accordingly to maximize their profits. This is a good
example of a case where the hypothesis of rational-expectations equilibrium
succeeds: Students reason about the behavior of publishers and publishers
reason about the behavior of students, and they settle into an equilibrium
where their expectations are consistent with each other.
The evolution of contemporary macroeconomics
The rational-expectations model of decision-making caught on quickly in
microeconomics, the branch of economics that studies how individual
agents make decisions, but macroeconomists were slower to adopt it.
Through the 1960s and into the 1970s, models in macroeconomics were
still based on statistical models of aggregate behavior (econometrics).
Rather than trying to understand causal mechanisms by reasoning from first
principles, econometrics simply looks to past statistical data to construct
models.
The conceptual framework that dominated macroeconomics at the time
was based on the ideas of the English economist John Maynard Keynes,
who emphasized the importance of the feedback loop between
unemployment and production.
4
If many people are thrown out of work, he
reasoned, suppliers have fewer consumers. Therefore suppliers have to
decrease production, which means firing more workers, which means
decreasing production even more, and so on. If unemployment increases,
for any reason, the economy can get stuck in an unfavorable self-
reinforcing equilibrium in which production is low and unemployment is
high. Keynes’s followers created econometric models inspired by his ideas.
These models were not based on utility maximization and the reasoning of
individual agents; rather, they incorporated relationships between factors
like unemployment, GDP and interest rates, based on what had happened in
the past.
Keynesian-inspired econometric models were challenged by the crisis of
high unemployment in the 1970s. In 1974, US unemployment jumped from
its previous level of about 4 per cent to almost 8 per cent. This put
policymakers under pressure to respond. As the story goes, they tried to
exploit something called the Phillips curve to bring down joblessness.
5
The
Phillips curve refers to the hypothesis that unemployment and inflation are
negatively correlated, which up until then had always been the case. If
unemployment becomes low, this should push wages higher, which in turn
causes inflation. But perhaps causality also runs in the other direction? If
prices go up, would manufacturers see this as an optimistic sign and boost
production, thus hiring more workers? Policymakers gave it a try,
intentionally inflating the money supply in order to spark inflation and drive
unemployment down. But this policy failed to lower unemployment, instead
causing a nasty combination of joblessness and inflation that was dubbed
stagflation.
As crises tend to do, this spurred a big shift in economic thinking.
Prominent economists such as Robert Lucas of Carnegie Mellon argued that
this approach had failed because it neglected the consequences of human
intelligence. In his words, employers and workers alike ‘saw through the
veil of inflation’: If the price of everything doubles, and wages double, then
nothing has really changed. People realized that what the policymakers had
done was artificial, and it just made a bad situation worse.
While the Keynesian econometrics models might fit historical data, such
models ignored the possibility that decision-making might change when
circumstances did. Lucas and his allies wanted macroeconomists to take
human reasoning into account, and proposed to do this using rational
expectations. The Lucas critique revolutionized macroeconomics. From the
mid-1970s onward, rational expectations took over macroeconomics as well
as microeconomics, leading to a new family of models called Dynamic
Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models. (Stochastic is just a
synonym for random.) In a standard DSGE model, households and
companies alike use rational expectations to make decisions that maximize
their utility. In contrast to their predecessors, which were based on
statistical relationships of aggregate measures like GDP, these models
incorporated the reasoning of households and firms, and for this reason are
said to be micro-founded.
A simple standard macro-model
To understand how a standard micro-founded DSGE model works, let’s
look at an early (and simple) example that grew out of an influential model
for economic growth introduced in 1956 by Nobel prize-winning economist
Robert Solow.
6
(We’re going to need this later when we compare it to a
complexity-economics version.) In Solow’s model, a household works for a
company that produces a single good. The firm and household represent all
the firms and households in the world (or at least in a given country), and
the good represents all goods and services. This is what is called a
representative-agent model, in which a single agent serves as a proxy for
many different agents. There are obvious problems with this, but the goal of
the Solow model was to provide insight by making things simple enough to
be easy to understand and solve.
In the Solow model, the firm pays the household for the labor and capital
it needs to produce the good. A key parameter, which you can think of as an
adjustable knob, is the savings rate – the fraction of its income that the
household saves. The model also has a parameter for population growth
(imagine packing the household with many millions of identical occupants).
The Solow model predicts that countries that save more become relatively
prosperous and countries with rapid population growth become relatively
poorer, and shows that the only way the economy can grow in the long run
is by making technological progress. (In this model, technological progress
corresponds to producing more of the single good with less capital and
labor.)
In the early 1960s, David Cass and Tjalling Koopmans each
independently modified the Solow model to turn it into a micro-founded
DSGE model. They did this by giving the household a utility function and
assuming that it is a rational agent whose goal is to adjust its savings rate in
order to maximize its utility.
7
The household’s utility at any point in time
depends on a combination of its current consumption and its expected
future consumption. Present consumption is considered more valuable than
consumption in the future, which is called discounting. The use of
discounted utility was inspired by a 1928 paper by the British
mathematician Frank Ramsey, so the resulting model is called the Ramsey-
Cass-Koopmans model, or simply the RCK model.
8
In the original Solow model the savings rate is constant, but in the RCK
model the household can adjust it through time. To maximize its utility, the
household needs to strike the right balance between savings and
consumption. On one hand, it must save to accumulate capital, but on the
other hand, it needs to consume to get utility. In the extreme case, if the
household doesn’t consume anything, the business it owns loses its only
customer; as a result, the household makes no profits and has nothing to
save. There is an optimal savings rate in the middle, which is the
equilibrium choice that maximizes the discounted utility.
If we now add shocks – for example, by letting the discount rate
fluctuate randomly – then the RCK model becomes a DSGE model. Each
external shock knocks the system away from equilibrium, but the rational
agent immediately adjusts its savings rate to compensate and get back on
the best path. Because there are ongoing shocks, the economy is always
changing; but if we turn off the shocks, the system will eventually come to
a state of rest – like a rocking chair.
Friction and other enhancements
Despite early enthusiasm for micro-founded models, during the 1980s it
became clear that they had problems matching reality. Given their
simplicity, this was not surprising, even to their advocates. While they
captured some features of the economy, there were many others that eluded
them. For example, in the early models, as the situation changes, wages
change freely to maximize everyone’s utility. In the real world, however,
workers get upset if their wages are lowered, so a company is reluctant to
lower them. This also makes them hesitant to raise them, fearing that it
might need to lower them again later. Wages play an essential role in
inflation, so the mismatch between the models and reality was a serious
problem.
In 1983, the Argentine-American economist Guillermo Calvo found a
way to fix this.
9
He modified a standard micro-founded model so that wages
no longer changed in response to each fluctuation in supply and demand.
Instead, they normally remained stuck, but once in a while, at random, they
suddenly adjusted to the proper equilibrium level where wages were set so
that the demand for labor matched the supply of labor. His hypothesis that
wages are ‘sticky’ is just one example of what economists call frictions. In
the presence of friction, agents still maximize utility using rational
expectations, but real-world constraints prevent them from doing what they
would otherwise like to do. Economists have incorporated frictions in
models to make the behavior of agents more like that of real people, who
act ‘as if’ they are not fully rational. To return to Star Trek, using frictions is
like putting Mr Spock in chains: He’s still rational, but many solutions are
now off limits, so he has to work around them to find the best option.
The use of frictions was initially controversial, even within the
mainstream. One of the original motives for rational expectations was to
avoid ad-hoc assumptions about behavior, but frictions are ad hoc by their
very nature. Calvo’s critics ridiculed his sticky-wage assumption as
depending on a ‘Calvo fairy’ to sprinkle pixie dust on frozen wages to
release them. Nonetheless, frictions have now become an accepted part of
the macroeconomics toolkit. Choosing the right set of frictions and solving
the resulting models in order to better fit the data is a main line of research
in theoretical macroeconomics.
Modern micro-founded macro-models used by central banks are more
complicated than the simple RCK model. Such models are now used by
virtually all central banks in the world.
10
Their forecasts are at best a little
better than those of simple statistical models, but unlike statistical models,
they can be used to test policies with ‘what-if’ experiments. (At least in
principle: As noted earlier, if their forecasts are poor, their reliability for
policy testing is questionable.)
Models at the frontier of macroeconomic research incorporate household
diversity, for example, by allowing two types of households. The rich
household makes savings decisions based on rational expectations and the
poor household lives hand-to-mouth, meaning that they do not save
anything. In what are called Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK)
models there is a continuous distribution of different households, ranging
from rich to poor. Nonetheless, like the Solow model, these models still
have only one representative industry. At the other extreme, there are
models with many industries, but only a single representative household.
11
There is another class of models, called Computable General Equilibrium
models, that allow multiple industries and multiple households, but they
have no dynamics (meaning that the models cannot study the path to a
stationary equilibrium – they jump to the static equilibrium in one step). As
we’ll see in the next chapter, these limitations stem from technical
difficulties in building these kind of models (which agent-based models
avoid).
All micro-founded macro-models, even those at the frontier of research,
are based on rational expectations with frictions, and incorporate little or no
information about the non-rational behavior of real people. Changing this is
another important frontier of contemporary research.
The behavioral revolution
As rational-expectations theory took over macroeconomics in the 1970s,
dissenting voices began to speak out and gather evidence against it.
Psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky documented deviations
from rationality in decision-making, forming a close partnership with
behavioral economist Richard Thaler. There is now a long list of common
deviations from rationality, all backed by experimental evidence. People
tend to be overconfident, particularly men; for example, students do not
follow rational expectations when forecasting their grades – they
consistently overestimate their final grade, even though it should be fairly
predictable based on factors such as past performance, ability and effort
level.
12
People pay inappropriate attention to sunk costs: If you’re playing
poker, for example, you should ignore how much you’ve already put in the
pot and worry only about whether your next bet is a good bet. These are just
two examples of many.
One of the big innovations of behavioral macroeconomics was the use of
experiments, pioneered by Vernon Smith.
13
Up until his work, it had been
assumed that economies could not be studied in the laboratory. (The
analogy was made to astronomy: We can observe the stars, but we can’t do
experiments with them.) Smith put his students in controlled environments,
such as asking them to play a game that was like a real market. He then
asked them to make economically relevant decisions (such as whether to
sell an asset and at what price) and rewarded them based on their
performance. His experiments made it clear that markets converge to
equilibrium in some situations but not in others.
14
Experimental economics
has been used to indicate when and how the economic behavior of Homo
sapiens departs from that of Homo economicus.
Not surprisingly, economics experiments were initially highly
controversial. Were the rewards large enough to be meaningful? Would
people really behave in the real world as they did in the laboratory? Despite
the initial resistance, experimental economics and behavioral economics
slowly entered the mainstream. Kahneman and Smith shared the Nobel
Prize in economics in 2002, and Thaler was awarded it in 2017.
Behavioral economics has now made the serious flaws of rational
expectations theory quite clear, but so far it has proved difficult to
incorporate behavioral alternatives into the workhorse macroeconomic
models used by central banks and treasury departments. Achieving this is a
central quest in contemporary economics, but it remains largely
unsuccessful. Economists often say that ‘it takes a model to beat a model’,
and there is still no widely accepted model that replaces rational
expectations with behavioral economics.
In the heyday of rational expectations, the three pillars of mainstream
economics fitted together nicely. To recap, in those days there was a
straightforward procedure to build an economic model:
1. Give each agent a utility function.
2. Use rational expectations – i.e., assume each agent’s beliefs are
correct and find the set of decisions that maximizes each agent’s
utility.
3. Solve for the equilibrium values of the relevant economic variables
(like prices and quantities traded).
Responding to the challenge posed by behavioral economics, some
economists have proposed replacements for step 2. One popular alternative
is to let some agents be rational while others are not. In recent years,
economists have begun trying to incorporate the findings of behavioral
economists more directly, by assuming that people make decisions based on
flawed models of the world. For example, Xavier Gabaix has developed a
macroeconomic model with myopic households who fail to look very far
into the future.
15
Similarly, Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer have
created a ‘diagnostic expectations’ model, incorporating departures from
rational expectations by assuming that people overreact to news.
16
These
approaches replace rational expectations with a different model of beliefs,
but they still assume that agents maximize utility, or something like utility.
This brings us to the present state of mainstream economics. As I write,
in 2023, two of the three pillars that form the foundation of standard
economic theory remain firmly in place, much as they were sixty years ago.
Virtually all mainstream economic theories continue to subscribe to utility
maximization (or some close cousin) and equilibrium. Most mainstream
theorists still assume rational expectations, though some explore
alternatives to the third pillar, agent beliefs. In contrast, as discussed in
more detail in the next chapter, complexity economics modifies or replaces
all three pillars.
Value-free modeling?
Economic models are often viewed with suspicion because they reflect the
values of their creators. The austerity debate, which we discussed in
Chapter 1, is just one of many examples of prominent economists reaching
opposite conclusions – conclusions that reflect their values more than any
underlying science. In an essay titled ‘Economics after Neoliberalism’,
Suresh Naidu, Dani Rodrik and Gabriel Zucman unintentionally make this
point:
Back in 1975, economist Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro wrote, ‘by now any bright graduate
student, by choosing his assumptions [. . .] carefully, can produce a consistent model
yielding just about any policy recommendation he favored at the start.’ Economics has
become even richer in the intervening four decades.
17
This kind of ‘richness’ concerns me. If left-wing and right-wing economists
can build models for the same thing ‘yielding just about any policy
recommendation [they] favor at the start’, the value of economics as a
reliable roadmap for all to share is seriously limited. It’s not very useful to
have one version of economic science for those on the right and another for
those on the left. As almost all economists will agree, we should strive to be
as objective and factdriven as possible. This is one of the biggest reasons
theories need to be empirically validated.
In fact, Naidu and his co-authors were trying to make a different point –
one that I agree with. They were explaining how economics has evolved
beyond the simple-minded misconceptions of neoliberalism. The
underpinnings of the Chicago school of economics, led by Milton
Friedman, used idealizations – such as perfectly functioning markets and
rational expectations – that led to conclusions supporting the school’s
libertarian leanings. But once economic models began to incorporate more
realistic assumptions, the results became more nuanced and conditional, and
most of the earlier results were shown to be wrong. This was an important
step in the right direction.
It will always be possible for researchers to fiddle with their models until
they get preconceived, desired results. But since complexity-economics
models can be founded directly on data from behavioral experiments, and
can match the structure of the economy more literally, this becomes harder
to do. In a complexity-economics model it is more obvious if someone is
cooking the books to get the answer they want. So my hope is that
complexity economics can provide a more objective framework; time will
tell whether this hope is realized.
Uncertainty vs risk
[A]s we know, there are known knowns; there are things we know we know.
We also know there are known unknowns; that is to say we know there are
some things we do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns – the
ones we don’t know we don’t know. [They] tend to be the difficult ones.
Donald Rumsfeld (2002)
18
In 1921, the economist Frank Knight, who would go on to be a cofounder
of the Chicago school but was at that time at the University of Iowa, was
the first to make a clear distinction between risk and uncertainty.
19
By risk
he meant situations where we know the set of possible future events and
their probabilities. In contrast, he used uncertainty to refer to situations
where we don’t know the probabilities of future events. Under what he
called true uncertainty, we may not even be able to imagine all possible
future events.
The standard workhorse macroeconomic models that are currently used
by central banks and treasury departments assume that we live in a world of
risk rather than one of uncertainty. Even if Zeus is throwing thunderbolts at
the world, we still know the possible events that can occur as a result and
the likelihood with which they will occur. These models assume that agents
make decisions as described earlier in this chapter, by listing all possible
future events, estimating their probabilities, calculating the utility of each
possible event, multiplying each utility by its probability and adding them
up to get the expected utility. The agents then select the choice that
maximizes their expected utility.
There is a large literature trying to deal with uncertainty in economic
modeling, but this is so far not sufficiently developed to be incorporated
into the workhorse models of macroeconomics. As discussed in the next
chapter, uncertainty is implicitly built into complexity economics – a
feature that makes it an attractive alternative for addressing big problems
like climate change where we cannot know all possible events, much less
assign them accurate probabilities.
...
6.
Modeling an Uncertain and Complicated
Economy
[T]he task is to replace the global rationality of economic man with a kind
of rational behavior that is compatible with the access to information and
the computational capacities that are actually possessed by organisms,
including man, in the kinds of environments in which such organisms exist.
Herbert Simon (1955)
1
Even as the theory of rational expectations was being developed in the mid-
1950s, its limitations were being criticized. One of the most prominent
critics was Herbert Simon, who is perhaps the pioneer of complexity
economics, even if that term didn’t exist in his day.
2
Simon held that in real situations people often make complicated
decisions with imperfect knowledge, noting that ‘the capacity of the human
mind for formulating and solving complex problems is very small
compared with the size of the problems whose solution is required for
objectively rational behavior in the real world – or even for a reasonable
approximation to such objective rationality’.
3
Simon argued that when we
are confronted with a hard problem, the cognitive limitations of the mind
make rationality moot. In his view, we seek ‘good enough’ choices rather
than optimal ones. He called this bounded rationality. His views on the
subject have been confirmed by psychologists and behavioral economists
alike. Yet despite his 1978 Nobel Prize, Simon is not a central figure in
mainstream economics – perhaps because his approach would have required
abandoning the standard theoretical assumptions that captured the
mainstream. Fortunately, Simon’s research program is far easier to
implement now than it was in the 1950s, because we now have a much
better understanding of psychology, as well as more data and far better
computer power.
Heuristics
Real people don’t solve day-to-day problems by doing complicated math
calculations. As a simple analogy, let’s consider two ways of playing
baseball. Imagine Mr Spock in center field. Let’s contrast his rational
approach to that of a human baseball player.
When a fly ball is hit, Spock knows that his team’s utility will be
maximized if he catches the ball before it touches the ground. To make this
happen, he measures the position and velocity of the ball. He then solves
Newton’s laws to compute the ball’s estimated landing point and runs to
that point in the field.
This is how we predicted the game of roulette using a computer in
Chapter 1, but it isn’t the way real center-fielders catch baseballs. A human
baseball player uses simple rules of thumb that she may not even be
consciously aware of. For example, she waits until the ball is sufficiently
high in the air, then fixes the angle between her body and the ball and
begins running to maintain this angle as consistently as possible. If she
succeeds, she’ll automatically be in the right place to catch the ball.
This rule of thumb is called the gaze heuristic.
4
Baseball players use it
(along with other rules of thumb) to help catch fly balls. Dogs use it to
catch Frisbees, and sailors use a similar technique to determine whether
they’re on a collision course with another boat. Unlike Mr Spock’s method,
it doesn’t require any math calculations and takes complicating factors like
wind into account. It doesn’t always result in optimal behavior – a player
may first back up and then run forward – but it is useful in practice.
The term heuristic comes from a Greek word meaning ‘to find out or
discover’. Heuristics are simple mental processes that humans, animals and
organizations use to quickly form judgments, make decisions and find
solutions to complex problems. We use heuristics all the time. To decide
whether or not to buy an umbrella, trial-and-error provides a simple
alternative to rational expectations: If you have recently been drenched, you
are more likely to remember to carry your umbrella. Or you might observe
that your friends all carry umbrellas and imitate them. Imitation and trial-
and-error are examples of common heuristics that work well in many
different contexts. In the next chapter we’ll revisit the Solow model, and see
how an agent-based model that replaces rational expectations with these
two simple heuristics leads to a surprising example of emergent behavior.
We’ve already seen a powerful and widely used heuristic in action, in the
way real-estate agents set house prices, initially offering the house at a price
slightly higher than the current market. If the house doesn’t sell, they mark
it down and wait for a buyer, repeating the process until it finally sells.
Psychologists call this heuristic aspiration-level adaptation. It is commonly
used in many other contexts, like selling used cars. Aspiration-level
adaptation proved very useful in our agent-based housing model, since it
allowed housing prices to roam far from the point where supply equals
demand, better matching reality (see Chapter 4). Although aspiration-level
adaptation is easy to simulate in a computer, it isn’t easy to write down and
solve equations for it. As a result, because of their desire for models with a
mathematical underpinning, mainstream economists are loath to use it.
A long list of heuristics have been identified by psychologists, with
names like the availability heuristic, the representativeness heuristic, the
anchoring heuristic, the affect heuristic, the consistency heuristic and the
control heuristic – and many others.
5
Unlike utility maximization using
rational expectations, which requires knowledge that most of us don’t have
and math calculations that most of us can’t do, heuristics are quick and
simple, operate on limited information and require little or no math.
Heuristics have verisimilitude. Psychology experiments show that real
people rely on them. They’re not the only way we solve problems, but
they’re an essential component.
You might think that because heuristics are simple, they cannot be a
good way to predict the future. But in uncertain environments simplicity is
a virtue.
6
As psychologist Gerd Gigerenzer and his colleagues have
documented, there are many situations where heuristics make better
predictions than more complicated methods. This is called the less-is-more
effect.
7
Portfolio choice provides a great example. Given a choice between
different assets, like stock or bonds, how much of each should you hold in
your portfolio? Suppose, just for the sake of argument, that you know their
expected future returns, as well as their volatility and their correlations with
each other. Harry Markowitz of UC San Diego got the 1990 Nobel Prize in
economics for using rational expectations to find an optimal formula for
how much of each asset you should buy in order to make the largest
possible return on your portfolio (on average) for a given level of risk.
8
This
is a simple and elegant result – but there’s a problem.
Later, in Part III of the book, I will describe my adventures as a
quantitative financial trader, but let me give a little preview that illustrates
how a simple heuristic outperforms Markowitz’s ‘optimal’ result. In 1991, I
was one of the founders of an enterprise called Prediction Company. In our
early days, we developed strategies for trading currencies, and we wanted to
decide what fraction of our trading capital to allocate to the model for each
currency. I bought a standard textbook on finance written by Eugene Fama
and read the chapter on portfolio theory.
9
It presented Markowitz’s method
as the right way to solve this problem, without any caveats. I tried it and
discovered that it worked fine – as long as the expected return and risk for
each currency strategy were known perfectly. But when I made a more
realistic test, by pretending I was at some point in the past and didn’t know
what would happen in the future, the results were terrible.
The reason for the poor performance of Markowitz’s formula is
uncertainty. At Prediction Company, it was impossible for us to know
precisely how well the strategy we applied to each currency would actually
perform in the future. Based on Markowitz’s formula, small variations in
the expected risk and return made the allocation to each currency vary
wildly. In fact, the trading system always did better if we used the simple
heuristic of assigning equal weights to each currency. Later I found out that
Markowitz himself knew the same thing: Ironically, when he invested the
money from his Nobel Prize, he used a portfolio with equal weights to pick
a few of his favorite stocks rather than the formula he received the prize for
discovering.
10,11
This brings up a key point: When testing a model, one should focus on
its ability to make predictions about the future, rather than its ability to fit
past data.
12
Unfortunately, most studies in economics don’t do this. Models
that fit past data well but fail to make good predictions on data they have
not seen are worthless. Heuristics often perform relatively poorly at fitting
data, but they nonetheless frequently make better predictions of the future.
The portfolio example is just one of many where heuristics outperform
rational expectations in realistic settings. This is because our library of
heuristics has developed through a process of cultural evolution to help us
deal with uncertainty, which is a pervasive feature of the real world.
13
Modeling behavior directly
Heuristics are a good example of what I call modeling behavior directly. In
contrast to utility, which is cumbersome to observe and must be inferred
indirectly, behavior is observable and easily measured – in the laboratory or
using data collected via surveys, censuses, the internet, or any forum that
records people’s decisions. Modeling behavior directly means developing
rules that encapsulate the way people actually make decisions. Utility
theory, in contrast, deduces people’s decisions from their preferences.
Utility theory often relies on ‘as-if’ arguments, while modeling behavior
directly is grounded on ‘as-is’ arguments, at least when it is done well.
Of course, heuristics are only part of modeling behavior directly. Even if
our ability to reason is finite – we are only boundedly rational – we
nonetheless use reasoning to solve many problems, and we need to take this
into account. We have a variety of different methods for doing this; we have
ways of deciding which heuristics to use in different situations, and we
combine heuristics with other (usually simple) modes of reasoning.
As an example, consider how people – as opposed to computers – play
complicated games like chess. There are about 10
40
possible sequences of
moves in a chess game; even the most powerful supercomputer can
examine only a tiny fraction of such sequences. Human chess players solve
this problem using a mixture of experience and intuition. The goal – to
checkmate your opponent’s king – looms in the distance at the start of the
game, which on average takes about 40 moves but can take as many as 200.
A human player can look only a few moves ahead – seeing further becomes
too difficult because of the explosion of possibilities. The problem must be
broken into pieces and addressed one step at a time.
Checkmate usually requires first gaining an advantage over the
opponent. This can be a piece advantage or a position advantage, or a
combination of the two. To gain a piece advantage, we’re guided by
heuristics such as ‘a queen is better than a rook’; to gain a position
advantage, we use heuristics such as ‘control the middle of the board’. This
narrows things down so that we need consider only the most promising
lines of attack – seeing whether we can swap a rook for a queen, for
example, or positioning pawns to better control the middle. In this case,
heuristics guide our limited powers for logical reasoning so that we use
them more effectively. And as we gain experience, we develop intuition that
allows us to search more efficiently and to know which heuristics to use
when.
Following in Herbert Simon’s footsteps, Gerd Gigerenzer and economist
Reinhard Selten have proposed that an essential part of problem-solving is
our ability to draw on an ‘adaptive toolbox’ of heuristics.
14
The toolbox is
adaptive because the heuristics we deploy depend on the situation. Our
intuition helps us guess which heuristics to apply, and we learn by
experience, favoring heuristics that have been successful recently and
abandoning those that have performed poorly. Gigerenzer calls this way of
solving problems ecological rationality.
15
The word ecological emphasizes
that our cognitive strategies exploit the representation and structure of
information (heuristics, search, learning, simple reasoning) to make
reasonable decisions. Unlike rational expectations, ecological rationality
allows us to cope with the fundamental uncertainties we encounter in day-
to-day life.
Learning is another important way we solve problems. This has been
extensively studied in psychology, computer science and behavioral
economics, leading to the development of standard algorithms that
characterize how people learn. A good example is reinforcement learning,
in which actions that have worked well in the past become more likely and
actions that have worked poorly become less likely. While reinforcement
learning doesn’t fully capture how real people behave, it provides a
reasonable approximation in many circumstances.
In the early part of the twenty-first century the field of machine learning
– which is essentially the application of sophisticated learning algorithms –
has exploded. Problems that previously seemed out of reach in artificial
intelligence, like facial recognition and speech recognition, are now
routinely solved by artificial neural networks (which are just another type of
learning algorithm). Complicated neural-network models that have been
trained on a vast corpus of human text, like ChatGPT, are writing student
term papers and making tasks like computer programming much easier.
Mainstream economists are beginning to use machine learning for
statistical data analysis, as an alternative to traditional econometrics. That
said, with a few exceptions, using learning algorithms to simulate the
behavior of agents in models is the domain of agent-based modeling.
16,17
Learning algorithms are easy to incorporate into agent-based models. For
example, a corporation might be assigned the goal of maximizing profits.
The model could then be given a learning algorithm that uses experience
over time to arrive at better decisions. This is a bit like utility maximization,
except that it doesn’t guarantee perfection – the decisions can be far from
optimal – and it can be applied even in complicated settings, using
information that is plausibly available. The explosive advances in machine
learning provide a huge opportunity for agent-based modeling that is still in
its early stage. The challenge is not to create models where the agents use
the ‘smartest’ possible learning algorithms, but rather to faithfully mimic
the way people actually make decisions.
Modeling behavior directly is still an unfinished research program.
18
So
far, there’s no one-size-fits-all method that tells us how people will make
decisions in any given situation. In the meantime, agent-based modelers
have cobbled together their own models of behavior, which incorporate
many different elements. Here are some of the ways agent-based modelers
incorporate behavior:
• State the obvious. There are many circumstances for which there is an
obvious decision rule. For example, a class of stock traders called
value investors (think Warren Buffett) follow the rule ‘buy
undervalued assets’.
• Ask experts, like psychologists and sociologists, who have done lab
experiments or field studies or performed surveys to understand how
people made decisions in a similar context.
• Study data where similar decisions have been made. In our housing
model for Washington DC, for example, we used data from the US
census on people’s housing choices, conditioned on income and
wealth.
• Do experiments in the context of the model. One can slow down an
agent-based model to human speed, unplugging the computer’s
decision-making algorithms and replacing them with the decisions of
real people, and then build a model mimicking the choices of the
human decisionmakers. This is a promising approach that remains
largely unexplored.
19
• Use learning algorithms to train agents to make better decisions
through time. This is the closest thing to a one-size-fits-all approach,
and is the way agent-based models answer the Lucas critique.
Although there are many learning algorithms, they often lead to similar
behaviors.
In mainstream economics there is a very clear and explicit formula for
modeling behavior, but the procedures used in agent-based modeling to
model behavior directly, as the list above shows, are less cut and dried.
They require more judgment on the part of the modeler. At the end of the
day, what matters is whether the models are able to represent the economic
world with sufficient verisimilitude to make good predictions.
Exploring the wilderness of bounded rationality
If instead we take the view that prices themselves may adjust sluggishly, we
enter the wilderness of ‘disequilibrium economics’.
Chris Sims (1980)
20
Although they have similar goals, mainstream economics and complexity
economics model the world completely differently. To see the difference
clearly, let’s recap the standard modeling template from Chapter 5, updating
it to account for the rejection of rational expectations by behavioral
economics:
1. Give each agent a utility function (or some other way of ranking the
desirability of different outcomes).
2. Give each agent a model of beliefs (which might be based on rational
expectations or on something more behaviorally grounded) and find
the set of decisions that selfishly maximize each agent’s utility, subject
to these beliefs.
3. Solve for the equilibrium values of the relevant economic variables
(like prices and quantities traded).
Complexity economics replaces this with agent-based modeling, which
follows a completely different template:
1. Assign each agent a method for making decisions. This can involve
heuristics, simple reasoning, search, learning, or a mixture of any of
these. When learning algorithms are used, goals may need to be
assigned to some agents, but these need not be utility functions.
2. Mimic the institutions, market mechanisms and other economic
factors that are actually involved, with as much verisimilitude as
necessary (remembering that it can be counterproductive to introduce
details that don’t matter).
3. Simulate the collective interactions of the agents as time unfolds.
Both methods have their pros and cons. In simple settings, it is reasonable
to model real agents ‘as if’ they follow rational expectations. If things
change sufficiently slowly, equilibrium is a plausible assumption. Then we
can use the standard framework to write down equations and solve them.
This has the advantage of being simple, comprehensible and easy to
implement.
In contrast, agent-based modeling is more useful in complicated settings
where agents do not plausibly understand things well enough to reason ‘as
if’ they follow rational expectations, or where things are changing
sufficiently fast that equilibrium is not a plausible assumption. Agent-based
modeling more easily captures the rich structure and interactions that play
important roles in the real economic world. There is much more latitude in
how things can be done, depending on the problem that needs to be solved.
A key difference is in step 3. In the standard template, equilibrium is
assumed from the outset – there is no consideration of what might happen
outside of it. The complexity-economics template makes no such
assumption; rather, as the collective dynamics unfold, equilibrium is a
possible outcome, which may or may not be attained.
I like to visualize the quest to find better models of human reasoning as
exploring a wilderness, like the cartoon in Figure 8. This metaphor is
inspired by a warning that is given to young economists who are tempted to
venture into complexity economics: There is a danger of getting lost in the
wilderness of bounded rationality. There is only one way to be rational, but
there are an infinite number of possible ways to be boundedly rational. This
makes it easy to get lost. Hence, aspiring economists are encouraged to
stick to the well-known path offered by the standard framework.
This advice is partly sound. The human mind is complicated, and until
we have a good model of how it works, well supported by empirical
findings, there is a danger of getting lost by trying out half-baked models.
Rational expectations is like a gate leading into the wilderness of bounded
rationality, which provides a useful reference point. By keeping this gate
carefully in sight, the mainstream hopes to avoid getting lost. It is a poor
approximation of reality when the economic setting gets complicated, but it
is a useful guide in simple settings. It provides a well-defined point of
departure that can be built on to incorporate more realistic assumptions and
get closer to the truth.
But this advice is missing something important: Rational expectations is
not the only way to enter the wilderness. Complexity economists like to
enter through a different gate, on the other side of the wilderness, by
assuming instead that people make decisions in very simple ways.
Heuristics, for example, require very little reasoning to implement and sit at
the opposite end of the intelligence spectrum from rational expectations. As
an extreme case, starting with ‘zerointelligence’ agents, who literally make
decisions at random, as if they were throwing darts at a dartboard, can be
very useful. Maria’s occupational labour model in Chapter 3 provides a
good example: Workers simply apply for jobs at random – their only
intelligence is in knowing which jobs they are suited for. Such zero-
intelligence models also provide a well-defined point of departure that can
be built on by incrementally adding learning or incorporating more
knowledge from behavioral economics.
21
They provide an alternate gate
into the wilderness of bounded rationality.
Figure 8. The wilderness of bounded rationality. The human brain is complicated, like a wilderness,
and creating a reliable model of the way we make decisions is difficult. To avoid getting lost, it helps
to start with simple assumptions and build incrementally more complicated models. Rationality is the
conventional starting point used in economics, but heuristics, and even the extreme assumption of
zero intelligence (random decision-making), provide useful and much less developed alternative
reference points.
To make good economic models we should use both gates, depending on
which is more effective for solving the problem at hand. In Chapter 8 we
will even see an example where it was useful to go through both gates at
once and meet in the middle.
22
To capture the complex and complicated
nature of real economies, we need to thoroughly explore the wilderness of
bounded rationality, entering through both gates.
Tractable models for complicated economies
The real economy – the one that we live and work in – is a complicated
beast with many interacting moving parts. The agents whose behavior needs
to be modeled include firms, households, banks, financial investors and
governments. There are many different kinds of firms producing many
different goods and services. Poor people behave differently than rich
people, and old people behave differently than young people. Financial
globalization and trading connect the economies of 195 different nation-
states. Building a macroeconomic model that takes all this into account is
challenging.
I think there are serious limitations to utility maximization as a
foundation for quantitative models, but my opinions on this are
controversial, and since this book is not about criticizing mainstream
economics, I have reduced them to an endnote.
23
There is, however, one
problem with utility maximization that is uncontroversial: In complicated
situations, the equations become very hard to solve. To quote two
prominent economists, Xavier Gabaix and David Laibson:
Tractable models are easy to analyze. Models with maximal tractability can be solved with
analytic methods – i.e. paper and pencil calculations. At the other extreme, minimally
tractable models cannot be solved even with a computer, since the necessary
computations/simulations would take too long. For instance, optimization is typically not
computationally feasible when there are dozens of continuous state variables – in such cases,
numerical solution times are measured on the scale of years or centuries.
24
A realistic model of a complicated economic phenomenon like the 2008
financial crisis requires understanding the behavior of many agents and
many institutions, which require ‘dozens of continuous state variables’ to
represent them. The reason that standard models fail is because they require
calculating the optimal decisions for each agent. It can be difficult for real
people to do this, and it becomes impossible even for a computer to do it
when things get complicated.
25
The tractability problems of the standard
modeling approach are unavoidable: It will never be possible to make
successful models of complicated real-world situations that take the many
interacting moving pieces of the economy into account.
In contrast, agent-based models don’t try to find optima, so they don’t
suffer from this problem. In our housing model, for example, we considered
as many as 100,000 households, all of whom differed from one another. We
had not dozens, but hundreds of thousands of continuous-state variables. It
would have been impossible to maximize each household’s utility function
while taking all the others into account. Instead, we mimicked the way that
real households behave. At each step, each agent processed the information
available to her and used simple heuristics to make decisions. Each agent’s
decisions consumed very little computer time, and as a result we could
model 100,000 heterogeneous agents on a laptop. This will never be
possible for a standard model based on utility maximization.
Agent-based simulation can easily incorporate realistic assumptions
about the complicated structure of the economy. We can come closer to
modeling the complexities of the real world, gaining verisimilitude in two
different ways: The decisions of the agents can be more realistic, and the
structure of the economy can be more realistic. But the most important
consequence is that we can make tractable models, ones that produce
solutions even when things get complicated. Whether or not direct models
of behavior are more realistic than utility maximization (or its variants) will
likely remain controversial for some time. However, the tractability
problem of utility maximization for confronting complicated economic
problems is not controversial.
This point was hammered home to me when I gave a presentation for the
Macrofinancial Seminar at the London School of Economics in 2018. I was
invited by Wouter den Haan, who is one of the leading European
macroeconomists. After the seminar I met with a few expert micro-founded
macro–modelers. To my surprise, they peppered me with procedural
questions: ‘How do you do this? How do you do that?’ They were
particularly keen to know how much effort it took to build and extend more
complicated agent-based models. When I asked them why they were asking
me all these questions, they began describing how much painstaking effort
was required to add new features to their models.
In Chapter 5 you may have wondered why there are no microfounded
models that can simultaneously deal with the diversity of households and
firms in a realistic way. The reason is that building complicated micro-
founded models using rational expectations is hard, and one rapidly reaches
a point where adding more realistic features becomes impossible. Agent-
based models, in contrast, are only limited by the size and speed of the
computers that run them. With a big enough budget for cloud computing, it
is now feasible to build a model that includes every person and every firm
in the world. Perhaps more importantly, it is possible to include all the
relevant economic effects that cause the economy to change.
...
7.
Why Is the Economy Always Changing?
It’s the economy, stupid.
James Carville, advisor to Bill Clinton (1999)
We can now return to the question raised in Chapter 1: What causes the
economy to change? Essential measures of the economy, such as GDP,
unemployment and inflation, fluctuate from quarter to quarter and year to
year and show long-term trends driven by structural changes. These
changes have a major impact on our well-being and, as James Carville
famously noted, cause governments to rise and fall. Explaining such
changes is one of the most important problems in economics. It is an
important problem for everyone: The performance of the economy
determines whether presidents are elected, and millions of jobs are gained
or lost during the course of the business cycle.
Complexity economics and standard economic theory explain change
very differently. As discussed in Chapter 1, there are two fundamental
causes of economic change: outside influences and factors within the
economy itself. With a few exceptions, standard economic models assume
that the drivers of change come from outside.
1
I will argue that economic
change results from a combination of internally and externally driven
causes, depending on the context, and discuss how complexity economics
provides natural explanations for this.
Spontaneous emergence of inequality and business cycles
Let’s begin with a simple example of emergent behavior when we turn a
standard model into a complexity-economics model.
2
In Chapter 5 we
discussed the Solow model and how it was converted into the RCK model,
which is a simple micro-founded DSGE model. The RCK model assumes a
single rational representative agent who can calculate the optimal savings
rate. What happens if we instead enter the wilderness of bounded rationality
through the back gate, assuming boundedly rational (very stupid)
heterogeneous agents? Does this fundamentally change the behavior
described above, and if so, how?
We investigated these questions in a project led by Yuki Asano, whom I
met at Oxford in 2017 while supervising his superb master’s thesis in
mathematics. He subsequently teamed up with Jobst Heitzig, Jakob Kolb
and me to investigate modifications of the RCK model. The goal of Yuki’s
model was to illustrate a conceptual point rather than to build a realistic
model. We turned the RCK model into a complexity-economics model by
replacing the single, utility-maximizing, rational household of the RCK
model with thousands of boundedly rational, heterogeneous households.
Rather than calculating the optimal savings rate, the households simply
copied one another, setting their savings rate using the two simple heuristics
mentioned earlier, ‘trial and error’ and ‘imitate the best’. The statusseeking
tendency of households to copy one another has been well documented, so
these seemed like sensible choices.
3
We assumed that the households in Yuki’s model live in a social
network.
4
The nodes correspond to households, and a link indicates that
they are neighbors, meaning they can observe one another’s behavior. As in
the original RCK model, each household saves a fraction of its income and
consumes the rest. All the households work for the same firm and receive
equal wages. In addition, each household contributes capital to run the
business; the households pool their capital and invest it in the firm, and
each household receives income based on the firm’s profits in addition to its
wages, proportional to its investment. As in real life, if a household gets
richer it owns more of the means of production than poor households, and
its higher investment profits allow it to consume more.
To get started, we randomly assigned each household its own savings
rate, consisting of a number between zero (saving nothing) and one (saving
everything). As in the RCK model, the households were allowed to adjust
their savings rates. To accomplish this, from time to time a random
household was allowed to update its savings rate by observing the
consumption rates of all its neighbors. It then copied the savings rate of the
neighbor who was currently consuming the most, with a small random error
(hence using the heuristic of ‘trial and error’).
5
In more colloquial terms,
each household looks at its neighbors, sees who has the fanciest car and
biggest house, knocks on their door and asks them their savings rate, then
begins saving at the same rate. Thus the agents in Yuki’s model behaved
like short-sighted, profligate consumers who want to ‘keep up with the
Joneses’.
A key parameter determining the behavior of the economy in the model
is the typical time between updates of the savings rates of each household,
which we called the social-interaction time. If the social-interaction time is
small the household updates their savings rate frequently, and if it is large
they do it only infrequently. When the social-interaction time is short, the
economy gets stuck in a poverty trap, where the average savings rate and
household consumption are very low. As the social-interaction time
increases, the savings rate goes up and everyone gets richer. Remarkably,
when the social-interaction time is long enough (meaning that savings rates
aren’t frequently updated), the savings rate approaches the golden rule, and
the households become almost as rich as they would be if they were all
perfectly rational. I say ‘remarkably’ because the agents in Yuki’s model
have extremely limited cognitive abilities; all they know how to do is
compare consumption rates and select the savings rate of the highest
consumer. If the social-interaction time is made even longer, the average
savings rate remains near the optimal value. The fact that two simple rules
of thumb can result in nearly optimal behavior is a good illustration of the
effectiveness of heuristics.
Even more surprising, just as the social-interaction time gets long
enough to make the savings rate nearly optimal, the economy suddenly
starts to oscillate. The average savings rate and quantities depending on it,
such as the output of the economy, make irregular fluctuations that
resemble a business cycle, as shown in Figure 9. At the same time, the
population spontaneously breaks into rich and poor groups. Households can
move between the two groups: When there’s a boom, there are more rich
households; when there’s a recession, the number of poor households
increases. Interestingly, there is almost no middle class – nearly all
households are either rich or poor.
How could such complex collective behavior arise from such simple
heuristics? This was not obvious to us at first, and understanding it took
considerable effort; emergent phenomena tend to be surprising by their very
nature.
6
So if you find this hard to understand, you are not alone – it was
hard for us too.
The key to the emergent oscillation is that the state in which everyone
saves at the golden rule is unstable. Suppose that all households initially use
the golden rule and have the same capital, so they have the same
consumption. Now consider a household that makes a small copying error
that lowers its savings rate. This household will now consume more than
the others, causing other households to copy it, and the evolving pressure
will drive savings rates further down. But as capital drops and the number
of poor households grows, the capital of the remaining thrifty households
becomes more valuable, due to supply and demand: Scarce capital is worth
more than abundant capital. So, despite their high savings rate, the thrifty
households make such high profits that they also have the highest
consumption. Other households then start to copy them, the average savings
rate goes up and the cycle repeats itself.
Figure 9. An endogenous business cycle from a simple agent-based model. When the social-
interaction time is large enough, the average savings rate and the aggregate output of the economy
spontaneously and irregularly oscillate. The panel on the left shows the relative number of
households with each savings rate; poor households have savings rates below 0.05, and rich
households have savings rates above 0.25, with almost none in between.
Again, we didn’t intend this to be a realistic model; we wanted only to
demonstrate how the behavior of the economy can differ when a rational
representative agent is replaced by many boundedly rational, heterogeneous
agents. ‘Imitate the best’ and ‘trial and error’ are only two examples of
many heuristics that describe the behavior of real households. Nonetheless,
our work suggests that if we properly understood how households and firms
really make decisions, we might find endogenous explanations for business
cycles, and better understand and predict them. In fact, some of my
complexity-economics colleagues have already made steps in this direction.
There are now a few agent-based models that generate endogenous business
cycles that look very realistic, and there are new agent-based models under
development that aim to match business cycles for a given country at a
given point in time.
7
DSGE modelers are aware that rationality is an approximation. Real
households are not rational, but their hope is that rationality (with
appropriate frictions) is ‘good enough’. My hypothesis is that the deviations
from rationality are important and shouldn’t be neglected. The planning
errors that households and firms make are likely an important cause of
business cycles – a cause that DSGE models, by their very nature, fail to
account for. I believe that if we make more realistic models, in which
households and firms are only boundedly rational, their planning errors will
cause business cycles to emerge spontaneously (as they do in many agent-
based models).
The question of whether bounded rationality plays a role in creating
endogenous business cycles harks back to the debate from Chapter 1 about
whether chaos is important in macroeconomics. As I mentioned there,
during the 1980s macroeconomic models with chaos were proposed and
then rejected, in part because it was necessary to assume unrealistic
parameters to induce chaos. The unrealistic parameter in question was the
aforementioned discount rate, which specifies the tradeoff between
consumption now and consumption in the future. The representative agent
in these old models was rational, and chaos happened only if the agent used
a very large discount rate. The net effect was to make such agents myopic,
in the sense that they cared much more about current consumption than
future consumption. A theorem proven by the Brazilian-American
economist José Shenckman in 1976 shows that a macro-model based on
rational expectations won’t become chaotic as long as the discount rate is
reasonable.
8
This is called the turnpike theorem, evoking the image of a
highway clearly visible to the horizon, where the future position of the car
is easy to anticipate. The name suggests that an economy controlled by a
rational agent who puts a sufficiently large weight on the future will ensure
that the future is consistent with the present, avoiding chaos. In other words,
in the absence of shocks, we should expect the model to settle into a static
equilibrium. This theorem no longer applies, however, if the agents are
boundedly rational. In this case, by definition, the agents cannot adequately
anticipate the economy’s future, and their planning may over- or undershoot
the mark. The economy behaves more like a drunk driver on a winding
mountain road, wobbling back and forth across the centerline.
Chaotic games
As mentioned in Chapter 1, my intuition about the prevalence of chaotic
dynamics comes from Ruelle and Takens’s remarkable proof. They showed
that when a system is pushed sufficiently far from equilibrium, chaos
becomes likely. Economic equilibrium is different from physical
equilibrium, but – unless there’s something special about economic systems
– that proof is still relevant.
Ruelle and Takens’s proof prefigured the inevitability of chaotic
dynamics in turbulence; the work I am about to describe here attempts to do
the same for the economy. (In Chapter 11, we’ll discuss the analogy
between fluid turbulence and financial turbulence, which makes this
connection even stronger.) The turnpike theorem indicates that long-range
rational planning in the economy suppresses chaos. Does this still happen
under bounded rationality? If chaos does emerge under bounded rationality,
under what conditions should we expect it to occur?
I began working on these questions in earnest some twenty years ago,
when two Japanese postdocs, Yuzuru Sato and Eizo Akiyama, knocked on
the door of my office at SFI and showed me some preliminary results
investigating the game of rock-paper-scissors. I imagine most of you have
played it: Two players simultaneously make a gesture, which can be either a
clenched fist (rock), a flat palm (paper) or a V-sign (scissors). Paper beats
rock, scissors beats paper, and rock beats scissors.
Studying rock-paper-scissors might seem silly, but games are widely
used in economics to study situations in which agents receive payoffs that
depend on their actions. Games capture the essence of strategic contests,
and strategic contests play an important role in economics. In the stock
market, for example, the movement of a stock’s price depends on others’
buying and selling, so your profits or losses depend not just on your
decisions but also on those of everyone else in the market. Similarly, in a
game, agents receive benefits that depend on their actions as well as the
actions of other players. There are many different kinds of games: Rock-
paperscissors is what is called a normal-form game, in which the players
make their moves simultaneously and get an immediate payoff that depends
on a combination of their own move and those of the other players. Games
provide an excellent testing ground for understanding how agents formulate
strategies and how strategic competition evolves over time.
There have been five Nobel Prizes awarded in economics for game
theory; the most well-known of the recipients is John Nash, protagonist of
the 2001 film A Beautiful Mind, starring Russell Crowe. Nash is famous for
his 1951 proof that normal-form games always have what is now called a
Nash equilibrium.
9
This means that each player follows a strategy such that
none of them have a better strategy unless one of the other players changes
her strategy. In rock-paper-scissors, for example, the Nash equilibrium
corresponds to both players randomly choosing rock, paper or scissors with
equal probability. You can do this by rolling a die and choosing rock if the
result is 1 or 2, paper if it is 3 or 4, and scissors if it is 5 or 6. If you play
this strategy, no one can have a better chance of winning than you do. At a
Nash equilibrium, all the players have settled into a strategy and have no
incentive to change it. The Nash equilibrium may not provide the best
outcomes for both players but, once there, the players are stuck. Just like
economies, games can have multiple equilibria, in which case, even for
rational players, it is not obvious which equilibrium will be chosen, and
there may be suboptimal outcomes.
Nash equilibrium in a game is not the same as equilibrium in an
economy, but it’s a close cousin. At a Nash equilibrium all the agents have
(locally) optimized their strategies, in the sense that there are no nearby
strategies that are better. In economics, where the problem is to solve for
prices and quantities traded, strictly speaking equilibrium means the point
where supply equals demand. But game theory has become so integral to
the way economists think about the world that they often loosely refer to
equilibrium in the strategic sense as the set of agent decisions that (locally)
optimize all their utilities.
When playing a game, a rational player will find a strategy
corresponding to a Nash equilibrium, and in an economy, rational agents
will settle into a set of decisions that maximize their utility. But when the
players are boundedly rational, they may never settle on an equilibrium at
all. If so, what happens? Can the behavior of the players become chaotic?
Eizo and Yuzuru were interested in these questions. To investigate them,
they simulated the game of rock-paper-scissors on the computer with two
players who each used reinforcement learning to formulate their strategies.
10
Under reinforcement learning, each player updates the probability of each
possible move to favor moves that have been successful in the past. Eizo
and Yuzuru hypothesized that under certain conditions the resulting
dynamics are chaotic, never settling into an equilibrium. I collaborated with
them in proving that this was true.
11
We showed that in the game of
rockpaper-scissors, under reinforcement learning, most of the time the
players don’t settle into a Nash equilibrium; instead, they chase each other
around the strategy space, as each tries to anticipate what the other will do.
If one player starts to play rock more often the other will start to play paper
more often, which will induce the other player to play scissors more often,
and so on. The surprising thing is that most of the time this doesn’t happen
in a regular and predictable way – the dynamics are chaotic, meaning that
the strategies never settle down and remain constant, and it is inherently
impossible to predict what the players will do in the far future.
As a cultural aside, our work brought us into contact with the World
Rock-Paper-Scissors Association, which promotes the game of rock-paper-
scissors and organizes tournaments (‘Dreams Do Come True! Play Rock-
Paper-Scissors Professionally.’).
12
They were enthusiastic when they heard
about our paper, which coincided with what they observed. No one actually
plays the Nash strategy of randomly making each move with the same
probability. No one actually uses reinforcement learning either, but they
thought the chaotic patterns we found, in which players chase each other’s
strategies, were closer to what they observed.
Rock-paper-scissors is just one of an infinite number of possible games.
We provided a proof of principle for chaos in game theory, but maybe rock-
paper-scissors is an anomaly? Rock-paper-scissors is special because its
Nash equilibrium is purely defensive, meaning that, on average, it can never
beat another strategy; in most games, the Nash equilibrium, on average,
beats other ‘nearby’ strategies.
13
When would chaos be likely and when would it be rare? My hypothesis
was that, because complicated games – games involving many players
and/or many possible moves – are difficult to learn, boundedly rational
players would be unlikely to converge to a Nash equilibrium. Conversely, in
simple games, converging to a Nash equilibrium should be likely. Tic-tac-
toe is a good example of the latter. When I was nine years old, my friends
and I had a lot of fun playing tic-tac-toe, but then I learned the strategy
whereby the second player can always get a tie, and my friends quickly
learned it too. The strategy we learned was the Nash equilibrium, and it
made the game boring, so we stopped playing. Go and chess, by contrast,
have many possible moves, and they’re so complicated that no one has been
able to discover their Nash equilibria. Nash proved there is at least one, and
there may be millions of them – but so far no one has found any of them.
I had some ideas about how to prove or disprove my hypothesis, but
after Eizo and Yuzuru returned to Japan, I lacked good collaborators. Then,
about a decade later, while I was briefly living in Berlin before taking up
my appointment at Oxford, I attended a session at the German Physical
Society of presentations by physicists who were working in social science. I
heard a talk by a bright young postdoctoral fellow named Tobias Galla, who
was studying the multiplicity of Nash equilibria in games that were
constructed at random. I approached him after his talk and we began a
collaboration.
14
Our idea was simple: We made up games at random, compiling a list of
all possible combinations of players’ possible moves and assigning a
random payoff to each player for each combination of moves. To
understand how we did this, think about a game with two players, Alice and
Bob, and two possible moves, Up and Down. There are four possibilities:
Alice and Bob both play Up, Alice and Bob both play Down, Alice plays
Up and Bob plays Down, and Alice plays Down and Bob plays Up. For
each of these four possibilities, we would randomly assign payoffs to Alice
and Bob. However, we did this for games with more than two possible
moves (where there is an explosion of different possible combinations as
the number of possible moves increases). This procedure allowed us to
generate any possible normal-form game, i.e. any game with simultaneous
moves. Note that once we assigned the payoffs, they were fixed, so
randomness entered only in creating the game – after that the game never
changed.
For each randomly constructed game, we repeated the process that Eizo
and Yuzuru had developed for rock-paper-scissors: We simulated the
learning dynamics of the games using reinforcement learning and recorded
what happened. Did the system settle into a fixed-point equilibrium, or were
the dynamics chaotic? While it’s impossible to investigate every possible
game this way, by sampling the space of possibilities we got a good idea of
the lay of the land.
The games we constructed weren’t actually completely random: We
could control the extent to which the game was competitive, as opposed to
non-competitive. In a competitive game, if one player wins, the other player
is likely to lose; the extreme case is called a zero-sum game, meaning that
the winning player’s gain is equal to the losing player’s loss. In a non-
competitive game, by contrast, if one player wins, the other player is more
likely to win. We studied games that ranged from perfectly competitive
(zero-sum) to perfectly non-competitive (meaning the payoffs for the two
players are identical).
The set of all possible games is enormously large, so to narrow down the
space of possibilities we decided to restrict our attention to two-player
games with a large number of moves.
15
We showed that the likelihood of
chaos depended on the degree of competitiveness and the way in which
reinforcement learning is done. Reinforcement learning has a key parameter
that determines the influence of recent moves relative to moves in the
distant past; like discounting, it’s usually better to pay more attention to
recent moves. The details of our results don’t matter here, but our overall
conclusion for competitive games was that, when the reinforcement-
learning parameter was set to sensible values, the learning dynamics were
overwhelmingly likely to be chaotic. That is, the players never coordinated
on an equilibrium; instead, they chased each other around the space of
possible strategies in an unpredictable manner. Furthermore, the chaos was
often complicated chaos, meaning that the process was effectively random
and therefore difficult, if not impossible, to learn well enough to improve
our reinforcement-players’ predictions. We also observed other interesting
things. For example, there were fads. For a while, the two players would
fixate on a few possible moves, ignoring all the others. Then they would
suddenly abandon those moves, replace them with others, play those for a
long period, then shift again. This behavior was intermittent – there were
times when there were steady payoffs and other times when payoffs
fluctuated a great deal. In financial markets, this is called clustered
volatility; in Chapter 11, I will argue that this correspondence is not an
accident.
A key point our model illustrated is that equilibrium is an emergent
property. Whether or not boundedly rational players will arrive at an
equilibrium depends on how competitive and complicated the game is. This
is not true for rational players, who will always arrive at an equilibrium
where their expectations are consistent with the outcomes. When the games
were sufficiently complicated and competitive, our boundedly rational
players didn’t do this – it is precisely the errors in the agents’ boundedly
rational expectations that cause the chaos.
A few years later, my graduate student Marco Pangallo studied the
behavior of simple games with two players and only two moves. Was chaos
possible in that case? He did a nearly exhaustive study, including an
analysis of many variations of reinforcement learning and its relatives, and
found that chaos in these circumstances is rare.
16
We now understood games with an enormous number of moves, where
chaos is common, and games with only two moves, where it isn’t. What
happens between these two extremes? Marco set to work. He broadened the
scope of the investigation beyond reinforcement learning to include five
other learning algorithms and found that, while there were some
differences, the frequency of chaos in these algorithms and the
circumstances in which it occurred were similar, implying that the behavior
was robust. When he chose sensible versions of bounded rationality that
capture key aspects of people’s decision-making, the results were more or
less the same. Then Marco invented a brilliant method to analyze the
behavior of games with any number of players, using methods from
statistical physics. He was joined by a clever German postdoc of mine,
Torsten Heinrich. Together they applied these methods to understand the
frequency of chaos for all possible normal-form games, depending on the
number of possible moves. This showed that for competitive games the
fraction of chaos increases rapidly as the game gets more complicated. The
conclusion was clear: Games converge to a static equilibrium if they are
non-competitive or simple; conversely, if they are both competitive and
complicated, they are unlikely to converge – instead, their dynamics will be
chaotic.
17
These results have profound conclusions for economics. Agents often
compete with each other in complicated economic settings, like a stock
market or an industry with many competing businesses. The standard way
economists model such settings is to assume equilibrium from the outset.
Under rational expectations, the result is typically a fixed point, resulting in
an economy that, as noted, changes only when it’s disturbed from the
outside. Our results suggest that, given the more realistic assumption that
the agents are boundedly rational, one should instead expect chaotic
dynamics. In a macroeconomic setting this means endogenous, irregular
business cycles, like the ones observed in Yuki’s model. Our results imply
that standard economic models in any complicated, competitive setting are
very likely wrong. This shows that we need complexity economics to
understand complicated, competitive phenomena like business cycles.
...
PART III:
The Financial System
...
8.
Inefficient Markets
Observing that the market was frequently efficient [efficient market theory
adherents] went on to conclude incorrectly that it is always efficient. The
difference between these propositions is night and day.
Warren Buffett
1
What does the financial system do?
The essential function of the economy is to structure and coordinate our
work, and allocate resources, including human capital. In a thriving
economy, individuals are far more effective than they would be if we had to
survive on our own. The financial system plays a subtle but essential role in
directing this coordination.
If the economy is the metabolism of society – its ‘digestive tract’ – the
financial system is analogous to the brain in our gut, which helps us digest
food. This is formally called the enteric nervous system, but is also
nicknamed the gut brain or the second brain. It stretches from the
esophagus to the rectum, and has half a billion neurons, five times as many
as in the spine and almost as many as the entire nervous system of a cat. It
directs the activities of the digestive system while operating almost entirely
independently of the brain in your head. If your gut brain ceases to function,
you lose the ability to digest food, and, without intravenous feeding, you
die. The digestive system is just another name for our metabolism, which
the gut brain guides and controls. Remarkably, even though we can’t live
without it, very few people have ever heard of the gut brain.
Analogously, the key function of the financial system is to guide and
control the economy by determining what we will or will not produce. It
plays an important role in processing information and making allocation
decisions. Like the gut brain, the financial system (in a capitalist economy)
operates more or less autonomously, though it needs regulatory guidance in
order to work well. How much regulation it should have, and what kind, is
hotly debated.
Shipwrecked on his desert island, Robinson Crusoe could consume only
the fruits of his own labor – for him, money would have been useless. But
as Adam Smith pointed out, in a modern economy we are able to specialize,
and we do this by using money to consume the fruits of the labor of others
and to allow them to consume ours. The financial system does its job by
controlling where money goes. Fundamentally, money directs what we
work on and what we produce. Someone says, ‘Hey, I’ve got a good idea
for a product and the competence to bring it to market,’ and a rich person
responds, ‘Okay, I believe you, and if you’ll give me a cut of the profits, I’ll
give you some money.’ Then a team of people goes to work with a common
purpose. In an ideal world, people who work in the financial system provide
a valuable service by processing information and making decisions so that
effort and resources are allocated where they can be most effective.
Contracts are an essential tool of the financial system. They operate by
structuring the flow of money and activity over time. Ownership of a stock
or a bond is a contract, relating an investment at one point in time to
payments at other points in time. Other contracts include loans, mortgages,
employment agreements, insurance policies, patents, pensions and wills.
Contracts specify the commitments of parties to one another and
synchronize their activities. They can also transfer risk – for example,
through insurance policies. If an airline wants to lock in the price of jet fuel,
it can buy a contract allowing it to transfer the uncertainty about future
prices to someone else. Contracts coordinate our actions by making future
commitments and dependencies clear.
Contracts form a vast web.
2
They are an important component of the
network of balance sheets, connecting us in space and time. Each contract
sits on someone’s balance sheet, either as an asset or a liability. The
relationship is reciprocal; my liabilities are someone else’s assets. The
insurance policy on my house says that if it burns down, money flows from
others (who may be far away) to me, so that local people can rebuild my
house.
As discussed in Chapter 2, economics can be viewed as a combination of
accounting and human decision-making. Contracts are an essential part of
accounting, which is a mechanical process following a set of simple laws.
3
The web of contracts is like a set of wound springs linking us all together;
as the conditions in the contracts are triggered, the springs unwind and
prescribed actions take place, affecting our decisions. If we could know the
web of all contracts in detail, we could make powerful predictions about the
global economic system from this information alone.
The financial system provides a mechanism for processing information
and making decisions in the economy. The way it does this is subtle,
generating debates about how well it functions. The efficient-markets
hypothesis assumes that the system functions perfectly. My theory of
market ecology, described in Chapter 10, offers a complementary view.
According to that theory, the inefficiencies of the financial system are
fundamental to its operation; admitting that markets are inherently
inefficient, and understanding what causes these inefficiencies, is essential
to understanding why markets can malfunction.
The relative size of the financial system in the economy has grown
enormously in recent history. Shortly after World War II, the US financial
sector accounted for 2.8 per cent of GDP; by 2006, it was 8.3 per cent.
4
In
1980, a typical financial-services employee earned about the same wages as
her counterpart in other industries; by 2006, employees in financial services
earned an average of 70 per cent more.
5
Between 1969 and 1973, only 6 per
cent of Harvard undergraduates went into financial services after
graduation; by 2008, this had grown to 28 per cent.
6
This suggests that the
financial system is directing an increasing amount of money and effort
toward itself rather than toward the rest of the economy.
Is the increase in resources devoted to the financial system necessary
because the economy has become more complex, requiring more
information to make sound investments? Is this increased effort stimulating
more innovation or increasing the efficiency of production? Or are we
suffering from an ailment where our collective gut brain has gone rogue,
and is engaging in cancer-like activities rather than doing its job?
7
Perhaps
major components of the financial system do nothing more than act as a
global casino for the very rich, while destabilizing the economy with little
positive benefit to the economy as a whole? In this part of the book, I will
argue that a complex-systems point of view can help answer these
questions.
The financial system is a vast complex system unto itself, with an array
of interacting institutions. These include regulated entities like commercial
banks, investment banks, insurance companies, mutual funds, pension
funds, hedge funds, private equity funds, venture-capital funds, housing
markets, stock exchanges, central clearing parties, security and investment
dealers, and specialinvestment partnerships – as well as a host of other
entities that constitute the shadow banking system, which creates credit
without regulatory oversight. However, the Fed’s FRB/US model and its
counterparts throughout the world use simplified models of the financial
system that lump most (usually all) of these diverse institutions together.
The complexity-economics approach, in contrast, can take the differing role
of each type of institution into account, in order to better understand how
the financial system functions, and explain why financial crises occur and
what we can do to fix them.
Beating the stock market
In 1985, while I was an Oppenheimer Fellow at Los Alamos, I began
mentoring my second graduate student, John Sidorowich (universally
known as Sid). Sid and I worked on a research project that merged my
earlier collaboration on predicting roulette with the Dynamical System
Collective’s work on identifying chaos, as described in Chapter 1. We took
advantage of the fact that chaos is a double-edged sword: On one hand,
chaos imposes fundamental limits to long-term prediction; on the other, it
means that data that otherwise look random can be predictable in the short
term.
There are many situations where useful models can be built even with no
fundamental understanding of causality. The best predictions of sunspots,
for example, are made by fitting a simple mathematical model to historical
records of sunspot levels.
8
The work I did with Sid showed that if random-
looking behavior is caused by simple chaos, one can take advantage of this
to make better predictions than those made using standard time-series
(historical) models. Our research led to a 1987 paper called ‘Predicting
Chaotic Time Series’.
9
Our method made good predictions as long as we had enough data and
the mechanism underlying its randomness was simple chaotic dynamics.
Some of the phenomena we predicted included weakly turbulent fluid flow,
sunspots and ice ages. I frequently spoke about this work at seminars and
conferences and, when it came time for questions, someone would
inevitably raise their hand and ask, ‘Have you tried applying your methods
to the stock market?’ I knew nothing about finance, but the question came
up so often that I couldn’t help thinking about it. I got tired of answering,
‘No.’
By 1991, I had been at Los Alamos for nearly a decade. I had great
collaborators and really liked my complex-systems group. But I was
spending too much time on administration, fund-raising and dealing with
government bureaucracy. What to do instead? I kept reflecting on the
question that everyone always asked about my work on prediction. Was it
possible to beat the market? At that time, the debate was dominated by
Eugene Fama, a professor in the business school at the University of
Chicago who would go on to win the 2013 Nobel Prize in economics. Often
regarded as the ‘father of modern finance’, he argued strongly in favor of
the efficient-markets hypothesis, which says that getting an advantage by
predicting stock prices is impossible.
10
The efficient-markets hypothesis flows automatically from the
assumption of rational expectations. If investors are rational, then stock
market prices should fully and accurately reflect all available information,
and prices should change only when new information enters the market.
New information is by definition unpredictable (or it wouldn’t be new);
ergo, future changes in prices should be random. Fama and most other
financial economists at the time believed that trying to predict stock prices
based on publicly available information would be pointless. I didn’t think
this could be true, and I liked the idea of disproving it.
Fama was not the first to suggest that stock-price changes are random. In
fact, financial markets were the original inspiration of the random-walk
model, introduced by the French mathematician Louis Bachelier in 1900. In
his PhD dissertation, he proposed that the price of a stock today is the price
yesterday plus a random number, and the price tomorrow is the price today
plus a different random number, and so on.
11
This is like a drunk who
randomly steps to the right or to the left, with no bias toward moving in
either direction. If the drunk starts at a tavern door, where is he after 100
steps? Knowing the size of his steps, and assuming that steps to the right or
left are equally likely, we can compute the probability that the drunk will be
at any given distance from the tavern. But he is equally likely to end up on
the right or the left; we cannot predict the direction of his movement.
Similarly, if stock prices follow a random walk, we can estimate how far
prices will drift from current prices after a given time, but not whether the
change in price will be up or down.
Beating the market seemed like a good challenge, so in 1991 my
childhood friend Norman Packard and I teamed up again and recruited
another old friend from Santa Cruz, Jim McGill, to run the business side of
things. We started Prediction Company, which in hindsight was one of the
earliest successful quantitative hedge funds. We made a deal with the
options-trading firm O’Connor and Associates, which was eventually
acquired by Swiss Bank Corporation, which itself later merged with the
Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS). They provided us with all the
investment capital we needed, and we got a cut of the profits; our job was to
find and implement a good trading strategy. For us, the stock market was
like a casino, only the stakes were much higher, you didn’t have to hide
your computer, and they didn’t throw you out or break your kneecaps for
winning.
At the time we knew very little about finance or economics, so we
treated the stock market as a vast stream of numbers. Our strategy was to
find ‘pockets of predictability’ in historical prices that recur more often than
they should at random; we would then make bets based on these patterns.
This book is not about beating the market, so I won’t go into detail about
what we did. Nonetheless, our systematic approach, which allowed us to
beat the market, provides some valuable methodological lessons that are
relevant to making better models of the economy.
Data and infrastructure were the foundation of everything we did at
Prediction Company. We collected all existing historical data on US stocks.
This included not just prices and trading volume but options, insider-trading
reports, analyst estimates and anything else we could lay our hands on. We
hired a few really good computerprogrammers and developed a framework
that let us automatically process vast amounts of data using an array of Sun
workstations, which were the most affordable powerful computers then
available. We created a special-purpose language for processing financial
data and developed a database program to quickly process prices and other
data. The resulting infrastructure made it easy to build models and simulate
trading.
Using machine learning and other statistical methods, including a few
we invented ourselves, we discovered several predictable patterns, but we
also realized that there was a great deal of useful information in the
published literature in finance – particularly in papers claiming to find
violations of efficient-market theory. For example, such a paper might say,
‘We tested trading rule X on stocks in the S&P index between 1970 and
1991 and showed that it produced returns 5 per cent in excess of those of
the S&P index.’ Because of the strong bias toward efficient markets, papers
like this were hard to get published, but some still managed to make it into
print, mostly in second- and third-tier journals. Our powerful framework
allowed us to rapidly and easily test whether the results of papers like this
were correct. We systematically tested the results of every published paper
that claimed to find deviations from randomness in stock markets.
The results were sobering, suggesting that, at least on this topic, the
published work was not reliable. For around half of the papers, we couldn’t
reproduce the results, even when we tested the postulated deviation from
efficiency using the same data. The results in another fourth of the papers
were correct when we used the same data but failed when we tested the
hypothesized method using different time periods or stocks. Fortunately, the
remaining fourth we tested contained useful, reproducible results.
Nonetheless, when taken by themselves, none of the trading rules in the
validated papers produced the steady profits we were seeking. Even if the
overall returns were good on average, they were uneven; the risk was too
large for our weak stomachs. But when we combined the trading rules from
all of the validated papers with those we found on our own, the result was
an effective trading system. As a result, Prediction Company made
substantial returns that were about five times steadier than those of a typical
mutual fund or stock index.
12
When we started Prediction Company, Eugene Fama was quoted in a
popular science magazine as saying that the odds of our success were ‘not
zero, but they are very, very low’.
13
This was a cute way of saying that, even
though stock prices are random, there was always a small chance that we’d
get lucky. The metaphor Fama and others liked to use was of monkeys with
typewriters: If enough monkeys type long enough, one of them will
eventually duplicate Shakespeare’s complete works.
A statistical analysis of our trading results makes it abundantly clear that
our steady profits were not due to chance. Prediction Company ran for
twenty-seven years, with only one losing year – 2007.
14
The odds of
achieving Prediction Company’s track record at random are vanishingly
small. Our performance showed that, with the right information and the
right model, one can take advantage of hidden patterns in stock prices. We
proved that, strictly speaking, the efficient-markets hypothesis is wrong.
And we weren’t the only ones; although we were among the first, a few
other firms did even better.
After eight years at Prediction Company, I was eager to get back to basic
research. In the process of becoming an expert on the stock market, I had
also begun to read more widely about finance and economics and had
concluded that economics needed new ideas. While mainstream economics
had flirted with chaos and complex systems, neither had taken hold. This
created an opportunity to do something new.
At Prediction Company, we built successful models that made good
predictions, but the models were black boxes that didn’t explain the
mechanisms that caused the inefficiencies we exploited. We had to keep our
models secret, which meant they contributed little or no value to society as
a whole. I wanted to build models that could explain why markets behaved
as they did – models that anyone could use and that would help solve the
world’s problems. This led me back to the Santa Fe Institute, where I began
doing basic research on financial markets.
How well does the market do its job?
Let’s revisit the question of how well markets do their job. As discussed,
financial markets are supposed to help us allocate our efforts so that they’re
productive. But what does beating the market have to do with the way we
allocate effort?
The phrase market efficiency has two senses. The first, ‘allocative
efficiency’, means that prices are always set correctly, so effort is allocated
appropriately. Stock prices help people decide how to do that: If the price of
pork bellies goes up, more farmers will grow hogs. The second,
‘informational efficiency’, means that you can’t increase profits by making
better predictions about stock prices. If all investors are rational and operate
within perfect markets, everyone’s utility is maximized, and the market is
efficient in both the allocational and informational sense.
15
In this
idealization, the statement that the market casino cannot be beaten is
equivalent to saying that resources are allocated correctly. However, this
depends on strong assumptions that aren’t well-supported in practice. Under
more realistic assumptions – for example, when investors are boundedly
rational – these two different notions of efficiency are no longer equivalent.
In fact, as I will argue, they can be really different.
To better understand the logic behind the efficient-markets hypothesis,
let’s make an analogy to traffic. Suppose there are two possible routes from
City A to City B. Without traffic, the travel time for each of the two routes
is the same, but if there is traffic, one may be faster than the other. If
everyone has access to traffic reports and chooses the fastest route, then the
faster route will gain more traffic until the travel times adjust so that they’re
the same. If this happens everywhere, the traffic system is efficient in the
informational sense, because no one can do better by picking a faster route,
and in the allocative sense, because cars are using the road system as well
as possible to keep everyone’s travel times as short as they can be. But
there’s a built-in contradiction, because if everyone believes that everyone
else is processing the information needed to choose the best route to make
the system efficient, then all the routes are the same, and there is no
incentive for anyone to process information, which will make the system
inefficient.
A famous joke illustrates the paradoxical nature of the efficient-markets
hypothesis. Eugene Fama and a friend are walking down the street when
they see a $100 bill. Fama says to his friend, ‘There’s no point in picking it
up. It must be counterfeit, or someone would have picked it up already.’ To
this I can add a true story: About two years after we formed Prediction
Company, Norman and I left our office on Aztec Street in Santa Fe to go to
lunch. We looked down and saw a $50 bill. We picked it up and used it to
buy an especially nice lunch at our favorite New Mexican restaurant. The
money may have been counterfeit, but the lunch was delicious.
The introduction of Google Maps shows how efficiency depends on
technological progress. By providing useful information about travel times,
Google Maps has substantially altered our driving habits and made the road
system more efficient.
16
Similarly, in the next section we will see how
computer technology moved the reference point for market efficiency in
finance.
Econophysics, market impact and the usefulness of efficient
markets
The efficient-markets hypothesis has been controversial since its inception,
but while it is no longer the iron-clad pillar it once was, it is still one of the
central ideas in mainstream financial economics.
17
Our experience at
Prediction Company and that of other successful trading firms shows that,
strictly speaking, the hypothesis is wrong. However, this doesn’t mean it
isn’t a useful approximation for some purposes. There are situations where
it works very well and others where it fails miserably. The efficient-markets
hypothesis is a good approximation for understanding some aspects of
markets when they are functioning properly. At the same time, it is
manifestly wrong: It predicts that markets never fail, which defies both
experience and common sense. We’ll explore some examples that illustrate
both points, beginning with some success stories.
The first is simple: The theory of rational expectations, which predicts
that the market should be efficient, explains why it is hard to beat the
market. While I am proud that we succeeded in beating the market, it
wasn’t easy; creating our first strategy making consistent, reliable profits
took five years of hard work for me and twenty others at Prediction
Company. This is a good example where market efficiency, while not
strictly true (our results disproved it), is a reasonable approximation.
Another success story is derivative pricing. Derivatives are financial
instruments whose value is based on other assets (their price is derived from
those assets). The classic example is a stock option, which allows you to
buy or sell a stock at a given price (called the strike price) at a given time.
This can be very useful to a business: An airline that wants to ensure that
rising oil prices won’t cut too much into its profits, for example, can buy an
option to purchase oil at a fixed price, no matter how high the market price
rises.
18
Mathematical methods for pricing options are based on the efficient-
markets hypothesis. This is done by assuming that the underlying stock
price follows a random walk. For example, suppose we want to estimate the
value of an option to buy – a call option. We do so by computing how often
and by how much the random walk for the underlying price rises above the
strike price. The idea is simple: If the price of the underlying stock fails to
rise above the strike price, the value of the option is zero; but, in cases when
it surpasses the strike price, its value is the price that was reached minus the
strike price. The value of the option is then computed by averaging all
possible realizations of the random walk. (This idea was introduced at a
practical level by Edward Thorp and Sheen Kassouf and refined by Fischer
Black, Robert Merton and Myron Scholes.
19
)
A much less well-known use of the efficient-markets hypothesis is for
deriving the shape of the market-impact function, which describes how
changes in supply or demand affect price. When a trader decides to buy an
asset, the demand for that asset rises, which tends to drive its price up. The
market-impact function quantifies the average increase in price in response
to initiating a trade of a given size. Remarkably, the market impact function
has a universal shape – that is, it’s the same in all markets where it’s been
tested: stocks, bonds, commodities and currencies.
I have chosen this example for several reasons: market impact is
practically important; its universal shape illustrates a quantitative ‘law’ in
economics, much like those in physics; and the theory that was developed
to understand it illustrates how it can be useful to enter the wilderness of
bounded rationality from both gates.
First, its practical importance. At Prediction Company, we worked hard
to understand our market impact because, since you make money in
markets by buying low and selling high, it lowered our profits and was the
gating factor on how much money we could successfully manage.
20
Market
impact increases with trading size, meaning larger orders are bought at
higher prices and sold at lower prices than small orders. This limited the
amount we could profitably buy and sell; if we tried to trade too much
money, the market impact became too large and our profits went to zero.
Prediction Company was among the first to carefully measure market
impact. We did this by recording the price just before our orders hit the
market and just after they were executed. We anticipated that market impact
would go up linearly with order size, or perhaps even faster than linearly. In
fact, we found just the opposite: It increased at a slower-than-linear rate. In
other words, small orders had a larger market impact per share than large
orders, so that the shape of the curve describing the shift in price became
progressively flatter with increasing order size. We found that the shift in
price increased roughly as the square root of the size of our trade (a fact that
has now been extensively confirmed).
21
This was great news for us, because it allowed us to trade at larger
volume and make more profits than we would have expected. But it was
also a puzzle – why should market impact look like this? Furthermore,
though our overall impact in heavily traded assets was lower than in lightly
traded assets, the curve had the same square-root shape for all assets. Why
should this be?
At Prediction Company, we didn’t have time to pursue questions purely
for their own sake. We just accepted that market impact was roughly
described by a square-root function and used this to optimize our trading
strategy. But after returning to basic research, I was keen to understand why
this was true.
To understand why the universal shape of market impact is so
remarkable, let’s revisit the law of supply and demand, which is perhaps the
most important and most reliable principle in economics. The law of supply
and demand says that prices tend to move to the place where supply equals
demand, so if supply goes up, prices go down, and if demand goes up,
prices go up. It’s a powerful and useful law, but there is no good theory
explaining the shape of supply and demand curves. When Professor Gurley
sketched the curves on the blackboard in my Economics 1 class at Stanford,
as mentioned in the introduction to Part I, the price could be any increasing
function of demand and any decreasing function of supply. Restated in
physics jargon, there is no universal functional form.
22
While economists
derive the shape of supply and demand curves from economic theory, this
depends on the utility function chosen for the agents – different utility
functions lead to differently shaped curves. But there are many possible
utility functions, with no good empirical justification for one over the other,
so even if everything else in the theory is right, the result can at best be
qualitatively correct.
Market impact is closely related to supply and demand – it indicates how
much the price changes when demand or supply changes. But if the supply
and demand curves can take any form, how could the market impact be the
same in many different markets? This seemed to be an important clue about
something fundamental to economics.
The story of how we came to understand market impact intertwines with
my own personal narrative. It involves a movement called econophysics
that emerged in the late 1990s, around the time I left Prediction Company.
During the latter half of the twentieth century, finance had become
increasingly mathematical. The job market in physics had grown tight in the
late 1960s, and, because physicists are good at math, more and more of
them were hired on Wall Street to work on tasks such as derivative pricing.
Econophysics took this a step further, as physicists began doing basic
research in economics – writing and publishing papers in academic journals
rather than just doing applied research for hire.
The arrival of physicists in economics, as part of the econophysics
movement, was met with some resistance by economists. The physicists
weren’t just trying to help economists with their math problems; they were
suggesting conceptual frameworks that were often contrary to those of
economists. The new assumptions and ways of thinking that physicists
wanted to import into economics were frequently antithetical to economic
orthodoxy. The economists felt under attack, and they weren’t going to let
the physicists into their club, so if physicists wanted to be part of a research
community, they needed to create one for themselves. Two of the leaders in
creating this movement were H. Eugene Stanley, a very distinguished
physicist from Boston University, and the Sicilian physicist Rosario
Mantegna. In 1999 they wrote a book called Econophysics, and the name
stuck.
23
There are several ways in which physicists approach science differently
than economists do. Physicists are taught to stay as close to the data as
possible; theories should emerge from empirical observations. Economists,
on the other hand, are taught to build theories and then test whether they
match the data. Their justification is that, unlike in physics, economic data
is so noisy that one needs a theory to make any sense of it.
24
Another important difference is that physicists believe that theory must
ultimately seek to be quantitative, in a strong sense. It is not enough to say
that matter attracts other matter, as Descartes did; the theory of gravity
became useful only when Newton asserted that the gravitational force
decays inversely with the square of distance. When combined with
Newton’s other famous law, F = ma, this allowed him to predict the motion
of planets and comets far into the future.
25
This is why physicists like me got so excited about the possibility of a
universal law for market impact. It suggests that there is a quantitative law
for changes in supply and demand in economics, a bit like the inverse-
square law of gravity. This was doubly exciting because market impact is a
kind of force. From a trader’s point of view, market impact is like friction –
it bleeds away profits. But, from the point of view of a complex-systems
scientist seeking to understand how markets work, it is an interaction rule:
Trading changes prices via market impact, and changes in prices cause
trading, and so on. (This runs directly counter to the mainstream view,
which holds that price movements are strictly due to new information.)
Market impact relates to how quickly prices approach equilibrium, so it is
an important clue about what happens out of equilibrium, partially
answering one of my original questions to Professor Gurley.
26
When I left Prediction Company to rejoin SFI, one of my goals was to
understand the square-root law of market impact. I thought it would be
useful to look at the way trades are actually made. The most common way
to organize trading in modern markets is via what is called the limit-order
book. Market participants can place orders to buy or sell at a given price or
better. If these orders don’t result in immediate transactions, they are placed
in the limit-order book, which has a list of all the active quotes.
Most theories of financial markets are based on rational investors.
Inspired by some earlier work, I decided to do just the opposite and assume
that people put orders in the limit-order book and canceled them at random,
except for the fact that everyone keys off the current price.
27,28
What would
happen in that case? Would we recover the square-root law of market
impact? I teamed up with several SFI collaborators, including Marcus
Daniels, László Gillemot and Giulia Iori, and the effort was led by our
brilliant colleague Eric Smith.
29
The zero-intelligence assumption allowed
us to explain several interesting properties of limit-order books using
powerful mathematical methods from statistical physics.
30
This led to some
strong, empirically testable predictions. For example, an important property
of the market is the bid–ask spread, which is the difference between the
highest-priced buy order and the lowest-priced sell order in the limitorder
book for a particular stock at any point in time. We compared our model to
real data and were able to accurately predict the bid–ask spread based on
rates of order placement and cancellation.
31
There were, however, parts of our model that didn’t fit. We were
disappointed that we didn’t reproduce the square-root law of impact very
well. While the impact function had the right shape – the slope decreased
with order size – it changed depending on assumptions about the flow of
buy and sell orders into the market, and it often deviated substantially from
a square-root function.
And there was something else that we couldn’t explain: Even though the
agents in our model placed random orders, the resulting price movements
weren’t random. Rather than making a random walk, the price movements
were mean-reverting, meaning that, if the price went up at one point in
time, it was more likely to go down at the next point in time. Rather than
being equally likely to step left or right, the drunk tended to reverse himself
– if he stepped right, his next step was more likely to be to the left. This was
puzzling. We had expected random order-placement to yield an efficient
market, but instead it yielded a market inefficiency, that is, a predictable
pattern in the prices.
This problem was solved in an elegant way by fellow econophysicist
Jean-Philippe Bouchaud and his collaborators. Jean-Philippe is both a
strong mathematician and a brilliant statistical physicist, who also runs a
successful hedge fund. He realized that our model showed that order-flow
could not be random. If it were, it would create an arbitrage, meaning that a
clever trader could make money from the non-random movement in prices.
He and his collaborators demonstrated that the assumption of market
efficiency implies the square-root law of market impact.
32
Or, said
differently, imposing the compatibility of a purely random order-flow with
price unpredictability mechanically leads to a square-root impact law.
The upshot is that market efficiency leads to a universal quantitative law
for changes in supply and demand, much like the laws of physics. To
summarize: In order to be consistent with the operation of the limit-order
book, the shifts in prices caused by placing orders must increase as the
square root of order size – otherwise there is an inefficiency that can be
exploited by arbitrageurs.
In Chapter 6, we discussed the metaphor of exploring the wilderness of
bounded rationality. Mainstream economists like to enter the wilderness
through the front gate of rational expectations, while complexity
economists like to enter it through the back gate. Both seek to understand
the bounded rationality of real people that lies somewhere in between,
deeper in the wilderness. The story of how we explained the square-root
law of market impact is a good example of how it can be useful to first
enter through the back door, then use the front door.
Random order-placement is an example of a zero-intelligence model –
the exact opposite of rational expectations – an idea introduced by the
economists Dhananjay Gode and Shyam Sunder.
33
While zero-intelligence
models are a bit far-fetched – people are at least somewhat intelligent – they
can provide a very useful starting point. If agents have no intelligence, then
they are like atoms in physics. This is what allowed Eric Smith, who was
well-trained in the branch of physics called statistical mechanics, to
construct a nice theory for what goes on inside the limit-order book, which
led to simple formulas allowing us to make empirically testable predictions.
The term zero-intelligence makes people laugh: When a summary of our
paper was translated into Russian, it erroneously said that our main result
showed that ‘traders are complete idiots’. The Russians thought this was so
funny that it was posted on the leading Russian website for jokes, where it
got a huge number of hits. Nonetheless, by exploring the consequences of
agents with no intelligence whatsoever, we could better understand the
dynamical properties of limit-order books. We showed that this market
institution is not inert but, rather, has its own characteristic dynamics –
suggesting that a little intelligence needed to be added to make a model
whose predictions were consistent with reality. In this case, the assumption
of market efficiency, which is a consequence of rational expectations,
provided the extra element needed to get the right answer.
The slow and uncertain path to market efficiency
The opposite of market efficiency is market inefficiency, which translates
into a persistent profit-making opportunity. The argument for efficient
markets depends on the idea that buying drives prices up and selling drives
them down, causing market inefficiencies to quickly disappear. An investor
who processes information and weighs the merits of one stock against
another and trades accordingly is called an arbitrageur. If Apple stock is
underpriced, arbitrageurs will buy it and drive the price up until it’s
properly priced. According to received knowledge, their action should
quickly remove any future opportunities to make profits, making the market
efficient.
But as already noted, this argument is self-contradictory: Market
efficiency requires arbitrageurs who are attracted by profits. However, if
markets are perfectly efficient, then there are no profits to be made by
arbitrageurs, and therefore no reason for them to participate in the market.
This means markets cannot be perfectly efficient – perfect market efficiency
is inherently paradoxical.
The advocates of efficient markets are aware of this paradox.
34
They
respond that, although arbitrageurs make profits, these are small – big
enough to motivate the arbitrageurs but small enough that market efficiency
is still a good approximation. The real debate is about whether or not
deviations from market efficiency are important. Are they big enough to
make a difference?
The proponents of market efficiency also argue that clever investors
rapidly discover and exploit any market inefficiencies and return the market
to an efficient equilibrium. But, assuming this happens, how long does it
really take? Our research at Prediction Company produced one of the few
published results on this.
35
Our most successful strategy was something
called statistical arbitrage. We built the strategy using eight years of
historical data from the late 1980s and early 1990s. Then, when we
suddenly acquired data going back to 1975, we were able to test our
strategy on data over a twenty-three-year span. The results, which provide a
sobering contradiction of the mainstream view, were really surprising.
As already mentioned, we built our trading strategy by taking advantage
of many different types of market inefficiencies. We could tell when the
market was behaving inefficiently because prices or other quantities
behaved in a particular way, flagging that an inefficiency was present. We
called these informational flags signals. One of our best signals was
associated with what is called convergence trading. We would look for
similar stocks, one of which was overpriced and one underpriced, and bet
their prices would converge. Another signal used analyst estimates as its
inputs – if analysts upgraded their estimates for a stock, this signal
predicted it was likely to increase in price for a while, and vice versa.
Though we combined all the signals in our trading strategy, each of them
could also act as a stand-alone trading strategy. When we measured the
profits from these two signals over a long span of time, we saw that, though
they changed in different ways, they were both very persistent. While our
convergence trading signal made excellent profits throughout the 1990s, if
we had been able to execute it in 1975, our analysis showed that we would
have made phenomenal profits. Although the performance of this signal
steadily declined over the twenty-three-year period by roughly a factor of 3,
it was still going strong in 1998. Does this mean the glass was half full or
half empty? An advocate of efficient markets would emphasize that the
profits decreased with time, indicating that the market was becoming more
efficient. True, but it was certainly taking its time in doing so. What we
observed was not at all the rapid return to market efficiency postulated by
proponents of the efficient-markets hypothesis.
The behavior of the analyst-estimate-based signal was even more
striking. No one could have traded this signal until 1984, when a regulatory
change made the data it needed available in a timely manner. This signal’s
profits were initially very low, but they steadily grew over the next fifteen
years. This is exactly the opposite of what the theory of market efficiency
would predict! The fact that the market became increasingly inefficient over
time is a strong contradiction of the efficient-markets hypothesis.
36
How
could this be?
Why is the path to market efficiency so slow? There are several
reasons.
37
The first has to do with the challenge, in statistical analysis, of
distinguishing the signal (the information useful for prediction) from the
noise (the random background fluctuations that make it harder to detect the
signal). To create a quantitative trading strategy, investors must identify
weak signals in a noisy background. Even for good trading strategies, like
those we used at Prediction Company, the signal is about twenty times
weaker than the noise.
To create a reliable trading strategy we had to accumulate enough data to
be able to pick the signal out of the noise – more data improves the
accuracy of statistical tests. For signals like these, it takes around five years
of data to effectively distinguish the signal from the noise. When you factor
in the time it takes to detect the signal, develop and test the strategy, and
convince someone to provide capital, it can take decades for a trading
strategy to be discovered and reach maturity.
An advocate of market efficiency might say that the mere fact that the
signal-to-noise ratio for trading signals is so small supports market
efficiency. In a sense, I agree: It is challenging to beat the market. But huge
profits result from small inefficiencies, and as I will argue in Chapter 10,
this can lead to substantial market failures.
The second reason that market inefficiencies can be so persistent is
technological progress. At Prediction Company, we used computers to trade
1,000 stocks every day, without human intervention. In 1975, it would have
been impossible to implement our trading strategy with the computers and
data-management technology available at the time.
Finally, as the market becomes more efficient, it approaches perfect
efficiency more and more slowly. If the market ever managed to reach
perfect efficiency, all trading signals would disappear. The closer the market
comes to perfect efficiency, the weaker the signals become, which means
they take longer to detect, making the continued approach ever slower. In a
2009 paper called ‘The Reality Game’, Dmitriy Cherkashin, Seth Lloyd and
I showed that this is true, even in an idealized setting.
38
(To be more precise,
we showed that the inefficiency decreases in time as a power law, which
approaches zero much slower than an exponential.)
This explains why the approach to efficiency is so slow, but not why
inefficiency can sometimes increase over time. The simple explanation is
that the landscape is always changing. The participants in the stock market
change. The rules change. New financial instruments, such as mortgage-
backed securities, are introduced. Innovation takes time. New strategies
often render old strategies less effective, but they can also make them more
effective. Because market participants are only boundedly rational, the
capital invested in a given strategy may grow too large and create
instabilities. New inefficiencies continually emerge from the shifting
landscape; it can take decades to detect them, and as a result, the market
never settles into the efficient nirvana that Eugene Fama and others
imagine.
Even small inefficiencies can have a big effect on how well markets
function – small informational inefficiencies can cause large allocational
inefficiencies. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 10, to fully understand this
process, we must think about market dynamics in ecological and
evolutionary terms. But before we do so, let’s look at some other ways in
which market inefficiencies manifest themselves.
...
9.
The Self-Referential Market
October: This is one of the peculiarly dangerous months to speculate in
stocks. The others are July, January, September, April, November, May,
March, June, December, August, and February.
Mark Twain
1
The efficient-markets hypothesis also has implications about how prices
respond to outside news. Markets have endogenous dynamics – prices
change on their own, even without news affecting fundamental valuations.
Put differently, markets make their own news.
The 1987 stock market crash
1987 was an important year for complexity economics, for two reasons.
First, it was the year of the SFI meeting on ‘The Economy as an Evolving
Complex System’, mentioned in the introduction to Part I – a meeting that
eventually led to the creation of two influential agent-based models that
help us understand why prices behave as they do, and why market
inefficiencies can cause market malfunction.
The second stimulus to complexity economics occurred later that year,
on October 19, when the US stock market lost more than 20 per cent of its
value in a single day. A drop in prices of this magnitude is huge: The stock
market reflects the total worth of the biggest companies, whose value is a
substantial share of the US economy. If you believe the market is always
right, this means that almost a fifth of the value of the real economy
disappeared in one day. Markets can change quickly: The real economy
makes measurable changes every quarter or every year, whereas financial
markets can change significantly in a day. The market normally changes by
less than 1 per cent on any given day, so this event was twenty times bigger
than normal.
What caused such a precipitous drop? For the fundamental value of the
real economy to drop this much in one day, something really big would
need to happen, such as the discovery that Earth might collide with an
asteroid or that we were on the brink of nuclear war. But there was no real
news that day. How could such a significant financial event come out of
nowhere?
Before the 1987 crash, the biggest overall drop in the stock market
occurred on October 28–29, 1929, when the market lost 25 per cent in two
days. The Great Depression that followed profoundly affected the entire
world and lasted for more than a decade, driving unemployment in the US
to 25 per cent at its peak. The 1987 crash immediately caused everyone to
worry that another Great Depression was on its way, provoking mass
anxiety. But, nine months later, the stock market was back where it had
been, and there were few long-term economic consequences.
While debates about the causes of the 1987 crash continue, most experts
believe that automatic trading by computers, called program trading,
played an important role.
2
The following explanation is a bit technical, but
it illustrates how the act of exploiting a small informational inefficiency can
cause a huge allocational inefficiency. In this case the problem was the
unstable feedback effects caused by the interaction of two specialized
trading strategies.
3
In the years leading up to the crash a new strategy called portfolio
insurance was introduced, which was designed to insulate investors against
a market crash. When the market goes into freefall, it can be hard to sell
individual stocks at reasonable prices, whereas it is much easier to sell an
S&P futures contract. (The S&P index consists of a basket of 500 large
companies, and an S&P-index-futures contract allows the owner to buy the
underlying stocks in the index at a given point in the future at a given
price.) With portfolio insurance, when the market starts to fall, a computer
automatically sells S&P futures on behalf of the owners of the insurance.
The goal of the insurance is to raise cash and protect investors against
losses due to sudden declines in the prices of the stocks in their portfolios.
The other trading strategy that caused problems, called index arbitrage,
looks for discrepancies between the index’s underlying stocks and the index
futures. If the underlying stocks in the index are overvalued relative to the
index-futures price, index arbitrageurs sell those stocks. When the stocks in
the index eventually once again match the index, they buy the stocks back
and make a profit.
The interaction of these two strategies caused an unintended side-effect:
During the crash, the use of portfolio insurance triggered an automatic
response, creating a feedback loop that couldn’t be stopped, making the
problem it was trying to protect investors against much worse. When the
market dropped, the computers sold S&P index futures. The resulting
market impact pushed the price of the S&P futures index down. Then index
arbitrage kicked in. The market impact from this caused the prices of the
stocks to drop even further. The combination of portfolio insurance and
index arbitrage meant that the more that prices dropped, the more shares
were automatically sold, which meant that prices dropped even more, and
so on, throwing the market into a death spiral. Combined with the fact that
investors were already nervous that the market was overvalued, this caused
an enormous crash, which was only stopped when prices got so low that
there were huge bargains. The brave souls who stepped in made enormous
profits.
Thus we see how the unanticipated interaction between an innovation
that was designed to reduce risk and a profit-making strategy that normally
makes the market more efficient resulted in a gigantic departure from
market efficiency: What probably should have been a small downward
correction in prices turned into Armageddon.
4
Even the most sophisticated
investors aren’t fully rational, and almost no one anticipated this outcome.
The crash offered dramatic evidence that markets can be far from efficient,
and it provided a great example of systemic risk – in this case, an
unanticipated (negative) emergent property of a market caused by a poorly
understood financial innovation.
Even though the economy recovered quickly, the 1987 crash
permanently changed views about market efficiency. Before the crash, most
financial economists were, as noted, strong believers in the theory of
efficient markets. But the crash forced a careful reexamination of views
about markets and their relationship to the real economy, and exposed the
flaws of logic based on the idea that investors are rational. If investors had
been perfectly rational, they would have foreseen the dangers of portfolio
insurance and behaved very differently. Market failures occur precisely
because investors are not rational. Despite this, rational-expectations
equilibrium continues to be the dominant mainstream framework for
understanding markets. In contrast, in Chapters 10 and 11 we’ll see how
complexity economics offers a better framework for understanding why
markets fail.
The market makes its own news
The October 1987 crash was just one remarkable event in a month full of
them: Five of the ten largest changes in the US stock market between World
War II and 1989 occurred around this time – an example of clustered
volatility. Volatility refers to the amplitude with which prices vary,
regardless of whether the movements are up or down. Clustered refers to
the fact that large market moves tend to be bunched together. Most of the
time, if the market is hot it’s likely to remain hot, and if it’s cool it’s likely
to remain cool.
An example is shown in Figure 10, which shows the price returns for the
S&P index on successive days from 1929 to 2023. The return is just a name
for the relative change in price – if the price increases from 100 to 105, then
the return is 5 per cent. The size of the vertical line is the return on a given
day. The large moves are clustered together.
Figure 10. The clustered volatility of price movements. The daily returns of the S&P index measured
in per cent from 1929–2023.
Without clustered volatility, large market movements like the 1987 crash
would be impossible. Under Louis Bachelier’s random-walk theory, if the
step sizes of the drunk are all the same and he takes many steps, the
distribution of possible distances he can be from the tavern after a given
number of steps follows a bell curve – that is, a normal distribution. If the
drunk takes n steps, each of size 1, then he can potentially be found a
distance n away from the tavern, but his typical distance away is only the
square root of n. For example, if n = 10,000, his typical distance away is
100 steps. Because it’s extremely unlikely that all his steps are in the same
direction, finding him at a distance 10,000 steps away from the tavern is so
rare that for all practical purposes it never happens. Similarly, if daily stock
returns followed a normal distribution with a typical size of 1 per cent, a
movement of 20 per cent would be essentially impossible.
Because of clustered volatility, a more accurate model of stock prices has
to take into account the drunk’s changing moods. When he’s feeling
energetic, he takes large, rapid steps; when he’s lethargic, he takes slow,
small steps.
5
If he’s in a particularly energetic mood, he may suddenly move
a long way from the tavern. The distribution describing the size of his steps
in markets has fat tails, meaning that large moves are far more common
than they are for the thin-tailed, normal distribution. While really large
movements like the 1987 crash are rare, they do happen a few times a
century.
According to models based on rational-expectations equilibrium, any
variation in the size of price returns must be due to new information, so
large market moves should correspond to important new information. If
stock-price movements show clustered volatility, this must be due to the
clustered volatility of this new information. But, as we have already seen,
there was no discernible news-related cause for the mammoth 1987 crash.
To test whether changes in stock prices are driven by news, the well-
respected economists David Cutler, James Poterba and Larry Summers
published a paper in 1989 entitled ‘What Moves Stock Prices?’
6
Summers,
who went on to become President of Harvard and Secretary of the Treasury
under Clinton, had attended the 1987 ‘Economy as an Evolving Complex
System’ meeting at SFI. I’ve always wondered whether that conference had
any influence on his 1989 paper. Summers has a remarkable pedigree as an
economist, being the double nephew of two of the most famous economists
who ever lived, Kenneth Arrow on his mother’s side and Paul Samuelson
on his father’s.
Cutler, Poterba and Summers began by finding the 100 largest daily
fluctuations in the S&P 500 index between 1946 and 1987. They then
looked at the New York Times on the day after each move and recorded a
summary of the paper’s explanation for the price change. The authors made
a subjective judgment as to whether these explanations could plausibly be
considered ‘real news’ – or at least real enough to have triggered a sizable
change in stock price. The New York Times’s explanations for the dozen
largest daily price moves are shown in Figure 11.
The explanations for the 20 per cent drop on October 19, 1987, were
‘worry over dollar decline and rate deficit’ and ‘fear of US not supporting
dollar’. Cutler, Poterba and Summers didn’t classify this as news, and I
agree. ‘Worry’ and ‘fear’ are subjective statements about the emotional state
of the market that have no specific reference to external events. Markets are
a place where worry and fear are appropriate and normal emotions. If your
investment advisor is not worried about losing your money, you should fire
her.
Figure 11. Does news explain clustered volatility? The 12 largest moves in the S&P index from 1946
to 1987. The first column ranks the moves, the second gives the date, the third the size of the move,
and the fourth a summary of the New York Times explanation. Moves that Cutler, Poterba, and
Summers rated as ‘real news’ are shown in grey.
The first example of real news among their list is the fifth-largest price
movement, on May 28, 1962; the news that day was ‘Kennedy forces
rollback of steel-price hike’. This is something that happened outside the
market which should have affected investor decisions. Other examples of
significant news items are ‘Eisenhower suffers heart attack’ and ‘outbreak
of Korean War’. Of the dozen largest price fluctuations, only four were
attributed to real news events, a ratio that they found also roughly applied to
the largest 100 moves.
Their paper offers strong evidence that the market frequently makes its
own news – that is, it often operates according to its own internal dynamics
rather than responding to external events. The clustered volatility of the
market is also evidence of this phenomenon: The three largest moves
between 1946 and 1987, and five of the twelve largest moves during those
years, all occurred during October 1987. The market was extremely volatile
that month, but none of the fluctuations were driven by external news. You
might also notice that nine of the twelve biggest movements were negative.
Prices go down faster than they go up!
Some of the explanations for these biggest fluctuations stand out. The
reason given by the New York Times for the fourth largest move, on
September 3, 1946, was ‘no basic reason for the assault on prices’. I doubt
that explanation will ever appear in the New York Times again, even if it’s
true; the press always gives a reason, whether or not it’s justified. Perhaps
journalists were more honest in the old days? Another good explanation was
‘investors looking for quality stocks’. Did they mean to imply that on other
days investors were looking for inferior stocks?
Cutler, Poterba and Summers’s conclusions have since been further
substantiated.
7
Subsequent studies refute the efficient-markets hypothesis
(at least in terms of allocational efficiency). While news events can
influence stock prices, the majority of price movements have little to do
with current affairs. Markets appear to have their own internal dynamics.
Can we measure financial-market efficiency in quantitative terms? This
question was put to a panel of experts at a three-day conference that John G.
and I organized at SFI in May of 2000, called ‘Beyond Equilibrium and
Efficiency’. We invited a group of leading financial economists – including
leading behavioral economists, such as Robert Shiller and Richard Thaler –
along with leading econophysicists and complexity economists. The
mainstream economists spoke on the first day, the complexity economists
and econophysicists spoke on the second day, and the third day was for
discussions. This proved to be a naïve way to organize the conference:
Almost all the mainstream financial economists skipped the second day and
went sightseeing. As a result, the discussion on the third day was not very
enlightening.
Nonetheless, we did have a lively formal debate about market efficiency
on the evening of the conference dinner. There were two teams, with three
people arguing in favor of market efficiency and three arguing against. The
latter team consisted of Shiller, Sanford (Sandy) Grossman and me. As
measured by the crowd reaction among the mainstream figures, we lost the
debate. It wasn’t even close. This was in part because my two teammates
largely agreed with the other side. Somehow, during the discussion, a
consensus emerged among the mainstream economists that ‘markets are
about 97 per cent efficient’. As they would freely admit, we don’t have a
good way to measure deviations from efficiency in quantitative terms.
Looking back, the debate was confused by the fact that we weren’t clear
about what this really meant.
In hindsight, I would answer that the efficiency of the market depends on
which kind of efficiency you are talking about. It is indeed hard to beat the
market. The fact that the signal-to-noise ratio of strategies like Prediction
Company’s are about 1:20 indicates that markets are close to informational
efficiency. But the Cutler, Poterba and Summers result indicates that only
about a third of daily market movements occur in response to meaningful
external events. This suggests that, from an allocative point of view, the
market is about 33 per cent efficient. My favorite summary of this
dichotomy is due to Fischer Black, one of the inventors of options pricing.
In a paper titled simply ‘Noise’, he made a tongue-in-cheek statement that I
will paraphrase as, ‘I believe in efficient markets: prices are within a factor
of two of fundamental values 90 per cent of the time.’
8
By this he meant
that, yes, prices loosely reflect fundamental values, but they often fail to do
so very well. This was borne out in a 1981 paper by Robert Shiller, who
compared the Dow Jones index to the valuation of the companies in the
index based on their dividends.
9
The correct way to compute fundamental
values is debated, but Shiller’s study suggests that prices make large swings
from fundamental values, indicating that markets are on average less than
50 per cent efficient. (Which is why I was particularly disappointed when
he agreed with the 97 per cent argument.)
This is not just an esoteric debate. As we will see in the next chapter, the
fact that markets can stray far from fundamental prices on their own means
they can malfunction, misguiding the economy. As the crisis of 2008
showed, this can have serious consequences, like causing unemployment to
surge. Acknowledging that markets are inefficient could lead us to theories
that would help us understand what causes malfunctions so that we can
better guide our economy.
While the Cutler, Poterba and Summers paper is widely cited, its main
lesson seems not to have been fully absorbed by mainstream economists. To
my knowledge, no extant equilibrium model offers a reasonable explanation
for clustered volatility that is consistent with their results. The only models
that plausibly explain it – those we are about to discuss – allow the market
to be out of equilibrium.
Complexity economics captures the moods of markets
The Cutler, Poterba and Summers study suggests that it is ‘as if’ the market
has moods. What causes them? Several of the early complexity-economics
models explain this ‘moodiness’.
Brian Arthur and John Holland were among those in attendance at the
1987 SFI meeting. Though never really part of the mainstream, Arthur was
an economist at Stanford at the time. Holland was a computer scientist and
one of the founding figures of complex-systems science and machine
learning, whom I had come to know well after inviting him to visit Los
Alamos in 1982. After the 1987 meeting, the two of them teamed up with
Blake LeBaron, an economist who was then a graduate student of José
Scheinkman and now teaches at Brandeis University, and the physicist
Richard Palmer. These four reconvened at SFI in subsequent years and
formed an interdisciplinary research team seeking ways to explain clustered
volatility in financial markets. They built an agent-based model for
financial markets now called the Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model.
10
Their goal was to understand what causes the market to stray from
equilibrium and make its own news. To do this, they built a computer
simulation of a market with heterogeneous agents using diverse investment
strategies.
The model’s agents were simulated traders, who were offered a choice
between investing in a stock or a bond. The stock paid dividends of variable
size, while the bond paid a steady (but lower) interest rate. Each simulated
trader was a boundedly rational agent with an ‘artificial brain’ based on a
machine-learning algorithm, invented by John Holland, called a classifier
system.
11
Their artificial brains allowed them to form their own expectations
and make decisions based on past experience. The agents could choose their
source of information. They could take account of the recent behavior of
prices, and base their decisions on these and other technical indicators, or
they could base their decisions on fundamentals, such as dividend
payments, or they could do both. Unlike a real market, which is full of
unknowns, in the Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market the researchers were like
gods: They knew everything about their artificial world because they had
created it themselves. They knew the statistical process by which the stock
paid dividends. This allowed them to experiment with imbuing all the
simulated traders with perfect rationality by overriding the classifier system
and replacing it with expectations that were objectively correct within their
artificial world. When they did this, as expected, the market obeyed the
rational-expectations equilibrium: The stock price stayed near the correct
valuation based on its dividend stream and fluctuated only when new
information arrived. In this experiment, the market was perfectly efficient
and everything happened just as rational expectations predicts it should.
However, when the agents in the model lost their divine guidance and
became boundedly rational, forming their own views with the classifier
system, the market’s behavior became more realistic. In this case, current
and future prices remained largely uncorrelated, as they are in the real
world (and as predicted by rational expectations). However, the volatility of
prices was much higher than predicted by rational expectations (as it is in
the real world). Furthermore, the volatility was clustered – quiet periods
were interspersed with bursts of noisy behavior, as happens in a real market.
The market appeared to be making its own news, just as Cutler, Poterba and
Summers’s study says the real market does. The clustered volatility of the
Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model was an emergent property,
generated by the interactions of the market with itself.
To figure out what caused the clustered volatility, the researchers could
look inside the brains of their artificial traders. They found that the artificial
traders spontaneously formed an ecosystem of specialists. Some of them
became value investors, focusing their attention on understanding the
dividend stream. Others became technical traders, dedicated to
understanding patterns in prices. Many of these technical traders were trend
followers, who bought the stock whenever its price started to trend upward
and sold it when it trended downward. The relative proportions of value
investors and technical traders fluctuated: When the trend followers became
active, the market was volatile; when they were inactive, it was quieter.
Individual artificial traders sometimes switched between these two
strategies, but most of them chose a strategy and stuck with it.
The Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market was a complicated model,
requiring serious software effort to reproduce. In parallel research,
published around the same time, William ‘Buz’ Brock of the University of
Wisconsin and the Dutch mathematician/economist Cars Hommes found
similar results using a much simpler model.
12
Their model’s set-up was
similar to that of the Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model; the agents
chose between a stock and a bond. But in the Brock-Hommes model, agents
were given an explicit choice between a value-investor rule and a few
simple technical trading rules. They could monitor the success of each rule
and switch to the ones that recently performed best. At different times,
different rules tended to dominate. Brock and Hommes observed clustered
volatility and fat tails in price returns, just as in the Santa Fe Artificial Stock
Market model.
13
Since these models came out, many other agent-based
models have explored similar ideas and confirmed the same basic results.
The best models achieve a good quantitative match to real data, generating
uncorrelated directional price movements, clustered volatility and price-
movement distributions that closely match real markets.
The underlying explanation of this behavior is essentially ecological.
During calm periods, the fundamentalists dominate. However, if for some
reason prices happen to move in the same direction several times, trend
followers start to do well, more of the agents are attracted to trend
following and their influence on the market grows. This generates a positive
feedback loop, launching a boom in which prices exceed fundamental
values, which causes the value investors to sell. When the trend followers
eventually run out of new capital, the upward trend falters, and, when prices
drop, the trend followers start selling too, and prices converge toward
fundamental values again.
These models provide a plausible explanation for the lack of
correspondence between price movements and news. In Chapter 11, we will
explore another family of agent-based models – those that study the
implications of the use of credit, which also leads to clustered volatility.
Both families of models assume bounded rationality and allow deviations
from equilibrium.
There are two reasons that agent-based models for markets haven’t
received much attention from mainstream economics. The first is that, like
any agent-based model, they run counter to the central tenets described in
Chapter 5. Another, better reason is the lack of useful quantitative
predictions. These models provide an explanation for why clustered
volatility occurs, and they do a good job of matching the statistical
properties of real markets, but so far they have no useful practical
applications.
This is changing: For example, it was recently shown that models of this
type can provide better predictions of clustered volatility than standard
models.
14
They are also beginning to be used by banks to understand and
even predict systemic market failures, and I am hearing more and more
rumors that some hedge funds are using them. We’ll discuss these practical
developments at the end of Chapter 11, but, before we do so, it’s worth
further developing the conceptual framework provided by my theory of
market ecology, which helps explain how and why markets deviate from
efficiency, and how this can cause them to malfunction.
...
10.
Ecology and Evolution in Finance
My journey from market anthropologist to market ecologist
When Prediction Company began, in 1991, our expertise was purely in
making predictions based on historical data. We needed funding and none
of us knew anything about financial markets, so we decided to look for a
partner with the capital and financial expertise we lacked. Someone needed
to go to Wall Street, and I was the chosen delegate. Since I had never owned
a suit, everyone felt that the company should buy one for me, but in the end
I paid for it myself. (After describing my mission to the fussy sales assistant
in the best men’s shop in Santa Fe, he spent hours making sure I had exactly
the right cut, the right tie and the right kind of shirts, shoes and socks.) I
began making trips from Santa Fe to New York, Chicago and San
Francisco, searching for a partner. In one year, I called on at least twenty
Wall Street firms, including Kidder-Peabody, Salomon Brothers, Goldman
Sachs, Renaissance, D. E. Shaw, Tudor Investment, Citibank, Bank of
America, and O’Connor and Associates. I was struck by how different these
firms were from one another – a difference reflected in their trading
strategies, their vocabulary and even the way they dressed and talked.
I felt like an anthropologist studying another culture. In trying to learn
their jargon and worldviews, I quickly realized that they belonged not to a
single tribe but to different tribes within a larger community. Even in the
same firm, there were sometimes distinct subcultures: At Bank of America,
on one floor everyone told me that fundamentals were all that mattered,
while on the floor below everyone said fundamentals were useless and
technical trading signals were the only thing worth paying attention to. I
encountered many different strategies for making money. To my surprise,
most traders were happy to talk about them, at least at a high level.
I came to regard finance practitioners as skilled specialists with detailed
domain knowledge, who were nonetheless far from rational in the way
economists use this term. A perfectly rational agent would be able to
exercise all possible strategies at once, whereas real traders are boundedly
rational, typically pursuing a single strategy, or a few at most. Standard
theoretical concepts like equilibrium and efficiency seemed of little use for
understanding what traders did, why they did it and how this affected
markets.
I turned instead to biology. The fact that investors are specialists makes
ecology the natural framework. Ecology provides a useful metaphor for
understanding specialized behavior in the economy in general, but for
financial markets I realized that it could be made mathematically precise
and used to explain many of the phenomena I observed. This provides a
deeper, more realistic understanding of how markets work and why they
sometimes don’t work. While I think ecology is a useful explanatory
principle for all of economics, financial markets provide a forum where it is
easy to make the ideas crisp and quantitative.
Let’s start with the big picture. To understand why ecosystems are the
way they are, and how they change through time, requires a theory of
evolution. The financial ecosystem satisfies the essential elements of the
theory of evolution, which Darwin called ‘descent with variation and
selection’. Here, descent means continuity across generations, variation
means offspring differ in some ways from their parents, and selection
means that only successful individuals survive and reproduce. Darwin and
Wallace showed that these three elements explain how new species emerge
and, over time, change the biosphere.
The same three essential elements characterize the agents and their
strategies in the financial system. There is descent because investors
develop their strategies by inheriting knowledge from their mentors, as well
as learning from their own prior experience. There is variation because
investors tinker with their strategies to improve them. There is selection
because strategies compete for profits; successful strategies accumulate
wealth and unsuccessful strategies go extinct.
Of course, there are important differences in the way organisms and
financial strategies evolve. Biological organisms interact by breeding,
eating one another, and reshaping their common environment, whereas
trading strategies interact via the market, reshaping patterns in the way
prices are formed as they eliminate and create market inefficiencies. The
distinctions among trading strategies are fuzzier than those among
biological species. Unlike biological organisms, which reproduce following
the fixed rules of biochemistry, financial strategies have no genetic code
and instead propagate via cultural transmission. People design strategies, so
their continual variation isn’t random; this accelerates the pace of evolution.
Selection in biology affects the population size of each species, whereas in
finance it affects the capital invested in each strategy, which I will call its
wealth.
Whether or not competition plays a fundamentally different role in
markets than it does in biology is a subject of debate. Competition is a core
assumption in financial economics, but mainstream economists reach
different conclusions about its consequences than biologists do. Economists
like Milton Friedman, who was Eugene Fama’s thesis advisor, used it to
shore up the efficient-markets hypothesis, arguing that competition should
quickly eliminate market inefficiencies. In contrast, Darwin and Wallace
used competition to explain why organisms specialize and how this creates
new species. Mainstream economists argue that competition leads to a state
of rest, whereas evolutionary biologists see it as the driver of perpetual
change.
Why did economists and biologists arrive at opposite views about the
role of competition? The key difference lies in their assumptions about the
reasoning power of agents. As noted, when Fama and Friedman postulated
efficient markets they also postulated rational agents – perfect problem-
solvers. If such rational agents really existed, the market would always be
calm and stable – 100 per cent efficient. But biological organisms are
agents who follow hardwired strategies that evolve through time to improve
their reproductive rates, in an environment that is perpetually subject to
change from both external and internal influences. Trees or bacteria behave
in a hardwired manner, whereas rational agents can solve any problem and
alter their strategies instantaneously.
People can indeed think, but their finite cognitive capacity places limits
on their successful strategizing. As discussed in Chapter 6, perfect
rationality provides a useful model for understanding human behavior when
the problems are sufficiently simple – options pricing or tic-tac-toe are
examples. But to explain market malfunctions, which generally occur in
complicated and unforeseen situations, specialization and bounded
rationality matter, and the basic principles of evolution and ecology provide
a better starting point than the efficient-markets hypothesis.
The proliferation of computerized trading strategies, like ours at
Prediction Company, underscores the bounded rationality of agents in the
market. While our strategies were constructed through a careful and
scientific search carried out by intelligent people, the final code that was
implemented to trade our strategies was very simple. It consisted of classic
stimulus/response instructions, of the form ‘If conditions A, B and C are
met, then buy (or sell) the following assets.’ Ants are far more intelligent
than our code was. It’s difficult to estimate precisely how much stock
trading is now done by computers, but most estimates put it well in excess
of 50 per cent. Computerized trading is far from rational, but it’s used in
many domains because it’s more successful than the trading done by human
beings, not to mention cheaper and quicker. If we were fully rational, we
would have foreseen the problems that program trading or mortgage-backed
securities would cause.
1
The theory of market ecology
My musings about market anthropology and our experience measuring
market impact led me to a theory of market ecology.
2
In my spare time at
Prediction Company I began scribbling and solving equations, which
eventually led to a paper titled ‘Market Force, Ecology and Evolution’,
which I finished and posted online in 1998. In a nutshell, the basic ideas are
that:
• Financial traders are boundedly rational, so they use specialized
strategies. Their strategies can be sorted into groups, like species in
biology, even if the boundary between groups can be fuzzy.
• Financial strategies feed off inefficiencies and interact through prices.
Trading has market impact, which changes prices and affects the
profits of each strategy.
• As a result, the wealth of each strategy evolves through time. As the
wealth invested in a strategy becomes larger, it has a bigger effect on
the market.
• This causes market inefficiencies to evolve through time. While
markets may tend toward an efficient state, the path there is bumpy, the
journey is slow and they never really reach their destination.
• If a destabilizing strategy becomes too dominant, it can unsettle the
market and cause it to malfunction. To understand why markets
malfunction we need to classify financial strategies, understand how
they affect the market and track their evolution through time.
Let’s now explore this in more depth.
The diverse anthropology of traders reflects the diversity of their
specialized strategies, which have names like trend following, technical
trading, value investing, index arbitrage, market making, derivative trading
and so on. Small firms typically only do one of these; big firms may do
many, but with an aggregation of specialized groups, who may have little
interaction with each other.
To a trader, the word inefficiency is just a fancy name for a pattern in
prices that can be exploited to make profits. The ultimate origin of
inefficiencies is economic activity, such as raising capital and offloading
risks, but, just as in biological ecosystems, strategies also exploit the
inefficiencies created by other strategies. Financial strategies take
advantage of these inefficiencies, but, in doing so, alter the market and
create new inefficiencies, and in some cases cause market malfunctions.
For example, a feature of economic activity that creates inefficiencies is
its persistence. Successful companies have momentum, meaning if they are
growing rapidly they are likely to continue growing rapidly, at least for a
while. This makes price changes persistent, creating a niche for trend-
following strategies, which buy when markets are rising and sell when
markets are falling. This can be profitable, but it can also drive prices away
from fundamental values. Trend strategies are destabilizing, so much so that
if there are only trend strategies in the market, prices blow up (head for
infinity).
3
Trend strategies can play a major role in fueling bubbles, such as
the dot-com bubble which peaked in early 2000. Stock prices in the Nasdaq
index went from under 1,000 in 1995 to a peak of 5,048 on March 10, 2000,
and then dropped to 1,114 on October 9, 2002. The huge swings in stock
market value had important economic consequences: At the peak of the
bubble, it was easy to get almost any new, or not-so-new, internet-related
idea funded. After the bubble popped, it became difficult to get even really
good ideas funded, and the pensions of many people who had the
misfortune to invest in tech stocks just before the bubble popped were
demolished. This is a great example of how imbalances in the market
ecology – in this case overpopulation of destabilizing strategies – can make
markets malfunction.
Eugene Fama initially resisted the idea that trend following could be
profitable, because it seemed irrational, but he and his collaborator Kenneth
French eventually looked at the data and realized that it could be
surprisingly profitable.
4
This contradicted efficient-markets theory, but they
fixed this by moving the goalposts, incorporating such profits into their
benchmark for efficiency instead of calling them excess profits.
Strategies affect each other’s profits via their market impact on prices,
and thinking in ecological terms can help understand their interaction. For
example, trend strategies can range from short-term strategies that buy
when prices go up for a short period of time (say a week) to those that only
react after much longer periods of time (say a year). Suppose the market
happens to have a good week, for whatever reason. As a result, the short-
term trend strategies buy. This drives prices up further, causing slightly
longer-term trend strategies to buy, causing prices to go up more, and so on,
until finally after a year the price has risen substantially and all the trend
followers have bought the asset. The price will eventually drop, generating
a wave of selling as all the trend followers unwind their positions.
This self-fulfilling dynamic is good for the short-term trend strategies
but bad for long-term trend strategies (whose profits are diminished by the
presence of the short-term strategies). To put this in ecological terms, short-
term strategies have a predator–prey relationship with long-term strategies.
An ecological analog might be rabbits and foxes: An increase in the rabbit
population causes the fox population to grow, and an increase in the fox
population causes the number of rabbits to drop. Similarly, an increase in
the wealth of long-term trend followers causes the returns of short-term
trend followers to grow, but an increase in the wealth of short-term trend
followers causes the returns of long-term trend followers to drop.
The possible relationships between trading strategies can be classified
using biological nomenclature, by applying ‘what-if’ experiments. What if
the wealth of strategy A increases? How does that affect the returns of
strategy B? Similarly, if the wealth of strategy B increases, how does this
affect the returns of strategy A? If both of their returns decrease when the
wealth of the other strategy increases, then they have a competitive
relationship. If A’s returns go up when B’s wealth goes up, but B’s returns
go down when A’s wealth goes up, then they have a predator–prey
relationship, in which A is the predator and B is the prey. If both of their
returns increase when the other’s wealth goes up, then they have a
mutualistic relationship. An important case is when A = B. The wealth of a
strategy strongly affects its own returns as well: The laws of supply and
demand imply that, absent market manipulation, the returns of a strategy
will decrease as its wealth increases, so strategies automatically compete
with themselves.
5
Sometimes two strategies simply don’t interact, so that a
change in the wealth of strategy A has no effect on the returns of strategy B.
But because trading affects prices, and almost all strategies are price-
dependent, many if not most strategies interact.
In my market-ecology paper, these ideas allowed me to derive a set of
equations describing how the wealth of strategies changes based on their
ecological interactions. My equations are similar to the most famous
equations in ecology – the Lotka-Volterra equations, named in honor of the
American mathematician Alfred J. Lotka and the Italian mathematician Vito
Volterra, who first wrote them down in the early twentieth century.
6
The
Lotka-Volterra equations showed that predator–prey systems could behave
in a surprising way. Independently, they showed that under certain
circumstances the populations of rabbits and foxes could oscillate
indefinitely. The equations are only an approximation – nothing ever
happens truly indefinitely – but there are many examples in real ecosystems
where populations of predators and prey markedly fluctuate over long
periods of time, without any obvious external stimulus. (In fact, more
realistic generalizations of the Lotka-Volterra equations often display
chaotic oscillations.)
My equations are a general version of the Lotka-Volterra equations, but
with the population of species replaced by the wealth of strategies. As in
their equations, there are some situations where the wealth of all the
strategies settles down to a constant value, approaching a fixed-point
attractor, and other situations where they oscillate indefinitely. So, for
example, the population of trend followers may go up while the population
of value investors goes down, and then the opposite happens. So far we lack
data to properly fit these equations to financial markets, and my derivation
relies on approximations that may not always be valid. At this point, it
remains to be seen whether sustained oscillations ever occur in practice, but
the theory makes the correspondence to biological populations tangible.
I submitted ‘Market Force, Ecology and Evolution’ to one of the more
avant-garde economics journals, but the referees didn’t really understand it
and, in the end, they wanted to publish only the first half, dropping the
discussion of evolution and much of the ecology. The resulting published
paper, which was co-authored with my research assistant Shareen Joshi,
gave only part of the story.
7
I despaired of ever publishing the full paper
until several years later I happened to meet Giovanni Dosi, a radical Italian
economist who has developed and promoted evolutionary ideas in
economics, and who is the head of one of the world’s largest complexity-
economics groups, based in Pisa, Italy.
8
Despite working well outside of
mainstream economics, Giovanni was then editor-in-chief of the Oxford
journal Industrial and Corporate Change; he liked my paper and published
it there. It caught the attention of Andrew Lo of MIT, a prominent financial
economist and an original thinker who manages to be a member of the
mainstream while also advocating ideas that are off the beaten path. Like
me, he felt that economics could benefit from borrowing more ideas from
biology, and our discussions resulted in a joint paper called ‘Frontiers of
Finance: Evolution and Efficient Markets’, published in 1999 in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
9
Andrew went on to
develop what he calls the adaptive-markets hypothesis, which embraces
market ecology and evolution but also introduces other interesting ideas
from biology, artificial intelligence and the cognitive neurosciences.
10
While ‘Market Force, Ecology and Evolution’ attracted interest from
econophysicists, complexity economists and a few open-minded
mainstream economists like Andy, it was otherwise ignored. I realized that
the only way to make mainstream economists pay attention to theories that
run counter to the accepted canon is by showing that they lead to superior
empirical predictions – and, even then, the evidence needs to be so
overwhelming that it cannot be ignored.
Can market ecology predict market malfunction?
In order to study market ecosystems empirically, I needed access to special
data. There is plenty of data available about market transactions, but it lacks
counterparty identifiers – a record of who transacted with whom. Without
counterparty identifiers, I was like an ecologist whose data say ‘some
animal ate another animal’, without naming the species involved. Most
regulators have this kind of data, but, despite several attempts, I never
managed to get any of them to share it with me. Without it, I couldn’t see
how to empirically show that the underlying ideas of market ecology were
useful. Since I couldn’t find the data I needed, I suspended my research on
market ecology.
Then, twenty years later, in 2018, I attended a conference organized by
Andy Lo and Simon Levin on applications of concepts from biology to
economics.
11
Simon is a professor of ecology at Princeton, and a fellow
member of SFI’s external faculty, who has collaborated with Andy on some
of his ideas about adaptive markets. The meeting brought together a diverse
group of interdisciplinary thinkers, including economists who thought in
biological terms and biologists who were interested in economics. This
rekindled my interest, spurring me to do some new work – an opportunity
that fortunately coincided with the interests of my Dutch graduate student,
Maarten Scholl. Maarten had been admitted into the Computer Science
Department at Oxford, and he was looking for a project. I realized that my
earlier paper had left many theoretical questions unanswered, so Maarten
and I began working on market ecology, along with his other thesis advisor,
Ani Calinescu.
Maarten built a ‘laboratory’ consisting of a computer simulation of an
idealized stock market. The set-up was similar to the Santa Fe Artificial
Stock Market, but it was simpler, and we had a different goal. Our purpose
was not to make a realistic simulation of a market but rather to use the
theoretical framework of ecology to better understand how deviations from
market efficiency evolve through time, in a transparent setting where we
could see exactly what caused what. In our market, there was a single stock
paying a randomly varying dividend and a bond paying a fixed interest rate.
There were three trading strategies – a value investor, a trend follower, and
a ‘noise trader’ who represented a nonprofessional investor making mostly
random decisions. Each of the strategies was initially endowed with wealth,
consisting of shares of the stock and the bond; as they traded them through
time, their wealth evolved in proportion to their profits and losses. While
the wealths of the three strategies tended to adjust so that the market
became somewhat more efficient, it did so slowly and with considerable
uncertainty. Even when we waited for simulated centuries, there were still
substantial fluctuations in the wealths of the strategies, corresponding to
deviations from perfect efficiency.
We used our laboratory to show explicitly how it is possible to apply
concepts from ecology to understand markets.
12
We classified the pairwise
relationships between the strategies as competitive, predator–prey and
mutualistic, and showed how these relationships could change with the
changing wealth of the strategies.
13
As expected, the trend follower and the
value investor tended to prey on the noise trader, but this was not always
true, and we even observed mutualistic relationships.
14
We mapped out the
‘food web’ of our financial system, demonstrating how the strategies utilize
inefficiencies to maintain their wealth, and how they create inefficiencies
that support one another.
We wanted to demonstrate how the theory of market ecology can predict
market malfunctions. By malfunctions, we meant deviations of the prices of
assets from their true value or volatility of prices in excess of what should
occur based on external information (as discussed in Chapter 9). Because
trend-following strategies are inherently destabilizing, we expected that
when that strategy has more wealth than the other two, we would see larger
mispricings and more volatility. This intuition was borne out: The changes
in the wealth of the strategies were highly predictive of both mispricings
and volatility.
But is there solid, empirical evidence that market ecology is useful?
Over the last two years, with a little help from Maarten, my persistent and
creative French mathematics student Aymeric Vie has developed an
empirically-grounded simulation of the US stock market that demonstrates
that the answer to this question is ‘yes!’. The simulation makes use of
regulatory filings by mutual funds, who are required to submit their
positions to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) every quarter.
This makes it possible to back-out crude approximations of the strategies of
long-term investors, who hold their positions for more than three months.
Aymeric explicitly simulates the trading of thousands of mutual funds:
Every quarter his simulation is initialized with the actual holdings of the
funds. It then simulates their trading and predicts how it will affect next
quarter’s prices. He has shown that his simulation has predictive power
above and beyond fundamentals alone. (Fundamentals refers to information
that affects the price for economic reasons, such as earnings and dividends.)
This shows that the market is not perfectly efficient: The type of funds that
are active at any point in time affects prices. Market ecology has predictive
power.
Regulatory implications of market ecology
Maarten and Aymeric’s work provides a proof of principle for a new, more
effective way to regulate markets. Regulators such as the SEC, who have
access to much better data, could use our methods to simulate markets,
monitor their stability and intervene when they are in danger of serious
disruption. Such a simulation could also provide a testing ground for new
financial instruments.
One of the challenges in ecology is understanding what happens to an
ecosystem when a new species is introduced or an existing species is
removed. For example, the widespread hunting of beavers for their pelts in
America in the nineteenth century had a host of negative side-effects.
Beavers eat young trees and thereby create meadows; their ponds raise the
water table and provide essential habitat for many plants and animals.
Another famous case is the introduction of rabbits into Australia in 1859.
Rabbits have no natural predators in Australia, and, by 1920, there were
roughly 10 billion of them.
15
Rabbits eat tree seedlings, denude vegetation
and have contributed to the loss of a vast number of native Australian
species. To control their population, other non-native species, such as foxes
and cats, were introduced, but these preyed on other small animals as well
and have caused even more environmental damage.
In the United States, major projects require environmentalimpact
statements that analyze ecological effects. But there is no equivalent impact
statement for a new type of derivative or financial exchange – at least in
part because the belief in efficient markets has suppressed development of
the science necessary to do this. There are many clear instances where
changes in market structure or the introduction of new financial instruments
caused serious problems. As noted, the introduction of portfolio insurance
fueled the 1987 stock market crash, and the introduction of mortgage-
backed securities was a primary cause of the financial crisis of 2008. To
understand the likely effect of future financial innovations, regulators could
make old data with counterparty identifiers available to researchers, who
could then develop quantitative agent-based models of financial markets
and use them to test market innovations for possible adverse side-effects.
We could also monitor the financial ecosystem in real time to anticipate
problems and intervene when necessary.
An agent-based model built for the Nasdaq stock exchange is proof that
this can work.
16
Prior to 1997, US stock prices were traded in increments of
an eighth of a dollar. Then, American stock exchanges were ordered by the
SEC to begin trading in increments of a penny, a process called
decimalization. To try to understand any possible adverse side-effects,
Nasdaq hired the BiosGroup, a consulting company of complex-systems
scientists founded by Stuart Kauffman. In an effort led by the complex-
systems scientist Vince Darley, the BiosGroup built an agent-based model
for trading on the Nasdaq. The agents in the model were traders who
followed specific strategies. The role of market-makers was particularly
important. The model made six predictions, five of which were borne out
when the change to decimalization was actually made. (For example, it
correctly predicted that spreads would narrow, and that the depth of the
market – that is, the size of the trades it could absorb without affecting
prices – would drop as well.)
Several regulatory institutions, such as the Bank of England and the
European Central Bank, are beginning to collect the necessary detailed data,
and to monitor the balance sheets of major banks and other important
financial institutions. Some of them are also beginning to build agent-based
models that can use this data, though none of these efforts is properly
funded. We’ll say more about this in the next chapter when we discuss the
destabilizing effects of leverage.
The market mass-extinction of August 2007
Convergent evolution is another concept from ecology that is useful for
understanding markets. There are many species which, despite having very
different ancestry to one another, evolve to inhabit the same niche and
perform similar functions. For example, hummingbirds and hawk moths
both hover in the air with their wings beating rapidly while extracting
nectar from flowers. They can be hard to tell apart from a distance, but up
close they look completely different, which is not surprising given that their
last common ancestor lived hundreds of millions of years ago.
Convergent evolution also happens in financial markets. Even without
any contact, people with similar training often find similar solutions to the
same problems. Prediction Company was what is known as a statistical
arbitrage (or stat-arb) fund. As a result of convergent evolution, Prediction
Company’s performance in the late 1990s became closely correlated with
that of other stat-arb funds; our niche became more crowded. As in
biological overpopulation, this was inimical to survival. To illustrate the
effects of overcrowding: One of our main competitors was an investment-
management firm called D. E. Shaw, which allied with Bank of America in
1997. An unrelated problem at Bank of America forced D. E. Shaw to
temporarily shut down its stat-arb fund. In the nine months or so that D. E.
Shaw halted its trading, we made profits at a rate much higher than normal.
As soon as they began trading again, this stopped. This was because, in
ecological terms, we were competitors, occupying the same niche; our
trades were similar to theirs, and we had common market impact, which
lowered both of our returns.
While there were only a handful of stat-arb funds in the mid- 1990s, by
2007 there were hundreds, most of them trading as much capital as they
possibly could. In August 2007, after I had left Prediction Company, I got a
call from Karen Lawrence, CEO of Prediction Company and a close friend.
She asked if I had heard about anything unusual going on in the markets.
Prediction Company was having a strange problem: It had taken substantial
losses for several days in a row, even though the market was otherwise
normal and there was nothing in the news. Almost all of the stocks
Prediction Company owned went down, and almost all of the stocks it had
short positions in went up. Though none of the individual losses were large,
Prediction Company was taking systematic losses on almost all of its 1,000
or so positions. This had never happened to statistical arbitrage firms
before, even if there were antecedents in other markets.
17
Company
researchers concluded that the only possible cause was that other stat-arb
funds were liquidating their positions.
It turned out that Prediction Company was right. The trigger was a
prominent investment bank with large positions in mortgage-backed
securities. As bad news emerged about housing markets, the investment
bank needed to raise cash to cover its anticipated losses. To do so, the
bank’s managers decided to liquidate the positions of their large stat-arb
fund in order to free up capital for the rest of the bank. To reduce market
impact, such liquidations are spread out over time, and can take weeks. The
persistent pressure on prices caused other stat-arb funds, who all had similar
positions, to take losses, and, once these were sufficiently large, they were
forced to liquidate as well. This set off what came to be known as the ‘quant
meltdown’, in which the market impact of liquidations systematically
pushed prices in the wrong direction. Prediction Company was confident
that, as soon as everyone stopped liquidating, profits would bounce back –
and so they did. The profits of the few survivors soared.
18
There were several surprising things about the quant meltdown. First, it
was not obvious beforehand that a niche could get so crowded that the
simple act of a large player liquidating its position could bring the whole
sector down, causing a mass extinction.
19
We now understand that this is
partly a consequence of the fact that stat-arb funds use leverage, which we
will examine in Chapter 11. Second, the trigger that brought them down
came from mortgage-backed securities, which are unrelated to any of the
assets traded by stat-arb funds. But the fact that several large investment
banks with stat-arb funds also held mortgage-backed securities created a
link between the two.
The quant meltdown was a disaster, but at least it was self-contained. If
you weren’t investing in stat-arb funds, you likely didn’t even notice it.
Nonetheless, it was a harbinger of far worse things to come. Less than a
year later, the link between mortgage-backed securities and lending in
general severely stressed the world’s financial system and caused a major
recession. If the regulators had been monitoring markets by running agent-
based models that could warn of systemic risk, they might have acted
sooner to avert or dampen the financial crisis of 2008. We’ll investigate this
further in the next chapter.
...
11.
How Credit Causes Financial
Turbulence
The most recent global financial crisis reminded the current generation of
the lessons that their grandparents had learned in the Great Depression:
The self-regulating economy does not always work as well as its proponents
would like us to believe.
Joseph Stiglitz
1
Credit, leverage and financial crises
Providing credit, including loans, mortgages, bonds and credit cards, is one
of the most important functions of the financial system. The details of
contracts for offering credit vary, but the basic mechanism is the same: A
lender temporarily provides money to a borrower. Credit is essential for the
operation of the economy – people need it to buy houses, businesses need it
to expand their operations – but it also introduces risks.
Credit connects us together by linking the balance sheets of borrowers
and lenders. Contracts for the provision of credit form a vast network, with
balance sheets as nodes, and links from lender to borrower. Borrowers often
use more than one source of credit, lenders supply money to multiple
borrowers, and the same agent can simultaneously both lend and borrow.
The network of credit contracts is an important subset of the web of
contracts. The credit network is also closely coupled with the rest of the
economy. If the economy goes into a depression and you lose your job, you
may be unable to repay your loans; if businesses can’t get credit, GDP
suffers. Upheavals in the credit network are the main cause of recessions.
2
The overextension of credit was a major cause of the 2008 financial
crisis.
3
When credit is used to buy assets, it’s called leverage. Buying assets
with borrowed money may sound imprudent, but people do it all the time.
Suppose you want to buy a home for $500,000 but you can’t pay the full
price in cash. You take out a mortgage, putting 20 per cent down and
borrowing $400,000 from the bank. Leverage is defined as the ratio of
assets to equity. Thus, your leverage is now 5:1, since the value of the house
(the asset) is five times the value of your equity (the 20 per cent down
payment).
4
The term leverage comes from a mechanical analogy to a lever. Just as a
lever lets you apply a larger force than your limited strength allows,
borrowing lets you buy more than your current assets permit. Most of us
couldn’t buy a home without leverage. It is essential for businesses, which
often need more resources than they can marshal with their own capital. But
unlike mechanical leverage, which amplifies force in a straightforward way,
financial leverage does more than just amplify profits and losses – it creates
risk and can destabilize markets.
Leverage can be risky for both borrower and lender. Suppose that
immediately after you buy your house for $500,000, its value drops by 10
per cent. You still owe the bank $400,000, but your house is now worth
only $450,000. Your equity in the house is now $50,000, which means your
leverage has increased to 450/50 = 9, nearly double what it was before. If
the value of the house declines by another 10 per cent of the original price,
to $400,000, your equity goes down to zero and your leverage becomes
infinite. This is a good example of nonlinearity: The second 10 per cent
drop drives leverage up infinitely more than the first. We will see later in
this chapter how the strongly nonlinear nature of leverage is a powerful
amplifier that can cause booms and busts in the economy.
Credit causes risk. To mitigate risk, lenders usually require collateral,
which in the case of a mortgage is usually the house itself. As a result, when
the value of your house drops, your loan becomes riskier for the lender.
When many types of financial assets, such as stocks or mortgage-backed
securities, are purchased using credit, to mitigate the cost of a potential
default, the lender usually requires partial repayment of the loan if the
leverage exceeds a certain threshold. In the financial world this is called a
margin call. One way to raise cash to meet a margin call is to sell some of
the asset. But if many investors do this, when asset prices drop, everyone
sells at the same time, lowering prices, which triggers even more margin
calls and more selling, creating a feedback loop that amplifies bad news. As
we’ll see, sufficiently high leverage can cause bubbles and crashes to occur
spontaneously for what might seem like no reason at all.
Margin calls lower the risk for an individual lender acting alone, but they
increase systemic risk. In principle, it seems prudent for the lender to
require a margin call; if only a few investors are using leverage, this helps
protect the lender against default. But when too many investors use
leverage, the collective effect of their actions can lead them all to default at
the same time, causing prices to drop and thereby increasing the risk to the
lender. Striking the right balance between individual risk and systemic risk
is a key challenge for regulators. As we will discuss at the end of the
chapter, some of the more progressive central banks are developing
complexity-economics models to better understand how to design
regulatory frameworks that take systemic risk into account.
In books and papers published in the 1970s, the Washington University
Marxist economist Hyman Minsky postulated that, when markets are calm,
competition drives investors to take on more leverage to increase their
profits, which can cause a crash when conditions change. Minsky’s
arguments were not expressed in mathematical terms, and they ran counter
to prevailing views about market efficiency, so they were largely ignored at
the time. They proved to be prescient for the 2008 financial crisis, when
Minsky’s work suddenly became very relevant.
I learned a lot about leverage from my friend John Geanakoplos, whose
pioneering work on leverage cycles shows how real-world experience can
drive scientific discovery. John was a professor at Yale, but he was also a
financial practitioner. His cousin, Mike Vranos, was Wall Street’s leading
mortgage-backed securities trader at a now defunct firm called Kidder-
Peabody. He arranged for John to join the firm as head of fixed-income
research, where John invented new mathematical methods for pricing
mortgage-backed securities. When Kidder folded (for unrelated reasons),
Mike and John and four of their colleagues started Ellington Management
Group, which quickly became the leading mortgage-backed-securities
hedge fund.
John’s model for leverage was inspired by the near meltdown of the
global financial system in 1998 because of the use of excessive leverage by
a high-flying hedge fund called Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM),
which was started by John Meriweather. LTCM’s board of directors
included Myron Scholes and Robert Merton, both Nobel laureates for their
work in finance. From its founding in 1994, through 1997, LTCM made
remarkable returns that for two years exceeded 40 per cent. This was
possible only because of their very high leverage. By 1998, they had $4.7
billion under management, but the size of their loan was an astounding
$125 billion, meaning their leverage was about 25:1. To put this in
perspective, with this much leverage it takes a loss of only 4 per cent (in
their case $4.7 billion) to go bankrupt.
Their core strategy was a type of statistical arbitrage called convergence
trading, which involves making bets on the spreads between interest rates
on bonds, for example, by buying British bonds and selling American
bonds. Their strategy was predicated on two assumptions: First, when
differences in interest rates widen, they will eventually return. LTCM
searched for pairs of bonds whose spreads were wider than their historical
average. They would then buy the bond with the lower interest rate and
short the bond with the higher interest rate (thereby betting that its price
would come down), in order to make a profit when the interest rates
eventually returned to normal. Their second assumption was that spreads
between different bonds behave independently of each other.
Both of these assumptions unraveled in 1998. The problems began with
the Asian financial crisis in 1997. Thailand, which had a booming economy
and significant foreign debt, was forced to stop pegging its currency to the
dollar, after which the Thai baht lost half its value, and the increase in
foreign debt left Thailand bankrupt. The ensuing panic affected all of
Southeast Asia, causing investors to lose faith in investing in developing
countries, which in turn resulted in an economic slowdown throughout the
developing world. It may also have contributed to the plummeting price of
oil, which declined to what was then an historical low of $11 per barrel in
November 1998. In the run-up to this, Russia defaulted on its bonds. The
global investment community became nervous that more such problems
might follow, causing a ‘flight to quality’ as investors rapidly moved their
capital from risky bonds to safer bonds.
This caused many of LTCM’s positions to go bad at the same time. Safe
bonds pay lower interest rates than risky bonds, so LTCM’s convergence
strategy meant that across the board it was long on low, safer interest rates
and short on high, riskier interest rates. The flight to quality drove the
interest rates of safe bonds even lower and the interest rates of risky bonds
even higher, so LTCM lost money across the board. The fact that LTCM
had become so huge and so leveraged caused both of the assumptions
underlying their strategy to be violated. As problems mounted, they made
the problem even worse: when spreads widened, to make their margin calls
they needed to unwind their positions; but as they did so, their market
impact made the spreads even wider. Because they were invested globally,
this happened everywhere, causing spreads throughout the world to widen
in tandem.
LTCM lost $5 billion – the fund’s entire net worth – in only four months.
Investors panicked: If the fund was forced to liquidate quickly, it would buy
safe bonds and sell risky bonds, and spreads would widen even more.
5
Virtually every major investment bank on Wall Street had money invested
with LTCM, and many had made huge convergence bets of their own, so a
rapid liquidation could have pulled down the entire global financial system.
The Federal Reserve stepped in and organized a bailout, whereby LTCM’s
major investors were pressured into purchasing it and winding it down
slowly. As in the 2007 quant meltdown, this illustrates the importance of
understanding market ecology, and is a good example of how leverage leads
to systemic risk.
John’s firm, Ellington, also used leverage, but at reasonable levels:
Where LTCM’s leverage was an astronomical 25, Ellington’s was only
about 5. Ellington traded mortgage-backed securities, not bonds, and they
were unaffected by the LTCM meltdown. However, one of Ellington’s
prime brokers got nervous and suddenly asked for a margin call – an
immediate repayment of the loan providing the leverage – allowing only
one day for repayment. Ellington saved the firm and its investors with
frantic trading and has used lower leverage since then. Perhaps even more
important, they changed their contracts so that their lenders need to give six
months prior notice before changing Ellington’s margins. This solved the
real problem that had caused the margin call: Despite the fact that there
were no problems with Ellington’s positions in the market, increasing
nervousness led the lenders to demand more collateral (forcing Ellington to
sell assets).
Inspired by these events, John quickly developed a theory for how
leverage causes booms and busts. He did this in 2000, eight years before the
2008 financial crisis.
6
Whereas Minsky simply presented the idea that
waves of investor pessimism and optimism could influence borrowing and
possibly cause a crash, John’s mathematical theory linked uncertainty,
leverage and asset prices, and incorporated the important role of collateral.
(John was unaware of Minsky.)
To put this in context, there is a highly influential theorem by Franco
Modigliani and Merton Miller which suggests that leverage shouldn’t affect
prices. Their theorem, formulated in 1958, is a classic result in economics,
and says that the enterprise value of a firm should be unaffected by how it is
financed. Enterprise value is a measure of fundamental value, not market
price, and their theorem involves a long list of strong assumptions,
including efficient markets, but it was widely interpreted to mean that
leverage shouldn’t affect prices.
7
The LTCM saga and Ellington’s
experience made it clear that leverage could have a big effect on prices.
John designed a model to show how leverage can distort prices. His
model is an equilibrium model with rational, profit-maximizing agents who
trade an asset (like a stock or bond). The model is formulated in a three-step
process; in between each step, information is revealed that can be ‘good’ or
‘bad’. There is a continuum of different agents, ranging from ‘optimists’,
who have a prior belief that good information is more likely, to ‘pessimists’,
who have a prior belief that bad information is more likely. Crucially, the
agents are allowed to lend to each other.
In the first period, the model assumes markets are calm (meaning asset
price volatility is low). The optimists borrow from the pessimists and buy as
much of the asset as they can, pushing up its price.
8
If good news is
received, this situation persists, but if bad news is received, the price drops.
One expects the price to drop due to bad news, but the leverage amplifies
the drop for two reasons: First, the leveraged optimists lose more money
from the initial price drop than the unleveraged pessimists. This decreases
the optimists’ influence on the market, giving the pessimists a bigger role in
setting prices, and forcing the asset price down. Second, and even more
important, the uncertainty created by the news makes the lenders nervous,
so they are not willing to lend as much. They lower the allowed leverage,
forcing a margin call and preventing new buyers from borrowing nearly as
much as the original buyers did to prop up the price. If bad news is received
twice in a row, this causes the market to crash. John showed that the rise
and fall in price goes hand in hand with the rise and fall in leverage, which
in turn goes hand in hand with the fall and rise in uncertainty, in a process
he called the leverage cycle. This demonstration of the dangers of leverage
contradicted the prevailing wisdom at the time, but unfortunately the lesson
was not absorbed in the build-up to the 2008 financial crisis.
On a broader level, John’s theory of the leverage cycle provides a great
example of how institutional structure can cause market inefficiency, even
with rational agents. If the agents were not allowed to lend, prices would
match fundamental values. The combination of heterogeneous expectations
and lending drives profits up, while pushing prices away from their
fundamental value. Even if the market is informationally efficient (it is not
possible for anyone to make excess profits), it can be far from allocational
efficiency. This is not a tiny effect – as we saw in 2008, it can be a huge
effect.
Leverage causes the market to make its own news
One summer day in 2003, a young professor from Vienna named Stefan
Thurner knocked on the door of my office at the Santa Fe Institute. Stefan
had abandoned a career as a clarinet player for particle physics. Then,
toward the end of graduate school, he decided that particle physics was
stuck and got his PhD in finance instead. He subsequently started the
Complexity Science Hub in Vienna, which is now probably the second-
largest complex-systems research center in the world (after the Santa Fe
Institute).
Stefan wanted to make a financial model and asked me if I had any
ideas. I had first heard about John’s theory of the leverage cycle at a talk he
gave at SFI in 2001, and had been keen since then to make an agent-based
model of the leverage cycle, so I suggested this as a good topic. We began a
project that we would work on for a few weeks each summer when Stefan
visited SFI, and during a long sailing trip we made in my boat,
Eudaemonia, from Jacksonville, Florida, to Nassau, in the Bahamas. Since
John G. was the inventor of leverage cycles and often visited SFI in the
summer, as well as being a good friend, we pulled him into the
collaboration.
9
Stefan began programming a simple agent-based model. The idea was to
do a complexity-economics version of John’s three-period equilibrium
model to see what it would tell us. John had kept his model simple, so that
he could solve it with pencil and paper. We wanted, instead, to make an
agent-based model to study the dynamics of leverage cycles in an open-
ended and more realistic manner.
As in many earlier agent-based models (see Chapter 9), traders had a
choice between a stock and a bond. But, unlike in those models, the traders
used leverage, and we only had value investors; there were no trend
followers. As in John’s model, the value investors varied in their level of
aggression (which had the same net effect as varying levels of optimism).
The most aggressive funds bought the asset as soon as it was underpriced,
whereas the less aggressive funds waited for more substantial mispricings.
There were some other differences, but they’re not important here. What
distinguished our model from earlier agent-based models of financial
markets was the use of leverage.
10
Our model contained a bank that could
lend to the funds, but, as in real markets, there was a cap on leverage. If the
leverage exceeded the cap, the funds were required to make a margin call
and partially repay their loan to bring the leverage back under their limit.
We worked mainly in the summer, during Stefan’s annual visits, so it
took several years and quite a bit of trial and error to fully develop the
model. When the 2008 financial crisis began, we realized that our model
was relevant to current events, and we kicked into gear, got the code
working and produced some results. We had set things up so that we could
turn the leverage up or down. Without leverage, the market behaved as one
would expect under rational expectations. The price fluctuated, but
remained close to the fundamental value. There was no clustered volatility,
and no one ever defaulted. Even in runs spanning centuries of simulated
time, the largest losses were less than 10 per cent.
However, as soon as we let the funds use leverage, everything changed.
As we began raising the leverage limit, clustered volatility and fat tails
appeared and grew stronger. There were periods when the market was
reasonably efficient; using leverage, the funds could make bigger bets,
which kept the price close to fundamental values. But, from time to time,
there would be a crash, triggering a volatile period in which the market was
inefficient and prices strayed significantly from fundamental values. The
crashes could be very large, sometimes generating losses as high as 40 per
cent, and many of the funds would default.
11
The crashes were caused by margin calls. When at least one fund
exceeded its leverage limit, generating the margin call, it depressed the
price of the asset even further. This raised the leverage even more, requiring
another margin call and causing other funds to make margin calls, and so
on. The net result was that a little bad news could be enormously amplified
by the market.
We weren’t too surprised by the big crashes; this is what we had been
expecting. In John’s model, leverage cycles were implicitly viewed as rare
events that resulted in large crashes. In ours, however, there were ‘crashes’
of all sizes, from frequent small price adjustments to rarer, large events.
Furthermore, there were long calm periods punctuated by turbulent periods
– in other words, clustered volatility. This, in turn, caused fat tails in price
changes, matching real markets surprisingly well.
Our model showed that there are at least two possible causes of clustered
volatility in financial markets. One cause is trend following, as in the Santa
Fe Artificial Stock Market or the Brock and Hommes model described in
Chapter 9, and the other is the excessive use of leverage, as in our model.
Usually, both are active at once, but in extreme circumstances one cause or
the other can dominate. The dot-com bubble was a quintessential case of a
crash caused by trend following, and the big decline in stock market prices
during the crisis of 2007–2008 was a classic example of a crash caused by
excessive leverage.
12
Upon reflection, these two mechanisms are more similar than they might
appear. Both trend following and margin calls cause inverted demand
functions. As noted, normally demand goes up as the price goes down and
supply goes down as the price goes down; this makes the market stable.
But, when there are trend followers or when there is a margin call, demand
goes down as the price goes down. This causes selling into falling markets,
which makes the market unstable, driving prices away from fundamental
values, or in other words, causing the market to malfunction.
Given our model’s simplicity, its volatility dynamics were surprisingly
realistic. Volatility in real markets follows a characteristic asymmetric
pattern, consisting of sharp upward spikes followed by slow decay. Our
model does something very similar, whereas standard mainstream models
of volatility have much more symmetric profiles. Our model gave a good
quantitative match to the empirical volatility profile.
One of the great values of agent-based models is that they can easily be
used to test different policies. We brought in Stefan’s graduate student
Sebastian Poledna as a collaborator, extended the model slightly to make it
more realistic, and compared three different policies for risk control. Our
baseline policy assumed a constant leverage cap, as described above. We
also tested two other more sophisticated, supposedly superior policies, one
in which the leverage cap depends on the recent volatility of markets (when
volatility goes down, the leverage cap goes up, and vice versa) and another
where banks require borrowers to buy options to offset the risk of possible
defaults. We tested all three policies under comparable circumstances,
counting the frequency of defaults under each policy.
13
With low leverage caps, both of the more sophisticated risk policies were
successful in reducing the frequency of defaults. But with higher leverage
caps, the opposite happened: The sophisticated policies made things worse,
because they caused the effective leverage cap to change based on recent
volatility. If volatility increased, leverage caps went down. This caused
even more selling into falling markets, amplifying downward price
movements, increasing volatility, lowering leverage even more, causing
more selling and so forth. As a result, there were crashes that would not
have occurred under the simple policy where the required leverage remains
constant.
Let’s reflect for a moment on how our agent-based model for leverage
differs from a standard mainstream model. We determine prices in our
model by matching supply and demand, so we do use the equilibrium
assumption. But, in all other respects, this differs from a mainstream model.
Our agents don’t maximize utility. Instead, they buy or sell according to
simple heuristics that approximate what fundamental investors actually do:
buy underpriced assets and sell them later. This behavior is directly
observable, and is unlikely to change in light of new policies. Our investors
are boundedly rational, which means their views are occasionally wrong.
This is why prices can deviate substantially from fundamental values and
why the market crashes. It is why the market is inefficient.
Our model illustrates the paradox of systemic risk. If only one small
fund uses leverage, its effect on the market is small, and margin calls
protect the lender by making sure that the leverage never goes too high. But
if many funds use leverage, margin calls have a systemic effect on the
market, increasing the risk of default and hurting the lender as well as the
borrower. Systemic risk presents a major challenge to regulators because,
by its very nature, it is an emergent property, dependent on the interactions
of many different actors. This means that it cannot be understood by
looking at each agent one at a time – it is essential to understand the
behavior of the system as a whole. Agent-based models make it easier to
understand systemic risk and test policies to control it.
The financial crisis of 2008
Leverage played a central role in the financial crisis of 2008. Here are the
highlights: The invention of a new type of financial instrument, mortgage-
backed securities, allowed banks to bundle mortgages into standardized
packages, to be bought and sold. This allowed banks to offload their risk to
bigger institutions with more risk-bearing capacity. This seemed like a good
thing for everyone: It was good for banks because it lowered their risk,
allowing them to offer more generous mortgages, and good for low-income
home buyers, because it allowed them to own homes and profit from the
expected rise in prices. It also seemed good for the big financial institutions
that bore the risk, because it allowed them to take on more leverage and
increase profits. But in the end it was bad for everyone because mortgage-
backed securities were priced on the assumption that the risk that any
particular mortgage would default was independent of other default risks,
whereas when things got bad, many households defaulted on their
mortgages at the same time.
14
Many consequences of this arrangement were unforeseen by most
economists (who, after all, are only boundedly rational). As discussed in
Chapter 4, mortgage-backed securities allowed banks to lower lending
standards, which allowed more people to enter the housing market, which
fueled a housing bubble. But this couldn’t go on forever; after a decade of
rising house prices, the pool of potential new low-income buyers was
exhausted. Therefore, housing prices had to come down, and when that
happened many homeowners defaulted on their mortgage payments and the
value of mortgage-backed securities plummeted.
Another side-effect of offloading risk using mortgage-backed securities
is that it coupled the world’s financial institutions together more tightly than
anyone realized. American mortgage-backed securities seemed like such a
good deal that many banks and investors throughout the world bought them.
The years leading up to the crisis were a period of quiet markets and steady
growth. As a result, everyone was highly leveraged, so when mortgage-
backed securities lost value, the portfolios holding them came under serious
stress. A few financial institutions (like Lehman Brothers) collapsed or
nearly collapsed and everyone quit lending. But because businesses depend
on loans to keep the real economy going, this caused stock markets to drop
precipitously and unemployment to skyrocket. Closing the loop, even more
homeowners defaulted on their payments, and housing prices dropped
further, stressing lenders and the economy even more.
To sum up, the crisis of 2008 was caused by a self-reinforcing feedback
loop involving the interaction of housing markets, credit markets and the
real economy. This feedback loop was not properly understood beforehand;
though many pundits had predicted the housing bubble, very few of them
predicted that its demise would cause a complete shutdown of credit (and
hence a major recession). This was a failure to understand systemic risk.
Later in this chapter, we’ll discuss a simple model that captures an
important aspect of the feedback loop between volatility and credit that
drove the crisis, but first we need to understand something about the
modern history of risk management.
The evolving landscape of risk management
We have to control risk, but risk management can have unintended systemic
side-effects, and if these aren’t properly considered, the results can be
disastrous. The organization that recommends standards for controlling
risks in banking is the Basel Committee, which has representatives from all
the G20 countries as well as important banking centers such as Singapore
and Hong Kong. One of their principal recommendations concerns
leverage. Starting in 1988, under what is now called Basel I, limits were
mandated for bank leverage.
15
The size of the leverage caps varied based on
the asset and could change from time to time.
Between 1991 and 1999, when I was at Prediction Company,
conventional wisdom about risk control evolved substantially. In 1991,
most firms managed risk by using fixed limits on leverage, even if they
didn’t explicitly follow Basel I. Even at the time, it was obvious that this
method suffered from several problems.
The first problem was that the riskiness of assets can change due to
clustered volatility. An asset whose price hardly moves, and so seems quite
safe, might suddenly become volatile and therefore much riskier. Assigning
risk based on face value does not automatically adapt to changing
conditions and requires monitoring and manual adjustment.
The second problem is that price movements of assets are correlated.
Positively correlated assets tend to move together, while negatively
correlated assets move in opposite directions. A portfolio of positively
correlated assets is riskier than a portfolio of negatively correlated assets.
Such correlations mean that the risk depends on the whole portfolio and
cannot be managed correctly on an asset-by-asset basis. Asset-specific
fixed-leverage caps cannot take this into account.
The third problem occurs for trading strategies that hedge risks by short-
selling (which produces profit if an asset drops in price). Fixed-leverage
caps fail to take the resulting risk into account; again, risk needs to be
managed at the level of the whole portfolio.
Because of all these problems, in the 1990s most firms abandoned fixed-
leverage caps for a method called Value-at-Risk or VaR. This involves
managing risk at the level of the portfolio, based on the probability of a loss
of a given size. For example, on a daily scale, a 5 per cent VaR of $1
million means that 5 per cent of the time (that is, one day out of twenty) you
should expect to take a loss of $1 million or more. VaR tracks volatility; if
the estimated volatility increases, VaR increases, and vice versa.
In theory, VaR solves all three of the problems raised above, and it
initially seemed like a big improvement over fixed-asset-level leverage
caps. Volatility is far more predictable than the direction of price
movements, and while volatility forecasts aren’t perfect, they’re pretty good
under normal conditions (though of course it is the surprises that cause
problems). Since VaR rises and falls with volatility, this makes risk control
dynamic – that is, the suggested leverage varies based on market conditions.
Under VaR, as volatility goes up, leverage goes down, and vice versa.
In 2004, the Basel committee implemented a new set of
recommendations called Basel II, which, among other things, specified VaR
as the standard for risk control.
16
This was by then accepted wisdom in the
financial community. From the point of view of an individual institution, it
makes good sense. When volatility is high, things are riskier than normal,
so it’s appropriate to use less leverage. Similarly, if volatility is low, it
should be safe to use more. What could be wrong with that?
There were a few voices in the wilderness, such as Charles Goodhart and
his collaborators, who worried that Basel II might have dangerous side-
effects.
17
As we’ll see, their concerns were valid.
Prudent risk management fueled the crisis
The 2008 financial crisis was complicated, but some of its essential
elements can be captured in a simple agent-based model. This model
suggests that the crisis was in part caused by misunderstanding the systemic
risk inherent in Value-at-Risk. We’ll see how a simple model of risk
management, using the procedure recommended by Basel II, can lead to an
endogenous leverage cycle, with a long, slowly building boom followed by
a precipitous crash. This happens even without any shocks from the outside
world, and provides a good example of how bounded rationality (based on
widely used heuristics) leads to a chaotic attractor with endogenous
dynamics.
The role of leverage in the crisis is illustrated in Figure 12, which shows
the evolution of three important market indicators from 2002 to 2015. The
S&P 500, a weighted index of the largest 500 US stocks, represents the
stock market. In the period leading up to the crisis, the S&P index rose
steadily from a trough of 776 in October 2002 to a peak of 1,565 in October
2007, then plummeted to 677 in March 2009, a level only 43 per cent of its
value at the peak and lower than its value in 2002. Such a large drop in the
market capitalization of US companies reflected larger problems with the
national economy, and was one of the main symptoms of the crisis.
Remarkably, as the stock market was climbing before the crash, the
volatility of the S&P index steadily dropped by more than a factor of 3,
reaching its trough in January 2007. (This is represented by the VIX, an
index of stock volatility based on options prices.) Though still low,
volatility then rose slowly until it spiked in August 2008, reaching a level
nearly twice as high as its starting point.
Figure 12. Comparison of the US stock market (dashed), broker-dealer leverage (solid) and volatility
(jagged).
17
US broker-dealers exhibited the most dramatic behavior of all. A broker-
dealer is an institution that trades both for its customers (acting as a broker)
and for its own account (acting as a dealer). Most of the investment banks
that played central roles in the crisis, such as Lehman Brothers and Bear
Stearns, had broker-dealers using leverage. Broker-dealer leverage steadily
climbed alongside the S&P index between 2002 and 2007, rising by roughly
the same amount. When the S&P index started to fall, leverage climbed
dramatically, spiking sharply upward at the beginning of 2008 and reaching
a peak nearly four times its 2002 level. It then plummeted just before
volatility spiked. Leverage continued to drop, so that in 2009 it was lower
than it had been in 2002.
Were the movements of these indicators unconnected, or did they have
causal relationships that give insight into the crisis? John G.’s model
suggested they were connected; ours, however, provides an even simpler
explanation that helps us understand not just the crash, but the build-up to
the crash.
The model we built to answer these questions was developed by
Christoph Aymanns, my first graduate student at Oxford. He had a master’s
degree in physics from Imperial College in London, where he was nearly
top of his class, and then went to work at McKinsey & Company for a year
before coming to Oxford. The research we did was supported by a large
grant from the European Union, whose projects are identified by acronyms.
Ours was CRISIS, which stood for Complexity Research Initiative for
Systemic InStabilities. I was scientific coordinator for this complicated
grant, which involved eleven institutions spread across seven countries and
was not easy to manage. One of our goals was to make a comprehensive
model of a financial system so that we could test policies for averting
crises.
Christoph and I set out to model how investment banks use leverage and
how this affects prices. We began by building an artificial economy – an
agent-based model with a financial system consisting of several investment
banks and a few assets, and a simplified real economy that had production,
labor and consumption. Then Christoph began playing with the model to
see what it did.
Initially, the simple artificial economy we built was unregulated – that is,
we didn’t impose any risk-control measures on the banks, nor did they
impose any on themselves. We just gave them an initial endowment of
assets, which we let them buy and sell. They could use leverage in a
completely unregulated way, which we called passive leverage. An example
of the behavior of the stock market under passive leverage is shown in the
top panel of Figure 13.
Over short time spans, the stock-market index varied in a random-
looking way. While this resembles a real stock market, such behavior is not
viable in the long run. The artificial banks in our simulation were using
leverage and taking risks. In the absence of any risk control, they would
eventually take risks that were too high, and they would fail.
To manage their risk, we imposed the Basel II regulations. This raised
and lowered their leverage limits based on the stock-market volatility. The
behavior of the economy changed dramatically, as seen in the lower panel
in Figure 13, labeled active leverage. The stock-market index began to
oscillate! During each oscillation, prices slowly rose and then abruptly
crashed, before the cycle repeated itself. The oscillations varied in period
and amplitude, but the basic pattern was clear. For reasons that were
initially mysterious to us, the act of imposing risk control under VaR had
completely altered the behavior of the market. We had imposed no shocks
from outside the system; the market was making its own booms and busts,
apparently for no reason at all.
Figure 13. Comparison of two agent-based simulations of the stock market.
18
The panels show prices
vs time for two different risk-control protocols. Given ‘passive leverage’ there were no risk controls.
The bottom panel is exactly the same, except that the banks are required to manage their risk
according to the policies recommended by Basel II.
To understand this behavior, Christoph began simplifying the model by
removing elements until the oscillating behavior stopped. The simulation
shown in Figure 13 had three banks and three stocks. Christoph reduced this
to one investment bank and one stock, and even got rid of the real economy,
so there was only a very simple financial system. As long as the bank
managed its risk using VaR, as recommended by Basel II, we saw the
oscillations.
The outcome was a model that we described in a paper called ‘Dynamics
of the Leverage Cycle’.
20
This model was extremely simple, which was nice
for conceptual understanding but perhaps too simple to be convincing. We
later teamed up with Fabio Caccioli and Vincent Tan to create a more
realistic model, detailed in another paper, ‘Taming the Basel Leverage
Cycle’.
21
In the interest of brevity I’ll skip the first model and describe the
more realistic second model.
It involves two types of investor: An investment bank that uses leverage
and a fund that does not. They trade a single asset, whose supply is fixed –
their alternative is to hold cash. They are both given an initial endowment
of the asset, and then they begin to trade. At each step, both the fund and the
bank evaluate their demand for the asset, and the price is set so that supply
equals demand. A diagram of the resulting model is shown in Figure 14.
The strategies of the two agents consist of a few simple but widely used
heuristics. The fund is a value investor who knows the value of the asset,
buys it when it’s undervalued and sells it when it’s overvalued (the first
heuristic). The bank is an investment bank that has a leverage target and
adjusts its leverage according to the recommendations of Basel II based on
VaR (the second heuristic). The bank also periodically updates its volatility
estimate by taking an average over the recent past. (The average is taken
using exponentially decreasing weights, meaning recent volatility is
weighted more than past volatility – the third heuristic.) There’s also a
random shock that alters the fund’s estimate of the fundamental value,
which can be turned up or down or even set to zero.
Figure 14. A simple schematic diagram of the Basel leverage-cycle model. There are two agents: the
fund, which represents all unleveraged value investors, and the bank, which represents all investors
with leverage targets. The equity flow is from their buying and selling of the asset, and the shock
represents outside noise that randomly influences the fund.
That’s it. The model lumps the entire investment-banking world into a
single bank and the entire fundamental-value world into a single fund, and
ignores everything else. This is a representative-agent model, and an
extreme simplification, but that was helpful here because it made the model
easy to analyze and allowed us to understand why the oscillations emerged.
The model has a few parameters that control its behavior. Perhaps the
most important parameter is the relative wealth of the bank and the fund.
22
If the fund has most of the wealth, then the dynamics are stable. The price
of the asset stays close to its fundamental value, and the leverage and
volatility are more or less constant. In contrast, if the bank has more wealth,
everything changes significantly, and the system begins to oscillate, as it
does in the bottom panel of Figure 13. Surprisingly, the oscillations persist
even if the shocks are turned off. This is because the oscillations are
chaotic; the system shows sensitive dependence on initial conditions and
has all the properties of chaotic dynamics, as discussed in Chapter 1.
In the course of a cycle, the stock price, leverage and volatility behave
much as they did in the crisis, as shown in Figure 12. The stock price and
leverage slowly build, while the volatility slowly drops. Then the market
suddenly crashes, the leverage plummets and the volatility spikes sharply
upward. The frequency of the oscillations depends on the time-window
used to compute volatility. When we do this using a two-year window,
which is the industry standard, the cycle takes about ten years, roughly
equivalent to the period of smooth growth in the build-up to the 2007–2008
crisis. The transition from the stable to the unstable regime occurs at a
leverage equal to about 9.
23
Why does the system do this? Because VaR is inherently destabilizing.
Whenever the price drops, the investment bank sells in order to lower its
leverage. It thus systematically sells into falling markets, and, if the bank
were the only actor, the market would immediately crash. The incipient
crash is prevented by the unleveraged value investor, who stabilizes the
market by buying when the price falls and selling when it rises. The
stability of the system depends on the competition between the value fund
and the investment bank. As long as the investment bank is small or its
appetite for leverage is low, the system is stable. But if the investment bank
is large or its appetite for risk is high, the market begins to oscillate. This is
because during the boom the estimated volatility slowly drops due to the
smoothing action of averaging past volatility. As the volatility drops, the
leverage increases nonlinearly, growing slowly at first and then suddenly
becoming very large (recall the example in Chapter 4). Leverage acts as an
amplifier; when the dial is turned up high enough, the system becomes so
unstable that even an infinitesimal perturbation can trigger a huge crash.
When the crash finally occurs, this drives the volatility up and the leverage
down, and the cycle repeats itself.
The fact that the transition between the stable regime and the chaotic
regime is both sudden and sharp poses a problem for regulators. Near the
transition, a small increase in the wealth of the investment bank causes the
system to abruptly move from a static fixed point to chaotic oscillations.
The oscillations don’t start out small and get bigger; when they appear, they
are full size. This is a good example of what in physics is called a phase
transition, in which a system suddenly changes from one state to another.
More realistic versions of this model could potentially help regulators
anticipate and prevent this kind of financial chaos.
When Christoph presented his model at a meeting at the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), it was strongly
criticized by a participant from the Bank for International Settlements
because of the lack of foresight of the agents. The criticism was roughly
this: ‘If the banks were rational, they would understand that their behavior
is leading to a crash and alter it accordingly – for example, by reducing
their leverage.’ My response was that real people are not always rational,
and certainly were not in the run-up to the crisis! Perhaps, if we had
recently experienced a similar crisis, and if we had had good quantitative
agent-based models for systemic risk in the 1990s, we might have been able
to see into the future well enough to avoid such a crisis, but we didn’t. Risk
management was evolving during the run-up to the crisis – VaR only began
to be widely implemented in the late 1990s.
24
Thus, roughly a decade
elapsed from this point until the crisis occurred – consonant with the
timeline our model predicts. Our model suggests that implementing a new
risk-management policy that we didn’t properly understand likely played a
key role in causing the crisis. It also suggests that the use of VaR, as
recommended by Basel II, together with the use of high leverage, were
sufficient to have caused the crisis on their own. Although the model does
not contain all the mechanisms that fueled the crisis, such as the housing
bubble, it generates behavior that quantitatively matches the crisis and the
events leading up to it. The housing bubble may only have been the spark
that lit the fire.
Our model is in the spirit of Hyman Minsky’s and John G.’s prescient
warnings, and we all agree that high leverage is problematic. But the
underlying mechanism causing problems is different: Minsky argued that
greed and competition would drive leverage up when markets got too quiet,
and John G. argued that the problem is due to heterogeneous investors, with
different levels of optimism. We show that systemic financial risk can be
caused by prudent investors – the problem exists even if investors aren’t
greedy, and even if they all act the same way. In our model, investors vary
their leverage based on volatility because their risk manager tells them to
do so, believing this makes them safer.
The job of a regulator like the Basel Committee is to set the rules of the
game to make the financial system work for everyone. We need credit to
make the economy run, but too much credit is destabilizing. Like
Goldilocks, the regulator needs to get things ‘just right’. That said, the
precautionary principle would suggest that regulators should err on the
conservative side, setting leverage limits low enough to leave an ample
buffer in order to ensure stability. The regulator’s job is complicated by the
fact that the leverage cycle appears suddenly and at full size. Because
leverage levels build slowly, and because random external events can affect
prices and volatility, it’s hard to know that we’re in a cycle until the
situation is already out of control. Nonetheless, high leverage, climbing
markets and low volatility all signal that the market is in trouble.
Is it possible to formulate a better policy that allows higher leverage
without increasing the risk of leverage cycles? To investigate this question,
we introduced a generalization of the Basel leverage policy with a
parameter that allowed us to use any mixture of Basel I (constant leverage)
and Basel II (VaR). We found that the best policy depends on the situation.
As we expected, when the banking sector is small and leverage is low,
Basel II was the best policy. But when the banking sector is bigger and/or
its leverage is higher, then the best policy is closer to Basel I. It’s a matter
of making the right tradeoff between individual and systemic risk.
We also explored alternative policies and found that we could
significantly improve risk management by giving the bank more time to
respond to changing conditions – for instance, by allowing it to adjust its
leverage targets slowly when the financial system comes under stress. This
caused a big improvement, and provides important advice for regulators.
We could only investigate this because our model is dynamic – it cannot be
understood with a static equilibrium model.
Taken together, John’s original leverage model, Stefan’s model presented
earlier in this chapter and Christoph’s model above show how standard
economic theory and complexity economics are complementary. John’s
equilibrium model blazed the trail, showing that the Modigliani-Miller
theorem does not apply, and illuminating the basic principles of leverage
cycles. Stefan’s agent-based model showed that leverage doesn’t just lead to
crashes – it contributes to clustered volatility and fat tails in price changes
on an ongoing basis. Christoph’s model discovered a different kind of
leverage cycle, caused by risk management alone, and illustrated how this
could lead to a slow boom followed by a rapid bust. Both agent-based
models provided platforms to study policy, showing the advantages of
alternative risk measures and the effectiveness of giving borrowers more
time to reduce their leverage.
In 2010–11, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision formulated a
new protocol, Basel III, which is still not fully implemented, and there is a
Basel IV on the horizon. These policies include more stringent caps on
leverage and involve changes in the precise way leverage is calculated, as
well as regulation of many other aspects of banking, including liquidity.
When fully implemented, they will force investment banks to hold a few
trillion dollars more capital in reserve than they did before, which will
likely lower their profit margins. Not surprisingly, this is all very
controversial. Many banks feel the regulations are excessive; other parties
feel they don’t go far enough to prevent the next crisis. I think the only way
to resolve this question is to build carefully calibrated agent-based models
that represent the heterogeneous agents of the financial system more
realistically and allow us to get quantitative answers.
The construction of such models is in progress. Working with the Bank
of England, my ex–graduate student Alissa Kleinnijenhuis built a prototype
for a potentially realistic model of systemic risk in global financial markets,
and another ex-student Garbrand Wiersema invented a mathematical
method to systemically understand the channels of contagion in financial
markets and their interactions, which has been used by the Bank of South
Africa.
25

,26
These models, which are ready to be put into practice, could
provide new tools for monitoring and regulating the financial system.
In summary, providing a better understanding of systemic risk in
financial markets is one of the success stories of complexity economics,
which could be further developed to make financial markets safer.
The resemblance between financial and fluid turbulence
Although the financial system and fluid flow are very different phenomena,
they have many things in common, and the correspondence between
financial turbulence and fluid turbulence has proven useful for concrete
applications such as predicting the volatility of financial markets. As we
will discuss in the next part of the book, the correspondence between the
two phenomena may also offer insights into how we can do a better job of
monitoring and regulating financial markets.
A fluid is anything that flows freely, like a gas or a liquid. When a fluid
is slightly stressed, its motion is calm (called laminar by the experts), but
when it is strongly stressed, it becomes turbulent. Picture the wind blowing
over the sea: On a calm day the sea is flat. As the wind starts to blow,
ripples form – not only are they small, but their shape is more or less
regular. As the wind blows harder, the ripples turn into waves, which get
bigger and bigger, and their motion becomes more and more irregular – the
motion becomes turbulent. In a hurricane this becomes what is called fully
developed turbulence.
As Edward Lorenz realized, turbulence is due to chaotic dynamics. As
soon as the movement of the ripples becomes irregular, the motion is
chaotic. Turbulence corresponds to complicated chaos, with many degrees
of freedom. Like financial markets, fluid turbulence exhibits clustered
volatility and fat tails. In a market, the clustered volatility is due to irregular
price movements; in a turbulent fluid flow, it’s due to the irregular motion
of the fluid. Figure 15 shows a measurement of the fluctuations of wind
velocity in a given direction at a given point in space. There are periods of
relative calm interspersed with gusts of wind, reminiscent of the clustered
volatility for stock market returns in Figure 10.
The resemblance goes much deeper. As shown in a remarkable paper by
the experimental physicist Shoaleh Ghashghaie and collaborators, the
fluctuations for both fluid turbulence and finance vary across different
scales in precisely the same manner.
27
They compared a fluid-turbulence
experiment to a finance ‘experiment’. In the fluid-turbulence experiment,
they measured fluctuations in wind velocity between two probes at different
locations, varying the distance between the probes from millimeters to
meters. In the finance experiment, they recorded the fluctuations of the
Deutschmark–dollar exchange rate by looking at the change in prices over
time-intervals ranging from five minutes to two days. Then they compared
the distribution of the sizes of the fluctuations in both cases.
Figure 15. Intermittency in fluid turbulence. Fluctuations in the wind velocity as a function of time
(in minutes) for turbulence in air.
They first matched the millimeter-separation fluctuations for fluid
velocity against the five-minute fluctuations in prices. Because of clustered
volatility, both distributions have fat tails. Most of the time, the fluctuations
are small, creating a sharp peak in the center, but once in a while the
fluctuations become large, creating a fat tail. As they went to larger scales,
either by putting the velocity probes further apart or by measuring the price
changes over a longer time, the distributions became less fat-tailed. By the
time the probes were a few meters apart, or the prices were two days apart,
the distribution became close to a normal distribution, with thin tails. As the
scale changed, the distributions of the velocity fluctuations and price
fluctuations changed in exactly the same way.
28
The analogy between fluid and financial turbulence has practical
applications. This was demonstrated by a group of French theoretical
physicists studying fluid mechanics, including Jean-Francois Muzy, Jean
Delour and Emmanuel Bacry, who adapted their techniques for predicting
volatility in fluid turbulence to finance. This required only minor changes in
the theory.
29
Their models give better predictions for price volatility than
previous techniques used in finance, though, as it happened, two financial
economists who were then at Yale, Laurent Calvet and Adlai Fisher,
independently developed a similar method around the same time.
30
(Calvet
and Fisher were strongly influenced by Benoit Mandelbrot, an early pioneer
in chaos and complex systems, who also knew a lot about fluid turbulence.)
It is striking that the same mathematical methods provide state-of-the-art
forecasts for volatility in both finance and fluid turbulence.
In Chapter 1, we distinguished between simple chaos and complicated
chaos. Fluid turbulence is an example of complicated chaos. In a strongly
turbulent system, like a hurricane or rapids in the Colorado River as it flows
through the Grand Canyon, there is both structure and randomness. This is
only a conjecture – I have no way of proving it at present – but I believe
that the dynamics of global financial markets are also an example of
complicated chaos, more accurately called high-dimensional chaos or chaos
with many degrees of freedom.
Complicated chaos, like fluid turbulence, happens in unstable systems
with many interacting components. In the financial system, when there are
many agents using high leverage or when trend following becomes
prevalent, prices become unstable. The global financial market has become
enormously complicated and closely connected: All developed countries
have stock markets and bond markets. Hundreds of thousands of assets are
traded globally every day. Hundreds of thousands of investors pursue
diverse trading strategies. High-frequency traders turn over their positions
in fractions of a second, while low-frequency value investors hold their
positions for years: The difference in timescale is a factor of 10 million!
31
As we saw in the LTCM crisis and the crisis of 2008, markets do not behave
independently – a disruption in Thai markets nearly brought down the US
financial system. (Similarly, Lorenz famously pointed out that a butterfly
flapping its wings could influence the trajectory of a hurricane.) In such a
complicated system, with the strong nonlinear feedback introduced by
leverage and trend following, it would be surprising if the movements of
prices were not chaotic and high-dimensional. Financial markets are
undoubtedly complicated and competitive, and as discussed in Chapter 7,
chaos and clustered volatility should be expected.
Our Basel leverage-cycle model makes it clear how leverage creates
nonlinearities that can cause even a very simple financial system to be
chaotic. That model is so simple that it cannot exhibit complicated chaos,
but in a more realistic model, replacing the two representative investors
with a more realistic constellation of diverse, heterogeneous investors, one
would still expect to see chaos, but with more complicated, turbulent
behavior. The models in this chapter suggest that leverage in financial
markets corresponds to stress in fluid flows, and indicate that as market
participants use higher leverage, the financial system becomes more
turbulent.
The weather is the best example of how fluid turbulence affects our
lives. A concerted and coordinated global effort has allowed us to make
accurate weather predictions. Could we learn from weather prediction how
to better understand the economy and keep its turbulence under control?
We’ll explore this idea in the next part of the book.
...
PART IV:
Climate Economics
Climate change has already begun to alter the Earth’s weather. The intensity
of storms is increasing and shifts in rainfall patterns are disrupting
agriculture and causing wildfires. Carbon dioxide persists in the atmosphere
for thousands of years so, even if we stopped greenhouse-gas emissions
immediately, we would still face a likely global sea-level rise of more than
a meter this century alone, and many more in centuries to come. Moreover,
runaway nonlinear feedback effects – such as the release of carbon-bearing
methane from thawing tundra and less reflected light due to diminishing ice
coverage – could potentially amplify human-induced climate change. We
need to bring greenhouse gases under control soon to avoid catastrophic and
irreversible changes in the biosphere, mass migrations, mass extinctions and
disruption of the systems that provide us with food and clean water. To limit
the average global temperature change to 1.5°C (2.7°F), we need to bring
net emissions to zero within the next twenty years or so.
1
While understanding climate change is the domain of physical scientists,
understanding climate change’s causes and potential solutions is largely the
domain of social scientists. Greenhouse gases are a byproduct of economic
activity. In order to stop emitting them, we need to transform virtually every
facet of the global economy – including land-use practices, which account
for about a quarter of emissions, and crucially, the way we generate and use
energy, which accounts for the remaining three quarters. While the energy
sector constitutes only about 4 per cent of GDP, every industry uses energy;
the entire economy collapses without it.
The change from fossil fuels to non-carbon-emitting energy sources is
often called the green-energy transition, where the word green emphasizes
the many other benefits, such as reduced air pollution, that will come from
abandoning fossil fuels. Since renewable energy sources and fossil fuels
have different supply chains, this transition will require re-wiring much of
the production network, shifting the occupational balance in the labor force
and building new infrastructure for generating and distributing energy.
Humanity has experienced this scale of rapid change only once, during the
Industrial Revolution of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
Switching to a net-zero carbon economy will also require structural
transformations in other economic sectors, including transportation,
construction and farming. Investors, insurance companies and central banks
have begun to realize that physical risks caused by climate change, such as
flooding, hurricanes, sea-level rise and lethal heat waves, pose major risks
for the economy. Navigating the transition will require new business
models. There will likely be significant shifts in wealth and power within
and across nation-states, affecting sociological polarization and geopolitics.
Before we discuss the economics of climate change, let’s look at how we
learned to predict weather and climate, a story that contains valuable
lessons for economics and for how we might address the economic origins
of climate change.
...
12.
How we Learned to Predict Weather and
Climate
If a single flap of a butterfly’s wings can be instrumental in generating a
tornado, so also can all the previous and subsequent flaps of its wings, as
can the flaps of the wings of millions of other butterflies, not to mention the
activities of innumerable more powerful creatures, including our own
species.
Edward N. Lorenz (1972)
1
Predicting the weather
Attempts to predict the weather date back thousands of years, but weather
forecasting achieved a huge breakthrough in the second half of the
twentieth century, thanks to a combination of better science, better
measurements and better computers. Over the last seventy years, a
coordinated, large-scale, global effort and an investment of hundreds of
billions of dollars have enabled us to predict the weather remarkably well.
2
Because we make daily global weather forecasts, we test weather-
forecasting models all the time, so we know how good they are. Testing
climate models is more challenging, because it requires running scenarios
we have not yet experienced. Nonetheless, reliable weather models give us
a good starting point for modeling climate.
Understanding the weather has been a matter of concern throughout
recorded human history. Babylonian tablets discussing weather forecasting
date from 650 
BCE
. The word forecast was coined by Robert FitzRoy, who
captained the HMS Beagle when Charles Darwin sailed with her. In 1854,
he founded what would later be called the British Met (Meteorological)
Office with the help of Francis Beaufort (whose surname all sailors will
recognize). In 1870, the US Weather Bureau (now called the National
Weather Service) was formed; it collected data from more than 500
observation stations and made daily forecasts throughout the country.
3
In those days, forecasts were subjective, based on experience and
intuition. Forecasters kept a large library of past local weather maps, which
they studied carefully and used to develop rules of thumb (heuristics).
Much as we did at Prediction Company, they observed patterns in past
behavior that allowed them to anticipate future behavior. One of the
procedures they followed, called the method of analogs, illustrates the
underlying principle that these methods are implicitly based on. It works
like this: The forecaster studies the current weather map, and might think,
‘This reminds me of the build-up to that big storm back in December of
1935.’ Then he looks through his library to find similar weather maps. If
December 10, 1935 provided a good match, he would look ahead to
December 11 as a possible forecast for tomorrow’s weather, adjusted to
account for differences in factors like wind speed and direction. He might
search for other, similar weather maps and repeat the procedure. Then he
would lick his finger and put it in the air, make a subjective judgment, and
produce a forecast.
The basic principle of the method of analogs is that the future will follow
the same patterns that existed in the past. This principle is extremely useful,
and is the basis of all statistical models, with broad applications beyond
weather forecasting. It underlies the breakthroughs in machine learning that
are revolutionizing everything from image recognition to writing high-
school term papers. In fact, such methods are now used by Google to make
forecasts a few hours ahead in places where the coverage of weather models
is poor.
The method of analogs, and its extensions via econometric models, is
still the most useful forecasting tool in economics. Instead of weather maps,
the forecaster compares economic conditions in the present to past events.
This method is limited, however, because there are just too many possible
patterns. There’s an enormous amount of information in a weather map (or
in the state of an economy) at any given point in time. Even with a library
of thousands of historical maps, the weather on any given day is never
really close enough to the weather on any previous day to produce an
accurate forecast. (Similarly, the economic conditions now are rarely
similar enough to conditions in the past to make reliable predictions.)
Because the weather is chaotic, small differences between today’s weather
map and a historical weather map turn into large differences between them
on the following day. Subjective weather forecasts were better than nothing,
but their value was limited. A new approach was needed.
In 1901, Cleveland Abbe, the Weather Bureau’s chief meteorologist,
proposed a radically different method that has come to be called numerical
weather forecasting.
4
He suggested using the laws of physics to predict the
weather. His proposal had the same essential elements as our method for
beating roulette discussed in Chapter 1: understand the forces, measure
initial conditions and use them to make predictions. Of course, weather is
vastly harder to predict than roulette. It involves the interaction of
temperature, pressure, wind velocity and humidity, as well as many other
variables, such as topography. Gathering initial conditions requires
simultaneous measurements over a fine grid covering the entire globe. It
now seems obvious that we should predict weather this way, but in 1901
there were no computers, measurements were limited and the physics of the
weather was still poorly understood. Cleveland Abbe’s proposal was
regarded as audacious and utopian and led to no immediate action.
The first numerical weather forecast was published by the English
polymath Lewis Fry Richardson in 1922.
5
Richardson was an early
complex-systems scientist who made contributions to mathematics, physics,
meteorology and psychology. He was one of the first to articulate the idea
of fractals, and he was the first to develop a quantitative theory for the
causes of wars. His Quaker upbringing made him an ardent pacifist, which
exempted him from military service, but in England at the time, it also
disqualified him from holding a proper academic appointment.
Richardson’s attempts at numerical weather prediction continued even
while he was working in a Quaker ambulance unit during World War I. He
eventually set himself a very specific task: To predict the weather for 1.00
p.m. on May 20, 1910, based on measurements made at 7.00 a.m. that day.
The weather depends on nonlinear equations whose dynamics are chaotic,
which means that the equations have to be solved step-by-step through time
and require an enormous number of arithmetic calculations. To cope with
this challenge, he introduced a procedure for solving the equations
numerically by hand. I mean literally by hand: He performed tens of
thousands of arithmetic calculations with pencil and paper! Even using the
biggest supercomputers in the world, the time and memory such
calculations take continues to define the limit on how accurately we can
predict the weather. Imagine what it was like for Richardson using nothing
but a pencil and paper – and on a battlefield to boot.
Making a six-hour-ahead forecast took Richardson about six months.
Unfortunately, the way he ingested the data into his model was flawed, so
the answers he obtained were off by a factor of 100. The publication of his
failed results had the opposite effect of the one he had hoped for, putting a
damper on numerical weather prediction for the next two decades.
In his 1922 book, Richardson went beyond his weather-forecasting
results and wrote about how parallel-processing might be used to make his
methods practical. He imagined a city of 10,000 human ‘computers’, who
would live in a special city. Every day, they would go to work and take their
positions in a stadium-like enclosure. Each human computer would perform
designated calculations with pencil and paper, and pass the results to her
neighbors on every side (while her neighbors passed their calculations to
her). Then the process would be repeated, with each ‘computer’ making a
new calculation in response to the inputs from her neighbors. Richardson
estimated that even though each calculation would still be slow, the
parallel-processing power of 10,000 people working simultaneously would
speed things up enough to produce useful real-time forecasts. It was an
extraordinary vision, but it was never implemented for weather prediction.
It was, however, put into action during World War II, when squads of
human ‘computers’ solved equations relevant for the design of the atom
bomb and performed other calculations for the war effort.
In 1950, John von Neumann was searching for non-military applications
for digital computers and decided that weather prediction was a good
candidate. He spoke to Carl-Gustaf Rossby, one of the leading
meteorologists of the day, who in turn recruited his young associate at the
University of Chicago, Jule Charney, to lead a team of other researchers.
Working intensely for two years, they produced a weather model simple
enough to run on the ENIAC computer.
6
The ENIAC was extremely crude
by the standards of modern computers. It had only 10 words of read-write
memory and 624 words of read-only memory, and could do 357
multiplications per second – more than a million times slower than a
modern smartphone. Von Neumann’s wife, Klara, taught the team how to
program and checked their code. By working around the clock with the
ENIAC for thirty-three days, they produced four retrospective forecasts.
The results were not as good as existing subjective forecasts, but they were
good enough to provide a proof of principle – and the field of numerical
weather prediction was born. At the time, the next day’s forecast still took
twenty-four hours to perform on the ENIAC, but the meteorologists were
confident that computers would speed up and reduce calculation times.
The global scientific community, governments and the military saw the
potential of numerical weather forecasting, and work began in earnest to
make forecasts faster and more reliable. Since the 1950s, hundreds of
billions of dollars of public investment have gone into producing daily
weather forecasts using numerical weather prediction. This effort has
included developing a better understanding of the physics involved,
improving numerical methods for solving the underlying equations on a
computer, getting more accurate measurements (particularly via satellites)
and taking advantage of bigger and faster computers.
With hindsight, it might seem obvious that numerical weather prediction
would be better than subjective weather forecasting, but it took almost
thirty years of hard work for this goal to be achieved. I became aware of the
contest between subjective and numerical forecasters at its turning point,
around 1980, while I was a graduate student doing research on chaotic
dynamics. I had the good fortune to be asked to intern at the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) with Edward Lorenz, the pioneer
of chaos theory and one of the leading meteorologists of his day.
Since my internship was unpaid, to save money I camped illegally on the
spectacular mesa that NCAR sits on, near Boulder, Colorado. My tent had
to be hidden during the day, and because I was using NCAR’s
supercomputer until late in the evening, it was a nuisance to set my tent up
in the dark. If I was confident it wasn’t going to rain, I preferred to sleep
under the stars. I told Ed about my dilemma, and in my conversation with
him at the end of each day, I would ask him whether he thought it was
going to rain. He had a corner office with a big window looking out over
the Great Plains. He would peer at the sky and study the clouds for a few
moments, and then give me one of three answers: ‘Yep’, ‘Nope’, or ‘Can’t
tell’. He was an excellent subjective weather forecaster: With the caveat
that he used ‘Can’t tell’ about 50 per cent of the time, he was never wrong,
and I never got wet due to a bad forecast. I later learned that he had been a
weather forecaster in the Pacific during World War II, so he had had some
practice.
I remember asking him when he thought he and the other physical
meteorologists would beat the subjective weather forecasters. He told me
they were breaking even, but steadily getting better and would soon pass
them. This is exactly what happened – numerical weather prediction now
produces far more accurate forecasts than subjective weather forecasters
ever did.
The enormous improvements in accuracy have changed our whole
attitude toward weather forecasting. Although reliable long-term forecasts
are inherently impossible because of the underlying chaotic nature of the
physics of fluid turbulence, short-term weather forecasts are now
reasonably accurate. This is economically useful: Estimates indicate that the
US spends about $5.1 billion per year on weather forecasting, for an
economic benefit of roughly $30 billion.
7
Since 1980, forecasting accuracy
has improved by about one day per decade – that is, the six-day forecast
now is about as accurate as the five-day forecast was ten years ago.
8
The standard economic models that many national statistics offices,
central banks and treasury departments use to make economic predictions
are on a much smaller scale than weather forecasts, and they aren’t nearly
as useful. We’re still at the point where the method of analogs and its
econometric extensions perform as well as or better than theory-based
models. As discussed, standard models operate at a much higher level of
aggregation and do not make use of microdata. If weather models have an
economic value to the US of $30 billion per year, better economic models
could save us trillions of dollars a year, but there is no large-scale effort to
build such models.
Predicting the climate
The global-circulation models that are used to predict the response of the
Earth’s climate system to increased levels of greenhouse gases were
developed out of models for weather prediction. Given that the dynamics of
the weather are chaotic, and therefore unpredictable in the long run, you
might think that modeling the climate, which involves predicting on
timescales of centuries or more, would be impossible. Fortunately, climate
involves a different kind of prediction, which makes it in a sense easier:
Climate models make a prediction about the statistical properties of the
weather rather than a forecast of its future state. We can’t say whether or not
it will rain a hundred days from now; we can, however, estimate how often
it will rain in a world with more greenhouse gases by running a numerical
weather simulation with increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere for a
very long span of time and recording how often it rains in the simulation.
Similarly, we can predict how high, on average, global temperatures will
rise over time in response to a given level of carbon in the atmosphere.
Thus, while chaos imposes a fundamental limit on short-term weather
forecasting, it imposes no such limit on the accuracy of climate prediction.
One of the best ways to test climate models is to use them to predict the
past. Carbon-dioxide levels and temperature have both varied substantially
over time. Tests are made by running global-circulation models with past
carbon concentrations to see whether the resulting temperature predictions
match the corresponding historical values. The match is still far from
perfect, but substantial progress has been made.
Climate models have improved substantially in the last forty years, but
their predictions are surprisingly consistent with earlier models. In 1979,
Jule Charney led an early study of climate change entitled Carbon Dioxide
and Climate: A Scientific Assessment.
9
The report stated, ‘We estimate the
most probable global warming for a doubling of CO
2
to be near 3°C with a
probable error of ± 1.5°C.’ Almost precisely the same statement appeared in
a report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
thirty-five years later.
10
Our current carbon-dioxide level is about 1.4 times
the pre-industrial level, and unless we take drastic action immediately we
are likely to reach the doubling point in about fifty years. The last time the
Earth was 3°C degrees warmer than it is now was 3 million years ago, when
beech trees grew in Antarctica, the seas were 80 feet higher, and horses
galloped across the Canadian coast of the Arctic Ocean.
It is a remarkable tribute to the power of science and the usefulness of
large-scale models that we can forecast the complex phenomenon of climate
change fifty to a hundred years into the future. But climate models can
inform us only about the consequences of our actions; they don’t tell us
how to solve the problems we’ve created. Re-wiring the economy so that it
no longer emits greenhouse gases will require a major structural
transformation. Our current economic models are woefully inadequate to
guide us through this transition. If only we had economic models as good as
our climate models . . .
Lessons for economics
There are several striking differences between the way we make economic
predictions and our predictions of weather and climate:
Weather forecasts have systematically improved over time. Economic forecasting, in
contrast, has never been very accurate and has made only slow, incremental progress over
the last eighty years. Numerical forecasting of the economy has yet to convincingly surpass
simple statistical models implicitly based on the method of analogs.
Weather is modeled from the bottom up. Weather modelers seek to model the atmosphere at
the finest scale possible, whereas government models for policymaking operate at the
aggregate level of a nation-state and use only a single representative household. The contrast
with weather models is stark: It would be utterly hopeless to predict the US weather based
solely on measurements of its average temperature, barometric pressure and wind velocity.
The fact that our ability to make measurements and run models at a finer scale has been
the biggest driver of improvements in weather forecasting’s predictive power demonstrates
the importance of a bottom-up approach. Current weather models track the relevant
variables on a three-dimensional grid in which each cell is 10 kilometers by 10 kilometers
wide and 100 meters high, with roughly 100 such cells stacked vertically. Each cell requires
a measurement of temperature, wind and humidity, which makes for a total of about 10
billion measurements over the entire globe. The global-circulation models for climate use a
coarser grid, 100 kilometers by 100 kilometers wide and 1 kilometer high, but this still
produces an enormous amount of information. Just as the improvements in computers over
the last seventy years have been driven by the increasing density of integrated circuits, many
if not most of the advances in meteorology have been driven by the increased density of grid
points in weather measurement and simulation. Weather simulation using the finest grids
possible requires state-of-the-art computers, and weather prediction employs some of the
largest computers in the world, each of which consumes about 10 megawatts of power
(enough to supply about 8,000 American households).
Weather models are highly nonlinear. Weather is an emergent phenomenon, and a linear
weather model would be useless. In contrast, while economic dynamics are also an emergent
phenomenon, and most of the DSGE models we talked about in Chapter 5 are intrinsically
nonlinear, many of those used for policymaking are simplified and replaced by linear
approximations that are easier to solve. This means, among other things, that endogenous
business cycles are ruled out from the get-go.
Weather models are global. Weather models are closed – that is, they cover the entire world,
so that a storm never appears from ‘off the map’. This is essential to capture endogenous
phenomena. In contrast, most official economic models are open – meaning, for example,
that they pertain only to a single nation-state, so that outside influences from other countries
(which are clearly important, such as a default in Thailand) have to be treated as exogenous
shocks. While some types of economic models are global, many, if not most, still model
only one country at a time.
If we were to implement agent-based economic models at a global scale,
similar to those used for weather or epidemiology, all of the ‘in contrast’
statements above would disappear. Such agent-based models would use the
finest scale feasible. With an all-out effort, it is now conceivable to
construct agent-based models on a one-to-one scale, so that each simulated
person in the model corresponds to a similar real person and each company
corresponds to a specific real company.
11
Running such a model, which
would require state-of-the-art data gathering and computer power, would
cope with nonlinearities and thus could potentially predict such emergent
phenomena as recessions, financial crises, inequality and economic growth.
These predictions could be made at many levels, from individual firms and
groups of households to industries, nations and the whole planet. While
there are factors that make simulating the economy harder than simulating
the weather, there are also factors that make it easier.
12
Complexity economics can do for economics what Cleveland Abbe
imagined for weather prediction. What Abbe proposed took eighty years to
reach fruition, but today we complexity economists already have adequate
computer power and much of the data needed to realize our ambitions. With
an appropriate effort, we could build much more accurate agent-based
models in five years or less, which could give us invaluable guidance in
negotiating the climate-driven transition of the economy and other global
problems that depend on economics. In Chapter 14 I will briefly describe
some efforts that are already underway.
...
13.
Climate Economics and Technological
Progress
Sensible policies on climate change should weigh the costs of slowing
climate change against the benefits of slower climate change.
William Nordhaus (2003)
1
Predictions about the anticipated impacts of climate change aren’t perfect:
We can’t say precisely how much warming will happen for a given level of
carbon in the atmosphere, and we don’t know exactly how high and how
quickly sea levels will rise, or when the carbon locked in the tundra will
warm enough to begin emitting vast quantities of methane. However, there
is a remarkable scientific consensus that these effects present a grave
danger. The economics of climate change, meanwhile, remains highly
controversial – both as to how much the green-energy transition will cost
and the right way to make it happen. Some say that it will be very
expensive, while our recent work (discussed below) says it will save us
money. Some say we need a crash program to build more nuclear reactors;
others (like me) say this would be a waste of money that could be spent
more usefully elsewhere. Some say we need a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade
system; others say we should simply criminalize carbon emission. Some say
that, with the right incentives, the market will take care of everything;
others say the government should play a leading role – for example, by
investing in new technologies. Some say that we must abandon the idea of
economic growth; others (like me) say that we can stop emitting greenhouse
gases while continuing to grow if we invest in the right technologies. Far
too many people say there is nothing we can do. To make the green-energy
transition rapidly and cheaply, we need reliable models, based on empirical
data, that allow us to predict the likely outcomes of each possible course of
action.
To reduce and ultimately eliminate greenhouse-gas emissions produced
by the burning of fossil fuels and bad agricultural practices, we need to
dramatically change the technological underpinnings of much of the global
economy. What is the best way to do this? How much will it cost?
I realized that I could contribute to solving this problem when the
Director of the US Department of Energy’s National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, Dan Arvizu, came to the Santa Fe Institute in 2008 with a few
of his scientists and asked us to help them ‘think out of the box’. The core
of the planning problem was to understand which green technologies were
most likely to be able to replace fossil fuels soonest and at the most
affordable price.
Our conversations led to a workshop at SFI attended by leading
technologists and economists studying the climate transition. The room was
full of disagreement. Many advocated for wind and solar energy, together
with various forms of energy storage. Others were fans of nuclear power;
still others advocated carbon capture and storage – that is, removing the
carbon dioxide when fossil fuels are burned, before it enters the
atmosphere. Who was right? It was not enough to know what different
methods of generating energy currently cost; we needed to know what the
costs would be twenty to fifty years in the future. The economics of climate
change hinges on anticipating how the costs of the various technological
solutions are likely to change over time.
William Nordhaus, an economist from Yale, was present at the
workshop. In a paper published in 1991, he was the first person to address
the economics of climate change.
2
In February 1992, he unveiled the
Nordhaus model, DICE, which stands for Dynamic Integrated Climate
Economy. It is based on a traditional, aggregate macroeconomic model,
similar to the Solow model discussed in Chapter 5, using a single
representative household that works for a single representative firm that
produces a single good. Nordhaus assumes this represents the entire world.
His DICE model extends the Solow model by adding an abatement function
and a damage function. The abatement function specifies the cost of
reducing emissions to a given level. You can think of abatement as an
investment – by spending a given amount of money every year, we reduce
emissions by a certain amount. The damage function gives the future
economic cost of global warming as a function of total emissions. The
reduction in the cost of the damages is like the return on the investment.
Nordhaus performs a cost-benefit analysis: The right level of investment to
combat climate change is computed by maximizing the utility of the
representative agent, which is effectively the best compromise between the
cost of abatement and the benefit of avoiding future damage.
While the Nordhaus model recommended that we should take action to
mitigate climate change, it suggested that we should do so at a measured
pace. In a recent paper, Nordhaus wrote that the optimal, ‘welfare
maximizing’ course of action would eliminate emissions so slowly that it
would result in about 3.4°C (6.1°F) of warming above pre-industrial levels.
3
That’s a lot of warming! Though the resulting sea-level rise would occur
slowly, it would eventually submerge most large cities. Nordhaus
subsequently received the Nobel Prize in 2018 for this work.
I strongly disagree with Nordhaus’s conclusions. Many prominent
mainstream economists, such as Nicholas Stern, Joseph Stiglitz and Jeffrey
Sachs, also disagree.
4
They argue that Nordhaus’s abatement function is
much too costly, his damage function is much too low, and his discount rate
is too high (meaning he doesn’t give enough weight to the future in relation
to the present). I agree with these critiques, but I go a step further:
Addressing energy-related emissions to combat climate change will very
likely save us a lot of money. The technological forecasts from my research
group at Oxford indicate that the green-energy transition will ultimately
make energy prices substantially lower than they have ever been. From a
purely economic perspective, even if climate change were not a looming
threat, we should still make the energy transition quickly (doing most of it
within twenty years). In addition to the huge benefits a fast transition will
reap for the climate, if we discount all the costs to the present, it will
probably save us tens of trillions of dollars. Here’s how my collaborators
and I arrived at that conclusion.
Predicting technological progress
For the economy to make the climate transition as quickly and cheaply as
possible, we need to know which technologies are most likely to succeed in
replacing fossil fuels quickly at the lowest cost. Given that technological
progress depends on innovation, which is by definition unanticipated,
predicting the pace of progress might seem a senseless task. But
surprisingly, rates of technological progress are very predictable, even if the
specific technological solutions that will achieve these rates are not.
Forecasting technological progress is possible because technological
change is persistent, and the rates of change for different technologies vary
widely. Figure 16 documents the enormous diversity in prices of a few
representative goods and services in the United States from 1998 to 2018,
with prices adjusted to include inflation and taking quality improvements
into account. Lower prices are one of the most salient manifestations of
technological progress. In those twenty years, the price of hospital services
skyrocketed, increasing by more than a factor of 2, while the cost of
televisions dropped by a factor of 20. Hospitals made negative progress, at
least in terms of the cost to society, while televisions made rapid progress.
5
Furthermore, the rates of change are persistent: If we had observed these
trends for the first ten years, we could have made a good prediction for the
next ten.
Figure 16. Differences in the price of some goods in the US from 1998–2018.
Moore’s Law is perhaps the best-known method of predicting
technological improvement. In 1965, Gordon Moore, Director of R&D at
Fairchild Semiconductor, noted that the density of components in integrated
circuits doubled roughly once a year and predicted that this trend would
continue for at least ten more years.
6
In 1975, he revised his prediction to a
doubling in density every two years. Roughly fifty years later, his
prediction has proved remarkably accurate. While his prediction applied
only to the density of components (transistors, capacitors, resistors, etc.),
similar improvement rates hold for computer cost, speed and energy
consumption per bit of computation.
It turns out that many other technologies follow a generalized version of
Moore’s Law, in the sense that their prices fall roughly exponentially with
time. This was demonstrated in a 2006 paper by Heebyung Koh and
Christopher Magee. Chris Magee attended the 2008 SFI workshop on green
technologies. He is an emeritus professor of engineering systems at MIT
and was previously Director of Programs and Advanced Engineering at the
Ford Motor Company. Koh and Magee gathered data on a variety of
different technologies, such as electrical transmission cables, flywheels and
batteries, and demonstrated that these technologies improved at exponential
rates over time spans of many decades, though with highly diverse rates of
progress.
7
Gordon Moore was not the first to propose a law for technological
change. There is a much older law for technological improvement that goes
under a variety of names, including learning by doing, the experience curve
and Wright’s law. This law was originally postulated in 1936 by Theodore
Wright, who has an interesting background. He was the brother of both the
influential evolutionary biologist Sewall Wright and Quincy Wright, one of
the pioneers of international political science. Rather than following his
brothers into academia, he became a World War I flying ace and went into
the aviation business after the war. In 1936, he observed that whenever the
cumulative production of a given type of airplane from a given factory
doubled, its cost of production dropped by about 20 per cent.
8
As it turns
out, this law applies to many other technologies besides airplanes, though
the rate at which the price drops varies substantially from technology to
technology (and in most cases is close to zero).
Wright’s Law applies not just to products emerging from a specific
factory; in many cases it applies globally as well, meaning that when the
global production of a given technology doubles, its average global cost of
production drops by x per cent, where x depends on the technology. Wright
was a special advisor to Roosevelt during World War II, in charge of
boosting aircraft production, and he successfully used his own law to
forecast the costs of airplane manufacturing. However, for most
technologies, x is close to zero, which means that Wright’s Law is not
useful. For some technologies, like nuclear power, x can even be negative
(meaning the cost goes up over time rather than down).
9
Because of the
wide variation in improvement rates, supporting some technologies is far
more effective than supporting others.
Why should Wright’s Law hold at all? The popular hypothesis is that
cumulative production correlates with level of effort, and improvement is
proportional to effort; as more of something is produced, more effort will be
put into improving it, and costs will drop. In a paper led by my ex–graduate
student and now Santa Fe Institute colleague James McNerney, we explored
the hypothesis that engineers improve things using a zero-intelligence
model, in which they try out random solutions and pick the best ones. We
showed that this leads to Wright’s Law, and that complicated technologies
with many interacting parts should improve more slowly.
10
Wright’s Law and the generalized Moore’s Law are important because
they provide the best tools we have for predicting the future performance of
a technology. In a commentary on nuclear power in Nature, in 2010, I
published my first prediction of solar-photovoltaic costs using Moore’s
Law, predicting that it would be cheaper than coal-fired electricity by
2020.
11
To put this in context, at the time the global weighted average cost
of solar-PV energy without storage was about 38 cents per kilowatt-hour (in
2020 dollars), much higher than it is now, and most commentators regarded
my prediction as implausible. A widely quoted 2014 article in The
Economist held that ‘solar power is by far the most expensive way of
reducing carbon emissions’.
12
Since then, its cost has plummeted, even
more steeply than I expected; I predicted 12 cents per kilowatt-hour by
2020, and instead it was only 6 cents.
13
Now solar energy is substantially
cheaper than nuclear power, whose costs are in the 12–20 cents per
kilowatt-hour range. In most locations, solar energy is now even cheaper
than coal-fired electricity.
Okay, I was more-or-less right, but so what? My arguments were not
convincing. To be convincing requires more evidence. We needed to gather
data and perform statistical tests.
Our early data-gathering efforts at SFI were led by my Transylvanian
postdoc Béla Nagy. Béla was then in his forties; he had had a career as a
computer programmer before getting his PhD in statistics from the
University of British Columbia. He was passionate in his quest to
understand technological progress, and he worked hard to make our project
succeed.
Given that technological progress is the most important driver of
economic growth, you might think there would be extensive databases
documenting it. Quite the opposite: At the time, it was difficult to find data
systematically recording the performance and cost of technologies over
long spans of time. Government statistical agencies collect data on
consumer products and intermediate economic goods, but only for
economically significant products, and such data is often too aggregated to
be useful. We wanted data for key technologies and tasks, such as
transistors or gene-sequencing – data that statistical offices do not track. So
we had to collect our own, but we had no budget to do so. Béla solved this
problem by assembling a group of high school and college students who
devoted free time to help him scour the literature. They even wrote to
Gordon Moore, who was kind enough to send us the data he had personally
collected on electronic components. The result was the Performance Curve
Database, which has data for about 100 technologies, covering a variety of
performance metrics, including cost, as a function of time.
14
Though created
more than a decade ago, it is still the only publicly available database
documenting technological progress.
To test the predictive power of Moore’s Law, Wright’s Law and several
other proposed laws for technological improvement, our research team
pretended we were in the past. We then made forecasts about future
improvements using only the information that would have been available
back then and compared our forecasts to what really happened. We used this
method to measure the forecasting accuracy of six different hypothesized
laws for technological progress.
15
We made about 6,000 forecasts for sixty-
two different technologies over time horizons ranging from one to thirty
years into the future. To our surprise, Moore’s Law and Wright’s Law tied
for first place. Their forecasts were better than any of the other four
alternatives, and they finished the race in a dead heat.
When we looked more closely at the data, we realized that there was a
simple explanation for the tie: For almost all of our technologies, the cost
dropped roughly exponentially as the cumulative production increased
exponentially. A simple math exercise shows that this results in Wright’s
Law. Béla later realized that this equivalence had been pointed out by
Devendra Sahal, an Indian scholar of technological change who wrote four
books about technological progress in the 1970s and early 1980s.
16
But
when Béla tried to track him down, he found that Sahal had mysteriously
disappeared after the last of these publications. Béla became obsessed with
Sahal, gathering every possible piece of information about his life and
corresponding with his brother in India. Then, about a year later, Béla also
mysteriously disappeared. I hope that he and Sahal found each other, and
that they are together somewhere, discussing the causes of technological
progress.
One of the goals of my work with Béla was to find a formula for the
accuracy of Wright’s Law and Moore’s Law. Making forecasts of unknown
accuracy, which was the usual practice prior to our work, is of limited
usefulness – if you don’t know how good a forecast is, how can you rely on
it? Béla found an approximate formula, but it was complicated and didn’t
work particularly well, and we had no good way to test it.
After moving to Oxford, in 2015 I hired a postdoc named François
Lafond, and we found an elegant solution to this problem. François is an
economist by training, an extraordinarily open-minded scholar, and among
the most intellectually honest scientists I know. He is skeptical of
everything, particularly his own work – which means his results can be
trusted. I have so far managed to convince François to stay at Oxford, and
he now co-leads my research group.
François and I derived a simple formula for the accuracy of Moore’s
Law. We began by generalizing the law, reformulating it as what is called a
geometric random walk with drift.
17
Our underlying hypothesis was so
simple that we assumed that our formula would give mixed results, but
when François tested it on the Performance Curve Database, to our
astonishment, it worked extremely well. When updated to allow for year-to-
year correlations, it did a good job of predicting the accuracy of our
forecasts for diverse technologies and time horizons. With a little help from
me, François managed to derive a similar formula for Wright’s Law.
18
Our formulas for Moore’s Law and Wright’s Law go beyond the state of
the art by predicting the distribution of possible future outcomes. Unlike the
simple application of Wright’s Law, which gives a point forecast with a
single answer of unknown reliability, our formula gives the likelihood of
each possible outcome using a method that has been extensively tested on
many technologies. For example, our forecast for solar panels using
Moore’s Law is shown in Figure 17. The most likely cost for 2030 is
substantially cheaper than it is now, but there is still a 5 per cent probability
that solar panels will be at least as expensive as they are now. Lower costs
are likely but not guaranteed. This forecast was made in 2013; costs since
then have dropped even faster than the median prediction, but they’re well
within the likely values we predicted. Our confidence in the formula comes
from the fact that we know it has done well in the past, not just for solar-PV
modules but also for other technologies.
Our method allows technologies to differ in their rates of improvement.
It also allows them to differ in their volatility: A technology that has
historically stayed close to its trend line is more predictable than a
technology that strays from it (as solar modules did during the first decade
of the millennium).
Figure 17. Prediction of the likely cost of solar-photovoltaic (PV) modules made in 2013. Prices are
in dollars per watt-peak, meaning the price to buy a module that can generate a watt of energy in full
sunlight. The grey circles are historical prices of PV modules and the squares are measured values
since the prediction was made. Each band corresponds to a probability of 5 per cent; at any given
time, there is a 5 per cent probability that the future price will be in the white area outside of the
bands.
This method is extremely useful, but it gives no insight into what
actually causes technological improvement. With hindsight, it is possible to
tell causal stories. For example, the flattening in solar-PV costs between
1999 and 2006 was caused by material shortages, and the plunge
immediately afterward was caused by China’s entering the market. These
kinds of events would have been difficult to forecast, and our method
doesn’t attempt to do so. Each technology has its story, but our model
doesn’t need to know anything about those stories. It just takes advantage of
the fact that technological trends are highly inertial – once a technology
begins a trend, it usually continues that trend. While technologies
sometimes break away from their trends (each story is special), our model
also takes this into account in estimating the future uncertainty.
While Moore’s Law and Wright’s Law give similar forecasts for the data
in the Performance Curve Database, from a policymaker’s point of view
they lead to completely different conclusions. Suppose a policymaker wants
to encourage the success of a technology through feed-in tariffs that support
deployment – for example, by compensating households for putting solar
panels on their roofs. Moore’s Law implies that costs will go down at a
given rate no matter what, so if Moore’s Law were literally true, money
spent on a feed-in tariff would be wasted. In contrast, Wright’s Law
suggests that costs will drop only through effort. This brings up a question
of cause and effect: Do costs go down because cumulative production goes
up (causing effort to go up)? Or does production go up because costs go
down on their own, thereby increasing demand? Policymakers need to
know the answer to this question to invest our tax dollars wisely.
To test the cause and effect of Wright’s Law, François and I tried to find
a good natural experiment and settled on World War II.
19
During World War
II, the United States went from being the eighteenth-largest military in the
world to producing two-thirds of worldwide military equipment (for both
sides combined). We know that President Roosevelt didn’t say, ‘Tanks are
getting cheaper, let’s build more.’ Rather, the US spent whatever it needed
to win the war. Furthermore, while production rose rapidly from 1939 until
the middle of the war, it declined rapidly as the war ended. Since production
stopped increasing exponentially after the war’s end, this makes it possible
to distinguish between Wright’s Law and Moore’s Law.
As usual, collecting data was the biggest hurdle. We hired a research
assistant, Diana Greenwald, who trolled through the archives in Detroit and
Washington, photographed microfiches, sent them to India for transcription
and put together a comprehensive data set for hundreds of products
produced for the US war effort, ranging from high-tech items like radars to
low-tech items like blankets. François performed a careful data analysis,
showing that about half of the cost decline for individual technologies is
explained by their increase in cumulative production. The other half is
explained by the overall trend; the costs of all technologies tended to come
down as the war effort ramped up. Thus we can say with some confidence
that increasing cumulative production can drive prices down, even if this is
not the full story.
So, our answer to policymakers is yes: Subsidies can bring technologies
that follow Wright’s Law down their learning curves and lower their prices.
This doesn’t hold for all technologies, because some, like fossil fuels and
nuclear power, don’t follow Wright’s Law. But for those that do, Wright’s
Law provides useful guidance for finding the cheapest and fastest way to
mitigate climate change. (In addition, James McNerney’s model in Chapter
3 shows that improvements also come from enhancements to the inputs of a
given technology, so, for best results, subsidies need to be distributed
thoughtfully.)
A rapid green-energy transition will likely save us money
We applied our forecasting methods to the green-energy transition in a
research project led by Rupert Way. Rupert began this project after finishing
his PhD in differential geometry, an abstract field of mathematics with no
relation to climate change. However, he was passionate about climate
change, wanted to do something practical, and convinced me that he could
quickly learn what he needed to know. Rupert became an expert on energy
technologies, collected an enormous amount of data, and built an energy
model with some help from Matt Ives, Penny Mealy and myself.
20
The history of energy provides some perspective and motivates our
model. How has the energy system changed in the past? Figure 18 shows
how the energy landscape has evolved over the last 140 years. The plots
have a logarithmic scale, in powers of 10, so exponential trends become
straight lines. The panel on the left gives the historical costs of the principal
energy technologies and the panel on the right gives their deployment. In
the left-hand panel, the diagram becomes congested as we approach the
present, with most of the curves on top of one another, indicating that we
are in a period of unprecedented energy diversity. There are many
technologies competing for dominance, all with global average costs near
$100 per megawatt-hour.
Figure 18. Historical global cost and deployment of energy technologies. The panel on the left shows
the inflation-adjusted useful energy costs (or prices for oil, coal, and gas), while the panel on the right
shows the global production of useful energy.
20
The long-term trends show how this competition is likely to be resolved.
Fossil fuel prices are volatile, but (inflation-adjusted) prices now are similar
to what they were 140 years ago.
21
In contrast, for several decades the costs
of solar photovoltaics, wind and batteries have dropped (roughly)
exponentially, at a rate near 10 per cent per year. If these trends continue,
renewables will soon become much cheaper than fossil fuels, even when the
costs of energy storage are considered. They are already substantially
cheaper than nuclear power, whose cost rose by about a factor of 3 since its
first commercial use in 1956 and then reached a plateau. In contrast, the
cost of solar cells has decreased by more than 3 orders of magnitude since
its first commercial use in the Vanguard satellite in 1958.
The panel on the right shows how the deployment of energy
technologies has evolved since 1880. It documents the slow exponential rise
in the production of oil and natural gas over a century, until they eventually
replaced traditional biomass around 1955 and caught up with coal around
1980. It also shows the rapid rise and plateauing of nuclear energy. But
perhaps the most remarkable feature is the dramatic, exponential rise in the
deployment of solar PV, wind, batteries and hydrogen electrolyzers over the
last decades as they transitioned from niche applications to mass markets.
Their annual rate of increase ranges from about 100 per cent for
electrolyzers to about 20 per cent for wind. Nuclear energy also underwent
a rapid expansion in the 1960s, but, unlike nuclear energy, renewables all
have exponentially-decreasing costs. The combination of exponentially-
decreasing costs and exponentially-increasing deployment has never
occurred for any other energy technologies. This positions renewables to
challenge the dominance of fossil fuels within a decade.
Let’s pause to take in some good news about what is already underway.
Look carefully at the steeply rising curves for solar, wind and batteries in
the right panel, which are growing at unprecedented rates. Rapid action on
climate change is already in progress, though few people are aware of it. In
part, this is because the data is difficult to obtain, but I think it’s mostly
because our intuition for rapid exponential growth is poor. To see it requires
viewing the world through logarithmic glasses. Just when we desperately
need energy technologies to replace fossil fuels, they are appearing and
growing at an exponential rate! If most of us haven’t taken this in, it’s
because exponential change starts out small, sneaking up on us before
suddenly appearing onstage. Assuming that historical trends persist,
renewables will become a substantial part of the energy system over the
next few years.
We need to solve the problem of intermittency for renewable power
sources to fully replace fossil fuels. Solar and wind power are variable, so
we need long-term energy storage. Overnight storage can be accomplished
by batteries, but they aren’t a good solution for longer-term storage. A better
solution is provided by hydrogen-based fuels, in which solar or wind
electricity is used to make hydrogen, which is then used to make fuels such
as ammonia, which are denser and easier to transport and store. Hydrogen-
based fuels can then be used for any application where fossil fuels are
currently used. This includes making electricity; they can be stored and then
cleanly burned later (without carbon emissions) to generate electricity when
sunlight or wind are lacking.
22
Although the electrolyzer technologies
needed to make hydrogen-based fuels are still expensive, their costs, too,
have been declining, and they also show rapid exponential growth (about
100 per cent per year). However, the deployment of hydrogen-based fuels
still lags behind the other technologies, and we need to do everything we
can to maintain and even accelerate their growth.
23
But will clean-energy technology costs continue to drop at the same rate
in the future? And what does this uncertainty imply for the overall cost of
the green-energy transition?
To put my group’s answers to these questions in perspective, let’s first
discuss how mainstream economics models answer them. The dominant
approach is via integrated-assessment models. The Nordhaus DICE model
is a simple example, but there are also much more complicated models that
render the energy system in great detail. For a given target to limit global
warming, integrated-assessment models calculate the ‘optimal’ energy
transition that maximizes the utility of a representative household. These
models are normative, not descriptive. In other words, they attempt to
describe the path we should take, rather than the path we’re likely to take.
Simple models like the Nordhaus model do everything at an aggregate
level, meaning with a single representative agent standing for everyone in
the world, and based on global abatement and damage functions, averaging
over all technologies and all parts of the world. So many different things are
lumped together that it is difficult to compare to reality, and impossible to
properly take the heterogeneous nature of technological change into
account. Many of these models simply assume that technology costs remain
roughly where they are now.
More complicated integrated-assessment models render the energy
system in detail and model technological improvement using Wright’s Law
(though, so far, not with our improved version including error estimates).
They then constrain climate emissions following a given scenario and
compute the set of decisions that maximize utility in this scenario. Among
other things, the output of these models includes the deployment and cost of
each energy technology over time.
An alternative is provided by the World Energy Model, developed by the
highly influential International Energy Agency (IEA). The IEA, a
consortium of thirty-one countries, was founded after the oil crisis of 1973–
74 to oversee oil supplies and has since broadened its mandate to
investigate related global energy issues, including the climate-induced
energy transition. Its World Energy Model is a complicated simulation
covering supply, demand and innovation for all of today’s significant
energy technologies. It makes ‘medium to long-term energy projections’.
(The word projections in effect ducks the responsibility associated with the
word forecast.)
Integrated-assessment models and the World Energy Model have been in
existence since the early 1990s, so we now have almost thirty years of data
available to check their track records. To summarize briefly, their
performance has been terrible. In our paper, led by Rupert Way, we
examined 2,905 projections made by various integrated-assessment models
for the annual rate at which solar-PV costs would fall between 2010 and
2020. The mean value of their projected annual cost reductions was 2.6 per
cent, and all were less than 6 per cent. In stark contrast, during this period
solar-PV costs actually fell by 15 per cent per year. The IEA forecasts are
similarly poor (and have been since the inception of their model). Both
types of models have consistently and wildly underestimated the
deployment of renewables and overestimated their cost. My simple
extrapolation of the exponentially decreasing trend made a far better
forecast.
Why have these models done so poorly? Integrated-assessment models
have typically put in assumptions by hand about the maximum deployment
and maximum growth rates for renewables, and they typically impose floor
costs, corresponding to fixed levels that costs can never fall below. Figure
19 illustrates how floor costs assumed in the past in integrated-assessment
models have repeatedly been violated. There is no empirical evidence
supporting them, and the only arguments for imposing them are based on
supposed ‘common sense’. The reasons for the failure of the IEA’s World
Energy Model are less obvious – it is a complicated model, and the code is
not public – but apparently they rely substantially on expert opinions
instead of data extrapolation. Expert opinions have generally been less
reliable for predicting technological progress than data extrapolation.
24
Figure 19. Track record of projections for PV costs and floor costs. The left panel compares
projections for PV costs to what actually happened. The right panel compares PV costs to floor costs
assumed in various integrated-assessment models, demonstrating that PV costs have consistently
penetrated assumed floor costs.
While these models have been updated in an attempt to correct the
systematic biases in their past projections, and they are improving, their
view of the future continues to differ from what one would infer from
historical trends. Even in its Net Zero Emissions by 2050 scenario, the
current IEA projection is that solar will reach only 16 per cent of electricity
generation in 2050; this was recently updated from its previous projection
of 11 per cent, which itself had been updated from a still-lower number. All
of the IEA adjustments have been in the same direction but have still not
changed sufficiently to match the historical trend. They have always been
wrong by a wide margin, underestimating the deployment of renewables
and overestimating their cost.
In our 2022 paper, ‘Empirically Grounded Technology Forecasts and the
Energy Transition’,
25
we took a different approach. Unlike the models
discussed above, which generate their projections for the deployment of
different technologies endogenously, we assumed hypothetical scenarios for
technology deployment and calculated the probability distribution for their
costs using the methods discussed in the previous section. Rather than
trying to compute optimal scenarios, we simply examined the cost of three
representative scenarios: Fast, Slow and No Transition. Our purpose was
not to find the best possible energy transition but to show that if current
trends continue for even another decade, we can make the green-energy
transition quickly and cheaply.
The deployment of technologies tends to follow an S-curve, in which
deployment increases exponentially and then levels off when the
technology saturates its market.
26
This is evident, for example, for nuclear
power in the right panel of Figure 18. The key difference between our three
scenarios is that the historical deployment trends for renewables level off at
different times.
In our Fast Transition scenario, renewable energy and storage
technologies maintain their current deployment growth rates for a decade,
replacing fossil fuels in two decades. The S-curve doesn’t level off until
renewables become dominant, after which their deployment slows to grow
at 2 per cent per year. We chose 2 per cent growth because that’s the rate at
which global energy usage has been increasing for many decades; we
assume that the past trend for energy demand will continue into the future.
Short-term storage and electrification of most modes of transportation are
achieved with batteries (some in electric vehicles), while long-duration
energy storage and all hard-to-electrify applications are served by
hydrogen-based fuels. We tried to be conservative, erring on the side of
being pessimistic about renewables; for example, we assumed we will need
enough stored energy to run the entire global energy system even if the sun
stopped shining and the wind stopped blowing at the same time for a month
everywhere around the globe (which we estimate is likely more than is
actually needed).
For comparison, we also assumed a Slow Transition scenario, in which
current rapid-deployment trends for renewables slow down immediately, so
that fossil fuels continue to dominate until midcentury. Finally, again for
comparison, we assumed a No Transition scenario, in which the energy
system remains in its current form and each source of energy grows
proportionally at a 2 per cent rate (meaning fossil fuels are locked in
forever). This is close to what are now called ‘worst case’ scenarios (which
were until recently called ‘business as usual’ scenarios).
When we apply our cost-forecasting methods to these three scenarios,
the surprising result is that Fast Transition wins by a good margin – many
trillions of dollars in savings over the No Transition scenario. To state an
exact figure, one must compare future savings to current costs; this is
usually done by assuming a discount rate, which puts more weight on the
present than the future. The Fast Transition costs a bit more now, but it still
produces substantial savings in the future – and for all reasonable discount
rates. With the 1.4 per cent discount rate advocated in the Stern Review on
the Economics of Climate Change, compiled by the UK government in
2006, the average savings of our Fast Transition would amount to $12
trillion.
27
Because rapid deployment brings us down the learning curve
faster, so that costs become lower sooner, the Fast Transition is also
substantially cheaper than the Slow Transition.
There are potential barriers to implementing the renewable-energy
transition quickly. Perhaps the most important is expanding the capacity of
the electrical grid. Electricity plays a much larger role in a world of
renewable energy – all vehicles, for example, will need to switch from
fossil fuels to either electricity or hydrogen-based fuels. We estimate that
grid capacity will need to be expanded by a factor of 4. Although the grid
costs for a rapid green-energy transition are substantial, we forecast that
they are likely to be more than offset by lower energy costs. In 2050, for
example, our estimated global annual expenditure on the electricity network
for the Fast Transition is about $670 billion per year, compared with $530
billion per year for the No Transition. However, the expected total system
cost in 2050 is about $5.9 trillion per year for the Fast Transition and $6.3
trillion per year for the No Transition. Thus, although the additional $140
billion of grid costs might seem expensive, it is significantly less than the
savings that come with cheaper energy.
Another potential barrier is the rapid deployment of technologies to
make hydrogen-based fuel. We assume that their current rapid exponential
growth continues, but it is vital that this trend not be interrupted.
We also examined a nuclear scenario, in which fossil fuels are replaced
mostly by substantially ramping up nuclear power. Nuclear power is already
more expensive than renewable technologies, and the gap will almost
certainly only widen in the future.
28
The nuclear scenario is by far the most
expensive, with an average cost of $15 trillion more than No Transition and
$27 trillion more than the Fast Transition.
29
In Chapter 1, I cited disagreement over austerity policies as an example
of the lack of consensus in economics. The controversy over the cost of the
climate transition is an even more urgent example. This is not just a matter
of academic debate. High cost estimates have dampened enthusiasm for
making the necessary changes quickly. If we are right that mitigating
climate change is a net economic benefit, and it is actually cheaper to act
quickly, then there are few remaining barriers to making the transformation
now, other than the vested interests of the fossil-fuel industry and NIMBY
resistance to grid expansion. Climate economics is an area where
complexity economics can make a huge difference to the world.
30
We have explored the virtues of complexity economics and its
accomplishments to date, but its fullest potential lies ahead of us. Part V
presents my vision of its potential to dramatically improve the reliability of
economic models, and hence to help us formulate policies for solving some
of the world’s biggest problems. What we have accomplished so far only
scratches the surface of what is possible.
...
PART V:
Modeling for a Better Future
We need models that can help navigate the big challenges that we face,
problems like climate change, inequality and financial instability. And we
need more than just conceptual understanding – what we really want are
models that can provide quantitative answers, based on testable predictions.
This requires building complexity-economics models that are carefully
grounded in data and that take all the important effects into account. The
following chapter discusses how to model these big challenges, with some
reflections about what is needed to make this happen. The envisioned
models make full use of state-of-the-art computing and data technology.
While ambitious, they are achievable with sufficient investment. The effort
involved is substantial, but the potential payoff is massive.
...
14.
Guidance to Solve Some of Our Big
Problems
Keeping the economy on a steady course
As I write, we are in a period of high inflation and everyone is concerned
about prices. Wages aren’t keeping up. Unemployment remains low, which
is a good thing, but it may be fueling inflation. The US Federal Reserve is
raising interest rates, trying to do a balancing act to calm inflation without
causing unemployment to soar and send us into a recession. The pundits are
debating: Is inflation just temporary or will it be persistent? How much do
we need to raise interest rates? Are there other policy levers besides interest
rates that could achieve these goals more effectively? If so, how should we
use them? Controlling inflation requires understanding the interaction of
many different factors – the money supply, lending, inequality, supply
chains, oil prices and foreign investment, among others. To properly control
inflation, we need models that take all these factors into account, in order to
understand how they will respond to the policy levers the government can
wield.
Inflation is the problem of the moment, but, as we move through the
business cycle, the economy keeps presenting us with new problems.
Agent-based models will eventually prove a better guide than the
mainstream tools currently available, but this requires taking them to a new
level. Existing macroeconomic agent-based models – for example, the
EURACE model built by Herbert Dawid’s group in Bielefeld, the Keynes-
Schumpeter model built by Giovanni Dosi’s group in Pisa, and the
pioneering series of models built by the ‘Italian cats’ Domenico delli Gatti
and Mauro Gallegati – model the economy in considerable detail and have
provided useful insight into many macroeconomic questions, but they
remain qualitative rather than quantitative tools.
1
They can tackle problems
like inflation and the causes of business cycles for a hypothetical economy
but not for a specific economy at a specific time. Building on earlier
models, Sebastian Poledna and his collaborators have recently developed an
agent-based model that was used to make quantitative predictions for the
Austrian economy.
2
They tested it head-to-head against the best DSGE
models for Austria and showed that its predictions were roughly as good.
The Bank of Canada is now using a further-developed version of this model
in-house. But as already noted, the performance of DSGE models is poor –
we need to do better.
3
Several groups, including mine, are working to build agent-based models
that can out-predict DSGE models. Our new model incorporates several
innovative features: For example, rather than using a representative
household, it features a demographically accurate synthetic population with
millions of households (matching age, education, race and consumption
habits). Instead of using a representative firm, we model the behavior of
tens of thousands of the largest firms, in one-to-one correspondence with
real firms. Instead of modeling a single country, we use the fifty-or-so
countries where data is available, making it possible to track economic
disruptions as they ricochet around the globe.
Our new model aspires to match all the properties of the economy as
accurately as the data allow and is both a microeconomic and
macroeconomic model at the same time. It can predict key indicators, like
aggregate unemployment, but it can also make micro-predictions, like the
effects on a particular industry, or even a particular firm in a given industry.
It will allow us to predict distributional properties, like how a given policy
will affect inequality or how inequality affects economic output, with far
more fidelity than any existing macroeconomic model.
Building models like this is not easy. It requires the acquisition and
curation of many large data sets to ground the model and test that it is
working properly. It requires the development and maintenance of software
libraries to implement models and incrementally improve them. It requires
ample cloud-computing resources to run and test models. It requires a large
team of researchers who have the necessary skills and domain knowledge to
monitor model performance, diagnose failures and correct them. The
resources needed to do all this properly are substantial, but as we will
discuss in the final chapter, the payoff could be huge.
Reducing inequality
Since the 1970s, economic inequality has grown in many developed
countries, particularly in the United States and Great Britain. For half a
century, American workers have gotten poorer: US real wages for ordinary
(non-supervisory) workers are lower than they were in 1970. Over the same
time period, the income of the top 0.1 per cent has grown fivefold, to more
than $5,000,000.
4
The good news is that the economic gap between
developed and developing countries has diminished, although the disparity
remains enormous. Mexico’s GDP per capita, for example, is only one-sixth
of that of the United States, and the GDP per capita of many African
countries is much smaller. Inequalities create friction between the haves and
have-nots that eats away at the fabric of society. A certain level of inequality
is arguably inevitable, but for our global civilization to function well, and
fairly, it needs to be reduced to sensible levels.
5
As inequality continues to disrupt society, economists like Thomas
Piketty and others have shown that government policies can have
unintended side-effects that exacerbate the problem.
6
There are overt
examples, such as the 2008 financial crisis, when the US government bailed
out banks while homeowners with subprime mortgages were left hanging.
But there are many other, less obvious examples, like quantitative easing
programs, in which central banks buy up bonds or other assets to control
interest rates and stimulate the economy. While this might accomplish
macroeconomic goals, it can have the undesirable side-effect of increasing
inequality (quantitative easing lowers interest rates, which boosts the stock
market while doing nothing for the poor). To gain a full understanding of
any policy, we need to consider its implications for all the parts of the
economy.
Understanding inequality has recently become a hot topic in mainstream
economics, but standard theoretical models struggle to provide reliable
quantitative answers; they cannot properly incorporate inequality without
sacrificing verisimilitude in other ways. HANK models replace the
representative household of other DSGE models (see Chapter 5) with a
continuum of representative households with different earning power,
ranging from poor to rich. These models can incorporate effects such as the
fact that rich households have a much higher savings rate than poor ones.
But, while the HANK models incorporate inequality, they do so only
crudely, and they do not include other essential features of the economy,
such as the heterogeneity of the production network.
Agent-based models, in contrast, can model inequality effects with little
effort. The use of synthetic household populations can capture the full
heterogeneity of real households, whose income and wealth can change
over time. The ability to accurately predict policy outcomes affecting
inequality is one of the biggest strengths of agent-based models.
The use of synthetic households builds on a method called
microsimulation that has been used for decades. It sits on the edge of the
mainstream – the pioneers of the method never received Nobel Prizes, and
microsimulation is not considered a sexy topic in economics research – but
it’s a key tool for policy analysis. Microsimulation models are often used,
for example, to evaluate the demographic effects of tax policies. A synthetic
population is matched to the real population, and the model then simulates
how tax policies affect the balance sheet of each household.
My group and others are borrowing methods from microsimulation in
developing our new agent-based models, but with one essential difference:
In a microsimulation model, there’s no feedback between consumers and
producers. If consumers spend less as a result of a tax, these models don’t
capture the effect this would have on producers, who might cut production
and fire workers, thus increasing unemployment, and so on. Agent-based
models consistently take the interactions of the various parts of the
economy into account. The indirect effects of policies can often be much
larger than direct effects.
How does inequality affect growth? Does increasing inequality bring
about slower growth, or does it happen the other way around? Or is the
relationship between the two context-dependent? There’s a tradeoff between
the two effects: Growth requires investment, but it also requires consumers.
When wealth becomes too concentrated, there is plenty of capital but less
consumption. But if wealth becomes too equal, many believe the economy
will stall due to lack of investment capital. Inequality also affects interest
rates and inflation – concentrating wealth takes money out of circulation,
which is deflationary. This may be an important cause of the low inflation
and interest rates of the past two decades.
Properly understanding inequality requires good quantitative models,
and our new agent-based models should be able to accomplish this.
7
By
using synthetic populations, we can precisely understand who will be the
winners and who will be the losers from changes in policies. Agent-based
modeling offers the possibility of creating a digital laboratory where any
proposed new policy can be debugged, and its effect on inequality
understood, before it’s implemented. This could reduce poverty and
unemployment, and save governments from painful mistakes with
disastrous effects on the poor.
Avoiding financial crises
Chapters 10 and 11 discussed how monitoring market ecology could help
regulators do a better job of keeping the financial system on a steady
course. The regulators in almost all developed countries could easily gather
the data to monitor the balance sheets for every actor in the system. As my
graduate student Maarten Scholl demonstrated in his thesis, it is possible to
classify market participants according to their trading strategies.
8
As
predicted by my theory of market ecology (see Chapter 10), monitoring the
wealth invested in each type of strategy would enable regulators to know
when destabilizing trading strategies are becoming large enough to cause
problems. The ability to accurately simulate markets, as demonstrated by
Aymeric Vie (with help from Maarten), could be immensely valuable. As
already mentioned, having such a financial laboratory could allow us to
evaluate new financial instruments and avoid financial crises.
While the 2008 financial crisis caused many problems within the
financial system, even greater damage was inflicted on the economy as a
whole. To understand how disruptions flow back and forth between the
financial system and the real economy, we need to merge models of
financial crises with macroeconomic models. This requires building
detailed maps for how funding flows from the financial system to the real
economy, linking the digital laboratory for the financial system with the
digital laboratory for the real economy. This isn’t difficult to do
conceptually, but it requires gathering an enormous amount of data. As
before, the task is substantial but the rewards could be far bigger.
Recovering from disasters
Financial disasters have global effects. So do other kinds of disasters: The
Fukushima earthquake and tsunami, Hurricane Katrina, the COVID
pandemic and the war in Ukraine are only a few recent examples. Even
local events, like Fukushima, can have effects that are felt around the world
because of their links to the global production network. The economics of
disasters are very different from ordinary economic behavior – the
economic shocks from disasters tend to be large, localized and sudden.
Though each disaster is unique – Zeus is capricious – the responses to them
are similar: Disasters cause disturbances in supply and/or demand,
producing shortages of specific goods and services, which in turn cause
disruptions to production, and so on.
Our model for the impact of the COVID pandemic on the UK economy,
discussed in the Prologue, provides a template for modeling the economic
consequences of disasters in general. That model allows us to anticipate
how the shocks caused by a disaster will propagate through the economy,
predict how much damage will be caused and explore strategies for
mitigating that damage. Because disasters often directly affect only a few
specific industries and geographic locations, aggregate models are of little
use – there are many devils in the details that require fine-grained models to
understand. Our original model was constructed at the level of fifty-five
industries and was based on a few representative households. With
sufficient resources, we can create a model at the level of individual firms
with a demographically and geographically accurate synthetic population.
Such a model would not only be more accurate but would answer many
more questions.
Disasters happen quickly and are usually unexpected, leaving little time
to build new models. One instead wants a library of models that are ready to
go, or can at least be quickly refitted for a new situation. Good disaster
models would also allow us to anticipate the likely harm from future
disasters, such as more intense hurricanes due to climate change, and plan
to minimize their effect.
Reducing climate change
As discussed in Part IV, the changing climate is probably the most urgent
problem humanity as a whole has ever faced. While the data-driven
techniques described there are useful tools, they address only a small part of
the problem. To help guide us through the necessary green-energy and
agriculture transition, we need models that can help us plan. How should a
country best develop its economy to profit from the transition? What is the
right strategy for a business to position itself to take advantage of the new
economy? Navigating these questions requires a better understanding of
how the transition will play out for the many facets of the economy,
including energy, agriculture, innovation, finance, production and labor.
To try to answer these questions, my postdocs, students, exstudents and I
are designing what we call the Climate Policy Laboratory. The purpose of
the Climate Policy Laboratory is to analyze and assess strategies for
mitigating climate change in order to transform the global economy as
rapidly, fairly and efficiently as we can. It will allow us to evaluate the
effectiveness of the various strategies available to decision-makers at levels
ranging from households to firms to nation-states.
Our envisioned Climate Policy Laboratory takes a modular approach. As
represented in the schematic diagram below, it’s composed of eight
modules, each corresponding to a different facet of the climate-change
mitigation problem. These modules can be developed and used by
themselves, and tested on their own against real data. They can then be
integrated to understand how they interact. For example, the Production
Network module affects what happens to industries or firms, and the
Households module simulates consumption of their products and the labor
supplied to them – each affects the other. When all the modules are used
together, they create a fine-grained model for long-range economic growth
and political action on a number of scales, which could help guide us
through the green-energy transition.
Figure 20. The Climate Policy Laboratory. The modules represent the different components of the
economy, and can be used separately or in tandem. To keep the diagram comprehensible, we show
only a few of the most important connections linking the modules. (Government & International
Relations, for example, affects everything.)
Each module has inputs and outputs that can include physical goods and
services and flows of money or information. For most of the modules,
outcomes depend on agents, such as government policymakers, business
executives or household members. Our goal is to enable decision-makers to
understand, in concrete terms, how their actions will affect them and their
organizations in the global context of the green-energy transition.
The eight modules of the Climate Policy Laboratory are briefly
described below:
• The Production Network Module contains the industries and firms that
provide goods and services. This module tracks the inputs and outputs
of each firm and each industry, and the products they make, through
time. Our goal is to do this precisely – that is, the firms will be
recognizable companies, realistically headquartered in specific
countries. This module allows us to envision possible scenarios for the
green transition in great detail, as well as to track carbon emissions
comprehensively and accurately.
9
• The Energy Systems Module provides detailed technoeconomic
predictions about the costs of decarbonizing energy producers and
energy-using industries, recommending the technology-investment
portfolio likely to be most cost-effective for making the transition.
• The Agriculture and Land Use Module allows us to understand the
green-food transition and the emergence of sustainable production
landscapes that deliver multiple ecosystem services, including carbon
sequestration.
• The Households Module represents people, who are both consumers
and workers, using a demographically realistic synthetic population of
individuals. It also incorporates the occupational-labor transition
model described in Chapter 4 and allows us to track how the supply of
occupational labor will shift in response to changes in the production
network on the route to net-zero carbon emissions.
• The Innovation and Technological Change Module allows us to
understand the innovative trends driving the transition. It will help us
determine the best technologies to make a speedy transition to net-zero
carbon emissions, and help understand how this process can be
accelerated. This module is based on an analysis of patents, historical
technology performance and other sources of information about
technological change.
10
• The Investment and Financial Stability Module tracks where the
financial capital needed for the transition comes from, and suggests
ways to prevent physical and transitional risks from destabilizing
financial markets and spilling over to the real economy (thereby
causing recessions and delaying the transition). This module will
identify the providers of capital, their linkages to each other and their
linkages to the firms in the real economy.
• The Green Industries Strategies Module allows us to recommend
developmental pathways that countries should follow to take
advantage of the transition.
11
• The Government and International Relations Module enables us to
differentiate the decision-making processes concerning climate change
mitigation in each nation-state, based on its system of governance and
responsiveness to factors such as economic success, popular opinion
and vested interests.
We already have prototypes for most of these modules, but it will require
substantial resources to develop them for industrial-strength applications,
link them together and turn them into practical tools that can be used on a
day-to-day basis.
The perceptive reader will have noticed that the proposed models for
addressing the big problems have a great deal in common. All of them
depend on properly representing firms and industries, and constructing
synthetic household populations. The details of the models are different;
understanding the short-term economic effects of a hurricane requires a
model substantially different from one that anticipates how occupational
labor will change over the next twenty years, but those two models also
share many components. This creates an economy of scale – aspects of the
models can be modular, and therefore may be bolted together as required.
Solving one problem makes solving the next problem easier.
Sustainable growth?
Creating a sustainable economy is the biggest challenge facing civilization.
Mitigating climate change is an important step, but it is just one of many
problems that need to be solved before the economy can operate sustainably
without further degrading the biosphere and destroying itself in the process.
I believe we can create a prosperous economy with a small environmental
footprint, but we don’t understand how to do this. Complexity economics
can help guide us.
Tim Jackson and many others say that to have a sustainable economy we
need to stop growing, or even have negative growth.
12
While I agree that we
urgently need to make the economy sustainable as quickly as possible, and I
don’t think growth is an important goal for its own sake, I worry it may be
counterproductive to pit sustainability against growth. There are too many
greedy people, too many vested interests and developing countries are
unlikely to embrace policies that leave them behind. Fortunately, I think it
is possible to achieve growth and sustainability at the same time.
The green-energy transition provides a good example. While renewable
energy does have environmental impacts, these are much smaller than those
of fossil fuels. As discussed in Chapter 13, we predict that renewable energy
will soon make energy cheaper and cleaner than it has ever been. This will
be a boon for everyone, and especially for developing countries. Producing
energy will still have some environmental effects, but these will be
dramatically reduced.
Growth is traditionally defined in terms of GDP. There are much better
indicators of prosperity that could provide superior measuring sticks for
well-being, but even GDP suggests that things are improving. GDP has
been dematerializing at a rate of about 0.7 per cent per year for many
decades, meaning that the weight-per-dollar of real (global) GDP has been
declining. As it evolves, the economy is becoming more information and
service intensive – in other words, industries making products with small
material needs are comprising a larger and larger fraction of the economy –
making each unit of GDP more sustainable than it was before. The rate is
still too slow to counterbalance the global average long-term growth rate of
roughly 2 per cent per year, but if we could double the rate of
dematerialization it would only take a 30 per cent reduction in the growth
rate to bring the two into balance. Of course, sustainability is about more
than material balance, but this is another step in the right direction.
Granular complexity economics models can help us achieve
sustainability. The sustainability of a product depends on the sustainability
of its inputs. Different firms in the same industry can have very different
environmental footprints. To measure sustainability we need to assess the
environmental footprint of every firm and product for the entire production
network and track the flow of unsustainability through the production
network. Complexity economics models that operate on this scale could
provide guidance to help us coax the economy into becoming sustainable
with a minimum of economic pain.
Another effective way to lower our environmental impact is by reducing
global population. Several countries, such as Japan, already have declining
populations, and most demographers estimate that the global population
will begin to decline before the end of this century. Declining populations
place a heavier burden on the young to support the old, with side-effects
such as declining housing prices, so it brings problems of its own. As
already mentioned, complexity economics models can easily be built with
demographically accurate synthetic populations, and could help us better
understand how to run an economy with an aging population.
If I am right, and we can show that sustainability and growth are
compatible, sustainability will be easier to achieve. If I am wrong, we will
need to convince people to stop growing the economy and plan carefully to
make de-growth as painless as we can. Either way, complexity economics
can help us achieve sustainability as soon as possible.
This chapter has presented a sketch of how agent-based models could be
used to help guide us through some of our biggest problems, but what do
we need to do to realize this goal, and what economic benefits would it
provide?
...
15.
Removing the Roadblocks
I was taught the way of progress was neither swift nor easy.
Marie Curie
Complexity economics is still in its infancy, and a great deal of work
remains to be done to realize its full benefits. What are the costs and what
would the benefits be? How long will it take?
Collecting better data
Data is the principal driver of scientific progress. There’s a bidirectional
feedback between data and theory: Data both inspires the development of
theories and makes it possible to test them, while theories determine the
type of data we collect. Theories can only be proved wrong or right by data;
when this doesn’t happen, theories become detached from reality, and
science gets lost.
Better data is of central importance for improving agent-based models.
Unlike traditional mainstream models, which need aggregate data, agent-
based models need fine-grained data about individual firms and consumers
to realize their potential. This doesn’t mean that they necessarily need data
about specific firms and consumers, which might violate their privacy, but
they need data to tell them how typical firms and consumers behave.
Unfortunately, though it is feasible to collect fine-grained data, this often
does not happen because current data collection systems are geared to
provide the aggregate data needed by mainstream models. This creates a
chicken-and-egg problem: Because agent-based models are not mainstream,
the data are not collected, and because the data aren’t available, this
handicaps efforts to create agent-based models that make superior
predictions, which is a prerequisite for acceptance by the mainstream.
Progress in fundamental physics over the last fifty years illustrates how
science succeeds when we have the right data to test theories, and how it is
stymied when this is lacking. Fundamental physics made astounding
progress during the first two-thirds of the twentieth century, leading to the
theory of quantum mechanics, which predicts the behavior of atoms, and
the standard model, which predicts the existence and behavior of the
elementary particles that are the building blocks of matter and energy. The
data engines that drove these discoveries were particle accelerators, which
probe the structure of matter and energy by smashing particles together. But
making progress requires probing ever-smaller scales, which can only be
done by bigger, more powerful accelerators, using exponentially increasing
amounts of energy and money. As larger and larger accelerators were built,
data flowed in at a steady rate and particle physics advanced rapidly. But
each discovery cost more and required more energy than the one before it.
The current state of the art in physics is the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN. It is 27 kilometers in circumference and consumes 1.3 terawatt-
hours of electricity a year. The electricity alone costs $23.5 million
annually, enough to power 300,000 homes. But this is only a small part of
its cost – it employs about 2,200 people, with an operating budget of about
$1 billion per year. Its crowning achievement to date was the observation of
the Higgs boson in 2012, which confirmed theoretical predictions published
in 1964. This observation required a forty-year effort and cost about $13
billion.
1
Gathering the data needed to understand the origins of dark matter and
dark energy requires even higher energies. Building an accelerator that
could do this would require such a massive expenditure of resources that
it’s unlikely to ever happen. Absent alternative sources of data, progress in
fundamental physics has nearly ground to a halt. The theories are far ahead
of the data and thus have become increasingly speculative, and the field is
bogged down in doctrinaire battles over the correct approach.
Fortunately, there are no such fundamental limits in economics. Quite
the opposite: It is now possible to collect vast quantities of data at a level of
detail that would have been inconceivable in 1950. Unfortunately, this isn’t
happening on the scale needed for agent-based models to fully realize their
potential.
In an ideal situation, to render the economy with verisimilitude, agent-
based models need data about the behavior of individual households and
firms. We don’t need information about any actual individuals, but we do
need to know in general how individuals make their decisions. For example,
what kind of house is a household with a given income and age profile
likely to buy? What are they likely to consume? How does this change in a
recession? Similarly, we need information about supply chains. In agent-
based modeling heaven, we would have access to the invoices and receipts
of all the companies in the world. These could then be used to initialize
agent-based models capable of simulating the economy in detail and
making much better predictions about everything, including how businesses
respond to disasters, business cycles and long-term growth.
Since we do not live in agent-based modeling heaven, the complexity-
economics group at Oxford and others have been developing methods for
reconstructing firm-level production networks. Such data is hard to obtain,
because firms don’t like to make their invoices and receipts public. There
are some countries (Belgium, Chile, Brazil, Ecuador, the Scandinavian
nations) where such data exists, but it’s hard to access, and most countries
don’t even collect this data. In the United States, it’s possible to obtain
partial information about the production network through a combination of
public regulatory filings and the media, and there are companies that collect
and sell such data. This provides a starting point, but the picture is highly
incomplete.
Reconstructing the firm-level network from the available data is like
trying to assemble a jigsaw puzzle with hundreds of thousands of pieces,
when you only have a small fraction of them and there is no picture on the
box. This might sound impossible, but, in a paper led by my clever graduate
student Luca Mungo, we showed that machine-learning methods are
remarkably effective in solving this problem.
2
We’re in the process of
developing better methods, ones which combine all possible sources of data
on the production network that are good enough for modeling purposes,
even if they miss the details.
You may be thinking: Wait a minute! This sounds really intrusive. What
about Big Brother? Fortunately, we can do all this without leaking
confidential information. New statistical methods have been developed that
make it possible to construct randomized synthetic populations that match
almost any desired characteristic of a real population, without giving away
any information about real individuals. Similarly, there are now companies
that specialize in holding the supply chains of individual firms in secure
silos, allowing models to probe the silos of many different firms, as needed,
without giving away any firm’s confidential information. It is vital to
preserve confidentiality, and this requires effort and care, but it is feasible to
do so.
Developing methods and infrastructure
We need to improve techniques for fitting agent-based models to time
series, create an appropriate software infrastructure, and establish standard
interfaces and benchmarks so that models can be tested against each other.
Models always have free parameters; these are like knobs that can be
turned to produce a whole family of related models. Fitting a model to data
requires finding the model within this family that most closely
approximates the data.
3
There are now many well-developed procedures for
fitting models if the functions they’re based on are smooth, meaning that
there are no discontinuities or kinks, but the problem becomes harder when
this is not the case. Mapping between the inputs and outputs of agent-based
models often lacks a simple expression in mathematical terms. Worse still,
it’s always nonlinear (otherwise no one would bother making an agent-
based model). For many years, it has been difficult to fit agent-based
models to data in a systematic manner; however, there has recently been
substantial progress.
4
Another significant problem is that agent-based models are written in
many different programming languages that are incompatible with each
other, making it hard to compare their outputs. There are no standard
interfaces that let you mix and match, taking part of model A and using it in
model B. There are no benchmark data sets on which to run different
models to compare their predictions. Agent-based modeling for economics
is still in early stages, but fortunately it is beginning to make rapid progress.
Institutional support
In its present form, complexity economics lacks a home in academia. In the
United States, there is only one active research group, led by Robert Axtell
at George Mason University. There are perhaps ten small research groups in
the rest of the world, and tenure-track positions are extremely rare. The
situation in central banks is slightly better: Four or five central banks now
support small agent-based modeling efforts. In industry, in contrast, agent-
based modelers for problems like traffic control are very much in demand.
The resistance to complexity economics in conventional economics
departments is so strong that mainstream academia will likely be the last to
accept it. Before this happens, I expect agent-based models to find practical
applications in both industry and central banks. This will put pressure on
academia, and ultimately the gate to economics departments will open – or,
alternatively, new departments doing complexity economics may be created
to provide an academic home.
One thing that could dramatically alter the future course of economics is
a change in the criteria for the Nobel Prize in economics, which motivates
exceptionally ambitious and talented young researchers and strongly
influences its scientific agenda. The five original Nobel Prizes – in physics,
chemistry, physiology and medicine, peace, and literature – were
established in 1896 by a grant from Alfred Nobel. An essential criterion for
awarding the prizes in physics, chemistry and physiology and medicine is
empirical validation. If a theory has not been shown to be empirically valid,
no matter how popular, conceptually appealing or influential it is, no prize
is given. This criterion is strict. For example, although the general theory of
relativity is perhaps the most profound and remarkable accomplishment in
the history of science, Einstein’s Nobel Prize was awarded, in 1921, for
‘services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law
of the photoelectric effect’, because general relativity, while supported by
observation of the solar eclipse of 1919, was not considered sufficiently
well verified.
5
The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred
Nobel, colloquially called the Nobel Prize in economics, was established
much later, in 1968. Although the nomination and selection processes
follow a procedure similar to those used for the other prizes, the selection
criteria for economics are closer to those used for the literature and peace
prizes than those for the other science prizes. The main criterion is
influence within the field of economics. Many of the prizes have been given
for theories that have not been empirically verified, and probably never will
be, because in hindsight they are very likely wrong. But why shouldn’t the
same criteria used in other sciences apply to economics as well? If the
Nobel Prize in economics made empirical validation an essential criterion,
this could prompt a more scientific approach to the study of economics.
For the last decade or so, my colleagues and I have been trying to fund
quantitative, large-scale complexity-economics models in the public sector.
While we have had some generous supporters (see the Acknowledgements
to this book), it is difficult to raise the funding needed to do this at scale.
Government funding agencies usually ask the advice of mainstream
economists, who do not usually support this idea. With a few exceptions,
most private foundations have more conventional charitable goals and do
not understand the need.
To bring these ideas to scale, my colleagues and I have started a
company called Macrocosm. Our goal is to build large-scale granular
models of the economy that make better predictions and reduce them to
practice, so they can be used day in and day out to address the important
problems discussed above. Our strategy is to fund our efforts through the
commercial sector, trying to guide it toward a more sustainable economy,
while keeping as much of the modeling power as possible available for
public good. Our intention is to put our models in the hands of treasury
departments, central banks and other influential actors in the global
economy so that they can plan more effectively.
Let’s conclude by zooming out to the big picture and thinking about the
benefits of complexity economics for humanity as a whole.
...
16.
Becoming a Conscious Civilization
The principal contradiction in the whole system comes about because of the
inability of men to forgo immediate gain for a longtime good [. . .] We do
not yet have a sufficient number of people who are ready to make the
immediate sacrifice in favor of a long-term investment.
Dwight Eisenhower
1
If the real economy is the metabolism of civilization, and the financial
system its enteric nervous system (its gut brain), then scientific models are
an important component of civilization’s nascent cerebral cortex. Just as the
cerebral cortex enables us to make sense of our environment, detect and
avoid dangers, plan ahead and reason, scientific models augment
civilization’s collective cognitive abilities. We increasingly use science and
scientific models to plan for the future and avert environmental threats. As
noted, agent-based models provided useful advice during the COVID
pandemic. The ability to rapidly create and manufacture vaccines saved
many lives. NASA’s Scout program, which searches for and performs
hazard assessments for potentially threatening near-Earth objects, such as
asteroids, may one day save Earth from a major existential catastrophe.
Weather forecasting helps us direct air travel and avert major accidents, and
climate prediction has alerted us to a major existential global threat, even if
we have so far been slow to heed its advice.
As climate change illustrates, we are increasingly altering our
environment, and in the course of doing so, creating unintended existential
threats to ourselves. While we once thought of nature as an entity unto
itself, independent of humanity, no aspect of the environment in today’s
world is unaffected by human activity. Forty per cent of global
photosynthesis is now required to support human civilization. For better or
worse, the world has become our garden, and we need to do a better job of
tending it.
To return to a biological analogy, in addition to the functions listed
above, our cerebral cortex provides us with the ability to understand and
model ourselves, which we call consciousness. Selfawareness is essential
for allowing individuals to cooperate and function as a society. Similarly, as
we increasingly dominate the planet, we need better models of our
collective behavior in order to survive and prosper. Civilization needs to
become more conscious.
Economics plays a central role in creating our collective environment.
Agent-based models of the global economy could potentially allow us to
better understand how our actions will shape our selfconstructed
environment and shape the future. This would endow civilization with
greater self-understanding and awareness and make a valuable contribution
to increasing civilization’s consciousness.
Throughout most of history, we have simply let events unfold. History
might be a guide, but its lessons can be murky and hard to follow. In
economics, statistical models and AI are useful, but they are inherently
limited – partly because past events are never enough like events in the
present, and partly because the world is always changing. As culture and
technology co-evolve, we create new technologies that lead to genuinely
new situations, with side-effects that are difficult to anticipate.
We now have the capability to build realistic agent-based models that
will allow us to safely experiment with diverse ideas about the best way to
run our economy and navigate societal challenges. These models will be
pale reflections of the real world, but, by grounding them in empirical data
and continually testing them, we can create and experiment with artificial
economies that yield useful insights and advice. Even if far from perfect,
their practical guidance could allow us to avert a great deal of economic and
social pain.
To put this in context, global GDP is on the order of $80 trillion per year.
The 2008 financial crisis cost the US alone approximately $10 trillion.
Suppose that by spending $100 million over the next five years we could
build a well-calibrated agent-based model of the global economy and avert
the next financial crisis of similar size. The payoff would be 100,000 to 1,
which corresponds to a financial return of 10 million per cent!
But let’s make a more sober estimate. Averting the next crisis with
absolute certainty is too optimistic. Suppose that the odds of succeeding are
only 1 in 100, and that by using a successful model we reduce the impact of
the crisis by only 1 per cent, meaning it is only slightly less bad – 99 per
cent of what it would have been otherwise. This might not sound like much
of an improvement – indeed, I think it is far too pessimistic – but even so
the return on the investment would still be 10 to 1, corresponding to a
financial return of 1,000 per cent.
Similar payoffs can be reaped by investing in models for other big
problems, such as navigating the green-energy transition, which will easily
cost us tens of trillions of dollars if we get it wrong, not to mention the
potential loss of biodiversity and the danger of increasing inequality and
social unrest. There are synergies between these problems; building a
modular laboratory to solve the climate problem makes it easier to solve
others. State-of-the-art agent-based models of the production network,
household consumption and the occupational network will let us do
economics on timescales ranging from days to decades. The calculation
above suggests that their construction is likely to be a very valuable
investment.
That said, it would be misleading to evaluate the benefits of prescient
models in purely monetary terms. A financial crisis that costs $10 trillion is
not just about rich people losing a lot of money; it entails widespread
unemployment, impoverishment, opioid use and all the other problems that
arise when people are put under financial stress.
Some might say that trying to smooth out the swings in the business
cycle is a bad idea. In Joseph Schumpeter’s theory of creative destruction,
mentioned in Chapter 2, business cycles and crises serve a useful role
because they clean out the dead wood, removing the incumbents to make
room for more dynamic, higher-quality businesses. But, even if
Schumpeter’s theory is true, recessions and crises may not be the only way
to achieve creative destruction. Building models like our Climate Policy
Laboratory, described in Chapter 14, might help persuade governments to
pursue other policies that could keep the economy on a steadier course
while allowing for some creative destruction.
In Chapter 14, I outlined how we could build a suite of new models to
help us solve some of the biggest problems facing civilization. Doing this
right would take a budget of tens of millions of dollars a year. This might
sound expensive, but to put it in perspective, we currently spend more than
$1 billion a year to smash elementary particles into each other, about $5
billion a year to predict the weather and about $500 million a year on polar
research. While I am a fan of all these activities – I am not advocating any
cuts in their funding – these figures suggest that it should be feasible to
spend a comparably modest amount to explore a new way of doing
economics that could help save civilization.
I believe that we can regulate the financial system to do its job well
without stirring up volatility and exacerbating inequality. I believe we can
implement policies that more fairly distribute profits while increasing our
economic output and shared well-being. I believe we can create a
sustainable economy that can promote the health of the earth’s ecosystems
while allowing us to prosper. I believe we can have the best of both worlds,
creating a smooth-running economy while allowing enough turnover for the
forces of creative destruction to do their job. But to create a road-map for
how to achieve these goals, we need to invest the collective resources and
effort to build large-scale quantitative agent-based models and let them
prove their full worth.
Sometime in the future, we are sure to create detailed agent-based
models of the global economy. Such models will be coupled to physical
models of the earth’s environment, and sociological and political agent-
based models of our collective behavior.
2
I have no doubt that this will
eventually happen: The question is, when will it happen? We now have the
capability – the sooner we do it, the sooner we will reap the benefits.
A crash program to build full-scale complexity-economics models is a
good bet: One that could guide us toward greater prosperity, make our
planet healthier and help humanity thrive.
...
Bibliography
Aleta, Alberto, David Martín-Corral, Michiel A. Bakker, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Marco Ajelli, Maria
Litvinova, Matteo Chinazzi, Natalie E. Dean, M. Elizabeth Halloran, Ira M. Longini Jr, Alex
Pentland, Alessandro Vespignani, Yamir Moreno and Esteban Moro. 2021. ‘Quantifying the
Importance and Location of SARS-CoV-2 Transmission Events in Large Metropolitan Areas’.
medRxiv 2020.12.15.20248273; doi: 10.1101/2020.12.15.20248273.
Alleman, T. W., K. Schoors and J. M. Baetens. 2023. ‘Validating a Dynamic Input-Output Model for
the Propagation of Supply and Demand Shocks During the COVID-19 Pandemic in Belgium’.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.16377.pdf
Anderson, Philip W. 2000. ‘Emergence, reductionism, and the seamless web: When and why is
science right?’ Current Science, vol. 78, No. 6.
Anderson, Philip W., Kenneth J. Arrow and David Pines (eds). 1988. The Economy as an Evolving
Complex System. New York: CRC Press.
Arnold, Robert, Jeanne De Sa, Tim Gronniger, Allison Percy and Julie Somers. 2006. ‘A Potential
Influenza Pandemic: Possible Macroeconomic Effects and Policy Issues’, revised July 27, 2006,
Congressional Budget Office. https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/109th-congress2005-
2006/reports/12-08-birdflu.pdf
Arthur, W. Brian. 1991. ‘Designing Economic Agents that Act Like Human Agents: A Behavioral
Approach to Bounded Rationality’. American Economic Review 81 (2): 353–359.
Ibid. 1994a. Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Ibid. 1994b. ‘Inductive Reasoning and Bounded Rationality’. American Economic Review 84 (2):
406–411.
Ibid. 1999. ‘Complexity and the Economy’. Science 284.5411: 107–109.
Ibid. 2021. ‘Foundations of Complexity Economics’. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(2): 136–145.
Arthur, W. Brian, John H. Holland, Blake LeBaron, Richard G. Palmer and Paul Tayler. 1996. ‘Asset
Pricing under Endogenous Expectations in an Artificial Stock Market’. SFI working paper 1996-
12-093, https://santafe.edu/research/results/workingpapers/asset-pricing-underendogenous-
expectations-in-an-.
Asano, Yuki M., Jakob J. Kolb, Jobst Heitzig and J. Doyne Farmer. 2021. ‘Emergent Inequality and
Business Cycles in a Simple Behavioral Macroeconomic Model’. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 118 (27): e2025721118, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2025721118.
Athey, S. and G. W. Imbens. 2019. ‘Machine Learning Methods that Economists Should Know
About’. Annual Review of Economics 11: 685–725.
Axtell, Robert L., J. Doyne Farmer, John Geanakpolos, Peter Howitt, Ernesto Carrella, Ben Conlee,
Jon Goldstein, Matthew Hendrey, Philip Kalikman, David Masad, Nathan Palmer and Chun-Yi
Yang. 2014. ‘An Agent-Based Model of the Housing Market Bubble in Metropolitan Washington
D.C.’, https://ssrn.com/abstract=4710928
Axtell, Robert L. and J. Doyne Farmer. 2022. ‘Agent-Based Modeling in Economics and Finance:
Past, Present, and Future’. Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming, doi:
10.1257/jel.20221319.
Axtell, Robert L. 2024. ‘Simon Said: Herb’s Research Rules and Life Lessons’, to appear in
Gigerenzer et al. (eds), A Companion to Herb Simon. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Aymanns, Christoph and J. Doyne Farmer. 2015. ‘Dynamics of the Leverage Cycle’. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 50: 155–179, doi: 10.1016/j.jedc.2014.09.015.
Aymanns, Christoph, Fabio Caccioli, J. Doyne Farmer and Vincent Tan. 2016. ‘Taming the Basel
Leverage Cycle’. Journal of Financial Stability 27: 263–277, doi: 10.1016/j.jfs.2016.02.004.
Aymanns, Christoph, J. Doyne Farmer, Alissa M. Kleinnijenhuis and Thom Wetzer. 2018. ‘Models
Of Financial Stability And Their Application In Stress Tests’, in Cars Hommes and Blake LeBaron
(eds), Handbook of Computational Finance 4: 329–391.
Bachelier, Louis. 1900. ‘Théorie de la Spéculation’. PhD thesis, University of Paris.
Bagley, R. J. and J. D. Farmer. 1991. ‘Spontaneous Emergence of a Metabolism’, in C. Langton, C.
Taylor, J. D. Farmer and S. Rasmussen (eds), Artificial Life II, proc. 93–140. Santa Fe Institute
Studies in the Sciences of Complexity. Redwood City: Addison Wesley.
Bak, Per, Maya Paczuski and Martin Shubik. 1997. ‘Price Variations in a Stock Market with Many
Agents’. Physica A 246 (3–4): 430–453, doi: 10.1016/S0378-4371(97)00401-9.
Baptista, Rafa, J. Doyne Farmer, Marc Hinterschweiger, Katie Low, Daniel Tang and Arzu Uluc.
2016. ‘Macroprudential Policy in an Agent-based Model of the Housing Market’. Bank of England
Staff Working Paper No. 619, https://www.inet.ox.ac.uk/files/swp619.pdf
Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi. 2019. ‘The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic
Shocks: Beyond Hulten’s Theorem’. Econometrica 87 (4): 1155–1203, doi: 10.3982/ECTA15202.
Bass, Thomas A. 1985. The Eudaemonic Pie. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Battiston, Stefano,
Michelangelo Puliga, Rahul Kaushik, Paolo Tasca and Guido Caldarelli. 2012. ‘DebtRank: Too
Central to Fail? Financial Networks, the FED and Systemic Risk’. Scientific Reports 2: 541, doi:
10.1038/srep00541.
Bauer, Peter, Alan Thorpe and Gilbert Brunet. 2015. ‘The Quiet Revolution of Numerical Weather
Prediction’. Nature 525: 47–55, doi: 10.1038/nature14956.
Baumol, William J. 2012. The Cost Disease: Why Computers Get Cheaper and Health Care Doesn’t.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Beaudry, Paul, Dana Galizia and Franck Portier. 2015. ‘Reviving the Limit Cycle View of
Macroeconomic Fluctuations’. NBER working paper 21241. https://www.nber.org/papers/w21241
Beaudry, Paul, Dana Galizia and Franck Portier. 2016. ‘Putting the Cycle Back into Business Cycle
Analysis’. NBER working paper 22825. https://www.nber.org/papers/w22825
Bednar, J. and S. Page. 2007. ‘Can Game(s) Theory Explain Culture?: The Emergence of Cultural
Behavior Within Multiple Games’. Rationality and Society 19 (1): 65–97.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1043463107075108
Beinhocker, Eric D. 2007. The Origin of Wealth: Evolution, Complexity, and the Radical Remaking
of Economics. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Benhabib, Jess, and Kazuo Nishimura. 1979. ‘The Hopf Bifurcation and Existence and Stability of
Closed Orbits in Multisector Models of Optimal Economic Growth’. Journal of Economic Theory
21: 421–444, doi: 10.1016/0022-0531(79)90050-4.
Benhabib, Jess, and Richard H. Day. 1981. ‘Rational Choice and Erratic Behaviour’. Review of
Economic Studies 48 (3): 459–471, doi: 10.2307/2297158.
Bergmann, Barbara R. 1980. ‘A Short Description of a Micro-Simulated Macro-Economic Model:
The Transactions Model of the U.S. Economy’, in B. R. Bergmann, G. Eliasson and G. H. Orcutt
(eds) Micro Simulation – Models, Methods and Applications. Stockholm: The Industrial Institute
for Economic and Social Research.
Black, Fischer and Myron Scholes. 1973. ‘The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities’. Journal
of Political Economy 81 (3): 637–654.
Black, Fischer. 1986. ‘Noise’. Journal of Finance 41 (3): 528–543, doi: 10.1111/j. 1540-
6261.1986.tb04513.x.
Blume, Larry and David Easley. 1991. ‘Evolution and Market Behavior’. Journal of Economic
Theory 58 (1): 9–40.
Boldrin, Michele and Luigi Montrucchio. 1986. ‘On the Indeterminacy of Capital Accumulation
Paths’. Journal of Economic Theory 40 (1): 26–39, doi: 10.1016/0022-0531(86)90005-0.
Bookstaber, Richard. 2019. The End of Theory: Financial Crises, the Failure of Economics, and the
Sweep of Human Interaction. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bouchaud, Jean-Phillippe. 2008. ‘Economics Needs a Scientific Revolution’. Nature, 455 1181.
Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe, Julius Bonart, Jonathan Donier and Martin Gould. 2018. Trades, Quotes
and Prices: Financial Markets Under the Microscope. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brock, William A., David A. Hsieh and Blake LeBaron. 1991. Nonlinear Dynamics, Chaos, and
Instability. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brock, William A. and Cars H. Hommes. 1997. ‘A Rational Route to Randomness’. Econometrica 65
(5): 1059–1095, doi: 10.2307/2171879.
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Yuliy Sannikov. 2014. ‘A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
Sector’. American Economic Review 104 (2): 379–421.
Buda, Gergely, Vasco M. Carvalho, Stephen Hansen, Alvaro Ortiz, Tomasa Rodrigo, José V.
Rodriguez Mora. 2022. ‘National Accounts in a World of Naturally Occurring Data: A Proof of
Concept for Consumption’. https://sekhansen.github.io/pdf_files/consumption_measure.pdf
Cabannes, Théopile, Marco Antonio Sangiovanni Vincentelli, Alexander Sundt, Hippolyte
Signargout, Emily Porter, Vincent Fighiera, Juliette Ugirumurera and Alexandre M. Bayen. 2018.
‘The Impact of GPS-Enabled Shortest Path Routing on Mobility: A Game Theoretic Approach’.
Transportation Research Board 97th Annual Meeting. https://trid.trb.org/view/1495267
Caccioli, Fabio, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud and J. Doyne Farmer. 2012. ‘Impact-Adjusted Valuation
and the Criticality of Leverage’. Risk, December, 74–77.
Calvet, Laurent and Adlai Fisher. 2001. ‘Forecasting Multifractal Volatility’. Journal of Econometrics
105 (1): 27–58.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. ‘Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework’. Journal of
Monetary Economics 12 (3): 383–398, doi: 10.1016/0304-3932(83)90060-0.
Carlin, Wendy and David Soskice. 2015. Macroeconomics: Institutions, Instability and the Financial
System. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carlson, Mark. 2007. ‘A Brief History of the 1987 Stock Market Crash with a Discussion of the
Federal Reserve Response’. Federal Reserve Staff Working Paper 2007–13, Finance and
Economics Discussion Series.
https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2007/200713/200713pap.pdf
Carro, Adrian and Patricia Stupariu. 2022. ‘Uncertainty, Non-Linear Contagion and the Credit
Quality Channel: An Application to the Spanish Interbank Market’. Banco de España documentos
de trabajo no. 2212.
https://www.bde.es/f/webbde/SES/Secciones/Publicaciones/PublicacionesSeriadas/DocumentosTra
bajo/22/Files/dt2212e.pdf
Carro, Adrian, Marc Hinterschweiger, Arzu Uluc and J. Doyne Farmer. 2022. ‘Heterogeneous Effects
and Spillovers of Macroprudential Policy in an Agent-Based Model of the UK Housing Market’.
Bank of England Staff Working Paper no. 976.
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/workingpaper/2022/heterogeneous-effects-ands-pillovers-of-
macroprudential-policy-in-model-of-uk-housing-market
Carroll, Christopher D. 1997. ‘Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
Hypothesis’. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1): 1–55.
Cass, David. 1965. ‘Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation’. Review of
Economic Studies 32 (3): 233–240, doi:10.2307/2295827.
Catapano, Gennaro, Francesco Franceschi, Michele Loberto and Valentina Michelangeli. 2021.
‘Macroprudential Policy Analysis via an Agent Based Model of the Real Estate Sector’. Banca
D’Italia temi de discussione number 1338. https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/temi-
discussione/2021/2021-1338/en_tema_1338.pdf
Charney, J. G., R. Fjörtoft and J. von Neumann. 1950. ‘Numerical Integration of the Barotropic
Vorticity Equation’. Tellus 2: 237–254, doi: 10.1111/j.2153-3490.1950.tb00336.x.
Cherkashin, Dmitriy, J. Doyne Farmer and Seth Lloyd. 2009. ‘The Reality Game’. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 33 (5): 1091–1105, doi: 10.1016/j.jedc.2009.02.002.
Chevalier, J. and A. Goolsebee. 2009. ‘Are Durable Goods Consumers Forward-Looking? Evidence
from College Textbooks’. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1853–1884.
Chinazzi, Matteo, Jessica T. Davis, Marco Ajelli, Corrado Gioannini, Maria Litvinova, Stefano
Merler, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Kunpeng Mu, Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan Sun, Cécile Viboud, Xinyue
Xiong, Hongjie Yu, M Elizabeth Halloran, Ira M Longini Jr and Alessandro Vespignani. 2020.
‘The Effect of Travel Restrictions on the Spread of the 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Outbreak’. Science 368 (6489).
Clark, Mills Gardner. 1956. The Economics of Soviet Steel. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
doi: 10.4159/harvard.9780674494268.
Coeure, Benoit. 2014. ‘What’s the Right Size for the Financial Sector?’ World Economic Forum, 9
September 2014. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2014/09/benoit-coeure-ecb-financial-sector/
Cohen, Joshua (ed.). 2019. Economics After Neoliberalism Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cokayne, Graeme. 2019. ‘The Effects of Macroprudential Policies on House Price Cycles in an
Agent-based Model of the Danish Housing Market’. Danmarks Nationalbank working paper no.
138.
https://www.nationalbanken.dk/da/publikationer/Documents/2019/05/Working%20Paper_nr.%201
38.pdf
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba and Lawrence H. Summers. 1989. ‘What Moves Stock Prices?’
Journal of Portfolio Management 15 (3): 4–12, doi: 10.3905/jpm.1989.409212.
Cutler, D. M., Poterba, J. M. and Summers, L. H. 1991. ‘Speculative Dynamics’. Review of
Economic Studies 58 (3): 529–546.
Daniels, Marcus G., J. Doyne Farmer, László Gillemot, Giulia Iori and D. Eric Smith. 2003.
‘Quantitative Model of Price Diffusion and Market Friction Based on Trading as a Mechanistic
Random Process’. Physical Review Letters 90(10): 108102–108104, doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.108102.
Danielsson, J., P. Embrechts, C. A. E. Goodhart, C. Keating, F. Muennich, O. Renault and H. S. Shin.
2001. ‘An Academic Response to Basel II’. http://www.bis.org/bcbs/ca/fmg.pdf
Darley, Vince and Alexander V. Outkin. 2007. A NASDAQ Market Simulation: Insights on a Major
Market from the Science of Complex Adaptive Systems. Hackensack: World Scientific.
Davis, Jessica T., Matteo Chinazzi, Nicola Perra, Kunpeng Mu, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Marco Ajelli,
Natalie E. Dean, Corrado Gioannini, Maria Litvinova, Stefano Merler, Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan Sun,
Xinyue Xiong, Ira M. Longini Jr, M. Elizabeth Halloran, Cécile Viboud and Alessandro
Vespignani. 2021. ‘Cryptic Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and the First COVID-19 Wave’. Nature
600: 127–132, doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04130-w.
Dawid, Herbert, Simon Gemkow, Philipp Harting, Sander van der Hoog and Michael Neugart. 2012.
‘The Eurace@Unibi Model: An Agent-Based Macroeconomic Model for Economic Policy
Analysis’. Bielefeld Working Papers in Economics and Management No. 05-2012, doi:
10.4119/unibi/2622068.
Day, Richard H. 1981. ‘Emergence of Chaos from Neoclassical Growth’. Geographical Analysis 13:
315–327, doi: 10.1111/j.1538-4632.1981.tb00741.x.
Ibid. 1982. ‘Irregular Growth Cycles’. American Economic Review 72 (3): 406–414.
Del Negro, Marco, Gauti Eggertsson, Andrea Ferrero and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2017. ‘The Great
Escape: A Quantitative Evaluation of the Fed’s Liquidity Facility’. American Economic Review
107 (3): 824–57.
del Rio-Chanona, R. M., P. Mealy, A. Pichler, F. Lafond and J . D. Farmer. 2020. ‘Supply and
Demand Shocks in the COVID-19 Pandemic: An Industry and Occupation Perspective’. Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, graa033, https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/graa033.
del Rio-Chanona, R. Maria, Penny Mealy, M. Beguerisse-Diaz, François Lafond and J. Doyne
Farmer. 2021. ‘Occupational Mobility and Automation: A Data-Driven Network Model’. Journal
of the Royal Society Interface, doi: 10.1098/rsif.2020.0898.
delli Gatti, D., S. Desiderio, E. Gaffeo, P. Cirillo and M. Gallegati. 2011. Macroeconomics from the
Bottom-Up (Vol. 1). Springer Science & Business Media. DeLong, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H.
Summers and R. J. Waldmann. 1990. ‘Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing
Rational Speculation’. Journal of Finance 45 (2): 379–395.
Dessertaine, T., J. Moran, M. Benzaquen and J. P. Bouchaud. 2022. ‘Out-ofEquilibrium Dynamics
and Excess Volatility in Firm Networks’. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 138:
104362.
Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig. 1983. ‘Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity’. Journal of
Political Economy 91 (3): 401–419.
Diamond, Peter and Drew Fudenberg. 1989. ‘Rational Expectations Business Cycles in Search
Equilibrium’. Journal of Political Economy 97 (3): 606–619, doi: 10.1086/261618.
Diederich, Sigurd and Manfred Opper. 1989. ‘Replicators with Random Interactions: A Solvable
Model’. Physical Review A 39 (8): 4333–4336, doi: 10.1103/physreva.39.4333.
Dosi, G. and R. R. Nelson. 1994. ‘An Introduction to Evolutionary Theories in Economics’. Journal
of Evolutionary Economics 4: 153–172.
Dosi, G., G. Fagiolo and A. Roventini. 2010. ‘Schumpeter Meeting Keynes: A Policy-Friendly Model
of Endogenous Growth and Business Cycles’. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 34 (9):
1748–1767.
Duan, Wei, Zongchen Fan, Peng Zhang, Gang Guo and Xiaogang Qiu. 2015. ‘Mathematical and
Computational Approaches to Epidemic Modeling: A Comprehensive Review’. Frontiers of
Computer Science 9: 806–826, doi: 10.1007/s11704-014-3369-2.
The Economist, ‘Sun, Wind and Drain’. July 29, 2014. https://www.economist.com/finance-and-
economics/2014/07/29/sun-wind-and-drain
Edge, Rochelle M. and Refet S. Gürkaynak. January 18, 2011. ‘How Useful are Estimated DSGE
Model Forecasts?’ FEDS Working Paper No. 2011–11. https://ssrn.com/abstract=1810075 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1810075
Edwards, Paul N. 2010. A Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data and the Politics of Global
Warming. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Epstein, J.M. and R. Axtell. 1996. Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom Up.
Brookings Institution Press.
Epstein, J.M. 2013. Agent_Zero. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Erev, Ido, Eyal Ert, Ori Plonsky, Doron Cohen and Oded Cohen. 2017. ‘From Anomalies to
Forecasts: Toward a Descriptive Model of Decisions under Risk, under Ambiguity, and from
Experience’. Psychological Review 124 (4): 369–409, doi: 10.1037/rev0000062.
Fama, Eugene F. 1976. Foundations of Finance. New York: Basic Books.
Fama, Eugene F. 1991. ‘Efficient Capital Markets: II’. Journal of Finance 46: 1575–1617, doi:
10.1111/j.1540-6261.1991.tb04636.x.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 1996. ‘Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing
Anomalies’. Journal of Finance 51 (1): 55–84.
Farmer, J. Doyne (ed.). 1986. Evolution, Games, and Learning: Models for Adaptation in Machines
and Nature: Proceedings of the Fifth Annual International Conference of the Center for Nonlinear
Studies, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA, May 20–24, 1985. New York: North-Holland.
Farmer, J. Doyne. 2001. ‘Toward Agent-Based Models for Investment’ in R. Max Darnell (ed.).
Developments in Quantitative Investment Models. AIMR Conference Proceedings. Boston: AIMR.
Ibid. 2002. ‘Market Force, Ecology, and Evolution’. Industrial and Corporate Change 11 (5): 895–
953, doi: 10.1093/icc/11.5.895.
Ibid. 2004. ‘The Everyday Practice of Physics in Silver City, New Mexico’, in John Brockman (ed),
Curious Minds: How a Child Becomes a Scientist. New York: Pantheon Books.
Ibid. 2005. ‘The Evolution of Adventure in Literature and Life’, presented on November 11, 2005, at
a conference organized by Marget Cohen, titled ‘Adventure’, at Stanford’s Center of the Study of
the Novel. https://www.doynefarmer.com/adventures
Ibid. 2013. ‘Hypotheses Non Fingo: Problems with The Scientific Method in Economics’. Journal of
Economic Methodology 20 (4): 377–385, doi: 10.1080/1350178X.2013.859408.
Farmer, J. Doyne, Tommaso Toffoli and Stephen Wolfram (eds). 1984. Cellular Automata:
Proceedings of an Interdisciplinary Workshop, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA, March 7–11,
1983. New York: North-Holland.
Farmer, J. D., Norman H. Packard and Alan S. Perelson. 1986. ‘The Immune System, Adaptation,
and Machine Learning’. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 22 (1–3): 187–204, doi: 10.1016/0167-
2789(86) 90240-X.
Farmer, J. D., S. Kauffman and N. H. Packard. 1986. ‘Autocatalytic Replication of Polymers’.
Physica D 22 (1–3): 50–67.
Farmer, J. Doyne and John J. Sidorowich. 1987. ‘Predicting Chaotic Time Series’. Physical Review
Letters 59 (8): 845, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett. 59.845.
Farmer, J. D. and A. W. Lo. 1999. ‘Frontiers of Finance: Evolution and Efficient Markets’.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96 (18): 9991–9992.
Farmer, J. Doyne and Shareen Joshi. 2002. ‘The Price Dynamics of Common Trading Strategies’.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 49 (2): 149–171, doi: 10.1016/S0167-
2681(02)00065-3.
Farmer, J. Doyne, Paolo Patelli and Ilija Zovko. 2005. ‘The Predictive Power of Zero Intelligence in
Financial Markets’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 102 (6): 2254–2259,
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0409157102.
Farmer, J. Doyne and John Geanakoplos. 2009. ‘The Vices and Virtues of Equilibrium and the Future
of Financial Economics’. Complexity 14 (3): 11–28.
Farmer, J. Doyne and Arjun Makhijani. 2010. ‘A US Nuclear Future? Counterpoint: Not Wanted, Not
Needed’. Nature 467: 391–393, doi: 10.1038/467391a.
Farmer, J. Doyne and Spyros Skouras. 2013. ‘An Ecological Perspective on the Future of Computer
Trading’. Quantitative Finance 13 (3): 325–346, doi: 10.1080/14697688.2012.757636.
Farmer, J. Doyne and François Lafond. 2016. ‘How Predictable Is Technological Progress?’.
Research Policy 45 (3): 647–655, doi: 10.1016/j.respol. 2015.11.001.
Farmer, J. Doyne, C. Hepburn, M. C. Ives, T. Hale, T. Wetzer, P. Mealy, R. Rafaty, S. Srivastav and
R. Way. 2019. ‘Sensitive Intervention Points in the Post-Carbon Transition’. Science 364 (6436):
132–134, doi: 10.1126/science.aaw7287.
Farmer, J. Doyne, Alissa M. Kleinnijenhuis, Paul Nahai-Williamson and Thom Wetzer. 2020.
‘Foundations of System-Wide Financial Stress Testing with Heterogeneous Institutions’. Bank of
England Working Paper No. 861.
Farmer, Roger E. A. October 4, 2016. ‘Not Keen on More Chaos in the Future of Macroeconomics’.
https://www.rogerfarmer.com/rogerfarmerblog/2016/10/4/nho932exasra0c2a2amkvdmovcy9rz?
rq=chaos
Fermi, Enrico, John Pasta, Stanislaw Ulam and Mary Tsingou. 1955. ‘Studies of Nonlinear
Problems’. Los Alamos National Laboratory Technical Report LA-1940, doi: 10.2172/4376203.
Fisher, Franklin. 1989. Disequilibrium Foundations of Equilibrium Economics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Forder, James. 2014. Macroeconomics and the Phillips Curve Myth. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Fostel, A. and J. Geanakoplos. 2008. ‘Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy’. American
Economic Review 98 (4): 1211–44.
Foster, G. and P. Frijters. 2012. ‘The Formation of Expectations: Competing Theories and New
Evidence’. http://tinyurl.com/Foster-Frijters-2012 Frey, Carl Benedikt and Michael A. Osborne.
2013. ‘The Future of Employment: How Susceptible are Jobs to Computerisation?’ Technological
Forecasting and Social Change 114 (C): 254–280, doi: 10.1016/j.techfore. 2016.08.019.
Friedman, Milton. 1953. ‘The Methodology of Positive Economics’, in Milton Friedman (ed.),
Essays in Positive Economics: 3–43. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gabaix, X. and D. Laibson. 2008. ‘The Seven Properties of Good Models’, in Andrew Caplan and
Andrew Schotter (eds), The Foundations of Positive and Normative Economics: A Handbook:
292–319. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2011. ‘The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations’. Econometrica 79 (3): 733–
772.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2020. ‘A Behavioral New Keynesian Model’. American Economic Review 110 (8):
2271–2327.
Galla, Tobias and J. Doyne Farmer. 2013. ‘Complex Dynamics in Learning Complicated Games’.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (4): 1232–1236, doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109672110.
Galton, Francis. 1907. ‘Vox Populi’. Nature 75: 450–451, doi: 10.1038/075450a0. Geanakoplos, J.
1997. ‘Promises, Promises . . .’, in W.B. Arthur, S. Durlauf and D. Lane (eds), The Economy as an
Evolving Complex System, II : 285–320. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Geanakoplos, John. 2003. ‘Liquidity, Default, and Crashes: Endogenous Contracts in General
Equilibrium’. Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World
Conference, August 2000, Volume II, Econometric Society Monographs: 170–205.
Geanakoplos, J. 2010. ‘The Leverage Cycle’, in D. Acemoglum, K. Rogoff and M. Woodford (eds.)
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009 (Vol. 24): 1–65. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Geanakoplos, John, Robert Axtell, J. Doyne Farmer, Peter Howitt, Benjamin Conlee, Jonathan
Goldstein, Matthew Hendry, Nathan M. Palmer and Chun-Yi Yang. 2012. ‘Getting at Systemic
Risk via an Agent-Based Model of the Housing Market’. American Economic Review 102 (3): 53–
58, doi: 10.1257/aer.102.3.53.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer. 2018. A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and Financial
Fragility. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Gennotte, Gerard and Hayne Leland. 1990.
‘Market Liquidity, Hedging, and Crashes’. American Economic Review 80 (5): 999–1021.
Ghashghaie, S., W. Breymann, J. Peinke, P. Talkner and Y. Dodge. 1996. ‘Turbulent Cascades in
Foreign Exchange Markets’. Nature 381: 767–770, doi: 10.1038/381767a0.
Ghazanfar, S. M., and A. Azim Islahi 1990. ‘Economic Thought of an Arab Scholastic: Abu Hamid
al-Ghazali.’ History of Political Economy 22.2:381–403.
Gigerenzer, Gerd, Peter M. Todd and the ABC Research Group. 1999. Simple Heuristics that Make
Us Smart. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, Gerd and Reinhard Selten (eds). 2001. Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gigerenzer, Gerd and Henry Brighton. 2009. ‘Homo Heuristicus: Why Biased Minds Make Better
Inferences’. Topics in Cognitive Science 1: 107– 143, doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2008.01006.x.
Gillemot, László, J. Doyne Farmer and Fabrizio Lillo. 2007. ‘There’s More to Volatility than
Volume’. Quantitative Finance 6 (5): 371–384, doi: 10.1080/14697680600835688.
Glandon, Philip, Kenneth Kuttner, Sandeep Mazumder and Caleb Stroup. 2022. ‘Macroeconomic
Research Present and Past’. NBER Working Paper 29628.
Gleick, James. 1987. Chaos: Making a New Science. New York: Viking. Gode, Dhananjay and
Shyam Sunder. 1993. ‘Allocative Efficiency of Markets with Zero-Intelligence Traders: Market as
a Partial Substitute for Individual Rationality’. Journal of Political Economy 101 (1): 119–137,
doi: 10.1086/261868.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goodwin, Richard M. 1967, ‘A Growth Cycle’, in C. H. Feinstein (ed.), Socialism, Capitalism and
Economic Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gordon, Deborah M. 1999. Ants at Work: How an Insect Society is Organized. New York: The Free
Press.
Grandmont, Jean-Michel. 1985. ‘On Endogenous Competitive Business Cycles’. Econometrica 53
(5): 995–1045.
Granovetter, Mark S. 1973. ‘The Strength of Weak Ties’. American Journal of Sociology 78 (6):
1360–1380, doi: 10.1086/225469.
Greenwood, Robin and David Scharfstein. 2013. ‘The Growth of Finance’. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 27 (2): 3–28, doi: 10.1257/jep.27.2.3.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. ‘On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient
Markets’. American Economic Review 70 (3): 393–408.
Gualdi, Stanislao, Marco Tarzia, Francesco Zamponi and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. 2015. ‘Tipping
Points in Macroeconomic Agent-Based Models’. Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control 50:
29–61.
Gurgone, Andrea. 2020. ‘The Interaction of Borrower-Targeted Macroprudential Tools in the Irish
Mortgage Market: A Baseline Multi-Agent Approach’. Working paper,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3708904.
Guvenin, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan and Jae Song. 2021. ‘What do Data on Millions of
Workers Reveal About Lifecycle Earning Dynamics?’. Econometrica 89 (5): 2303–2339.
Helbing, D. and A. Kirman. 2013. ‘Rethinking Economics Using Complexity Theory’. Real-world
Economics Review 64.
Henrich, J., R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr and H. Gintis (eds). 2004. Foundations of
Human Sociality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hidalgo, Cesar A. and Ricardo Hausmann. 2009. ‘The Building Blocks of Economic Complexity’.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (26): 10570–10575,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0900943106.
Hill, Raymond R. and Andreas Tolk. 2017. ‘A History of Military Computer Simulation’, in Andreas
Tolk et al. (eds), Advances in Modeling and Simulation: Simulation Foundations, Methods, and
Applications. Cham: Springer, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-64182-9_13.
Holland, John H. 2014. Complexity: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hommes, Cars. 2013. Behavioral Rationality and Heterogeneous Expectations in Complex Economic
Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, doi:10.1017/CBO9781139094276.
Hommes, C., M. He, S. Poledna, M. Siqueira and Y. Zhang. 2022. CANVAS: A Canadian Behavioral
Agent-Based Model (No. 2022-51). Bank of Canada.
IPCC. 2014. AR5 Sythesis Report. Climate Change 2014. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/
IPCC. 2018. Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming
of 1.5°C above Pre-industrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in
the Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the Threat of Climate Change, Sustainable
Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty. V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H. O. Pörtner, D.
Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.
B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T.
Waterfield (eds). Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 616 pp.,
doi:10.1017/9781009157940.
Jackson, Matthew O., Brian Rogers and Yves Zenou. 2017. ‘The Economic Consequences of Social
Network Structure’. Journal of Economic Literature 55 (1): 49–95, doi: 10.1257/jel.20150694.
Jackson, T. 2016. Prosperity Without Growth: Foundations for the Economy of Tomorrow. Abingdon:
Taylor & Francis.
Joulin, Armand, Augustin Lefevre, Daniel Grunberg and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. 2008. ‘Stock Price
Jumps: News and Volume Play a Minor Role’. arXiv 0803.1769v1 [q-fin.ST].
Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Khandani, Amir E. and Andrew W. Lo. 2011. ‘What Happened to the Quants in August 2007?
Evidence from Factors and Transactions Data’. Journal of Financial Markets 14 (1): 1–46, doi:
10.1016/j.finmar.2010.07.005. Kirman, A. P. 1992. ‘Whom or What does the Representative
Individual Represent?’. Journal of Economic Perspectives 6 (2): 117–136.
Kirman, A. 2010. ‘The Economic Crisis is a Crisis for Economic Theory’. CESifo Economic Studies
56 (4): 498–535.
Knez, M. and V. Smith. 1987. ‘Hypothetical Valuations and Preference Reversals in the Context of
Asset Trading’, in Alvin E. Roth (ed.), Laboratory Experimentation in Economics: Six Points of
View : 131–154. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Knight, Frank Hyneman. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Koh, Dongya, Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis and Yu Zheng. 2020. ‘Labor Share Decline and Intellectual
Property Products Capital’. Econometrica 88 (6): 2609–2628.
Koh, Heebyung and Christopher L. Magee. 2006. ‘A Functional Approach for Studying
Technological Progress: Application to Information Technology’. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change 73: 1061–1083, doi: 10.1016/j.techfore.2006.06.001.
Ibid. 2008. ‘A Functional Approach for Studying Technological Progress: Extension to Energy
Technology’, Technological Forecasting and Social Change 75 (6): 735–758, doi:
10.1016/j.techfore.2007.05.007.
Kolic, Blas, Juan Sabuco and J. Doyne Farmer. 2022. ‘Estimating Initial Conditions for Dynamical
Systems with Incomplete Information’. Non-linear Dynamics 108: 3783–805, doi:
10.1007/s11071-022-07365-y.
Koopmans, T. C. 1965. ‘On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth’, in L. Johnansen (ed.), The
Economic Approach to Development Planning: 225–287. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Krugman, Paul. 1996. The Self-Organizing Economy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ibid. April 29, 2015. ‘The Case for Cuts was a Lie. Why Does Britain Still Believe It? The Austerity
Delusion’. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/apr/29/the-
austerity-delusion
Ibid. June 29, 2015. ‘Greece over the Brink’. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/29/opinion/paul-krugman-greece-overthe-brink.html
Ladyman, James and Karoline Wiesner. 2020. What is a Complex System? New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Lafond, François, Aimee Gotway Bailey, Jan David Bakker, Dylan Rebois, Rubina Zadourian,
Patrick McSharry and J. Doyne Farmer. 2018. ‘How Well Do Experience Curves Predict
Technological Progress? A Method for Making Distributional Forecasts’. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change 128: 104–117, doi: 10.1016/j. techfore.2017.11.001.
Lafond, François, Diana Seave Greenwald and J. Doyne Farmer. 2020. ‘Can Stimulating Demand
Drive Costs Down? World War II as a Natural Experiment’. INET Oxford Working Paper No.
2020-02, https://www.inet.ox.ac.uk/publications/no-2020-02-can-stimulating-demanddrive-costs-
down-world-war-ii-as-a-natural-experiment/
Lamperti, F., G. Dosi, M. Napoleatano, A. Roventini and A. Sapio. 2018. ‘Coupled Climate and
Economic Dynamics in an Agent-based Integrated Assessment Model’. Ecological Economics
150: 315–339.
Lazo, J. K., R. E. Morss and J. L. Demuth. 2009. ‘300 Billion Served: Sources, Perceptions, Uses and
Values of Weather Forecasts’, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 90: 785–798, doi:
10.1175/2008BAMS2604.1.
Legendre, Adrien-Marie. 1806. Nouvelles méthodes pour la détermination des orbites des comètes.
Paris: Firmin Didot.
Leontief, Wassily W. 1951. ‘Input-Output Economics’. Scientific American 185 (4): 15–21.
Levin, S. A. and A. W. Lo. 2021. ‘Introduction to PNAS Special Issue on Evolutionary Models of
Financial Markets’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 (26): e2104800118.
Li, T. J. and J. A. Yorke. 1975. ‘Period Three Implies Chaos’. American Mathematical Monthly 82:
985–992.
Lo, A.W. 2004. ‘The Adaptive Markets Hypothesis: Market Efficiency from an Evolutionary
Perspective’. Journal of Portfolio Management. 2004.
Lo, A.W. and R. Zhang. 2018. ‘Biological economics’, in Biological Economics. Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Lo, Andrew W. 2019. Adaptive Markets. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691191362/adaptive-markets
Lorenz, Edward Norton. 1963. ‘Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow’. Journal of the Atmospheric
Sciences 20 (2): 130–141, doi: 10.1177/0309133315 623099.
Lotka, Alfred J. 1925. Elements of Physical Biology. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Mantegna, R. N. and H. E. Stanley. 1999. Introduction to Econophysics: Correlations and
Complexity in Finance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Markowitz, Harry. 1952. ‘Portfolio Selection’. Journal of Finance 7 (1): 77–91, doi:
10.2307/2975974.
Marshall, Alfred. 1920. Principles of Economics: An Introductory Volume, eighth ed. London:
Macmillan and Co.
Marx, Karl. 1867. Capital Volume I, reissue ed: 1990, London: Penguin Classics.
McNerney, James, J. Doyne Farmer, Sidney Redner and Jessika E. Trancik. 2011. ‘Role of Design
Complexity in Technology Improvement’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108
(22): 9008–9013, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1017298108.
McNerney, J., C. Savoie, F. Caravelli, V. M. Carvalho and J. D. Farmer. 2022. ‘How Production
Networks Amplify Economic Growth’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (1):
e2106031118, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2106031118
Mealy, Penny, R. Maria del Rio-Chanona and J. Doyne Farmer. 2018. ‘What You Do at Work
Matters: New Lenses on Labour’. Working paper. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=3143064
Meng, Jing, Rupert Way, Elena Verdolini and Laura Diaz Anadon. 2021. ‘Comparing Expert
Elicitation and Model-Based Probabilistic Technology Cost Forecasts for the Energy Transition’.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 (27): e1917165118, doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1917165118.
Mérő, Bence, András Borsos, Zsuzsanna Hosszú-Zsolt and Oláh-Nikolett Vágó. 2022. ‘A High
Resolution Agent-based Model of the Hungarian Housing Market’. MNB Working papers 7.
Miller, John H. and Scott E. Page. 2007. Complex Adaptive Systems: An Introduction to
Computational Models of Social Life. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mirowski, Philip. 1989. More Heat than Light: Economics as Social Physics, Physics as Nature’s
Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, Melanie. 2009. Complexity: A Guided Tour. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moore, Gordon E. 1965. ‘Cramming More Components into Integrated Circuits’. Electronics 38 (8):
114.
Moses, M.E., S. Hofmeyr, J. L. Cannon, A. Andrews, R. Gridley, M. Hinga, K. Leyba, A. Pribisova,
V. Surjadidjaja, H. Tasnim and S. Forrest. 2021. ‘Spatially Distributed Infection Increases Viral
Load in a Computational Model of SARS-CoV-2 Lung Infection’. PLoS Computational Biology 17
(12): e1009735.
Mungo, Luca, François Lafond, Pablo Astudillo-Estévez and J. Doyne Farmer. 2022. ‘Reconstructing
Production Networks Using Machine Learning’. INET Oxford Working Paper No. 2022-02.
Muth, John F. 1961. ‘Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements’. Econometrica 29
(3): 315–335, doi: 10.2307/1909635.
Muzy, J., J. Delour and E. Bacry. 2000. ‘Modelling Fluctuations of Financial Time Series: From
Cascade Process to Stochastic Volatility Model’. European Physics Journal B 17: 537–548.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s100510070131
Nagy, Béla, J. Doyne Farmer, Quan M. Bui and Jessika E. Trancik. 2013. ‘Statistical Basis for
Predicting Technological Progress’. PLoS ONE 8 (2): e52669, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052669.
Nash, John. 1951. ‘Non-Cooperative Games’. The Annals of Mathematics, Second Series 54 (2):
286–295.
National Research Council. 1979. Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientific Assessment.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, doi: 10.17226/12181. Nelson, Richard R. and
Sidney G. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge, MA: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Newman, Mark. 2018. Networks, second edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Newman, M. E. J. 2018. ‘Network Structure from Rich but Noisy Data’. Nature Physics 14: 542–45.
Nordhaus, William D. 1991. ‘To Slow or Not to Slow: The Economics of the Greenhouse Effect’.
Economic Journal 101 (407): 920–937, doi: 10.2307/2233864.
Ibid. 1992. ‘An Optimal Transition Path for Controlling Greenhouse Gases.’ Science 258 (5086):
1315–1319, doi: 10.1126/science.258.5086.1315.
Ibid. 2017. ‘Revisiting the Social Cost of Carbon,’ PNAS 114 (7): 1518–1523, doi:
10.1073/pnas.1609244114.
O*NET OnLine, National Center for O*NET Development, www.onetonline.org/. (Accessed 13
April 2022.)
Opper, Manfred and Sigurd Diederich. 1992. ‘Phase Transition and 1/f Noise in a Game Dynamical
Model’. Physical Review Letters 69 (10): 1616–1619, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.69.1616.
Packard, N. H., J. P. Crutchfield, J. D. Farmer and R. S. Shaw. 1980. ‘Geometry from a Time Series’.
Physical Review Letters, 45 (712): 712–716, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.45.712.
Page, Lawrence, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani and Terry Winograd. 1999. ‘The PageRank Citation
Ranking: Bringing Order to the Web’. Technical Report. Stanford InfoLab.
Page, Scott E. 2007. The Difference. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Ibid. 2018. The Model
Thinker: What You Need to Know to Make Data Work for You. New York: Basic Books.
Palmer, R. G., W. B. Arthur, John H. Holland, Blake LeBaron and Paul Tayler. 1994. ‘Artificial
Economic Life: A Simple Model of a Stockmarket’. Physica D 75 (1): 264–274, doi:
10.1016/0167-2789(94)90287-9.
Pangallo, Marco, James B. T. Sanders, Tobias Galla and J. D. Farmer. 2022. ‘Towards a Taxonomy of
Learning Dynamics in 2 x 2 Games’. Games and Economic Behavior 132: 1–21.
Pangallo, Marco, Torsten Heinrich and J. D. Farmer. 2019. ‘Best Reply Structure and Equilibrium
Convergence in Generic Games’. Science Advances 5 (2), doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aat1328.
Pangallo, M., A. Aleta, R. Chanona, A. Pichler, D. Martín-Corral, M. Chinazzi, F. Lafond, M. Ajelli,
E. Moro, Y. Moreno and A. Vespignani. 2023. ‘The Unequal Effects of the Health-Economy
Tradeoff During the COVID-19 Pandemic’. Nature Human Behaviour, pp.11–12.
Philippon, Thomas and Arielle Reshef. 2009. ‘Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Financial
Industry: 1909–2006’. NBER working paper 14644, doi: 10.3386/w14644.
Pichler, Anton, Marco Pangallo, R. Maria del Rio-Chanona, François Lafond and J. Doyne Farmer.
2020. ‘Production Networks and Epidemic Spreading: How to Restart the UK Economy?’ arXiv:
2005.10585 [econ.GN], doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2005.10585.
Pichler, Anton, Marco Pangallo, R. Maria del Rio-Chanona, François Lafond and J. Doyne Farmer.
June 7, 2020. ‘Production Networks and Epidemic Spreading: Re-Opening the UK Economy’.
VoxEU.org. https://voxeu.org/article/production-networks-and-epidemic-spreadingre-opening-uk-
economy
Pichler, A., M. Pangallo, R. M. del Rio-Chanona, F. Lafond and J. D. Farmer. 2022. ‘Forecasting the
Propagation of Pandemic Shocks with a Dynamic Input-Output Model’. Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control Volume 144:104527. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jedc.2022.104527
Pichler, Anton, François Lafond and J. Doyne Farmer. 2020. ‘Technological Interdependencies
Predict Innovation Dynamics’. arXiv: 2003.00580 [physics.soc-ph], doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2003.00580.
Piketty, Thomas. 2015. The Economics of Inequality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. ‘Distributional National Accounts:
Methods and Estimates from the United States’. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (2): 553-609.
Platt, Donovon. 2022. ‘Bayesian Estimation of Economic Simulation Models Using Neural
Networks’. Computational Economics 59: 599–650, doi: 10.1007/s10614-021-10095-9.
Plonsky, Ori, Reut Apel, Eyal Ert, Moshe Tennenholtz, David Bourgin, Joshua C. Peterson, Daniel
Reichman, Thomas L. Griffiths, Stuart J. Russell, Evan C. Carter, James F. Cavanagh and Ido
Erev. 2019. ‘Predicting Human Decisions with Behavioral Theories and Machine Learning’.
arXiv: 1904.06866 [cs.AI], doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1904.06866.
Poincaré, Henri. 1914. Science and Method, Chapter 4. T. Nelson & Sons.
Polanyi, Karl. The Great Transformation: the Political and Economic Origins of our Time. Foreword
by Joseph E. Stiglitz; with a new introd. by Fred Block.—2nd Beacon Paperback ed. p. cm.
Originally published: New York: Farrar & Rinehart, 1944 and reprinted in 1957 by Beacon in
Boston. Poledna, Sebastian, Stefan Thurner, J. Doyne Farmer and John Geanakoplos. 2014.
‘Leverage-Induced Systemic Risk under Basel II and other Credit Risk Policies’. Journal of
Banking & Finance 42: 199–212, doi: 10.1016/j.jbankfin.2014.01.038.
Poledna, Sebastian, Michael Gregor Miess, Cars Hommes and Katrin Rabitsch. 2022. ‘Economic
Forecasting with an Agent-Based Model’. European Economic Review, 104306, doi:
10.1016/j.euroecorev.2022.104306.
Ramsey, Frank P. 1928. ‘A Mathematical Theory of Saving’. Economic Journal 38 (152): 543–559,
doi:10.2307/2224098.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Richardson, Lewis Fry. 1922. Weather Prediction by Numerical Process. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Rissanen, Jorma. 2007. Information and Complexity in Statistical Modeling. Cham: Springer.
Romer, Paul M. 2016. ‘The Trouble with Macroeconomics’. Working paper,
https://paulromer.net/trouble-with-macroeconomics-update/WP-Trouble.pdf.
Ruelle, David and Floris Takens. 1971. ‘On the Nature of Turbulence’. Communications in
Mathematical Physics 20: 167–192, doi: 10.1007/BF01646553.
Sachs, J. D., G. Schmidt-Traub, M. Mazzucato, D. Messner, N. Nakicenovic and J. Rockström. 2019.
‘Six Transformations to Achieve the Sustainable Development Goals’. Nature Sustainability 2 (9):
805–814.
Samuelson, Paul A. 1974. ‘A Biological Least-Action Principle for the Ecological Model of Lotka–
Volterra’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 71 (8): 3041–3044, doi:
10.1073/pnas.71.8.3041.
Sanders, James B. T., J. Doyne Farmer and Tobias Galla. 2018. ‘The Prevalence of Chaotic
Dynamics in Games with Many Players’. Scientific Reports 8: 4902, doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-
22013-5.
Sahal, Devendra. 1982. The Transfer and Utilization of Technical Knowledge. Lexington: Lexington
Books.
Sargent, T. J., 1993. ‘Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics: The Arne Ryde Memorial Lectures’.
OUP Catalogue.
Sato, Yuzuru, Eizo Akiyama and J. Doyne Farmer. 2002. ‘Chaos in Learning a Simple Two-Person
Game’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99 (7): 4748–4751, doi:
10.1073/pnas.032086299.
Savoie, Charles. 2017. ‘Input-Output Analysis and Growth Theory’. PhD thesis, University of
Oxford, Lincoln College.
Scheinkman, José Alexandre. 1976. ‘On Optimal Steady States of n-sector Growth Models when
Utility is Discounted’. Journal of Economic Theory, 12 (1): 11–30.
Scholl, Maarten P., Anisoara Calinescu and J. Doyne Farmer. 2021. ‘How Market Ecology Explains
Market Malfunction’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 (26): e2015574118,
doi: 10.1073/pnas. 2015574118.
Schrödinger, Erwin. 1948. What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1994 [1942]. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. London: Routledge.
Shannon, C.E. 1948. ‘A Mathematical Theory of Communication’. Bell System Technical Journal 27:
379–423, 623–656, doi: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948. tb01338.x.
Shiller, Robert J. 1981. ‘Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes in
Dividends?’ American Economic Review 71 (3): 421–436.
Simon, Herbert A. 1955. ‘A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice’. Quarterly Journal of Economics
69 (1): 99–118, doi: 10.2307/1884852.
Ibid. 1957. Models of Man: Social and Rational – Mathematical Essays on Rational Human
Behavior in a Social Setting. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Sims, Chris. 1980. ‘Macroeconomics and Reality’. Econometrica 48 (1): 4. Smets, Frank and Rafael
Wouters. 2007. ‘Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach’.
American Economic Review 97 (3): 586–606, doi: 10.1257/aer.97.3.586.
Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. London: W. Strahan & T. Cadell. Smith, Eric, J. Doyne
Farmer, László Gillemot and S. Krishnamurthy. 2002. ‘Statistical Theory of the Continuous
Double Auction’. Quantitative Finance 3 (6): 481–514, doi: 10.1088/1469-7688/3/6/307.
Smith, V.L. 1962. ‘An Experimental Study of Competitive Market Behavior’. Journal of Political
Economy 70 (2): 111–137.
Smith, Vernon. 2008. Rationality in Economics: Constructivist and Ecological Forms. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Solow, Robert M. 1956. ‘A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth’. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 70 (1): 65–94, doi: 10.2307/1884513. Stanley, H. Eugene, V. Afanasyev, L. A. N.
Amaral, S. V. Buldyrev, A. L. Goldberger, S. Havlin, H. Leschhorn, P. Maass, R. N. Mantegna, C.
K. Peng, P. A. Prince, M. A. Salinger, M. H. R. Stanley and G. M. Viswanathan. 1996. ‘Anomalous
Fluctuations in the Dynamics of Complex Systems: From DNA and Physiology to Econophysics’.
Physica A 224 (1–2): 302–321, doi: 10.1016/0378-4371(95)00409-2.
Stein, P. R. and Stanislaw Ulam. 1964. Non-Linear Transformation Studies on Electronic Computers.
Warsaw: Panstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe.
Stern, Nicholas H. 2006. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Stern, Nicholas, Joseph E. Stiglitz and Charlotte Taylor. 2021. ‘The Economics of Immense Risk,
Urgent Action, and Radical Change: Towards New Approaches to the Economics of Climate
Change’. NBER Working Paper 28472, https://www.nber.org/paper65s/w28472.
Stiglitz, Joseph. November 19, 2006. ‘A Cool Calculus of Global Warming’. Project Syndicate.
https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/a-coolcalculus-of-global-warming-2006-11
Strober, Elizabeth A. 1998. ‘Interview with Barbara Bergmann’. Feminist Economics 4 (3): 5–6.
Summers, L. H. 1986. ‘Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental Values?’ Journal of
Finance 41 (3): 591–601.
Ibid. 2000. ‘International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and Cures’. American Economic
Review, 90 (2): 1–16.
Tarne, Ruben, Dirk Bezemer and Thomas Theobald. 2021. ‘The Effect of Borrower-Specific Loan-
to-Value Policies on Household Debt, Wealth Inequality and Consumption Volatility: An Agent-
Based Analysis’. FMM Working paper No. 70. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=3915516.
Tesfatsion, Leigh. 2006. ‘Agent-Based Computational Economics: A Constructive Approach to
Economic Theory’ in Handbook of Computational Economics (Vol. 2): 831–880.
Theiler, James, Stephen Eubank, André Longtin, Bryan Galdrikian and J. Doyne Farmer. 1992.
‘Testing for Nonlinearity in Time Series: The Method of Surrogate Data’. Physica D 58 (1–4): 77–
94, doi: 10.1016/01672789(92)90102-S.
Thorp, Edward O. and Sheen T. Kassouf. 1967. Beat the Market: A Scientific Stock Market System.
New York: Random House.
Thurner, Stefan, J. Doyne Farmer and John Geanakoplos. 2012. ‘Leverage Causes Fat Tails and
Clustered Volatility’. Quantitative Finance 12 (5): 695–707, doi: 10.1080/14697688.2012.674301.
Thurner, Stefan, Rudolf Hanel and Peter Klimek. 2018. Introduction to the Theory of Complex
Systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Trichet, Jean-Claude. 2010. Opening Address, ECB Central Banking Conference Frankfurt,
November 18, 2010 https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2010/html/sp101118.en.html.
Turchin, P. 2023. End Times: Elites, Counter-Elites, and the Path of Political Disintegration. New
York: Penguin Press.
Veblen, Thorstein. 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: The Macmillan Company.
Volterra, Vito. 1926. ‘Variazioni e fluttuazioni del numero d’individui in specie animali conviventi’.
Mem. Accademia dei Lincei Roma 2: 31–113.
von Neumann, John. 1966. Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, edited and completed by Arthur
W. Burks. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Way, Rupert, Matthew C. Ives, Penny Mealy and J. Doyne Farmer. 2022. ‘Empirically Grounded
Technology Forecasts and the Energy Transition’. Joule 6 (9): 2057–2082, doi:
10.1016/j.joule.2022.08.009.
Wicksell, Knut. 1918. ‘Review: Ett bidrag till krisernas teori’. Ekonomisk Tidskrift 20 (2): 66–75,
doi: 10.2307/3437495.
Wiener, Norbert. 1948. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wiersema, Garbrand, Alissa M. Kleinnijenhuis, Thom Wetzer and J. Doyne Farmer. 2023. ‘Scenario-
Free Analysis of Financial Stability with Interacting Contagion Channels’. Journal of Banking &
Finance 146: 106684.
Wright, T. P. 1936. ‘Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes’. Journal of the Aeronautical Sciences 3:
4, doi: 10.2514/8.155.
Zhou, Ping. September 1, 2021. ‘Australia’s Massive Feral Rabbit Problem’., ThoughtCo.
thoughtco.com/feral-rabbits-in-australia-1434350.
Zucman, G. and E. Saez. 2019. The Triumph of Injustice: How the Rich Dodge Taxes and How to
Make them Pay. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
...
Notes
Prologue
1 Phelps, Edmund S. (2018). ‘Equilibrium: An Expectational Concept.’ The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics. Palgrave Macmillan, London. https://doi.org/10.1057/978-1-349-
95189-5_334
2 Arnold et al. (2006). https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/109th-congress-2005-
2006/reports/12-08-birdflu.pdf
3 https://www.onetonline.org
4 https://www.governo.it/sites/new.governo.it/files/dpcm_20200322.pdf
5 del Rio-Chanona et al. (2020).
6 O*NET prompted us to target the US economy, but the disadvantage was that US policies for
dealing with COVID differed from state to state, and the lockdowns were far from simultaneous.
So, while the first paper (predicting only the first-order shocks) targeted the US, the second paper,
which predicted how the shocks would be amplified as they moved through the economy, focused
on the UK.
7 To determine which inputs are critical, we convinced IHS Markit to survey their industry analysts.
One or more of their analysts flagged the essential inputs for each of the fifty-two different
industries. This gave us a much higher level of realism than other models, which was essential to
the success of our predictions.
8 Pichler et al. (2020, 2022). We posted our paper publicly on May 21, 2020. The version we posted
then had essentially the same results as the May 8 version, but the 2022 version does a post-
mortem, examining our forecasts for each industry and a few time horizons. The conclusion of our
post-mortem was that, though we did have a bit of luck, we mostly succeeded due to skill.
9 Alleman et al. (2023).
10 Farmer (2005).
Introduction
1 Strober, Elizabeth A. (1998) Interview with Barbara Bergmann. 4:3, 5–6, DOI:
10.1080/135457098338284
2 If you have any doubt that the economy is a major driver of politics and social change, I highly
recommend Peter Turchin’s book End Times (2023).
3 See https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/us-models-about.htm
4 From a presentation given by Simon Potter, then Director of Economic Research at the New York
Fed, at a 2010 conference I co-organized with Rob Axtell, titled ‘Agent-Based Models of the
Financial Crisis’.
5 See, for example, Trichet (2010).
6 See Piketty et al. (2018), Koh et al. (2020), Guvenin et al. (2021) and Buda et al. (2022).
7 Miller and Page (2007), Mitchell (2009), Holland (2014), Thurner, Hanel and Klimek (2018) and
Ladyman and Wiesner (2020).
8 Arthur (1999, 2021). Alan Kirman is another important pioneer of complexity economics, see
Kirman (1992), Kirman (2010) and Helbing and Kirman (2013). An early agent-based modeler
whose work I will not be able to discuss here is Leigh Tesfatsion (2006).
9 See Miller and Page (2007).
10 For a review, see Axtell and Farmer (2022).
11 Gigerenzer and Brighton (2009).
12 Page (2007)
13 Del Negro et al. (2017).
14 Several economists, like Robert Shiller, Raghuram Rajan, Nouriel Roubini and others (including
Simon Potter and the economists at the New York Fed discussed at the beginning of the
introduction), presciently warned of a crisis in the years leading up to 2007. But their warnings
were based on good economic intuition rather than theoretical models. Their warnings were also
confined to the possibility of financial crisis – almost everyone failed to anticipate the broader
consequences for the economy as a whole.
15 See Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) and Del Negro et al. (2017).
16 A model that comes close to being comprehensive, taking many different economic factors into
account at once, is FRB/US, but it is an econometric model – while it has economic constraints
built into it, it is not derived from a theory based on utility maximization.
17 Friedman (1953).
18 Smith (1776).
19 Nordhaus (1992, 2017).
20 In the US there are only two complexity economists who sit in economics departments. Europe is
more supportive, but departments that allow complexity economics are still rare.
Part I: What is Complexity Economics?
1 At the time my Stanford tuition was $2,400 a year, which meant that I was paying my professors
about $3 an hour for their lectures. This was roughly the same wage I got working summers doing
manual labor, which made me feel justified in asking questions – I wanted my money’s worth.
2 Fisher (1989).
3 In the process of tatonnement an auctioneer picks a price and queries the audience for their offers
to buy or sell at that price. If the two do not match, he chooses another price and repeats the
process. He continues this until supply equals demand, at which point transactions are made.
4 Anderson, Arrow and Pines (1988).
5 Farmer and Geanakoplos (2009).
1: What is a Complex System?
1 Anderson, P. W. 2000. ‘Emergence, Reductionism and the Seamless Web: When and Why Is
Science Right.’ Current Science, vol. 78, no. 6, 2000, pp. 673–76. JSTOR,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/24103876.
2 See Mitchell (2009), Holland (2014) and Thurner et al. (2018).
3 See Wiener (1948), Shannon (1948), von Neumann (1966) and Schrödinger (1948).
4 Farmer et al. (1984), Farmer et al. (1986c).
5 There is no precise, objective mathematical definition of an emergent property; at this stage, the
classification remains subjective – a situation reminiscent of Justice Potter Stewart’s famous
statement about pornography in Jacobellis v. Ohio (1964): ‘I know it when I see it.’
6 Gordon (1999).
7 Krugman (2015a, 2015b).
8 Harry Truman famously said, ‘Give me a one-handed economist. All my economists say “on one
hand”, then “but on the other”.’
9 Gabaix and Laibson (2008).
10 Romer (2016).
11 Bass (1985).
12 For an account about who Tom Ingerson is and how he inspired me to become a scientist, see
Farmer (2004).
13 This also depends on the wheel being in good working order. If one or more of the frets separating
the cups on the rotor sticks up too much, the number in front of it will come up more often than it
should. This has been successfully used to beat the house. But if the casino takes good care of
their wheels this doesn’t happen.
14 There is also rolling friction, caused by the contact of the ball against the wheel, but our
experiments made it clear that this is small in comparison to wind resistance. Rolling friction is
simpler to handle because it is constant, in contrast to wind resistance, which depends on velocity.
The slowing down of the spinning wheel in the center can be predicted using the assumption of
rolling friction, but the ball cannot be predicted very well this way.
15 In part because of our demonstration that roulette could be beaten, the state of Nevada
subsequently passed a law against ‘using a computer to predict the outcome of a game’.
16 As we were completing construction of the first wearable digital computer, our friend Jim
Crutchfield came home one evening and said that he had just been to a meeting of the HomeBrew
Computer Club, where two guys were working on a computer that they said they were going to
sell to housewives. We couldn’t figure out why housewives would want computers, and decided
that we would make more money by beating roulette. The two guys were Steve Jobs and Steve
Wozniak.
17 Lorenz (1963).
18 The term ‘chaos’ for sensitive dependence on initial conditions was first used by Li and Yorke in a
1975 paper called ‘Period Three Implies Chaos’. However, it didn’t really catch on until the
1980s, in particular with the publication of James Gleick’s popular book, Chaos (1987).
19 Poincaré (1914).
20 Packard et al. (1980).
21 Wicksell, Knut. 1918. ‘Review of Karl Petander, “Goda och da ~liga tider”.’ Ekonomisk Tidskrift
11: 66–75.
22 See, for example, Benhabib and Nishimura (1979), Benhabib and Day (1981), Day (1982),
Grandmont (1985) and Diamond and Fudenberg (1989).
23 Beaudry, Galizia and Portier (2015, 2016).
24 Day (1981) and Boldrin and Montrucchio (1986).
25 Brock et al. (1991).
26 See R. Farmer (2016) for an account of how chaos and the events narrated here are viewed by the
economics community.
27 In the late 1980s, several papers claimed that EEGs displayed low dimensional chaos. In Theiler
et al. (1992) we extended the techniques developed by Brock et al. to allow for correlations, and
produced a similar result showing that in the case of the EEG there was no evidence to support
this hypothesis.
28 Ruelle and Takens (1971).
29 To give a bit more detail about the Ruelle and Takens’ theorem: As discussed in Chapter 1, there
are only two types of endogenous motion: regular motion and chaos. Regular motion corresponds
to a limit cycle or a combination of limit cycles with frequencies whose ratios are irrational
numbers. By combining two such cycles, you get a motion that looks like a doughnut, which
mathematicians call a 2-torus. Similarly, if you combine three such cycles, you get a higher-
dimensional generalization of a doughnut, called a 3-torus. And so on. Ruelle and Takens proved
that anything higher than a 2-torus is very unlikely to occur. That is, if you make up dynamical
systems at random, their attractors can be fixed points or limit cycles or 2-tori, but they will
almost never be a 3-torus or higher. Instead, chaotic attractors become likely. They used this
theorem to argue that chaotic attractors must underlie turbulence.
2: The Economy is a Complex System
1 Krugman, Paul. 1996. The Self Organizing Economy. Wiley Blackwell.
2 Krugman (1996).
3 When Malthus observed that the population grows exponentially, he failed to realize that the real
limit is the carrying capacity of the earth to support the human population, which has dramatically
increased through time. Malthus’s essay was a comment on Marquis de Condorcet’s essay, Sketch
for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind. Unlike Malthus, Condorcet saw
clearly that technological progress was increasing the carrying capacity for the human population
and correctly predicted that it would continue to grow rapidly as a result.
4 See, for example, Lo and Zhang (2018).
5 Marshall (1920), preface to the 8th edition.
6 Schumpeter (1942).
7 Nelson and Winter (1982), p.4.
8 Smith (1776). See book 1, chapter 3. As this book is going to press I learned that there is a much
older, very articulate statement of how the economy operates through the interaction of specialists
by Ilya Ulum al Din al-Ghazali, who lived from 1058–1111. See Ghazanfar and Illahi (1990).
9 For organisms, the energy budget plays a role that is in some ways analogous to the balance sheet;
organisms in an ecosystem interact via their energy flows, for example by eating or being eaten.
3: Understanding the Metabolism of Civilization
1 Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, reissue ed. 1990, London: Penguin Classics.
2 Self-organization is a particular kind of emergence in which disorganized configurations of matter
become highly organized. The origin of life is a good example.
3 Granovetter (1973).
4 See, for example, Newman (2018a, 2018b).
5 See, for example, Jackson, Rogers and Zenou (2017).
6 Page et al. (1999).
7 Battiston et al. (2012).
8 Farmer et al. (1986a).
9 Farmer et al. (1986b).
10 Bagley and Farmer (1991).
11 Leontief (1951).
12 Thinking in terms of money flows has an important drawback: It fails to give any insight into
sustainability. The flow of material and energy is not circular – the economy gathers raw materials
and produces waste, so material flows into and out of the economy. But the flow of money is
circular by definition. Mining companies, for example, extract raw materials and sell them, but
their money flows look much like those of any other company: The money flowing in from sales
equals the money flowing out for expenses and profits. Unfortunately, almost all of the
measurements of the production network are money flows rather than flows of material and
energy.
13 Clark (1956), foreword by Wassily Leontief.
14 Stanley et al. (1996).
15 Gabaix (2011).
16 McNerney et al. (2022).
17 Households consume the goods that the economy produces, and they are analogous to the
organism that a metabolism feeds. Households also provide labor to the economy, much as an
organism gathers food for the metabolism to process.
18 The trophic level is also equivalent to the average number of times a dollar (or renminbi) spent by
an industry changes hands until it ends up in the pocket of a worker.
19 If the government injects extra demand, for example by subsidizing household food purchases, the
output multiplier measures how much this increases overall output in the economy. We are using
the concept differently, but this is equivalent to what I am calling the trophic level here.
20 Baumol (2012).
21 Our predictions are about as accurate as other, earlier predictions based on factors like GDP,
education and labor share. However, because none of these predictions are very accurate, and
because our predictions are right when others are wrong and vice versa, if you average our
predictions together with existing methods of prediction, they result in an overall improvement in
predictive power. (This follows a well-known principle discovered by Francis Galton in the
twentieth century, that is now sometimes called ‘the wisdom of crowds’ (Galton, 1907) – but in
this case the ‘crowd’ corresponds to different models.) See Page (2018).
22 Savoie (2017).
23 The trophic levels of the economy are a result of all the decisions made by producers and
consumers through time, so in a sense they depend on human decisions. But to make our
predictions we didn’t need to worry about how the trophic levels were created – we just took them
as given.
24 We derived the model in McNerney et al. (2022) from a basic statement in accounting: The
amount that companies pay for their inputs is equal to their revenue from selling their outputs
minus their profits. We assumed the profits are small enough to be negligible in comparison to the
revenue, which is not a bad approximation relative to the other factors influencing technological
innovation. Our derivation allows any production function and makes no assumptions about utility
maximization.
25 The standard way to derive the basic model requires the assumption that firms maximize the
utility of their profits and that the relationship between the inputs and outputs is given by a Cobb-
Douglas production function. The Cobb-Douglas assumption is reasonable for highly aggregate
circumstances involving the tradeoff between capital and labor, but it is not a plausible description
of production functions needed at the level of industries or products.
26 Beinhocker (2007). Bookstaber (2019) is another nice book advocating agent-based modeling in
economics, and see Bouchaud (2008) for an articulate manifesto for complexity economics.
27 Mealy, del Rio-Chanona and Farmer (2018).
28 del Rio-Chanona, et al. (2021). This model neglects labor mobility, which is an important factor at
the national level, but is less important for a large metropolis where workers seldom move. We are
developing a new model that takes geographic mobility into account as well.
29 The links in the occupational transition agent-based model are based on the frequency of
occupational job transitions, whereas our earlier job space paper was based on similarity of work
activities.
30 Frey and Osborne (2013).
31 According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics a ‘dispatcher’ will ‘Schedule and dispatch workers,
work crews, equipment, or service vehicles for conveyance of materials, freight, or passengers, or
for normal installation, service, or emergency repairs rendered outside the place of business.
Duties may include using radio, telephone, or computer to transmit assignments and compiling
statistics and reports on work progress.’
4: How Simulations Help us Understand the Economy
1 Steen, Lynn A. 1999. Twenty Questions about Mathematical Reasoning. Developing
Mathematical Reasoning in Grades K-12: NCTM Yearbook 1999. Lee Stiff, Editor. Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 1999, pp. 270–285.
2 Another example is military simulation. See, for example, Hill and Tolk (2017).
3 https://tfresource.org/topics/TRANSIMS.html
4 See, for example, Duan et al. (2015), Davis et al. (2021) and Aleta et al. (2021). There were also
very useful models for how the COVID virus behaves in the lungs, see Moses et al. (2021).
5 One problem with large agent-based models is that they can become black boxes, whose behavior
is difficult to understand. This can be avoided by building models modularly, so that it is easy to
experiment with them and identify what causes what.
6 Increasing returns provide a good example of the importance of nonlinear behavior in economics.
See for example Arthur (1994a).
7 When I moved to Los Alamos in 1981 I had the pleasure of being invited to Ulam’s house several
times. He made good margaritas.
8 Fermi et al. (1955); Stein and Ulam (1964).
9 Chinazzi et al. (2020).
10 Pangallo et al. (2023).
11 A synthetic population is a population of imaginary individuals whose characteristics match those
of a real population – even if none of the individuals matches any particular individual in detail.
12 Geanakoplos et al. (2012). See also Axtell et al. (2014).
13 This is according to the Case-Shiller index: https://www.spglobal.com/spdji/en/index-
family/indicators/sp-corelogic-case-shiller/sp-corelogic-case-shiller-composite/#overview.
14 Epstein and Axtell (1996).
15 Tax returns contain your name, age, income and address. By comparing tax returns in successive
years, it is therefore possible to see how many people in each income and age group changed
address, either leaving or entering a given area. (Someone inside the agency did this for us, so we
never saw any names – only the probability of a person of a given age and income changing
address.)
16 We used the Carroll (1997) permanent income model.
17 It is important to keep in mind that the housing model’s outputs depend on all the model inputs
along the way, such as interest rates, lending policy, etc. So, even though we ran thirteen years
ahead of the starting point, the answers are somewhat anchored by the inputs. Only somewhat,
though: Setting the parameters to sufficiently counterfactual values could dramatically change the
outputs.
18 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Case%E2%80%93Shiller_index
19 Baptista et al. (2016).
20 The central banks now using agent-based models, influenced by our early model for Washington
DC, include Denmark (Cokayne, 2019), Ireland (Gurgone, 2020), Italy (Catapano et al., 2021),
The Netherlands (Tarne et al., 2021), Spain (Carro and Stupariu, 2022) and Hungary (Mérő et al.,
2022), as well as further work by the Bank of England (Carro et al., 2022).
Part II: Standard Economics 
⇔
Complexity Economics
5: A Lightning Summary of Standard Economics
1 For more on utilitarianism, see https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/utilitarianism-history/.
2 Muth (1961).
3 Chevalier and Goolsebee (2009). This example was taken from Carlin and Soskice (2015).
4 Keynes (1936).
5 The account I present here, which is standard lore in economics, has been criticized as apocryphal
by James Forder (2014). He argues that contemporary Keynesian economists were not as naïve as
they were portrayed, and that they did not advocate using the Phillips curve as a justification to
intentionally inflate the money supply, nor did this motivate policymakers.
6 Solow (1956).
7 Koopmans (1965) and Cass (1965).
8 Ramsey (1928).
9 Calvo (1983).
10 A standard model is Smets and Wouters (2007). See Glandon et al. (2022) for a review, and Edge
and Gürkaynak (2011) for an evaluation of predictive performance.
11 Baqaee, Rezza and Farhi (2019). This model is not a micro-founded model, but rather builds on
Leontief’s original ideas. These models incorporate the production network, and from this point of
view have a complexity economics flavor.
12 Foster and Frijters (2012).
13 Smith (1962).
14 Knez and Smith (1987).
15 Gabaix (2020).
16 Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018).
17 In Cohen (2019), Naidu et al. prefaced the remark I cited by saying, ‘In fact, all predictions and
conclusions in economics are contingent: if x and y conditions hold, then z outcomes follow. The
answer to almost any question in economics is “it depends”, followed by an exegesis on what it
depends on and why.’ I wholeheartedly agree with this; economics should depend on conditions.
However, that doesn’t mean that we should be able to prove the efficacy of any policy
recommendation we favor at the outset.
18 https://papers.rumsfeld.com/about/page/authors-note
19 Knight (1921).
6: Modeling an Uncertain and Complicated Economy
1 Simon, Herbert A. 1955. ‘A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice’. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 69, no. 1, 1955, pp. 99–118. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/1884852.
2 I unfortunately never met Herbert Simon, who died in 2001. Given that he was clearly one of the
pioneers of complex systems, and complexity economics in particular, it always struck me as
peculiar that he never spent time at the Santa Fe Institute. I once asked SFI founder Murray Gell-
Mann why this never happened. He answered that he had once served on a committee with Simon
and felt intimidated by him. Given that Murray was the smartest and most intimidating person I
knew (by a healthy margin), Simon must have been a real force of nature. For more on Herb
Simon, see Axtell (2024).
3 Simon (1957), p.198.
4 Gigerenzer and Brighton (2009).
5 Gigerenzer and Brighton (2009). Note that heuristics can vary culturally, see Heinrich et al.
(2004).
6 In statistics the maxim that simplicity is a virtue is called parsimony.
7 See Gigerenzer, Todd, and the ABC Research Group (1999).
8 Markowitz (1952).
9 Fama (1976).
10 The use of equal weights for portfolios is not the same as investing in an index. Instead, it means
picking the assets one wants to invest in and investing equal amounts of money in each of them.
11 Despite the fact that it is now well-documented that sophisticated portfolio optimization methods
based on Markowitz’s original paper perform worse, out of sample, than equal weights, to my
knowledge portfolio optimization is still taught in textbooks without any mention that it is useless
(and in fact lowers performance). There are still highly profitable companies who sell this to
clients, apparently with no awareness that simple heuristics are superior.
12 The term bias–variance tradeoff describes the problem of fitting a family of models with free
parameters to data. The result can fail because the family of models is too simple, so that it does
not contain the ‘true’ model. This is called bias. Or it can fail due to variance, which means that
the family of models is too complicated, so that with limited data the resulting parameters overfit
the data, and make poor predictions on data they have not seen. In my experience people reason
about this poorly: Models are far more often wrong due to excessive variance than excessive bias.
13 As a result, heuristics can vary based on experience; see Bednar and Page (2007).
14 Gigerenzer and Selten (2001).
15 Vernon Smith (2008) independently proposed a concept he also calls ecological rationality, but he
means something different, specifically how we solve problems collectively through developing
institutions and social norms. Both are relevant.
16 Athey and Imbens (2019).
17 There is an important mainstream literature on replacing rational expectations with learning
algorithms in traditional economic settings, pioneered by Thomas Sargent. See, for example,
Sargent (1993).
18 See Arthur (1991, 1994b) for early attempts to design algorithmic agents that act like human
agents and Epstein (2013) for ‘Agent_Zero’, which incorporates a cognitively plausible approach
to human behavior in agent-based models.
19 Cars Hommes and his collaborators run economic experiments and explain the results of these
experiments using simple agent-based models. See Hommes (2013).
20 Sims, Christopher A. 1980. ‘Macroeconomics and Reality.’ Econometrica, vol. 48, no. 1, 1980,
pp. 1–48. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/1912017. Although the original quote concerned the
wilderness of disequilibrium, this evolved into the wilderness of bounded rationality. Both are
appropriate.
21 I should also say that not all complexity economists have entered through the back door and kept
it in sight. Others have walked boldly into the interior, and let themselves get a bit lost while
searching for better economic models. One problem with this is that models can become too
complicated and hard to understand, and can be difficult to compare to data, but some of the
models that have used this approach provide useful proofs of principle.
22 See Gode and Sunder (1993).
23 Although the concept of utility is useful for building conceptual models, it is limited as a basis for
building fully quantitative models. The utility functions measured in experiments are complicated,
even in simple settings (see Erev et al., 2017, or Plonsky et al., 2019). This makes it difficult to
match reality quantitatively. To simplify the math, economists like to use simple functional forms
for utility. For example, a common choice is to assume that utility is the logarithm of
consumption, or consumption raised to a power – the choice is typically based on mathematical
convenience, which means that the answers also depend on mathematical convenience rather than
empirical evidence. Another problem is that utility is always assumed to be maximized. This
means that the agents in the model don’t just strive to make their utility bigger – all of them
actually succeed in making it as big as it can be, given the situation. In simple situations this
might be a reasonable assumption, but, as discussed in Chapter 7, it is unreasonable to expect that
real agents could do this in more complicated situations.
24 Gabaix and Laibson (2008).
25 Finding the equilibrium for N assets is NP hard. Roughly speaking, unless there is an as yet
unknown shortcut, this means that the effort required increases exponentially with the number of
assets.
7: Why is the Economy Always Changing?
1 For examples where mainstream models produce endogenous business cycles, see Beaudry et al.
(2015, 2016), Day (1981, 1982) and Boldrin and Montrucchio (1986). Blume and Easley (1991)
show how endogenous dynamics can arise in a more general context.
2 For other interesting examples of emergent behavior, see, for example, Gualdi et al. (2015) or
Dessertaine et al. (2022).
3 See, for example, Veblen (1899).
4 Asano et al. (2021).
5 When it copies the rate of its best neighbor, each household makes a small random error, so that
its new savings rate is a bit different from the one it copied. This prevents the economy from
getting stuck in exactly periodic cycles.
6 This is particularly surprising given that the social-interaction time is effectively a measure of the
inattention of the households. A large social-interaction time means that households only
occasionally tune into what the other households are doing – most of the time they just ignore the
world and keep on doing what they have been doing. It is therefore surprising that households
become richer by paying less attention. The reason this happens is because longer interaction
times allow more effective selection – it means that the household that is copied has kept its
savings rate constant longer, and that it has had more time to reap the benefits of saving.
7 Dosi et al. (2010), and Dawid et al. (2012).
8 Scheinkman (1976).
9 Nash (1951).
10 In fact, chaos in rock-paper-scissors only happens if the payoffs are asymmetric, meaning that one
of the players has an inherent advantage over the other. In other words, if Bob wins he gets more
points than Susie does when she wins.
11 Sato, Akiyama and Farmer (2002).
12 See also https://www.tiktok.com/@rockpaperscissorsbattle/
13 This makes rock-paper-scissors particularly unstable and is part of the reason why the learning
dynamics do not converge to equilibrium even though it is a very simple game.
14 Galla and Farmer (2013).
15 Studying games with an infinite number of moves might seem like a strange choice – why not
start with the simplest case, like games with only two possible moves? In physics it is often the
case that understanding the behavior of an infinite number of particles is simpler than
understanding a finite number (greater than two). We were building on some remarkable work by
the German physicists Sigurd Diederich and Manfred Opper, who studied random games with an
infinite number of moves, and showed analytically how the number of Nash equilibria depends on
the degree of competitiveness. See Diederich and Opper (1989) and Opper and Diederich (1992).
16 Pangallo et al. (2022). See also Sanders et al. (2018).
17 Pangallo, Heinrich and Farmer (2019).
Part III: The Financial System
8: Inefficient Markets
1 Buffet, Warren E. 1988. Berkshire Hathaway Letters to Shareholders 1965–2014. Max Olson,
Editor. Sanage Publishing House, 2015.
2 The number of active contracts is the number of people in the world – roughly 8 billion – times
the number of contracts per person, plus all the contracts that exist between businesses, and
businesses and governments. I estimate that the typical person in the developed world has many
thousands of active contracts. A trillion total contracts is probably a low estimate. When we
include businesses and governments there are likely tens or hundreds of trillions of contracts in
existence at any point in time.
3 As in physics. People often say that physics has had a big influence on economics, but the
influences also go the other way. Joule, who formulated the conservation of energy, was an
accountant for a brewery. See Mirowski (1989).
4 Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013).
5 Philippon and Reshef (2009).
6 Goldin and Katz (2008).
7 See also the ECB conference on ‘The Optimal Size of the Financial Sector’,
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/events/conferences/html/140902_opt_size.en.html and Coeure (2014).
8 How we came to be able to predict sunspots is a fascinating story. In the seventeenth century,
using the newly invented telescope, monks in Belgium began making daily recordings of sunspot
activity. They handed this off to future generations in the form of a long record of sunspot activity.
In 1927 the British polymath Udney Yule invented the concept of the time-series model and
showed that it could be used to predict sunspot cycles.
9 Farmer and Sidorowich (1987).
10 Fama (1991).
11 Bachelier (1900).
12 The ratio of annual returns to annual risk is called the Sharpe ratio. The Sharpe ratio of the S&P
index is about 0.5; for Prediction Company it was about 2.5. This means that our profits were very
steady, far steadier than proponents of efficient markets deemed possible.
13 I have been unable to find the original source, so this is based on my memory.
14 I left Prediction Company to return to academia, according to my original plan, in 1999.
Prediction Company was sold to UBS in 2006. The Dodd-Frank Bill implemented the Volcker
Rule, which prohibited investment banks from trading for themselves and for their clients at the
same time, and as a result the company was sold to the Millennium stable of hedge funds in 2013.
Despite remaining profitable, it was recently disbanded by Millennium, for reasons that are not
appropriate to explain here.
15 For this to be true markets need to be ‘complete’, which means that there are forums where the
underlying assets can be bought and sold so that prices can adjust accordingly. In addition, this
requires the assumption of a rational-expectations equilibrium.
16 Cabannes et al. (2018).
17 See, for example, Shiller (1981) and Summers (1986).
18 The airline company would of course prefer to buy an option for jet fuel, but this isn’t possible.
However, since the price of jet fuel is closely correlated to the price of oil, if the price of oil goes
up above the strike price of their option, they can sell the option for a profit and use this to offset
their higher fuel costs.
19 Thorp and Kassouf (1967); Black and Scholes (1973).
20 The US SEC requires mutual funds to report their positions every quarter. Warren Buffett was
once granted a waiver from doing this in a timely manner. He was in the process of buying 5 per
cent of IBM, and he wanted nine months so that he could do this gradually and in secrecy, since if
the information that he was buying leaked out, others would buy the stock too and drive the price
up before he could take his position.
21 The square-root function is infinitely steep at the origin, so a purchase of a single share has a far
larger impact per share than a purchase of a million shares. The square-root law is well supported
by the data, as long as there is an ‘orderly market’. There are circumstances, such as financial
crises, where the prediction is violated, but under normal conditions it works very well.
22 For historical reasons, economists usually sketch price as a function of supply or demand rather
than the other way around.
23 Stanley et al. (1996); Mantegna and Stanley (1999).
24 For a thoughtful reflection on data’s relationship to modeling, see Page (2018).
25 While Descartes had a theory that purportedly explained why gravity existed – which Newton did
not – Newton’s theory was far more useful. See Farmer (2013) for a discussion of how physics
mainly uses inductive logic, whereas economics mostly uses deductive logic.
26 Even if we assume market clearing, when the supply or demand functions change, the price will
move, and we will observe market impact. So, in this case, market impact is a description of how
the equilibrium has changed. But if prices do not immediately move to a new equilibrium, market
impact tells us about the rate of movement. In either case, it is a very useful thing to know.
27 Bak, Paczuski and Shubik (1997) is one example of earlier work that assumed random order
placement.
28 In our theory, buy orders were placed randomly at all prices below the current best bid, and sell
orders were placed randomly at all prices above the current best offer.
29 Daniels et al. (2003).
30 The zero-intelligence assumption was pioneered by Gode and Sunder (1993). See Smith et al.
(2002).
31 Farmer, Patelli and Zovko (2005).
32 Bouchaud et al. (2018).
33 Gode and Sunder (1993).
34 Grossman and Stiglitz (1980).
35 Farmer (2001).
36 In the following decade, the value of this signal decreased substantially, but it nonetheless
remained valuable for some time after we evaluated it in 1998.
37 Farmer (2002). See also Summers (1986), which presents some related arguments.
38 Cherkashin et al. (2009).
9: The Self-Referential Market
1 Twain, Mark. 1894. Pudd’nhead Wilson. London: Chatto and Windus, 1894, p. 130.
2 Carlson (2007).
3 The point that speculative feedback strategies such as trend-following can be destabilizing to
markets has also been made by Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1991).
4 You may wonder how the market ever recovers from such feedback loops. Eventually, it becomes
so obvious that stocks are dramatically underpriced that enough courageous investors step in and
start buying to stop the fall; if their timing is good, they make profits.
5 Clustered volatility in stock prices has two immediate causes. One is that trading volume varies;
the other is that the size of the price-response to each trade varies. In a ‘liquid’ market, the size of
price-responses to trades is small. We showed that liquidity is a more important determinant of
price movements than trading volume. (Gillemot et al., 2007.)
6 Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1989).
7 Several other studies have been done since then, and have found similar results. A comprehensive
study done on shorter timescales, which compared prices to a newsfeed, found that on short
timescales an even smaller fraction of price changes are associated with information arrival. See
Joulin et al. (2008).
8 Black (1986). His actual statement was, ‘[. . .] we might define an efficient market as one in
which price is within a factor of 2 of value, i.e., the price is more than half of value and less than
twice value. The factor of 2 is arbitrary, of course. Intuitively, though, it seems reasonable to me,
in the light of sources of uncertainty about value and the strength of the forces tending to cause
price to return to value. By this definition, I think almost all markets are efficient almost all of the
time. “Almost all” means at least 90%.’
9 Shiller (1981).
10 See, for example, Palmer et al. (1994), Arthur et al. (1996).
11 In a classifier system, each agent is given a set of rules. Each rule consists of an input condition
and an output if that condition is met. Successful rules reproduce, albeit imperfectly, with
modifications to the rules via random mutations and recombination, and unsuccessful rules are
removed from the population, so that the system learns over time.
12 Brock and Hommes (1997).
13 Many in the cast of characters I have described above have gone on to play significant roles in
complexity economics. Brian Arthur, a master storyteller who speaks with a soft and gentle Irish
brogue, was one of the first to illuminate the unstable and nonintuitive behavior of economies
with increasing returns. He later wrote a very influential paper called ‘The El Farol Problem’,
where the discussion is anchored around a popular bar down the street from the first home of the
Santa Fe Institute, and coined the term ‘complexity economics’. Blake LeBaron became a leading
expert on agent-based modeling in finance, and has provided a great deal of insight into the
origins of booms and busts. Cars Hommes went on to start a large group at the University of
Amsterdam, where he has performed many experiments that illuminate when markets converge or
do not converge to equilibrium, explaining the behavior of the subjects of his experiments with
simple agent-based models.
14 Platt (2022).
10: Ecology and Evolution in Finance
1 Understanding hard problems can take years, decades, centuries or even millennia. Markets and
financial strategies have been evolving since Mesopotamian times. This is not to underestimate
the Mesopotamians! Herodotus describes sophisticated Babylonian auctions, and the first known
recorded commercial laws in Babylonia banned monopolies and included definitions of the
different types of monopolies. Such laws were not introduced in the United States until the 1890s.
2 Farmer (2002), Farmer and Skouras (2013) and Scholl et al. (2021).
3 See Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1991).
4 Fama and French (1996). The way in which trend-following strategies can survive in the market
was shown by Delong et al. (1990).
5 Cornering a market happens when a single player owns enough of the market to have monopoly
power, so that it can set prices to its own advantage. This is a good example where markets need
to be regulated.
6 See Lotka (1925) and Volterra (1926). Analogues of the Lotka-Volterra equations have also been
used by Paul Samuelson (1974) and Richard Goodwin (1967). Their use of them was ad hoc –
they simply postulated that such equations might apply. In Farmer (2002), I showed how these
equations can be derived from a simple set of plausible assumptions about market impact and
capital flows.
7 Farmer and Joshi (2002).
8 See, for example, Dosi and Nelson (1994).
9 Farmer and Lo (1999).
10 Lo (2004, 2019).
11 Levin and Lo (2021).
12 Scholl et al. (2021).
13 In ecology, it is also common that the properties of an ecosystem depend on the relative
populations of the species in it. This is called density dependence. In Scholl et al. (2021), we
showed that financial ecosystems are strongly density-dependent.
14 A particularly interesting case occurs when the market is efficient. As an approximation, we
neglected risk and defined efficiency as the situation where the returns of all strategies are equal.
If we artificially adjusted the wealths of the three strategies to make the market perfectly efficient,
all three strategies had a mutualistic relationship – that is, increasing the wealth of any of them
increased the returns of the others.
15 Zhou (2021).
16 Darley and Outkin (2007).
17 There is a close parallel in the downfall, in 1997, of the high-flying firm LTCM, as described in
Roger Lowenstein’s book When Genius Failed. LTCM had large, highly leveraged convergence
bets on a variety of international bond spreads. When they started to unwind their huge positions,
they caused bond spreads to widen in unison, threatening the stability of the entire global bond
market.
18 Khandhani and Lo (2011). Their analysis indicates this was only a four-day event, but I think that
is because they did the analysis with an extremely simplified stat-arb strategy. Prediction
Company’s losses suggested that liquidation activity occurred for more than ten days in late July
and early August.
19 In fact, with sufficiently high leverage, a single fund liquidating its positions can cause itself to
become bankrupt. See Caccioli, Bouchaud and Farmer (2012), where we show how this can
happen and propose a valuation method that would make markets more stable.
11: How Credit Causes Financial Turbulence
1 Polanyi, Karl, 1886–1964. The great transformation: the political and economic origins of our
time. Foreword by Joseph E. Stiglitz; with a new introd. by Fred Block.—2nd Beacon Paperback
ed. p. cm. Originally published: New York: Farrar & Rinehart, 1944 and reprinted in 1957 by
Beacon in Boston.
2 Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).
3 Another important amplifier of systemic risk was the loss of faith in the banking system. There
was effectively a bank run on the shadow banking system that removed its ability to provide
credit. See Summers (2000) for a review.
4 In this example I assume that all the savings of the owner are in the equity in her house. It is often
convenient to think about leverage one investment at a time, but for most purposes it is more
relevant to consider all your equity and all your assets. For example, if, in addition to your
$500,000 house with your $400,000 mortgage, you have $300,000 in the bank, then your total
assets are worth $800,000 and your total equity is $400,000, so your total leverage is 2:1.
5 As shown in Caccioli, Bouchaud and Farmer (2012), this is a good example where the market
impact of unwinding a large position needs to be taken into account in valuing a portfolio. Even
without any external events, LTCM’s own market impact might easily have driven them bankrupt
if they had been forced to rapidly liquidate their portfolio.
6 John’s theory of the leverage cycle built on a surprising result that a single equation for supply
and demand could determine both interest rates and leverage, which was published in the 1997
SFI conference ‘The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II’, which was a follow-up to the
original conference discussed in Chapter 9 (Geanakoplos, 1997). The full theory was published in
Geanakoplos (2003). See also Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008) and Geanakoplos (2010). The fact
that leverage can amplify crashes was discussed earlier in Gennotte and Leland (1990).
7 The assumptions include no taxes, no bankruptcy costs, no agency costs and no asymmetric
formation, as well as efficient markets.
8 This already violates the widely held interpretation of the Modigliani-Miller theorem that prices
should not be affected.
9 I am abbreviating the story of this collaboration. Originally we were hoping to simulate credit
networks involving multiple assets in collaboration with Duncan Watts and Alan Kirman. This
proved to be too difficult because of the challenges of doing market clearing on multiple assets, so
we simplified the problem to study a single asset.
10 Thurner, Farmer and Geanakoplos (2012).
11 When funds defaulted, we created a new fund with the same characteristics and a modest amount
of capital. In most cases, the fund’s assets would grow over time, and if we ran long enough, there
would eventually be another big crash and they would default again.
12 During a taxi ride from LaGuardia to midtown Manhattan in 1998, my driver talked non-stop
about the great tech funds I should invest in. Thinking this indicated that we were close to the
peak of the bubble, I immediately sold half my stock portfolio. This might sound like a great
move, but in the next two years the market went up by another factor of 2 before it reached its
peak and came tumbling down. Fortunately, the fall was gradual and I managed to unwind the rest
of the portfolio while prices were still fairly high.
13 Poledna et al. (2014).
14 The drying up of credit during the 2008 financial crisis caused a bank run on the shadow banking
system, which further stressed institutions that depended on credit. The causes of bank runs were
studied in Diamond and Dybvig (1983).
15 https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs04a.htm
16 https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs107.htm1
17 Danielsson et al. (2001).
18 From Aymanns et al. (2016).
19 From Aymanns and Farmer (2015).
20 Aymanns and Farmer (2015).
21 Aymanns et al. (2016).
22 The relative wealth of the bank vs the fund has essentially the same effect as another parameter
that controls the risk appetite of the bank. When the risk appetite is large, the bank uses higher
leverage. Taking more leverage allows the bank to buy more of the asset.
23 The critical leverage depends on the overall volatility of the asset. The huge leverages of 30 or 40
used by investment banks are for carefully hedged portfolios that have very low, unleveraged
volatility. While it’s easily possible to estimate the critical leverage for the financial system, doing
so accurately requires a more detailed model.
24 Basel II was not officially adopted by the Basel Committee until 2004, but VaR was widely used
before then.
25 Farmer et al. (2020). See Aymanns et al. (2018) for a review.
26 Wiersema et al. (2023).
27 Ghashghaie et al. (1996).
28 It is well known that aggregating variables with fat tails makes the tails thinner, and there are
precise mathematical rules for how this occurs. Nonetheless, the resemblance of the clustered
volatility in both cases, and the quantitative match, is striking.
29 Muzy et al. (2000).
30 Calvet and Fisher (2001).
31 In 1996, when Ghashghaie’s study was done, the fastest trading strategies had reaction times on
the order of a hundredth to a thousandth of a second. Now the reaction time can be as low as 50
microseconds, with turnaround times that are themselves a fraction of a second.
Part IV: Climate Economics
1 See IPCC (2018), https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
12: How we Learned to Predict Weather and Climate
1 Lorenz, Edward N. 1972. ‘Predictability: Does the flap of a butterfly’s wings in Brazil set off a
tornado in Texas?’ Presented before the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
December 29, 1972. https://eapsweb.mit.edu/sites/default/files/Butterfly_1972.pdf
2 Much of the account given here is drawn from Edwards (2010), which I highly recommend.
3 https://www.weather.gov/timeline
4 The Norwegian Vilhelm Bjerknes also suggested the idea of numerical weather forecasting,
independently of Abbe. His son Jakob developed the theory of El Niño.
5 Richardson (1922).
6 Charney, Fjörtoft and von Neumann (1950).
7 Lazo, Morss and Demuth (2009).
8 Bauer, Thorpe and Brunet (2015).
9 National Research Council (1979).
10 IPCC (2014), https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/
11 This might bring to mind the Borges story ‘On Exactitude in Science’, written in 1946, in which
he imagines an empire where the science of cartography becomes so exact that only a map on the
same scale as the empire itself will suffice. This is not what we have in mind! Any simulation is
only a caricature of the real thing; even if there is a simulated agent corresponding to every human
on earth, the simulated agent is at best a pale reflection of the real agent, containing vastly less
information. Models are, by definition, highly compressed renderings of reality. See Rissanen
(2007).
12 A skeptic might argue that weather simulations are based on hard- and-fast laws of physics,
whereas there are no such laws in economics. This is partially true – some aspects of weather
depend on well-understood phenomena, like fluid flow. However, many essential aspects of
weather, such as cloud formation, are not fully understood from first principles, and require
heuristics for their solution. While I can’t prove this yet, my intuition is that the instabilities of the
economy are weaker than those of the weather, the measurement problems for the economy are
easier, and the simulation power required is far less.
13: Climate Economics and Technological Progress
1 Nordhaus, W. D. and Boyer, J. G. 2000. Warming the World Economic: Models of Global
Warming, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, p. 69.
2 Nordhaus (2017).
3 Stern (2006), Stiglitz (2006), Sachs et al. (2019) and Stern et al. (2021).
4 The fact that services have gone up in price and high technologies have dropped in price is related
to the Baumol effect, which is at least partially explained by our model for technological progress
discussed in Chapter 3.
5 Moore (1965). Transistors alone have dropped in cost at a rate of about 40 per cent per year for
the last seventy years. They are now so small that they are approaching the molecular limit, and
Moore’s Law as a scaling law for transistor density must break down. It will be interesting to see
how this affects other aspects of the rate of progress in computers, such as their performance and
cost. Once we can’t make the components of integrated circuits any smaller, will technological
progress in computers grind to a halt? In any case, the rate is likely to change.
6 Koh and Magee (2006, 2008).
7 Wright (1936).
8 There are usually multiple criteria for measuring the performance of a technology, so stating a
single rate of improvement can be difficult. Consider energy generation: Power is measured in
watts, and so it might seem like a watt is a watt. But there are clean watts and dirty watts, steady
watts and intermittent watts, and safe watts and unsafe watts. Nuclear power, for example, went
up in price at least in part because of changing safety standards.
9 McNerney et al. (2011).
10 Farmer and Makhijani (2010).
11 The Economist (2014).
12 These numbers do not quite agree with those in Farmer & Makhijani. This is because there we
used US numbers, whereas here, to be consistent with Way et al. (2022), I am using global
averages.
13 The Performance Curve Database can be found at pcdb.santafe.edu.
14 Nagy et al. (2013).
15 See, for example, Sahal (1982).
16 Farmer and Lafond (2016).
17 Lafond et al. (2018).
18 Lafond, Greenwald and Farmer (2020).
19 Way et al. (2022).
20 Useful energy measures the work that is extracted from each energy source. Electricity-generation
technology costs are levelized costs of electricity (LCOEs), which take factors such as
amortization and the cost of capital into account. Battery series show capital-cost per cycle and
energy stored per year, assuming daily cycling for ten years (these are not directly comparable
with other data series here). Modeled costs of power-to-X (P2X) fuels, such as hydrogen or
ammonia, assume historical electrolyzer costs and a fifty-fifty mix of solar and wind electricity.
See Way et al. (2022).
21 There is some evidence that the prices of oil and gas increased around 1980 and have never
returned to the same level, but this is still small compared to the transformations in renewable
energy prices.
22 Burning ammonia can produce NOx (smog) if it isn’t burned cleanly, but there are good ways to
prevent the smog from developing.
23 The most remarkable cost declines for energy-storage technologies are for capacitors, which have
dropped in cost and increased in performance at rates comparable to computers. Extrapolation
suggests that they could become cost- and performance-competitive with batteries circa 2030.
This would be a major breakthrough, because capacitors are solid-state devices that can be more
reliably operated and maintained than batteries and can be charged and discharged quickly. See
Koh and Magee (2008).
24 Meng et al. (2021).
25 Way et al. (2022).
26 While costs of improving technologies like solar photovoltaics or wind tend to follow Moore’s
Law, their deployment follows S-curves, meaning that it initially increases exponentially and then
eventually levels off.
27 Stern (2006).
28 There are proposals afoot to develop small modular nuclear reactors that can be mass-produced.
Conceivably this will lower the costs, but it runs up against fundamental economies of scale. The
probability of success is difficult to estimate, and it is unlikely that this will happen quickly.
Modular nuclear reactors would be a new product, and only rarely are new products developed
and brought to market at sufficient scale to drive substantial price declines in only a decade. There
is no good evidence that this will result in lower costs. It is worth reiterating that (after adjustment
for inflation) most technologies have historically declined in cost at very slow rates – computer
technologies and the renewable energy technologies mentioned are special.
29 The real costs of nuclear power are much higher than the stated costs. The two main reasons for
this are insurance and waste disposal. Because insurance companies refuse to insure the full risk
of nuclear power plants, it is borne by the public. Very little nuclear waste has yet been disposed
of, and this remains a work in progress. It is difficult to make good cost estimates, but these two
factors substantially inflate the costs. We have neglected these costs here.
30 Farmer et al. (2019) discusses the idea of finding ‘sensitive intervention points’ to accelerate the
transition.
Part V: Modeling for a Better Future
14: Guidance to Solve Some of Our Big Problems
1 Dosi et al. (2010), delli Gatti et al. (2011), Dawid et al. (2012), Lamperti et al. (2018).
2 Poledna et al. (2022).
3 Hommes et al. (2023).
4 Zucman and Saez (2019).
5 Turchin (2023).
6 See, for example, Piketty (2015), Piketty et al. (2018).
7 The agent-based models of Dawid et al. (2012) and Lamperti et al. (2018) have produced good
qualitative insight into the origins of inequality; we now need to do this more quantitatively.
8 See Maarten Scholl’s Oxford DPhil thesis (2023).
9 Properly estimating carbon emissions requires a complete knowledge of the production network.
This is because it is necessary to take the emissions of the inputs to a product into account, and
most firms have many inputs, and each of these inputs has many inputs. It only takes a few levels
to reach a large fraction of the economy.
10 To see how this can be done, see Pichler, Lafond and Farmer (2020).
11 This module incorporates a set of ideas and methods developed by Cesar Hidalgo, now at the
University of Toulouse, and my Santa Fe Institute colleague Ricardo Hausmann, who is also a
professor at the Harvard Kennedy School. Hidalgo and Hausmann (2009).
12 Jackson (2016).
15: Removing the Roadblocks
1 https://en.as.com/latest_news/how-much-money-did-cerns-large-hadron-collider-cost-to-build-
and-who-paid-for-it-n/
2 Mungo et al. (2022).
3 The idea of fitting parameters to data was first demonstrated by Adrien-Marie Legendre in 1806.
Legendre showed how to find the parameters of a line, which has parameters for the slope and the
yintercept, so that the sum of the squared distance between the data points and the line are as
small as possible. Legendre (1806), with the least-squares method appearing in the appendix.
4 Platt (2022); Kolic et al. (2022).
5 To give another example from physics, Ed Witten, perhaps the most brilliant living theoretical
physicist and the unquestioned leader of string theory, has received numerous awards and honors,
including the Fields Medal and the National Medal of Science. Hundreds of the best physicists
have been working on string theory for the last thirty years and have been strongly influenced by
Witten, and no one questions his brilliance. But unless the predictions of string theory are
confirmed in experiments, his work will not win a Nobel Prize.
16: Becoming a Conscious Civilization
1 Eisenhower, Dwight. Diary, 7/2/53, PDDE, 14: 358–60.
2 For some preliminary ideas for how this might be done see Bednar and Page (2007).
...
Index
Page references in italics indicate images.
abatement function 236, 249
Abbe, Cleveland 225, 233
accounting 46–7, 53, 141
adaptive-markets hypothesis 183, 184
Agamemnon (mythical character) 22
agency 7, 74
agent-based models
agents and 6–7, 10, 12, 74, 83
algorithms and 7, 84, 114–15
aspiration-level adaptation and 110
behavior modeling and 114–17
business cycle and xi, 124–8, 126
climate change and 233
complexity and 10, 121–2
conscious civilization and 277, 278
Covid-19 and see Covid-19
data and 9, 270–74
defined 6–7
dynamic nature of 8, 63
epidemiology and 74–5, 80, 277
future of 255–81
global financial crisis (2008) and see
global financial crisis households and 121, 124–7, 258, 272
housing market and 80–90, 88, 110, 121
inequality and 260–1
institutional support and 274–6
labor market model 65–72, 66, 69
leverage cycle models 194, 197–202, 206–16, 209, 211, 219
macroeconomic 257–8
markets and xii, 161, 170–73, 184–5, 187–8, 190, 200, 208, 209
methods and infrastructure, developing 273–4
microsimulation and 1, 260–61
nonlinearity and 75–8, 219
production networks and 50–63, 52, 59, 72, 222, 260, 262, 264, 265, 266,
268–9, 272–3, 279
quantitative 70, 71, 90, 120, 173, 176, 187, 213, 214, 216, 255, 258, 260,
261, 275–6, 80
simulation and see simulation
standard economic theory and 8, 9
stock market and see stock market
traffic modeling and 74
verisimilitude and 10, 121
weather forecasting and 233
See also individual model name
agents
agent-based models and see agent-based models
behavioral economics and 5–6, 104, 114–17, 120, 121
beliefs 93, 96–7, 105, 116
complexity economics and 5, 6–7, 10–11, 12
defined 4, 5–7
microeconomics and 97, 107
rationality and see rationality
representative-agent model 99–100, 211
standard economic theory and 4, 5–6, 95
utility function and 4, 5, 7, 12, 63, 93–6, 98, 99, 100, 101, 104, 105, 107,
109, 110, 115, 120–22
zero-intelligence 118, 118n, 120, 154, 156, 239–40
Akiyama, Eizo 129, 131, 132, 133
Aleta, Alberto 78
algorithms
agent-based models and 7, 84, 114–15
housing models and 84
machine-learning 114–16, 117, 134–5, 171
PageRank 49–50
amplification effect 61, 192, 193, 197, 200, 212–13
Anderson, Philip 16, 17, 19
Apple 27, 157
arbitrage 155, 163, 179, 188, 189, 194
arbitrageur 155, 157, 163
Arrow, Kenneth 16, 96, 166
Artemis 22
Arthur, W. Brian 5, 170–71
artificial intelligence 1, 3, 11, 42, 65, 114, 183
Arvizu, Dan 235
Asano, Yuki 124–5, 135
Asian financial crisis (1997) 195, 219, 232
‘as-if’/’as-is’ reasoning 8, 10, 112
aspiration-level adaptation 110
assets
accounting and 47
agent-based models and 7, 115 balance sheets and 45–6
behavioral macroeconomics and 103
buying underpriced 7, 115, 202
contracts and 141
derivative pricing and 150
leverage and 192, 193, 196, 197, 199, 200, 204–5, 208, 210, 211–12, 211
malfunctions and 185
market impact and 150, 151
portfolio choice and 111
prices and 181, 185
quantitative easing programs and 259
risk management and 204–5, 208, 210, 211–12, 211
attractors 30–37, 32, 182, 206
chaotic attractor 31–2, 34, 36, 206
fixed-point attractor 30–31, 33, 34, 36–7, 182
limit-cycle attractor 34
Lorenz attractor 32, 34
strange attractor 30–31, 33, 35
austerity 22, 105, 254
Austria xviii, 258
automation 1, 12, 20, 65, 68–72
Axtell, Rob 82, 274
Aymanns, Christoph xi, xii, 207–8, 210, 213–14, 215
Bachelier, Louis 144, 165
backward-looking expectations 83–4
Bacry, Emmanuel 216
Bagley, Richard 51
balance sheets 45–7, 51, 141, 188, 191, 260, 261–2
Bank for International Settlements 213
Bank of America 175–6, 189
Bank of Canada 258
Bank of England xviii, 89, 188, 216
Bank of Hungary 90
Bank of South Africa 216
baseball, gaze heuristic and 109
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 204–16
Basel I 204, 214–15
Basel II 205, 206, 208, 209, 210, 213, 214–15
Basel III 215
Basel IV 215
Basel leverage-cycle model xii, 204–16, 211, 219
Baumol, William 62
Beaufort, Francis 224
beavers, hunting of 186–7
behavioral economics 5–6, 9, 17, 40, 46, 47, 93, 103–5, 106, 108, 114, 116,
120, 168
Beinhocker, Eric: The Origin of Wealth 63–4
Bergmann, Barbara 1
Beveridge curve xi, 69, 69, 70–71
‘Beyond Equilibrium and Efficiency’ conference (2000) 168–9
bid-ask spread 154
biology 4, 8, 16, 21, 51, 54, 175–90, 239, 278
market ecology see ecology, market
understanding the economy and concepts from 43–5
BiosGroup 187–8
Black, Fischer 150, 169
Black Monday stock market crash (1987) 161–4, 165, 166, 167, 168, 187
Boeing 73
Bohr, Niels 23, 24
Boldrin, Michele 37
bonds 111, 140, 150, 171, 172, 185, 191, 194–7, 199, 219, 259
Boston University 56, 57, 153
Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe 155
bounded rationality 116–20, 118n, 119, 173
computerized trading strategies and 178
defined 108–9
endogenous business cycles and 124, 128, 129
game theory and 135
market impact and 151, 155–6
risk management and 206
wilderness of xi, 116–20, 118n, 119, 124, 151, 155–6
Boyle’s Law 23–4
brain
artificial 171, 172
brainwaves, chaos and 38
cerebral cortex 277, 278
as complex system 5, 20–21
gut brain 139–40, 142, 277
prediction and 23
wilderness of bounded rationality and 118n, 119
Brin, Sergey 49
British Met (Meteorological) Office 224
Brock, William ‘Buz’ 38, 39, 172–3, 200
broker-dealers 207
Brown University 82
Buffet, Warren 115, 139
business cycles
Beveridge curve and 71
bounded rationality and creating endogenous business cycles 124–8, 126,
135
chaos and 28–9, 37, 40
creative destruction and 279–80
endogenous business cycle from a simple agent-based model xi, 124–8,
126, 135
inflation and 257, 258
nonlinear behavior and 76, 78
spontaneous emergence of 123, 124–8, 126, 135, 258
Calchas (mythical character) 22
Calinescu, Ani 184
call option 150
Calvet, Laurent 218
Calvo, Guillermo 101–2
‘Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientific Assessment’ report (1979) 230
Carnegie Mellon 98
Carville, James 123
Case-Shiller index 88, 89n
Cass, David 100
census data 6, 67, 80, 81, 87, 112, 115
Center for Nonlinear Studies at Los Alamos 16, 41
change, economy and 8, 123–35
business cycles see business cycles chaotic dynamics and 128–35
internally and externally driven causes 8, 123
markets and 162, 164–70, 165, 167
chaos xviii, 24
Basel leverage-cycle model and 212, 213, 217
business cycles and 28–36
chaotic attractor xi, 30–36, 31, 206
defined 30–36, 32
economy as chaotic 36–41, 128
financial crisis (2008) and 206
fluid turbulence and 218–19
game theory and 128–35
sensitive dependence on initial conditions and 25, 31–4, 40, 212
simple chaos and complicated chaos 37, 38–40, 134, 143, 217, 218–19
stock market and 129, 135, 143
weather and 225, 226, 228, 229
Charney, Jule 227, 230
ChatGPT 114
Cherkashin, Dmitriy 159
chess 113, 132
Chicago school of economics 106–7
child-care workers 70
China, trophic structure of the U.S. and Chinese economies, comparison of
xi, 59–63, 59
classifier system 171–2
climate change 1, 3, 12, 57, 65–6, 107, 221–54, 255, 263
Climate Policy Laboratory see Climate Policy Laboratory
conscious civilization and 277–80
Dynamic Integrated Climate Economy (DICE) 235–6, 246–7
economic predictions and predictions of weather and climate 221–69
green-energy transition 65–72, 222, 234–7, 245–54, 246, 250, 263–8, 279
historical global cost and deployment of energy technologies 245–54,
246
predicting climate 229–31
solar photovoltaic modules see solar photovoltaic power
sustainable growth 267–9
technological progress and 234–54, 237, 243, 246, 250
weather predicting and 223–9
Climate Policy Laboratory xii, 264–7, 264, 280
Agriculture and Land Use Module 264, 266
Energy System Module 264, 265–6
Government and International Relations Module 264, 266–7
Green Industrial Strategy Module 264, 266
Households Module 264, 266
Innovation and Technological Change Module 264, 266
Investment and Financial Stability Module 264, 266
origins of 264–5
The Production Network Module 264, 265
closed-form solutions 76–7
clustered volatility 219
credit and 173
defined 134, 164–5
fluid turbulence and 217, 218
leverage and 199–202, 215
news and xi, 164–74, 165, 167, 199–202, 215
price movements and xi, 164–74, 165, 167
quantitative predictions and models of 173–4
risk management and 204–5
Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model and 170–73, 184–5, 200
trend-following and 200
coal miners 65
competition 42, 44, 67, 70
biological 177–82, 185, 189
game theory and 129, 133–5
complete network 68
complex systems xix
adaptive complex systems 21, 43
chaos and see chaos complicated 35–6
defined 19–21
economy as 16, 42–7
financial system as 142
networks and 48–50
nonlinearity and 75–6, 77
science of 4–5, 19–21, 26, 29–30
self-organization and 48
‘The Economy as an Evolving Complex System’ conference, Santa Fe
Institute (1987)
and origins of 16–17, 161, 166
complexity economics
agent-based models and see agent-based models
‘as-if’ and ‘as-is’ reasoning and see ‘as-if‘/’as-is’ reasoning
bounded rationality and see bounded rationality
chaos and see chaos
climate change and see climate change
complex systems and see complex systems
data and see data
defined xviii–xix, 4–5, 19
ecology and see ecology
equilibrium and see equilibrium
hard problems, ability to solve 8–9
institutional support 13–14, 274–6
Leontief and emergence of 54–7
markets and see markets
methods and infrastructure, developing 273–4
standard economic theory and see standard economic theory
tools 6–7, 11
verisimilitude and see verisimilitude
Complexity Science Hub, Vienna 198
complicated chaos 35–6, 38–40, 218–19
complicated complex systems 35–6
Computable General Equilibrium models 102
Congressional Budget Office, US xiv
consciousness 5, 20, 21, 76, 278
conscious civilization 277–81
contracts 46, 140–41, 191, 196
convergence trading 158, 194
convergent evolution 188–9
counterparty identifiers 184, 187
COVID-19 pandemic
agent-based models and 75, 277
business cycles and 8, 29, 262
model of epidemics’ effect on sickness and the economy and xi, 78–80,
79
Oxford model predicts economy response to xiii–xviii, 12, 50, 78, 263
Cowan, George 20
creative destruction 43, 279–80
credit
agent-based models and 173
credit crisis 82
financial crisis (2008) and see global financial crisis (2008)
financial turbulence and 191–220
lending and see lending
leverage and see leverage
risk management and see risk management
shadow banking system and 142
CRISIS (Complexity Research Initiative for Systemic InStabilities) 208
Crutchfield, Jim 35
Curie, Marie 270
Cutler, David 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 172
cybernetics 20
damage function 236, 249
Daniels, Marcus 154
dark matter/dark energy 271
Darley, Vince 187–8
Darwin, Charles 176, 177, 223
data
collecting better 270–73
microdata 72, 87, 229
Dawid, Herbert 257
Day, Richard 37
decimalization 187–8
decision making 7, 11, 46, 63, 74, 83, 97, 99, 103, 115, 118n, 135, 141,
266–7
default 8–9, 49, 85, 90, 193, 195, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 232
degrees of freedom 38–40, 217, 219
Delour, Jean 216
demand
curves 15, 96, 152
equilibrium and 8, 15
housing 87–8, 95–6, 110
inverted demand functions 200–201
labor 65–8, 71–2, 101
market ecology and 182
market impact function and 150–56
Nash equilibrium and 130
shocks xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, xvii, 262–3
Standard models in economics and 85
tatonnement and 15–16
World Energy Model and 249
Wright’s Law and 244
Department of Energy National Renewable Energy Laboratory, US 235
Department of Labor, US xiv
derivatives 179, 187
derivative pricing 150, 152
Descartes, René 153
descent, evolution and 176
D. E. Shaw 175, 189
determinism 30–31, 33, 37, 39, 96
‘diagnostic expectations’ model 104
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F. 105
DICE (Dynamic Integrated Climate Economy) 235–6, 248–9
differential geometry 245
digital twins 6, 73
disasters, recovering from 262–3
discounting 100, 133
disequilibrium xiii, 71, 116
dispatchers 68–70
Dosi, Giovanni 183, 257
dot-com bubble 180, 200
Dow Jones Index 38, 39, 169
Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models 99–101, 124,
127, 232, 258, 260
dynamical systems 7, 30–31, 35–8, 40, 50–51
‘The Dynamics of the Leverage Cycle’ (paper, 2015) 210
ecology 8, 10–11, 43, 44, 54, 160, 173, 175–90
adaptive-markets hypothesis and 184
agents reasoning power and 177–8
competition and 177–82, 185, 189
complexity economics origins and 54–7
convergent evolution and 188–9
ecological rationality 114, 143–4
ecosystems 11, 44, 48, 60, 65, 172, 176, 179, 182, 184, 186, 187, 266,
280
evolution, theory of 7, 176–9, 183, 188–9
‘Frontiers of Finance: Evolution and Efficient Markets’ (paper, 1999) 183
inefficiency and 177, 179–80, 185
Lotka-Volterra equations 182–3
market ecologist, author’s journey from market anthropologist to 175–8
market ecology theory 141, 174, 178–83
‘Market Force, Ecology and Evolution’ (paper, 1998) 179–83
market malfunction, market ecology and predicting 184–6
market mass-extinction (August 2007) and 188–90, 198, 261–2
metabolism of civilization, economy as 50–54, 52, 277
production networks and 57–63
regulatory implications of market ecology 186–8
work, evolution of the ecology of 63–72, 66, 69
econometrics 3, 97, 99, 114
‘Economics after Neoliberalism’ (Naidu, Rodrik and Zucman) 105
Economist, The 240
econophysics 56, 152–3, 155, 168–9, 183
ecosystems 11, 44, 48, 60, 65, 172, 176, 179, 182, 184, 186, 187, 266, 280
efficiency, market/efficient market theory 24, 140–74
allocative efficiency 147–8, 160, 162, 168, 198
‘Beyond Equilibrium and Efficiency’ conference (2000) 168–9
definition of 139, 141, 143–4, 147–8
environmental-impact statements and 187
Fama and see Fama, Eugene
‘Frontiers of Finance: Evolution and Efficient Markets’ (paper, 1999) 183
inefficiencies, market see inefficiencies, market
informational efficiency 148, 160, 162, 169, 198
leverage and 196–200, 202
market ecology and 141, 177, 178, 179–80, 184–7
market-impact function and 150–6
measuring in quantitative terms 168–70
news and 161, 162, 163, 164
paradoxical nature of efficient-market hypothesis 148–9
Prediction Company and 144–52, 154, 157, 159, 169
slow path to 156–60
traffic and 148–9
trend-following and 180
usefulness of efficient market theory 149–56
Eisenhower, Dwight 167, 277
electricity 284, 251, 253
Ellington Management Group 194, 196–7
emergent phenomena
Beveridge curve 71
complex systems and 4–5, 19, 20–21, 35, 42–3
equilibrium and 8, 134
economy as 44
heuristics and 110
nonlinearity and 75–7
Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model and 172
savings and 126–7
simulation and 73
systemic risk as 202
traffic as 74
weather as 232–3
‘Empirically Grounded Technology Forecasts and the Energy Transition’
(paper, 2022) 251
endogenous phenomena
business cycles xi, 126–8, 126, 135, 232
dynamics 78, 161
leverage cycle 206–7
motion 29, 31, 32, 32, 40
energy technologies, historical global cost and deployment of xii, 245–54,
246. See also individual technology name
ENIAC computer 227
enterprise value 196–7
epidemic simulations xi, xiv, 6, 74–5, 78–80, 79. See also Covid-19
equilibrium 17, 29
behavioral economics and 103, 104, 105
Beveridge curve and 71
‘Beyond Equilibrium and Efficiency’ conference (2000) 168–9
bounded rationality and 116, 117, 128
chaos and 36, 37, 128–35
clustered volatility and 164–5, 170 complexity-economics and xvi, 8, 55,
63
Computable General Equilibrium models 102
disequilibrium xiii, 71, 116, 117
DSGE models and 99–101
financial crises and 197, 198–9, 201, 215
market efficiency and 157
markets moods and 171, 173, 176
Nash equilibrium 130–32
origins and definition of 15–16
Standard economic models and xvi, 8, 17, 93, 95–6, 97, 98, 99–101
‘The Virtues and Vices of Equilibrium and the Future of Financial
Economics’ (paper, 2009) 17
EURACE model 257
European Central Bank 2, 50, 188
evolution, theory of 7, 176–9, 183, 188–9
excess profits 180–81, 198
experience curve 239
experiments 6, 28
agent-based models and 278
behavioral economics and 103–4, 106, 110, 115
chaos 33, 36
counterfactual 87–8
fluid-turbulence 39, 217–18
market 171–2, 181
‘what-if’ 102, 181
expert opinions 6, 115
Explorer Post 114 25
Fama, Eugene 111, 143–4, 146, 148–9, 160, 177, 180
Federal Reserve Bank, US 257
Federal Reserve Bank US model (FRB/US) 2, 82
Feigenbaum, Mitchell 41
financial crises 1, 2, 11, 142, 233, 280
Asian financial crisis (1997) 195, 219, 232
avoiding future 261–2
credit, leverage and 191–8
dot-com bubble 180, 200
global financial crisis (2008) see global financial crisis
Great Depression 2, 162, 191
Greek debt crisis 22
stock market crash (1987) 161–4, 165, 166, 167, 168, 187
Financial Policy Committee, UK 90
financial system
credit and 191–220 see also credit
disruptions that flow back and forth between the economy and,
understanding 262
ecology and evolution 175–90 see also ecology
markets, inefficient 139–60 see also markets
self-referential market 161–74 see also markets
Fisher, Adlai 216
FitzRoy, Robert 223–4
fixed-leverage caps 205
fixed-point attractor 30–31, 33, 34, 36–7, 182
floor costs 250–51, 250
fluid turbulence
chaos and 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 143, 229
intermittency in xii, 129, 216–20, 217
resemblance between financial and 216–20, 217
food chain 57–8
Ford Motor Company 238
forecast, etymology of 223
fortuitous phenomena 33
free parameters 86–7, 273–4
French, Kenneth 180
Frey, Carl 68
friction 101–3, 127, 153
Friedman, Milton 9, 106, 177
‘Frontiers of Finance: Evolution and Efficient Markets’ (paper, 1999) 183
fundamentals 171, 175–6, 186
Gabaix, Xavier 23, 56, 104, 120–21
Gallegati, Mauro 257–8
Galla, Tobias 132
game theory 128–35
Gatti, Domenico delli 257–8
GDP (Gross Domestic Product)
balance sheets and 47
business cycles and 28–9
Covid-19 and xv, xvii, xviii
credit network and 191–2
economic inequality and 259
energy sector and 221
financial system size and 141
global 279
Greek debt crisis and 22
growth and 268
trophic structure of the U.S. and Chinese economies, comparison of xi,
59–63, 59
Geanakoplos, John 17, 82, 168, 193–200, 207, 214, 215
Gennaioli, Nicola 104
‘Geometry from a Time Series’ (paper, 1980) 36
George Mason University 82, 274
Ghashghaie, Shoaleh 217
Gigerenzer, Gerd 111, 113, 114
Gillemot, László 154
global financial crisis (2008) 191
agent-based models and 190, 198–204, 206–16, 206, 209, 211
business cycle for 69, 70–71
change in the economy and 8–9
complex-systems thinking and 50
credit/leverage and 191–216, 206, 209, 211, 219
economic inequality and 259
Federal Reserve Bank US model (FRB/US) and 2, 82
GDP and 279
housing market and xi, 2, 80–90, 88, 89n, 203–4, 237
market inefficiency and 170
modeling failures and 1–2, 8–9, 121
mortgage-backed securities and 81–2, 160, 178, 187, 189–90, 193–4,
196, 202–3
risk management and 206–16, 206, 209, 211
Gode, Dhananjay 156
golden rule 125, 126–7
Goodhart, Charles 205
Google 49, 224
Google Maps 149
Granovetter, Mark 48
grass
food chain and 57–8
specialists and 10–11, 44
gravity, theory of 3, 74, 153
Great Depression, The 2, 162, 191
Greece 22–3
green-energy transition 222
Climate Policy Laboratory and see Climate Policy Laboratory
‘Empirically Grounded Technology Forecasts and the Energy Transition’
(paper, 2022) 251
Fast Transition scenario 237, 252–4
labor transitions 64–72, 266
modeling evolution and 263–8, 264, 279
No Transition scenario 251–4
Slow Transition scenario 252–3
speed of 245–54, 246, 250
technological progress and 234–54, 237, 243, 246, 250
greenhouse gases 221, 229–31, 235
Greenwald, Diana 245
Gurley, John 15, 152, 154
gut brain 139–40, 142, 277
Haan, Wouter den 122
Harry (first wearable computer) 27
Harvard Mark II 55
Harvard University 17, 23, 54, 55, 141, 166
hedge fund 142, 144–5, 155, 174, 194
Heinrich, Torsten 135
Heitzig, Jobst 124
heterogeneity 7, 102–3, 260
Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) models 102–3, 260
heuristics 109–15
‘adaptive toolbox’ of 113–14
agent-based simulation and 121
bounded rationality and 117, 118, 118n, 202, 206
defined 109–12
gaze heuristic 109–10
‘imitate the best’ 124, 125–6, 127
modeling behavior directly and 112–15
risk management and 210–11
weather forecasts and 224
Higgs boson 271
high-dimensional chaos 219
Hoermann, Ingrid R. 28
Holland, John 170, 171
Hommes, Cars 172–3, 200
Homo economicus 6, 11, 103
households
as agents 4, 6
agent-based models and 121, 124–7, 258, 272
Asano model and 124–7, 135
balance sheets and 46
business cycles and 124–7, 126
Climate Policy Laboratory and 264, 264, 265, 266
DSGE models and 99–100, 127, 258, 260
Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) models 102, 260
housing market and 81, 83–9
myopic 104
production network and 58, 60
RCK model and 124–7
savings 81
Solow model and see Solow mode synthetic 260, 267
housing market 16, 142, 189–90, 269
global financial crisis (2008) and xi, 2, 80–90, 88, 89n, 203–4, 237
London, housing prices in 89–90
Washington DC simulation xi, 80–90, 88, 89n, 110, 115, 121
Howitt, Peter 82
hydrogen-based fuels 248, 252, 253
IHS Markit xvii
imitation 7, 110
‘imitate the best’ 124, 125–6, 127
index arbitrage 163, 179
Industrial and Corporate Change 183
industries
agent-based modeling and xiii, xiv–xviii, 263, 274–5
climate change and 221, 222, 254, 264, 265, 266
Covid-19 model and xiii, xiv–xviii, 263
Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) models and 102
households as 51
labor demand and 65–6
non-essential xiii, xiv–xv
production networks 53–63, 59, 76
service 58, 60, 62
sustainable growth and 267, 268
inefficiencies, market
arbitrageur and 155, 156–7
defined 141, 179–80
emergence of 160
institutional structure and 198
market crashes and 161–70, 199–200, 202
market ecology and 141, 177, 179–80, 185
Prediction Company and 147, 155, 156–7
signals and 157–9
slow path to market efficiency and 156–60
technological progress and 159
inequality, economic 1, 3, 11, 49, 124, 233, 255, 257, 258, 259–61, 279, 280
inflation 3, 28, 47, 98, 101, 123, 238, 257–8, 261
information, theory of 20
Ingerson, Thomas Edward v, 25, 27
innovation 4, 11, 12, 17
agent-based models and testing for side-effects of 187–8
balance sheets and 46
climate change and 234–54, 237, 243, 246, 250, 266
evolutionary perspective 43, 44
specialization and 63
stock market crash (1987) and 163–4
technological 3, 6, 13, 27, 28, 42, 50, 57, 60–61, 63, 100, 149, 159, 234–
54, 237, 243, 246, 250, 266, 278
input-output models 55, 56
Institute for New Economic Thinking, Oxford Martin School 64, 82
institutional support, complexity economics and 13–14, 274–6
integrated-assessment models 248–51, 250
interbank-lending network 49–50
interest rates 24, 47, 82, 84, 87, 89, 98, 167, 171, 185, 194, 195, 257, 259–
60, 261
International Energy Agency (IEA) 249–50, 250, 251
investment banks 142, 189–90, 195, 207, 208, 210–11, 212–13, 215
Iori, Giulia 154
Iphigenia (mythical character) 22
Ives, Matt 246
Jackson, Matthew 49
Jackson, Tim 267
Jevons, William Stanley 95–6
job space for the United States, network view of xi, 66–8, 66
Joshi, Shareen 183
Kahneman, Daniel 103–4
Kauffman, Stuart 51, 187–8
Keynes, John Maynard 97–9, 102, 257
Keynes-Schumpeter model 257
Kidder-Peabody 175, 194
Kleinnijenhuis, Alissa 216
Knight, Frank 106–7
Koh, Heebyung 238
Kolb, Jakob 124
Koopmans, Tjalling 100
Krugman, Paul 22, 42
labor transitions 64–7, 66, 266
Lafond, François 242, 244, 245
Laibson, David 23, 120–21
laptop, supply chain of xi, 51, 52, 53–4, 60–61, 121
Large Hadron Collider at CERN 271
law of large numbers 56
Lawrence, Karen 189
learning 114–15
algorithms 114–16, 117, 134–5, 171
machine learning see machine learning
reinforcement 114, 131, 133–5
Wright’s law/learning by doing 239–45, 249
LeBaron, Blake 38, 39–40, 170–71
lending
contracts and 140
housing bubbles/financial crises and 8–9, 80–89, 190, 191–9, 202, 203
inflation and 257
interbank-lending network 49–50
Leontief, Wassily Wassilyevich 54–7, 63
less-is-more effect 111
leverage 188, 191–216
agent-based models of the leverage cycle 198–216, 211, 219
assets and 192, 193, 196, 197, 199, 200, 204–5, 208, 210, 211–12, 211
Basel leverage-cycle model xii, 204–16, 211, 219
broker-dealer leverage and volatility, comparison of the U.S. xi, 206–7,
206
cycle 198–9, 201–2, 208, 209, 211, 213, 215–16
definition of 192–3
financial crisis (2008) and 192, 202–16, 206, 209, 211
fixed-leverage caps 205
Geanakoplos and see Geanakoplos, John
Long-Term Capital Management (LCTM) and 194–8
mortgages and 84
news and 198–202
passive 208, 209, 209
prices and 196–205, 208, 209, 210–12, 211, 214, 215
risk management and 204–16, 206, 209, 211
stat-arb funds and 190
‘The Dynamics of the Leverage Cycle’ (paper) 210
U.S broker-dealer leverage and volatility, comparison of xi, 206–7, 206
Levin, Simon 184
liabilities 45–7, 141
limit cycle 30–31, 33, 34, 37, 40
limit-order book 154–6
links 45–6, 48, 49–50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 57, 58, 59, 66–7, 66, 67, 73, 191
Lloyd, Seth 159
Lo, Andrew 183, 184
London, housing prices in 89–90
Long-Term Capital Management (LCTM) 194–8
Lorenz attractor xi, 30–36, 32
Lorenz, Edward xi, 30–36, 32, 38–40, 217, 219, 223, 228
Lotka-Volterra equations 182–3
Lucas critique 4, 116
Lucas, Robert 98–9
machine learning xix, 3, 11, 76, 170
agent-based models and 114–15
analogs and 224
firm-level network and 273
stock market and 145, 170, 171
Mackintosh, David xi, 119
Macrocosm 276
macroeconomics 3, 7, 9, 29, 47, 56, 102, 103, 107, 128
evolution of contemporary 97–9
Macrofinancial Seminar, London School of Economics (2018) 122
Magee, Christopher 238
malfunction, market 11, 141, 161, 170, 174, 178, 179, 180, 185, 201
market ecology predicting 184–6
Manhattan Project 41
Mantegna, Rosario: Econophysics 153
manufacturing xi, 51–63, 52, 59, 79, 98, 121, 239, 277
margin calls 193–7, 199–202
markets
complexity economics and mood of 170–74
crashes see individual crash name
econophysics and 56, 152–3, 155, 168–9, 183
efficiency/inefficiency see efficiency, market
fat tails 165, 173, 199–200, 215, 217, 218
financial system and 139–42
leverage and see leverage
market ecology see market ecology
market-impact function 150–56, 163, 178–81, 189–90, 195
Prediction Company and see Prediction Company
rational expectations and see rationality
regulation see regulation
risk and see risk
self-referential 161–74
signals and see signals
stock market see stock market
technological progress and 149, 159
thin tails 165, 218
Markowitz, Harry 111–12
Marshall, Alfred 95–6
Principles of Economics 43
Marx, Karl 48
McCarthy, Joe 25
McGill, Jim 144
McNerney, James 57–8, 239–40, 245
Mealy, Penny xi, xiv, 64, 246
Meriweather, John 194
Merton, Robert 150, 194
meta-dynamical systems 50–51
metabolism, economy as 43, 50–54, 55, 139, 277
method of analogs 224–5, 229, 231
Metropolis, Nicholas 41
Mexico 65, 259
microdata 72, 87, 229
microeconomics 9, 47, 97, 99
micro-founded models 99–103, 122, 124
micro-simulation 1, 260–61
Milgram, Stanley 45
Miller, Merton 196, 215
Minsky, Hyman 193, 196, 214
MIT 183, 238
modeling, future 255–69
climate change and 263–7, 264
disasters and 262–3
economic inequality and 259–61
financial crises and 261–2
steady course of economy and 257–9
sustainable growth and 267–9
models. see agent-based models and individual model name
Modigliani, Franco 196, 215
Montrucchio, Luigi 37
Moore, Gordon 238–9, 241
Moore’s Law 238–45
mortgages 84, 85, 86, 90, 140, 191, 192–3, 259
mortgage-backed securities 81–2, 160, 178, 187, 189–90, 193–4, 196, 202–
3
Mungo, Luca 273
Muth, John 96–7
mutual funds 142, 146, 186
Muzy, Jean-Francois 218
Nagy, Béla 240–42
NASA Scout program 277
NASDAQ 180, 187–8
Nash equilibrium 130–32
Nash, John 130–32
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) 228
Nature 240
Nelson, Richard: An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change 43
neoclassical economics 43
neoliberalism 105
networks
balance sheets and 45–7, 141, 191
complex systems and 45–6, 48–9
credit network 191–2
defined 45
ecology of production networks 57–63, 58
interbank-lending network 49–50
meta-dynamical systems and 50–51
network modeling 48–55, 72, 73
network view of the job space for the United States xi, 66–7, 66
neural-network models 114
occupational-labor network 65–72, 66, 69, 266, 279
production networks xi, 50–63, 52, 59, 72, 121, 222, 260, 262, 264, 265,
266–7, 272–3, 279
simulation and 73
social networks 45, 48, 49, 124–5
websites and 49
Neumann, John von 20, 227
Neumann, Klara von 227
Newman, Mark 48–9
Newton, Isaac 3–4, 26, 30, 109, 153
New York Federal Reserve Bank 2
New York Times 42, 166, 167, 168
Nobel Prize in economics 3, 16, 24, 130, 194, 260
(1978) 11, 108
(1990) 111, 112
(2002) 104
(2013) 143
(2017) 104
(2018) 12, 236
criteria 275
establishment of (1968) 275
nodes 45–6, 48–50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 58, 59, 66–7, 73, 124, 191
‘Noise’ (paper) 169
Nordhaus, William 12, 234, 235–6, 248–9
normal-form game 129–30, 135
Northeastern University 78
nuclear power 162, 234, 235, 239, 240, 245, 246, 247, 252, 253–4
O’Connor and Associates 144–5
O*NET xiv
Oppenheimer, Frank 25
Oppenheimer, J. Robert 41
optimization 7, 111, 121
options pricing 169, 178
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 213
Osborne, Mike 68
output multiplier 58
Oxford Martin School 64
Packard, Norman 25, 27, 36, 50, 144
Page, Larry 49
PageRank 49, 50
Palmer, Richard 170–71
Pangallo, Marco xiv–xv, 78–9, 134
Paris Bourse 15–16, 95
Performance Curve Database 241, 242, 244
pharmacy aides 68–70
Phelps, Edmund S. xiii
Phillips curve 98
Pichler, Anton (Toni) xvi
Piketty, Thomas 259
planned economy 55–6
Poincaré, Henri 32–3, 40
Polanyi, Karl 191
Poledna, Sebastian 201, 258
portfolio 203, 204–5, 211, 265
choice 111–12
insurance 162–4, 187
theory 111
Portland, Oregon 25, 74
Poterba, James xi, 165–70, 172
‘Predicting Chaotic Time Series’ (paper, 1987) 143
prediction
behavioral realism and see behavioral economics
climate see climate
Covid-19 and see Covid-19
defined 23–4
economic predictions, improving 3–6, 21–4, 28
markets and see markets
market ecology and see market ecology
network theory and 50
physics and 26, 31
pockets of predictability 145
Prediction Company see Prediction Company
roulette and see roulette
shocks and 29–30, 37 see also individual shock name
technological progress and 237–45, 237, 243
weather see weather
Prediction Company 152, 224
bounded rationality of agents in the market and 178, 179
global financial crisis (2008) and 189–90
market efficiency and 144–52, 154, 157, 159, 169
market impact and 151, 154
origins of 111–12, 144–7
risk control and 204
signal-to-noise ratio of strategies 169
statistical arbitrage and 157, 188–90
technological progress and 159
Wall Street partners, search for 175–6
prices
clustered volatility of xi, 134, 164–74, 165, 167, 199–200, 204, 215, 217,
218, 219
derivative pricing 150, 152
energy prices 236–8, 237, 239, 243, 245, 246, 247
equilibrium and 15–16, 95–6, 130, 201–2
house see housing
inflation see inflation
leverage and 196–205, 208, 209, 210–12, 211, 214, 215
margin calls and 193–7, 199–202
market ecology theory and 179–82, 185, 186
market efficiency and 147–8
market impact and 150–52, 154–5, 179–81
mean-reverting 155
news and volatility in 161–73
persistence and 180
production networks and 57, 61
stock see stocks
turbulence and 217–18, 219
US goods, differences in the price of some (1998–2022) xii, 237
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 183
production function xvi–xvii, 55–6, 63, 76
production networks
agent-based models of 50–63, 52, 59, 72, 222, 260, 262, 264, 265, 266,
268–9, 272–3, 279
climate change and 72, 222, 260, 262, 264, 265, 266, 268–9
ecology of 57–63, 59
laptop supply chain xi, 51, 52, 53–4, 60–61, 121
specialization and 83
trophic structure of the U.S. and Chinese economies and xi, 59–63, 59
program trading 162, 178
proto-life 51, 54
psychology 5–6, 11, 17, 47, 74, 103, 108, 109, 110, 111, 114, 115, 225
quant meltdown (2007) 190–91, 196
quantitative easing programs 259–60
quantitative theories
Beveridge curve and 70, 71
complexity economics as a quantitative science 11, 43
financial-market efficiency and 168–74, 176, 187
future modeling and 255, 258, 259–60, 261, 275–6, 280
housing market model and 90
inequality and 260, 261
market impact and 150–51, 153
occupational unemployment models and 70, 71
supply and demand changes and 155
systemic risk and 213–14, 216
utility maximization and 120
volatility and 201
wars and 225
quantum mechanics 271
rabbits 181, 182, 187
Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans (RCK) model 100–102, 124–5
Ramsey, Frank 100
random order-placement 155–6
random process 39
random walk/random-walk model 49, 144, 150, 155, 165, 242
geometric random walk with drift 242
rationality/rational expectations, theory of
behavioral economics and 5–6, 103–5
bounded rationality and see bounded rationality
business cycles and 124, 125, 127–8
Chicago school of economics and 106
ecological rationality 114
efficient-markets hypothesis and 144, 149–50, 154, 155–6, 163–6, 171–2,
176, 177–8, 198, 199
heuristics and 109, 110, 111, 112, 113
Homo economicus 6, 11, 103
leverage and 213
micro-founded models and 100–103
origins of 96–9
rational agents 5–6, 11, 100–101, 103, 128, 130, 171, 176, 177–8, 198
Simon criticises 108–9
standard economic theory and 5–6, 17
turnpike theorem and 129
‘The Reality Game’ (paper, 2009) 159
recessions 28–9, 69, 70–71, 126, 190, 192, 204, 233, 257, 266, 272, 280
regulation
analyst-estimate-based signal and 158
Basel see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
complexity-economics models and 193
counterparty identifiers and 184
financial system and 140, 142
market ecology, regulatory implications of 186–8, 190, 261–2
network analysis and 50
systemic risk and 202
remote-labor index xiv
Renata (computer) 28
renewable energy 12, 72, 222, 235, 245–54, 250, 268
representative-agent model 99–100, 211
return 164–6, 165, 173, 181–2, 189, 194
Richardson, Lewis Fry 225–7
Rio-Chanona, Maria del xi, xiv, 64–5, 66, 67
risk 4, 111–12, 140, 146, 163, 164, 179, 190
climate change and 222, 286
leverage and 191–8
management of, financial crisis and 201–16, 206, 209, 211
uncertainty and 106–7
Value-at-Risk (VaR) 205, 206, 210–11, 212–15, 217
rock-paper-scissors 129–33
rocking horse model 36–9
Romer, Paul 24
Roosevelt, F. D. 239, 244
Rossby, Carl-Gustaf 227
roulette 25–8, 30–31, 34, 109, 143, 225
Ruelle, David 40, 128–9
Rumsfeld, Donald 106
Sachs, Jeffrey 236
Sahal, Devendra 241–2
Samuelson, Paul 96, 166
S&P index 146, 162–3, 164–5, 165, 166, 167, 206, 207
Sandwich, The 27
Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model 170–73, 184–5, 200
Santa Fe Institute (SFI) 16, 17, 20, 48–9, 57, 63–4, 82, 129, 147, 154, 161,
166, 168, 170–71, 194, 198, 235, 238, 239–40
SARS virus xiv
Sato, Yuzuru 129, 131, 132, 133
savings 81, 85, 99–101, 102, 124–7, 126, 252–3, 260
Savoie, Charles 62
Schäuble, Wolfgang 22
Scheinkman, José 38, 170–71
Scholes, Myron 150, 194
Scholl, Maarten 184, 262
Schrödinger, Erwin 20
Schumpeter, Joseph 43, 257, 279–80
S-curve 251–2
sea-level rise 221, 222, 236
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 186, 187
selection, evolution and 176–7
self-organization/self-organizing systems 20, 42, 48
self-referential market 161–74
self-reproducing automaton 20
Selten, Reinhard 113
sensitive dependence on initial conditions 25, 31–4, 40, 212
Shannon, Claude 20
Shaw, Robert 30, 31
Sheinckman, José 128, 170–71
Shiller, Robert 168
Shleifer, Andrei 104
short-selling 205
short-term strategies, predator-prey relationship and 181–2
Sidorowich, John ‘Sid’ 142–3
‘Predicting Chaotic Time Series’ (paper, 1987) 143
signals 158–9
Silver City, New Mexico 25
Simon, Herbert 11, 13, 108–9, 113–14
Sims, Chris 116
simulations, computer 6–7, 73–89
advantages of 7
agent-based models see agent-based models
complexity economics use of 6–7
defined 73–5
emergence of 76–7
human behavior, controversies around models based on 75
micro-simulation 1, 260–61
models see individual model name
need for 77–8
nonlinearity and 75–8
usefulness 75
verisimilitude and 10
six degrees of separation 45
Smith, Adam 140
The Wealth of Nations 10, 43–4, 54–5, 63
Smith, Eric 154, 156
Smith School for Geography and the Environment 64
Smith, Vernon 103–4
social-interaction time 125–6
social network 45, 48, 49, 124
software infrastructure 273–4
solar power xii, 65, 235, 240–50, 243, 246, 251
Solow, Robert 96, 99–100, 102, 110, 124, 235–6
Soros, George 64, 82
Soviet Union 15, 54–7
specialization 42, 54–5, 63, 178
square-root law of market impact 151, 154–6
stagflation 98
standard economic theory 93–107
agents and see agents
behavioral economics and see behavioral economics
Beveridge curve and 71
change and 123
climate change and 3
clustered volatility and 174, 201
complexity economics and 5–13
Covid-19 and xv–xvi, xviii
emergent phenomena and 5
equilibrium and see equilibrium
foundational assumptions of 93–7, 116
friction and 101–3
housing markets and 81
how it works 91–107
inequality and 260
leverage and 201–2, 215
macroeconomics, evolution of contemporary and 97–9
microdata and 229
optimization and 7, 100, 108, 109, 111, 115, 121, 124, 125, 126, 130
rational agents and see rationality
‘rocking horse’ model and 39
shocks and 29
simple standard macro-model 99–101
summary of 93–107, 116
theoretical frameworks of 7–8
tools of the trade 6
uncertainty/risk and 106–7
utility maximization and 93–4
value-free modeling and 105–6
Stanley, H. Eugene 56: Econophysics 153
statistical analysis 3–4, 146–7, 158–9
statistical arbitrage (stat-arb) 157, 188–90, 194
statistical mechanics 156
statistical physics 8, 10, 135, 154
steel production xvi–xvii, 52, 56, 65, 167
Steen, Lynn 73
Stern, Nicholas 236
Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change 253
Stiglitz, Joseph 236
stock market 16, 85, 95
agent-based simulations of the stock market, comparison of two xii, 208,
209, 210
computerized trading 162, 178
contracts and 140
crashes see financial crises and individual crash name
decimalization 187–8
indexes see individual index name
Santa Fe Artificial Stock Market model 170–73, 184–5, 200
stock option 150
stock prices 95, 129, 142–8, 150–52, 154–8, 159, 161–74, 180, 187–8,
189, 200, 206–12, 206, 209, 211
portfolio choice 111–12
portfolio insurance 162–4, 187
portfolio theory 111
Prediction Company and see Prediction Company
program trading 162
U.S broker-dealer leverage and volatility, comparison of xi, 206–7, 206
value investors 115, 172–3, 182, 185, 199, 210, 211, 212, 219
‘What Moves Stock Prices?’ (paper, 1989) 166
See also markets
strange attractor 30–31, 33, 35
structural property of the economy 63
subsidies 245
substitutions xvi–xvii, 76
Summers, Larry xi, 17, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 172
Sunder, Shyam 156
supply
chains xi, xiii, xiv–xvi, vii, 51, 52, 53–4, 60–61, 121, 222, 257, 262, 272,
273
housing see housing
labor see labor
law of supply and demand 8, 15–16, 85, 110, 130, 152, 153, 155, 182,
201–2, 210
market-impact function and 150, 152
shocks xiii, xiv–xvi, xvii
sustainable growth 267–9
Swiss Bank Corporation 145
Systemically Important Financial Institutions 50
Takens, Floris 40, 128–9
tantalum 52, 60–61
tatonnement 15–16
tax 85, 86, 234, 244, 260, 261
technological progress 3, 6, 13, 27, 28, 42, 50, 100, 266, 278
climate economics and 234–54, 237, 243, 246, 250
market efficiency and 149, 159
predicting 237–45, 237, 243
production network and 57–63, 59
Thailand 195, 219, 232
Thaler, Richard 103, 104, 168
‘The Economy as an Evolving Complex System’ conference, Santa Fe
Institute (1987) 16
three-body problem 33
Thurner, Stefan 198–9
tic-tac-toe 132, 178
tractable models 8, 120–22
traffic modeling 74, 148
trajectory 30, 31, 32, 33
trend-following 173, 180–81, 185, 200–201, 219
Trichet, Jean-Claude 2
Trojan War 22
trophic level 57–8
structural property of the economy 63
trophic structure of the U.S. and Chinese economies, comparison of xi,
59–63, 59
turbulence
chaos and 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 129, 143, 229
credit and financial see credit
intermittency in fluid turbulence xii, 129, 216–20, 217
resemblance between financial and fluid 216–20, 217
turnpike theorem 128, 129
Tversky, Amos 103
Twain, Mark 161
UCSC Dynamical Systems Collective 35, 36, 38
Ukraine War (2022–) xviii, 262
Ulam, Stanislaw 41, 77
uncertainty
bounded rationality and 108–9, 116–20, 119
green-energy transition and 248
heuristics and 109–12
leverage and 196, 197
Lorenz equations and 33
modeling behavior directly and 112–16
risk and 106–22, 140, 185, 196, 197, 244, 248
rules of thumb and 7
tractable models for complicated economies and 120–22
true uncertainty 107
unemployment
automation/artificial intelligence and 1, 68, 69–71, 69
business cycles and 28–9
Covid-19 and xvii, 79–80, 79
financial crisis (2008) and 170, 203
Great Depression and 2, 162
Greek debt crisis and 22l
housing and 81, 82
inflation and 257
Keynes and 97–8
macroeconomics and 3, 47
network view of job space, United States (2016) and 65, 66, 66, 67
occupational-transition model and 68, 69–71, 69
Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) 145
United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 230
University of California at Santa Cruz 19–20, 25–7, 30, 40, 77, 144
University of Chicago 143, 227
University of Oxford xiii, xiv, xvi, 63–5, 68, 82, 89, 124, 132, 183, 184,
207–8, 236, 242, 272
U.S.
broker-dealer leverage and volatility, comparison of xi, 206–7, 206
goods, differences in price of some (1998–2022) xii, 237
job space, network view of xi, 66–8, 66
market crashes see individual crash name
trophic structure of U.S. and Chinese economies, comparison of xi, 59–
63, 59
Washington DC, housing market simulation for xi, 80–91, 88, 115
Weather Bureau 224
utilitarianism 94
utility function/maximization
behavioral economics and 104, 105
boundedly rationality and 130
climate change and 236, 249
complexity economics and 5, 7, 12, 117
friction and 101
heuristics and 109, 110
informational efficiency and 148
learning algorithms and 115
leverage and 202
modeling behavior directly and 112
problem with utility maximization 120–22
rational expectations and 104, 105
RCK model and 124
risk/uncertainty and 107
standard economic theory and 4, 5, 7, 63, 93–6, 98, 99, 100, 101, 107,
116
supply and demand and 152
vacancy rate 69, 69, 70, 88
Value-at-Risk (VaR) 205, 206, 210–11, 212–15, 217
value-free modeling 105–6
value investors 115, 172–3, 182, 185, 199, 210, 211, 212, 219
variation, evolution and 176–7
verisimilitude, principle of xviii, 10, 110, 116, 117, 121–2, 260, 272
Vespignani, Alessandro 78
Vie, Aymeric 186, 262
‘The Virtues and Vices of Equilibrium and the Future of Financial
Economics’ (paper, 2009) 17
volatility 111, 134, 164–5, 172, 185
clustered volatility see clustered volatility
credit/leverage and xi, 191–216
turbulence and 216–19
Volterra, Vito 182
Vranos, Mike 194
wages 60, 63, 98, 101, 102, 124, 125, 141, 257, 259
Wall Street 152, 175, 194, 195
Walras, Léon 15–16, 95
Washington DC housing market simulation xi, 80–91, 88, 115
Washington University 193
Way, Rupert 245–6, 250
weather, predicting x, 22, 35, 37, 38–40, 43, 220, 221–2, 277, 280
economic predictions and 231–3
history of 223–30
websites, network analysis and 49–50
Western New Mexico University 25
‘What Moves Stock Prices?’ (paper, 1989) 166
Wicksell, Knut 36, 37
Wiener, Norbert 20
Wiersema, Garbrand 215
wind power 235, 246, 247–8
Winter, Sidney: An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change 43
World Bank 64
World Energy Model 249–51
World Rock-Paper-Scissors Association 131–2
World War I (1914–18) 226, 239
World War II (1939–45) 40, 141–2, 164, 227, 228, 239, 244–5
Wright’s Law 239–45, 249
Yale University 17, 194, 218, 235
zero-intelligence agents/models 118, 118n, 120, 154, 156, 239–40
Zeus (Greek God) 29, 107, 262
...
