arXiv:cond-mat/0309233v2  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  17 Feb 2004
The Predictive Power of Zero Intelligence in Financial Markets
J. Doyne Farmer,1, ∗Paolo Patelli,1, 2 and Ilija I. Zovko1,3
1Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA
2Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies, Piazza Martiri della Libert`a 33, Pisa, Italy
3CENDEF, University of Amsterdam, Roetersstraat 11, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
(Dated: Original version Sept. 9, 2003; this version Feb. 9, 2004)
Standard models in economics stress the role of intelligent agents who maximize utility. How-
ever, there may be situations where, for some purposes, constraints imposed by market institutions
dominate intelligent agent behavior. We use data from the London Stock Exchange to test a simple
model in which zero intelligence agents place orders to trade at random.
The model treats the
statistical mechanics of order placement, price formation, and the accumulation of revealed supply
and demand within the context of the continuous double auction, and yields simple laws relating
order arrival rates to statistical properties of the market.
We test the validity of these laws in
explaining the cross-sectional variation for eleven stocks. The model explains 96% of the variance of
the bid-ask spread, and 76% of the variance of the price diﬀusion rate, with only one free parameter.
We also study the market impact function, describing the response of quoted prices to the arrival
of new orders. The non-dimensional coordinates dictated by the model approximately collapse data
from diﬀerent stocks onto a single curve. This work is important from a practical point of view
because it demonstrates the existence of simple laws relating prices to order ﬂows, and in a broader
context, because it suggests that there are circumstances where institutions are more important
than strategic considerations.
Contents
I. Introduction
1
A. Continuous double auction
2
B. Review of model
2
II. Testing the scaling laws
3
A. Data
3
B. Testing procedure
3
C. Spread
3
D. Price diﬀusion rate
4
III. Average market impact
4
A. Collapse in non-dimensional coordinates
5
IV. Conclusions
5
References and acknowledgments
6
References and Notes
6
A. Supplementary Material
8
1. Additional background information on the model8
2. The London Stock Exchange (LSE) data set
8
3. Measurement of model parameters
9
4. Measuring the price diﬀusion rate
10
5. Estimating the errors for the regressions
10
6. Longitudinal vs. cross-sectional tests
12
7. Market impact
15
8. Alternative market impact collapse plots
15
9. Error analysis for market impact
15
∗Electronic address: jdf@santafe.edu
10. Extending the model
17
I.
INTRODUCTION
This work has goals at two levels. At the immediate
level, its goal is to investigate the possibility of simple
laws relating the ﬂow of trading orders into a market to
statistical properties of prices. The laws that we propose
and investigate are not temporal predictions, but rather
relations restricting the possible values that the underly-
ing variables can take at any given point in time. The
ideal gas law provides a simple physical analogy that il-
lustrates both the limited scope and the potential utility
of such laws.
In our case, the goal is to relate prop-
erties of the order ﬂow, such as market order placement
rate, limit order placement rate, and cancellation rate, to
properties of the market such as the gap between the best
prices for buying and selling, or the variability of prices.
In addition, we present some results that are related to
the nature of supply and demand functions.
At a broader level, this work is interesting because of
the nature of the model we test, which makes the sim-
ple assumption that agents place orders to buy or sell at
random [4, 5]. This is in constrast to standard models
in economics, which typically devote considerable eﬀort
to modeling the strategic behavior and expectations of
agents.
No one would dispute that this is important.
However, there may be some circumstances where other
factors may be more important. For example, Becker [2]
showed that a budget constraint is suﬃcient to guarantee
the proper slope of supply and demand curves, and Gode
and Sunder [3] demonstrated that if one replaces the stu-
dents in a standard classroom economics experiment by
zero-intelligence agents, the zero-intelligence agents per-

2
FIG. 1: A random process model of the continuous double
auction.
Stored limit orders are shown stacked along the
price axis, with sell orders (supply) stacked above the axis at
higher prices and buy orders (demand) stacked below the axis
at lower prices. New sell limit orders are visualized as ran-
domly falling down, and new buy orders as randomly “falling
up”. New sell orders can be placed anywhere above the best
buying price, and new buy orders anywhere below the best
selling price. Limit orders can be removed spontaneously (e.g.
because the agent changes her mind or the order expires) or
they can be removed by market orders of the opposite type.
This can result in changes in the best prices, which in turn
alters the boundaries of the order placement process. It is this
feedback between order placement and price formation that
makes this model interesting, and its predictions non-trivial.
form surprisingly well. The model we test here builds
on earlier work in ﬁnancial economics [6, 7, 8, 9] and
physics [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. (See also interesting subse-
qent work [15, 16]). We show here that in some circum-
stances the zero-intelligence approach can make surpris-
ingly good quantitative predictions.
A.
Continuous double auction
The model of Daniels et al. [4] assumes a continuous
double auction, which is the most widely used method of
price formation in modern ﬁnancial markets [5]. There
are two fundamental kinds of trading orders: Impatient
traders submit market orders, which are requests to buy
or sell a desired number of shares immediately at the
best available price. More patient traders submit limit
orders, which include the worst allowable price for the
transaction. Limit orders may fail to result in an im-
mediate transaction, in which case they are stored in a
queue called the limit order book, illustrated in Fig. 1.
As each buy order arrives it is transacted against accu-
mulated sell limit orders that have a lower selling price,
in priority of price and arrival time. Similarly for sell or-
ders. The lowest selling price oﬀered in the book at any
point in time is called the best ask, a(t), and the highest
buying price the best bid, b(t).
B.
Review of model
The model that we test here [4, 5] assumes that two
types of zero intelligence agents place and cancel orders
randomly, as shown in Fig. 1.
Impatient agents place
market orders of size σ, which arrive at a rate µ shares
per time. Patient agents place limit orders of the same
size σ, which arrive with a constant rate density α shares
per price per time. These agents may be thought of as
liquidity demanders and suppliers. Queued limit orders
are canceled at a constant rate δ, with dimensions of
1/time. Prices change in discrete increments called ticks,
of size dp.
To keep the model as simple as possible,
there are equal rates for buying and selling, and order
placement and cancellation are Poisson processes.
All
of these processes are independent except for coupling
through their boundary conditions: Buy limit orders ar-
rive with a constant density α over the semi-inﬁnite inter-
val −∞< p < a(t), where p is the logarithm of the price,
and sell limit orders arrive with constant density α on the
semi-inﬁnite interval b(t) < p < ∞. As a result of the
random order arrival processes, a(t) and b(t) each make
random walks, but because of coupling of the buying and
selling processes the bid-ask spread s(t) ≡a(t) −b(t) is
a stationary random variable.
As new orders arrive they may alter the best prices a(t)
and b(t), which in turn changes the boundary conditions
for subsequent limit order placement. For example, the
arrival of a buy limit order inside the spread will alter
the best bid b(t), which immediately alters the boundary
condition for sell limit order placement. It is this feed-
back between order placement and price diﬀusion that
makes this model interesting, and despite its apparent
simplicity, quite diﬃcult to understand analytically. This
model has been analyzed using both simulation and two
diﬀerent mean ﬁeld theories [5].
One of the virtues of this model is that it gives simple
scaling laws relating the parameters of the model to fun-
damental properties such as the average bid-ask spread,
and the price diﬀusion rate. The mean value of the spread
predicted based on a mean ﬁeld theory analysis of the
model in the limit dp →0 is
ˆs = (µ/α)f(σδ/µ).
(1)
The nondimensional ratio ǫ = σδ/µ is the ratio of re-
moval by cancellation to removal by market orders, and
plays an important role in determining the properties of
the model. f(ǫ) is a relatively slowly varying, monoton-
ically increasing non-dimensional function that can be
approximated as f(ǫ) = 0.28 + 1.86ǫ3/4.
Another prediction of the model is of the price dif-
fusion rate, which drives the volatility of prices and is
the primary determinant of ﬁnancial risk. If we assume
that prices make a random walk, then the diﬀusion rate
measures the size and frequency of its increments. The
variance V of an uncorrellated normal random walk af-
ter time t grows as V (t) = Dt, where D is the diﬀu-
sion rate. We choose to measure the price diﬀusion rate

3
rather than the volatility because it is a stationary quan-
tity that provides a more fundamental description of the
volatility process. This is the main free parameter in the
Bachelier model [1], and while its value is essential for
risk estimation and derivative pricing there is very little
understanding of what determines it. Numerical exper-
iments indicate that the short term price diﬀusion rate
predicted by the model is
ˆD = kµ5/2δ1/2σ−1/2α−2,
(2)
where k is a constant.
The model was constructed to be simple enough to
be analytically tractable, and so makes many strong as-
sumptions. For example, it assumes that the rates for
buying and selling are equal, the sizes of limit orders and
market orders are the same, that limit order deposition is
uniform on semi-inﬁnite intervals, and that rates of order
submission are unaﬀected by changes in price. Many of
these assumptions are economically unreasonable in the
presence of intelligent agents, but the reader should bear
in mind that the only market participants in the model
are zero-intelligence “noise” traders, who can be thought
of as random liquidity suppliers and demanders1. While
intelligent agents are clearly essential for many purposes,
such as determining the levels of prices, what we suggest
here is that for other purposes their presence is not essen-
tial. We would like to emphasize that the construction
of the model and all the predictions derived from it were
made prior to looking at the data.
II.
TESTING THE SCALING LAWS
A.
Data
We test this model with data from the electronic open
limit order book of the London Stock Exchange (SETS),
which includes about half of the total volume on the ex-
change. We used data from eleven stocks for August 1st
1998 - April 30th 2000, which includes 434 trading days
and a total of roughly six million events. For all these
stocks the number of total events exceeds 300,000 and
was never less than 80 on any given day (where an event
corresponds to an order placement or cancellation). Or-
ders placed during the opening auction are removed to
accomodate the fact that the model only applies for the
continuous auction. See the Supplementary Material Sec-
tion A 2 for more details.
1 A “liquidity demander” is someone who needs to make a trans-
action quickly. In the sense used here, a noise trader is someone
who wants to make transactions for reasons unrelated to this
particular market, and so is insensitive to price.
B.
Testing procedure
¿From the point of view of the model, the order ﬂow
rates µ, α, and δ, and the mean order size σ are all free
parameters. In analyzing the model we ﬁnd scaling rela-
tions connecting these parameters to the average spread
and the price diﬀusion rate, as given in Equations 1 and
2. We test the model by testing the validity of these re-
lations, taking advantage of the fact that diﬀerent stocks
have diﬀerent average values of these parameters. For
each stock we measure the average market order arrival
rate µ, limit order rate density α, cancellation rate δ,
and order size σ, where the averages are taken across the
full time period. We then measure the average spread
and volatility and compare them to the predictions of
the model.
A problem occurs in measuring α and δ due to the sim-
plifying assumption of a uniform distribution of prices for
order ﬂow and cancellation. In the real data order place-
ment and cancellation are concentrated near the best
prices [15, 20]. We cope with this by making the assump-
tion that order placement is uniform inside a price win-
dow around the best prices, and zero outside this window.
We choose the price window to correspond to roughly
60% of limit orders at the best prices, and compute α
by dividing the number of shares of limit orders placed
inside the price window by the size of the price window.
We do this for each day and compute the average value
of α for each stock.
We compute δ as the inverse of
the average cancellation time for orders cancelled inside
the same price window. See the Supplementary Material
Section A 3 for details.
The scaling laws that we describe here do not make
temporal predictions, but rather are restrictions of state
variables. The ideal gas law, PV = RT , provides a good
analogy. It predicts that pressure P, volume V , and tem-
perature T are constrained – any two of them determines
the third. Similarly, here we are testing two relations re-
lating properties of orders to properties of prices. We are
not attempting to predict the temporal behavior of the
order ﬂows, only trying to see whether the restrictions
between order ﬂows and prices are valid.
We would like to emphasize that in testing the model
we are not treating the order ﬂow rates and order size
as free parameters in the regressions.
Instead, we are
testing the predictions of the model based on order ﬂow
rates against the measured values in the same period.
The only free parameters are in the speciﬁcation of the
price interval as described above (which was done more
or less arbitrarily).
C.
Spread
To test Equation 1, we measure the average spread
¯s across the full time period for each stock, and com-
pare to the predicted average spread ˆs based on or-
der ﬂows.
Spread is measured as the daily average of

4
log b(t) −log a(t).
The spread is measured after each
event, with each event given equal weight. The opening
auction is excluded.
To test our hypothesis that the predicted and actual
values coincide, we perform a regression of the form
log ¯s = A log ˆs + B.
We used logarithms because the
spread is positive and the log of the spread is approxi-
mately normally distributed. We use the free parameters
A and B for hypothesis testing. Based on the model we
predict that the comparison should yield a straight line
with A = 1 and B = 0, but because of the degree of free-
dom in choosing the price interval as described above,
the value of B is somewhat arbitrary.
The least squares regression, shown together with the
data comparing the predictions to the actual values in
Fig. 2, gives A = 0.99±0.10 and B = 0.06±0.29. We thus
strongly reject the null hypothesis that A = 0, indicating
that the predictions are far better than random. More
importantly, we are unable to reject the null hypothesis
that A = 1. In fact, we are also unable to reject B = 0,
but this is probably largely a matter of luck in our choice
of the price interval. The regression has R2 = 0.96, so
the model explains most of the variance. Note that be-
cause of long-memory eﬀects and cross-correlations be-
tween stocks the errors in the regression are larger than
they would be for IID data (see the discussion in the
Supplemenary Material Section A 5).
FIG. 2: Regressions of predicted values based on order ﬂow
parameters vs.
actual values for the log spread.
The dots
show the average predicted and actual value for each stock
averaged over the full 21 month time period. The solid line is
a regression; the dashed line is the diagonal, representing the
model’s prediction without any adjustment
D.
Price diﬀusion rate
As for the spread, we compare the predicted price dif-
fusion rate based on order ﬂows to the actual price diﬀu-
sion rate ¯Di for each stock averaged over the 21 month
period, and regress the logarithm of the predicted vs.
actual values, as shown in Fig. 3.
FIG. 3: Regressions of predicted values based on order ﬂow
parameters vs. actual values for the logarithm of the price
diﬀusion rate. The dots show the average predicted and ac-
tual value for each stock averaged over the full 21 month time
period. The solid line is a regression; the dashed line is the
diagonal, representing the model’s prediction without any ad-
justment of slope or intercept.
The regression gives A = 1.33 ± 0.25 and B = 2.43 ±
1.75. Thus, we again strongly reject the null hypothesis
that A = 0. We are still unable to reject the null hypothe-
sis that A = 1 with 95% conﬁdence, though there is some
suggestion that the scaling of the model and the actual
values are not quite the same. (This could happen if, for
example, the scaling exponent predicted by the model of
one or more of the order ﬂow rates is wrong; however
this suggests that it is at least quite close). Although the
results are not as good as for the spread, R2 = 0.76, so
the model still explains most of the variance.
III.
AVERAGE MARKET IMPACT
Market impact is practically important because it is
the dominant source of transaction costs for large traders,
and conceptually important because it provides a conve-
nient probe of the revealed supply and demand functions
in the limit order book. When a market order of size ω
arrives, if suﬃciently large, it will remove all the stored
limit orders at the best bid or ask, causing a change in the

5
midpoint price m(t) ≡(a(t) + b(t))/2. The average mar-
ket impact function φ is the average logarithmic midpoint
price shift ∆p conditioned on order size, φ(ω) = E[∆p|ω].
A long-standing mystery about market impact is that
it is highly concave [15, 17, 18, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. This
is unexpected since simple arguments would suggest that
because of the multiplicative nature of returns, market
impact should grow at least linearly [5]. The model we
are testing predicts a concave average market impact
function, with the concavity becoming more pronounced
for small values of ǫ = σδ/µ. However, these predictions
are not in good detailed agreement with the data, in that
the model predicts a larger variation with ǫ than what is
actually observed. However, the model is still useful for
understanding market impact, as described below.
A.
Collapse in non-dimensional coordinates
A surprising regularity of the average market impact
function is uncovered by simply plotting the data in non-
dimensional coordinates, as shown in Fig. 4.
See the
Supplementary Material Section A 1 for a discussion of
how the nondimensional coordinates are derived from the
model. Each market order ωi causes a possible change
∆pi in the midquote price. If we bin together events with
similar ω and plot the mean order size as a function of the
mean price impact ∆p, we typically see highly variable
behavior for diﬀerent stocks, as shown in Fig. 4(b). We
have also explored other ways of renormalizing the order
size, such as taking the ratio of each order’s size to the
daily or full-sample mean, but they give similar behavior,
as shown in the Supplementary Material Section A 7.
Plotting the data in non-dimensional units tells a sim-
pler story.
This involves normalizing the price shift
and order size by appropriate dimensional scale fac-
tors based on the daily order ﬂow rates. In particular,
∆p →∆pαt/µt and ω →ωδt/µt, where αt, µt, and δt
are the average order ﬂow rates for day t. The data col-
lapses onto roughly a single curve, as shown in Fig. 4(a).
The variations from stock to stock are quite small; on av-
erage the corresponding bins for each stock deviate from
each other by about 8%, roughly the size of the statistical
sampling error. We have made an extensive analysis, but
due to problems caused by the long-memory property of
these time series and cross correlations between stocks,
it remains unclear whether these diﬀerences are statisti-
cally signiﬁcant. In contrast, using standard coordinates
the diﬀerences are highly statistically signiﬁcant. This
collapse illustrates that the non-dimensional coordinates
dictated by the model provide substantial explanatory
power: We can understand how the average market im-
pact varies from stock to stock by a simple transforma-
tion of coordinates. Plotting in double logarithmic scale
shows that the curve of the collapse is roughly a power
law of the form ω0.25 (see Supplementary Material, Sec-
tion A 7). This provides a more fundamental explana-
tion for the empirically constructed collapse of average
market impact for the New York Stock Exchange found
earlier [17].
FIG. 4: The average market impact as a function of the mean
order size.
In (a) the price diﬀerences and order sizes for
each transaction are normalized by the non-dimensional co-
ordinates dictated by the model, computed on a daily basis.
Most of the stocks collapse extremely well onto a single curve;
there are a few that deviate, but the deviations are suﬃciently
small that given the long-memory nature of the data and the
cross-correlations between stocks, it is diﬃcult to determine
whether these deviations are statistically signiﬁcant.
This
means that we understand the behavior of the market impact
as it varies from stock to stock by a simple transformation of
coordinates. In (b), for comparison we plot the order size in
units of British pounds against the average logarithmic price
shift.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
The model we have presented here does a good job of
predicting the average spread, and a decent job of pre-
dicting the price diﬀusion rate.
Also, by simply plot-
ting the data in non-dimensional coordinates we get a
better understanding of the regularities of market im-
pact. These results are remarkable because the underly-

6
ing model completely drops agent rationality, instead fo-
cusing all its attention on the problem of understanding
the constraints imposed by the continuous double auc-
tion.
The approach taken here can be viewed as a divide and
conquer strategy. Rather than attempting to explain the
properties of the market from fundamental assumptions
about utility maximization by individual agents, we di-
vide the problem into two parts.
The ﬁrst and much
easier problem, addressed here, is that of understanding
the characteristics of the market given the order ﬂows.
The second (and harder) problem, which remains to be
investigated, is that of explaining why order ﬂow varies as
it does. Explaining order ﬂow involves behavioral and/or
strategic issues that are likely to be much more diﬃcult
to understand.
The model that we test succeeds in part because it
takes explicit advantage of information that is available
in a continuous double auction, that is not available in
a standard Walrasian auction. By measuring the rate of
market order placement vs. limit order placement, and
the rate of order cancellation, we are able to measure
how patient or impatient traders are. A higher ratio of
market orders to limit orders, or a higher rate of cancel-
lation implies a less patient, and therefore more volatile
market, with larger spreads. The model makes this quan-
titative. The agreement with the model indicates that
the degree of patience is an important determinant of
market behavior. This is potentially compatible with ei-
ther a rationality-based explanation in terms of informa-
tion arrival, or a behavioral-based explanation driven by
emotional response, but in either case it suggests that
patience is a key factor.
This is part of a broader research program that might
be characterized as the “low-intelligence” approach to
economics: We begin with zero-intelligence agents to get
a good benchmark of the eﬀect of market institutions,
and once this benchmark is well-understood, add a little
intelligence, moving toward market eﬃciency. We thus
start from zero rationality and work our way up, in con-
trast to the canonical approach of starting from perfect
rationality and working down. Follow-up research will
examine the eﬀects of adding bounded rationality. See
Ref. [30].
These results have several practical implications. For
market practitioners, understanding the spread and the
market impact function is very useful for estimating
transaction costs and for developing algorithms that min-
imize their eﬀect. For regulators they suggest that it may
be possible to make prices less volatile and lower trans-
action costs by creating incentives for limit orders and
disincentives for market orders. These scaling laws might
be used to detect anomalies, e.g. a higher than expected
spread might be due to improper market maker behavior.
The model we test here was constructed before look-
ing at the data [4, 5], and was designed to be as sim-
ple as possible for analytic analysis.
A more realistic
(but necessarily more complicated) model would more
closely mimic the properties of real order ﬂows, which
are price dependent and strongly correlated both in time
and across price levels, or might incorporate elements of
the strategic interactions of agents. An improved model
would hopefully be able to capture more features of the
data than those we have studied here. We know there
are ways in which the current model is inappropriate,
e.g., predicts unrealistically strong negative autocorrela-
tions in prices, allowing arbitrage opportunities that do
not exist in the real market.
Nonetheless, as we have
shown above, this extremely simple model does a good
job of explaining some important properties of markets,
such as transaction costs, price diﬀusion and market im-
pact. It does this by focusing on the way order placement
and price formation interact to alter the accumulation of
stored supply and demand.
For the phenomena stud-
ied here this appears to be the dominant eﬀect. We do
not mean to claim that market participants are unintel-
ligent: Indeed, one of the virtues of this model is that
it provides a benchmark to separate properties that are
driven by the statistical mechanics of the market institu-
tion from those that are driven by conditional strategic
behavior. It is surprising that such a simple model can
explain anything at all about a system as complex as a
market.
[1] L.
Bachelier,
“Th´eorie
de
la
sp´eculation”,
1900.
Reprinted in P.H. Cootner, The Random Character of
Stock Prices, 1964, MIT Press Cambridge.
[2] Becker, G., Irrational behavior and economic theory, J.
of Political Economy 70, 1 (1962) 1-13.
[3] D. Gode and S. Sunder, Allocative eﬃciency of markets
with zero intelligence traders: Markets as a partial sub-
stitute for individual rationality. J. of Political Economy,
101, 119 (1993).
[4] Daniels, M, Farmer, J.D., Gillemot, L., Iori, G., and
Smith, D.E. Quantitative model of price diﬀusion and
market friction based on trading as a mechanistic ran-
dom process. Physical Review Letters 9019, 10 2003.
[5] Smith, E., Farmer, J.D., Gillemot, L., and Krishna-
murthy, S., Statistical theory of the continuous double
auction. To appear in Quantitative Finance, 2003.
[6] H. Mendelson, Market behavior in a clearing house,
Econometrica 50, 1505-1524 (1982).
[7] K.J. Cohen, R.M. Conroy and S.F. Maier, Order ﬂow and
the quality of the market, in: Y. Amihud, T. Ho and R.
Schwartz, eds., Market Making and the Changing Struc-
ture of the Securities Industry, 1985, Lexington Books,
Lexington MA.
[8] I. Domowitz and Jianxin Wang, Auctions as algorithms,
J. of Econ. Dynamics and Control 18, 29 (1994).
[9] T. Bollerslev, I. Domowitz, and J. Wang, Order ﬂow and

7
the bid-ask spread: An empirical probability model of
screen-based trading, J. of Econ. Dynamics and Control
21, 1471 (1997).
[10] P. Bak, M. Paczuski, and M. Shubik, Price variations in
a stock market with many agents, Physica A 246, 430
(1997).
[11] D. Eliezer and I.I. Kogan, Scaling laws for the mar-
ket microstructure of the interdealer broker markets,
http://xxx.lanl.gov/cond-mat/9808240.
[12] S. Maslov, Simple model of a limit order-driven market,
Physica A 278, 571(2000).
[13] F. Slanina, Mean-ﬁeld approximation for a limit order
driven market model, Phys. Rev. E, 64, 056136 (2001).
[14] D. Challet and R. Stinchcombe, Analyzing and Modeling
1+1d markets, Physica A 300, 285, (2001).
[15] J.-P. Bouchaud, M. Mezard, M. Potters, Statistical prop-
erties of the stock order books: empirical results and
models, Quantitative Finance 2 (2002) 251-256.
[16] Potters, M. & Bouchaud, J.-P., ”More statistical proper-
ties of orders books and price impact”, Physica A 324,
133-140 (2003)
[17] Lillo,F. Farmer. J.D. & Mantegna, R.N., Master Curve
for Price-Impact Function, Nature 421, 129-130 (2003).
[18] Gabaix, X., Gopikrishnan, P., Plerou, V. and Stanley,
H.E. A theory of power-law distributions in ﬁnancial mar-
ket ﬂuctuations, Nature 423, 267-270 (2003).
[19] SETS four years on - October 2001, published by the
London Stock Exchange
[20] Zovko, I. and Farmer, J.D., The power of patience: A be-
havioral regularity in limit order placement, Quantitative
Finance, October 2002.
[21] Bouchaud,J.-P., Gefen,Y., Potters,M., and Wyart,M.
(2003). Fluctuations and response in ﬁnancial mar-
kets:
the subtle nature of ’random’ price changes,
xxx.lanl.gov/cond-mat/0307332.
[22] Lillo, F. and Farmer, J.D., The long memory of the eﬃ-
cient market, xxx.lanl.gov/cond-mat/0311053 (2003).
[23] Beran, J. Statistics for Long-Memory Processes, Chap-
man & Hall (1994).
[24] J.A. Hausman and A.W. Lo, “An ordered probit anal-
ysis of transaction stock prices”, Journal of Financial
Economics 31 319-379 (1992)
[25] J.D.
Farmer,
“Slippage
1996”,
Prediction
Company
internal
technical
report
(1996),
http://www.predict.com/jdf/slippage.pdf
[26] N. Torre,
BARRA Market Impact Model Handbook,
BARRA Inc, Berkeley CA, www.barra.com (1997).
[27] A. Kempf and O. Korn, “Market depth and order size”,
University of Mannheim technical report (1998).
[28] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, X. Gabaix, and H.E. Stan-
ley, “Quantifying stock price response to demand ﬂuctu-
ations”, Phys. Rev. E 66 027104 (2002).
[29] Farmer, J.D. and Lillo, F., On the origin of power
law
tails
in
price
ﬂuctuations,
xxx.lanl.gov/cond-
mat/0309416.
[30] Nelkin, I., Innovations in trading strategies, Quantita-
tive Finance 3, Number 4, C63-74 (2003). (See relevant
remarks by J.D. Farmer).
[31] William H. Greene, Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall.
We would like to thank Credit Suisse First Boston, the
James S. McDonnell Foundation, the McKinsey Corpo-
ration, Bob Maxﬁeld, and Bill Miller for their support of
this project. We would also like to thank Sam Bowles,
Supriya Krishnamurthy, Fabrizio Lillo, and Eric Smith
for useful discussions, and Mark Bieda, David Krakauer,
Harold Morowitz and Elizabeth Wood for comments on
the manuscript.

8
APPENDIX A: SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
1.
Additional background information on the
model
One of the virtues of this model is that we can make
approximate predictions of several of its properties with
almost no work using dimensional analysis.
This also
greatly simpliﬁes the analysis and understanding of the
model, and is particularly useful for understanding mar-
ket impact.
There are three fundamental dimensional quantities
describing everything in this model: shares, price, and
time. There are ﬁve parameters deﬁned in the model.
When the dimensional constraints between the parame-
ters are taken into account, this leaves only two indepen-
dent degrees of freedom. It turns out that the order ﬂow
rates µ, α, and δ are more important than the discrete-
ness parameters σ and dp, in the sense that the properties
of the model are much more sensitive to variations in the
order ﬂow rates than they are to variations in σ or dp.
It therefore natural to construct non-dimensional units
based on the order ﬂow parameters alone.
There are
unique combinations of the three order ﬂow rates with
units of shares, price, and time.
This gives character-
istic scales for price, shares, and time, that are unique
up to a constant. In particular, the characteristic num-
ber of shares Nc = µ/δ, the characteristic price interval
pc = µ/α, and the characteristic timescale tc = 1/δ.
These characteristic scales can be used to deﬁne non-
dimensional coordinates based on the order ﬂow rates.
These are ˆp = p/pc for price, ˆN = N/Nc for shares, and
ˆt = t/tc for time. The use of non-dimensional coordi-
nates has the great advantage that it reduces the number
of degrees of freedom from ﬁve to two, and many quan-
tities are much more well-behaved and easily understood
when plotted in non-dimensional coordinates than they
are otherwise.
The remaining two degrees of freedom are naturally
discussed in terms of non-dimensional versions of the
discreteness parameters.
A non-dimensional scale pa-
rameter based on order size is constructed by dividing
the typical order size σ (with dimensions of shares) by
the characteristic number of shares Nc. This gives the
non-dimensional parameter ǫ ≡σ/Nc = δσ/µ, which
characterizes the granularity of the order ﬂow. A non-
dimensional scale parameter based on tick size is con-
structed by dividing the tick size dp by the characteristic
price, i.e. dp/pc = αdp/µ. The usefulness of this is that
the properties of the model only depend on the two non-
dimensional parameters, ǫ and dp/pc: Any variations of
the parameters µ, α, and δ that keep these two non-
dimensional parameters constant gives exactly the same
market properties.
One of the interesting results that
emerges from analysis of the model is that the eﬀect of
the granularity parameter ǫ is generally much more im-
portant than the tick size dp/pc.
For a more detailed
discussion, see reference [5].
While a(t) and b(t) make random walks, the incre-
ments of their random walks are strongly anti-correlated.
This is a good example of how the properties of this
model are not simple to understand. One might naively
think that under IID Poisson order ﬂow, price incre-
ments should also be IID. However, due to the coupling of
boundary conditions for the buy market order/sell limit
order process to those of the sell market order/buy limit
order process, this is not the case. Because of the fact
that supply and demand tend to build as one moves away
from the center of the book, price reversals are more
common than price changes in the same direction. As
a result, the price increments generated by this model
are more anti-correlated than those of real price series.
This has an interesting consequence: If we add the as-
sumption of market eﬃciency, and assume that real price
increments must be white, it implies that real order ﬂow
should be positively autocorrelated in order to compen-
sate for the anticorrelations induced by the continuous
double auction. This has indeed been observed to be the
case [21, 22].
This is of course also a criticism of the model, since it
implies a lack of arbitrage eﬃciency. However, we wish
to stress that we make no claims that this model explains
everything about the market; just that it explains a few
things fairly well.
2.
The London Stock Exchange (LSE) data set
The London Stock Exchange is composed of two parts,
the electronic open limit order book, and the non-
electronic upstairs market, which is used to facilitate
large block trades. During the time period of our dataset
40% to 50% of total volume was routed through the elec-
tronic order book and the rest through the upstairs mar-
ket. It is believed that the limit order book is the dom-
inant price formation mechanism of the London Stock
Exchange: about 75% of upstairs trades happen between
the current best prices in the order book [19]. Our analy-
sis involves only the data from the electronic order book.
We chose this data set to study because we have a com-
plete record of every action taken by every participating
institution, allowing us to measure the order ﬂows and
cancellations and estimate all of the necessary parame-
ters of our model.
We used data from the time period August 1st 1998
- April 30th 2000, which includes a total of 434 trading
days and roughly six million events. We chose 11 stocks
each having the property that the number of total num-
ber of events exceeds 300,000 and was never less than 80
on any given day. Some statistics about the order ﬂow
for each stock are given in table I.
The trading day of the LSE starts at 7:50 with a

9
stock
num. events
average
limit
market deletions eﬀ. limit eﬀ. market # days
ticker
(1000s)
(per day) (1000s) (1000s)
(1000s)
(shares)
(shares)
AZN
608
1405
292
128
188
4,967
4,921
429
BARC
571
1318
271
128
172
7,370
6,406
433
CW.
511
1184
244
134
134
12,671
11,151
432
GLXO
814
1885
390
200
225
8,927
6,573
434
LLOY
644
1485
302
184
159
13,846
11,376
434
ORA
314
884
153
57
104
12,097
11,690
432
PRU
422
978
201
94
127
9,502
8,597
354
RTR
408
951
195
100
112
16,433
9,965
431
SB.
665
1526
319
176
170
13,589
12,157
426
SHEL
592
1367
277
159
156
44,165
30,133
429
VOD
940
2161
437
296
207
89,550
71,121
434
TABLE I: Summary statistics for stocks in the dataset. Fields from left to right: stock ticker symbol, total number of events
(eﬀective market orders + eﬀective limit orders + order cancellations) in thousands, average number of events in a trading
day, number of eﬀective limit orders in thousands, number of eﬀective market orders in thousands, number of order deletions
in thousands, average limit order size in shares, average market order size in shares, number of trading days in the sample.
roughly 10 minute long opening auction period (during
the later part of the dataset the auction end time varies
randomly by 30 seconds). During this time orders ac-
cumulate without transactions; then a clearing price for
the opening auction is calculated, and all opening trans-
actions take place at this price. Following the opening at
8:00 the market runs continuously, with orders matched
according to price and time priority, until the market
closes at 16:30. In the earlier part of the dataset, un-
til September 22nd 1999, the market opening hour was
9:00. During the period we study there have been some
minor modiﬁcations of the opening auction mechanism,
but since we discard the opening auction data anyway
this is not relevant.
Some stocks in our sample (VOD for example) have
stock price splits and tick price changes during the period
of our sample. We take splits into account by transform-
ing stock sizes and prices to pre-split values. In any case,
since all measured quantities are in logarithmic units, of
the form log(p1) −log(p2), the absolute price scale drops
out. Our theory predicts that the tick size should change
some of the quantities of interest, such as the bid-ask
spread, but the predicted changes are small enough in
comparison with the eﬀect of other parameters that we
simply ignore them (and base our predictions on the limit
where the tick size is zero). Since granularity is much
more important than tick size, this seems to be a good
approximation.
3.
Measurement of model parameters
Our goal is to compare the predictions of the model
with real data. The parameters of the model are stated in
terms of order arrival rates, cancellation rate, order size,
and tick size. We choose an appropriate time interval
and measure the parameters over that interval, and then
compare to the properties of the market over that same
interval.
Reconstructing the limit order book on a moment-by-
moment basis makes it clear that the properties of the
market tend to be relatively stationary during each day,
changing more dramatically at the beginning and at the
end of day. It is therefore natural to measure each param-
eter for each stock on each day. Since the model does not
take the opening auction into account, we simply neglect
orders leading up to the opening auction, and base all
our measurements on the remaining part of the trading
day, when the auction is continuous. Averaging daily pa-
rameters, rather than computing the parameters directly
across the whole period, has the important advantage in
computing volatility, of neglecting the eﬀect of overnight
price movements, which our model does not attempt to
explain.
In order to treat simply and in a uniﬁed manner the di-
verse types of orders traders can submit in a real market
(for example, crossing limit orders, market orders with
limiting price, ‘ﬁll-or-kill, execute & eliminate) we use
redeﬁnitions based on whether an order results in an im-
mediate transaction, in which case we call it an eﬀective
market order, or whether it leaves a limit order sitting in
the book, in which case we call it an eﬀective limit order.
Marketable limit orders (also called crossing limit orders)
are limit orders that cross the opposing best price, and so
result in at least a partial transaction. The portion of the
order that results in an immediate transaction is counted
as a eﬀective market order, while the non-transacted part
(if any) is counted as a eﬀective limit order. Orders that
do not result in a transaction and do not leave a limit
order in the book, such as for example, failed ﬁll-or-kill
orders, are ignored altogether. These have no aﬀect on
prices, and in any case, make up only a very small frac-
tion of the order ﬂow, typically less than 1%. Note that
we drop the term “eﬀective”, so that e.g. “market order”
means “eﬀective market order”.
A limit order can be removed from the book for many
reasons, e.g. because the agent changes her mind, be-
cause a time speciﬁed when the order was placed has

10
been reached, or because of the institutionally-mandated
30 day limit on order duration. We will lump all of these
together, and simply refer to them as “cancellations”.
Our measure of time is based on the number of events,
i.e., the time elapsed during a given period is just the
total number of events, including eﬀective market order
placements, eﬀective limit order placements, and cancel-
lations. We call this event time. Price intervals are com-
puted as the diﬀerence in the logarithm of prices, which
is consistent with the model, in which all price intervals
are assumed to be logarithmic in order to assure prices
are always positive.
We measure the average value of the ﬁve parameters
of the model, µ, α, δ, σ, and dp for each day. This has
the advantage that it allows us to skip over the opening
auction, but is not essential for this analysis. µ, σ, and dp
are straightforward to measure, but there are problems
in measuring α and δ that must be understood in order
to properly interpret our results.
The parameter µt, which characterizes the average
market order arrival rate on day t, is straightforward to
measure. It is just the ratio of the number of shares of
eﬀective market orders (for both buy and sell orders) to
the number of events during the trading day. Similarly,
σt is the average limit order size2 in shares for that day.
Measuring the cancellation rate δt and the limit order
rate density αt is more complicated, due to the highly
simpliﬁed assumptions we have made for the model. In
contrast to our assumption of a constant density for
placement of limit orders across the entire logarithmic
price axis, real limit order placement is highly concen-
trated near the best prices (roughly 2/3 of all orders are
placed at inside of the best prices), with a density that
falls oﬀas a power law as a function of the distance ∆
from the best prices [15, 20]. In addition, we have as-
sumed a constant cancellation rate, whereas in reality
orders placed near the best prices tend to be cancelled
much faster than orders placed far from the best prices.
We cope with these problems as described below.
In order to estimate the limit order rate density for day
t, αt, we make an empirical estimate of the distribution
of the relative price for eﬀective limit order placement
on each day. For buy orders we deﬁne the relative price
as ∆= m −p, where p is the logarithm of the limit
price and m is the logarithm of the midquote price. Sim-
ilarly for sell orders, ∆= p −m.
We then somewhat
arbitrarily choose Qlower
t
as the 2 percentile of the den-
sity of ∆corresponding to the limit orders arriving on
2 The model assumes that the average size of limit orders and
market orders is the same. For the real data this is not strictly
true, though as seen in Table I, it is a good approximation to
within about 20%. For the purposes of the analysis we use the
limit order size as the measure because for theoretical reasons
we think this is more important than the market order size, but
because the two are approximately the same, this will not make
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the results.
day t, and Qupper
t
as the 60 percentile of ∆.
Assum-
ing constant density within this range, we calculate αt as
αt = L/(Qupper
t
−Qlower
t
) where L is the total number
of shares of eﬀective limit orders within the price inter-
val (Qlower
t
, Qupper
t
) on day t. These choices are made
in a compromise to include as much data as possible for
statistical stability, but not so much as to include orders
that are unlikely to ever be executed, and therefore un-
likely to have any eﬀect on prices.
Similarly, to cope with the fact that in reality the av-
erage cancellation rate δ decreases [15] with the relative
price ∆, whereas in the model δ is assumed to be con-
stant, we base our estimate for δ only on canceled limit
orders within the range of the same relative price bound-
aries (Qlower
t
, Qupper
t
) deﬁned above. We do this to be
consistent in our choice of which orders are assumed to
contribute signiﬁcantly to price formation (orders closer
to the best prices contribute more than orders that are
further away). We then measure δt, the cancellation rate
on day t, as the inverse of the average lifetime of a can-
celed limit order in the above price range. Lifetime is
measured in terms of number of events happening be-
tween the introduction of the order and its subsequent
cancellation. Some simple diagnostics of the parameter
estimates are presented in Fig. 5.
4.
Measuring the price diﬀusion rate
The measurement of the price diﬀusion rate requires
some discussion. We measure the intraday price diﬀu-
sion by computing the variance V (τ) of m(i −τ) −m(i),
averaged over diﬀerent intraday events i. Here an event
is anything that changes the midpoint price m.
If we
assume that the events are asymptotically IID, then the
estimated slope of the variance plot is the diﬀusion rate
Dt for day t. To compute this we regress V (τ) against τ,
using the assumption V (τ) = Dtτ. We use an ordinary
least squares regression to estimate Dt, weighting each
value of τ by the square root of the number of indepen-
dent observations. An example of this procedure is given
in Fig. 6.
One must bear in mind that the price diﬀusion rate
from day to day has substantial correlations, as illus-
trated in Fig. 7.
5.
Estimating the errors for the regressions
The error bars presented in the text are based on
a bootstrapping method.
We are driven to use this
method for two reasons: First, the spread, price diﬀusion
rates, and parameters are highly cross-correlated between
stocks, and second, because order ﬂow variables, spread,
and price diﬀusion rates all have slowly decaying pos-
itive autocorrelation functions. Indeed, it has recently
been shown that order sign, order volume and liquidity
as reﬂected by volume at the best price, are long-memory

11
FIG. 5: Density estimations and cross correlations for Vodafone between the four model parameter measures. On the diagonal
we present the histogram of the corresponding parameter. Upper oﬀ-diagonal plots are the time cross correlation. We see
that δ is uncorrelated with other measures, while the other three are quite correlated although without any noticeable lead-lag
eﬀects. The lower oﬀ-diagonal plots are scatter plots between the parameters. µ and α are particularly strongly correlated;
fortunately, for the prediction of the spread their hgratio is the most important quantity, and this correlation largely cancels
out.
processes [21, 22]. These eﬀects complicate the statistical
analysis, and make the assignment of error bars diﬃcult.
The method we use is inspired by the variance plot
method described in Beran [23], Section 4.4. We divide
the sample into blocks, apply the regression to each block,
and then study the scaling of the deviation in the results
as the blocks are made longer to coincide with the full
sample. We divide the N daily data points for each stock
into m disjoint blocks, each containing n adjacent days,
so that n ≈N/m. We use the same partition for each
stock, so that corresponding blocks for each stock are
contemporaneous. We perform an independent regres-
sion on each of the m blocks, and calculate the mean Mm
and standard deviation σm of the m slope parameters Ai
and intercept parameters Bi, i = 1, . . . , m. We then vary
m and study the scaling as shown in Figs. 8 and 9.
Figs. 8(a) and (b) illustrate this procedure for the
spread, and Figs. 9(a) and (b) illustrate this for the price
diﬀusion rate. Similarly, panels (c) and (d) in each ﬁg-
ure show the mean and standard deviation for the inter-
cept and slope as a function of the number of bins. As
expected, the standard deviations of the estimates de-
creases as n increases. The logarithm of the standard
deviation for the intercept and slope as a function of
log n is shown in panels (e) and (f). For IID normally
distributed data we expect a line with slope γ = −1/2;
instead we observe γ > −1/2. For example for the spread
γ ≈−0.19. |γ| < 1/2 is an indication that this is a long
memory process; see the discussion in Section (A 7).
This method can be used to extrapolate the error for
m = 1, i.e. the full sample. This is illustrated in panels
(e) and (f) in each ﬁgure. The inaccuracy in these error
bars is evident in the unevenness of the scaling.
This
is particularly true for the price diﬀusion rate. To get a
feeling for the accuracy of the error bars, we estimate the
standard deviation for the scaling regression assuming
standard error, and repeat the extrapolation for the one
standard deviation positive and negative deviations of
the regression lines, as shown in panels (e) and (f) of

12
FIG. 6: Illustration of the procedure for measuring the price
diﬀusion rate for Vodafone (VOD) on August 4th, 1998. On
the x axis we plot the time τ in units of ticks, and on the
y axis the variance of mid-price diﬀusion V (τ). According
to the hypothesis that mid-price diﬀusion is an uncorrelated
Gaussian random walk, the plot should obey V (τ) = Dτ. To
cope with the fact that points with larger values of τ have
fewer independent intervals and are less statistically signiﬁ-
cant, we use a weighted regression to compute the slope D.
Figs. 8 and 9 The results are summarized in Table II.
One of the eﬀects that is evident in Figs. 8(c-d) and
9(c-d) is that the slope coeﬃcients tend to decrease as m
increases. We believe this is due to the autocorrelation
bias discussed in Section (A 6).
6.
Longitudinal vs. cross-sectional tests
It is possible to test this model either longitudinally
(across diﬀerent time intervals for a given stock) or cross-
sectionally (across diﬀerent stocks over the same time
period). We have applied tests of both types, but due to
the very strong autocorrelations of the order ﬂow rates,
spread, and price diﬀusion rates, there are diﬃculties in
getting a clean test of the model longitudinally. In this
section we discuss these problems, and discuss some of
our results on the longitudinal tests.
A priori we would expect to do a better job making
cross-sectional rather than longitudinal predictions. In-
deed, it is not clear that this model should predict any-
thing at all about longitudinal variations. To see why,
imagine that the assumptions of the model are satisﬁed
perfectly, and suppose that the ﬁve parameters of the or-
der ﬂow process (µ, α, etc.) for a given stock are ﬁxed in
time. Then the only daily variations we would observe in
testing the model would be due to sample errors in the
estimation process.
Even though the assumptions are
satisﬁed perfectly, we would ﬁnd no correlation between
predicted and actual values. To observe such a correla-
FIG. 7: Time series (top) and autocorrelation function (bot-
tom) for daily price diﬀusion rate Dt for Vodafone. Because
of long-memory eﬀects and the short length of the series, the
long-lag coeﬃcients are poorly determined; the ﬁgure is just
to demonstrate that the correlations are quite large.
tion requires real variations in the parameters of the or-
der ﬂow process. There are also possible problems with
relaxation times: If a parameter is suddenly changed, ac-
cording to the model it takes the system time to reach
a new steady state behavior. There are two characteris-
tic times in the model: σ/µ, which is the characteristic
time for removal of limit orders by market orders, and
1/δ, which is is the characteristic time for spontaneous
removal of limit orders. For the data here it appears that
σ/µ is typically less than a minute, whereas 1/δ ranges
from a few minutes to a few hours.
Thus, 1/δ is the
slowest relaxation time, and in some cases at least it is
potentially problematic for a daily analysis. In addition,
there is the very signiﬁcant problem that real order ﬂows
are strongly autocorrelated, discussed below.
Cross-sectionally, in contrast, we expect a priori that
diﬀerent stocks should have diﬀerent parameters. There
are likely to be larger variations in the parameters be-
tween stocks than in the parameters for a given stock at
diﬀerent times. In addition, for a cross-sectional analysis
there are no problems with relaxation times, and in any
case averaging over longer periods of time reduces the
sampling error. Thus cross-sectional analysis is expected
to be more promising and more reliable.
As noted, for the daily analysis, and even for cross-
sectional analysis over long periods of time, there are
problems caused by the long range autocorrelations of
real order ﬂow, spreads, and price diﬀusion rates. Auto-
correlations can remain strongly positive on the order of
50 days. This creates problems in performing the regres-

13
FIG. 8: Subsample analysis of regression of predicted vs. actual spread. To get a better feeling for the true errors in this
estimation (as opposed to standard errors which are certainly too small), we divide the data into subsamples (using the same
temporal period for each stock) and apply the regression to each subsample. (a) (top left) shows the results for the intercept,
and (b) (top right) shows the results for the slope. In both cases we see that progressing from right to left, as the subsamples
increase in size, the estimates become tighter. (c) and (d) (next row) shows the mean and standard deviation for the intercept
and slope. We observe a systematic tendency for the mean to increase as the number of bins decreases. (e) and (f) show the
logarithm of the standard deviations of the estimates against log n, the number of each points in the subsample. The line
is a regression based on binnings ranging from m = N to m = 10 (lower values of m tend to produce unreliable standard
deviations). The estimated error bar is obtained by extrapolating to n = N. To test the accuracy of the error bar, the dashed
lines are one standard deviation variations on the regression, whose intercepts with the n = N vertical line produce high and
low estimates.
sion, and can result in a systematic bias in the estimated
parameters. It causes severe systematic biases and inter-
pretation problems for a daily analysis.
To produce estimates of the average values of the pa-
rameters and of the price diﬀusion and spread across the
full 21 month period for the cross-sectional regressions,
we have used the event-weighted average of the daily
values. The alternative would have been to repeat the
measurements as done for the daily data on a 21 month
rather than a daily time-scale. However, this latter ap-
proach would run into problems because of the open-
ing auction, which is not treated by our model. There
are price changes driven by the orders received during
the opening auction, and if we measured price diﬀusion
across the full period we would be including these as well
as the intra-day price movements. As a simple solution

14
FIG. 9: Subsample analysis of regression of predicted vs. actual price diﬀusion (see Fig. 6), similar to the previous ﬁgure for
the spread. The scaling of the errors is much less regular than it is for the spread, so the error bars are less accurate.
regression
estimated standard bootstrap low high
spread intercept
0.06
0.21
0.29
0.25 0.33
spread slope
0.99
0.08
0.10
0.09 0.11
diﬀusion intercept
2.43
1.22
1.76
1.57 1.97
diﬀusion slope
1.33
0.19
0.25
0.23 0.29
TABLE II: A summary of the bootstrap error analysis described in the text. The columns are (left to right) the estimated
value of the parameter, the standard error from the cross sectional regression in Fig. 6, the one standard deviation error bar
estimated by the bootstrapping method, and the one standard deviation low and high values for the extrapolation, as shown
in Figs. 8(e-f) and 9(e-f).

15
to this problem we use an event-weighted 21 month aver-
age of daily values to compute values for each of the or-
der ﬂow parameters, and then make predictions for each
stock based on the average values. The weighting is done
by the number of events in a day, which for simple quanti-
ties such as the market impact rate reduces to something
that is equivalent to applying the analysis over the full
period.
Similarly, to get the 21 month average of the
spread and price diﬀusion we simply compute an event-
weighted average of their daily values.
We have tried
several variations on this procedure and the diﬀerences
appear to be inconsequential.
When we perform longitudinal regressions at a daily
time-scale we get values for the slope coeﬃcient of the
regressions that are less than one, often by a statisti-
cally signiﬁcant amount. We believe this is caused by
the strong autocorrelation. For example, consider a time
series process of the form
yt = axt + ρyt−1 + nt
(A1)
where nt is an IID noise process. In case xt are i.i.d.,
regressing yt against xt will result in coeﬃcients that
are systematically too small, due to the fact that the
yt−1 term damps the response of yt to changes in xt.
Of course, one can ﬁx this in the simple example above
by simply including yt−1 in the regression [31]. For the
real data, however, the autocorrelation structure is more
complicated – indeed we believe it is a long-memory pro-
cess – which is not well modeled by an AR process in the
above form. Without ﬁnding a proper characterization
of the autocorrelation structure, we are likely to make
errors in estimating the dependence of the predicted and
actual values. This is borne out in the error analysis pre-
sented in Section (A 5), where we see that as we break
the data into shorter subsamples, the estimated slope co-
eﬃcients systematically decrease for the spread and the
price diﬀusion.
If we ﬁt a function of the form φ(ω) = Kωβ to the
market impact curve, we get β = 0.26 ± 0.02 for buy
orders and β = 0.23 ± 0.02 for sell orders, as shown in
Fig. 10. The functional form of the market impact we
observe here is not in agreement with a recent theory by
Gabaix et al. [18], which predicts β = 0.5. While the er-
ror bars given are standard errors, and are certainly too
optimistic, it is nontheless quite clear that the data are
inconsistent with β = 1/2, as discussed in Ref. [29]. This
relates to an interesting debate: The theory for average
market impact put forth by Gabaix et al. follows tradi-
tional thinking in economics, and postulates that agents
optimize their behavior to maximize proﬁts, while the
theory we test here assumes that they behave randomly,
and that the form of the average market impact function
is dictated by the statistical mechanics of price forma-
tion.
7.
Market impact
The market impact function is closely related to the
more familiar notions of supply and demand. We have
chosen to measure average market impact in this paper
rather than average relative supply and demand for rea-
sons of convenience. Measuring the average relative sup-
ply and demand requires reconstructing the limit order
book at each instant, which is both time consuming and
error prone. The average market impact function, in con-
trast, can be measured based on a time series of orders
and best bid and ask prices.
At any instant in time the stored queue of sell limit
orders reveals the quantity available for sale at each
price, thus showing the supply, and the stored buy or-
ders similarly show the revealed demand. The price shift
caused by a market order of a given size depends on the
stored supply or demand through a moment expansion
[5]. Thus, the collapse of the market impact function re-
ﬂects a corresponding property of supply and demand.
Normally one would assume that supply and demand are
functions of human production and desire; the results we
have presented here suggest that on a short timescale in
ﬁnancial markets their form is dictated by the dynami-
cal interaction of order accumulation, removal by market
orders and cancellation, and price diﬀusion.
8.
Alternative market impact collapse plots
We have demonstrated a good collapse of the market
impact using nondimensional units. However, in decid-
ing what “good” means, one should compare this to the
best alternatives available.
We compare to three such
alternatives. In ﬁgure 11, the top left pane shows the
collapse when using non-dimensional units derived from
the model (repeated from the main text). The top right
plot shows the average market impact when we instead
normalise the order size by its sample mean. Order size
is measured in units of shares and market impact is in log
price diﬀerence. The bottom left attempts to take into
account daily variations of trading volume, normalising
the order size by the average order size for that stock on
that day. In the bottom right we use trade price to nor-
malise the order sizes which are now in monetary units
(British Pounds). We visually see that none of the al-
ternative rescalings comes close to the collapse we obtain
when using non-dimensional units; because of the much
greater dispersion, the error bars in each case are much
larger.
9.
Error analysis for market impact
Assigning error bars to the average market impact is
diﬃcult because the absolute price changes ∆p have a
slowly decaying positive autocorrelation function. This
may be a long-memory process, although this is not as

16
FIG. 10: The average market impact vs. order size plotted on log-log scale. The upper left and right panels show buy and
sell orders in non-dimensional coordinates; the ﬁtted line has slope β = 0.26 ± 0.02 for buy orders and β = 0.23 ± 0.02 for sell
orders. In contrast, the lower panels show the same thing in dimensional units, using British pounds to measure order size.
Though the exponents are similar, the scatter between diﬀerent stocks is much greater.
obvious as it is for other properties of the market, such as
the volume and sign of orders [21, 22]. The signed price
changes ∆p have an autocorrelation function that rapidly
decays to zero, but to compute market impact we sort the
values into bins, and all the values in the bin have the
same sign. One might have supposed that because the
points entering a given bin are not sequential in time, the
correlation would be suﬃciently low that this might not
be a problem. However, the autocorrelation is suﬃciently
strong that its eﬀect is still signiﬁcant, particularly for
smaller market impacts, and must be taken into account.
To cope with this we assign error bars to each bin us-
ing the variance plot method described in, for example,
Beran [23], Section 4.4. This is a more straightforward
version of the method discussed in Section (A 5). The
sample of size N = 434 is divided into m subsamples of
n points adjacent in time. We compute the mean for each
subsample, vary n, and compute the standard deviation
of the means across the m = N/n subsamples. We then
make use of theorem 2.2 from Beran [23] that states that
the error in the n sample mean of a long-memory process
is ˆe = σn−γ, where γ is a positive coeﬃcient related to
the Hurst exponent and σ is the standard deviation. By
plotting the standard deviation of the m estimated inter-
cepts as a function of n we estimate γ and extrapolate to
n = sample length to get an estimate of the error in the
full sample mean. An example of an error scaling plot for
one of the bins of the market impact is given in Fig. 12.
A central question about Fig. 4 is whether the data for
diﬀerent stocks collapse onto a single curve, or whether
there are statistically signiﬁcant idiosyncratic variations
from stock to stock. From the results presented in Fig. 4
this is not completely clear. Most of the stocks collapse
onto the curve for the pooled data (or the pooled data set
with themselves removed). There are a few that appear
to make statistically signiﬁcant variations, at least if we
assume that the mean value of the bins for diﬀerent or-
der size levels are independent. However, they are most
deﬁnitely not independent, and this non-independence
is diﬃcult to model. In any case, the variations are al-
ways fairly small, not much larger than the error bars.
Thus the collapse gives at least a good approximate un-
derstanding of the market impact, even if there are some
small idiosyncratic variations it does not capture.

17
FIG. 11: Market impact collapse under 4 kinds of axis rescaling. In each case we plot a normalised version of the order size on the
horizontal axis vs. a (possibly normalised) average market impact log(pt+1)−log(pt) on the vertical axis. (a) (top left) collapse using
non-dimensional units based on the model; (b) (top right) order size is normalised by its mean value for the sample. (c) (bottom
right) order size is normalised the average daily volume. (d) (bottom right) Order size is multiplied by the current best midpoint
price, making the horizontal axis the monetary value of the trade.
10.
Extending the model
In the interest of full disclosure, and as a stimulus for
future work, in this section we detail the ways in which
the current model does not accurately match the data,
and sketch possible improvements. This model was in-
tended to describe a few average statistical properties of
the market, some of which it describes very well. How-
ever, there are several aspects that it does not describe
well, such as the scale-free power law properties. This
would require a more sophisticated model of order ﬂow,
including a more realistic model of price dependence in
order placement and cancellations [15, 20], long-memory
properties [21, 22] and the relationship of the diﬀerent
components of the order ﬂow to each other. This is a
much harder problem, and is likely to require a more
complicated model. While this would have some advan-
tages, it would also have some disadvantages.
Some market properties that might proﬁt from such an
improved model are detailed below.
• Price diﬀusion. The variance of real prices obeys
the relationship σ2(τ) = Dτ 2H to a good approx-
imation for all values of τ, with H close to and
typically a little greater than 0.5. In contrast, un-
der Poisson order ﬂow, due to the dynamics of
the double continuous auction price formation pro-
cess, prices make a strongly anti-correlated ran-
dom walk, so that the function σ2(τ) is nonlin-
ear.
Asymptotically H = 0.5, but for shorter
times H < 0.5. Alternatively, one can character-

18
FIG. 12: The variance plot procedure used to determine error
bars for mean market impact conditional on order size. The
horizontal axis n denotes the number of points in the m dif-
ferent samples, and the vertical axis is the standard deviation
of the m sample means.
We estimate the error of the full
sample mean by extrapolating n to the full sample length.
ize this in terms of a timescale-dependent diﬀusion
rate D(τ), so that the variance of prices increases
as σ2(τ) = D(τ)τ. Refs. [4, 5] showed that the
limits τ →0 and τ →∞obey well-deﬁned scal-
ing relationships in terms of the parameters of the
model.
In particular, D(0) ∼µ2δ/α2ǫ−1/2, and
D(∞) ∼µ2δ/α2ǫ1/2. Interestingly, and for reasons
we do not fully understand, the prediction D(0)
does a good job of matching the real data, as we
have shown here, while D(∞) does a poor job. Note
that it is very interesting that the double contin-
uous auction produces anti-correlations in prices,
even with no correlation in order ﬂow.
One can
turn this around: Given that prices are uncorre-
lated, there must be correlations in order ﬂow. And
indeed this is observed to be the case [21, 22].
• Market eﬃciency.
The question of market eﬃ-
ciency is closely related to price diﬀusion.
The
anti-correlations mentioned above imply a market
ineﬃciency. We are investigating the addition of
“low-intelligence” agents to correct this problem.
• Correlations in spread and price diﬀusion. We have
already discussed in Section (A 6) the problems
that the autocorrelations in spread and price diﬀu-
sion create for comparing the theory to the model
on a daily scale.
• Lack of dependence on granularity parameter. In
Section (A 7) we discuss the fact that the model
predicts more variation with the granularity pa-
rameter than we observe. Apparently the Poisson-
based non-dimensional coordinates work even bet-
ter than one would expect. This suggests that there
is some underlying simplicity in the real data that
we have not fully captured in the model.
Although in this paper we are stressing the fact that we
can make a useful theory out of zero-intelligence agents,
we are certainly not trying to claim that intelligence
doesn’t play an important role in what ﬁnancial agents
do. Indeed, one of the virtues of this model is that it
provides a benchmark to separate properties that are
driven by the statistical mechanics of the market institu-
tion from those that are driven by conditional intelligent
behavior.
