Author’s Note
AS A READER, I SUPPOSE IT’S NOT UNUSUAL TO SKIP OVER
THE preface to a book and get straight down to the
business end of things. At least, that’s what I tend to do.
If you do the same, it won’t stop you understanding the
key theme of this book: how the science of uncertainty can
help us make sense of our very uncertain and unpredictable
world. But you may wonder, since pretty much everything
in life is uncertain, why I focus on the particular, seemingly
disparate  topics  singled  out  in  this  book—climate  change,
economics, 
quantum 
physics 
and 
cosmology, human
creativity  and  consciousness,  to  name  a  few?  Why  not
earthquakes, drug design or cyberattacks? The answer lies
in my scientiﬁc background.
I studied for a PhD in the 1970s, researching Einstein’s
theory of general relativity—Einstein had become a hero of
mine by the time I was a teenager. I was lucky, the 1970s
are  considered  to  have  been  a  golden  age  for  general
relativity  theory.  At  the  ﬁrst  scientiﬁc  conference  I  ever
attended,  in  1974,  I  literally  heard  Stephen  Hawking—he
hadn’t  then  lost  his  voice—announce  his  most  important
and famous result: that black holes aren’t truly black, but
radiate quantum particles.
My research supervisor1, Dennis Sciama, Hawking’s PhD
supervisor some years earlier, was ecstatic about this
result. Sciama was optimistic that we were on the verge of
understanding  how  to  unify  Einstein’s  theory  of  general
relativity with quantum mechanics, the theory that
successfully describes atoms and elementary particles.

There were problems, however. One problem which
frustrated Sciama was that Hawking’s calculations were a
little  arcane.  Sciama  was  convinced  that  there  must  be  a
more physically transparent way of deriving such an
important  result.  He  started  to  look  at  alternative  ideas
based  on  concepts  from  a  ﬁeld  of  physics  called  non-
equilibrium  thermodynamics.  Sciama  asked  me  to  look  at
what 
is 
called 
the 
principle 
of 
maximum 
entropy
production, something I hadn’t heard of at the time.
Towards the end of my PhD research 2, I had become an
expert  on  black  holes  and  was  successful  in  securing  a
postdoctoral position in Hawking’s group at Cambridge. All
seemed set for a career as a theoretical gravitational
physicist.
But the closer I came to starting this new position, the
less sure I became that this was what I wanted to do. For a
start, the work I was doing had absolutely no relevance to
the well-being of the person in the street. On top of that, I
realised that there were actually only a handful of
professional people in the world who were truly interested
in the nitty-gritty details of my work.
Perhaps none of this would have mattered if I felt I was
going  to  be  the  person  to  unify  quantum  mechanics  and
general  relativity.  This  was  a  holy  grail  for  physics  in  the
1970s, and indeed it still is today; it remains an unsolved
problem. But the more I thought about it, the more I found
myself  concluding  that  at  a  conceptual  level  these  two
theories  were  quite  incompatible  and  weren’t  going  to  be
uniﬁed—at least not by me.
The  prevailing  view  at  the  time  was  to  ignore  these
conceptual problems and to press ahead with the
mathematics hoping something miraculous would work out
in the end (dubbed “Shut up and calculate” by the
American physicist David Mermin). However, not everyone
felt like this. I began thinking back to that ﬁrst conference I

attended in 1974. The conference was opened by the
renowned  British  theoretical  physicist  Chris  Isham.  In  his
introductory talk3, Isham remarked,
“It has become unfashionable these days for much notice
to  be  taken  of  these  conceptual  problems,  most  people
preferring  to  work  on  the  more  ‘respectable’  technical
diﬀiculties.  However,  in  quantum  gravity,  the  conceptual
and technical problems frequently go hand in hand and it is
possible  that  by  neglecting  the  former  one  is  rendering
irrelevant the latter.”
These words began to resonate. I started to worry about
embarking on a career working on things that would
ultimately turn out to be irrelevant.
By 
chance, 
I 
met 
a 
world-famous 
meteorologist,
Raymond Hide. Hide had interests in both astronomy and
meteorology;  he  was  the  only  person  to  be  president  of
both the Royal Astronomical Society and the Royal
Meteorological Society. I asked him what was new in
climate  physics.  He  proceeded  to  describe  a  paper  by  an
Australian  colleague4  showing  how  properties  of  Earth’s
climate  can  be  derived  from  the  principle  of  maximum
entropy production. It was as if a bolt of lightning had just
hit me. Here was some obscure concept in physics whose
existence I had only recently become aware of which could
seemingly unify everything from the quantum evaporation
of black holes to the structure of Earth’s climate system!
At the time, the United Kingdom’s Met Oﬀice was
looking for scientists. Almost on a whim, I decided to apply,
not  sure  if  this  was  what  I  really  wanted  to  do.  At  the
interview stage I blathered incoherently about the critical
importance of the principle of maximum entropy production
for  understanding  climate.  To  my  great  surprise  I  was
oﬀered a job.
But should I turn down an oﬀer to work with one of the
world’s  top  theoretical  physicists,  and  instead  move  into

the more prosaic world of the scientiﬁc civil service,
working on a ﬁeld about which I knew next to nothing? My
parents would be disappointed with me if I turned down the
job  oﬀer  from  Hawking.  I  didn’t  know  what  to  do  and
walked round in a complete state of indecision for day after
day. I decided to shelve the problem for a few days and get
back  to  writing  my  thesis.  And  then  a  week  or  so  later,  I
walked into my oﬀice and it suddenly became crystal clear
to me what to do. Before I started to have second thoughts,
I wrote to the head of the Department of Applied
Mathematics  and  Theoretical  Physics  at  the  University  of
Cambridge, declining the oﬀer.
What on earth was going on in my brain that suddenly I
knew what to do, when earlier I was like Buridan’s donkey,
unable to move towards either the pile of hay or the pail of
water? I became deeply interested in the process by which
the brain makes decisions.
For ten years, I didn’t think about fundamental physics. I
immersed myself in weather and climate science, and was
able, 
with 
colleagues, 
to 
make 
some 
exciting
breakthroughs. Michael McIntyre and I discovered the
world’s  largest  breaking  waves  in  Earth’s  stratosphere—a
process fundamental to understanding why the ozone hole
was discovered unexpectedly over the Antarctic. Chris
Folland,  David  Parker  and  I  showed  that  the  decade-long
drought in the sub-Saharan Sahel—the drought which
motivated  the  famous  Live  Aid  concert—was  caused  by
ﬂuctuations  in  tropical  Atlantic  sea  temperatures.  Glenn
Shutts  and  I  developed  a  way  of  representing  small-scale
atmospheric gravity waves (not the gravitational waves of
general relativity that I had previously been researching) in
weather forecast models, and showed how this helped
airlines  improve  their  fuel  eﬀiciency.  And  James  Murphy
and I developed the world’s ﬁrst ensemble forecast system,
about which I shall be writing in detail. It was during this

time that I met Ed Lorenz, a key protagonist in this book,
and became deeply interested in chaos theory.
In fact, in the 1980s, “chaos” was becoming a buzzword
around the world thanks to James Gleick’s masterful book
Chaos: Making a New Science5. Working with chaos
pioneer  Bob  May,  I  began  to  meet  scientists  from  other
ﬁelds where chaos theory was relevant, and started
thinking about whether ensemble prediction methods could
be applied in these other areas. This aroused my interest in
ensemble prediction in ﬁelds like economics.
My career was developing well and I was happy and felt
fulﬁlled  in  what  I  was  doing.  I  had  pretty  much  forgotten
about my earlier life in fundamental physics.
But then, sometime in the late 1980s, I was in one of the
main bookshops in Oxford. It was 1987, the three
hundredth anniversary of Newton’s famous 
Principia
Mathematica, and a new book celebrating the anniversary,
edited  by  Stephen  Hawking,  had  just  appeared.  I  ﬂicked
through the pages. It brought my old world back to me in
an instant. The distinguished physicist Roger Penrose had
contributed an article in which he mentioned the key
experiment—the Bell experiment—which has led physicists
to reject Einstein’s views about quantum reality.
And then, some weeks later, completely out of the blue, I
had  an  idea  based  on  chaos  theory—a  possible  way  to
explain how this key experimental result might after all be
consistent  with  Einstein’s  views.  I  wrote  a  paper  on  this
6
and then tried to forget about it and get back to my post-
PhD ﬁelds of research. I found I couldn’t. I began to devour
papers on the foundations of quantum physics, made easier
with  the  rapidly  developing  internet,  and  tried  to  develop
my ideas on quantum physics further. I was being sucked
back into the type of physics I thought I had left behind, in
the evenings at least.

For this type of work, you simply need pencil and paper.
However, to solve the equations that were part of my day
job  in  weather  and  climate  physics,  I  needed  some  of  the
largest supercomputers available. But the more I got to use
these  computers,  the  more  frustrated  I  became  by  how
much of a limitation they were on what could be studied.
For all their impressive capabilities, being able to perform
millions of billions of calculations per second for example,
computers nevertheless put severe limitations on the
amount of detail that can be coded into a global weather or
climate  model  and  on  the  number  of  ensemble  members
that could be run at any time.
Ultimately, the processing power of a supercomputer is
limited by the electrical power used to run it. It takes a lot
of  electrical  power—some  tens  of  megawatts—to  run  a
modern supercomputer. I became interested in the
possibility  that  you  could  reduce  the  amount  of  energy  a
computer  uses  by  turning  the  voltage  down  across  the
transistors7. This might allow you to add more chips to your
supercomputer  for  the  same  amount  of  input  energy,  and
that would enable you to increase the amount of detail in
your model, or the number of ensemble members you could
run. But reducing the voltage would make the chips
unreliable—the calculations would be corrupted by thermal
noise from the uncontrollable jiggling of atoms inside these
chips and would no longer be precisely correct. With such
noise, computers would no longer be infallible. However, as
I will discuss, in chaotic systems noise can be a
constructive resource, amplifying signals rather than
obscuring them. I proposed 8 that we should be developing
low-energy, noisy 
supercomputers 
for 
problems 
like
weather and climate prediction. This is starting to happen.
To  try  to  argue  my  point  to  colleagues,  I  began  to
wonder  if  there  are  examples  of  systems  in  nature  that
make  use  of  low-energy  noisy  computation.  I  began  to

realise the human brain, which needs only 20W to ﬁre its
80  billion  neurons,  may  provide  an  example.  And  this  got
me  thinking  about  what  actually  it  is  that  makes  us  the
creative species we are.
All  these  topics  have  in  one  way  or  another  fascinated
me  and  have  become  interwoven  in  my  research  career
over the years. This is the reason why they appear together
in this book.
...
