Acknowledgements
THE DEVELOPMENT OF ENSEMBLE WEATHER AND CLIMATE
PREDICTION  systems—a  concept  that  lies  at  the  heart  of
this book—involved the hard work of many dedicated and
inspiring colleagues, ﬁrst at the Met Oﬀice and then at the
European  Centre  for  Medium-Range  Weather  Forecasts.  I
want to start by acknowledging these colleagues. My deep
thanks  and  gratitude  to  Dave  Anderson,  Jan  Barkmeijer,
Roberto Buizza, Philippe Chapelet, Francisco Doblas-Reyes,
Dennis  Hartmann,  Renate  Hagedorn,  Martin  Leutbecher,
Jean-Francois Mahfouf, Doug Mansﬁeld, Martin Miller,
Franco  Molteni,  Robert  Mureau,  James  Murphy,  Thomas
Petroliagis,  Kamal  Puri,  David  Richardson,  Glenn  Shutts,
Tim Stockdale, Stefano Tibaldi, Joe Tribbia and Antje
Weisheimer.  In  addition,  I  want  to  thank  Jagadish  Shukla,
now at George Mason University, who made me realise the
potential power of physics-based models for exploiting the
predictability of the atmosphere. His work kickstarted my
passion for ensemble forecasting. I also want to thank Peter
Webster,  from  the  Georgia  Institute  of  Technology,  who
played  such  an  important  role  showing  how  probabilistic
ensemble forecasts could be used for disaster preparedness
in the developing world. His work is the forerunner of the
anticipatory  action  programmes  which  are  now  changing
the way disaster relief is enacted by humanitarian
organisations.
In my career I have learned from many great scientists.
From my undergraduate days at Bristol University, I thank
my tutors Michael Berry, Brian Pollard and Ruth Williams.

From  my  graduate  days  at  Oxford  University,  I  thank  my
supervisor, Dennis Sciama, and my teacher and my internal
doctoral  examiner,  Roger  Penrose.  Dennis  was  the  most
inspiring  speaker  I  have  ever  heard.  It  was  impossible  to
come away from a Sciama lecture without somehow feeling
good  about  the  world.  And  of  course  Roger,  now  a  Nobel
laureate, was something else. When I participated in small
discussion meetings in Roger’s oﬀice, I felt that the
Copernican principle was being violated; I was manifestly
in a preferred frame of reference at the very centre of the
universe.  Importantly,  Dennis  and  Roger  together  taught
me not to be afraid to think outside of the box, to think in
terms of geometric pictures and simple models, and not to
be intimidated by complicated-looking mathematics—things
which I believe have served me well throughout my career.
Raymond  Hide  taught  me  all  I  needed  to  know  about
geophysical  ﬂuid  dynamics  to  make  a  start  in  my  new
career,  and  I  am  so  grateful  to  him  for  this.  I  was  soon
lucky  to  be  working  with  three  of  the  most  outstanding
scientists in meteorology, Jim Holton, from the University of
Washington; Michael McIntyre, from the University of
Cambridge;  and  then  Ed  Lorenz,  from  the  Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Ed was shy and diﬀicult to engage
in conversation, but eloquent on stage when giving a
lecture. He reminded me of Dennis’s own supervisor, Paul
Dirac.  Like  Penrose,  Lorenz  was  a  geometer  at  heart—by
forming simple pictures he ﬁnally discovered the geometry
of  chaos.  He  gave  me  great  support  in  developing  the
ensemble  forecast  system  when  others  around  me  were
expressing scepticism. Only later did I realise how lucky I
was to have interacted with him.
Like Dennis Sciama and Raymond Hide before him, Bob
May showed boundless enthusiasm, and from him I learned
not only ideas from chaos theory, but also how to
communicate  these  ideas  eﬀectively,  of  which  he  was  a
master.  Through  him  I  met  economists  like  Mervyn  King,

governor of the Bank of England, something I would have
hardly  imagined  possible  when  I  started  my  career.  I  was
elected  to  the  Royal  Society  in  2003,  when  Bob  was  its
president. A highlight of my career was sitting next to him
and his wife at the special banquet for the new inductees. I
still  get  goosebumps  thinking  about  this.  I  am  grateful  to
Bob for all he did for me.
I need to thank the Royal Society in another way. I have
been  able  to  pursue  the  interdisciplinary  topics  described
in this book through an award of a Royal Society Research
Professorship 
(in 
2010, 
the 
Royal 
Society’s 
350th
anniversary year). This, I think, is the closest one can come
to  being  given  money  and  being  told  to  get  on  and  do
whatever  you  like!  I  suppose  a  position  like  this  could  be
abused. However, in my case, it allowed me to do research
on  many  of  the  diverse  topics  discussed  in  this  book.  As
such, I am profoundly grateful to the Royal Society for this
position.  It  occurs  to  me  that  philanthropic  money  should
be  used  to  fund  many  more  such  very  light-touch,  open-
ended  research  positions.  It  would  be  a  good  way  for
billionaires to give something back to society and I suspect
the bang per buck would be enormous.
I  also  want  to  acknowledge  the  kindness  of  two  of  the
world’s leading philosophers of physics, Harvey Brown and
Jeremy  Butterﬁeld,  in  carefully  explaining  to  me  the  ﬁner
points 
of 
Bell’s 
inequality 
in 
quantum 
mechanics—
discussed in detail in this book—and in welcoming me into
their  fold  as  one  of  their  own.  The  Philosophy  of  Physics
seminars at Oxford University were one of the main ways I
managed to get up to speed on the foundations of physics,
whilst continuing my day job in meteorology.
And my thanks to Krishna Palem, now at Rice University,
for  teaching  me  about  low-energy  noisy  transistors.  He,
more than anyone, has pioneered the concept of imprecise
computers.

I  have  been  lucky  that  a  number  of  colleagues  have
given  me  extremely  helpful  comments  on  early  drafts  of
this book, correcting things where they needed correcting.
In particular I would like to thank Harvey Brown, Martha
Buckley, Mark Cane, Peter Coveney, Clara Deser, Josh
Dorrington,  Simant  Dube,  Kerry  Emanuel,  Doyne  Farmer,
Charles Godfray, Weisi Guo, Dennis Hartmann, Sabine
Hossenfelder,  Saleh  Kouhen,  John  Krebs,  Beatriz  Monge-
Sanz, Sebastian Poledna, Juan Sabuco, Chris Shaw,
Jagadish 
Shukla, 
Nick 
Stern, 
Bjorn 
Stevens, 
Nick
Trefethen, Joe Tribbia and Peter Webster. I thank my
editors,  Latha  Menon  (Oxford  University  Press)  and  Eric
Henney, Emily Andrukaitis and Thomas Kelleher (Basic
Books),  for  extensive  comments  which  improved  the  book
enormously. As ever, remaining errors are my own.
My  thanks  to  my  son  Brendan  Palmer  for  drawing  and
preparing many of the ﬁgures throughout this book; to my
students  Josh  Dorrington  and  Milan  Klouwer  for  many  of
the diagrams showing chaos and turbulence in Chapters 1
to 3; to my weather forecast colleagues Martin Leutbecher,
Fernando Prates and Cihan Sahin for the ensemble weather
forecast ﬁgures shown in Chapter 5; and to Paul Lowe and
Alex  Rattan  at  the  Bank  of  England  for  providing  the  fan
chart ﬁgure in Chapter 8.
Finally, I need to thank my family for their love, and for
their patience and understanding when I would disappear
for  hours  and  hours  (indeed  months  and  months)  in  my
study: to my wife, Gill; my sons, Sam, Greg and Brendan,
who are now all doing so well in their own careers; and to
my  brother,  John,  and  sister,  Rosalyn,  for  their  boundless
encouragement and enthusiasm for this project.
...
