Introduction
UNCERTAINTY IS AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THE HUMAN
CONDITION. We don’t know if we will be run over by a bus
in  the  coming  week  or  win  some  stupendous  prize  in  the
national  lottery,  should  we  have  bought  a  ticket.  Looking
farther into the future, we can’t be sure if our investments
will  be  rendered  worthless  by  the  next  global  ﬁnancial
crash, or whether we will succumb to a new pandemic, to
the  next  world  war,  or  indeed  to  climate  change.  Perhaps
we  might  wish  for  supernatural  powers  to  predict  the
future and relieve us from the stress of living under such
uncertainties.  But  what  sort  of  people  would  we  be  if  we
had these powers? If we knew for certain what was heading
our  way,  would  we  still  be  the  creative,  get-up-and-go
species we are?
Apparently,  it’s  not  just our  lives  that  are  uncertain.
According to our most successful theory of physics—
quantum  mechanics—uncertainty  is  also  an  essential  part
of the life of the elementary particles from which both we
and  the  world  around  us  are  made.  How  would  these
elementary particles behave if we could excise uncertainty
from the basic laws of physics? Would they also end up as
indolent  good-for-nothings?  Would  the  universe  be  a  very
diﬀerent place if the laws of physics were themselves
certain?
These are some of the questions I will try to answer in
this  book.  I  will  be  elevating  the  notion  of  uncertainty,  or
doubt, to a status it is not usually given: not as an “Oh, I
suppose we’d better do a risk analysis” afterthought, but as

a  matter  of  primal  importance  and  focus.  There  are  two
reasons for doing this. First, there is the practical reason
that we are liable to make lousy decisions if we base them
on predictions with unreliable estimates of uncertainty. But
just as important, at least for me as a scientist, we may be
able to understand better the way systems work by
focusing  on  the  ways  in  which  they  are  or  can  become
uncertain. These reasons form the two themes of my book:
the  science  of  uncertainty  to  predict  our  uncertain  world
and to understand our uncertain world.
A well-known saying, variously attributed to Danish
quantum physicist Niels Bohr and baseball philosopher Yogi
Berra,  is  that  prediction  is  very  diﬀicult,  especially  if  it’s
about  the  future.  However,  even  tougher  than  making  a
prediction  is  reliably  estimating  the  uncertainty  in  that
prediction. You never hear an astrologer put error bars on
their  forecast  that  you’ll  meet  a  tall  dark  stranger.  The
reason predicting uncertainty is so tough is that the
underlying causes of uncertainty can be small and
seemingly insigniﬁcant. Recall the famous proverb:
For want of a nail the shoe was lost.
For want of a shoe the horse was lost.
For want of a horse the rider was lost.
For want of a rider the message was lost.
For want of a message the battle was lost.
For want of a battle the kingdom was lost.
And all for the want of a horseshoe nail.
But this is only the half of it. Most of the time, kingdoms
weren’t  lost  for  want  of  a  single  horseshoe  nail.  It’s  only
occasionally  that  they  were.  Most  of  the  time,  kingdoms
ticked  along  in  a  reasonably  steady  and  predictable  way,
even though horseshoes frequently lost nails. The real
challenge  is  to  know when  the  kingdom  is  at  risk  of  a

missing nail that results in huge repercussions, and when a
missing nail is irrelevant and doesn’t matter.
Many will have heard of the butterﬂy eﬀect: the idea that
a butterﬂy ﬂapping or not ﬂapping its wings in the jungle
can  make  the  diﬀerence  between  a  storm  forming  or  not
forming  over  a  remote  part  of  the  world.  Whether  or  not
this  is  literally  true,  our  weather  forecast  models  cannot
represent  all  the  tiny  gusts  of  air  on  every  part  of  the
planet. Like the lost horseshoe nail, tiny errors in
representing small-scale gusts of wind can grow very
rapidly to make huge errors in large-scale weather
patterns. But most of the time they don’t. Most of the time
it doesn’t matter that we don’t know about these tiny gusts
of air when we are forecasting the weather for tomorrow or
the next day.
But sometimes it does matter.
Michael Fish was a respected weather forecaster on BBC
TV. Although his forecasts weren’t spot on all the time, by
and large they were reliable and the British public trusted
what he said—at least until October 16, 1987. Then,
overnight, he became an eponym for a failed and
discredited forecast system.
In his TV weather forecast on October 15, Fish famously
said: “Earlier on today, apparently, a woman1 rang the BBC
and said she heard there was a hurricane on the way. Well,
if you’re watching, don’t worry, there isn’t!” Yet in the early
hours  of  the  sixteenth,  hurricane-strength  winds  battered
the south of England in what was the worst storm to hit the
country in over three hundred years. Fifteen million trees
were  blown  down,  twenty-two  people  died  and  damages
exceeded  $3  billion.  Of  course,  if  people  had  known  that
there was indeed a hurricane on the way, they would have
moved  cars  from  under  trees  and  secured  boats,  cranes
and aircraft. They would have cancelled or postponed

inessential  trips.  But  they  trusted  Fish’s  assessment  that
there would be no hurricane.
There  was  little  else  on  the  morning  news.  The  BBC
anchorman harangued the weather forecaster on duty:
“Well,  you  chaps  were  a  fat  lot  of  good  last  night.…  If
you  can’t  forecast  the  worst  storms  for  several  centuries
three hours before they happen, what are you doing?!”
The  nation  was  incensed  and  there  were  calls  for  Sir
John  Houghton,  the  director  general  of  the  UK’s  national
weather  service—the  Met  Oﬀice—to  resign.  For  all  their
supercomputers and satellite data, the government agency
which provided Michael Fish with the weather forecast had
failed  woefully  in  its  most  fundamental  duty:  to  warn  the
public of life-threatening weather. Why was this? As we will
see, it was the intermittent butterﬂy eﬀect.
Economists had their Michael Fish moment in 2008
when the global ﬁnancial markets collapsed without
forewarning. So said the Bank of England’s chief economist
Andy Haldane2 in a speech to the UK Institute for
Government  in  2017.  According  to  Haldane  the  problem
with economic modelling was much worse than with
weather modelling: the economic models were “simply
unable  to  function  properly  when  the  world  was  tipped
upside down”. Why should this be? Is the economy
fundamentally more unpredictable than weather and
climate, as some leading economists believe
3? Or was the
2008 crash an example of when, like the 1987 storm, the
conditions were right for small uncertainties in the
economic system to cascade up and create complete loss of
predictability at the macroeconomic scale? Does the
intermittent butterﬂy eﬀect apply to the economy as well?
In  Part  I  of  this  book,  I  will  explain  why  the  butterﬂy
eﬀect is profoundly intermittent—and hence why we can be
lulled into a false sense of security about the predictability
of systems like the weather and perhaps the economy too.

Indeed,  I  will  discuss  how  even  planets,  whose  motion  is
the  very  epitome  of  clockwork  predictability,  might  have
their  own  Michael  Fish  moments.  Underpinning  this  is
something I call “the geometry of chaos”: a type of fractal
geometry  discovered  by  meteorologist  Ed  Lorenz,  which  I
rate  as  important  as  Einstein’s  theories  of  relativity  and
Schrödinger 
and 
Heisenberg’s 
theory 
of 
quantum
mechanics. “The Geometry of Chaos” vied with “The
Primacy of Doubt” as the title of this book.
The  1987  storm  made  it  clear  that  we  need  to  know
ahead  of  time  when  the  butterﬂy  eﬀect  is  going  to  be
particularly  virulent  and  when  it  isn’t.  In  Part  II  of  this
book, I discuss practical methods for dealing with
uncertainty  in  a  number  of  diﬀerent  areas  where  having
reliable predictions is critically important for our own
personal well-being and that of society more generally. For
example, weather services around the world no longer run
their  model  once  when  they  make  a  weather  forecast.
Instead, they run it perhaps ﬁfty times in what is called an
“ensemble 
prediction”. 
The 
ﬁfty 
diﬀerent 
starting
conditions for these forecasts are virtually identical.
However, they diﬀer by small “ﬂaps of butterﬂies’ wings”—
uncertain disturbances on the smallest scales resolvable by
the  models.  Not  only  that,  some  randomness,  or  noise,  is
introduced  into  the  computer-based  weather  equations  to
represent the fact that the computer models are also
uncertain. When the atmosphere is especially unstable, as
it  was  in  October  1987,  the  members  of  the  ensemble
diverge from one another very rapidly. On other occasions,
they may only diverge very slowly. By studying how quickly
the small diﬀerences in the ensemble members grow
during the forecast period, forecasters should not be
caught out again by an explosively unpredictable situation
such as occurred in October 1987.
A consequence of the development of ensemble forecast
systems,  one  that  many  of  us  are  familiar  with  on  our

weather apps, is that the primary weather forecast
variables 
are 
now 
expressed 
as 
probabilities, 
the
probability of rain for example. This probability is
determined by the fraction of the ﬁfty ensemble members
in  which  it  is  raining.  You  may  curse  these  probabilistic
forecasts  for  their  imprecision—after  all  you  just  want  to
know  if  it’s  going  to  rain  or  not.  However,  probabilistic
forecasts now provide an objective basis for disaster relief
agencies to act pre-emptively ahead of a possible extreme
weather  event,  rather  than  simply  wait  for  the  event  to
happen as they did in the past. This is called anticipatory
action.  And  these  probabilistic  ensemble  techniques  are
vital tools for trying to predict climate change on
timescales of decades and longer.
In  Part  II  I  also  discuss  the  development  of  ensemble
prediction techniques for pandemic, economic and conﬂict
prediction, areas of enormous societal importance. Indeed,
COVID-19 has seen a rapid development of so-called multi-
model  ensemble  methods  for  predicting  hospitalisations
and deaths from the pandemic. The Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change uses a similar multi-model
technique to estimate future levels of climate change. Our
experience  in  using  these  types  of  ensembles  for  climate
prediction can help assess their strengths and weaknesses
for pandemic prediction.
But what about those elementary particles and the
uncertain lives that they seem to lead? Einstein thought the
idea that the laws of physics are uncertain was nonsense.
He  believed  that  the  uncertainty  in  quantum  physics  was
no  diﬀerent,  in  principle,  from  uncertainty  in  forecasting
the weather. That is to say, it’s not the elementary particles
that  are  uncertain,  it’s  our  knowledge  of  the  elementary
particles  that  is  uncertain.  As  I  discuss  in  Part  I,  most
contemporary physicists reject Einstein’s view, largely
because there are lab experiments which cast doubt on this
view.

In  Part  III,  I  challenge  this  consensus  view  of  quantum
uncertainty using ideas based around the geometry of
chaos. The implications for fundamental physics—currently
in crisis given the ongoing failure to understand the nature
of the dark universe and a seeming inability to unify
Einstein’s  theory  of  gravity  with  quantum  mechanics—are
potentially massive.
One  of  the  key  results  discussed  in  Part  I  is  that  noise
can be a constructive resource, and not the nuisance it is
often considered to be, when representing complex
systems. For example, when modelling a turbulent ﬂuid, it
makes  sense  to  use  noise  to  represent  eddies  and  whirls
which are too small-scale to be modelled explicitly. In Part
III,  I  claim  that,  in  a  similar  way,  the  brain  makes  use  of
noise in modelling the world around us and that this is an
essential  part  of  what  makes  us  the  creative  species  we
are.
But creativity is just one of our deﬁning characteristics.
We also have a very visceral sense of having a free will and
of  being  conscious  of  ourselves  and  the  world  around  us.
But what is free will and consciousness? In Part III, I will
suggest  that  the  geometry  of  chaos  can  also  provide  new
insights into these age-old conundrums.
In  navigating  through  this  book,  one  can  read  Part  III
independently  of  Part  II,  and  indeed  one  doesn’t  need  to
absorb  all  of  Part  I  to  read  the  later  chapters.  Although  I
will be discussing mathematically sophisticated ideas
throughout  the  book,  I  have  tried  hard  to  avoid  using
mathematics  in  the  main  text.  I  have  drawn  the  Lorenz
equations, the Navier-Stokes equation and the Schrödinger
equation—the  three  key  sets  of  equations  in  this  book—
simply  as  cartoons.  Along  with  the  works  of  the  great
artists, these are products of remarkable human creativity.
I have written a few equations in the endnotes.
The title of this book is taken from Gleick’s biography of
Richard  Feynman,  one  of  the  greatest  physicists  of  the

twentieth  century.  But  what  do  we  mean  by  “doubt”?  If  a
friend asserts something and you reply, “Hmm, I have my
doubts”,  then  you  are  expressing  uncertainty  about  the
assertion.  Indeed,  “to  feel  uncertain  about  something”  is
the ﬁrst deﬁnition in the Oxford Learner’s Dictionary
4 for
the  word  “doubt”.  However,  if  you  instead  reply  to  your
friend, “I really doubt that”, then you are expressing more
than uncertainty, you are eﬀectively saying the assertion is
unlikely  to  be  correct.  In  this  book,  I  am  using  the  word
“doubt” in the former sense. I do not mean it to imply that
something is unlikely to be true. Indeed, as I shall discuss,
it  is  important  to  neither  overestimate  nor  underestimate
uncertainty. Both can, and indeed have, led to poor
decisions.
In short, the scope of this book is quite unique. On the
one  hand  we  cover  the  loftiest  questions  that  philosophy
has  ever  addressed  and  attempt  to  answer  them  in  novel
ways. On the other we’ll describe practical techniques that
have transformed the way we go about predicting how our
world will evolve over the coming days, years and decades
ahead.  Some  readers,  I  hope,  will  be  exhilarated  by  the
discussion  of  long-standing  conceptual  problems  like  free
will,  consciousness  and  the  puzzling  nature  of  quantum
physics. Others may be thrilled to see the science of chaos
applied for the beneﬁt of society (and some of the poorest
parts of society in particular). For yet others, reading this
book  may  help  them  understand  themselves  better.  Not
least they may come to realise that some of our apparent
shortcomings  are  not  signs  of  irrationality  or  failure,  but
manifestations of our unique ability to cope with the
enormous uncertainties of life. There is, I hope, something
for everyone.
...
