1
Chaos, Chaos Everywhere
MANY OF US WOULD DESCRIBE OUR LIVES AS CHAOTIC—
DISORDERED  and  confused.  Indeed,  the  science  of  chaos
describes systems whose behaviour is so unpredictable as
to appear disordered and confused. Strange, then, that the
science of chaos was initially developed by studying what
most of us believe to be the epitome of order and
predictability:  the  motion  of  the  planets.  We  take  it  for
granted that the sun will rise in the east, not only tomorrow
but every day for the rest of our lives. And because we can
predict  with  great  precision  the  movement  of  the  Earth
about the sun, and the moon about the Earth, we know with
conﬁdence the time of high tide and the date of an eclipse,
not only days ahead, but for the rest of our lives.
And yet, for all that, the future motion of the planets in
the  solar  system  is  profoundly  unpredictable  and  hence
uncertain.
The story starts with the scientiﬁc renaissance, the
series  of  events  which  marks  the  emergence  of  modern
science. The renaissance was kickstarted by Nicolaus
Copernicus’s 
De 
Revolutionibus Orbium 
Coelestium,
published  in  1543,  and  completed  with  the  publication  of
Isaac Newton’s Principia Mathematica, in 1687.
In  his  book,  Newton  uses  his  famous  three  laws  of
motion,  together  with  his  law  of  gravity,  to  deduce  the

formula found empirically by German astronomer Johannes
Kepler—that  the  motion  of  a  planet  around  the  sun  is  an
ellipse with the sun at one focus 1. To make this prediction,
Newton ignored the complications of the real solar system
and assumed it comprised just two gravitating bodies: the
sun and the planet in question.
There is nothing random or indeterminate about
Newton’s laws. If you know a planet’s position and velocity
right now, and you know the forces acting on the planet in
the  future,  you  can  calculate  the  position  and  velocity  of
the  planet  at  all  times  in  the  future.  Those  of  us  who
studied science in high school may recall the rather tedious
homework  problems  in  which  one  had  to  calculate  the
precise distance a projectile would travel if thrown with a
given initial speed and angle of elevation. The calculation
provides an example of how the future is seemingly
determined  by  applying  Newton’s  laws  to  a  given  set  of
initial conditions. Because of this, Newton’s laws are said
to  be  deterministic.  In  1814,  the  French  philosopher  and
mathematician  Simon  Laplace  wrote  about  a  hypothetical
daemon2 who could exploit Newtonian determinism to
predict the future perfectly. Laplace said:
“An intellect which at a certain moment would know all
forces  that  set  nature  in  motion,  and  all  positions  of  all
items  of  which  nature  is  composed,  if  this  intellect  were
also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would
embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest
bodies  of  the  universe  and  those  of  the  tiniest  atom;  for
such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future
just like the past would be present before its eyes.”
This  reference  to  “a  single  formula”  is  relevant  here,
because Laplace was one of the many scientists from
Newton onwards who tried hard to generalise the formula
for an ellipse3 in order to describe the orbits of a
hypothetical 
solar 
system 
with 
three 
or 
more

gravitationally  bound  bodies,  e.g.,  the  sun,  the  Earth  and
the moon—or the sun, the Earth, the moon and Jupiter. One
would  input  the  time  into  the  formula,  and  the  formula
would output the positions of the planets at that time.
The problem became known as the 
n-body gravitational
problem.  Newton  had  solved  the  problem  for  two  bodies
(the sun and the Earth for example). Now the race was on
to  ﬁnd  the  formula  for n  =  3  or  more.  Laplace  and  his
contemporaries  failed  to  ﬁnd  this  formula.  Finding  the
formula became a cause célèbre, and to celebrate his
sixtieth birthday, King Oscar II of Sweden oﬀered a prize to
anyone who could ﬁnd it.
The  problem  was  ﬁnally  solved  in  the  late  nineteenth
century by the French physicist and mathematician Henri
Poincaré,  cousin  of  French  president  Raymond  Poincaré.
Poincaré’s solution took the scientiﬁc community by
surprise. Whilst all the previous giants of mathematics had
assumed from the outset that such a formula exists,
Poincaré  showed  that  when n  =  3  or  more,  no  formula
exists.
What does it mean that no formula exists? Using a laptop
computer, which of course did not exist in Poincaré’s time,
we can solve Newton’s laws to plot the orbits of the three
bodies on the laptop screen, let’s say over a million Earth
years of simulated time. In principle we—or better, perhaps
an  artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI)  system—could  ﬁnd  a  single
mathematical  formula,  more  complicated  than  that  of  an
ellipse, that describes these orbits very accurately.
However,  if  we  extend  the  computer  solution  to  two
million Earth years, then we will ﬁnd that our formula fails
to describe the orbits over the second million years. Our AI
system  can  perhaps  ﬁnd  a  yet  more  complicated  formula
which  describes  the  orbits  of  the  three  bodies  over  two
million  years.  However,  this  formula  will  again  fail  if  the
simulation  is  extended  to  three  million  years.  Indeed,  no
matter how complex a formula we construct to describe the

motion of the three bodies over any given ﬁnite period of
time, the formula will eventually fail if the motion is
extended  to  longer  periods  of  time.  There  is  no  single
formula  that  can  describe  the  orbits  of  these  bodies  over
arbitrarily long periods of time. This is what Poincaré
found.
A  consequence  of  this  is  that  the  orbits  of  the  three
bodies  never  repeat;  if  they  did  repeat,  then  there  would
exist  a  formula  for  the  orbits  which  would  apply  over
arbitrarily  long  periods  of  time.  We  say  that  the  orbits  of
the  three  bodies  are  non-periodic.  Poincaré  realised  that
this  meant  the  motion  of  planets  in  the  solar  system  is
ultimately unpredictable—a property shared with the
weather. By studying planetary motion, Poincaré had
discovered a phenomenon we now call “chaos”. Because of
chaos, there is no formula that Laplace’s daemon can use
to see arbitrarily far into the future.
We can get some understanding of this planetary chaos
by looking at snapshots from a computer animation for n =
4 gravitating bodies (Fig. 1)4. This example has been set up
to illustrate explicitly and dramatically what Poincaré
understood  could  happen  from  his  mathematical  analysis.
For a limited period of time, the orbits of these four bodies
resemble  ellipses,  and  based  on  data  from  this  limited
period, an AI system would likely conclude that the motion
would  continue  indeﬁnitely  on  these  near-elliptical  orbits.
However, very suddenly and with little warning, the planets
decide  to  spiral  oﬀ  to  inﬁnity!  The  simple  near-elliptical
formula that describes the orbits of the four bodies in the
early period fails completely in the later period.

FIG. 1. Snapshots of the orbits of four gravitationally bound objects. For
quite a long time, illustrated by snapshots 1–3, the bodies orbit around one
another in paths that approximate well to ellipses. However, suddenly,
seemingly out of nowhere, the objects spiral out to spatial inﬁnity. The
animation of this—see endnote 4—is well worth watching.
Fig.  1  illustrates  a  feature  of  chaotic  systems  which
occurs  also  for  weather,  and  perhaps  the  economy  and
many other systems. Like the Michael Fish moment
described 
in 
the 
introduction, 
the 
system 
appears

reasonably  predictable  until,  out  of  the  blue,  it  behaves
unpredictably diﬀerently.
Could the Earth ever get ejected from the solar system
in  this  way?  That,  were  it  to  occur,  would  make  global
warming, ﬁnancial crashes and everything else discussed in
this book pale into insigniﬁcance. How would we ﬁnd out?
The  answer  is  to  make  a  computer  model  of  the  solar
system and run it into the future.
But can our computer model be relied on to predict such
an  event?  Perhaps,  like  Michael  Fish’s  weather  forecast,
the model will tell us not to worry. Perhaps the model will
predict  that  the  simulated  Earth  will  continue  to  orbit
periodically  around  the  sun—only  for  us  to  ﬁnd  the  real
Earth  getting  ejected  from  the  solar  system  in  ﬁve  years’
time.
The way to address this legitimate concern is to
understand  the  key  uncertainties  in  predicting  the  future
orbits  of  the  planets.  In  this  case,  the  key  uncertainty
relates to the precise position of the planets. To deal with
this,  we  can  run  our  model  hundreds  of  times  with  the
planets  having  very  slightly  diﬀerent  starting  positions,
consistent  with  this  uncertainty.  This  is  an  example  of  an
ensemble  forecast,  a  concept  we  will  meet  many  times  in
this book.
We can be relieved. Researchers from Princeton
University have run such an ensemble 5, and in none of the
ensemble  members  is  the  Earth  ejected  from  the  solar
system over the coming billions of years. So we can assign
this  potential  crisis  event  a  probability  that  is  extremely
close to (but, strictly, not identical to) zero. The only crisis
event  of  note  from  these  ensembles  is  that  in  about  1
percent  of  the  ensemble  members,  the  orbit  of  Mercury
becomes  suﬀiciently  eccentric  that  it  collides  with  Venus
some billions of years in the future.
