Here is our ﬁrst example of the application of the
ensemble prediction method. It allows us to conclude that
it’s extremely unlikely that the Earth will be ejected from
the solar system. However, such ensemble forecasts
indicate that the chance of the Earth being hit by a minor
asteroid, one that could easily destroy a large city such as
London,  is  not  so  completely  negligible.  This  is  why  we
monitor threats from such asteroids as best we can6.
«  »
AFTER THE DEATH OF Henri Poincaré, a Harvard University
mathematician,  George  Birkhoﬀ,  took  over  the  mantle  as
the world’s leading expert on the gravitational n-body
problem.  In  the  1930s,  Birkhoﬀ  took  on  a  bright  student,
Ed Lorenz, who was setting out on his postgraduate
studies, having studied mathematics at a nearby New
England  Ivy  League  college.  The  mathematical  topic  that
Lorenz worked on under Birkhoﬀ was not the gravitational
n-body  problem,  but  was  in  an  area  called  Riemannian
geometry. However, it would seem that some of Birkhoﬀ’s
thinking  rubbed  oﬀ  on  the  young  Lorenz,  as,  in  the  early
1960s, Lorenz was to make one of the greatest discoveries
of chaos theory, indeed of science in general I will argue.
Lorenz discovered the fractal geometry of chaos.
Lorenz’s plans to become a mathematician were
disrupted by the Second World War, and as a result he had
to decide how to best use his mathematical talents for the
war  eﬀort.  Since  he  had  been  rather  fascinated  by  the
weather as a child, Lorenz signed on for a wartime training
course for meteorologists and eventually went out into the
Paciﬁc arena as an operational weather forecaster.
After  the  war,  Lorenz  had  the  option  to  continue  his
mathematics  research  at  Harvard.  However,  his  wartime

work had rekindled his interest in weather, and he switched
ﬁelds and worked for a PhD at the Massachusetts Institute
of  Technology  (universally  known  as  MIT)  on  the  new,
physics-based  weather  forecast  models  that  were  starting
to  be  developed  in  the  immediate  postwar  years.  Having
completed his PhD at MIT and a postdoctoral appointment
at the University of California, in 1956 Lorenz was oﬀered
a permanent job back at MIT. His duties included leading a
group of researchers who were exploring the possibility of
predicting weather a month or more into the future.
In 
those 
days, 
little 
was 
understood 
about 
the
predictability of weather more than a day or two into the
future.  Some  of  the  leading  statisticians  of  the  day  told
Lorenz that long-range weather forecasting 
was in
principle an easy problem to crack. Say you want to
forecast the weather a month ahead. Then you simply go to
the  weather  archives  and  ﬁnd  a  weather  map  that  looks
close enough to today’s weather map—this would be called
an analogue. The forecast for a month hence would simply
be  the  weather  map  in  the  archive  a  month  following  the
date of the analogue map.
The  method  didn’t  seem  to  work  in  practice.  However,
the statistical experts argued that this was simply because
the  archives  were  not  large  enough,  and  hence  did  not
contain  close-enough  analogues.  Wait  for  the  archives  to
grow,  they  would  say,  and  then  you  will  ﬁnd  that  the
analogue  method  will  start  to  work.  Lorenz  was  sceptical
about  this.  For  analogue  forecasting  to  work  in  this  way,
Lorenz  argued,  the  weather  would  have  to  be  periodic,
repeating itself over and over, as in the movie 
Groundhog
Day.  Lorenz’s  intuition  was  that  the  weather  equations
would not support such periodic behaviour. Indeed, this is
exactly what Poincaré had shown in the case of the 3-body
gravitational problem.
But  there  are  two  important  diﬀerences  between  the
motion of the planets and the evolution of weather. Firstly,

unlike the solar system, with a relatively small number of
planets  and  moons,  the  atmosphere  is  a  turbulent  ﬂuid7
with literally trillions upon trillions of whirls or eddies with
all  sorts  of  diﬀerent  sizes.  If  you  had  asked  most  of  the
meteorological experts of the day, they, like Lorenz, would
also have been sceptical that the atmosphere ever repeated
itself. However, the experts would have said that such non-
periodicity arose because the atmosphere is such a
complex multiscale system, with numerous interacting
whirls from the planetary scale down to the microscale. In
other words, conventional wisdom had it that the
complexity of the atmosphere was the origin of its
unpredictability. The more the weather equations are
simpliﬁed, the experts of the time would have conjectured,
the more the simpliﬁed weather equations would produce
periodic and hence predictable behaviour.
Lorenz had the idea of trying to use the computer-based
weather  forecast  models  he  had  helped  develop  as  a  PhD
student  to  demonstrate  his  intuition  that  weather  did  not
repeat itself. However, the very fact that these were
complex models posed a practical problem. You might run a
model for a hundred years and conclude that the simulated
weather  did  not  repeat  itself.  But  perhaps  years  101–200
were exact repeats8 of years 1–100. Who’s to say?
In thinking about this, Lorenz began to wonder whether
non-periodicity could be found in simpliﬁed systems which
could be described with a very small number of equations.
Where did he get this idea? Was it from practical
experience, running simpliﬁed weather models on the
computer? Or did he get the idea from the fact that the 3-
body  gravitational  problem  was  not  periodic?  In  his  semi-
biographical  book9, The  Essence  of  Chaos,  Lorenz  writes
that,  despite  working  with  Birkhoﬀ,  he  was  not  familiar
with Poincaré’s work. And so we have to assume it was a

hypothesis he formed from his experience in running
weather models.
In  any  case,  Lorenz  was  right  and  the  meteorological
experts 
were 
wrong. 
Lorenz 
kept 
simplifying 
and
simplifying until he devised a mathematical model of ﬂuid
motion  based  on  just  three  equations  for  three  variables,
conventionally labelled X, Y and Z. This is actually a
simpler  set  of  equations  than  for  the n  =  3  gravitational
problem,  since  each  planet  in  the  gravitational  problem
needs six variables to represent it: three spatial coordinate
positions and three components of velocity.
Lorenz’s model is so idealised it no longer makes much
sense to relate these three variables to speciﬁc ﬂuid
quantities (though it is possible to make a chaotic
waterwheel whose motion is described by the Lorenz
equations10). So, let’s just think of 
X, Y and Z as abstract
variables  whose  values  change  with  time.  At  a  particular
instant in time, these variables can be described by three
numbers, e.g., X = 3.327, Y = 5.674, Z = 0.485. Lorenz’s
equations describe how these numbers evolve in time. The
equations  make  use  of  the  mathematical  technique  called
calculus,  discovered  by  Newton  and  independently  by  the
German mathematician, philosopher and engineer Gottfried
Leibniz. Using the calculus, the time rate of change of 
X, Y
and Z can be described in terms of the current values of X,
Y and Z and various ﬁxed parameters (see Fig. 2). Lorenz’s
equations would have been quite understandable and
recognisable to Newton or Leibniz as three so-called
nonlinear diﬀerential equations.
The word “nonlinear” is of crucial importance here.
Nonlinear systems are those whose outputs do not change
in direct proportion to their inputs. Assuming you are not a
wealthy person, you would be very happy indeed to win $1
million in the lottery. You would be even happier to win $2
million, but likely not twice as happy. You would very likely

not  be  ten  times  as  happy  to  win  $10  million  (substitute
billions  for  millions  if  you  are  very  wealthy).  That’s  an
example of nonlinearity—your happiness (output) does not
vary in direct proportion to your lottery winnings (input). In
the case of the Lorenz system, if you double the size of the
X, Y and Z variables, the time rate of change of the X, Y and
Z variables does not double. You, dear reader, are a
nonlinear system, just as Lorenz’s equations are. Lorenz’s
system  would  be  predictable  if  its  governing  equations
were linear.

FIG. 2. THE LORENZ EQUATIONS AS A WORK OF ART.
Solving  these  equations  on  a  computer  of  the  early
1960s  was  a  challenging  task.  However,  with  just  three
variables, Lorenz could run the equations for long enough
periods  of  time  for  him  to  ﬁnally  realise  that  the  model
state was never going to repeat itself. How exactly he came
to this realisation will be discussed in the next chapter—it

is one of the great discoveries of twentieth-century science.
Published  in  the Journal  of  the  Atmospheric  Sciences
  in
1963, Lorenz’s most famous paper announces the discovery
of  “Deterministic  Non-periodic  Flow”11.  As  before,  “non-
periodic” means non-repeating. Because it was published in
such  a  “niche”  journal,  it  took  another  decade  before  the
paper  became  known  to  the  mathematical  community  at
large, and this delayed the explosion of chaos science by a
similar period of time.
However,  Lorenz’s  model  is  not  best  known  for  this
property of non-periodicity. Instead, it’s known for a
property which is a consequence of non-periodicity, though
Lorenz himself did not fully understand this at ﬁrst.
Lorenz  used  to  tell  the  story  about  how  he  wanted  to
repeat  a  simulation  on  his  computer  in  order  to  get  the
computer  to  output  data  more  frequently.  He  took  some
values  which  the  computer  had  previously  outputted  onto
printer  paper,  and  restarted  the  computer  initialising  the
model  with  these  printed  values.  After  he  had  returned
from  a  coﬀee  break,  Lorenz  noticed  that  the  repeated
values of X, Y and Z bore no relation to the original values
that  the  computer  had  earlier  outputted.  An  example  of
what Lorenz saw is shown in Fig. 3. At ﬁrst, he thought that
the computer had become faulty (valves, or “tubes”, often
failed in these early computers). However, he quickly
realised that this wasn’t the problem. Rather the problem
was related to the fact that the printer did not record the
variables  at  “machine  precision”  but  instead  printed  only
the  leading  digits  of  the  variables.  For  example,  if  the
precise value of a variable was 
X = 0.506127, the printer
printed only X = 0.506. Starting the model with X = 0.506
instead of 0.506127 eventually led to big diﬀerences in the
future values of X, Y and Z.
This 
“sensitive 
dependence 
on 
initial 
conditions”
eventually became known as the butterﬂy eﬀect. However,

in some ways this is a misnomer. Butterﬂies are very small
creatures,  certainly  much  smaller  than  weather  systems.
The Lorenz model, with only three variables, has no
concept of spatial scale. It is too simple to describe
weather,  never  mind  butterﬂies.  In  particular,  the  Lorenz
model cannot describe how a small-scale error can aﬀect a
large-scale weather system. All it can do is describe how a
small-amplitude error can grow into a large-amplitude
error. We will look at the butterﬂy eﬀect in terms of small-
scale  errors  growing  into  large-scale  errors  in  Chapter  3.
And we will ﬁnd something even more mind-boggling than
the type of chaos shown here.
FIG. 3. This is the classic illustration of chaos in the Lorenz model. Two
almost but not quite identical initial conditions eventually lead to very
diﬀerent evolutions. This is the way chaos is traditionally described.
However, there is something deeper underpinning this behaviour.
In  some  ways,  the  illustration  of  chaos  in  Fig. 3  seems
not so diﬀerent to that in Fig. 1. In Fig. 1, the position of
the  planets  is  unpredictable,  whilst  in  Fig.  3,  the  more
abstract  variables  in  Lorenz’s  equations  are  seen  to  be

unpredictable. We might well ask whether Lorenz’s chaos is
somehow described by the earlier theory of Poincaré.
The answer is no. There is one very important diﬀerence
between  Lorenz’s  chaos  and  Poincaré’s  chaos.  Real-world
ﬂuids are viscous. If a ﬂuid’s viscosity is large, the ﬂuid is
sticky like treacle. Viscosity is a kind of internal friction in
the ﬂuid which makes it resistant to small-scale gradients
in ﬂuid velocity. In practice, viscosity converts such small-
scale  changes  in  ﬂuid  velocity  into  the  random  motion  of
molecules and hence into heat. This process is called
energy  dissipation.  All  realistic  ﬂuids,  water  or  air  for
example, are viscous to a greater or lesser extent.
Imagine a tank of water at rest that is suddenly stirred
vigorously  with  a  paddle.  Whilst  the  paddle  is  moving,  it
excites  turbulent  whirls  that  spread  out  from  the  paddle.
However, as soon as one stops stirring, the whirls die out
due to the eﬀects of viscosity. The ﬂuid returns to a state of
rest  but  is  very  slightly  warmer  than  it  was,  due  to  the
eﬀects of energy dissipation by viscosity. Now, if we
videoed  this,  and  ran  the  video  backwards,  we  would  see
something completely unrealistic: small eddies growing in
the  ﬂuid  far  from  the  paddle  and  converging  onto  the
paddle. In this backwards-in-time video, it would seem the
paddle’s motion is being powered by a slight uniform
cooling of the ﬂuid, contradicting the second law of
thermodynamics,  which  says  that  uniform  low-grade  heat
can’t  be  converted  into  work  in  such  a  way.  Because  the
backwards-in-time  motion  is  unrealistic,  we  say  that  the
equations  that  govern  the  motion  of  viscous  ﬂuids  are
irreversible in time—the video and hence the ﬂuid
equations  can  realistically  be  run  in  only  one  direction  in
time.
By  contrast  the  equations  that  govern  the  motion  of
planets are time reversible. If we had a video of the planets
moving around the sun and reversed it, the motion would
be consistent with the laws of physics. In some sense, it is

only chance that makes the planets rotate the way they do
about the sun.
Lorenz felt that it was vital to include this time
irreversibility into his equations. He was right. Time
irreversibility  is  crucial  for  generating  the  geometry  of
chaos, a geometry that will form a central part of this book.
The irreversibility we see in ﬂuid motions is much more
commonplace than the reversibility in time that we see in
planetary  motion.  For  example,  when  we  drop  a  glass,  it
smashes into hundreds of pieces. We never see the reverse.
A baby grows into an adult. We never see the reverse. We
can  easily  scramble  eggs.  We  can’t  unscramble  them  into
whites  and  yolks.  We  can  think  of  many  similar  types  of
examples.  What  is  the  origin  of  such  irreversibility?  This
has  perplexed  scientists  for  centuries  because  Newton’s
laws of motion, or indeed Schrödinger’s equation of
quantum  mechanics,  are  themselves  time  reversible;  the
same equation describes a system in a movie, irrespective
of  whether  the  movie  is  run  forwards  or  backwards.  The
way most scientists deal with this problem is to say that the
universe must have begun at the time of the Big Bang in an
exceptionally 
ordered 
state. 
That 
is 
to 
say, 
the
irreversibility we see arises from the fact that the
cosmological initial conditions were special. I will attempt a
diﬀerent explanation, using the geometry of chaos, in
Chapter 11.
Now, although the type of chaos studied by Poincaré and
Lorenz made use of Newton’s calculus, calculus is not itself
an essential ingredient of chaos. Before ﬁnishing this
chapter,  I  want  to  give  a  very  simple  example  of  chaos—
popularised by physicist-ecologist Bob May and applied to
population growth—which doesn’t use calculus.
If  Adam  and  Eve  had  four  children,  two  boys  and  two
girls, and in the next generation, each pair of adult males
and females in turn produced four children, then the size of
the  population  for  each  generation  would  double  (2,  4,  8,

16…  ).  Prior  to  May,  it  was  assumed  that  the  population
would grow until it eventually either came into some kind
of  steady  state  consistent  with  the  ﬁnite  environmental
resources  available  to  the  population  or,  at  most,  would
oscillate 
periodically. 
As 
a 
result, 
when 
irregular
ﬂuctuations  in  some  species’  populations  were  observed,
ecologists assumed this must be because the environmental
resources were changing because of external factors—
maybe because of irregular ﬂuctuations in the climate, for
example.
However,  with  a  very  simple  equation,  May12  showed
that  this  was  not  necessarily  the  case.  May’s  equation13
determines the size of a population at the next generation,
given  the  population  at  this  generation.  The  size  of  the
population  at  each  generation  can  be  computed  using  a
simple  calculator—the  equation  is  that  simple.  In  May’s
equation,  there  is  a  free  parameter  called a.  It  describes
the  number  of  oﬀspring  each  single  adult  produces  on
average,  at  least  in  the  initial  phases  of  growth.  In  Adam
and  Eve’s  example, a  =  2.  However,  once  the  population
becomes large enough, its growth becomes limited by
environmental resources. In such circumstances, the
population can suddenly crash to small values, before
starting  to  grow  again.  What  May  showed  was  that  if a
exceeds  about  3.57,  the  evolution  of  the  population  over
multiple  generations  is  chaotic—the  periods  of  boom  and
bust start to occur irregularly. This means two things. Like
the Lorenz-model variables, the population ﬂuctuates non-
periodically without any external forcing in environmental
resources. And like in the Lorenz model, it is very diﬀicult
to predict these ﬂuctuations—they are sensitive to the
starting conditions for the population size.
In this way, chaos theory has had a signiﬁcant impact in
the science of ecology. Indeed, over the years, chaos theory
has  impacted  on  almost  all  branches  of  science:  not  only

astronomy, meteorology 
and 
ecology, but 
chemistry,
engineering,  biology  and  social  science;  you  name  it!  But
perhaps one ﬁeld where chaos theory hasn’t had so much
impact is the foundations of quantum physics 14. The reason
is simple: the basic equation which governs the evolution of
quantum mechanical systems, the Schrödinger equation, is
a linear equation. As such, the governing equation of
quantum  mechanics  doesn’t  exhibit  the  type  of  sensitive
dependence on initial conditions that we discussed earlier.
It  is  sometimes  argued  that  because  we  expect  planetary
motion,  the  weather  and  indeed  population  dynamics  to
somehow follow from quantum mechanics (not that anyone
has actually shown this), chaos is somehow only an
approximate notion and uncertainty in the weather is
ultimately due to quantum uncertainty, not chaos. My view
is  180°  diﬀerent.  I  believe  chaos  actually  underpins  the
dynamical equations of quantum physics; chaos is a
property of the planets and the weather, precisely because
chaos  is  a  property  of  the  fundamental  dynamics  of  the
universe. I will discuss in the next chapter why such a view
is  in  fact  consistent  with  the  linearity  of  the  Schrödinger
equation.
...
