2
The Geometry of Chaos
ALTHOUGH  ISAAC  NEWTON  WOULD  HAVE  UNDERSTOOD
LORENZ’S equations, not least because these equations are
expressed using the calculus which he himself had
discovered, Newton would not have had the slightest
inkling  of  the  remarkable  type  of  geometry  that  emerges
from them.
For  Newton,  the  word  “geometry”  was  a  shorthand  for
the  geometry  of  Euclid,  the  Greek  mathematician  from
Alexandria born around 300 BCE. As part of his training to
be a natural philosopher, Newton would have studied
Euclid’s seminal work, The  Elements. Here Euclid, for
example,  introduces  the  cross-sections  of  a  cone.  One  of
these,  the  ellipse,  describes  well  the  motion  of  a  planet
around the sun.
The ellipse characterises an important aspect of many of
the geometric ﬁgures studied by Euclid. Draw an ellipse on
a  piece  of  paper  and  zoom  into  any  portion  of  it  with  a
magnifying glass. With a powerful enough glass, any small
portion will become indistinguishable from a straight line.
Similarly,  zoom  into  the  surface  of  an  ellipsoid—an  egg-
shaped two-dimensional ﬁgure. Again, with a powerful
enough magnifying glass, any small portion of the ellipsoid
will  be  indistinguishable  from  a  ﬂat  plane.  In  Einstein’s
theory  of  general  relativity,  space-time  is  a  curved  four-

dimensional  space.  The  curvature  of  space-time  manifests
itself by the fact that the internal angles of a triangle do not
sum  to  180°.  However,  if  you  zoom  suﬀiciently  into  any
region  of  space-time,  it  looks  ﬂat—the  internal  angles  of
small-enough triangles sum as close as you like to 180°.
In all these examples, the special properties of the
geometric object that make it an ellipse, or an ellipsoid or a
solution of Einstein’s equations of general relativity,
somehow get washed out if you zoom in enough with your
magnifying glass. Considered as spaces in their own right,
these  geometric  objects  are  called  “locally  Euclidean”.  By
contrast, the properties associated with the geometry
produced by Lorenz’s equations never get washed out
under such a zoom, no matter which part of the geometry
you  zoom  into.  This  is  a  concept  which  would  have  been
alien to Newton and to the generations of mathematicians
and scientists brought up studying Euclid’s 
Elements. The
idea that such a strange geometry could be the product of a
simple  set  of  equations  based  on  calculus  was  also  mind-
boggling to Lorenz, and it took him a long time to realise
what he had actually discovered.
In  my  view,  Lorenz’s  really  great  discovery  was  not  so
much the butterﬂy eﬀect—this was, after all, implicit in the
work of Poincaré—as the discovery of the fractal geometry
of chaos. As we shall see, the consequences of this
geometry  permeate  everything  in  this  book,  from  modern
mathematics,  to  climate  change,  to  quantum  physics,  to
free will and to consciousness.
«  »
IT IS RATHER CONVENIENT that there are only three
variables, X, Y and Z, in Lorenz’s model of chaos. It means
we can represent a point in Lorenz’s “state space” (relative

to three right-angled axes labelled X, Y and Z) in the same
way  we  would  plot  a  point  in  ordinary  three-dimensional
physical 
space 
(relative 
to 
three 
right-angled 
axes
conventionally labelled x, y and z, in lower case).
The notion of state space is really important in this book.
So I want to give a simple example of state space. Suppose
you  are  buying  a  pair  of  trousers.  The  ﬁrst  thing  to  do  is
decide what leg length, what waist size and what colour of
material to buy. Let’s suppose the only choice of colour is a
shade  of  grey.  Then  a  particular  pair  of  trousers  can  be
represented  as  a  point  in  an  abstract  space  where  one
direction describes variations in leg length, a second
describes variations in waist size and a third the shade of
grey.  We  can  call  this  three-dimensional  space  “trouser
state space” (see Fig. 4). There is nothing special about the
fact that trouser state space is three dimensional. Indeed, if
we  also  had  the  possibility  to  choose  the  type  of  material
used (e.g., wool, polyester or some mixture thereof), then
we  would  need  an  extra,  fourth  dimension  to  additionally
account for the choice of type of material, and trouser state
space  would  then  be  four  dimensional  (and  impossible  to
illustrate  in  a  single  ﬁgure  in  this  physical  book).  In  this
way, the dimension of state space is equal to the number of
independent variables needed to specify the object you are
interested in (such as a pair of trousers).
Compared  with  the  theory  of  physics  known  as  string
theory,  which  posits  that  the  physical  space  in  which  we
live is not three dimensional but ten or eleven dimensional,
there is nothing weird, unusual or incomprehensible about
a multidimensional state space. If you get confused about
the diﬀerence between physical space and state space, just
think trousers!

FIG. 4. You want to buy a pair of trousers. You have to know what leg
length, waist size and shade of grey to choose. Your choice corresponds to a
point in three-dimensional “trouser state space”. If you also had the option
of a type of material, then this would correspond to a fourth dimension in
trouser state space, making the state space impossible to illustrate but
nevertheless easy to understand conceptually.
Let’s  think  of  another  example:  the  state  space  of  3
gravitationally bound bodies. Each body can be speciﬁed by
a  position  and  a  velocity.  In  physical  3-dimensional  space
we  need  3  numbers  to  specify  a  position  and  3  more
numbers to specify velocity (the speed of the body relative
to  the x, y  and z  axes).  This  means  that  the  number  of
independent  numbers  needed  to  specify  the  position  and
velocity  of  the  3  bodies  is  3  lots  of  3  +  3,  which  is  18.
Hence, the dimension of the state space of the 3 bodies is
181. Although it is impossible to visualise an 18-
dimensional space, the concept of an 18-dimensional state
space is perhaps not especially diﬀicult in principle.
The dimension of the state space of weather is enormous
by comparison. If we consider all the whirls that exist in the
atmosphere  at  any  time,  the  state  space  of  weather  is

bigger than anything we could ever represent in a
computer—not just today’s computers, but ones in the
foreseeable future too. The state space of a modern
weather prediction model has more than a billion
dimensions. That’s a large number of course, and one that
a  modern  supercomputer  can  handle,  but  it’s  still  a  tiny
fraction of the dimension of the actual state space of
weather2.
Try  to  imagine  the  state  space  of  the  whole  universe,
comprising  all  the  atoms  that  make  all  the  stars,  galaxies
and  clusters  of  galaxies.  The  dimension  of  such  a  state
space is overwhelmingly, unbelievably large. But as long as
it  is  a  ﬁnite  number,  it  is  in  principle  no  more  diﬀicult  to
comprehend than 4-dimensional trouser state space.
Let’s return to Lorenz’s 3-dimensional state space.
Choose a point in this state space. This can be considered
as an initial state for Lorenz’s equations. Using a computer,
we  can  solve  Lorenz’s  equations  over  a  ﬁnite  period  of
time. This solution describes a set of points in state space,
one for each moment in time. We can represent the overall
time  evolution  of  the  values  of X, Y  and Z  as  a  curve  in
Lorenz’s 3-dimensional state space (see Fig. 5). We call this
curve a state-space trajectory, or simply a “trajectory”.
If Lorenz’s model did have periodic (i.e., repeating)
behaviour, and if the state-space trajectory were continued
for a long-enough time, it would eventually join up with the
starting point, represented by the dot. The states described
by such a closed loop would then repeat over and over.

FIG. 5. A short trajectory segment in Lorenz’s state space. The initial point
is marked with a dot. This can be chosen arbitrarily. The trajectory gives the
values of the X, Y and Z variables at future times and is obtained by solving
the Lorenz equations on a computer.
Fig.  6  shows  a  picture  of  what  the  trajectories  of  the
Lorenz model look like when you solve the equations over a
long period of time. It is now quite a famous diagram. To
produce such a picture, it doesn’t matter from what state
you  start.  Eventually,  the  trajectories  start  following  this
strange shape with the two lobes. It is as if the trajectories
are attracted to this geometric object in state space. As a
result, this geometric object is called an “attractor”.
Curiously,  it  looks  a  bit  like  a  butterﬂy,  but  that  is  a
coincidence.

The question Lorenz asked himself was this: What is the
underlying  geometry  of  this  attractor?  Is  it  some  kind  of
Euclidean geometry? One possibility is that, if the
computer  could  continue  running  Lorenz’s  model  forever,
all  the  tiny  gaps  that  appear  in  Fig. 6  would  be  ﬁlled  in,
leaving  a  solid  3-dimensional  object,  one  that  we  could
perhaps carve from a piece of solid wood.
FIG. 6. An approximation of the famous Lorenz attractor as represented by
a computer. No matter where you start in state space, the Lorenz equations
will take you closer and closer to this attractor. One can say that the
attractor is an emergent property of the Lorenz equations. The key question
Lorenz asked himself is this: What is the geometry of this attractor? Is it a
solid object or a complex folded surface? Lorenz showed it could be neither
of these; it had to be a fractal.

However,  Lorenz  realised  this  could  not  be  so.  This  is
where the time irreversibility of Lorenz’s model is crucial.
As  we  saw  in  the  last  chapter,  Lorenz  included  a  very
simple representation of the irreversible eﬀects of energy
dissipation in his model. Hence Lorenz’s equations are time
irreversible. And this makes these equations fundamentally
diﬀerent to those for planetary motion, studied by Poincaré.
Under  the  eﬀect  of  the  irreversible  energy  dissipation,  a
solid 3-dimensional ball of initial conditions in state space
would  eventually  shrink  to  an  object  with  zero  volume,
under  the  action  of  the  Lorenz  equations.  On  the  other
hand, because of the chaotic unpredictability of the Lorenz
equations,  the  diﬀerent  points  of  the  initial  3-dimensional
ball will eventually uniformly cover the whole Lorenz
attractor.  As  such,  the  volume  of  the  attractor  has  to  be
strictly zero.
Now, a 2-dimensional surface has zero volume. So could
the  attractor  be  2-dimensional?  For  example,  instead  of
carving it from a block of wood, perhaps we could
construct the attractor by carefully folding a 2-dimensional
sheet, like a piece of origami. Well, Lorenz could rule this
out  too,  by  a  mathematical  theorem  proved  by  Poincaré
himself.  The  Poincaré-Bendixson  theorem  says  that  if  the
attractor were 2-dimensional and had the property of
sensitive dependence on initial conditions (which we
showed in the last chapter was the case) and lay in some
bounded region of state space (which the Lorenz attractor
does),  then  somewhere  the  state-space  trajectories  would
cross over themselves. However, if the equations are
deterministic, then such a crossing point would be
impossible:  determinism  implies  that  an  initial  point  in
state  space  can  evolve  in  time  only  into  another  single
point, not into two diﬀerent points.
Well, perhaps the attractor is just some closed 1-
dimensional  curve  where  a  trajectory  eventually  joins  up
with  itself,  like  a  convoluted  circle?  But  if  this  were  the

case,  it  would  imply  that  the  model  is  periodic,  and  the
computer output from the model suggests otherwise3.
So, what is the geometry of the attractor if it is neither a
3-dimensional  volume  nor  a  2-dimensional  sheet  nor  a  1-
dimensional  line?  Lorenz  agonised  about  this  for  quite
some time. I can easily understand his frustration. He knew
he was onto something important, but he couldn’t quite put
his ﬁnger on what it was.
The  solution  came  from  the  work  of  the  nineteenth-
century German mathematician Georg Cantor. Cantor was
the founder of a type of mathematics known as set theory.
At  one  level,  sets  are  fairly  trivial  mathematical  things.
They simply denote collections of objects. The set {1, 2, 3,
4}  is  the  collection  of  whole  numbers  between  1  and  4
inclusive. The collection of countries in the world is a set
whose  elements  are  individual  countries.  However,  things
get mathematically interesting when considering sets
which contain unlimited numbers of objects, such as the set
of all positive whole numbers, which we can write as {1, 2,
3… }. Now although this set is inﬁnite, it is, as Cantor was
able to show in a precise way, not nearly as big as the set of
all  numbers,  which  includes  not  only  whole  numbers  and
fractions  like  2.4  and  6.97,  but  also  numbers  like  √2,  the
square 
root 
of 
2, 
and 
π, 
the 
ratio 
between 
the
circumference  of  a  circle  and  its  diameter.  Numbers  like
2.4 and 6.97 can be written as fractions (24/10 and
697/100), but √2 and π cannot be written in this way and
are called “irrational”. Such irrational numbers cannot be
represented on a computer with a ﬁnite number of bits. We
call the set of all numbers, which includes such irrational
numbers, “real numbers”. It is the complete dominance of
the irrational numbers over the rational numbers that
makes the set of real numbers so much bigger than the set
of whole or, indeed, rational numbers.

There  is  an  intimate  relationship  between  sets  of  real
numbers and Euclidean geometry. If you draw a line, say of
length 10 cm, then each point on the line can represent a
real number, say between 0 and 10. The whole numbers—0,
1, 2,… 10—can be represented by points at a distance 0 cm,
1 cm… 10 cm from one end. The number π corresponds to
a point roughly 3.14 cm from one end of the line.
Now, a line is a one-dimensional set. One might imagine
that all sets which contain as many points as the set of real
numbers  are  at  least  one  dimensional.  However,  Cantor
constructed  a  set,  and  in  turn  a  geometry,  in  which  this
intuitive idea is false. Cantor was criticised by his
colleagues for his ideas. The great Henri Poincaré said that
in  the  future  people  would  look  on  Cantor’s  work  as  “a
disease from which one has recovered”4. Ironically,
Poincaré had no idea how important Cantor’s work would
be to understanding the subject that he, Poincaré, had kick-
started: chaos theory. Ultimately these criticisms sent
Cantor into a depression from which he never fully
recovered. Forty years after Cantor’s death, Lorenz ﬁnally
understood the importance of Cantor’s ideas. Cantor is now
rightly seen as a mathematical pioneer.
Cantor’s set, shown in Fig. 7, can be described by a set
of steps. These steps are repeated applications, or
iterations, of a simple rule. Start with the real-number line
between  0  and  1.  In  the  ﬁrst  application,  throw  away  the
middle  third  of  this  line  (technically,  one  keeps  the  end
points  of  the  two  remaining  smaller  lines).  Then,  in  the
second application, throw away the middle thirds of the two
smaller lines. Then, in the third application, throw away the
middle thirds of the four remaining lines. One can carry on
like  this  indeﬁnitely,  removing  at  each  step  the  middle
thirds  of  the  remaining  lines.  Cantor’s  set  is  the  set  of
points  that  are  common  to  all  the  iterates.  What  Cantor
showed was that his eponymous set had as many points as

the points of the original line—even though we have thrown
away an inﬁnite set of points. In this sense, Cantor’s set is
very  large  (much  larger  than  the  set  of  whole  numbers).
However,  in  a  diﬀerent  sense,  Cantor’s  set  is  also  rather
small.  One  way  of  seeing  this  is  to  imagine  randomly
choosing a point from the original line (between 0 and 1).
The probability that this randomly chosen point belongs to
Cantor’s  set  is  equal  to  zero.  Mathematicians  say  that
Cantor’s set has “measure zero”.
FIG. 7. The Cantor set is created by a series of iterations. Start with the
line between 0 and 1 and remove the middle third. Then remove the middle
thirds of the remaining two pieces and continue on and on as shown. The
Cantor set is the set of points which belong to all the iterates.
The Cantor set (as I shall now call it) reminds me of the
time  traveller  Doctor  Who’s  spacecraft  from  the  BBC  TV
science  ﬁction  series—apologies  to  readers  who  have  not
encountered this TV programme. From the outside, Doctor
Who’s spacecraft looks like a 1950s police telephone box—
small  and  insubstantial.  However,  from  the  inside  it  looks
palatial,  with  rooms  everywhere!  From  the  outside,  the
measure-zero  property  of  the  Cantor  set  makes  it  appear

tiny. However, it has as many points as the real line and so,
looked at internally, it seems enormous. This has big
consequences.
We can easily see that the geometry of the Cantor set is
diﬀerent to the Euclidean geometries discussed earlier. No
matter how much we zoom into the Cantor set we ﬁnd the
same  structure  as  we  started  with—small  intervals  with
pieces missing. Whatever the geometry of the Cantor set is,
it is not locally Euclidean.
So  how  can  we  describe  the  Cantor  set  in  a  way  that
distinguishes it from the real-number line? It turns out that
one way of doing this is through the concept of dimension.
Now,  a  set  containing  a  ﬁnite  collection  of  points  is  a  0-
dimensional set. Lines are 1-dimensional sets. Surfaces are
2-dimensional sets, and solid objects are 3-dimensional
sets.  Space-time  in  Einstein’s  theory  of  relativity  is  a  4-
dimensional 
set, 
and, 
as 
we 
have 
discussed, 
the
unrestricted state space for the gravitational 3-body
problem is an 18-dimensional set. It is possible to
generalise this notion of dimension in order to describe the
Cantor set. With this deﬁnition it turns out that the Cantor
set has a dimension which lies between 0 and 1—neither 0
nor  1,  but  approximately  0.631 5.  The  type  of  geometry
associated with the Cantor set is known as fractal
geometry, 
so 
named 
by 
the 
French 
American
mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot6. The word “fractal” is in
fact short for “fractionally dimensioned”.
The Cantor set lies at the heart of the Lorenz attractor.
To explain this, I am going to actually describe the fractal
attractor of a set of equations similar to but slightly simpler
than the Lorenz equations. These are known as the Rössler
equations.
The German biochemist Otto Rössler discovered his set
of three equations7 as a direct result of Lorenz’s work. This
is  the  simplest  set  of  equations  which  uses  calculus  to

produce a fractal attractor. The Rössler attractor is shown
in Fig. 8 (I have labelled the axes X, Y and Z as before, but
now these variables satisfy equations diﬀerent to the
Lorenz equations).
To  understand  how  the  Rössler  equations  generate  a
fractal attractor, let’s start by imagining part of the
attractor as a simple 2-dimensional sheet. The action of the
Rössler  equations  is  to  fold  the  sheet  over  as  in  the  left-
hand picture of Fig. 9. But we can’t join the two ends of the
sheet  because  one  end  is  folded  and  the  other  end  not.
Also, because of dissipation, the total area of the folded end
is a little smaller than the original, unfolded end. We could
imagine starting with a folded-over sheet, as in the middle
panel of Fig. 9. But now the action of the Rössler equations
is to create a doubly folded-over sheet. Again, we can’t join
the  two  ends  together.  We  could  imagine  starting  with  a
doubly folded-over sheet, as in the right-hand panel of Fig.
9. But now the action of the Rössler equations is to create a
four-times folded-over sheet. Again, we can’t join the ends
together. We can repeat this over and over and over. In this
way, what started as a simple 2-dimensional sheet becomes
in  fact  like  a  piece  of  inﬁnitely  layered  ﬁlo  pastry!  The
Rössler  attractor  is  like  this  ﬁlo  pastry  in  the  limit  where
there are an inﬁnite number of folds, in fact where there is
a Cantor set’s worth of layered ﬁlo pastry.

FIG. 8. Like the Lorenz attractor, the Rössler attractor is also a fractal
geometry. Its relationship to the Cantor set is a little easier to understand
than the Lorenz attractor’s.
FIG. 9. Constructing the Rössler attractor. From Abraham and Shaw (1984).
Lorenz was the ﬁrst to have the insight that the Cantor
set lies at the heart of his attractor. Here are Lorenz’s exact
words from his famous 1963 paper:

“We see that each surface is really a pair of surfaces, so
that,  where  they  appear  to  merge,  there  are  really  four
surfaces.  Continuing  this  process  for  another  circuit,  we
see that there are really eight surfaces, etc., and we ﬁnally
conclude that there is an inﬁnite complex of surfaces, each
extremely close to one or the other of two merging
surfaces.”
Lorenz  realised  that  his  attractor,  as  with  the  Rössler
attractor, can be considered a Cantor set’s worth of
surfaces on which the state-space trajectories reside. It was
this  discovery  that  ﬁnally  made  Lorenz  realise  that  the
states of his model would never repeat themselves, that the
trajectories  would  simply  be  moving  from  one  part  of  the
Cantor set to a diﬀerent part, without repetition. The
fractal dimension of the Lorenz attractor is 2.06 with
typical parameter values. That is to say, it is just a little bit
more than a 2-dimensional surface. However, the extra bit
is absolutely crucial to understanding the non-periodic
properties of the Lorenz equations.
It’s hard to overestimate the signiﬁcance of this
discovery.  Before  Lorenz,  no  one8  imagined  that  a  set  of
three coupled equations based on Newton’s calculus could
generate 
such 
an 
extraordinary 
geometry. 
As
mathematician Ian Stewart wrote in 19979 of Lorenz’s 1963
paper:
“When I read those words, I get a prickling at the back
of  my  neck  and  my  hair  stands  on  end.  He  knew!  Thirty-
four  years  ago,  he  knew!…  In  a  mere  12  pages  Lorenz
anticipated several major ideas of nonlinear dynamics,
before it became fashionable, before anyone else had
realised  that  new  and  baﬄing  phenomena  such  as  chaos
existed.”
It  actually  took  another  forty  years  before  the  Lorenz
attractor was shown rigorously to be fractal, i.e., according
to the exacting standards of mathematics10.
