«  »
LET US RETURN TO the serendipitous experiment that
Lorenz  performed:  starting  a  run  of  his  model  with  an
approximate  value  for  the  starting  conditions  (X  =  0.506)
rather than the model’s exact value ( X = 0.506127). Would
we  expect  some  initial  error  to  grow  at  the  same  rate,
regardless  of  the  starting  conditions?  Fig.  10  shows  that
the answer is certainly no. Here is our ﬁrst application of
the geometry of chaos, one that has big consequences, as
discussed in Part II of this book.
In Fig. 10 we imagine that we know the initial conditions
only  approximately.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  actual  initial
state lies somewhere inside a small ring of points—but we
don’t  know  where  exactly.  Fig.  10  shows  how  this  initial
ring evolves on the Lorenz attractor over a ﬁxed period of
time, for three diﬀerent positions of the ring on the
attractor.
With  the  initial  ring  in  the  position  on  the  attractor
shown  in  the  top  left  of  Fig.  10,  there  is  no  growth  of
uncertainty, even though the ring evolves from one lobe of
the  attractor  to  the  other.  In  this  case  we  can  be  certain
that the actual future state will make a transition from the
left-hand lobe of the attractor to the right-hand lobe.
With the initial ring in the top right of Fig. 10,
uncertainty grows with time. We see that the ring evolves
into a distorted banana/boomerang shape. If we wanted to
know whether the actual state will make a transition to the
right-hand lobe of the attractor, then all we could
reasonably say is that there is roughly a 40 percent chance
of  a  transition,  and  hence  a  60  percent  chance  the  true
state will stay on the left-hand lobe.
However,  when  the  initial  uncertainty  ring  is  in  the
position  on  the  attractor  shown  in  the  bottom  of  Fig.  10,

then  the  uncertainty  grows  explosively.  Here  we  have  no
idea whether the actual state will lie on the left- or right-
hand lobe of the attractor. With a deterministic prediction
system, there’s a good chance we will forecast the outcome
completely incorrectly.
Let’s return to the parable of the missing horseshoe nail,
as  discussed  in  the  introduction.  Let’s  suppose  we  can
model the dynamic state of kingdoms using chaotic
dynamics. (Can we? This I discuss later.) Let’s imagine the
initial uncertainty refers to possible missing horseshoe
nails.  Let’s  also  imagine  that  for  states  on  the  left-hand
lobe  of  the  Lorenz  attractor,  the  king  has  retained  his
kingdom,  whilst  for  states  on  the  right-hand  lobe  of  the
attractor, the king has lost his kingdom.
Then, for the example on the top left of Fig. 10, the king
will certainly lose his kingdom. Here it doesn’t really
matter  whether  some  horseshoe  nails  are  missing  or  not,
the kingdom is sure to be lost (perhaps the king is totally
incompetent). By contrast, in the example at the bottom of
Fig.  10,  whether  the  king  loses  his  kingdom  or  not  is
critically  dependent  on  the  uncertain  state  of  horseshoe
nails. It is this parlous state to which the parable refers.
Fig. 10 is an important ﬁgure for this book. The fact that
the  evolution  of  uncertainty  depends  so  strongly  on  the
position of the initial ring of uncertainty on the attractor is
a consequence of the nonlinearity of the underlying
equations11.  It  explains  why  there  are  occasions—like  the
October 1987 storm, and possibly the 2008 ﬁnancial crash
—which are so diﬀicult to predict in a precise manner.

FIG. 10. The initial ring of points represents the uncertainty in our
knowledge of the actual initial state. How the ring evolves depends on
where it is located on the attractor. In the top left, the ring of uncertainty
does not grow at all. In the top right, the ring is distorted into a thin
banana/boomerang shape, indicating that it is not certain whether the time
evolution of the actual state makes a transition from the left-hand lobe to
the right-hand lobe. In the bottom ﬁgure, the position of the time evolution
of the actual state on the attractor is very uncertain.
However,  an  ensemble  system  can  warn  us  when  the
system is transitioning into a very unstable situation where
dramatic things might, but not necessarily will, happen.
A  mathematician  might  ask  whether  there  is  a  single
equation  which  describes  how  these  banana/boomerang

shapes evolve from simple rings, as shown in Fig. 10. There
is indeed. It is called the Liouville equation
12, named after
the 
nineteenth-century 
French 
mathematician 
Joseph
Liouville. It turns out that the Liouville equation is
remarkably similar to the Schrödinger equation, the
fundamental equation of quantum mechanics.
Indeed, like the Schrödinger equation, the Liouville
equation is a linear equation. What does this mean? Earlier,
we asserted that it was 100 percent certain that the “true”
state  lay  inside  the  initial  ring  of  uncertainty.  However,
suppose instead it was only 80 percent certain that the true
state  lay  inside  the  initial  ring.  If  this  was  so,  then  there
would be only an 80 percent probability that the future true
state lay inside the evolved banana/boomerang-shaped
ring. We can rescale probabilities in this way because the
Liouville equation is linear.
In  early  papers  on  probabilistic  weather  prediction,  it
was suggested13 that meteorologists should try to solve the
Liouville equation to forecast uncertainty in weather
predictions. However, it turned out that this is totally
impractical. In fact, even for a simple model based on the
Lorenz equations, it is hard to solve the Liouville equation
directly. This is because the shape of the probability
contours becomes more and more convoluted and distorted
the longer the prediction time. It is much easier to estimate
probabilities using ensembles.
Let’s look at another feature of the Lorenz attractor. The
long time series at the top of Fig. 11 shows the evolution of
the X  variable  in  the  Lorenz  model  over  a  long  period  of
time.  The X  variable  moves  irregularly  between  positive
and  negative  values  (corresponding  to  irregular  chaotic
oscillations  between  the  left-  and  right-hand  lobes  of  the
Lorenz 
attractor). 
These 
irregular 
oscillations 
are
completely unpredictable for most of the timescales shown.
However, irrespective of the starting condition, overall the

value of the X variable is positive as often as it is negative.
This  is  because  of  a  symmetry  in  the  geometry  of  the
Lorenz attractor: the left- and right-hand lobes of the
attractor  (c.f.  Fig.  6)  are  of  exactly  the  same  shape  and
size.
FIG. 11. Top: time series of the X variable in Lorenz’s original model.
Bottom: time series of the  X variable from the forced Lorenz model, where
an extra constant term is added to the equations. The likelihood of being in
one of the lobes of the attractor is itself predictable, even if the precise
ﬂuctuations in either time series are not.
The long time series at the bottom of Fig. 11 shows the
evolution of the X variable in a modiﬁed version of Lorenz’s
equations. Here I have added a constant term to the right-
hand  side  of  the  equations14.  You  can  think  of  this  extra
constant term as representing an external perturbation to
the Lorenz system. It is as close as one can get, in a system
as  simple  as  the  Lorenz  system,  to  a  forcing,  such  as  a
doubling of the carbon dioxide concentration in the
atmosphere.

The  irregular  oscillations  in  the  lower  time  series  are
still  unpredictable  and  depend  sensitively  on  the  starting
conditions, as before. However, in the lower time series, it
is  now  more  likely  on  average  that  the X  variable  has  a
positive  value  than  a  negative  value.  The  external  forcing
has changed the symmetry of the attractor geometry,
making one lobe of the attractor bigger and the other lobe
smaller. Let’s think of the lobes of the Lorenz attractor as
corresponding to opposite types of weather, such as warm
weather  or  cold  weather,  or  wet  weather  or  dry  weather.
The added forcing to the equations changes in a
predictable  way  the  likelihood  of  having  warm  or  cold
weather,  or  wet  or  dry  weather,  even  though  the  detailed
way in which the weather evolves between these states is
unpredictable. This is an important conceptual point when
thinking about climate change.
«  »
THERE  ARE  SOME  REMARKABLE  and  profound  connections
between  the  geometry  of  fractal  attractors—the  geometry
of chaos—and some of the deepest mathematical theorems
of 
twentieth- 
and 
twenty-ﬁrst-century 
mathematics.
Because  of  this,  Lorenz’s  geometry  really  does  connect
Newtonian mathematics with some of the most modern and
exciting mathematical developments of recent years. When
I  learned  about  these  connections,  they  convinced  me  of
the  fundamental  importance  of  fractal  geometry,  not  only
for  mathematics  but  also  for  physics.  I  leave  this  latter
point  for  Part  III  of  the  book  but  discuss  some  of  the
mathematical  connections  here.  You  can  skip  to  the  next
chapter if this is not to your taste.
Let’s go back to the line, the simplest type of Euclidean
geometry.  As  mentioned,  if  you  draw  a  line  on  a  sheet  of

paper, you can think of each point of the line as
representing a number, such as 1, √2 or π. There will also
be points on the line representing numbers like 1 + √2, and
√2 + π, or even √2 × π. Indeed, take any two points on the
line and convert them to their corresponding real numbers.
Now either add or multiply these two real numbers
together  to  get  a  third  real  number.  Finally,  convert  this
third  number  back  to  a  point  on  the  line.  In  this  way,  we
can add or multiply two points on the line and get a third
point  on  the  line.  We  can  do  arithmetic  on  the  real  line
using  real  numbers.  This  reﬂects  the  fact  that  there  is  a
deep connection between real numbers and Euclidean
geometry.
Can  we  do  arithmetic  on  the  points  of  the  Cantor  set
using  real  numbers?  No!  If  we  take  two  points  on  the
Cantor  set  and  convert  them  into  real  numbers,  and  then
either  add  or  multiply  the  numbers  together,  the  third
number typically won’t correspond to a third point on the
Cantor set. However, the reason is not because we can’t do
arithmetic on the Cantor set. Instead, it’s because the real
numbers are not good numbers to use to describe points on
the Cantor set. As we have discussed, fractal geometry is
fundamentally  diﬀerent  to  Euclidean  geometry.  We  should
therefore not be surprised that we need a diﬀerent type of
number system to do arithmetic on fractals.
It turns out that there is a number system—called the p-
adic numbers—which allows you to do arithmetic on
fractals. Here p itself stands for a whole number 15. Now, it
is  probably  diﬀicult  to  imagine  that  there  exist  numbers
that are not described by real numbers. To get a glimpse at
the diﬀerence between real numbers and p-adic numbers, a
real number such as √2 can be written in decimal format as
1.41421356237… whilst a possible 10-adic number is
written instead as… 739620285.643, where the dots go oﬀ
to  inﬁnity  towards  the  left  (corresponding  to  smaller  and

smaller pieces of the associated fractal). It’s best to think of
a p-adic  number  simply  as  a  new  type  of  number,  better
suited to Cantor sets than lines. The rules for adding and
multiplying p-adic  numbers  are  very  similar  to  those  for
adding  and  multiplying  real  numbers.  For  the  Cantor  set
shown in Fig. 7, p = 2. In this way, each point on a Cantor
set can be represented by a 2-adic number 16. If you add or
multiply two such 2-adic numbers, the sum or the product
is a 2-adic number and corresponds to a third point on the
Cantor set.
We have to generalise the notion of a Cantor set in order
for it to be a geometric representation of 3-adic, or 5-adic,
or  more  generally p-adic  numbers.  For  example,  Fig.  12
shows  a  generalised  Cantor  set  where  we  start  with  a  2-
dimensional  disk  and  then  in  the  ﬁrst  iteration  shrink  it
down to create 5 smaller disks inside the original disk. We
repeat  this  iteration  over  and  over  and  the  generalised
Cantor set comprises the points common to all the
iterations. This generalised Cantor set can then be
described mathematically by the 5-adic numbers17. As
before,  if  we  take  two  points  on  this  fractal  set,  convert
them into 5-adic numbers, and add or multiply the numbers
together, the resulting 5-adic number corresponds to
another  point  on  the  generalised  Cantor  set.  It’s  easy  to
generalise  this  further  to  imagine  what  a p-adic  fractal
looks like for an arbitrary p.

FIG. 12. The ﬁgure describes a fractal based on an
iteration which takes a 2-dimensional disk and maps it
to 5 smaller disks. It generalises the Cantor set with
two iterated line segments. Just as the real line is a
geometric representation of real numbers, so this
fractal disk is a geometric representation of 5-adic
numbers. Such numbers play a vital role in modern
number theory.
The p-adic numbers are bread and butter for pure
mathematicians, and number theorists in particular. A
number theorist is someone primarily interested in
understanding the properties of the whole numbers {1, 2,
3… }. Whole numbers are in some sense the “quanta” of all
numbers. The greatest mathematician of all time, the
nineteenth-century 
German 
Carl 
Friedrich 
Gauss,
described mathematics as the queen of sciences and
number  theory  as  the  queen  of  mathematics.  His  view

would  have  been  that  number  theory  lies  at  the  heart  of
everything quantitative.
The importance of p-adic numbers was clear to Andrew
Wiles, who in 1995 famously proved Fermat’s last theorem.
Pierre de Fermat was a brilliant French mathematician of
the seventeenth century. His so-called last theorem was in
fact  a  conjectured  property18  of  the  whole  numbers  that
Fermat  was  himself  never  able  to  prove.  This  conjecture
captivated mathematicians over the centuries, and had
become,  until  Wiles,  one  of  the  most  famous  unsolved
problems in mathematics.
What  is  amazing  about  Wiles’s  proof  is  the  variety  of
mathematical ideas and techniques needed to crack
Fermat’s last theorem. However, one of the really
important techniques Wiles used revolves around the
theory of p-adic numbers.
Moving into the twenty-ﬁrst century, one of the greatest
contemporary 
number 
theorists 
is 
the 
German
mathematician  Peter  Scholze.  In  2018  Scholze  won  the
Fields Medal, the most prestigious mathematical prize for
mathematicians under the age of forty. The oﬀicial citation
was  for  “transforming  arithmetic  algebraic  geometry  over
p-adic ﬁelds through his introduction of perfectoid spaces”.
These perfectoids are examples of fractal geometry. Given
what I have written, it is perhaps not surprising that
Scholze  uses p-adic  numbers  to  describe  his  perfectoid
spaces. In an interview, Scholze said19:
“ Now  I  ﬁnd  real  numbers  much,  much  more  confusing
than p-adic numbers. I’ve gotten so used to them that now
real numbers feel very strange.”
Perhaps one might imagine that there are many diﬀerent
types  of  geometry  in  addition  to  locally  Euclidean  and
fractal geometry. However, an important theorem in
number theory, Ostrowski’s theorem, says not. If your
geometry  has  an  associated  distance  function,  called  a

metric, then, according to Ostrowski’s theorem, the metric
is  essentially  locally  Euclidean  or  fractal,  represented  by
the real numbers or the p-adic numbers, respectively.
I believe number theory, and 
p-adic numbers in
particular,  will  play  a  central  role  in  physics  in  years  to
come, reﬂecting the importance of the geometry of chaos.
A mathematical theorem of the twentieth century
rivalling Wiles’s proof of Fermat’s last theorem in terms of
fame is Gödel’s incompleteness theorem. Here again there
is a link to fractal geometry.
The logician, mathematician and philosopher Kurt Gödel
was born in part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire (now in
the Czech Republic) in 1906 and did his famous work while
in  Vienna,  before  immigrating  to  the  United  States  and
becoming a colleague and friend of Einstein. The key result
at the heart of Gödel’s theorem is a formula which can be
constructed  from  the  rules  of  any  suﬀiciently  powerful
logical  system.  However,  it  is  a  strange,  self-referential
formula. It states that if this formula could be proved, the
formula would be false 20. We must assume that consistent
application of the rules of any logical system will yield only
true results. The only way out of the dilemma is to
acknowledge  that  Gödel’s  formula,  whilst  true,  cannot  be
proved.
In  the  1930s,  the  British  mathematician  Alan  Turing,
who subsequently went on to lead the code-breaking work
at Bletchley Park during World War II, realised that Gödel’s
theorem implies that certain mathematical problems
cannot  be  solved  by  algorithm:  they  are  “uncomputable”.
As an example, Turing demonstrated that a universal
computer—a concept that Turing deﬁned—would, in
principle, be unable to solve a mathematical problem posed
by  the  German  mathematician  David  Hilbert  some  years
earlier.  Hilbert’s  “halting  problem”  was  to  construct  an
algorithm 
which, 
on 
inputting 
some 
mathematical

proposition,  would  halt  if  the  proposition  was  true.  When
he  posed  the  halting  problem,  Hilbert  believed  that  there
was no such thing as an unsolvable problem. Turing
showed that no algorithm can solve the halting problem.
Roger 
Penrose 
has 
speculated 
that 
Gödel/Turing
undecidability will underpin the theory of quantum
gravity21,  the  as-yet  undiscovered  theory  that  synthesises
quantum and gravitational physics. Penrose himself won a
Nobel Prize for his pioneering work on space-time
singularities in Einstein’s geometric theory of gravity,
general  relativity.  Indeed,  by  studying  properties  of  the
famous fractal Mandelbrot set, Penrose speculated on the
link between undecidability and fractal geometry, and
hence between fractals and quantum gravity22.
In 1993, the computer scientist Simant Dube proved the
link  between  undecidability  and  fractal  geometry 23.  He
showed  this  by  constructing  Turing’s  universal  computer
using  fractal  geometry.  In  this  way,  undecidable  problems
such  as  Hilbert’s  halting  problem  can  be  expressed  as
problems in fractal geometry. Dube did this using
dynamical systems called iterated function systems24,
which  are  even  simpler  than  the  Lorenz  equations25.  An
iterated  function  system  can  produce  fractal  ﬁgures  like
the Sierpinski triangle, shown in Fig. 13. This fractal
triangle is to the iterated function system what the Lorenz
attractor is to Lorenz’s three equations. That is to say, no
matter what point in the plane one starts from, the iterated
function system ends up operating only on the points of the
Sierpinski triangle. The triangle is a fractal attractor of the
iterated function system.
Dube showed that a problem similar to Hilbert’s halting
problem  was  equivalent  to  asking  whether  a  given  line
intersects the fractal attractor of the iterated function
system.  If  it  could  be  determined  by  algorithm  whether  a
given line intersects a fractal, then a point of intersection,

or lack of it, could be used to determine if the
corresponding  Turing  machine  would  halt  (at  the  state
corresponding  to  the  point  of  intersection).  We  know  that
we can’t decide by algorithm whether such a Turing
machine will halt, ergo we can’t decide by algorithm
whether the line will intersect the fractal.
The idea that fractal geometry provides a way to
understand the mysteries of quantum physics is a
discussion point in Part III of this book.
FIG. 13. The Sierpinski triangle, the fractal attractor of
an iterated function system.
...
