3
Noisy, Million-Dollar Butterﬂies
WATCHING  WATER  FLOW  DOWN  A  WATERFALL  CAN  BE
MESMERISING.  The  ﬂow  at  the  very  top  is  quite  smooth
—“laminar”,  as  it  is  sometimes  called.  But  as  it  starts  its
journey down, the water breaks into a myriad of pieces. We
might try to follow the path of one small parcel of ﬂuid, but
it  breaks  into  yet  smaller  pieces  which  soon  become  too
small to follow individually. Is the science of chaos for such
complex  systems  fundamentally  similar  or  fundamentally
diﬀerent to what Lorenz had found with his three-variable
model? We will ﬁnd that the growth of uncertainty in such
complex systems is like chaos on steroids, so much that our
deterministic mathematical models seem to fail us. This has
important  consequences  whose  implications  extend  well
beyond waterfalls.
«  »
THE  UBIQUITOUS  PHENOMENON  OF  turbulence  has  both
fascinated  and  perplexed  scientists.  Werner  Heisenberg,
one of the founding fathers of quantum mechanics,
famously remarked: “When I meet God, I am going to ask
him  two  questions.  Why  [Einstein’s  theory  of]  relativity?

And why turbulence? I really believe he will have an
answer for the ﬁrst!”
As 
we 
will 
see, 
turbulence 
continues 
to 
fox
mathematicians today. One of the most important unsolved
mathematical problems relates to the question of just how
predictable turbulent ﬂow really is. How far down a
waterfall could Laplace’s daemon predict the motion of an
individual small piece of ﬂuid? All the way down? A tenth of
the  way  down?  Big  prizes  (and  considerable  kudos)  await
the  person  who  can  advance  our  knowledge  of  such  a
problem. As I will discuss in this chapter, the phenomenon
of chaos as described in the last two chapters may not be
unpredictable enough to describe turbulence adequately.
In the 1940s, the Russian mathematician Andrey
Kolmogorov 
developed 
a 
mathematical 
model 
of
turbulence. In his model, a turbulent ﬂuid is characterised
by  a  spectrum  of  interacting  eddies  or  whirls,  some  big,
some medium sized, some small. Energy is injected on the
largest  scale,  e.g.,  by  stirring  a  tank  of  water  with  a  big
paddle or, in the case of the atmosphere, by the sun, which
preferentially  warms  the  equatorial  regions  of  the  Earth.
The  energy  then  cascades1  down  to  smaller  and  smaller
scales,  where  eventually  it  dissipates  by  increasing  the
irregular  motion  of  individual  molecules,  manifest  by  a
general  warming  of  the  ﬂuid.  As  we  have  discussed,  this
dissipation eﬀect is characterised by an internal frictional
property of a ﬂuid known as its viscosity. A pithy
description  of  Kolmogorov’s  cascade  of  energy  was  given
by  the  polymath  Lewis  Fry  Richardson  (whom  we  shall
meet several times in this book)2:
Big whirls have little whirls
That feed on their velocity,
And little whirls have lesser whirls
And so on to viscosity.

An example of turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow with multiple whirls of
diﬀerent scales is shown in Fig. 14.
The  atmosphere  itself  is  a  turbulent  ﬂuid  system.  The
very  largest-scale  whirls  in  the  atmosphere  are  the  jet
streams3, rivers of fast-moving air in the high atmosphere.
Aircraft  avoid  jet  streams  when  ﬂying  from  east  to  west,
and try to catch them when ﬂying west to east. The location
of the jet streams is not ﬁxed, but varies from day to day,
month to month and season to season. The jet streams do
not  always  ﬂow  directly  from  west  to  east,  but  can  have
large meanders towards higher and lower latitudes
(perhaps reminiscent of the meandering of a river of water
as it wends its way to the sea). These meanders have scales
of  10,000  km  (6,213  miles)  or  so.  They  can  cause  long
spells of unusual weather. In February 2021, a meander in
the jet stream caused Texas to experience record-breaking
cold  weather  for  around  ten  days.  In  July  2021,  another
meander  caused  parts  of  British  Columbia  to  experience
record-breaking  hot  temperatures,  reaching  almost  50°C
(122°F).

FIG. 14. A computer simulation of turbulence, characterised by a spectrum
of eddies or whirls, some big, some small. We shall be referring to this
simulation again.
The jet streams, in turn, determine the evolution of low-
pressure weather systems—or midlatitude cyclones, as they
are often called—that routinely bring rain and strong winds
to those of us who live in midlatitude regions. These
midlatitude  cyclones  have  scales  around  1,000  km  (620
miles), and so are smaller in spatial scale than the
meanders  of  the  jet  streams.  Inside  a  cyclone,  regions  of
warm  and  cold  air  are  separated  by  features  known  as
fronts, close to which many of the rain-bearing clouds are
clustered. Big thunderstorm clouds can have scales
between 10 and 100 km (6.2 and 62 miles). Inside
individual  clouds,  the  air  can  be  particularly  turbulent,
which  is  why  ﬂying  through  clouds  can  be  an  unpleasant
experience. In extremis, such turbulent eddies can cause a
plane  to  crash.  And  embedded  in  one  of  these  sub-cloud
eddies are even smaller-scale whirls that may not be

energetic enough to buﬀet an aircraft but can be detected
by small balloons. And so on to viscosity.
FIG. 15. The Navier-Stokes equation as a work of art.
Fluid motion is described mathematically by an equation
discovered independently in the nineteenth century by the
French mathematician Claude Navier and the Irish
mathematician George Stokes. Based on Newton’s laws of

motion,  the  nonlinear  Navier-Stokes  equation4  describes,
with twenty-three symbols, the motion of every whirl in the
atmosphere, from the smallest to the largest (see Fig. 15).
Being based on Newton’s laws, the Navier-Stokes equation
is  deterministic;  it  contains  no  indeterminate  or  random
terms.
This 
equation 
appears 
to 
generate 
a 
type 
of
unpredictability and uncertainty which is much more
radical than the type of chaos we have met so far: not only
can  Laplace’s  daemon  not  predict  arbitrarily  far  into  the
future, it cannot predict beyond a ﬁxed ﬁnite time horizon.
This remarkable result was set out in a paper published by
Ed  Lorenz  (yes,  him  again!)  in  19695,  six  years  after  his
famous  paper  on  the  geometry  of  chaos  was  published.
Here is part of the abstract of Lorenz’s 1969 paper:
“It  is  proposed  that  certain  formally  deterministic  ﬂuid
systems which possess many scales of motion are
observationally 
indistinguishable 
from 
indeterministic
systems; speciﬁcally, that two states of the system diﬀering
initially by a small ‘observational error’ will evolve into two
states diﬀering as greatly as randomly chosen states of the
system within a ﬁnite time interval, which cannot be
lengthened by reducing the amplitude of the initial error
.”
The  last  clause  (my  italics)  is  the  killer.  In  the  type  of
chaos  described  in  the  last  chapter,  the  more  we  can
reduce the uncertainty in the initial state, the farther ahead
we can predict. Put another way, you tell me how far ahead
you want to predict and I will tell you how accurately you
need to know the initial conditions. However, according to
Lorenz’s  1969  paper,  in  a  complex  system  that  contains
many scales of motion which interact with each other, you
will not be able to predict beyond some ﬁxed predictability
horizon no matter how well you know the initial conditions.
In this picture, the limit where the uncertainty in the initial
conditions is strictly zero is what’s called a singular limit.

According 
to 
Lorenz, 
even 
if 
the 
uncertainty 
was
inﬁnitesimally  diﬀerent  to  zero,  we  would  not  be  able  to
predict beyond a ﬁnite horizon in time. We will meet
singular limits again when we discuss quantum physics.
Lorenz  gave  a  popular  account  of  his  1969  paper  at  a
meeting in 1971 of the American Academy for the
Advancement of Science. This 1971 talk has become
famous because of the title: “Does the Flap of a Butterﬂy’s
Wings in Brazil Lead to a Tornado in Texas?”; it is the origin
of  the  phrase  “the  butterﬂy  eﬀect”.  What  I  am  going  to
describe is the original meaning of the phrase “the
butterﬂy eﬀect”6. It is more radical than the meaning that
is usually attributed to it today, described in Chapter 1.
To  solve  the  Navier-Stokes  equation,  we  will  need  a
computer, indeed a very powerful computer. To make use of
the  computer,  we  must  ﬁrst  transform  the  Navier-Stokes
equation into a form that the computer can understand. To
do  this  we  create  a  ﬁnite  mathematical  representation  of
the  atmosphere  by  partitioning  it  into  a  number  of  small
but  ﬁnite  volumes  which  are  called  “gridboxes”  (see  Fig.
16). In this mathematical representation, the atmosphere is
assumed to be homogeneous and hence unvarying on
scales smaller than the gridbox scale. That is to say, in this
ﬁnite mathematical representation, all the turbulent scales
of  motion  that  are  smaller  than  the  gridbox  scale  are
assumed  to  be  unimportant  and  are  therefore  removed
from  the  computer’s  representation  of  the  Navier-Stokes
equation.  Hence,  the  representation  of  the  Navier-Stokes
equation that the computer sees is not the original
equation, but the mathematical model based on this
simpliﬁed atmosphere.
The  smaller  the  size  of  the  gridbox,  the  more  accurate
the 
computer’s 
representation 
of 
the 
Navier-Stokes
equation. However, the smaller the gridbox, the more
powerful the computer we will need to solve the equation.

Let’s  suppose  that  the  gridboxes  in  our  model  have  a
horizontal  dimension  of  100  km7,  which  might  describe  a
weather forecast model from a few decades ago.
To  estimate  the  future  weather,  we  will  need  a  set  of
initial conditions corresponding to today’s weather 8. These
initial conditions—of temperature, pressure, wind velocity,
humidity  and  so  on  around  the  world—are  determined  by
observations of today’s weather. These come from a
combination  of  remote  satellite  measurements  and  in  situ
instruments on weather balloons.
We will assume that we have plentiful perfectly accurate
observations  of  the  atmosphere  everywhere  around  the
globe. This doesn’t mean that the initial conditions for our
weather  forecast  model  are  perfect  and  without  error.  As
mentioned,  all  of  the  whirls  in  the  atmosphere  on  scales
smaller  than  100  km  are  necessarily  missing  from  the
model’s 
initial 
state, 
even 
though 
we 
may 
have
observations  of  these  small-scale  whirls.  Because  of  the
ﬁnite size of the model gridboxes, we are unable to
“assimilate”9  all  the  sub-100-km  information  provided  by
the observations into the model’s initial state.
Now let’s suppose we are interested in predicting
weather systems only on scales of, say, 1,000 km or more.
We  might  think  that,  as  a  result,  we  don’t  have  to  worry
that scales smaller than 100 km are missing in the model’s
initial  conditions.  However,  we  would  be  wrong  to  think
this. Because of the nonlinear nature of turbulence, these
initial sub-100-km-scale errors will grow in amplitude and
in spatial scale as the forecast proceeds. They will after a
few  days  become  large,  1,000-km-scale  forecast  errors.
Eventually, even forecasts of the 10,000-km-scale meanders
in  the  jet  stream  will  be  in  error  because  of  the  missing
sub-100-km scales.

FIG. 16. A schematic of gridboxes in an atmospheric model.
With a 100-km gridbox model, we can, on average,
forecast 1,000-km weather patterns to about a week ahead.
Not bad, but suppose we really want to predict the day-to-
day evolution of the weather three weeks ahead. A way to
improve the forecast would be to decrease the size of the
gridbox  from,  say,  100  km  to  50  km.  This  increases  the

number  of  gridboxes  in  our  model,  which  means  we  will
need a more powerful computer to make the forecasts. OK,
suppose we have a new computer to do this. With the new
model, errors in the computer model’s initial conditions will
now be conﬁned to scales smaller than 50 km, rather than
100  km  as  before.  This  will  reduce  the  initial-condition
error  and  will  allow  us  to  predict  the  weather  for  longer
than seven days. But how much longer?
Lorenz in his 1969 paper concluded that such a doubling
of model resolution would not lead to an extra seven days
of  skilful  forecast  time.  Using  the  theory  developed  by
Kolmogorov,  he  estimated  that  a  doubling  of  resolution
would give us only an extra 7 / 2 = 3.5 days of prediction
time. 
The 
fundamental 
reason 
for 
this 
is 
that 
in
Kolmogorov’s theory, errors grow faster on smaller scales.
For example, a small error in the structure of a 1,000-km-
scale  weather  system  will  get  twice  as  big  after  a  day  or
two of forecast time, whilst a small error in the structure of
a 1-km-scale cloud will get twice as big after only an hour
or two.
Continuing in this way, Lorenz argued that each doubling
of the resolution of the model will increase our prediction
time by only half of what the previous doubling achieved.
So, if we decrease the size of a gridbox in our model in a
series of steps from 100 km to 50 km, to 25 km to 12.5 km,
our prediction time will increase from 7 days to 7(1 + ½) =
10.5 days, to 7(1 + ½ + ¼) = 12.25 days, to 7(1 + ½ + ¼ +
⅛)  =  13.125  days.  This  is  clearly  a  law  of  diminishing
returns, since each doubling of model resolution provides a
smaller and smaller gain in prediction time10.
Can you see a problem here? If we keep increasing the
resolution of the model again and again and again until the
gridboxes become inﬁnitesimally small—in which case, with
our perfect observations, the initial error will also become
inﬁnitesimally small—we are not going to be able to predict

forever,  as  we  might  think  we  should  be  able,  given  the
determinism of the Navier-Stokes equation. Instead, we will
be able on average to predict for only a maximum of 7(1 +
½ + ¼ + ⅛ + 1⁄16… ) days ahead, where there are now an
inﬁnite number of fractions inside the brackets, each a half
of the one before. In this limit, the predictability timescale
sums to 7 × 2 = 14 days, because 1 + ½ + ¼ + ⅛ + 1⁄16…
=  2.  That  is  to  say,  even  with  perfect  observations  of  the
weather,  we  can  predict  ahead  for  only  14  days.  In  this
picture, the idea of predicting ahead 3 weeks would be an
in-principle impossibility, even for an omniscient being like
Laplace’s  daemon!  This  is  the  real  meaning  behind  the
butterﬂy eﬀect.
But is the butterﬂy eﬀect literally true? Well, the Navier-
Stokes equation does not take account of quantum physics,
so going to the limit of inﬁnitesimal-scale errors is artiﬁcial.
A  better  question  would  be  this:  Does  the  Navier-Stokes
equation exhibit a ﬁnite predictability horizon? The truth is,
we don’t know for sure. In his 1969 paper, Lorenz was fully
aware that he hadn’t rigorously proved that the initial-value
problem for the Navier-Stokes equation had a ﬁnite
predictability horizon; his arguments were plausible but did
not come up to the rigorous standard of proof in
mathematics.  That’s  why  he  says  in  the  abstract  quoted
earlier “it is proposed that”, not “it is proved that”. Indeed,
over  ﬁfty  years  later,  we  still  don’t  know  whether  the
butterﬂy  eﬀect  is  literally  true  or  not.  Understanding  this
property of the Navier-Stokes equation remains one of the
most important unsolved problems in mathematics: it is one
of the Clay Mathematics Institute’s Millennium Prize
problems, set at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century11.
This list of problems is a modern update of a set of
mathematical  problems  posed  by  German  mathematician
David Hilbert at the beginning of the twentieth century
12.
Solving any of the Millennium Prize problems will win you a

million-dollar  prize—hence  the  title  of  this  chapter.  The
only Millennium Prize problem to have been solved at the
time  of  writing  was  one  posed  by  Poincaré  in  the  ﬁeld  of
topology.
On the other hand, evidence from computer models
suggests  the  butterﬂy  eﬀect  is  true  in  practice.  We  don’t
have computers powerful enough for us to reduce the size
of the gridboxes to the scale of butterﬂies. However, if we
reduce the gridbox size to the size of individual clouds, we
do indeed ﬁnd that forecasts of large-scale weather can be
very  sensitive  to  uncertainties  in  these  small-scale  cloud
structures. Not only that, fourteen days does seem to
represent well the limit to which we can predict the
detailed motion of weather systems, on average.
This takes us back to the discussion in Chapter 1 as to
why weather is unpredictable. Back in the 1950s, the
experts  would  have  said  it  is  unpredictable  because  the
atmosphere  is  turbulent  and  contains  many  whirls  and
eddies of diﬀerent scales. I mentioned that Lorenz’s
intuition  at  the  time  was  that  the  atmosphere  would  be
unpredictable even if the atmosphere had as few as three
degrees of freedom.
Both  views  are  correct.  In  1963,  Lorenz  showed  that  a
model with just three variables could be chaotically
unpredictable.  However,  in  1969  Lorenz  showed  that  the
experts were right too—a system with a very large number
of  variables  (big  whirls  and  small  whirls)  could  be much
more unpredictable than a system with a very small
number of variables. In practice, the latter is actually the
key reason why the atmosphere is unpredictable.
For  this  reason,  we  must  distinguish  between  what  is
called low-order chaos (or low-dimensional chaos) and
high-order  chaos  (or  high-dimensional  chaos).  Here  the
word  “dimension”  refers  to  the  dimension  of  state  space,
i.e., the number of variables needed to describe the system
being  studied.  Recall  trouser  state  space  as  an  example.

The  number  of  variables  in  a  system  describable  by  low-
order chaos is suﬀiciently small that they can all be
represented  in  a  computer.  By  contrast,  the  number  of
variables in a system describable by high-order chaos is so
large  that  not  all  can  be  represented  in  a  computer.  The
Lorenz model described in Chapters 1 and 2 is an example
of low-order chaos. Turbulence, as described by the Navier-
Stokes equation, is an example of high-order chaos.
However, we are now on the horns of a dilemma. On the
one hand, we must limit the number of whirls in order to be
able  to  solve  the  Navier-Stokes  equation.  Essentially,  we
must reduce the dimension of weather state space to
something a powerful supercomputer can manage, a billion
or so. However, in so doing, the model has lost all
knowledge of the butterﬂies (i.e., tiny whirls) in the
atmosphere.  As  we  have  seen,  these  butterﬂies  can  and
indeed will cause the weather forecast to go completely oﬀ
the  rails  after  some  ﬁnite  time.  A  model  without  these
butterﬂies  could  produce  detailed  forecasts  that  may  in
reality  be  complete  nonsense.  And  if  that’s  the  case,  the
forecasts  will  lead  us  up  the  garden  path  in  predicting
things that may never happen, or, in Michael Fish’s case, in
not predicting things that do happen.
We  solve  this  problem  by  representing  the  unresolved
ﬂapping butterﬂies by random numbers. That is to say, we
deliberately  make  our  models  noisy13.  A  fancy  word  for
randomness is “stochasticity”. In this way, modern weather
forecast models (and, increasingly, climate models—see
Chapter 6) are stochastic in nature. If we run an ensemble
of forecasts using our stochastic weather model, even when
each ensemble member has absolutely identical initial
conditions,  the  individual  members  of  the  ensemble  will
still spread apart from each other, because each ensemble
member  has  diﬀerent  realisations  of  the  random  noise  in
the model equations. Put another way, to represent a high-
