order chaotic system on a computer, we ﬁrst truncate the
system  so  it  is  a  low-order  chaotic  system  and  then  add
noise to represent the scales of motion (the tiny whirls) that
have been excised by the truncation.
The  consequences  of  using  noise  to  model  high-order
chaotic systems extend well beyond weather prediction, as
we will see.
«  »
IF WE SAY THAT noise is created by random numbers, then
this raises the question: What are random numbers? That’s
a diﬀicult question to answer. It’s easier to say what
randomness isn’t. The sequence of numbers (0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5… ) is not random because there is an obvious pattern to
the sequence: the next number is one more than the last.
So,  certainly,  a  sequence  of  random  numbers  should  not
exhibit any pattern like this.
In  computer  science,  we  create  random  numbers  using
“pseudorandom-number  generators”,  or  PRNGs  for  short.
PRNGs  are  in  fact  deterministic  pieces  of  computer  code
that  produce  sequences  of  numbers  without  any  obvious
patterns.  Now,  this  might  seem  like  a  contradiction  in
terms: 
How 
can 
you 
generate 
randomness 
from
determinism? Indeed, it is a contradiction, and the
contradiction  has  consequences.  A  computationally  cheap
PRNG  will  spit  out  numbers  that  may  superﬁcially  look
random, but when analysed in more detail will reveal
patterns.  Worst  of  all,  the  numbers  from  a  PRNG  will
eventually start to repeat themselves, a sure-ﬁre guarantee
that the PRNG isn’t truly random. The cure is to increase
the complexity of the computer code for the PRNG.
However, if we keep increasing the complexity of the
PRNG, it will eventually be as computationally expensive to

run as representing the butterﬂies that we truncated away
in the ﬁrst place! We therefore have to make a judgement.
We  need  a  PRNG  that  is  suﬀiciently  complex  to  emulate
randomness  well  enough,  but  still  computationally  cheap
compared  with  simulating  the  processes  the  randomness
represents.
However, there may be a fascinating alternative to
PRNGs in future-generation computers: using noise created
directly by the computer hardware. For example, as
mentioned in the introduction, if we turn the voltage down
across  a  transistor  in  a  computer,  it  will  start  to  become
rather  “noisy”  in  the  way  it  operates.  The  transistor  will
become sensitive to the seemingly random motion of atoms
and molecules associated with their thermal energy.
Indeed,  as  discussed,  if  the  transistors  are  small  enough,
then the noise will start to become directly associated with
quantum  physics  (for  example,  through  a  process  called
quantum  tunnelling).  In  this  way,  the  ultimate  source  of
such  hardware-based  noise  is  quantum  noise,  believed  to
be the purest form of randomness possible in the universe.
In this way, it may be possible to generate almost
perfectly random noise for truncating our high-order
chaotic  models,  not  at  some  small  computational  cost  as
would be the case with a PRNG, but at negative
computational cost. That is to say, by turning the voltages
down, we can run the computer using less energy than we
did  when  the  computer  was  operating  deterministically.  I
hope 
this 
is 
the 
way 
some 
future-generation
supercomputers  will  work 14—many  of  their  chips  being
low-energy indeterministic processors.
But hang on. Why are we trying to generate noise? We
normally  think  of  noise  as  a  nuisance,  something  to  be
eliminated or at least minimised. In signal detection theory
we often speak about a “signal to noise” ratio, and try hard

to  maximise  this  ratio  by  boosting  the  signal  or  reducing
the noise as much as possible.
However, in chaotic systems, noise can be a positive and
useful resource and not one we should be trying to
eliminate or minimise. This is perhaps a paradoxical
message,  but  one  that  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  nonlinear
philosophy that underpins this book. This is such an
important point that I want to give some examples of when
noise  can  play  an  important  role,  not  in  making  a  signal
harder to see—the intuitive picture we have of noise—but
in making it easier to see. In all the examples next,
nonlinearity plays a crucial role.
Look at the percentage ﬁgures on the left of Fig. 17. The
pixels in the ﬁgures are made from diﬀerent shades of grey
(where  solid  black  would  correspond  to  100  percent  and
plain white would correspond to 0 percent).
Let’s suppose we want to transmit the greyness of one of
the ﬁgures, but we can transmit only one bit of information
per pixel: 0 (white) or 1 (black). For the percentages in the
middle  of  Fig.  17,  the  lighter  shades  of  grey  are  simply
truncated to 0, and the darker shades truncated to 1. We
have clearly lost a lot of information. In fact, we now can’t
see half of the ﬁgures, because they have been truncated to
the same whiteness as that of the page.
However, there is an alternative way to truncate a shade
of  grey  to  1  bit,  and  that  is  to  use  noise.  The  results  are
almost magical—see the right-hand ﬁgures in Fig. 17. As an
example,  consider  a  pixel  element  in  the  “30  percent”
ﬁgure. Instead of deterministically truncating to 0, we ﬁrst
randomly choose a fraction between 0 and 1 (e.g., using a
PRNG)  assuming  all  fractions  are  equally  likely.  If  the
randomly  chosen  number  is  greater  than  0.3,  then  we
truncate the shading of the pixel to 0 (white). If the
randomly chosen number is less than (or equal to) 0.3, then
we truncate the value of the pixel to 1 (black). There is a 70
percent  chance  that  the  randomly  chosen  number  will  be

greater than 0.3. Hence it is more likely than not that the
pixel  will  be  truncated  to  white.  By  contrast,  consider  a
pixel element in the “70 percent” ﬁgure. We now truncate
to white if the randomly chosen number is greater than 0.7.
It is more likely than not that the pixel will be truncated to
black.
FIG. 17. Stochastic rounding. On the left are percentage ﬁgures shown in
diﬀerent shades of grey. In the middle, the shade of grey is rounded to one
bit (black or white) in a systematic way. On the right, the shade of grey is
also rounded to one bit (black or white) but in a more stochastic way, i.e.,
using random noise. There is clearly more information on the right-hand
side than in the middle.
If 
we 
use 
a 
similar 
procedure, 
performing 
this
“stochastic rounding” to all the pixels and choosing
independent  random  numbers  for  each  pixel,  we  end  up
with something looking like the right-hand side of Fig. 17.

Hey presto, the missing percentages have reappeared! The
noise has ampliﬁed the signal!
Stochastic  rounding  is  beginning  to  play  an  important
role  in  weather  modelling 15.  Fig.  18  is  a  simulation  of
turbulence, like that in Fig.  14, but where each ﬂuid
variable  is  represented  by  16  bits  instead  of  the  default
numerical “precision” in scientiﬁc computation, which is 64
bits.  There  is  a  good  reason  to  try  to  use  as  few  bits  as
possible when doing a computation. Most of the energy of a
modern supercomputer is used transporting bits of
information  inside  the  computer,  e.g.,  from  memory  to  a
processing  unit.  If  you  can  condense  the  information  into
packages of 16 bits rather than 64 bits, then you will save
about three-quarters of the energy otherwise used for
moving data. The problem is that the 16-bit computation is
deﬁnitely  not  as  accurate  as  the  64-bit  computation.  It
looks like we have lost information in the 16-bit
computation. However, when applying stochastic rounding
to the 16-bit representations of variables, as shown in the
bottom panel in Fig. 18, the result is almost identical to the
original 64-bit computation.
I strongly believe that future electronic computers must
develop this type of stochastic rounding capability in
hardware16.  With  several  billion  variables  in  a  weather
model, tens of billions of bits are being transported
unnecessarily  inside  the  computer  when  each  variable  is
represented  with  64  bits.  This  is  energetically  ineﬀicient
and  constrains  the  speed  at  which  the  computer  can  do
calculations.

FIG. 18. Top: a copy of the simulation of the ﬂuid
turbulence shown in Fig. 14. Here, the individual ﬂuid

variables in the simulation are represented by 64-bit
numbers. This representation is the default in scientiﬁc
computation but uses a lot of computer resources.
Middle: where the number of binary digits representing
the individual ﬂuid variables in the simulation has been
reduced from 64 to 16. The turbulent whirls in the
simulation are degraded in realism compared with the
top ﬁgure. Bottom: the same simulation but where the
stochastic rounding technique has been used when
truncating to 16 bits. Now the simulation is virtually
identical to the top ﬁgure. Adding noise has made the
simulation more accurate. From Paxton et al. (2022).
FIG. 19. Simulated annealing is an algorithm which uses noise to ﬁnd the
highest point of a complicated set of peaks and troughs. Here the algorithm
is shown progressing to the highest peak in nine steps.
These  are  not  the  only  examples  where  noise  can  be
shown to be a valuable resource.
Suppose  we  want  to  ﬁnd  the  highest  point  of  some
complicated  curve,  such  as  the  one  shown  in  Fig.  19.  A
deterministic algorithm for ﬁnding this highest point would
typically start at some arbitrarily chosen initial point on the
curve and then simply move one step to the left or one step
to the right depending on which direction is up. However,
such  an  algorithm  will  get  stuck  at  a  local  peak.  Once  at
this local peak, both directions are “down”, and the

algorithm  will  wrongly  think  it  has  reached  the  highest
point and stop.
There is, however, an algorithm (called “simulated
annealing”) which uses random numbers to ﬁnd the highest
point. Let’s imagine the algorithm has been running for a
while and has reached a point on the curve which is not yet
the highest point. Let’s see what happens in the next step
of the algorithm.
First of all, the algorithm consults a PRNG, which
randomly suggests a new point on the graph for the
algorithm to consider. The algorithm ﬁrst looks to see if the
suggested point is higher up the curve than the old point. If
it is higher, then the algorithm deﬁnitely accepts the
PRNG’s suggestion and we move on to the next step of the
algorithm.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  new  point  is  lower
than the original point, the algorithm doesn’t automatically
reject  the  PRNG’s  suggestion.  However,  as  the  algorithm
proceeds, it becomes less and less likely that a point which
is substantially lower than the current point will be
accepted. That is to say, in the early stages, the algorithm
won’t  be  too  fussy  about  accepting  a  substantially  lower
point,  but  later  on  it  becomes  more  discriminating  about
accepting such a degradation. This latter feature is
reminiscent  of  annealing  metals,  hence  the  name  of  the
algorithm—when  a  metal  is  hot,  in  the  early  phases  the
metal is quite pliable; however, as the metal cools, it
becomes more rigid.
Fig.  19 shows the simulated annealing algorithm at
work. The steps from 1 to 9 correspond to the steps
suggested by the PRNG and accepted by the algorithm. The
rejected  steps  are  not  shown.  The  step  from  1  to  2  is
accepted because 2 is higher than 1. The step from 2 to 3 is
accepted because, although 3 is lower than 2, we are in the
early phases of the algorithm; as mentioned, there is a fair
probability that lower steps will be accepted early on. The
step from 4 to 5 is accepted because 5 is only very slightly

lower than 4. The likelihood of actually ﬁnding the highest
point  of  the  graph  depends  on  the  length  of  time  the
algorithm is run. However, for a given length of time, the
algorithm  appears  very  eﬀicient  at  estimating  the  highest
point compared with more deterministic algorithms.
In the ﬁnal example, we add noise (not too weak, not too
strong) to the chaotic Lorenz model. The result, shown in
Fig. 20, is startling. Instead of washing out the structure of
the  two  lobes  of  the  Lorenz  model,  the  noise  exaggerates
these lobes. The system typically spends longer in one lobe
before  making  an  unpredictable  transition  to  the  other
lobe. This is a rather profound example of the way in which
nonlinearity can partially stabilise a nonlinear system,
making it more predictable.
In conclusion, for nonlinear systems, noise can be your
friend. It’s not necessarily the nuisance we often think it to
be.  Perhaps  nature  makes  use  of  this  fact  much  closer  to
home  than  in  weather  models.  I  will  be  discussing  this  in
Part III of the book.

FIG. 20. Top: a time series of the X-variable of the standard Lorenz model.
Bottom: a time series of the X-variable of the Lorenz model where noise has
been added to the equations. The presence of noise makes the “regime”
structure of the model much more pronounced, with the system spending
longer in one of the lobes17. The transitions between the positive and
negative X regimes remain completely unpredictable.
...
