4
Quantum Uncertainty
Reality Lost?
THE BUTTERFLY EFFECT IS PART OF WHAT IS CALLED
“CLASSICAL” physics. Classical physics describes everything
that  predates  quantum  mechanics,  as  formulated  in  the
mid-1920s by Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Erwin
Schrödinger and others (Fig. 21). Hence, Einstein’s theory
of  relativity  is  considered  “classical”  even  though  it  was
formulated in the twentieth century. Because Lorenz’s
equations of chaos are ultimately based on Newton’s laws
of motion, these equations are also described as “classical”.
Should we describe the algorithmically undecidable fractal
geometry of chaotic systems as “classical”? I would say not
—the discovery of this geometry postdates quantum
mechanics. But we are jumping the gun.
Uncertainty lies at the heart of quantum physics. Indeed,
it is elevated to a principle: Heisenberg’s uncertainty
principle. According to the uncertainty principle, there are
pairs  of  properties  of  a  quantum  particle,  say  its  position
and its momentum, and if you know one of these properties
perfectly, then you know nothing about the other property.
There’s  the  old  (and  not  very  good)  joke  about  the  traﬀic
cop pulling Heisenberg over and asking whether he knows

how  fast  he  was  going.  “No,”  replies  Heisenberg,  “but  I
know  where  I  am.”  “Well,  you  were  doing  exactly  one
hundred  miles  per  hour,”  says  the  cop.  “Oh  great,”  says
Heisenberg, “now I’m completely lost!”
FIG. 21. The Schrödinger equation lies at the heart of quantum mechanics.
Like Newton’s laws of motion, it makes use of Newton and Leibniz’s
calculus. Unlike Newton’s laws, it describes a picture of physical reality
which physicists and philosophers argue about to the present day.

According  to  Heisenberg’s  uncertainty  principle,  if  the
precise 
position 
of 
the 
particle 
is 
mathematically
determined, its precise momentum is mathematically
undetermined.  What  on  earth  does  this  mean?  I  think  it’s
fair to say no one really understands what it means.
However, it has sparked a debate that originated with the
birth of quantum mechanics, and continues to the present
day. Is quantum uncertainty “epistemic” or “ontological” in
nature?  We  can  deﬁne  these  words  as  follows.  If  it  is
epistemic, then quantum uncertainty merely describes 
our
uncertainty about an otherwise precisely deﬁned system. If
it is ontological, then quantum uncertainty describes some
inherent  property  of  a  quantum  system,  independent  of
whether  we  are  trying  to  study  it  or  not.  Most  physicists
believe that quantum uncertainty is ontological for reasons
I will discuss in this chapter. Since what we call reality is
comprised  of  myriads  of  elementary  particles,  this  means
that the very concept of reality—which most of us take for
granted—is itself uncertain.
The  debate  about  the  nature  of  quantum  uncertainty
goes  back  a  long  way.  In  his  1930  book, 
The  Physical
Principles of the Quantum Theory, Werner Heisenberg tried
to explain his eponymous principle by imagining locating a
particle (we’ll call it the “object-particle”) by looking
through  a  microscope.  He  argued  that  the  smaller  the
wavelength of the light used by the microscope, the better
the  position  of  the  object-particle  can  be  determined.  In
fact,  modern  microscopes  use  electrons  with  wavelengths
up to 100,000 times smaller than visible light to see small
objects  with  ultra-high  resolution.  However,  the  smaller
this  wavelength,  the  more  energetic  are  the  photons  (or
electrons) 
and 
hence 
the 
more 
they 
will 
recoil
unpredictably with the object-particle being measured,
making it increasingly diﬀicult to determine the momentum
of the object-particle.

This  seems  like  a  nice  explanation  of  the  uncertainty
principle,  except  it  isn’t  right,  at  least  according  to  Niels
Bohr, Heisenberg’s mentor. Bohr argued that variables like
position and momentum are inherently “complementary”—
an  experiment  to  measure  one  necessarily  excludes  the
possibility 
of 
measuring 
the 
other. 
Heisenberg’s
explanation  suggests  that  the  quantum  uncertainty  in  the
momentum of the particle describes 
our uncertainty,
necessarily  arising  when  we  try  to  measure  the  quantum
properties  of  the  object-particle  by  shining  light,  or  other
particles, on it. Bohr complained that quantum uncertainty
is more profound than this, and that it somehow refers to
the particle’s own uncertainty.
Bohr  came  to  this  point  of  view  because  of  so-called
wave-particle  duality:  the  notion  that  to  explain  quantum
reality  we  must  sometimes  use  the  language  of  waves,
whilst other times we must use the language of particles. A
good  example  is  the  so-called  double-slit  experiment,  as
shown  in  Fig.  22.  In  the  nineteenth  century,  the  British
polymath Thomas Young demonstrated the wavelike nature
of light by passing light waves through a screen with two
closely  spaced  slits.  At  the  other  side  of  the  screen,  the
waves spread out from the two individual slits and
interfered with each other. In some regions the intensity of
the light was increased by this interference eﬀect; in other
regions the intensity was decreased. In the twentieth
century  we  were  able  to  pass  single  photons  through  the
same double-slit screen. Providing you don’t try to observe
which  slit  a  photon  goes  through,  the  individual  photons
tend to be detected in places where the light waves
interfered positively 
to create regions of enhanced
brightness,  and  tend  not  to  be  detected  in  regions  where
the waves interfered negatively to create regions of
darkness.  On  the  other  hand,  if  you  try  to  observe  which
slit  a  photon  goes  through,  then  the  interference  pattern
disappears  and  the  photons  behave  like  small  classical

particles. In this way, we can describe the quantum double-
slit experiment using both wave and particle descriptions of
light. But neither description alone is suﬀicient. Bohr
characterised these wave and particle descriptions as being
complementary to each other. Why quantum physics should
be like this is a mystery1.
FIG. 22. Individual photons passing through two slits produce a wavelike
interference pattern on a screen behind the screen—unless we try to
observe which slit a photon goes through. How this happens remains a
deep mystery and is illustrative of wave-particle duality in quantum
physics.
Einstein famously battled with Bohr about this issue. He
believed that the standard interpretation of quantum

mechanics,  in  which  the  laws  of  physics  contain  some
inherent uncertainties, made no sense. At the famous 1927
Solvay  Conference  in  Brussels,  Einstein  posed  a  simple
thought experiment to challenge Bohr and the other
proponents  of  quantum  mechanics.  It  illustrates  his  two
major  objections  to  quantum  mechanics.  The  ﬁrst  is  its
inherent indeterminism, made famous by Einstein’s phrase
“Does God play dice?” The second refers to what he called
“spooky 
action 
at 
a 
distance”. 
Einstein’s 
thought
experiment  still  poses  a  profound  challenge  for  today’s
advocates of quantum mechanics.
Consider a single photon emitted by a light source (Fig.
23).  The  particle  passes  through  a  small  hole  in  a  screen
and is sent to a point on a hemisphere coated with
phosphorescent material. As suggested in Fig. 23, it seems
reasonable to imagine that the photon travels to the
hemisphere  in  some  particular  direction,  which we  don’t
know, but the photon does, until the photon hits the point q
on  the  hemisphere.  Then  both we  and  the  photon  know
where the photon is, and hence which path it took from the
source.  Surely  that’s  the  sensible  way  to  imagine  what’s
going on.
But no! According to quantum mechanics, before it
excites  the  photoluminescent  material  and  reveals  itself,
the photon is described by a mathematical quantity called a
“wavefunction”.  The  wavefunction  is  represented  by  the
Greek letter ψ in the art gallery in Fig. 21. The
wavefunction 
describes 
mathematically 
the 
wavelike
features of quantum systems. It spreads out in all
directions from the hole in the screen like a wave
propagating out from a source. In popular books, the
wavefunction is sometimes called a “probability wave”. But
that’s a dumbed-down description which does not do justice
to 
the 
incomprehensibility 
of 
quantum 
mechanics.
According  to  quantum  mechanics,  the  wavefunction  does
not  assert  that  there  is  (say)  a  40  percent  chance  of  the

photon  being  here  and  a  60  percent  chance  of  it  being
there. Rather, the wavefunction describes a photon which is
somehow simultaneously here and there, with the degree of
“hereness”  and  “thereness”  being  weighted  by  quantities
that resemble2 probabilities (like 40 percent and 60
percent) but aren’t. This is usually called a “superposition”.
For example, in the quantum two-slit experiment, we don’t
say that there is a 50-50 chance of a photon going through
one slit or the other; instead the wavefunction appears to
require  us  to  say  that  the  photon  went,  equally,  through
both slits at once. Confused? Join the club. But that’s only
the half of it!

FIG. 23. An example Einstein raised at the Solvay Conference in 1927. A
photon hits a point on a hemisphere coated with phosphorescent material.
According to quantum mechanics, the wavefunction associated with the
particle collapses randomly at q to reveal a particle. At all other points,
such as r, the wavefunction collapses to not reveal a particle. How the
wavefunction achieves this without “spooky action at a distance” is a
mystery.
When the photon hits the sphere and causes the
photoluminescent material to glow at q, then suddenly the
photon 
exists 
only 
at 
q, 
and 
nowhere 
else. 
The

superposition no longer applies. In standard quantum
mechanics, this process is described by the “collapse of the
wavefunction” and is associated with what is called
“measurement”:  the  process  by  which  we  get  to  know
about  quantum  information.  During  collapse,  the  photon
suddenly (and mysteriously) goes from being everywhere at
once, describable by a wavefunction, to existing only at 
q.
Put another way, the wavefunction mysteriously goes from
looking like a wave to looking like a particle. According to
standard  quantum  mechanics,  the  position  of  the  point q,
where the wavefunction collapses to reveal a deﬁnite
particle, is inherently random.
Maybe we might be prepared to accept such randomness
in the laws of physics. But before so doing, we should be
aware  that  this  does  not  resolve  the  conceptual  dilemma
associated  with  this  thought  experiment.  If  the  place q,
where the wavefunction collapses to reveal the particle, is
random,  so  too  are  the  other  places  on  the  sphere  where
the wavefunction collapses to reveal no particle. This
means that all these random processes on the sphere
cannot  be  operating  independently  of  one  another;  if  the
processes  were  operating  independently,  then  there  is  a
chance we would see more than one ﬂash on the
photoluminescent  screen.  But  we  don’t.  So  the  random
processes  on  the  hemisphere  have  to  be  correlated  with
one another. How could this correlation arise in practice? Is
it that, when the wavefunction randomly collapses at 
q to
reveal a photon, quantum information is somehow sent to
all the other points on the sphere telling the wavefunction
at these other points not to collapse to reveal a photon, i.e.,
to instead collapse to reveal no photon? If so, how quickly
does  this  apparent  information  propagate?  Well,  it  would
have  to  be  instantaneous.  Otherwise,  there  would  be  a
chance that at the precise instant that the wavefunction at
q collapses to reveal a photon, at some other point r on the
sphere the wavefunction would collapse to produce a

second photon before the information from q arrives telling
the wavefunction at r not to collapse in this way. Again, this
can’t  happen  because  we  know  that  the  source  produced
only  a  single  photon—and  indeed  we  see  only  a  single
photon. And so, even if the hemisphere were light years in
radius, the apparent quantum information telling the
wavefunction at r not to collapse to reveal a photon would
have to have been propagated instantaneously from q.
If  quantum  uncertainty  was  epistemic,  i.e.,  it  was  our
uncertainty,  then  this  process  would  not  be  conceptually
problematic. The instant we know that the particle is at 
q,
then we also know it cannot be anywhere else. If we hear
that we have won the lottery and that the lottery has only
one  winner,  then  we  know  instantly  that  no  one  else  has
won  the  top  prize.  But  if  the  wavefunction  really  does
describe the evolving nature of quantum reality at diﬀerent
places in space-time—and that is the standard way of
thinking—then  this  instantaneous  propagation  of  quantum
information  poses  severe  conceptual  problems.  Indeed,  if
you think this just sounds completely crazy—then you are
in very good company; this is what Einstein thought too.
Newton’s theory of gravity (which is, on Earth at least, a
very  accurate  theory  of  physics)  also  shows  this  type  of
instantaneous  propagation,  called  “action  at  a  distance”.
Imagine in a distant part of the universe, two neutron stars
colliding with each other. How long does it take the
information  about  the  changing  gravitational  ﬁeld  of  the
two stars to arrive here on Earth? According to Newton’s
theory, it takes no time at all; the information propagates
instantaneously.  Newton  himself  realised  this  couldn’t  be
right, but it took Einstein to solve the problem. In general
relativity  theory,  gravitational  information  propagates  at
the speed of light, in the form of gravitational waves3.
Having found action-at-a-distance again appearing in
quantum mechanics, Einstein concluded that there must be

something wrong with the theory, just as there was
something 
wrong 
with 
Newton’s 
theory 
of 
gravity.
Einstein’s thought example is important because many
physicists think that quantum action-at-a-distance—or
nonlocality, as it is now called—is a feature of having two or
more interacting particles4. However, this is not the case. If
we can understand what is happening with a single
quantum particle, we will likely be able to understand what
happens with more than one.
Here is what Einstein said about quantum mechanics5:
“The attempt to conceive the quantum-theoretical
description  as  the  complete  description  of  the  individual
systems leads to unnatural theoretical interpretations,
which become immediately unnecessary if one accepts the
interpretation  that  the  description  refers  to ensembles  of
systems and not to individual systems” (emphasis mine).
The  question  of  whether  it  is  possible  to  interpret  the
quantum wavefunction as a description of an ensemble of
systems  is  central  to  the  debate  about  whether  quantum
uncertainty is epistemic or ontological. According to
Einstein,  there  exists  a  deeper  theory  of  physics  in  which
the photon does indeed just go from the source to 
q. From
the  point  of  view  of  this  deeper  theory,  the  wavefunction
simply approximates a probabilistic description of an
ensemble  of  possible  but  hypothetical  worlds,  in  one  of
which the photon travels to q, in another it travels to r and
in yet other worlds the photon travels to other points on the
sphere. Until the photon hits the sphere, we humans cannot
be  sure  which  of  the  ensemble  members  corresponds  to
reality. In Einstein’s picture, the photon itself knows where
it is and to which point on the sphere it is heading. Reality
is something deﬁnite, it corresponds to one of the ensemble
members, and the photon knows which ensemble member
corresponds to reality. In this interpretation, uncertainty in
the  particle’s  movement  is  fundamentally  no  diﬀerent  to

uncertainty in how the weather will evolve: we don’t know
how the weather will evolve, even though the weather itself
(or,  at  least,  the  set  of  equations  describing  the  weather)
does. According to Einstein’s ensemble interpretation,
quantum uncertainty is all ours (epistemic uncertainty), not
the particle’s (ontological uncertainty).
So,  there  you  are—straight  from  the  horse’s  mouth—
ensembles  are  the  solution  and  quantum  uncertainty  is
epistemic. Now you see why quantum physics ﬁts so easily
into a book focussing on ensemble forecasting for weather
and climate prediction.
If Einstein was right, that quantum uncertainty reﬂects
merely  our  uncertainty,  then  as  far  as  the  particles  are
concerned, their properties and behaviour must be
determined  by  precise  rules  and  laws.  It  may  be  that  the
precise forms of these rules are hidden from us, but they
are  not  hidden  from  the  particles  themselves.  A  theory
which  assumes  such  a  set  of  rules  is  called  a  “hidden-
variable theory”.
The  ﬁrst  attempt  at  such  a  model  was  made  by  one  of
the quantum pioneers, the French physicist Louis de
Broglie in the 1920s. Einstein himself had a go at
developing  a  hidden-variable  model,  but  abandoned  the
attempt when he found it was inconsistent with his theory
of relativity—more about that later. The physicist best
known  for  developing  hidden-variable  models  of  quantum
physics (and in so doing, rediscovering the earlier work of
de  Broglie)  is  the  American  physicist  David  Bohm.  Bohm
was one of the leading theoretical physicists of the 1950s.
But,  having  earlier  written  one  of  the  standard  textbooks
on quantum mechanics, he became disenchanted with the
theory. Bohm suﬀered badly at the hands of the McCarthy
witch hunts of the time and was forced out of the country,
eventually settling in England. However, he also suﬀered at
the hands of his physics colleagues, who considered him as

no better than an amateur crank for questioning quantum
mechanics.
As  I  will  describe,  physicists  typically  do  not  believe
quantum physics can be described by hidden-variable
theories. As a result, Einstein is 
almost universally
considered to have been misguided in his ensemble
interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics.  To  understand  why,
we  need  to  probe  a  little  more  deeply  into  the  world  of
quantum  physics.  To  do  this,  I  will  introduce  a  quantum
experiment using what is called a Stern-Gerlach device, or
SG  for  short,  named  after  German  physicists  Otto  Stern
and  Walther  Gerlach.  I’ll  be  using  SG  devices  for  two
diﬀerent (but ultimately related) purposes ahead.
Again, imagine a source of particles. Instead of spitting
out  photons,  the  source  spits  out  electrons6.  An  electron
has a property usually referred to as “spin”. The spin can
be  measured  by  passing  the  electron  through  a  magnet
whose  north  and  south  poles  are  aligned  in  a  direction
chosen  by  the  experimenter.  When  it  passes  through  the
magnet,  the  electron  will  be  deﬂected  either  upwards  or
downwards relative to this chosen direction. If the electron
is deﬂected up, we say it is “spin up” relative to the chosen
direction. If it is deﬂected down, we say that the electron is
“spin  down”.  In  the  following,  SGz  denotes  an  SG  device
whose magnet is oriented in the z direction (as in Fig. 24),
and SGx denotes an SG device whose magnet is oriented at
right  angles  in  the x  direction.  We  will  suppose  that  the
electrons are moving in the 
y direction—the third
orthogonal direction in physical space.
We can link two or more of these SG devices together, as
in Fig. 25.  These  are  called  “sequential  SG  experiments”.
Let’s  ﬁrst  analyse  the  double-SG  experiment  in  Fig.  25a.
The ﬁrst SG device in Fig. 25a is an SGz. We take the “spin
up”  output  from  this  device  and  feed  it  into  a  second  SG
device oriented in the orthogonal x direction—an SGx.

FIG. 24. Top: the Stern-Gerlach device. Here a beam of electrons passes
through a magnet (with north and south poles showing) oriented in a
certain direction, z, and is split into two beams, traditionally referred to as
“spin up” and “spin down”. Bottom: the same Stern-Gerlach device
represented more schematically.
According to quantum mechanics, it is completely
uncertain whether an electron will be deﬂected to the spin-
up  or  the  spin-down  output  channels  of  the  second  SGx
device. All we can say is that there is a 50 percent chance
of an electron being output to the spin-up output channel
and a 50 percent chance of it being output to the spin-down
output channel.

A hidden-variable theory of quantum physics can easily
explain this behaviour. In such a theory, it is predetermined
how each particle will react to being sent through magnets
aligned in diﬀerent directions.  This  implies  a  hypothetical
“look-up  table”  which  says,  for  example,  that  a  particular
particle will have an up spin when passed through a
magnet oriented in the z direction, and a down spin when
passed through a magnet oriented in the x direction. Table
1, which has two rows and twelve columns, is an example
of such a look-up table, where each column corresponds to
a  diﬀerent  electron.  The  ﬁrst  row  (+  for  “spin  up”,  −  for
“spin down”) shows the spin of the twelve electrons when
measured in the z direction. The second row shows the spin
of the twelve electrons when measured in the 
x direction,
as implied by the hidden-variable theory. The table
accounts for the results shown in Fig. 25a.
FIG. 25. Two sequential SG experiments performed on an ensemble of
particles: a) SGz—SGx and b) SGz—SGx—SGz. The fraction of particles in
each of the two output channels of the ﬁnal device is shown. The second of
these is not straightforward to explain: Since the ﬁrst SGz ﬁlters out all
spin-down particles, how come they reemerge from the second SGz?

Although  the  hidden-variable  model  is  able  to  describe
the  results  of  SG  experiments  with  two  sequential  SG
devices,  problems  appear  if  we  couple  three  SG  devices
together.  In  Fig.  25b  we  have  added  a  third  SG  device,
oriented again in the z direction—an SGz. What would we
expect to see coming out from this second SGz? Well, since
the  ﬁrst  SGz  device  has  eﬀectively  ﬁltered  out  all  the  −
particles, i.e., particles which are spin down in the z
direction, we would surely expect to see only spin-up
particles  emerging  from  the  second  SGz.  But  that’s  not
what we see. In reality, half the particles coming out of the
second SGz are spin up, and half are spin down. So where
on earth have these spin-down electrons come from, if the
ﬁrst SGz supposedly ﬁltered them all out beforehand?
TABLE 1. The twelve columns refer to twelve diﬀerent electrons, showing
part of a hypothetical “look-up” table giving the spins of these twelve
particles for two diﬀerent possible orientations of the SG magnet. The table
is a consequence of assuming that quantum physics can be explained by a
deterministic hidden-variable theory. For each particle, the ﬁrst row gives
the result of a possible SG measurement in the z direction. The second row
represents the result of a possible SG measurement in the x direction. The
table is consistent with the probabilities shown in Fig. 25a. In particular,
taking all columns which are + in the ﬁrst row, half are + in the second row
and half are −.
Explaining the triple-SG experiment is problematic for a
hidden-variable  model,  though  it’s  possible  to  fudge  some
sort of explanation7. However, there is another experiment,
which  can  also  be  described  using  SG  devices,  that  is
generally  considered  to  provide  the  killer  blow  to  hidden-
variable 
theories 
and, 
with 
it, 
Einstein’s 
ensemble
interpretation of quantum physics. This is the so-called Bell
experiment.  I  am  going  to  describe  the  Bell  experiment
next and return to it in Chapter 11. In this experiment, the

notion  of  nonlocality  rears  its  ugly  head  in  a  way  which
seems  even  more  unavoidable  than  in  Einstein’s  thought
experiment  shown  in  Fig.  23.  By  contrast,  the  triple-SG
experiment shown in Fig. 25b seems to have nothing to do
with  nonlocality.  Despite  this,  in  Chapter  11,  I  will  try  to
explain how both the Bell and triple-SG experiments can be
understood using ensembles in exactly the same way.
The  Bell  experiment  makes  use  of  the  phenomenon  of
“entanglement”, a word coined by Schrödinger to describe
interacting 
quantum 
systems. 
The 
importance 
of
entanglement 
for 
testing 
hidden-variable 
theories
experimentally was realised in the 1960s by Irish physicist
John Bell8, whose day job was as a high-energy physicist at
CERN9. Bell showed that under seemingly unexceptionable
assumptions, hidden-variable theories that do not have
action-at-a-distance 
must 
satisfy 
a 
certain 
statistical
inequality  that  is  violated  in  quantum  mechanics.  At  the
time  Bell  published  his  paper,  no  one  had  tested  whether
the inequality was violated experimentally. However, there
was very little doubt that if quantum mechanics predicted
that  the  inequality  was  violated,  then  it  would  indeed  be
violated in reality.
To  understand  Bell’s  inequality,  we  construct  another
table like Table 1, made of +s and −s. This time, however,
we  have  three  rows  instead  of  two  (see  Table 2).  As  with
Table 1, I have used twelve columns by way of illustration,
though  in  principle  we  can  have  as  many  columns  as  we
like. There is nothing special about the way I have ﬁlled the
boxes of Table 2 with +s and −s. You can choose your own
entries if you want. In fact, for the time being, just imagine
the table as something without any particular connection to
physics.
Now count the number of columns where there is a + in
the  ﬁrst  row  and  a  +  in  the  second  row,  and  call  this 
A.
From  Table  2, A  =  2  (corresponding  to  the  fourth  and

eighth columns). Now count the number of columns where
there is a − in the second row and a + in the third row, and
call this B. From Table 2, B = 6. Finally, count the number
of columns where there is a + in the ﬁrst row and a + in
the third row, and call this C. From Table 2, C = 5. In this
example, A +  B = 8 is clearly bigger than C = 5.
As Bell showed in 1964
10, A +  B  will  always  be  bigger
than or equal to C, no matter how we ﬁll in the entries to
this  table  with  +s  and  −s.  This  result  is  known  as  Bell’s
inequality. I give a proof of Bell’s inequality using
elementary mathematics in the endnotes11.
TABLE 2. We ﬁll +s and −s into a table with three rows and as many
columns as we like (here twelve). The statistics of these +s and −s
necessarily satisfy a mathematical inequality, known as Bell’s inequality,
described in the text.

FIG. 26. The famous Bell experiment, using pairs of entangled particles
moving in opposite directions. In this experiment, Alice’s and Bob’s SG
devices can be oriented arbitrarily. However, if they are oriented in the
same direction and Alice measures her particle to be spin up, Bob will
measure his particle to be spin down. In practice, the experiment is
typically performed with photons and polarisers instead of electrons and SG
devices.
Bell applied his eponymous inequality to a situation
where  a  source  emits  pairs  of  entangled  particles,  say
electrons12, moving in opposite directions, as shown in Fig.
26.  Here  the  particles  are  sent  to  two  SG  devices  which
measure the particles’ spins. Each SG device is oriented by
the  experimenter.  Traditionally,  “Alice”  sets  the  left-hand
SG device and hence measures the spin of the left-moving
particle,  and  “Bob”  sets  the  right-hand  SG  device  and
measures the spin of the right-moving particle. As before,
we will denote spin up by a + symbol and spin down by a −
symbol.  But  now  we  imagine  that  each  SG  device  can  be
oriented in any direction Alice or Bob chooses and not just
the z and x directions.
A crucially important property of such entangled particle
pairs is that if Alice’s and Bob’s SG devices are oriented in
the same direction, and if one device outputs a +, then the
other  device,  measuring  the  spin  of  the  other  entangled
particle, will output a −, or vice versa. That itself is not a
surprising  fact  and  can  easily  be  explained  with  hidden
variables13. It relates to the fact that the combined spin of
the two particles leaving the source must always be zero.
If the particles’ spins are determined by hidden
variables, then we can imagine Alice’s and Bob’s two sets
of particles each having a look-up table. An example of such

a  look-up  table  was  in  fact  shown  in  Table  2.  We  can
imagine it’s a look-up table for twelve of Alice’s particles,
where the “1”, “2” and “3” that label the rows of the table
correspond  to  three  possible  orientations  for  Alice’s  SG
device. Bob’s look-up table for the twelve particles that are
entangled with Alice’s, and for the same three orientations,
would be the same as Alice’s look-up table except that each
+ in Alice’s look-up table would be a − in Bob’s, and each −
a +. In this way, the mathematical inequality—that A + B is
greater than or equal to 
C—becomes an intrinsic property
of this type of hidden-variable theory of quantum physics.
The  question  that  Bell  asked  himself  was  this:  Can  we
test  experimentally  the  hidden-variable  model  prediction
that A  + B  is  greater  than  or  equal  to C,  in  Alice’s  (or
Bob’s) look-up table? It turns out that there is a way, using
real-world entangled particle pairs. For example, as
mentioned, the quantity A describes the number of columns
where there is a + in the ﬁrst row and a + in the second
row 
of 
Alice’s 
look-up 
table. 
We can 
estimate 
A
experimentally  by  measuring  the  spins  of  an  ensemble  of
entangled  particles,  where  for  each  pair,  Alice  measures
her particle in the 1 direction and Bob measures his in the
2  direction.  We  now  use  the  “zero-spin”  property  to  infer
that if Bob’s particle was measured to be a +, then Alice’s
particle, if it had been measured in the 2 direction, would
necessarily have given a − outcome, and vice versa. In this
way we can estimate the quantity A in Alice’s look-up table
from  an  experiment  on  an  ensemble  of  entangled  particle
pairs using measurements that Alice and Bob actually
make.  We  can  similarly  estimate B  and C  on  separate
ensembles of entangled particle pairs.
So  which  theory  is  correct  in  reality:  the  conceptually
simple 
deterministic 
ensemble-based 
hidden-variable
model, where A + B is necessarily greater than or equal to
C, or quantum theory, where the inequality can be violated?
The  exact  experiment  that  is  performed  is  a  little  more

complex  than  the  one  suggested  and  tests  a  variation  of
Bell’s inequality known as the CHSH 14 inequality. However,
the answer is not good for hidden variables, and hence for
Einstein’s ensemble interpretation of quantum physics.
Bell’s inequality is violated in practice15, exactly as
predicted by quantum mechanics.
So, what is going wrong with our hidden-variable model
in  failing  to  predict  the  experimental  violation  of  Bell’s
inequality? There’s something wrong with this assumption
that Alice and Bob’s particles each have their own separate
look-up tables. But what is wrong?
One  conclusion  is  that  the  concept  of  the  look-up  table
doesn’t  work  because  there’s  no  such  thing  as  deﬁnite
reality  in  quantum  physics.  That’s  what  most  physicists
believe  (even  though  it’s  really  hard  to  know  what  this
means physically), and that’s the reason why most
physicists  believe  Einstein  was  misguided  to  think  that
uncertainty in quantum physics can be explained by
ensembles.
It’s important to understand that this is not the same as
saying that quantum physics contains some randomness. As
discussed in Einstein’s thought experiment, one needs also
to posit some kind of action-at-a-distance to ensure that the
randomness is properly correlated over space. It’s the same
with Bell’s inequality. One can posit that the hidden-
variable model contains some stochastic terms which make
the  spin  outcomes  deﬁned  in  only  a  probabilistic  sense.
However,  such  a  stochastic  hidden-variable  model  is  still
constrained  by  Bell’s  inequality  (essentially  because  the
quantities A, B and C are statistical quantities deﬁned from
the statistics of the look-up tables). Randomness alone does
not explain the experimental violation of Bell’s inequality.
A  diﬀerent  way  to  invalidate  the  existence  of  separate
look-up  tables  for  Alice’s  and  Bob’s  particles  would  be  to
assume that reality is deﬁnite, but that the spins of Alice’s

electrons  are  determined  not  only  by  the  orientation  of
Alice’s  SG  device  but  also  by  the  orientation  of  Bob’s  SG
device. This would mean giving up on the idea that Alice’s
and Bob’s particles have their own separate look-up tables,
as in Table 2. This is what physicists typically mean by the
word  “nonlocality”.  But  it  is  a  truly  horrible  idea,  in  my
view. If Bob made up his mind how to set his SG device only
just as his electron was arriving, his decision would have to
somehow  be  communicated  instantaneously  to  Alice.  It’s
the same old action-at-a-distance idea which we saw earlier
and which Einstein—rightly in my view—hated so much.
On the other hand, nonlocality is a subtle matter. As with
Einstein’s thought experiment, we cannot use nonlocality to
send  classical  information  instantaneously  from  Alice  to
Bob.  For  example,  Bob  cannot  communicate  the  result  of
some horse race superluminally to Alice using these
entangled  particles.  If  he  could  do  this,  then  the  hidden-
variable theory would explicitly violate a basic property of
causality  in  relativity  theory:  that  causes  always  precede
eﬀects.  If  this  idea  is  violated,  then  Alice  and  Bob  could
make certain money at the bookies.
Because  it’s  not  possible  to  signal  superluminally  with
these  types  of  experiments,  most  physicists  take  the  view
that understanding what is going on in Bell’s experiment is
not  something  to  lose  sleep  over,  e.g.,  when  doing  low-
temperature experiments or quantum computing.
But for fundamental physics I believe this is something
we should lose sleep over. Even if quantum nonlocality does
not  allow  superluminal  signalling  of  classical  information,
this  superluminal  communication  of  quantum  information
goes  against  the  spirit  of  relativity  theory.  Perhaps  our
failure  to  understand  quantum  nonlocality  is  the  primary
reason why we are still struggling to unify quantum
mechanics and general relativity theory into a single
uniﬁed  theory  of  physics—as  the  Penrose  quote  at  the
beginning of Part III of this book suggests.

So,  does  the  experimental  violation  of  Bell’s  inequality
require us to either abandon our intuitive concept of reality
or accept spooky action-at-a-distance? If pressed hard,
most  physicists  will  admit  that  there  is  likely  something
deeper  going  on,  which  we  have  yet  to  understand.  In
Chapter  11,  I  will  suggest  there  may  be  another  way  to
explain both Bell’s experiment of Fig. 26 and the sequential
SG  experiment  of  Fig.  25b.  The  explanation  is  consistent
with Penrose’s speculation that Gödel/Turing undecidability
may play a key role in any future theory of quantum gravity.
In  particular,  the  explanation  requires  us  to  exploit  the
geometry  of  chaos.  If  the  explanation  is  correct—without
clear-cut  experimental  tests  I  cannot  be  certain—then  it
will be possible to describe the mysteries of quantum
physics 
using 
Einstein’s 
ensemble 
interpretation. 
In
particular, God will not play dice, there will be no action at
a distance, quantum uncertainty will be epistemic and
reality something deﬁnite. In claiming this, I am not
proposing  a  return  to  pre-quantum  classical  physics:  as
mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, we should not
think of the algorithmically undecidable geometry of chaos
as classical.
However,  before  developing  these  ideas,  we  have  more
practical matters to discuss.
...
