5
The Two Roads to Monte Carlo
THE PREVIOUS FOUR CHAPTERS HAVE BEEN QUITE
INTENSE, 
developing 
concepts 
which 
underpin 
our
understanding  of  uncertainty  in  the  world  around  us.  It’s
now time to apply this understanding to matters of
practical concern—to eﬀorts to predict our chaotic world.
I need to issue a caveat. I am not an expert in some of
the topics discussed in this part of the book, notably
disease,  economic  and  conﬂict  prediction.  Nevertheless,  I
have taken the liberty of expressing my views about what I
see  as  the  state  of  play  in  these  areas,  based  on  my
experience  in  the  areas  of  predictive  science  where  I  do
have  some  in-depth  technical  knowledge.  I  expect  some
experts will be rather exasperated with my meddling in this
way.  I  can  fully  understand  this  feeling  as  I  myself  have
been  at  the  butt  end  of  criticism  from  those  expressing
their views to me about the inadequacy of climate science.
In  truth,  it  is  good  to  have  multiple  views  from  diﬀerent
ﬁelds about a topic, and in my experience progress is often
made by taking existing ideas from one ﬁeld and applying
them to another.
«  »

THE EMERGENCE OF MODERN science, sparked by the
scientiﬁc renaissance, seemed to have passed by the dark
art  of  weather  prediction.  The  rather  desperate  state  of
aﬀairs coming into the twentieth century was well
described in Thomas Hardy’s novel 
The Mayor of
Casterbridge, published in 1886. The novel’s protagonist, a
hay  and  grain  merchant,  has  fallen  on  hard  times.  In  an
attempt  to  regain  some  of  his  lost  wealth,  he  decides  to
consult  a  “weather  prophet”  about  the  harvest  weather.
The self-proclaimed prophet tells him:
“By the sun, moon and stars, by the clouds, the winds,
the  trees,  and  grass,  the  candle-ﬂame  and  swallows,  the
smell of the herbs; likewise by the cats’ eyes, the ravens,
the leeches, the spiders, and the dungmixen, the last
fortnight in August will be—rain and tempest.”
Unfortunately for the grain merchant, the forecast turns
out wrong, and he is ruined.
In fact, just a few years before Hardy’s book was
published,  the  ﬁrst  attempts  to  make  weather  prediction
more scientiﬁc had begun. This development was spurred
by a tragic event. On October 25, 1859, the steam clipper
the  Royal Charter was on the last leg of its sixty-day voyage
from  Melbourne  to  Liverpool,  having  crossed  the  Paciﬁc
and  navigated  the  infamous  Cape  Horn.  There  were  four
hundred  passengers  aboard,  many  bringing  the  fortunes
they had made in Australia back home to Britain. As they
passed Anglesey, an exceptionally violent storm developed.
The captain of the Royal Charter could not control her and
she was thrown against the rocks of an Anglesey headland.
Only  forty-one  passengers  survived;  none  were  women  or
children. Victorian Britain was traumatised.
As  others  were  wringing  their  hands,  one  man  thought
he  could  do  something  to  prevent  such  a  loss  happening
again. Robert Fitzroy was a naval oﬀicer who had made a
name for himself captaining the ship, the HMS  Beagle, that
carried Charles Darwin on his epic voyage to the

Galápagos,  inspiring  him  to  the  theory  of  evolution  by
natural selection that would revolutionise biology.
Four years before the Royal Charter disaster, Fitzroy had
been  put  in  charge  of  the  Meteorological  Oﬀice.  In  those
days,  the  Meteorological  Oﬀice  did  not  make  forecasts.
Indeed,  the  word  “forecast”  did  not  exist—Fitzroy  would
later  invent  the  word.  But  Fitzroy  had  a  brilliant  idea.
Using  the  electric  telegraph  invented  a  few  years  earlier,
he realised that if all of the coastal stations taking weather
readings  could  relay  their  information  to  a  central  oﬀice,
then  Fitzroy,  with  his  expert  meteorological  knowledge,
could analyse the information to create a spatial picture of
the current weather patterns, and with that picture make a
prediction of the expected weather for the coming days.
The ﬁrst storm warning was made on February 6, 1861.
It  was  a  success  and The Times congratulated Fitzroy for
his pioneering work. For the next few years, things
generally  went  well.  The  number  of  shipwrecks  dropped
and the media and public alike were impressed by Fitzroy’s
forecasts.  However,  a  number  of  inaccurate  predictions
began to be made. As a result, questions were asked about
the  expense  of  Fitzroy’s  telegraphic  network.  And  ﬁnally,
some  of  his  scientiﬁc  colleagues  began  complaining  that
there was no scientiﬁc basis to the method Fitzroy used to
make his predictions. By 1865 Fitzroy’s health was
beginning to fail him and he ran out of energy and
enthusiasm. He sank into one of the black moods he would
suﬀer  from  time  to  time.  On  Sunday,  April  30,  1865,  just
before  he  was  due  to  go  to  church,  he  pulled  out  a  razor
and cut his throat.
Fitzroy had correctly identiﬁed one key aspect of how to
make skilful weather forecasts: the need for plentiful
observations, not just at one location but across a
geographical domain. In modern parlance, he realised the
importance of accurate “initial conditions”. However,
knowing the initial conditions was only part of the solution.
