«  »
AROUND THE SAME TIME, in a part of the British Empire far
from the stormy coasts of Britain, meteorology was taking
another step forward.
As  winter  turns  to  spring,  the  sun  melts  much  of  the
snow that has fallen over the Asian land mass, the Tibetan
plateau in particular. When the snows have largely melted,
the land warms and surface temperatures begin to rise. To
the south, the Indian Ocean also feels the changing energy
of the sun, but here the sun’s energy evaporates moisture
from the sea surface and the sea warms less than does the
land1.  As  a  result,  a  strong  surface  temperature  gradient
develops  between  the  Indian  Ocean  and  the  land  mass  to
the north. The gradient is the reverse of what one normally
ﬁnds, where low latitudes are warmer than higher
latitudes. In turn, a vast current of moist air starts to ﬂow
north over the Indian subcontinent—a sea breeze of
massive proportions. As the air is forced up over the
Western Ghats mountains of India, the air cools and
releases its moisture through torrents of rain. The summer
monsoon  has  arrived.  Many  give  thanks  as  the  stultifying
heat and humidity of the early summer are ﬁnally broken.
Under  the  plentiful  rainfall,  the  crops  grow,  and  the  food
sustains  the  inhabitants  of  the  Indian  subcontinent  for
another year.
And yet, the chaos in the climate system ensures that the
strength of the monsoon is not the same year in, year out.
Some years the monsoon fails altogether, bringing drought
and misery to the population.
In  the  1870s,  there  were  a  series  of  monsoon  failures.
Exacerbated  by  British  imperial  policy,  the  drought  led  to
famine  and  death.  The  British  authorities  looked  to  their
scientists to see if these monsoon failures could be

predicted.  In  1882,  the  India  Meteorological  Department,
established a few years earlier and under the control of its
ﬁrst  director,  Henry  Blanford,  began  to  make  the  ﬁrst
monsoon forecasts for India. Unlike a weather forecast for
a  few  days  ahead,  this  was  an  attempt  at  a  long-range
seasonal  prediction  for  rainfall  over  all  of  India  averaged
over the summer months of June through September, and
made before the summer monsoon actually broke.
Blanford was convinced that the key to successful
prediction of the monsoon lay in estimating the amount of
snowfall that fell over the Tibetan Plateau during the
preceding winter: the less snow that falls during the winter,
the less there is to melt in the spring, and the more the sun
can  warm  the  plateau.  From  this,  the  larger  will  be  the
temperature diﬀerence between the continental land mass
and  the  more  constant  ocean  temperatures  to  the  south,
and the stronger will be the Asian summer monsoon.
Blanford used observations of the amount of snow on the
Himalayan mountain peaks as an indicator of more general
snow  cover  over  the  Tibetan  Plateau  to  the  north.  Like
Robert  Fitzroy’s  early  predictions  back  in  Great  Britain,
Blanford’s ﬁrst predictions were reasonably successful.
However,  after  a  series  of  forecast  failures,  it  became
apparent that there must be other things going on.
Things  took  a  big  step  forward  when  in  1904  Gilbert
Walker 
became 
the 
third 
director 
of 
the 
India
Meteorological Department.
Walker attempted to improve the long-range forecasting
techniques of his predecessors by correlating monsoon
strength with observations of atmospheric surface pressure
from  weather  stations  around  the  world.  He  discovered
that  the  strength  of  the  Indian  monsoon  tended  to  be
correlated 
with 
the 
diﬀerence 
in 
surface-pressure
observations  taken  at  Tahiti  and  Darwin,  Australia,  some
months earlier. A barometer eﬀectively measures the mass
of air in a column above the instrument. Systematic

variations in mass between one location and another are an
indication 
of 
some 
large-scale 
circulation 
in 
the
atmosphere.  From  this,  Walker  deduced  that  the  strength
of  the  Indian  monsoon  was  correlated  with,  and  could  be
predicted  by,  indicators  of  some  large-scale  atmospheric
circulation over the tropical Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean
basins—a circulation we now call the Walker circulation.
Walker referred to the variations in the pressure
diﬀerence  between  Tahiti  and  Darwin  as  the  “Southern
Oscillation”—in  contrast  with  another  pressure  oscillation
he had discovered involving stations in the North Atlantic
region,  which  he  called  the  “North  Atlantic  Oscillation”.
But what caused these so-called oscillations? Walker had no
idea.
From  Fitzroy  to  Walker,  Victorian  meteorologists  had
identiﬁed  that  observations  of  the  weather  are  vital  to
making good forecasts. But by themselves, they aren’t
enough.
«  »
AROUND THE TURN OF the twentieth century, two
meteorologists, the American Cleveland Abbe and the
Norwegian Vilhelm Bjerknes, who incidentally studied
under  Poincaré,  independently  suggested  that  we  could
make much better forecasts if we put the laws of physics to
work  on  these  observations.  Speciﬁcally,  they  suggested
that  we  should  try  to  solve  the  Navier-Stokes  equation
(amongst others) as discussed in Chapter 3. They proposed
that  weather  forecasting  should  be  seen  as  a  scientiﬁc
initial-value problem: we use the laws of physics to
determine  the  future  state  of  the  atmosphere,  given  the
initial conditions from today.

The ﬁrst person generally credited with trying to make a
forecast  using  these  ideas  was  Lewis  Fry  Richardson
2.
Richardson was born in 1881 into a Quaker family, and this
instilled  in  him  a  deep  belief  in  paciﬁsm  that  strongly
shaped his life. He graduated from Cambridge in 1903, and
worked  at  a  number  of  places  including,  just  before  the
outbreak  of  World  War  I,  the  Meteorological  Oﬀice  (now
called the Met Oﬀice). When war broke out, he refused to
ﬁght,  resigned  from  the  Met  Oﬀice  and  instead  served  in
the  Friends’  Ambulance  Unit  near  the  front.  In  free  time
during  this  period,  he  performed  his  pioneering  weather-
forecast calculations.
In practice, Richardson wasn’t making a forecast at all,
because the computations of how the weather would evolve
over  a  few  hours  took  him  many  months  of  hard  work.
However,  the  method  he  developed  to  solve  the  Navier-
Stokes equation is still, broadly speaking, the way it is done
today.  Richardson’s  method  was  described  in  Chapter  3,
and is based on dividing the atmosphere up into a number
of gridboxes, inside which one assumes the atmosphere is
uniform 
and 
unchanging. 
After 
weeks 
of 
tedious
computations,  Richardson  ﬁnally  reached  the  endpoint  of
his forecast calculation: an estimate of the change in
surface pressure over six hours for one of the gridboxes. It
was  a  disaster.  His  estimate  was  over  one  hundred  times
bigger than occurred in reality.
The  error  Richardson  introduced,  which  led  to  such  a
disastrously wrong forecast, was in fact a subtle one. The
problem  wasn’t  the  way  the  forecast  calculations  were
made.  Rather  it  lay  in  how  the  initial  conditions  were
created from the limited observations available. Relatively
recently, Irish meteorologist Peter Lynch developed an
algorithm to improve the way in which the available
observations could be used to create initial conditions for
the model gridboxes. After applying this algorithm, Lynch

showed  that  Richardson’s  retrospective  forecast  became
remarkably accurate after all3.
The  more  serious  problem  with  Richardson’s  method
was that the calculations were proceeding much more
slowly  than  the  weather  was  itself  advancing.  Hence  in
practice  the  method  was  useless.  Richardson  dreamt  of  a
future weather forecast factory where thousands of human
“computers” 
toiled 
away 
doing 
mindless 
arithmetic
calculations at breakneck speed, in an attempt to beat the
weather to it. This vision was remarkably prescient if
instead  of  a  human  computer,  we  think  of  an  individual
processing unit inside a massively parallel electronic
supercomputer.
It  took  the  end  of  World  War  II  to  realise  Richardson’s
dream, thanks indeed to the development of the ﬁrst
electronic digital computers. The mathematician and
physicist John von Neumann, based at Princeton University,
put together a team of meteorologists led by Jule Charney.
Since  these  models  are  based  on  laws  of  physics  such  as
the  Navier-Stokes  equation,  I  will  henceforth  call  them
“physics based”, to distinguish them from statistical-
empirical models (sometimes called data-driven models) of
the  type  that  Fitzroy,  Blanford  and  Walker  developed.  To
run  their  physics-based  models,  Charney’s  team  used  the
ﬁrst fully programmable electronic digital computer, known
as ENIAC, which stood for “electronic numerical integrator
and computer”.
Weather forecasting wasn’t ENIAC’s main use. Although
it was originally conceived as a tool to help in the
computation  of  artillery  look-up  tables,  one  of  ENIAC’s
main uses was for hydrogen bomb computations 4. Here von
Neumann  and  his  colleague  Stanislaw  Ulam  were  major
users of the computer.
These bomb calculations turned out to be hard because
the hydrogen bomb is in part a classical device, describable

using classical laws of physics, and partly a quantum device
—after all, the basic release of energy is due to the fusion
of  nuclei  of  the  hydrogen  atom.  As  we  saw  in  Chapter  4,
quantum mechanics deals in abstract quantities, which
under the right circumstances can be interpreted as
probabilities.
Ulam  was  only  too  aware  how  hard  it  was  to  make
calculations when some of the basic variables were
probabilistic  and  others  not.  When  recuperating  from  an
illness, he began playing a game of solitaire, which he lost
many  more  times  than  he  won.  He  began  to  think  about
how 
one 
might 
calculate 
from 
ﬁrst 
principles 
the
probability of winning this game. Like his H-bomb
calculations,  this  was  a  diﬀicult  mathematical  problem.
However, in the case of solitaire there was an alternative—
you could simply play the game enough times and count the
fraction of times that you win. That gives you the
probability you are looking for.
This  was  a  eureka  moment  for  Ulam.  What  he  realised
was  that  instead  of  treating  the  diﬀusion  of  neutrons  in
terms of probabilities, he could use pseudorandom-number
generators (PRNGs) to create an ensemble of possible
deterministic paths for the neutrons, get ENIAC to do the
computations  separately  for  each  of  these  deterministic
paths,  and  then  ﬁnally  average  the  results  from  all  these
computations. This was so much simpler than dealing with
probabilities  explicitly.  Essentially  the  idea  was  to  let  the
computer do the hard work—ENIAC wouldn’t mind
repeating, over and over, calculations for how the neutrons
might diﬀuse.
This new method was considered so important that Ulam
and von Neumann decided they needed to give it some kind
of secret name, and the code name “Monte Carlo”
emerged,  based  on  the  casino  in  Monaco  where  Ulam’s
uncle had gambled.

Here is a simple example of the Monte Carlo method at
work.  Suppose  you  want  to  estimate  the  value  of  p  /  4
without using a calculator. The area of a circle is (π / 4) ×
D2 where D is its diameter. The Monte Carlo way to
estimate π would be to take a sheet of paper and draw on it
a  square  (of  area D2)  which  just  contains  the  circle  (see
Fig.  27).  You  then  randomly  scatter  a  number  of  small
seeds on the sheet of paper. It is the random scattering of
small seeds that is the repeated operation mentioned
earlier.  Now  count  the  total  number, N1,  of  seeds  that  lie
inside the square. Of these count the number, N2, that also
lie  within  the  circle.  If  indeed  the  seeds  are  randomly
distributed inside the square, then the ratio N2 / N1 will get
closer and closer to p / 4 the greater the number of seeds
that are scattered on the sheet of paper.
The circumstances of Ulam’s eureka moment are similar
to  those  of  many  other  eminent  scientists’.  The  moments
occurred when they were relaxing—playing a game of
solitaire in Ulam’s case. Why do eureka moments seem to
occur  during  moments  of  relaxation?  I  will  have  some
things to say about this later in the book.
The  methods  of  Ulam  and  von  Neumann  would  have
been  known  to  Chuck  Leith,  an  American  physicist  and
mathematician  who  also  worked  on  the  hydrogen  bomb
after  the  war.  However,  in  the  1950s,  Leith  decided  to
change direction and work in the newly developing ﬁeld of
climate  modelling.  With  his  knowledge  of  Ulam  and  von
Neumann’s work, Leith wrote a paper in 1974 suggesting
that  the  Monte  Carlo  method  could  also  be  applied  to
weather forecasting. Leith proposed that instead of running
a  weather  forecast  model  once,  you  run  it  several  times
from slightly diﬀerent initial conditions, each initial
condition being consistent with the slightly imperfect
observations  you  have  at  the  initial  time.  Like  the  Monte

Carlo  simulations  for  the  bomb,  you  then  average  all  the
forecasts together.
FIG. 27. An illustration of the Monte Carlo method. Here we randomly
scatter small seeds on a sheet of paper on which a square and the largest
circle which ﬁts inside the square have been drawn. The ratio of the total
number of seeds lying inside the circle to those lying inside the square
provides an estimate of the (irrational) number π / 4.
Suppose  a  particular  low-pressure  system  is  especially
unpredictable.  Then  whilst  one  member  of  a  Monte  Carlo
forecast might predict a drop in the pressure system,
another  member  might  predict  an  increase  in  pressure  in
the same spot. By averaging the two forecasts together, the
averaged prediction would be for no change in pressure at
all, neither positive nor negative. In this way the averaged

Monte  Carlo  forecast  would  ﬁlter  out  the  unpredictable
parts of the weather, leaving only the predictable part: the
part common to all Monte Carlo members. Leith estimated
that  in  order  to  get  the  most  beneﬁt  from  such  a  Monte
Carlo  forecast,  you  would  only  need  to  average  together
about ten forecasts.
The idea that averaging together many individually
uncertain forecasts can lead to improved predictions wasn’t
itself new. In 1906, British statistician Francis Galton
observed a phenomenon now referred to as the “wisdom of
the  crowd”.  At  a  country  fair,  eight  hundred  people  took
part in a contest to guess the weight of an ox. Galton noted
that the average estimate from the eight hundred uncertain
guesses was within 1 percent of the true weight. In another
example, in the 1980s, ﬁnance professor Jack Treynor
famously asked his ﬁfty-six students to guess the number of
jellybeans  in  a  jar.  The  actual  number  was  850.  Only  one
student did better than the average guess of 871, an error
of 2 percent.
If  only  von  Neumann  and  Ulam  had  talked  more  to
Charney  and  his  team  at  Princeton,  Monte  Carlo  weather
prediction  could  have  ﬁrst  happened  on  ENIAC.  But  the
Monte Carlo methods were secret and so they didn’t talk. It
would take another forty years for this synthesis to occur.
Instead, the early weather forecast models attempted to
forecast 
tomorrow’s 
weather 
based 
on 
a 
single
deterministic  run  of  the  forecast  model.  It  would  take
several decades before the operational weather forecasters
came to rely fully on these forecast models and completely
abandon  their  own  empirical  rules  of  thumb  for  weather
prediction.
As these computer forecasts using physics-based models
started 
to 
become 
more 
and 
more 
successful,
meteorologists began to wonder how far ahead they could
forecast the day-to-day evolution of weather. Certainly, the
1963 paper of Ed Lorenz, discussed in Chapter 1, had made

it clear one could not predict indeﬁnitely far ahead.
However,  by  the  end  of  the  1960s,  there  was  a  general
feeling,  backed  up  by  some  research,  that  the  day-to-day
evolution  of  weather  should  be  predictable  to  about  two
weeks  ahead,  consistent  with  the  analysis  I  described  in
Chapter  3.  Two  weeks  became  known  as  the  “limit  of
deterministic predictability”.
In  1975,  the  countries  of  Europe  got  together  to  pool
their human and computing resources and create the
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts
(ECMWF).  The  primary  purpose  of  this  new  organisation,
located  in  Reading  in  southern  England,  was  to  realise  a
forecast system that could predict the detailed evolution of
weather up to the two-week limit of deterministic
predictability.
In the early days of ENIAC, when forecasts were made
only one day ahead and for a speciﬁc region of the world—
the United States—it was not necessary to model weather
in  the  tropics  or  in  the  southern  hemisphere.  Hence  the
early physics-based models had regional domains with
lateral  boundaries.  However,  when  forecasting  two  weeks
ahead,  the  weather  anywhere  on  the  globe  can  aﬀect  the
weather anywhere else. It became clear that to realise the
goal of forecasting to two weeks ahead, physics-based
models with a global domain had to be developed.
In  setting  up  ECMWF,  the  European  countries  rightly
realised  that  there  was  no  point  in  each  member  state
developing its own global model, and so the eﬀort focussed
on developing a single global forecast system which would
beneﬁt  all  the  citizens  of  Europe  equally.  From  the  day  it
started producing forecasts, ECMWF became de facto the
most skilful centre in the world at so-called medium-range
weather  prediction.  This  forecast  system  now  beneﬁts  all
the  citizens  of  the  world,  especially  those  at  risk  of  the
most extreme forms of weather.
