«  »
IN  THE  1960S,  WILHELM  Bjerknes’s  son,  Jacob,  started  to
ponder  Gilbert  Walker’s  ﬁnding  that  the  strength  of  the
Indian  monsoon  could  be  forecast  knowing  the  Southern
Oscillation index (the surface pressure diﬀerence between
Tahiti and 
Darwin, 
Australia). 
Bjerknes 
junior 
had
emigrated in 1940 to the US, where he founded the
Department of Meteorology at the University of California,
Los  Angeles.  There,  he  asked  himself  a  question:  What
makes the Southern Oscillation vary from year to year? He
began to realise that the answer depended on an oceanic
phenomenon known for many centuries to Peruvian
ﬁshermen.
Under  normal  circumstances,  sea  temperatures  along
the equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean are relatively warm in the west
and relatively cold in the east. This is a consequence of the
trade winds that blow from east to west across the
equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean. The winds blowing over the ocean
near the South American coast cause cold water to upwell
from the deeper parts of the ocean. However, the ﬁshermen
knew  that  in  some  years  this  normal  state  of  aﬀairs  is
completely disrupted—again the chaotic variability of
climate  at  work.  When  these  disruptions  occur,  the  trade
winds and the cold upwelling in the eastern Paciﬁc weaken
and the water warms. This is bad news for the ﬁshermen,
since the upwelled waters carry nutrients such as nitrates
and phosphates, the product of the decomposition of
sinking organic matter. So when the upwelling ceases, the
source  of  nutrients  is  shut  oﬀ  and  the  ﬁsh  either  die  or
move  elsewhere.  When  these  disruptions  occurred,  they
tended  to  be  ﬁrst  noticed  around  Christmastime  and  so
were  referred  to  as  El  Niño  events—“El  Niño”  meaning
“the Christ Child”5.

Jacob Bjerknes realised that these occasional disruptions
to  sea  temperatures  in  the  equatorial  eastern  Paciﬁc  are
intimately related to variations in Walker’s Southern
Oscillation. Bjerknes postulated a dynamical process
involving feedbacks between the tropical Paciﬁc Ocean and
the atmosphere above it to explain both the El Niño event
and  the  Southern  Oscillation.  Thanks  to  Bjerknes’s  work,
we now inexorably link El Niño to the Southern Oscillation
through the joint acronym ENSO (El Niño/Southern
Oscillation). Indeed, in part due to Bjerknes, we now think
of  the  atmosphere  and  oceans  as  components  of  a  single,
dynamically coupled entity.
In the 1970s, it began to be realised that when an ENSO
event  occurs,  the  eﬀects  not  only  inﬂuence  the  Indian
monsoon,  they  can  also  be  broadcast  around  the  globe
through what are called atmospheric teleconnections6.
Indeed, it turns out that through these teleconnections, El
Niño  can  also  inﬂuence  Gilbert  Walker’s  North  Atlantic
Oscillation and hence the weather of Europe7.
In this way, the interaction between the atmosphere and
the underlying ocean (and to a lesser extent land) provides
a source of predictability for the atmosphere on timescales
much longer than the limit of deterministic weather
predictability of two weeks.
Does 
the 
possible 
existence 
of 
such 
long-range
predictability conﬂict with the butterﬂy eﬀect discussed in
Chapter 
3? 
No. 
ENSO 
changes 
the 
statistical
characteristics  of  weather  during  a  season.  For  example,
knowing  ENSO,  we  can  make  a  prediction  of  the  likely
number of Atlantic hurricanes in a season, and their typical
intensity and track, even though the intensity and track of
any single Atlantic hurricane may be rather unpredictable
more than a few days ahead.
By the end of the 1970s, a kind of meteorological schism
had arisen. Complex physics-based models had been
