developed  to  forecast  the  weather  within  the  two-week
limit 
of 
deterministic 
predictability, 
whilst 
simple
statistical-empirical  models  were  used  to  predict  weather
on  month-to-seasonal  timescales.  The  forecasts  from  the
physics-based  models  were  precise  and  deterministic  (“it
will be sunny” or “there will be no hurricane”), whilst the
forecasts from the statistical-empirical models were based
on probabilities and hence uncertain in nature.
The two groups of meteorologists developing these
diﬀerent  forecast  systems  hardly  talked  to  each  other—
their methodologies had next to nothing in common.
«  »
I JOINED THE UK’S Met Oﬀice in the 1970s having
completed a PhD in general relativity theory. After
spending a few years working on the nonlinear dynamics of
the upper region of the atmosphere known as the
stratosphere8, in 1982 I was posted to the branch making
long-range  weather  forecasts.  At  the  time,  I  wasn’t  super
keen  about  this  posting,  but  in  the  scientiﬁc  civil  service
you  do  not  always  get  to  choose.  As  it  turned  out,  it  was
probably the best thing that happened to me in my
scientiﬁc career.
Pioneering  work  on  monthly  prediction  using  physics-
based models of the atmosphere had begun to be
performed by Indian American meteorologist Jagadish
Shukla, from NASA, and Japanese American meteorologist
Kiku  Miyakoda,  from  Princeton.  In  Shukla’s  studies,  the
observed slowly varying sea-surface temperatures provided
what are called “lower boundary conditions” for the
atmospheric 
models, 
and 
these 
boundary 
conditions
generated  predictable  atmospheric  circulations  inside  the

models on the monthly timescales 9. These studies made me
realise that physics-based models could play a valuable and
powerful role in long-range weather forecasting, alongside
the more traditional statistical-empirical models. My
colleagues  Chris  Folland  and  David  Parker  had  developed
statistical-empirical  models  for  monthly-averaged  weather
prediction over the UK. These statistical models predicted
probabilities 
of 
diﬀerent 
types 
of 
time-averaged
atmospheric  circulation  patterns,  and  the  forecasts  were
sold  to  utility  companies—water,  electricity  and  gas—to
help their planning for the weeks and months ahead.
We began wondering, Could the physics-based models be
used  to  strengthen  the  skill  of  these  statistical-empirical
models  for  long-range  predictions  over  the  UK?  Maybe—
but in order to blend the statistical-empirical model
approach with the physics-based model approach, the latter
would need to be probabilistic somehow.
It was clear that some kind of Monte Carlo method of the
type  Leith  had  been  advocating  some  years  earlier  was
needed. But instead of averaging the forecasts together as
Leith  had  suggested,  we  would  need  to  estimate  forecast
probabilities of diﬀerent types of weather patterns from the
members of the ensemble. In this way, in November 1985,
my colleague James Murphy and I implemented the world’s
ﬁrst ensemble weather forecast system based on the latest
generation of physics-based models 10. It was a very crude
system by present-day standards.
I recall thinking at the time: Why are we making these
ensemble  forecasts  only  for  the  monthly  timescales?  Why
don’t we also run these ensemble forecasts for predictions
on  shorter  timescales,  i.e.,  within  the  two-week  limit  of
deterministic predictability? I joined ECMWF in 1986 with
the  aim  of  trying  to  do  something  about  this.  I  wanted  to
take  the  ensemble  system  that  James  Murphy  and  I  had

recently developed and implement something similar within
the two-week forecast range, the focus of work at ECMWF.
This  idea  met  some  resistance  both  from  my  research
colleagues  and  from  the  weather  forecasters  who  made
forecasts  for  the  media.  They  saw  the  two-week  limit  of
deterministic predictability as a natural dividing line
between 
deterministic 
prediction 
and 
probabilistic
prediction.  My  colleagues’  view  was  that  when  predicting
weather  on  timescales  shorter  than  two  weeks,  you  just
make  a  single  best-guess  forecast  from  your  single  best-
guess initial state using your single best-guess model.
Hence,  these  colleagues  argued  that  when  new  computer
resources became available—this was the era when
computer  speed  was  increasing  exponentially  with  time—
they should be focussed on improving the best-guess model
and  best-guess  initial  state,  and  not  on  making  multiple
ensemble forecasts to estimate forecast uncertainty. In
addition, the forecasters didn’t like the idea of ensembles
because they felt that by explicitly estimating uncertainty,
these 
predictions 
were 
somehow 
undermining 
their
professionalism. Their job, they felt, was to tell it like it was
—and not how it might or might not be.
I did not agree. Because the atmosphere is nonlinear, its
predictability  will  vary  from  day  to  day.  This  variation  in
predictability  can  be  seen  in  simple  chaotic  models—see
Fig.  10.  On  many  days,  the  atmosphere  might  indeed  be
predictable enough so that deterministic predictions would
be quite accurate for a long time ahead (like the top left of
Fig. 10). However, there will be days when the atmosphere
is  suﬀiciently  chaotic  that  the  deterministic  predictions
could become inaccurate even after a few days of forecast
time (like the bottom of Fig. 10). And yet we were releasing
these deterministic forecasts to the public every day,
without any idea whether the atmosphere is in a
predictable  state  or  in  an  especially  chaotic  state.  If  the
latter,  then  the  best-guess  forecasts  could  be  worse  than

useless  if  people  used  them  to  make  important  decisions.
What is it, after all, that distinguishes science from
pseudoscience?  Surely  one  key  feature  is  an  ability  to
handle uncertainty, to estimate error bars. Weather
forecasting  inside  the  limit  of  deterministic  predictability
had no reliable means of estimating these error bars.
However, to estimate these error bars reliably, ensemble
systems  would  need  to  have  many  more  members  than
Leith’s  estimate  of  ten.  This  method  really  was  going  to
take  a  lot  of  computer  time.  My  deterministic  colleagues
were not happy.
The 1987 storm, discussed in the introduction, was
something  of  a  godsend.  We  ran  our  ensemble  system
retrospectively on this storm. In the computer simulation,
we  initialised  the  ensemble  just  over  two  days  before  the
storm hit the UK. The ﬁfty ensemble members started with
virtually, but not quite, identical initial conditions—ﬂaps of
butterﬂies’  wings  if  you  like.  Just  two  days  later  the  ﬁfty
ensemble  members  had  diverged  more  than  I  would  have
believed  possible  (see  Fig.  28).  Some  ensemble  members
showed intense storms. Others showed rather benign
weather. 
The 
atmosphere 
was 
in 
an 
exceptionally
unpredictable and chaotic state during this period and the
diversity  of  possible  solutions  was  remarkably  large.  This
was the equivalent in the real world of the explosive growth
of  uncertainty  shown  at  the  bottom  in  Fig.  10  for  the
Lorenz system.
What  can  one  do  with  these  ﬁfty  forecasts?  The  last
thing you would want to do is average the forecasts
together in the way Leith was suggesting. If you did that,
the  storm  solutions  would  just  get  smoothed  away  and
there  would  be  no  chance  of  predicting  the  possibility  of
hurricane-force winds.
Instead,  one  can  simply  count  the  number  of  ensemble
members with exceptional storms and treat this as a
frequentist-based estimate of the probability for an

exceptional storm. Fig. 29 is a map showing just this. It is a
forecast  of  the  probability  of  hurricane-force  winds.  From
Fig. 29  you  can  see  that  such  winds  are  predicted  with  a
probability of around 30 percent or so over southern
England. Given that “in Hertford, Hereford and Hampshire,
hurricanes hardly ever happen 11”, a 30 percent probability
is enormously large compared with one’s prior expectations
of  hurricanes  over  southern  England.  At  the  very  least,
knowing  such  a  probability,  it  might  be  prudent  to  park
your expensive new car in the garage and not under a big
oak tree.
FIG. 28. An ensemble forecast for the morning of October 16, 1987, from
initial conditions from midday on October 13. Illustrated are ﬁfty “stamp
maps” of forecast surface pressure. The uncertainties in the initial
conditions and in the model equations have led to enormous divergence in
possible forecast states for the sixteenth. Some ensemble members have
severe storms, others benign high-pressure weather.

FIG. 29. A map showing the probability of hurricane-strength winds on
October 16, 1987, based on the ensemble forecast shown in Fig. 28.
If  ever  there  was  a  slam-dunk  example  of  the  need  for
ensemble forecasts, this was it. The arguments and
discussions were over. The ECMWF ensemble forecast
system12 went operational late in 1992. At the same time,
colleagues Eugenia Kalnay and Zoltan Toth implemented a
similar  scheme  at  the  US  National  Weather  Service.  Over
the coming years, all operational weather forecast centres
around  the  world  would  implement  ensemble  prediction
systems of one sort or another.

Of course, an ensemble system like this would be useless
if it predicted hurricanes over England all the time. Fig. 30
illustrates  a  set  of  ensemble  “stamp  maps”  for  a  rather
typical situation (a three-day ensemble forecast at the time
of writing). Compared with Fig. 28, the ﬁfty pressure maps
look fairly similar to one another and suggest a rather high
probability  of  a  cool  northerly  air  stream  across  parts  of
central and western Europe. There is no chance of a
hurricane over England.
Of  course,  it’s  not  just  midlatitude  storms  that  beneﬁt
from ensembles. Fig. 31 shows weeklong ensemble forecast
tracks  for  three  tropical-cyclone/hurricane  forecasts.  The
top shows the ﬁfty forecast tracks for Cyclone Sidr, which
hit Bangladesh in 2007. This is an example where the path
of the storm was fairly predictable. The Bangladesh
authorities  sent  out  clear  warnings  of  the  storm  and  few
lives were lost. The middle shows the forecast tracks of the
infamous  Hurricane  Katrina  ﬁve  days  before  it  hit  New
Orleans. Here the path of the storm was much less
predictable. At this range the most likely path was actually
up over Florida. However, there was a second, weak
maximum  in  the  probability  of  predicted  tracks  over  the
Gulf of Mexico and on to New Orleans. This path became
more and more likely as landfall time approached. Katrina
is  an  example  of  an  only  partially  predictable  event.  The
bottom shows an ensemble forecast for Hurricane Nadine
in  the  Atlantic  in  2012.  In  this  case,  the  direction  Nadine
would take was completely uncertain.
The widely familiar probability forecasts on weather
apps  today  give  ensemble-based  probabilistic  predictions
right down to postcode or zip code scales. To do this, some
additional “downscaling” software is applied to the physics-
based  model  output.  This  is  an  area  where  AI  techniques
are becoming more and more important.
But  what  does  a  probability  forecast  mean?  It’s  worth
pausing  to  think  about  this.  After  all,  it’s  easy  to  make  a

probability forecast, and it seems you can’t go wrong. Just
say, “There is an eighty percent chance of it raining
tomorrow”. If it rains you say, “Well, I did say it would very
likely rain!” and if it doesn’t rain you say, “Well, I did say it
might  not  rain!”  So,  if  we  are  putting  a  lot  of  computer
resources  into  estimating  these  probabilities,  we’d  better
be sure we know what a forecast of 80 percent probability
actually means and whether our forecast system captures
this properly.
FIG. 30. An ensemble of surface pressure “stamp maps” over Europe for a
three-day weather forecast starting November 26, 2021. Compared with
Fig. 28, the ensemble forecasts have not diverged much. This is a more
typical situation in weather prediction.


FIG. 31. Ensembles of week-long forecast tropical-cyclone/hurricane
tracks, made using the ECMWF ensemble forecast system.
Top: Sidr—fairly predictable.
Middle: Katrina—fairly unpredictable.
Bottom: Nadine—totally unpredictable!
Suppose my weather app says that the probability of rain
between  6  and  7  p.m.  over  my  town  on  Tuesday  is  80
percent. This doesn’t mean that it will rain over 80 percent
of my town on Tuesday between 6 and 7 p.m. Neither does
it mean that it will rain for 80 percent of the time between
6  and  7  p.m.  over  my  town  on  Tuesday.  And  ﬁnally,  it
doesn’t  mean  that  only  80  percent  of  weather  forecast
providers think it will rain over my town between 6 and 7
p.m. on Tuesday. So what does it mean?
Let’s  suppose  that  we  have  access  to  all  the  ensemble
weather forecasts that have been made over the last year
(from a particular weather provider, like ECMWF). That’s 2
ensemble forecasts per day for 365 days, making 730
ensemble  forecasts  altogether.  Now  let’s  extract  from  all
these ensemble forecasts the ones that predicted rain
between  6  and  7  p.m.  over  my  town  with  80  percent
probability. That is to say, with an ensemble forecast
comprising 50 individual forecast members, we are looking
for ensembles where 40 out of the 50 ensemble members
(i.e.,  80  percent  of  them)  predicted  rain  over  my  town
between 6 and 7 p.m.
Let’s  suppose  there  were  35  days  over  the  last  year
when the forecast probability of rain was 80 percent. Now,
if these forecast probabilities are reliable, we should expect
that in reality it actually rained on 80 percent of these 35
forecast  dates;  that  is  to  say,  it  actually  rained  on  28
occasions. If, for example, we found it rained only on 3 of
the dates when an 80 percent probability had been
forecast, it is likely 13 that our ensemble forecast system is

not reliable and we would need to go back to the research
and development drawing board to try to ﬁnd out why we
are not representing forecast uncertainties properly in our
ensemble system.
More  generally  and  more  succinctly,  if  the  ensemble
system produces reliable forecast probabilities, then, from
all  occasions  that  a  weather  event  is  predicted  with  a
probability of p percent, the weather event should actually
occur on p percent of these occasions. What we are doing
here is taking a probability from the ensemble forecast and
comparing it with a frequency of occurrence from the real
world. The ﬁrst time I referred to “
p percent”, it was as a
forecast probability. The second time it was as a frequency
of  occurrence  in  the  real  world.  It  is  this  link  between
estimated 
probabilities 
of 
occurrence 
and 
actual
frequencies of occurrence that makes ensemble forecasting
useful.
It turns out that developing an ensemble forecast system
whose probabilities are reliable in this way (i.e., precisely
calibrated 
with 
frequencies 
of 
occurrence) 
is 
very
challenging, especially for the most extreme types of
weather. Merely adding random perturbations to the initial
conditions  doesn’t  lead  to  reliable  ensembles  at  all:  with
such perturbations, the ensemble members do not typically
diverge from one another nearly as rapidly as they should.
As a result, such ensembles underestimate forecast
uncertainty,  and  the  corresponding  forecast  probabilities
are  overconﬁdent.  Decisions  on  when  to  evacuate  a  city
based  on  unreliable  probabilities  of  hurricane-force  winds
could be disastrous. In order to forecast uncertainty
reliably,  you really  have  to  understand  the  nature  of  the
uncertainties  you  are  dealing  with—it’s  the  primacy  of
doubt again.
Trying  to  represent  the  butterﬂy  eﬀect  properly  in  an
operational ensemble weather prediction system took many
years 
of 
hard 
work, 
not 
least 
because 
the 
error

characteristics of many processes relevant in determining
the forecast initial state are diﬀicult to quantify (e.g., how
exactly 
information 
in 
observations 
is 
lost 
when
assimilating  these  observations  into  truncated  models  of
the atmosphere). To compensate for such “uncertainty
about uncertainty”, we implemented techniques from what
is called generalised instability theory. Essentially the idea
is to focus initial ensemble perturbations along state-space
directions  in  which  the  atmospheric  circulations  are  most
unstable. Such perturbations are known as “singular
vectors”.  Without  such  singular-vector  perturbations,  the
ensemble members tend to be too tightly clustered and the
ensemble 
is 
overconﬁdent 
and 
generates 
unreliable
probabilities. We will return to these singular vectors when
discussing ensemble conﬂict prediction, because the
concept  has  relevance  more  generally.  Because  of  these
special types of perturbations, operational ensemble
forecast  systems  are  not  the  simple  Monte  Carlo  forecast
systems  originally  envisaged  by  Leith,  and  so  instead  we
now use the more general phrase “ensemble prediction” to
describe them.
From the time of implementation in 1992 to the time of
writing, the ﬁfty-member ECMWF ensemble has been run
in  parallel  with  a  more  traditional  single-member,  best-
guess  deterministic  forecast.  The  latter  is  made  with  a
model whose spatial resolution is around twice that of the
ensemble model. With its higher resolution model, the
deterministic forecast provides more detail than the
ensemble  model.  However,  there  is  no  way  of  knowing
whether  this  extra  detail  is  trustworthy  or  not.  As  I  write
these words, ECMWF has just announced that in 2023 the
horizontal resolution of the ensemble prediction system will
be increased to 9 km (5.6 miles), the same as the
deterministic forecast model. Essentially, in 2023, the
ensemble  system  will  be  ECMWF’s  only  forecast  system.
This event will mark the end of a very long road of research
