6
Climate Change
Catastrophe or Just Lukewarm?
CLIMATE CHANGE HAS VARIOUSLY BEEN DESCRIBED AS A
CATASTROPHE in waiting or a lukewarm perturbation to our
climate  system  of  no  great  signiﬁcance.  That’s  quite  a
diﬀerence  of  opinion.  Which  is  scientiﬁcally  correct?  How
should we view climate change from a perspective
consistent with the “primacy of doubt”?
Let’s start by reviewing two opposing sides of the
argument. On the one hand:
We are in a climate crisis. We have reached this state by
burning fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas. This started in
earnest with the Industrial Revolution and continues to the
present day. Over this time, we have released back into the
atmosphere hundreds of billions of tons of carbon, most of
which  had  been  stored  in  the  ground  for  hundreds  of
millions of years. In this way, we have suddenly increased
the  concentration  of  carbon  dioxide  in  the  atmosphere  to
levels not seen for millions of years.
These  concentrations  will  continue  to  increase  into  the
future unless we stop burning fossil fuels. Because carbon
dioxide  is  a  greenhouse  gas,  our  carbon  emissions  will
warm  the  atmosphere,  leading  to  catastrophic  changes  to

our climate, including deadly heatwaves, storms of
unprecedented intensity, and metres of sea-level rise
caused  by  ocean  warming  and  the  disintegration  of  ice
sheets.
And the carbon we release into the atmosphere will stay
there for hundreds if not thousands of years. We must stop
our emissions now.
On the other hand:
Such alarmist warnings are completely overblown.
Carbon dioxide is what is called a “trace gas” in the
atmosphere.  Its  concentration  is  measured  in  parts  per
million.  Since  the  start  of  the  Industrial  Revolution,  the
concentration has increased by just one part in ten
thousand. That’s a tiny amount. Indeed, if you calculate the
amount  of  warming  due  to  a  doubling  of  carbon  dioxide
concentration, it is barely more than 1°C (1.8°F). Not only
is 
this 
not 
a 
catastrophe, it’s 
barely 
noticeable.
Temperatures  change  by  more  than  1°C  from  one  day  to
the next.
And of course, Ed Lorenz’s great insight was to realise
that a chaotic climate never repeats itself. On this basis, a
chaotic  system  like  climate  is  always  changing  and  hence
we can never be sure that some unusual warm spell in the
atmosphere is not just the eﬀect of internal variability, even
if the warm spell is record breaking. In any case, climate-
change  prediction  is  just  a  long-range  weather  forecast,
and,  again,  we  know  from  chaos  theory  that  such  long-
range predictions are impossible. Hence, these forecasts of
deadly heatwaves and substantial sea-level rise are
completely bogus.
On top of this, the climate models are ﬂawed and
unreliable. If we look at the predictions of climate change
made  thirty  years  ago,  the  models  predicted  too  much
warming.  Indeed,  when  has  a  climate  model  ever  made  a
prediction that has actually turned out to be correct?

And in any case, this increase in carbon dioxide
concentration  is  something  we  should  be  happy  about—
having  those  extra  molecules  of  carbon  dioxide  in  the
atmosphere  will  help  plants  grow  more  strongly,  thereby
greening the planet.
There—I  have  summarised  both  sides  of  the  argument,
hopefully in an accurate and disinterested way. Perhaps the
arguments on both sides sound plausible.
Before diving into the science of climate change, I need
to ﬁnd some words that describe these two points of view.
Sometimes the phrase “climate sceptic” is used to describe
the second point of view. However, all scientists, including
climate scientists, are inherently sceptical people. Bob May,
whose work on chaos and ecology was described in
Chapter 
1, 
characterised 
science 
as 
“organised
scepticism”. Another phrase that is sometimes used is
“climate denier”. However, the overtones of Holocaust
denial  make  this  phrase  oﬀensive  to  many  people.  In  an
attempt to be neutral, I propose to call the ﬁrst a “climate
maximalist” 
position 
and 
the 
second 
the 
“climate
minimalist” position1. An important question is this: Where,
on a spectrum in which these positions lie at the extremes,
does climate science lie? Near one end, halfway along?
The maximalists’ certainty that we are headed for
disaster  seems  inconsistent  with  the  “primacy  of  doubt”
mantra  of  this  book.  Perhaps,  therefore,  we  should  heed
the minimalists who emphasise the need to be cautious and
who stress uncertainties in our understanding of the
climate system.
However, as stressed in the previous chapter, estimates
of uncertainty are useful for making decisions—e.g.,
whether  to  cut  carbon  emissions  or  not—only  if  they  are
reliable, i.e., neither overconﬁdent nor underconﬁdent.
Exaggerating uncertainty can be just as damaging as
underestimating it. If Michael Fish had warned of a

possible hurricane hitting southern England every evening
he appeared on TV, no one would have paid attention on the
day when the hurricane did actually hit.
In  their  inﬂuential  book Merchants  of  Doubt2,  Naomi
Oreskes and Erik Conway describe how a group of
scientists  and  scientiﬁc  advisers  exploited  the  inevitable
uncertainties  in  research  to  obscure  scientiﬁc  knowledge
on a variety of issues from tobacco smoke to global
warming. Oreskes and Conway’s book appears to give 
The
Primacy of Doubt a bad name! However, the authors focus
on the deliberate inﬂation of uncertainty for ideological or
commercial reasons. Clearly, we should be just as wary of
inﬂation of uncertainty as of attempts to make predictions
more certain than can be justiﬁed.
In short, in trying to estimate what climate change holds
in store for us, it is vital that our estimates of uncertainty
are reliable. How do we achieve this? We typically estimate
uncertainty 
using 
ensemble 
techniques 
of 
the 
type
described  in  the  previous  chapter  for  weather  prediction.
Indeed, it’s simply not possible to describe climate change
in an objective, scientiﬁc way without explaining the three
roles  of  ensembles:  for  estimating  the  uncertain  feedback
eﬀects  in  climate  science;  for  estimating  the  impact  of
climate  policy  on  climate  change;  and  for  separating  the
eﬀects  of  natural  chaotic  variability  from  human-induced
eﬀects.
From the ﬁrst way of using ensembles, we can address
how big an impact our emissions of greenhouse gases are
having  on  global  temperatures.  With  the  second  set  of
ensembles,  we  can  assess  whether  mitigating  actions  can
be eﬀective or not. And from the third set of ensembles, we
can not only assess the extent to which observed changes
in  weather  and  climate  are  natural  (“climate  is  always
changing”), we can try to attribute speciﬁc weather events
to climate change, at least in a probabilistic way.

But  let’s  start  at  the  beginning.  What  is  a  greenhouse
gas? We say that carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas
because  it  is  relatively  transparent  to  the  predominantly
visible and ultraviolet photons emitted from the sun, but is
relatively  opaque  to  the  less  energetic  infrared  photons
emitted back to space by the cooler Earth3. Imagine
looking down on Earth from space, wearing infrared
goggles4. Then instead of seeing Earth’s surface, the blue
of  the  ocean,  for  example,  we  will  see  a  fuzz  of  photons
emitted  from  the  atmosphere  a  few  kilometres  above  the
Earth’s  surface.  These  are  the  photons  emitted  by  the
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. We would not be able
to  make  out  the  Earth’s  surface  at  all  from  this  fog  of
infrared photons.
Suppose we could suddenly double the amount of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere. Then the Earth’s surface would
become  even  more  invisible.  The  greenhouse  blanket  is
now stronger than before. Carbon dioxide is what is called
a  “well-mixed  gas”,  which  means  that  if  we  double  the
amount 
of 
carbon 
dioxide 
in 
the 
atmosphere, 
its
concentration  will  double  everywhere  in  the  atmosphere.
As  a  result,  the  photons  that  we  see  with  our  infrared
goggles 
will 
on average 
have 
been 
emitted 
from
greenhouse gas molecules a little higher up in the
atmosphere—the  original  layer  we  were  seeing  with  our
goggles  is  now  partially  obscured  by  extra  greenhouse
molecules above this layer. But higher up in this part of the
atmosphere,  the  air  is  a  little  cooler.  This  means  that  the
energy  of  the  infrared  photons  that  are  emitted  out  to
space  is  less  than  it  was  before.  The  Earth  is  now  in  an
energetic  imbalance:  the  sun  is  giving  the  Earth  more
energy  than  the  Earth  is  re-radiating  back  to  space.  The
only way to restore this balance is for the Earth to warm. It
does  this  at  the  level  where  the  photons  are  radiating
energy back to space, and, as a consequence, it warms at

the  surface  too5.  Directly  from  this  eﬀect,  a  doubling  of
carbon  dioxide  from  pre-industrial  times  will  warm  the
surface of the Earth by a little more than 1°C—perhaps not
something to make a big deal of. Here the minimalists are
correct.
However, carbon dioxide is not the only greenhouse gas
in  the  atmosphere.  Indeed,  it  is  not  even  the  strongest
greenhouse  gas,  molecule  for  molecule.  As  discovered  by
the  Irish  physicist  John  Tyndall  in  the  nineteenth  century,
the  most  important  greenhouse  gas  in  the  atmosphere  is
actually  water  vapour—the  gaseous  form  of  water.  When
the sky is blue and cloudless, there is still plenty of water
vapour in the air. This water vapour is largely transparent
to visible light, which is why we don’t see it. However, it is
opaque to light at infrared wavelengths. Hence, like carbon
dioxide, it can trap the outgoing energy from the Earth.
We  often  think  of  the  important  role  that  liquid  water
plays in sustaining life on Earth. However, Tyndall realised
that, as a greenhouse gas, the gaseous water vapour plays
a  vital  role  too.  In  a  wonderfully  eloquent  turn  of  phrase,
Tyndall wrote,
“This aqueous vapour is a blanket more necessary to the
vegetable life of England than clothing is to man. Remove
for a single summer night the aqueous vapour from the air
that  overspreads  this  country,  and  you  would  assuredly
destroy every plant capable of being destroyed by a
freezing temperature. The warmth of our ﬁelds and
gardens  would  pour  itself  unrequited  into  space,  and  the
sun would rise upon an island held fast in the iron grip of
frost.”
With this in mind, you may well wonder why we are so
bothered  by  an  increase  in  carbon  dioxide  concentration.
Surely,  we  should  instead  be  worried  about  the  eﬀect  we
might be having on the amount of water vapour in the air.

The  answer  is  that  we are  worried  about  the  eﬀect  we
are having on the amount of water vapour in the air. But we
aren’t  worried  so  much  by  any  direct  emissions  of  water
vapour as by the knock-on eﬀect on water vapour from our
emissions of carbon dioxide. Speciﬁcally, if the global
atmosphere  warms  a  little  from  our  emissions  of  carbon
dioxide, this warming will be ampliﬁed by a knock-on
increase  in  the  amount  of  water  vapour  in  the  air.  The
process  is  perhaps  more  familiar  in  reverse.  During  cold
autumn nights, the warm, moist air of the day cools and the
water vapour condenses into small droplets we call fog (or
a low-level cloud). The cooler nighttime air contains fewer
water vapour molecules than the warmer daytime air. And
then, as the next day breaks, the air warms again and the
opaque water droplets slowly re-evaporate back into
optically transparent water vapour.
The amplifying knock-on eﬀect is an example of what is
called a positive feedback process. We emit carbon dioxide
into the air. The air warms globally a small amount.
Because  of  evaporation  (e.g.,  from  the  oceans  and  land
surface), the warmer air becomes more moist. The
greenhouse  eﬀect  from  this  extra  water  vapour  increases
the  warming  of  the  air  from  carbon  dioxide  alone.  The
direct  warming  due  to  a  doubling  of  carbon  dioxide  is  a
little over 1°C. However, if we add this water vapour
feedback, the warming doubles to just over 2°C (3.6°F). If
we  also  take  into  account  the  fact  that  reﬂective  ice  and
snow cover on the Earth’s surface start to disappear as the
Earth  gets  warmer,  so  that  more  of  the  sun’s  energy  is
absorbed  at  the  surface,  the  warming  increases  to  about
2.5°C (4.5°F). Now climate change starts to become
something to worry about.
We understand these feedback processes reasonably
well. 
However, 
there 
is 
another 
feedback 
process
associated  with  water  that  we  understand  rather  poorly.
This is the cloud feedback process. Clouds occur when the

water vapour in moist air condenses into small water
droplets or small ice crystals. Compared with water vapour,
very little of the water in the atmosphere is in the form of
clouds6 (less than one hundredth). However, clouds have a
big eﬀect on climate. They punch well above their weight,
so to speak.
There are two key questions: How will clouds adjust to
the increasing levels of carbon dioxide, and will this lead to
an  ampliﬁcation  of  the  warming  or  an  oﬀ-setting  cooling
eﬀect?  These  are  especially  diﬀicult  questions  to  answer.
This is partly because, depending on its type, a cloud might
warm or cool the Earth’s surface. For example, a layer of
cloud  just  above  the  Earth’s  surface  will  predominantly
scatter photons from the sun back to space. Earth’s surface
will  never  see  these  photons,  and  so  the  surface  will  be
cooler than it would be if the layer of cloud weren’t there.
However, a thin, wispy cirrus layer of cloud, mainly
comprising ice crystals high in the atmosphere, would have
an opposite eﬀect. These clouds let sunshine through.
However, like carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, they trap
infrared photons emitted from the atmosphere below. The
Earth’s surface is warmer as a result.
How  do  clouds  respond  to,  say,  a  doubling  of  carbon
dioxide? If low-level clouds increase and high-level clouds
decrease, then clouds will likely save us from catastrophe 7.
They will oﬀset the warming due to the increase in carbon
dioxide.  In  this  scenario,  clouds  will  feed  back  negatively
on climate change. It won’t take us all the way back to the
minimalist  description  of  climate  change,  but  perhaps  to
somewhere in the middle ground between minimalism and
maximalism. By contrast, if it’s the other way around—low-
level clouds decrease and high-level clouds increase—then
clouds will exacerbate the warming due to the increase in
carbon dioxide. In this scenario, clouds provide a positive
feedback  on  climate  change.  Another  positive  feedback,

compounding  the  water  vapour  feedback,  would  be  very
bad  news  for  humanity.  In  this  case  we  will  be  facing
climate maximalism.
The  question  of  whether  clouds  act  as  a  positive  or
negative  feedback  on  climate  change  can’t  at  present  be
answered  unambiguously:  indeed,  I  would  say  it  is  the
biggest unsolved problem in physical climate-change
science. There are two reasons why it is a diﬀicult problem.
Firstly, the physics of the small droplets and ice crystals
in  a  cloud—what  is  called  cloud  microphysics—is  itself
rather complicated. For example, the balance between ice
crystals  and  water  droplets  determines  how  reﬂective  a
cloud  is  to  incoming  solar  photons,  and  this  reﬂectivity  is
crucial in determining the eﬀect of the cloud on the
temperature at the surface. Now, it isn’t the case that cloud
droplets 
simply 
freeze 
into 
ice 
crystals 
once 
the
temperature of the cloud falls below 0°C (32°F). In
particular, cloud droplets frequently comprise supercooled
liquid water at temperatures well below 0°C. The
conversion of supercooled water droplets into ice crystals
depends  not  only  on  temperature  but  also  on  impurities
(natural and manmade) in the air—what are called
“aerosols”. Indeed, these aerosols are important for
determining how much water vapour in the cloud turns into
water droplets and ice crystals in the ﬁrst place. In
addition,  once  the  ice  crystals  do  freeze,  their  precise
shape and size can be important in determining things like
cloud reﬂectivity. Hence, trying to estimate how individual
clouds  will  change  as  the  atmosphere  warms  depends  on
quite complicated cloud microphysical processes.
The  second  problem  is  that  clouds  also  depend  on  the
larger-scale  environment  in  which  they  exist.  There  are
many types of clouds in the atmosphere, and assessing how
each  of  these  changes  in  response  to  increasing  levels  of
carbon dioxide is a complicated business. One type which is
believed to be important is what is called “marine

stratocumulus”.  Over  the  Paciﬁc  Ocean,  for  example,  the
extent of these types of clouds depends on the strength of
the 
Walker 
circulation, 
the 
large-scale 
atmospheric
circulation associated with Gilbert Walker’s Southern
Oscillation, as described in Chapter 5. The marine
stratocumulus  clouds  broadly  occur  in  the  sinking  branch
of the Walker circulation, over the tropical eastern Paciﬁc 8.
By contrast, deep thunderstorm clouds form in the
ascending branch of the Walker circulation, over the
tropical western Paciﬁc, bringing rain to these regions. The
conversion of water vapour to liquid water in these
thunderstorm clouds plays a crucial role in determining the
strength  of  the  Walker  circulation.  And  so  if  we  want  to
know what will happen to the marine stratocumulus clouds
under climate change, it’s not enough to simply study the
microphysics  of  the  stratocumulus  clouds  in  the  eastern
Paciﬁc; it is also important to understand what will happen
to the thunderstorm clouds in the remote western Paciﬁc
9.
And this is just one small part of the cloud feedback jigsaw.
It’s  all  consistent  with  the  complicated  picture  of  high-
order  chaos  described  in  Chapter  3.  It  is  why  climate-
change  science  is  unquestionably  complicated  and  why
clouds are the most complicated and uncertain part of it all.
At present, there is no observational evidence that global
cloud cover is systematically changing. On the other hand,
neither is there evidence that it is not changing. The record
we have of high-quality global cloud observations is
relatively  short,  and  the  changes  we  are  looking  for  are
small compared with natural year-to-year variations in
cloud cover. The problem of detecting changes in clouds is
compounded 
by 
the 
fact 
that 
individual 
satellite
instruments do not produce data over multidecadal
timescales  and  the  precise  calibration  of  one  instrument
relative  to  its  successor  or  predecessor  is  delicate  and
diﬀicult. However, if we do one day start to see systematic

changes,  and  they  are  in  the  direction  of  reducing  global
low-level  cloud  cover,  and/or  increasing  high-level  cloud
cover,  indicating  a  positive  cloud  feedback,  this  will  be  a
bleak  day  indeed  for  humanity.  Here  the  word  “positive”
does not denote something good.
Precisely  because  observations  of  global  cloud  cover
have yet to change in a systematic way, it is impossible to
estimate how much warming we can expect over the rest of
this century by simply looking back at the amount of
warming that has happened over the past ﬁfty years or so
and  extrapolating  into  the  future.  These  cloud  feedbacks
are highly nonlinear processes.
So,  we  are  faced  with  a  problem.  We  cannot  model
clouds  using  the  proper  laws  of  physics  (i.e.,  using  the
Navier-Stokes 
equation 
of 
Chapter 
3) 
because 
the
gridboxes in current global climate models are too coarse
in  spatial  scale,  in  turn  because  the  computers  climate
scientists use aren’t powerful enough. Instead, clouds have
to be represented by simpliﬁed formulae known as
parametrisations. These parametrisations are, by their
nature,  approximate  and  uncertain.  The  real  problem  is
that  we  are  trying  to  compress  the  complex  fractal-like
multiscale structure of clouds into a highly simpliﬁed
formulaic representation. Just as Poincaré found there is no
simple formula to describe the motion of planets, so climate
scientists realise there is no simple formula to describe the
structure  of  clouds.  As  discussed  in  Chapter  3,  a  way  to
incorporate  the  inherent  uncertainty  in  cloud  and  other
small-scale turbulent processes is through stochastic noise.
Such 
noisy 
parametrisations 
are 
beginning 
to 
be
introduced into the current generation of climate models.
The ﬁrst physics-based climate model was developed in
the 1950s by Norman Phillips, a meteorologist at the
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. Phillips showed
that  many  of  the  properties  of  climate,  such  as  the  jet
streams and cyclonic weather disturbances, could emerge

naturally from the Navier-Stokes equation and other
primitive equations of classical physics. However, Phillips’s
model was crude. The model knew nothing about the
continentality  of  the  Earth  or  the  seasons,  and  had  no
representation of clouds or rain. In addition, the model had
very coarse-scale gridboxes.
In  1958,  one  of  the  pioneers  of  climate  science,  Nobel
laureate  Syukuro  Manabe10  (known  to  his  colleagues  as
“Suki”), moved from the University of Tokyo, where he had
just completed his PhD, to the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory  at  Princeton  University,  then  being  led  by  Jo
Smagorinsky, another of the early ENIAC pioneers.
Together  Smagorinsky  and  Manabe  began  to  develop  the
ﬁrst  comprehensive  global  climate  models  with  realistic
geography and seasonal cycles and with hydrological cycles
and hence (parametrised) clouds.
Whilst  these  models  were  important  for  understanding
the emergence of Earth’s climate from the laws of physics,
Manabe realised that they could also be useful in
estimating  the  impact  of  human  emissions  of  greenhouse
gases, a matter which was already of concern in the 1960s
in  scientiﬁc  and  environmental  circles.  In  the  mid-1970s,
Suki Manabe and his colleague Richard Wetherald11
performed  the  ﬁrst  climate-change  experiment  with  the
three-dimensional  climate  model  they  had  developed.  In
this model they estimated the eﬀect on climate of doubling
the carbon dioxide concentration from pre-industrial
values, as discussed earlier. Fig. 32 shows the temperature
response of the model to such a doubling, as a function of
latitude and height.
Let’s  take  a  careful  look  at  this  early  physics-based
climate  model  simulation  of  climate  change.  You  can  see
two  clear  predictions,  over  and  above  the  prediction  that
the surface of the Earth will warm due to the doubling of
carbon dioxide concentration. The ﬁrst is that in the

stratosphere, the region of the atmosphere above about 15
km (9.3 miles), the doubling of carbon dioxide will actually
cool the air. The second is that the surface warming will be
particularly marked in the Arctic.
The  stratosphere  is  a  region  of  the  atmosphere  where
temperatures increase with height due to the absorption of
sunlight by stratospheric ozone, a special molecule made of
three oxygen atoms. The absorption of ultraviolet light by
stratospheric  ozone  is  important  in  preventing  us  from
getting  skin  cancer.  So  why,  then,  does  the  stratosphere
cool when the carbon dioxide concentration increases? The
ﬁrst  point  to  make  is  that  carbon  dioxide  is  a  well-mixed
gas. So, when we emit carbon dioxide into the atmosphere,
it 
mixes 
throughout 
the 
atmosphere, 
including 
the
stratosphere,  fairly  quickly.  The  second  point  is  that  the
temperature in the stratosphere arises from a balance
between a warming from the absorption of solar radiation
by ozone and a cooling from the emission back to space of
infrared  radiation  by  carbon  dioxide.  If  the  amount  of
carbon dioxide in the stratosphere increases, then the
emission  to  space  dominates  over  the  ozone  absorption,
and  the  stratosphere  cools.  As  the  stratosphere  cools,  it
emits less infrared radiation to space, and in this way the
stratosphere gets back into equilibrium at a reduced
temperature.

FIG. 32. A simulation of climate change from Manabe and Wetherald’s
seminal 1975 study. It shows the simulated change in temperature,
averaged around a line of constant latitude, as a function of latitude and
height in the northern hemisphere, with the North Pole on the left and the
equator on the right. Note the cooling in the stratosphere (at a height of
about 15 km [9.3 miles]) and the “hot spot” warming over the surface
Arctic. Both stratospheric cooling and enhanced Arctic warming have
occurred in reality. Published in 1975 by the American Meteorological
Society.
This diﬀerential heating eﬀect—a warming of the surface
and a cooling in the stratosphere—would not be expected if
the warming of the Earth’s surface was due to an increase
in  energy  from  the  sun.  In  that  case,  the  stratosphere
should 
warm. 
Observations 
show 
that 
the 
Earth’s
stratosphere is indeed cooling as the Earth’s surface
warms. This is a clear prediction of Manabe and
Wetherald’s model that has been veriﬁed by observations.
The  second  prediction  from  Manabe  and  Wetherald’s
study, the enhanced warming in the Arctic, has also come

to  pass—large  parts  of  the  Arctic  are  now  ice-free  in  the
summer. This is in part (there are other reasons) due to a
positive feedback eﬀect associated with water. The sea ice
over  the  Arctic  reﬂects  sunlight  straight  back  to  space.
However, as the Arctic warms, the sea ice melts and
exposes  darker  water  underneath,  which  absorbs  these
solar photons, which then adds further to the warming of
the Earth.
After  the  success  of  Manabe  and  Wetherald’s  climate-
change papers, many institutes around the world began to
develop their own climate models. The number has
continued  to  grow  to  the  present  day  and  is  approaching
one hundred. What was technically innovative has become
relatively  straightforward  for  individual  climate  institutes.
These  models  are  all  based  on  the  same  principles:  a
“dynamical 
core” 
where 
the 
Navier-Stokes 
equation
(amongst  others)  is  solved  up  to  some  imposed  spatial
resolution, and a set of simpliﬁed parametrisation formulae
for  unresolved  subgrid  scale  processes  like  clouds.  The
models contain representations not only of the atmosphere
but  also  of  the  oceans,  the  land  and  the  cryosphere  (the
regions  of  Earth  covered  in  ice),  and  more  recently  the
biosphere.
This  provides  a  natural  “ensemble  of  opportunity”  to
study  climate  change.  It  is  an  example  of  the  so-called
multi-model ensemble mentioned in Chapter 5. Each model
diﬀers from the others in the precise computational
techniques used to solve the Navier-Stokes equation, and,
more importantly, in the parametrisation formulae for
unresolved processes. Every few years, the World Climate
Research Programme, partly under UN auspices, oversees
the  production  of  a  set  of  highly  coordinated  multi-model
ensembles  to  study  climate  change.  Results  from  these
multi-model ensembles are fed into the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessment reports.

Let’s  use  these  ensembles  of  opportunity  to  estimate
how much global warming would arise if we were to double
the  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in  the  atmosphere—from
roughly 300 parts per million (pre-industrial values) to 600
parts per million (which we may reach later this century) 12.
In Fig. 33  I  have  shown  these  estimates  in  the  form  of  a
histogram combining together output13 from climate
models  which  contributed  to  either  the  ﬁfth  or  the  sixth
IPCC assessment report. It can be seen that the most likely
warming is around 3°C (5.4°F) though a number of models
predict increases of more than 5°C (9°F). No models
predict  the  Earth  will  warm  less  than  about  2°C  (3.6°F).
The Earth’s surface has already warmed by over a degree
since pre-industrial times.

FIG. 33. A histogram of estimates of climate sensitivity—the global
warming that arises from a doubling of carbon dioxide concentration—from
models which contributed to either the ﬁfth or sixth IPCC assessment report
(Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 [CMIP5] or CMIP6). The
dashed line is a probabilistic estimate of such warming. As expected from
theory, it is skewed towards large values of warming.
Motivated by expectations from theory 14, I have ﬁtted a
simple  curve  to  this  histogram.  The  higher  the  curve,  the
more  likely  the  corresponding  increase  in  global  mean
surface  temperature  shown  on  the  horizontal  axis.  The
distribution has a characteristic shape that statisticians call
“skewed”,  which  means  the  distribution  is  not  symmetric
about  its  peak,  i.e.,  about  its  most  likely  value.  It  has  a
long,  fat15  tail  going  out  to  large  warming  values16.  By
contrast, it goes to zero for global warming values less than
one degree. We will see other examples of skewed

distribution when we study pandemics and ﬁnancial
crashes. Skewed distributions with long, fat tails are
indicative of an underlying nonlinear system17.
One  consequence  of  such  a  skewed  distribution  is  that
the warming we can expect to see will be greater than the
most likely warming predicted by a single model. To
illustrate  this,  suppose  we  have  10  hypothetical  models
which  diﬀer  by  the  value  of  some  uncertain  parameters,
and  suppose  the  10  predictions  from  the  10  models  are
described by the highly skewed sequence of numbers {1; 1;
1; 1; 1; 1; 1; 1; 1; 100,000}. If each set of parameter values
is equally likely, the most likely single-model prediction is
the  value  1.  However,  if  we  average  the  predictions  over
the 10 models, then the average or “expected” prediction is
close  to  10,000—much  larger  than  the  most  likely  single-
model  prediction.  Based  purely  on  the  ensemble  data  in
Fig. 33, the most likely warming from a single-model
prediction  is  between  2.5°  and  3°C,  whilst  the  expected
warming from the ensemble is about 3.6°C (6.5°F). If this is
the warming we can expect, it is the level of warming we
should be prepared for.
The skewed shape of the climate sensitivity curve can be
largely understood from the feedbacks discussed earlier
18.
We  have  already  mentioned  that  if  climate  change  were
associated only with an increase in carbon dioxide, then we
would expect the Earth’s surface to warm by a little over
1°C. As mentioned, with water vapour feedback this
increases to just over 2°C. The fact that we have this rather
broad, skewed distribution is largely due to uncertainty in
the  cloud  feedback  eﬀect 19.  Whilst  a  few  models  have
negative cloud feedback eﬀects, most climate models
predict 
positive 
cloud 
feedbacks 
but 
with 
diﬀerent
strengths.
Although  climate-model  experiments  in  which  carbon
dioxide  levels  are  doubled  (such  as  shown  in  Fig. 33) are

useful in quantifying the possible changes in weather due
to  climate  change,  they  are  in  one  particular  way  too
idealised to be useful for policy-making. These experiments
don’t  tell  us  when  we  will  reach  a  given  level  of  climate
change.  If  our  emissions  reduce  substantially,  but  not  to
zero, it could take many hundreds of years before carbon
dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere will double.
Politicians tend to lose interest about things too far in the
future.
This brings us to the second important use of ensembles
in  climate  prediction.  If  we  are  to  estimate  the  future
climate for, say, the year 2100, we need to know how our
emissions of carbon dioxide will change with time over the
twenty-ﬁrst  century.  This  of  course  depends  on  how  we
humans respond to the model simulations of climate
change.  Climate  models  are  like  economic  models  in  this
respect—just  as  output  from  economic  models  can  aﬀect
the economy, so output from climate models can aﬀect the
climate.  Earth’s  climate  could  turn  out  very  diﬀerently  if,
on the one hand, we ignore the simulations or, on the other
hand,  we  heed  the  simulations.  In  principle  one  could
imagine incorporating these diﬀerent human responses
into  a  single  coupled  human-climate  ensemble—in  which
humanity ignores the predictions in some ensemble
members and cuts emissions in others.
However,  this  may  not  be  especially  useful  for  policy-
making. Policymakers need to know how climate will
change both without regulatory policy and with regulatory
policy. From such information they can assess the value of
such regulatory policy.
To  do  that,  separate  ensembles  are  run  for  diﬀerent
emissions “scenarios”, as they are called. For example, one
emissions scenario could be considered a worst-case
situation  in  which  we  burn  fossil  fuels  as  rapidly  as  we
can20.  We  appear  to  have  moved  away  from  this  scenario

because we are not burning coal as much as we might be.
In another emissions scenario, we try to decarbonise at a
leisurely  pace.  In  a  third  emissions  scenario  we  not  only
decarbonise rapidly, we ﬁnd ways of sucking carbon dioxide
back out of the air—e.g., by planting more trees or by more
technological means—through what are called negative
emissions.
In  this  way,  climate  scientists  tend  to  talk  not  about
climate predictions but climate “projections”. A projection
is  a  prediction  conditioned  on  an  assumed  scenario  for
carbon emissions (and other related processes). We create
an ensemble of climate projection for each emission
scenario.
Being aware of this dependence 
on scenario is
particularly important when examining the accuracy of
climate projections made in past decades. For example, one
of the best-known historical sets of projections was made in
1988 by one of the leading climate scientists: Jim Hansen
from NASA. Hansen presented to a US congressional
committee  results  based  on  the  NASA  climate  model,  run
using three diﬀerent emissions scenarios. In retrospect we
can  see  that  his  Scenario  A  overestimated  the  emissions
that have actually occurred. This does not mean that
Hansen’s  model  was  wrong  with  this  projection—Hansen
could not have been sure how our emissions would evolve
with time. Indeed, his somewhat less aggressive Scenario B
has turned out to be a more accurate representation of our
emissions. Some climate minimalists use Hansen’s Scenario
A projection to suggest that the models overpredict global
warming.  However,  in  terms  of  Scenario  B,  the  observed
and  simulated  changes  in  global  temperature  are  quite
close. Indeed, looking more broadly at those climate
projections whose emissions scenarios were close to what
actually  happened,  estimates  of  increases  in  global  mean

surface  temperature  were  found  to  be  broadly  consistent
with observations21.
So  far,  we  have  focussed  on  global  mean  temperature.
Scientists describe climate change in terms of increases in
global mean surface temperature, not because it’s a
societally important variable but because the chaotic
internal 
variability 
of 
climate 
aﬀects 
global 
mean
temperatures much less than more regional temperatures.
The temperature over London can change by 1°C from one
hour to the next. However, the temperature averaged over
the whole surface of the Earth is much more stable.
Changing it by 1°C is a big deal.
Using global mean surface temperature to describe
climate  change  comes  with  a  major  downside—it  conveys
no real sense of what climate change means to us humans.
We,  after  all,  are  aﬀected  by  local  weather,  not  by  global
mean  temperatures.  Perhaps  the  best  book  I  know  that
gives a plausible sense of what a warmer world would be
like at the regional scale is Mark Lynas’s Our Final
Warning: Six Degrees of Climate Emergency
.
What  I  want  to  do  now  is  ﬁx  on  a  speciﬁc  level  of  4°C
(7.2°F) of warming. According to Fig. 33, it’s a little more
than  the  expected  warming  given  a  doubling  of  carbon
dioxide but certainly one that is plausible in the future. This
is what Lynas says about a 4°C warmer world:
“At  four  degrees  a  whole  new  process  has  begun  to
unfold, making substantial areas of the planet biologically
uninhabitable  for  humans.  Whilst  the  increased  mortality
risk  in  today’s  heatwaves  tends  to  be  among  older,  very
young  and  other  vulnerable  people,  temperatures  at  four
degrees  of  global  heating  are  high  enough  to  reach  a
critical  threshold  that  will  kill  anyone,  however  ﬁt  and
healthy, because of the laws of thermodynamics.”
Here Lynas is referring to the fact that the human body
loses excess heat (e.g., when air temperature exceeds body

temperature) by sweating, i.e., by evaporative cooling.
However,  once  temperature  and  humidity  pass  a  certain
threshold,  we  are  unable  to  lose  heat  by  sweating,  and,
without  going  into  an  air-conditioned  building,  death  will
result.  It  is  no  good  sitting  in  the  shade  for  respite.  The
critical threshold occurs when a thermometer whose bulb
is encased in a wet piece of cloth—the temperature of a so-
called wet-bulb thermometer—reaches 35°C (95°F).
We 
have 
not 
yet 
experienced 
such 
wet-bulb
temperatures, though in 2015 the wet-bulb temperature in
Bandar  Mahshahr  in  Iran  reached  34.6°C  (94°F)
22.  Lynas
recounts how, in a 4°C warmer world, such deadly
heatwaves will become commonplace in large parts of the
Middle East and South Asia, including large parts of India
and China. The consequence would likely be mass
migration either polewards or to higher altitudes.
But this won’t necessarily bring complete relief because,
according to the models, subtropical regions like the
Mediterranean,  whilst  not  as  hot  as  the  Middle  East,  will
have turned into deserts as the rain-bearing storms
themselves  shift  polewards23.  The  desertiﬁcation  of  large
parts of the world will impact the crops we grow for food,
and simultaneous drought in the main breadbaskets of the
world will not be uncommon.
On  top  of  that,  the  more  humid  conditions  will  make
extreme  storms  more  intense.  The  latent  heat  released
when  water  vapour  condenses  into  liquid  water  plays  an
important role in determining the intensity of such storms.
More water vapour in the air allows for greater latent heat
release.  With  sea-level  rise  (caused  by  a  combination  of
thermal expansion of water and disintegrating ice sheets),
the  storm  surges  associated  with  some  of  these  extreme
storms will be devastating for many coastal cities.
From Lynas’s description, a 4°C or warmer world
describes  a  vision  of  hell.  I  cannot  imagine  anyone  would

want to live in such a world, even if it were possible to ﬁnd
ways of adapting to it in part.
However, we should not have to take Lynas’s word for it.
Since climate models are very similar in structure to
weather  forecast  models—historically,  they  evolved  from
the  weather  models  of  the  1950s—they  not  only  simulate
changes in global temperature, they also simulate changes
in regional weather patterns.
Indeed, because of this, we can in principle use climate
models  to  study  whether  some  actual  observed  weather
event, let’s say a heatwave in Canada or a ﬂooding event in
Germany, is somehow caused by climate change. This is a
contentious  issue,  as  these  days  climate  maximalists  tend
to  associate  any  observed  extreme  weather  event  with
climate change, whilst minimalists dismiss them as part of
the natural chaotic variability of climate.
This brings us to the third use of ensembles. Two
separate ensembles of runs of physics-based climate
models are made. In the ﬁrst ensemble, the climate model
is  run  for,  say,  one  hundred  years  with  an  atmospheric
carbon  dioxide  concentration  that  is  ﬁxed  at  values  from
just  before  the  beginning  of  the  Industrial  Revolution.  In
the  second  ensemble,  the  carbon  dioxide  concentration  is
doubled. Let’s suppose we are interested in whether
climate  change  will  aﬀect  the  probability  of  a  heatwave
over California. We simply count the number of times such
heatwaves occur in each of the two ensembles. If the model
is 
realistic 
enough, 
Californian 
heatwaves 
will
spontaneously  occur  in  the  ﬁrst  ensemble  since  they  are
part  of  the  natural  variability  of  climate.  Comparing  the
two ensembles’ heatwave frequencies will give us an
estimate of the change in likelihood of a Californian
heatwave due to our carbon emissions 24. The technique of
quantitatively attributing real-world weather events to
climate  change  was  pioneered  by  my  Oxford  colleague

Myles  Allen25  in  2003,  and  the  application  of  his  ideas
features strongly in the most recent IPCC assessment
report.
It’s  certainly  true  that  because  a  chaotic  system  never
repeats  itself,  we  can  never  be  100  percent  certain  that
some  real-life  weather  event  was  caused  by  our  carbon
emissions.  It’s  true  but  pretty  much  irrelevant.  What  is
relevant is knowing that, under climate change, the
likelihood of this type of event has changed from 1 in 1,000
years to, say, 1 in 10 years. From such a statistic, we can
decide whether it’s worth trying to mitigate the eﬀects of
such  weather  events,  for  example  by  changing  forestry
management practices or by building better ﬂood defences.
This methodology works if the weather events we study
are  not  too  extreme.  However,  there  is  a  problem  if  the
weather events are particularly extreme. If we try to
perform attribution studies on some of the recent extreme
events (e.g., from 2021, the extreme summer temperatures
in  British  Columbia  or  the  extreme  rainfall  in  the  Eifel
region of Europe, Henan Province in China or New York),
we ﬁnd that current-generation models are not capable of
simulating  events  of  this  intensity.  This  is  simply  because
the  climate  model  gridboxes  aren’t  small  enough  to  allow
the model equations to generate the intensity of rainfall or
temperature  or  wind  associated  with  such  extremes.  The
probability of such events in both pre-industrial times and
in the twenty-ﬁrst century is 0, according to current-
generation  models.  Hence,  according  to  the  recipe  I’ve
described,  the  eﬀect  of  climate  change  is  equal  to  0  /  0,
which is an undeﬁned number—it could literally be
anything.  And  yet  it  is  these  extreme  events  in  which  we
are most interested. This very much suggests that if we try
to  use  current  climate  models  to  estimate  the  nature  of
weather  extremes  in  a  4°C  warmer  world,  we  will  likely
underestimate them.
