The conclusion is not that climate change isn’t aﬀecting
the likelihood of such extreme events. Rather, it means we
need  to  put  more  resources  into  climate  modelling26  to
decrease  the  size  of  model  gridboxes  enough  to  allow
climate models to simulate such extremes. I return to this
point further on.
«  »
MAXIMALIST 
OR 
MINIMALIST: 
WHICH 
is 
scientiﬁcally
correct?
Let’s start by pointing out a few scientiﬁcally incorrect
statements  on  both  sides.  Clearly  what  is  wrong  with  the
maximalist position (as stated earlier) is the assertion that
climate change will be catastrophic. This is not supported
by the science. Because of uncertainties in climate
feedbacks, most importantly with clouds, the science is not
that certain.
However,  the  minimalist  position  (as  stated  earlier)  is
scientiﬁcally incorrect in a number of ways.
For  example,  one  cannot  dismiss  century-long  climate
projections  just  because  a  deterministic  weather  forecast
goes wrong after a few days. Climate-change prediction is
not an initial-value problem of the type suggested by
Cleveland Abbe and Vilhelm Bjerknes, as we saw in
Chapter  5. In weather forecasting, we try to estimate
where we will be on the climate attractor as accurately as
possible at some point in the future. In climate forecasting,
by  contrast,  we  try  to  estimate  how  an  external  forcing
(e.g., coming from our carbon emissions) changes the
shape  of  the  climate  attractor  as  a  whole.  Fig.  11  from
Lorenz’s model illustrates the point well: we can predict a
change  in  the  shape  of  the  attractor  with  much  more

conﬁdence than we can predict where the state will be on
the attractor at any time.
A second factually incorrect point in the minimalist
argument  as  stated  is  that  models  from  thirty  years  ago
predicted too much warming and that these climate models
made no other veriﬁable predictions. As mentioned, given
the correct emissions scenario, the early models did predict
the  correct  amount  of  warming.  In  addition,  the  earliest
climate models correctly predicted the cooling of the
stratosphere and the fact that the Arctic would be
especially prone to warming.
Then there are statements in the minimalist position that
are true but misleading. It is true that we can never be sure
that  some  record-breaking  event  is  not  part  of  natural
climate variability. However, as I have explained, this is a
red herring. What we want to know is whether such types
of events are becoming more likely, and by how much, as a
result of climate change.
Another example of a misleading statement is that
increases  in  carbon  dioxide  will  help  to  green  the  planet.
Such  beneﬁcial  impacts  will  occur  only  as  long  as  the
weather doesn’t become unconducive to plant growth. It’s
no good having that extra plant material if there is too little
or too much rain for it to grow or it is so hot that it wilts.
Perhaps  there  is  an  analogy  with  addictive  recreational
drugs. Initially they seem beneﬁcial to your sense of well-
being, but ultimately, they can destroy you.
Insofar  as  the  science  of  climate  change  is  concerned
with estimating the probabilities of diﬀerent levels of
climate  change,  it  is  unscientiﬁc  to  assert  that  we  are
heading 
towards 
climate 
maximalism 
or 
climate
minimalism, or indeed any speciﬁc point in between.
It may appear from what I have written that I am more
sympathetic with the climate maximalist position than the
climate minimalist position. However, there is one element
of 
the 
climate 
minimalist 
statement 
that 
I 
cannot

completely dismiss: the possibility that the climate models
are, in part, unreliable. To be clear, I would ﬁnd it very hard
to believe that the probabilistic projections of global
warming  are  completely  unreliable,  for  the  simple  reason
that these estimates are entirely consistent with basic
physics in a moist atmosphere. On top of which, it is hard
to think of any external forcing (like solar variability), or an
internal  dynamical  mechanism,  that  would  generate  the
observed changes in global temperatures in both the lower
and upper atmospheres on a multidecadal timescale.
Nevertheless,  there  are  good  reasons  to  suppose,  for
example,  that  we  are  not  estimating  the  cloud  feedback
term  as  accurately  as  we  might.  For  example,  no  cloud
parametrisation  scheme  can  properly  represent  what  is
called the “mesoscale” structure of clouds: structures that
are larger than individual clouds but smaller than the grid
spacing  of  the  models.  For  example,  holes  can  appear  in
sheets of stratus cloud, like in a regular honeycomb27. Such
structures can’t be properly represented in current climate
models because the gridboxes—typically 100 km (62 miles)
or more in horizontal length—aren’t small enough. Another
type of mesoscale structure which can’t be represented in
climate  models  is  associated  with  the  way  thunderstorm
clouds sometimes aggregate together to form superstorms.
When they do aggregate, the surrounding air is clear and
relatively dry. Such structures change the radiative balance
of  the  Earth.  If  the  mesoscale  structure  of  clouds  evolves
under  climate  change,  this  will  contribute  to  the  cloud
feedback term.
Indeed, because of such inherent shortcomings, current-
generation climate models depart systematically from
observations in quantities like regional seasonally averaged
rainfall.  Indeed,  these  systematic  departures  (indicating  a
bias of the models compared with observations) are
somewhat  larger  than  the  climate-change  signals  we  are

asking the models to simulate 28. In a nonlinear system like
climate, this is an indication of unreliability on the regional
scale.
We can imagine a climate version of the “Turing test” for
AI.  In  the  original  Turing  test—the  imitation  game29—we
ask the AI system questions and, based on the answers, try
to tell whether we are talking to a human or a computer.
Current AI systems cannot pass the Turing test. Similarly,
current climate models cannot pass the climate Turing test;
looking at output from these models, we can tell that it is
coming  from  a  computer  model  rather  than  from  the  real
world30.
Despite  these  shortcomings,  we  cannot  simply  ignore
climate  models.  These  models  are  our  only  tool  to  try  to
understand  and  estimate  the  future.  It’s  not  like  other
areas  of  science  where  we  can  simply  do  a  laboratory
experiment. There are no lab experiments that can emulate
climate change.
Climate models are central in determining the best
strategy  on  carbon  emissions.  One  particularly  important
issue is whether we will pass “tipping points”—changes to
ice sheets, rain forests or ocean circulations which cannot
be undone by negative carbon emissions at a later time. We
can plant as many trees as we like, but if they are planted
after one or more of these tipping points have been passed,
they will be ineﬀective in returning us to current
conditions.  Current  climate  models  are  not  able  to  assess
reliably  whether  such  tipping  points  will  occur,  as  the
models’ resolution is too coarse.
Output  from  climate  models  is  also  vital  for  assessing
societal  vulnerability  to  climate  change  on  the  regional
scale,  and  so  for  determining  the  investments  needed  to
make society resilient to changes in climate. This is
particularly important in the developing world where
extremes of weather are likely to become especially

extreme (e.g., wet-bulb temperature exceeding 35°C).
Prioritisation of possible adaptation strategies will be
crucial  for  such  countries:  Is  preparing  for  drought  and
heatwaves  more  important  than  preparing  for  exceptional
storms  and  deluges  of  rain,  or  vice  versa?  Again,  this
requires high-resolution simulations of climate.
Climate models are also vital if we are ever to consider a
so-called  Plan  B  in  which  we  try  to  actively  control  the
climate, e.g., by spraying aerosols (or their precursors) into
the  stratosphere  to  reﬂect  sunlight  back  to  space31.  The
danger with such alternatives is that they may have
unexpected consequences, such as diverting the monsoons
or shutting oﬀ the moisture supply to the rainforests.
Reliable  climate  models  are  the  only  tools  we  have  to
quantify these risks.
It is for all these reasons that I am not happy with the
status quo in climate modelling—i.e., with the multi-model
ensembles  of  relatively  low-resolution  models,  as  used  in
the IPCC reports. They have done their job of warning the
world  of  the  dangers  of  climate  change,  but  they  are  not
well  suited  for  estimating  climate  change  at  the  regional
level, particularly for estimating changes in the likelihood
of extreme events. The problem is that individual institutes
often lack the necessary human and computational
resources. They simply can’t aﬀord to run their models at a
higher resolution. As a result, we do not have the capability
to produce high-resolution ensemble projections of climate.
My  own  view  is  that  we  need  a  new  framework  for
developing  next-generation  climate  models  if  we  are  to
reduce some of these key uncertainties about climate
change. 
Instead 
of 
a 
large 
number 
of 
subcritical
institutional eﬀorts, we need to pool resources into a
“CERN 
for 
climate 
change”32, 
CERN 
being 
the
international institute which found the Higgs boson. In this
way, scientists should work more collaboratively to develop

next-generation, high-resolution climate models for the
beneﬁt  of  society  worldwide.  There  is  a  relevant  African
proverb: if you want to go fast, go alone—if you want to go
far,  go  together.  Perhaps  philanthropy  can  play  a  role  in
supporting such an institute. The cost per year need not be
much more than that of launching a few craft into space.
With  such  an  institute—or  better,  a  federated  hub  of
institutes around the world—we can envisage applying
ensemble prediction in a fourth sense, one which connects
with its use in weather prediction as described in Chapter
5. As we discussed, it doesn’t matter that weather  is
chaotic and unpredictable when making projections of
future climate. As such we do not have to try hard to ﬁnd
precise initial conditions for the projections, as we would in
weather  forecasting.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  some
evidence  that  decadal-timescale  variability  in  the  oceans
may  be  partially  predictable.  For  example,  as  mentioned
right at the beginning of this book, decadal-timescale
drought  in  the  Sahel  region  of  Africa  may  be  linked  to
ocean  circulations  in  the  Atlantic.  There  is  evidence  that
these circulations may be inherently predictable, that is to
say,  can  be  predicted  given  an  ensemble  of  forecasts  in
which the ocean circulations are accurately initialised from
observations.  This  raises  the  prospect  of  making  regional
climate projections over multidecadal-timescales using
ensembles which are both carefully initialised with
observations and in which scenarios for our carbon
emissions  are  also  included33.  Such  an  endeavour  would
need  high-resolution  climate  ensembles.  It  would  be  an
ideal goal for an international federated institute with
pooled human and computing resources.
Here  I  am  not  arguing  for  a  single,  monolithic  climate
model. However, I am arguing for a rationalisation of eﬀort
around  a  few  modelling  systems  (perhaps  one  or  two  per
continent)  which  individually  have  suﬀicient  resolution  to

pass the climate Turing test. I hope this is something both
climate  minimalists  and  climate  maximalists  will  support.
The  better  we  can  represent  our  climate  system  with  the
primitive laws of physics, the more conﬁdence we can have
in the output of these models.
Let’s summarise. Taking a speciﬁc position—minimalist,
maximalist  or  indeed  any  speciﬁc  point  in  between—is
simply  inconsistent  with  the  science.  The  key  message  of
this chapter is that one’s attitude to climate change, like to
weather  prediction,  should  be  framed  in  terms  of  risk:  Is
the risk of undesirable changes to climate high enough to
warrant  taking  precautionary  action  now?  Consider  the
possibility of the Earth spiralling oﬀ to inﬁnity, as discussed
in  Chapter  1.  If  this  were  to  occur,  it  would  wipe  out
humanity. We could take precautions of a sort by diverting
massive  resources  into  populating  Mars  (assuming  Mars
won’t itself be ejected at the same time). However, the risk
is so small—recall that not one single member of the
ensemble  of  solar  system  forecasts  predicted  this  would
happen—that 
it 
is 
clearly 
not 
worth 
taking 
such
precautions. However, as we have seen, the risk of a hellish
4°C or warmer world is far from negligible—it is only a few
tenths of a degree warmer than what we would expect from
a doubling of carbon dioxide concentration.
If we think the risk is worth the cost, then manifestly the
uncertainties discussed in this chapter should not deter us
from taking precautionary action. That is, uncertainty
should  not  be  a  cause  for  inaction.  However,  given  the
importance of the problem, if we do decide to act, we must
surely continue to fund the research that will help reduce
uncertainties,  or  will  at  least  increase  conﬁdence  in  the
reliability of our estimates of uncertainty. Whether the risk
really  is  worth  the  cost  is  something  I  will  address  in
Chapter 10.

...
