7
Pandemics
COVID-19  HAS  KILLED  MILLIONS  AROUND  THE  WORLD.
AND YET, IF we can leave aside the misery it has brought,
the  disease  provides  a  fascinating  example  of  the  role  of
ensemble prediction in practice. COVID-19 also illustrates
an  extraordinary  number  of  parallels  with  the  climate-
change problem. What can we learn from this?
Early in the days of the pandemic, governments around
the world faced diﬀicult decisions about which most had no
prior experience. Indeed, although some, like the UK, had
made plans for a major outbreak in disease and illness, the
plans  were  not  really  appropriate  for  COVID-19,  where
many in the population were asymptomatic carriers. In any
case,  the  crucial  question  was  whether  to  impose  strict
lockdowns to try to minimise the spread of the virus, and
hence minimise the risk that the countries’ health services
would collapse under the weight of COVID infections, but
with the consequence that the countries’ economies would
suﬀer  badly.  The  alternative  was  to  simply  let  economies
continue as unimpeded as possible, suﬀer the health
consequences and hope for some eventual herd immunity.
Many policies were based on the former approach, though
some governments took a more laissez-faire attitude.
This  strikingly  paralleled  strategies  on  tackling  climate
change: try to cut emissions and get to net-zero as quickly

as possible, or do little that might threaten economic
growth. As far as I could tell, those who advocated minimal
restriction to the economy during the pandemic tended to
also advocate minimal restrictions on the use of fossil fuels.
In the UK at least, the politicians repeatedly said that we
must  “follow  the  science”  in  dealing  with  the  pandemic.
However,  as  with  climate  change,  science  does  not  itself
advocate a particular policy. If you want to reduce the risk
of  dangerous  levels  of  climate  change,  then,  according  to
climate science, you should reduce carbon emissions.
Climate-change science does not say that you 
must reduce
emissions—that 
involves 
making 
value 
judgements.
Similarly, if you want to reduce the risk that health services
get overrun, then, according to COVID-prediction science,
you should restrict the way people interact with one
another. The science does not say that you therefore must
restrict 
such 
interactions. 
That 
too 
involves 
value
judgements.
To  invoke  measures  that  minimise  the  risk  of  hospitals
being  overrun,  governments  need  ways  of  predicting  the
number  of  people  needing  hospitalisation  as  a  function  of
diﬀerent  possible  policy  measures.  The  predictions  will
therefore  be  contingent  on  these  policy  measures.  This  is
exactly  the  same  as  occurs  in  estimating  climate  change.
Because of this, the COVID-modelling community uses the
same terminology as the climate-modelling community:
predictions contingent on particular policies are called
“projections”.  This  is  important  when  trying  to  assess  the
accuracy of a particular projection. It’s no good comparing
real-world  data  with  a  projection  of  hospital  admissions
that assumes a policy of normal, unrestricted societal
interaction 
if 
in 
the 
real 
world 
the 
government
implemented  a  policy  to  restrict  interaction.  This  is  like
comparing the observed global warming rate with climate
projections based on bigger carbon emissions than
occurred in reality.

The  core  of  typical  COVID  prediction  models  is  quite
simple.  The  population  at  any  time  is  divided  into  three
classes: individuals who have not yet been in contact with
the  virus  but  are  susceptible  to  infection;  individuals  who
have  the  virus  and  can  infect  others;  and  individuals  who
have been infected and have either recovered or died, but
in either case cannot infect others. This is often referred to
as an SIR (susceptible/infected/removed) model.
The 
development 
of 
eﬀective 
vaccines 
does 
not
invalidate  the  SIR  model.  Now  vaccinated  individuals  are
less  susceptible  to  infection  (and  are  much  less  likely  to
need  hospitalisation  and  much  less  likely  to  die).  This
eﬀectively  increases  the  number  of  “removed”  individuals
in the SIR model.
The  diﬀiculty  in  predicting  the  spread  of  the  disease  is
less  to  do  with  uncertainty  in  classifying  the  stages  of
infection,  and  more  to  do  with  uncertainty  in  the  way  we
humans  interact  with  each  other,  and  hence  uncertainty
into which of these three classes an individual will belong.
At one extreme, one can imagine a hypothetical population
of individuals which is fully homogeneous in the sense that
each  individual  has  the  same  chance  of  interacting  with,
and hence of passing the infection to, any other individual.
This  is  described  by  the  R0  parameter:  R0  describes  how
many  people  each  infected  person  will  infect  on  average.
With  R0  =  2,  on  average  1  infected  person  will  infect  2
people, these 2 people will infect 4 people, these 4 people
will infect 8 and so on. This is called exponential growth.
More generally, if R0 is greater than 1, the disease grows. If
R0  is  less  than  1,  the  virus  will  eventually  die  out  on  its
own.
Clearly  no  population  is  homogeneous  in  this  way.  We
each  live  in  our  own  regions,  our  own  cities,  towns  and
villages.  Living  in  the  south  of  England,  I  am  much  less
likely to come into contact with someone living in Scotland

than  with  someone  living  in,  say,  London.  We  can  try  to
account for this by estimating the R0 parameter for
diﬀerent regions. On the other hand, if this heterogeneity
extends down to the smallest scales—as well it might—then
R0 ceases to be a simple parameter, and instead becomes a
highly  dynamic  variable  which  ﬂuctuates  wildly  from  one
grouping of people to another, and from time to time.
The most obvious manifestation of the heterogeneity of
society  is  the  potential  existence  of  “superspreaders”—
individuals  who  infect  many  more  people  than  would  be
implied by a single R0 parameter—or “superspreader
events”, where many more people would get infected than
would  be  expected  from  a  more  homogeneous  society.  An
important question is whether overall infection rates can be
signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by a small number of superspreader
events.  To  answer  this,  the  assumption  of  homogeneity
must be replaced with one which is not overly complex and
intractable,  and  yet  takes  account  of  the  way  in  which
individuals interact as a function of age, geographic
location and other factors.

FIG. 34. An example of a network of people. Individuals correspond to
nodes of the network, and they interact if they are joined or linked together.
One  way  to  model  the  more  heterogeneous  aspects  of
society  is  through  what  are  known  as  networks
1.  From  a
mathematical point of view, a network is easy to describe: it
is a set of points, called “nodes”, and lines joining some of
these points, called “links”. A simple example of a network
is  shown  in  Fig.  34.  Here  nodes  reﬂect  individuals,  and
they are joined by links when the individuals interact.

For example, imagine a cocktail party where initially no
one  knows  anyone.  The  nodes  of  the  associated  network
would  correspond  to  the  individuals  at  the  party.  If  two
people talk to each other during the party, we draw a link
between  the  two  corresponding  nodes.  Since  it  is  fairly
unpredictable  who  will  talk  to  whom,  we  can  model  the
interactions  between  individuals  in  a  stochastic  way,  i.e.,
using random numbers. That is to say, we assign a
probability p that these individuals will interact. If all the
individuals are introverts, then p will be quite small; if they
are  all  extroverts, p  will  be  larger.  Nodes  are  then  joined
randomly, consistent with the probability p.
This is sometimes called a random network. One of the
interesting properties of a random network is that it
exhibits what is sometimes called the “small-world”
property:  if  you  choose  any  two  individuals  on  Earth,  you
will  ﬁnd  that  one  of  them  knows  someone,  who  knows
someone, who knows someone, who knows someone, who
knows someone, who knows someone, who knows the other
person, i.e., that any two people are linked by at most six
intermediate acquaintances. For many years after network
theory  was  developed,  it  was  thought  that  such  random
networks described societal and many other types of
interaction quite accurately.
In random networks of the type I’ve described, it is very
unlikely that nodes with a large number of links will exist if
p is small. For example, with 100 nodes and with p = 0.02,
then  we  would  expect  each  node  to  have  about  2  links
emanating  from  it  on  average.  The  likelihood  that  a  node
has, say, 8 links emanating from it is virtually zero. This is
because of the assumption that if the probability that
individual A interacts with individual B is equal to 
p, then
the  probability  that  individual  A  will  interact  with  both  B
and C is equal to p × p = p2. If p is a small number (e.g.,
0.02), then p2 is a very small number (0.0004). Because of

this,  the  number  of  nodes  with 
k  links  to  other  nodes
decreases exponentially the larger is k. Just as exponential
growth represents very rapid growth, so exponential decay
represents very rapid decay.
However,  in  the  real  world,  this  assumption  frequently
turns out to be incorrect. Imagine that at our cocktail party
we had invited a few celebrities. Then, likely, we would ﬁnd
that many people would try to interact with those
particular individuals. In terms of the corresponding
network, there would be many more links emanating from
the celebrity nodes compared with the non-celebrity nodes.
If we analyse the World Wide Web, where the URLs
(websites)  are  represented  by  nodes,  then  we  will  ﬁnd
numerous  nodes  with  a  small  number  of  links  coexisting
with a few nodes with a very large number of links—we call
these “hubs”. If we look at an air-traﬀic network, we ﬁnd a
few  hubs  coexisting  with  many  nodes  of  small  degree.
These hubs correspond to superspreaders in COVID
transmission.
In networks with hubs, the number of nodes with k links
does not decrease exponentially as k increases. Instead, the
probability that a node has k links is described by what is
called  a  “power-law”  distribution,  where  the  probability
decays with k much more slowly than exponential decay.
Such power-law distributions also describe how energy,
in  the  spectrum  of  whirls  in  a  turbulent  ﬂuid,  varies  with
the size of the whirl. Indeed, fractal geometries can also be
described 
by 
such 
power-law 
distributions. 
The
mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot—the one who coined the
word “fractal”—drew attention to these connections in his
book The  (Mis)behaviour  of  Markets
2.  He  made  the  point
that  extreme  events,  like  ﬁnancial  crashes,  which  might
superﬁcially  be  assessed  as  extremely  unlikely,  are  not
unlikely at all in models with this type of power-law
behaviour. The existence of power-law behaviour is telling

us about a type of nonlinearity which underpins multiscale
systems,  which  is  common  to  the  spread  of  disease,  the
economy, the weather and maybe even the whole universe.
Using power-law networks of ten thousand nodes, where
nodes  represent  individuals  who  are  either  “susceptible”,
“infected” or “recovered”, it was indeed found that the best
strategy  for  curbing  the  spread  of  the  infection  was  to
reduce the extent to which the superspreader hubs spread
the  infection3.  Here  the  spread  of  the  disease  when  the
number of links emanating from a hub is reduced is
compared  with  a  strategy  in  which  the  number  of  links
emanating from randomly chosen nodes is cut.
Whilst such network models are useful in drawing
attention to the importance of heterogeneity of the
population, they are still too idealised to be useful in
actually estimating infection and hence hospitalisation
numbers.  For  a  country  like  the  UK,  one  would  need  to
increase the number of nodes from ten thousand to about
67 million if one were to capture the population using one
of  these  networks  (and  model  the  way  in  which  all  such
individuals  interact  with  each  other).  And  that  would  not
include the infections coming from people travelling to the
UK 
from 
abroad. 
Although 
this 
is 
not 
completely
inconceivable—as 
I 
discuss 
later 
on—with 
present
supercomputers it is not feasible.
Instead, state-of-the-art epidemiological models—such as
the Imperial College COVIDSim model4—work 
in 
a
somewhat diﬀerent way. COVIDSim is an important model
as its projections provided one of the key pieces of
information that led the UK government to order a
nationwide  lockdown  in  March  2020  to  try  to  contain  the
virus. In COVIDSim, the country is tiled with gridsquares,
in much the same way a weather or climate model tiles the
Earth  with  gridboxes.  Each  of  the  gridsquares  contains
information  about  the  population  within  the  gridsquare—

for 
example, 
population 
density, age 
structure 
and
household structure, along with information about schools,
universities 
and 
workplaces. 
This 
information 
is
represented in the form of parameters—some 940 of them
in  total—numbers  which  are  ﬁxed  and  don’t  change  with
time during a model forecast.
A key question for any government is whether the
projections from a model like COVIDSim are reliable. Can
the projections be trusted to give a plausible picture of the
future? Clearly this depends on the accuracy of the
parameter values. It turns out that there is real uncertainty
in about sixty of the parameter values and the model output
is  especially  sensitive  to  the  value  of  about  nineteen  of
these uncertain parameters.
Is it important to know how uncertain the values of these
sensitive parameters are? Suppose we wanted to know only
the expected numbers of hospitalisations and deaths from
COVID. Then we might argue that all we need to do is run
the model with the most likely values of the parameters. As
such,  the  uncertainty  in  these  parameter  values  wouldn’t
be judged to be particularly important.
However, this argument is valid only if the system we are
dealing  with  is  fundamentally  linear.  The  emergence  of
power-law network scaling suggests that we are not
dealing with linear systems. Here we can get some
guidance from climate-change projections. In Chapter 6 we
saw that if we vary the uncertain subgrid parametrisations
in a climate model, the global warming caused by a
doubling of carbon dioxide appears to have a rather
asymmetric, skewed probability distribution with a long, fat
tail 
going 
out 
to 
large 
warming 
values 
(and 
no
corresponding  tail  at  low  warming  values).  For  such  a
distribution,  the  expected  warming—the  average  over  an
ensemble of models with diﬀerent parametrisations—is
larger than the warming obtained by setting the parameter

values at their most likely values. The same situation
occurs here.
In 2021, a study 5 was published of ensemble projections
with COVIDSim in which these uncertain parameters were
varied according to plausible estimates of their uncertainty.
These  estimates  were  obtained  by  what  is  called  “expert
solicitation”,  which  means  asking  the  experts  how  much
they felt a parameter value could be in error: 10 percent,
20 percent, 50 percent? Ensembles were then run in which
the  parameter  values  were  randomly  perturbed  by  the
experts’ estimates of parameter uncertainty. One of the key
results  from  the  study  is  shown  in  Fig.  35.  It  illustrates
probability distributions of projected COVID deaths for two
diﬀerent policy scenarios.
Interestingly, 
the 
ensemble-based 
probability
distribution  of  projected  deaths,  particularly  for  the  ﬁrst
policy  scenario,  is  remarkably  similar  to  the  probability
distribution of global warming due to a doubling of carbon
dioxide—a  skewed  distribution  with  a  long,  fat  tail  going
out to large numbers of deaths.
As  with  global  warming,  this  means  that  the  expected
number  of  deaths  cannot  be  reliably  estimated  using  a
model  simulation  run  with  the  most  likely  values  of  the
uncertain  parameters.  This  is  shown  explicitly  in  Fig.  35.
The expected number of deaths is higher than the number
predicted using the most likely values of the parameters. In
the case of the second, more laissez-faire policy, the
estimated cumulative number of deaths at day three
hundred  using  the  most  likely  value  of  the  parameters  is
around  25,000.  However,  the  expected  number  of  deaths
based  on  the  full  ensemble  with  perturbed  parameters  is
signiﬁcantly larger than this, around 40,000.

FIG. 35. (Facing Page) The grey shading denotes estimates of uncertainty
in COVID deaths based on ensembles of Imperial College COVIDSim model
projections. The darker the shading, the more likely is the estimated
number of deaths. The diﬀerence between the top and lower illustrations

reﬂects diﬀerent policy assumptions (e.g., whether social gatherings are
allowed). The thin solid lines show the average of the ensemble
distributions. The dashed lines show the estimated number of COVID
deaths projected by a model with its parameters ﬁxed at their most likely
values. The former is higher than the latter, providing an important reason
to make an ensemble of projections. The squares show real data. The fact
that reality does not lie within the ensemble estimates of uncertainty
suggests that the ensemble does not fully capture the true uncertainty in
these projections (especially initial infections). From Edeling et al. (2021).
Estimates of the expected numbers of deaths and
hospitalisations may  not  be  the  most  relevant  information
for policy decisions. Having a health system that essentially
collapses  because  it  is  overwhelmed  with  new  patients  is
something  a  government  may  not  wish  to  risk  at  all.  As
such, plausible worst-case outcomes can be just as
important,  if  not  more  so,  as  expected  outcomes.  This  is
similar to the situation in weather forecasting—the
averaged forecast can hide the possibility of some
catastrophic weather event. Hence, for example, if we take,
as an estimate of a plausible worst-case scenario, the value
given by the distribution at the edge of the heavier shading
(the  region  where,  according  to  the  ensemble,  there  is  a
two-thirds  probability  of  occurrence),  then  the  number  of
deaths rises to 60,000, well over double the prediction with
best-guess parameter values.
However, Fig. 35 also illustrates a problem. As
discussed,  an  ensemble  prediction  is  useful  only  if  the
probabilities  it  generates  are  reliable.  For  the  ensemble
predictions  I  have  helped  develop  in  weather  and  climate
science, far and away the largest part of research time was
spent 
on 
developing 
initial-condition 
and 
model
perturbations  which  would  produce  reliable  probabilities.
We can see in Fig. 35 that in the ﬁrst hundred days or so,
the actual numbers of deaths rose much more sharply than
the  ensemble  suggested  could  occur.  This  means  that  the
ensemble probabilities, in this case, weren’t reliable.

Clearly some other sources of uncertainty are important. In
this  case,  the  missing  source  of  uncertainty  is  associated
with the date the disease started to grow—in reality it must
have been growing sooner than was thought possible. That
is to say, the projections used unduly certain initial
conditions. 
This 
result 
is 
consistent 
with 
weather
prediction, where uncertainty in the forecast initial
conditions  is  typically  more  important  than  uncertainty  in
the values of model parameters.
However, there is a second type of uncertainty in these
projections which is not well represented by simple
parameter perturbations. For example, COVIDSim is based
on a tiling of the country. Are the assumptions of
homogeneity  within  a  tiled  region  accurate?  How  small
should the tiles be for this assumption to be correct? Is it
ever correct? More generally, there may be many
assumptions in the models where uncertainty goes far
beyond  simple  parameter  uncertainty.  Such  uncertainties
are often referred to as “structural model uncertainties”.
This is perhaps a good time to dust oﬀ the much-
repeated  saying  from  Donald  Rumsfeld,  US  secretary  of
defense at the time of the invasion of Iraq. Speaking about
reports of the lack of evidence for weapons of mass
destruction, he famously said in 20026:
“Reports  that  say  that  something  hasn’t  happened  are
always  interesting  to  me,  because  as  we  know,  there  are
known knowns; there are things we know we know. We also
know  there  are  known  unknowns;  that  is  to  say  we  know
there are some things we do not know. But there are also
unknown  unknowns—the  ones  we  don’t  know  we  don’t
know. And if one looks throughout the history of our
country  and  other  free  countries,  it  is  the  latter  category
that tends to be the diﬀicult ones.”
In  the  context  of  modelling,  and  this  could  be  COVID
modelling  or  weather  and  climate  modelling,  the  known

knowns could refer to a subset of parameter values which
are  known  to  great  certainty.  In  a  weather  or  climate
model, this could be the value of the gravitational constant
or the amount of energy the Earth receives from the sun. In
COVIDSim,  this  could  be  some  of  the  demographic  data.
Continuing, the known unknowns are the parameters
where  we  can  quantify  the  range  of  uncertainty  in  the
parameter values. In weather and climate models, the
values of some of the parameters relating to the
microphysical  properties  of  clouds  are  uncertain,  but  the
range of uncertainty can be quantiﬁed.
In this context, Rumsfeld’s unknown unknowns refer to
structural model uncertainties—to uncertainties in the way
in which the computational equations are formulated in the
ﬁrst  place.  Here  it  is  not  easy  to  quantify  the  range  of
uncertainty  of  a  parameter  value,  because  the  process  in
question  may  not  be  representable  by  a  ﬁxed  parameter
value at all. In a weather or climate model, the structural
form  of  the  parametrisation  formulae  used  to  represent
unresolved processes such as clouds are profoundly
uncertain; there is no good reason to suppose that one can
represent  clouds  accurately  with  such  formulae.  Hence,
some  of  the  parameters  in  such  a  parametrisation  are
ontologically rather than epistemically uncertain, to borrow
from the philosophical language used in Chapter 4.
Similarly, in COVIDSim, the basic assumptions around the
way in which humans interact with one another, and indeed
respond to governmental restrictions, are themselves
ontologically uncertain.
If  we  are  to  aspire  to  truly  reliable  predictions  and
projections,  we  have  to  ﬁnd  some  way  of  handling  these
structural model uncertainties. However, they can be some
of the hardest uncertainties to represent and quantify.
There’s  an  old  North  English  saying:  “There’s  nowt  so
queer as folk!” For sure, there’s nowt as uncertain as folk.
In Chapter 3, I discussed the representation of unresolved

scales  in  models  of  ﬂuid  turbulence  using  random  noise.
Such noise can in principle also provide a representation of
some  of  the  uncertainty  associated  with  structural  model
error—even with the uncertainty of folk. Now whilst models
like COVIDSim do have some inherent stochasticity in their
equations, the associated noise processes do not contribute
much to the ensemble spread7. As such, the use of
stochasticity  as  a  means  to  represent  inherent  structural
uncertainty in these COVID models is likely being
underdone. One argument I heard in this regard is that if
we were to use stochasticity to represent structural model
uncertainty, then the spread from the ensembles would be
unusably  huge.  But  of  course,  that  is  the  whole  point  of
ensembles! When ensemble spread is truly huge, as it was
for the retrospective ensembles for the weather for October
1987, then the ensembles tell you, on this occasion at least,
not  to  trust  any  of  the  outcomes  and  to  be  wary  of  the
possibility  of  extreme  outcomes.  The  worst  thing,  under
such  circumstances,  is  to  act  on  the  basis  of  unreliably
conﬁdent, underspread ensembles.
In Chapter 5 I discussed another approach to the
problem of structural model error: the multi-model
ensemble.  For  seasonal-timescale  climate  predictions  of
ENSO,  the  multi-model  ensemble  was  more  skilful  than
were  single-model  ensembles.  On  a  very  pragmatic  level,
the  rather  diﬀicult  issue  of  the  ontological  uncertainty  of
structural model error was addressed by constructing
ensembles  using  multiple  models  developed  in  diﬀerent
institutes. In some ways, this is no diﬀerent to the “wisdom
of the crowd” concept, where here the “crowd” is not the
views of members of the public, but the views of diﬀerently
constructed 
climate 
models 
developed 
in 
diﬀerent
institutes.
A limited form of multi-model ensemble was used by the
UK 
government’s 
Scientiﬁc 
Advisory 
Group 
for

Emergencies  when  making  COVID  projections8.  However,
the  multi-model  ensemble  approach  has  been  developed
more  extensively  in  the  United  States,  where  there  are
many  more  individual  groups  developing  COVID  models.
Here, the  US  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention
(CDC)  partnered  with  an  academic  research  lab  at  the
University of Massachusetts Amherst to create the COVID-
19 Forecast Hub, launched in April 2020. Predictions focus
on the one-to-two-month timescale, which can inform
operational 
decisions 
about 
allocation 
of 
healthcare
supplies, staﬀing needs or such matters as school closures.
Essentially, any team in the US was permitted to submit a
forecast model to the multi-model ensemble as long as data
was provided in a speciﬁed format and a full description of
the methods used to generate a forecast was given.
According  to  a  paper  describing  this  technique 9,  some
twenty-three  models  had  met  the  eligibility  criteria  and
were  used  in  the  evaluation  of  the  multi-model  ensemble.
Separate forecasts were submitted for all ﬁfty states in the
US, and a national forecast for the whole of the US.
The results were entirely in line with what we found for
seasonal 
climate 
prediction. 
Although 
for 
any 
one
particular  forecast  it  was  possible  to  ﬁnd  a  model  that
performed better than the ensemble, the ensemble
performed better on average, both in terms of an ensemble-
averaged prediction and as a probability forecast. Clearly,
consistency  in  skill  is  important  when  making  decisions,
indicating that the multi-model ensemble was preferable to
any individual model forecast.
Since the US COVID-19 Forecast Hub went live, a similar
multi-model  ensemble  system  has  been  implemented  in
Europe. There is perhaps one further step to go: a global
multi-model 
ensemble 
forecast 
system 
for 
disease
prediction, to which all nations of the Earth can contribute

their models in a coordinated way. There is a precedent for
this.
In 
the 
mid-1990s, 
the 
World 
Climate 
Research
Programme—an international body of climate scientists
sponsored  by  the  World  Meteorological  Organisation  and
the International Oceanographic Commission (both United
Nations bodies) as well as the International Science
Council began to organise a set of coordinated multi-model
ensemble 
experiments 
that 
would 
feed 
into 
the
Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  assessment
reports.  The  project  which  organised  these  coordinated
experiments  became  known  as  CMIP—the  Coupled  Model
Intercomparison Project. In the ﬁrst multi-model CMIP
experiment, climate modelling groups from around the
world ran experiments with their models with a prescribed
1  percent  increase  in  carbon  dioxide  concentration  per
year. In the latest CMIP experiment, the prescribed
increases in carbon dioxide are based on diﬀerent
socioeconomic scenarios, ranging from what is sometimes
called “business as usual”, to net-zero by 2050. There are
now some thirty diﬀerent modelling groups contributing to
the CMIP multi-model ensemble.
It seems to me that there is a need for global
collaboration like this for disease prediction in general—not
just  for  COVID  but  for  other  diseases  such  as  malaria,
dengue,  inﬂuenza  and  Ebola.  Perhaps  the  World  Health
Organization could take the lead.
But  there  are  downsides  to  the  multi-model  ensemble.
The  “wisdom  of  the  crowd”  works  only  if  estimates  from
members of the crowd really are independent. For example,
if  there  is  a  rumour  going  round  that  Fred  guessed  ﬁve
hundred jellybeans, and that Fred is quite a smart guy, then
the possibility that other people’s guesses are inﬂuenced by
Fred’s  estimate  can  completely  negate  the  beneﬁt  of  the
ensemble approach to guessing the number of jellybeans in
the jar.

In  practice,  individual  modelling  groups are  inﬂuenced
by other groups’ assumptions, and so the models are
typically not independent of one another. They are at best
quasi-independent. This is certainly true in climate
modelling, and I would ﬁnd it hard to believe it is not also
true 
in 
disease 
modelling. 
The 
types 
of 
model
representations 
and 
parametrisations 
that 
diﬀerent
institutes use can be strongly inﬂuenced by one dominant
player in the group. That is to say, in a multi-model
ensemble,  the  models  may  be  less  independent  of  one
another,  and  hence  less  useful,  than  an  outsider  might
imagine them to be.
There is another problem. Each modelling group is
typically not composed of a team of one hundred
researchers, say. It may be only a half a dozen. Indeed, the
team  may  comprise  just  one  person.  The  question  then
arises—Which  is  a  better  use  of  resources:  funding  the
development of a large number of quasi-independent
models,  or  focussing  human  and  computing  resources  to
produce a much smaller number of (necessarily stochastic)
models? In terms of climate, I believe the latter is a
preferable route. I am not expert enough in disease
modelling  to  know  which  strategy  is  better.  However,  it
strikes me as an important topic for discussion.
There  is  one  aspect  of  these  COVID  ensembles  that
hasn’t  been  discussed.  If  we  study,  say,  the  one-to-two-
month multi-model ensembles across a range of initial
conditions, is there evidence that the spread of the
ensembles varies from one initial condition to another (as
illustrated in Fig. 10)? If so, can the spread of the ensemble
be  used  to  predict  the  likely  skill  of,  say,  the  ensemble-
average forecast? For example, if the spread of an
ensemble is especially small, we would expect each
ensemble  member  to  be  close  to  the  truth.  By  contrast,
when the spread is especially large, many of the ensemble
members will turn out not to be skilful at all. This is only

now starting to be studied. Results will have to await a new
edition of this book.
At  the  time  of  writing,  COVID-19  isn’t  over.  The  highly
transmissible  Omicron  variant  has  spread  exponentially.
The primary uncertainty about Omicron when it ﬁrst
appeared was its virulence—how many hospitalisations and
deaths  would  it  cause?  Fortunately,  it  seems  not  to  be  as
virulent as some of the previous variants. In the UK, some
politicians  to  the  right  of  centre  have  complained  that
scientists 
have 
somehow 
exaggerated 
the 
Omicron
predictions,  giving  politicians  only  worst-case  scenarios
10.
Of course, this is not so. As we have discussed, the job of
the  scientists  is  to  provide  information  about  the  whole
range of possible future hospitalisations and deaths,
including the expected as well as plausible worst-case and
best-case scenarios. In the earlier phases of development,
when little is known, the predictions are necessarily broad.
As with climate change, it’s up to the politicians to decide
on  policy  implications  given  such  forecast  information—
further lockdowns, lighter measures to try to restrict social
interactions or a complete relaxation of such measures. Of
course, it isn’t easy to decide when predictions are highly
uncertain. However, making politicians’ lives easier by
giving  them  forecasts  which  are  more  precise,  but  less
reliable,  is  not  the  right  way  to  go—though  more  precise
forecasts  would  provide  politicians  with  a  scapegoat  (the
scientists) if policies turn out badly.
In the meantime it seems we need a new generation of
ensemble systems which, coupled to these SIR models, can
probabilistically 
predict the spread of COVID virus
mutations.  Some  ﬁrst  steps  in  this  direction  have  already
been taken with models trained using the many millions of
genome  sequences  of  COVID  viruses  (mutations  of  the
SARS-CoV-2 virus to be more speciﬁc). In one paper
11, the
authors develop a model for predicting virus mutations that

will spread across the population for diﬀerent phases of the
pandemic. The key information for making such predictions
is an analysis of the recent patterns of spread of a
particular 
mutation/variant, 
and 
whether 
particular
mutations  appear  in  diﬀerent  viral  subtypes  (a  criterion
called  “convergence”  in  biology).  Based  on  observations
outside the training data, the authors show that the model
has predictive power out to about four months.
Ultimately, one wonders whether it might be possible to
predict  the  spread  of  virulent  virus  mutations  from  ﬁrst
principles, i.e., directly from the basic genomic structure of
the virus. However, there are so many potential mutations
to consider that predicting viral evolution in a general way
would 
be 
completely 
intractable 
with 
present-day
computational  technology.  On  the  other  hand,  this  is  the
sort  of  problem  that  might  conceivably  be  solvable  with
some future-generation quantum computing technology,
discussed later in the book.
...
