8
Financial Crashes
ACCORDING TO ANDY HALDANE IN 2017, THEN THE BANK
OF England’s chief economist, economists had their
“Michael Fish moment” when the global ﬁnancial markets
collapsed without warning in 2008 1. The economic models
were  simply  unable  to  function  properly  when  “the  world
was tipped upside down”.
When I read Haldane’s comments, his reference to
Michael Fish brought to mind something that I had
wondered  from  time  to  time:  whether  the  same  ensemble
techniques that have transformed weather and climate
prediction could also play a role in economic prediction. If
it  was  possible  to  create  a  reliable  ensemble  prediction
system, would the 2008 crash turn out to have been
something  inevitable,  insensitive  to  the  precise  economic
starting conditions and economic model equations, or
would it look like the actual Michael Fish storm, something
highly 
unpredictable 
and 
only 
forecastable 
in 
a
probabilistic sense? Even if the latter, a probabilistic
ensemble 
prediction 
would 
still 
be 
useful. 
Just 
as
forecasting the October 1987 storm in a probabilistic way
is enough to make simple planning decisions, so too
presumably if an imminent global ﬁnancial crash is
predictable only probabilistically.

However, 
responses 
from 
economists 
about 
the
possibility  of  creating  such  an  ensemble  forecast  system
were mostly disappointing. There were a number of
diﬀerent  reactions,  all  of  which  were  broadly  negative  in
one way or another. The ﬁrst response was that in
economics,  more  than  in  weather  and  climate  prediction,
there is an element of uncertainty that is itself unknowable.
This  is  often  called  “radical  uncertainty”2.  It’s  related  to
the type of ontological uncertainty discussed in Chapter 7.
For example, no one could have predicted the 9/11 attack
on the Twin Towers, and yet this had a major impact on the
state  of  the  world,  including  its  economies,  resonating  to
the present day. The view was that such radical uncertainty
would make the prediction of ﬁnancial crashes impossible.
Another point raised by the economists was that whilst
weather follows along the “tramlines” provided by the
Navier-Stokes equation, there is no known equation which
governs  the  state  of  the  economy.  Economists  are  in  the
dark,  so  the  argument  went,  about  the  equations  which
govern ﬁnancial shocks and crises.
Then there was the “self-referential” argument. A
weather  forecast  doesn’t  change  the  weather,  whilst  an
economic forecast can change the economy. Hence the two
systems  are  completely  diﬀerent  from  each  other  and  not
much can be learned comparing one with the other. Finally,
I met economists who, although somewhat sympathetic to
what  I  was  suggesting,  said  that  economists  had  not  yet
developed techniques to assimilate economic data into
models  with  the  same  mathematical  sophistication  that
meteorologists use to assimilate weather observations into
their models.
Dispirited, I let the idea drop. But in planning this book,
I decided to revisit these issues. Perhaps things had moved
on.  Alas,  writing  to  some  economists  I  knew,  I  got  pretty
much the same responses as the ﬁrst time around. Are they

right? Is the idea of creating some kind of ensemble
prediction system for predicting economic shocks a
complete  non-starter?  Of  course,  as  an  outsider  in  this
ﬁeld, it would be arrogant of me to claim that the experts
are categorically wrong. However, I was not convinced by
their 
objections. 
For 
example, 
radical 
ontological
uncertainty does certainly play a role in weather and
climate  prediction.  Indeed,  I  might  make  a  probabilistic
seasonal forecast for six months from now, only for it to be
completely undone by an unpredicted volcano whose
aerosols spread around the atmosphere and dim the sun’s
radiation. In principle, one could include a volcano in one
or  two  ensemble  members.  However,  that  is  not  what  we
do.  We  just  accept  that,  occasionally,  even  probabilistic
forecasts can go wrong as a result of the radical
uncertainty  of  a  volcano.  I  don’t  think  that  makes  the
probabilistic El Niño forecasts any the less useful.
However,  as  discussed  in  Chapter  3,  we  do  include  a
certain amount of radical uncertainty in our weather
forecast  models  by  introducing  noise  into  the  truncated
version  of  the  Navier-Stokes  equation.  It  really  isn’t  the
case  that  the  Navier-Stokes  equation  provides  hard-and-
fast tramlines on which the forecasts evolve. Now it may be
that  to  model  the  radical  uncertainties  that  exist  when
modelling  the  economy,  the  amplitude  of  the  stochastic
noise would have to be much larger than it is when
modelling  the  weather.  If  realistic  amounts  of  noise  mean
that  the  ensembles  are  always  so  highly  spread  that  no
useful signal can be extracted, then so be it. However, as
with  forecasts  of  weather,  it  may  be  that  sometimes  the
spread isn’t that large, meaning that the state of the
economy 
is 
able 
to 
absorb 
the 
inherent 
radical
uncertainties that exist. On other occasions, the ensembles
may  tell  us  that  the  state  of  the  economy  is  like  the
kingdom whose existence is so fragile that it can be
compromised by a missing horseshoe nail.

Regarding  the  self-referential  issue,  although  it  is  the
case  that  weather  forecasts  don’t  change  the  weather,  it
certainly is the case that climate forecasts can change the
climate, as discussed in Chapters 6 and 7. For many years,
climate  scientists  have  known  that  they  are  not  really
making predictions of climate change but projections; they
are  “merely”  estimating  how  the  climate  will  respond  to
certain  emissions  scenarios  for  greenhouse  gases.  These
projections  can  be  veriﬁed  once  the  emissions  scenarios
are  known.  In  this  sense,  the  diﬀerence  between  climate
and 
economic 
projections 
need 
not 
necessarily 
be
fundamental.
Economists do in fact make eﬀorts to present their
projections, such as the inﬂation rate or the gross domestic
product,  with  estimates  of  uncertainty.  For  example,  the
Bank of England’s projections are in the form of what are
known  as  “fan  charts”3.  These  essentially  give  error  bars
on predictions and were inspired by discussions with
meteorologists  back  in  the  1990s.  They  are  called  fan
charts  because  the  uncertainties  get  larger,  as  one  would
expect, for longer forecast times. However, these fan charts
are not themselves based on ensembles. Instead, they are
based on a statistical analysis of errors from past forecasts.
However, there are times when subjective judgements are
added to widen or narrow the fan charts from one forecast
to the next, based on whether the outlook is deemed to be
more or less uncertain.
This was the key question for me. As a nonlinear system,
the predictability of the economy should itself be variable,
perhaps  similar  to  what  was  shown  in  Fig.  10  for  the
Lorenz  model.  Instead  of  thinking  of  the  two  lobes  of  the
Lorenz system as, say, fair weather and foul weather, let’s
imagine  them  as  representing  a  vibrant  economy  and  a
depressed economy. Fig. 10 showed that there were
situations where the transition from one lobe to the other

was quite predictable, and hence rather inevitable, and yet
others  where  it  was  very  unpredictable,  and  hence  not  at
all inevitable. Is there a way to characterise the
predictability of the economic system under capitalism as it
moves between boom and bust in this way?
FIG. 36. A Bank of England “fan chart” predicting the rate of inﬂation (from
November 2019). The shaded regions denote the likelihood that the true
rate of inﬂation lies within certain values. The heavier the shading, the
more likely lies the true rate of inﬂation. However, these fan charts are
based not on ensemble forecasts but on a statistical analysis of past error,
together with subjective judgements about future uncertainty. From the
Bank of England Monetary Policy Report, November 2021. With permission
from the Bank of England.
To  try  to  quantify  such  predictability,  we  need  good
models of the economy. What is a “good” economic model?
Based  on  discussions  with  economists,  the  authors  of  a

paper  entitled  “The  Seven  Properties  of  Good  [Economic]
Models4” 
identify 
goodness 
in 
terms 
of 
parsimony,
tractability, conceptual 
insightfulness, 
generalisability,
falsiﬁability, empirical consistency and predictive precision.
The authors then go on to comment that only the ﬁrst four
are well accepted by economists, the last three not so.
This struck me as very odd. If I were to ask a group of
my  meteorologist  colleagues  to  characterise  the  principal
diﬀerence  between  a  good  weather  forecast  model  and  a
bad  weather  forecast  model,  the  answer  would  hardly  be
surprising: a good weather forecast model makes accurate
weather forecasts and a bad one makes inaccurate weather
forecasts.  There  may  be  some  discussion  about  how  one
might measure the accuracy or inaccuracy of weather
forecasts  (e.g.,  how  much  emphasis  one  should  give  to
forecasting 
extreme 
weather 
situations 
rather 
than
common or garden situations) but that is a matter of detail.
In other words, the properties of falsiﬁability, empirical
consistency and predictive precision, which are at the
bottom of these economists’ list, would be at the top of the
list for meteorologists, and vice versa. Indeed, I have never
heard a meteorologist use the word “parsimony” as a
desirable trait for a weather forecast model. This does not
mean they put processes into their models that are
irrelevant, like the weather on Jupiter. However, there is no
conscious eﬀort to pare things down to the bare minimum
—rather  the  philosophy  is  to  add  as  much  detail  into  the
model as the computer resources allow.
However, there are circumstances where parsimony,
tractability and conceptual insightfulness are  important
attributes of meteorological models. In their research,
meteorologists develop hierarchies of models. At one end of
the  hierarchy,  there  are  the  models  which  are  good  at
forecasting the weather. Because these models are so
complex,  with  millions  upon  millions  of  lines  of  code,  and

billions of individual variables, they are not at all tractable
and  are  diﬀicult  to  generalise,  the  things  that  economists
hold dear. However, at the other end of the hierarchy are
the simple conceptual models, like Lorenz’s prototype
model of chaos. The conceptual models are better for
understanding  why  the  weather  is  the  way  it  is,  but  they
are typically useless at forecasting it.
It was a simple conceptual model of the atmosphere that
drew me into a career in meteorology. It was based on the
assumption that the behaviour of weather could be
understood using the so-called principle of maximum
entropy  production,  an  idea  drawn  from  the  physics  of
thermodynamic systems (like steam engines). This principle
can’t  be  rigorously  shown  to  apply  to  large-scale  weather
systems. But it is an interesting concept, and it’s certainly
interesting  to  explore  what  properties  of  the  weather  can
be derived from it. From this perspective, midlatitude
weather  systems  can  be  thought  of  as  nature’s  way  of
transporting heat from hot tropical latitudes to colder polar
latitudes  as  eﬀiciently  as  possible  on  a  rotating  planet.
Such a model predicts how the temperature of the Earth,
as  well  as  more  complex  variables  like  mean  cloud  cover
and  poleward  ﬂuxes  of  heat,  varies  between  the  equator
and the poles on average.
These simple models certainly are parsimonious, in the
sense  that  they  are  stripped  to  the  bone  of  irrelevant
complexity,  and  can  sometimes  be  solved  with  pencil  and
paper, or at worst with a laptop computer. They are
certainly tractable and conceptually insightful. During
periods when the weather seems relentlessly wet and
windy, it is somehow reassuring to know that the
atmosphere  is  being  a  ruthlessly  eﬀicient  thermodynamic
machine—if it weren’t like this, then lower latitude regions
would become unbearably hot, and higher latitude regions
unbearably cold. So, the rainy, stormy weather we
frequently experience here in the UK is at least making life

more  equable  for  others  on  the  planet,  and  that  provides
some  modicum  of  comfort  when  the  weather  is  especially
bleak!
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  important  to  understand  the
limitations of these parsimonious conceptual weather
models.  They  are  useless  for  actually  predicting  weather.
And  they  are  utterly  useless  in  predicting  the  sorts  of
extreme  weather  that  occurred  over  southern  England  in
October 1987. I am not aware of any way that the principle
of  maximum  entropy  production  could  have  been  used  to
predict the October storm.
What conclusion can we draw from this? Could it be that
the economists are trying to have their cake and eat it too?
They can have highly parsimonious models, good for
understanding how the economy works in general terms, or
they can have predictive models, good for actually
forecasting  the  economy.  However,  perhaps  one  size  does
not ﬁt all.
So, what are these economic models and why did
Haldane paint such a bleak picture of their ability to
predict the 2008 crash? Well, it seems there are two
traditional types of models.
The 
ﬁrst 
are 
so-called 
econometric 
models. 
An
econometric  model  is  really  the  same  type  of  statistical-
empirical  analogue  model  which  Ed  Lorenz’s  statistical
colleagues said could be used to predict the weather weeks
or  months  ahead.  That  is  to  say,  an  econometric  model
predicts the future based on patterns it ﬁnds in past data.
Essentially, we try to ﬁnd an analogue of the current state
of the economy and base our prediction on what happened
in  the  months  and  seasons  following  the  analogue  state.
These  days,  one  might  use  sophisticated  AI  to  do  the
forecasting, 
but 
the 
underpinning 
methodology 
is
essentially the same.
Lorenz  had  shown  that  this  method  doesn’t  work  for  a
nonlinear system like the weather. As such, perhaps it’s not

surprising that it doesn’t work well for a nonlinear system
like  the  economy,  especially  during  periods  of  extreme
volatility.
The second traditional type of economic model is based
on what is called neoclassical economics. The fundamental
idea in neoclassical economics is the notion of an
equilibrium arising from an agent maximisation problem. A
simple example arises in determining the price of
something like a car. The more expensively a car is priced,
the  more  proﬁt  the  seller  can  potentially  make.  However,
the more expensive the car, the less likely a potential buyer
will want to buy it. An “equilibrium” is reached when the
seller’s  and  buyer’s  desires  (to  make  as  much  proﬁt  as
possible  and  to  buy  as  cheaply  as  possible)  are  jointly
optimised.
The value of something is encoded into a concept called
a utility function. This originated in the theory of
utilitarianism by nineteenth-century moral philosophers
Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill as a way of
measuring  pleasure  or  happiness.  In  this  way,  the  utility
function can be used to discriminate quantitatively between
diﬀerent possible choices. For example, I typically get more
pleasure eating chocolate ice cream than, say, strawberry-
ﬂavoured,  and  would  in  principle  pay  (a  little)  more  for  a
chocolate ice cream than another ﬂavour.
Neoclassical 
economists 
treat 
agents 
as 
idealised
rational beings who make decisions to maximise some
relevant utility function. In the neoclassical framework, an
agent is really an idealised representative of a set of
individuals  or  businesses.  As  the  idealised  agent  behaves,
so, it is assumed, the set of individuals represented by the
agent behaves. However, we have seen (e.g., in both
climate and pandemic prediction) that in a nonlinear
system,  this  assumption  can  break  down.  The  prediction
made by a “representative” prediction model with its most
likely set of model parameters can diﬀer greatly from the

expected  prediction  when  we  vary  the  model  parameters
according to their uncertainties.
Why  do  economies  crash,  as  they  sometimes  do?  The
standard  neoclassical  view  is  that  it  is  because  of  factors
which  are  external  to  this  world  of  utility  maximisation.
This  can  be  in  the  form  of  a  shock—some  kind  of  noisy
input from the outside which would make the system non-
deterministic—or some “externality”, an outside factor that
the  capitalist  system  of  price  setting  does  not  take  into
account. 
For 
example, 
environmental 
pollution 
or
degradation  is  traditionally  considered  an  externality  in
neoclassical  economics  (despite  the  fact  that  it  is  us,  the
agents, who cause it in the ﬁrst place). One of the mantras
of  environmental  economics  is  the  need  to  internalise  the
externalities—the price of goods should reﬂect their
damage  to  the  environment,  e.g.,  in  shipping  them  from
one part of the world to another.
The more I thought about it, the more the “maximisation
of  utility”  philosophy  of  neoclassical  economics  sounded
like the “maximisation of entropy production” used in
meteorology to understand why weather behaves the way it
does.  In  both  cases,  we  are  taking  a  principle  which  has
some  relevance  under  certain  speciﬁc  circumstances,  and
applying it at a scale where it no longer rigorously holds.
For example, the principle of maximum entropy production
holds for systems which are close to being in what’s called
thermodynamic  equilibrium.  However,  the  climate  system
is  not  like  this—the  energy  the  atmosphere  receives  from
the  sun  every  day  means  it  is  far  from  thermodynamic
equilibrium.  In  a  similar  way,  the  idea  that  we  can  model
the economy based on the actions of representative agents
who are maximising some speciﬁc utility function may not
be a good assumption for a highly heterogeneous nonlinear
system in which the individuals may be acting according to
some  individually  tailored  optimisation  principles.  In  both
cases  we  can  form  some  understanding  of  the  systems  of

interest—the weather and the economy, respectively—from
these  heuristic  optimisation  principles,  but  equally  it  is
important  to  understand  their  shortcomings  when  making
actual predictions of systems far from equilibrium.
Pursuing this analogy, and given that we do not use the
principle  of  maximum  entropy  production  to  forecast  the
weather,  is  there  an  alternative  to  the  principle  of  utility
maximisation by representative agents to forecast the
economy? In Chapter 7 I discussed how we can model the
spread of disease using networks in which nodes represent
individuals.  Could  such  a  framework  also  be  relevant  in
economic modelling? Indeed, it seems it can. In 2009, the
year after the crash, economists Doyne Farmer and Duncan
Foley  published  an  inﬂuential  paper  in Nature  explaining
why neoclassical economic models were fatally ﬂawed
when  it  came  to  predicting  the  crash.  In  the  paper  they
claimed  that  so-called  agent-based  models  will  stand  a
much  better  chance  of  predicting  the  next  big  crash  than
neoclassical models ever could.
I knew Farmer’s name when I ﬁrst read this paper, as he
features prominently in James Gleick’s masterful 1988
book,5 Chaos: Making a New Science, the book that
brought  Ed  Lorenz’s  work  to  the  public’s  attention.  In
Gleick’s  book,  Farmer  was  portrayed  as  one  of  the  new
generation of “complexity theorists”—scientists steeped in
the  concepts  and  methods  of  chaos  theory.  In  his  youth,
Farmer perfected a way of beating the casinos at roulette
by embedding a small computer in the sole of his shoe. The
computer was fed with data on the position of the roulette
ball as it went around the wheel, in the form of taps of the
foot.  From  this,  the  computer  would  calculate  where  the
roulette ball would ﬁnally land. Farmer had great success
until the casinos discovered what was going on and banned
him from entering again! Farmer went on to found
Prediction  Company  and  made  a  small  fortune.  He  now

uses his expertise in complexity theory to understand
macroeconomic cycles and crashes; he is director of
complexity  economics  at  the  Institute  for  New  Economic
Thinking  at  the  University  of  Oxford,  where  he  is  now  a
close colleague and friend of mine.
Farmer has remarked on the sociology of mathematical
sophistication  in  economics6.  He  makes  the  point  that  if
your  model  isn’t  based  on  the  standard  mantra—about
representative  agents  maximising  their  utility  functions—
all wrapped up in elegant mathematics, then you won’t get
your paper published in one of the top economics journals.
If you are a young academic seeking tenure, you will be at
a  disadvantage  if  your  paper  deviates  from  this  mantra.
When  I  ﬁrst  read  this,  I  have  to  confess,  I  wondered
whether there was an element of hyperbole in this
statement, or whether, if it was once true, it is no longer so.
But it seems there is some truth in Farmer’s views today, as
we shall see.
In an agent-based model, an agent represents an actual
economic unit. It could be an actual individual, or it could
be an actual ﬁrm or a bank. In an agent-based model, one
tries to represent as many of these microeconomic agents
as possible—thousands, millions (or potentially billions,
which we’ll see ahead). Agents are perceived as acting as a
unit  from  the  outside.  They  have  an  ability  to  act  and  to
react  to  external  stimuli,  and  they  can  interact  with  each
other. A key question is what sort of macroeconomic
behaviour is emergent when studying such large numbers
of microeconomic agents. An example of emergent
behaviour—though nothing directly to do with economics—
can  be  seen  in  studying  the  ﬂow  of  traﬀic  on  a  road7.
Suppose  we  think  of  each  car  or  truck  as  an  agent  who
merely responds to the agent in front. When the density of
vehicles  is  small,  the  traﬀic  ﬂows  well.  However,  as  the
density increases, we start to see the familiar shock waves

as  the  traﬀic  becomes  congested.  These  shock  waves  are
examples of macro-scale emergent behaviour.
In  fact,  a  relatively  simple  agent-based  model  may  be
able to describe some of the essentials of the 2008 crash
8.
In this model, there are three types of agents. The ﬁrst are
described as “noise traders”. They more or less trade
stocks  and  shares  at  random.  However,  they  believe  that
these  shares  have  some  intrinsic  fundamental  value.  The
second type of agent is a hedge fund. It holds stocks which
the hedge fund managers believe to be underpriced.
Otherwise,  they  hold  cash.  The  third  type  of  agent  is  the
bank that can lend money to the hedge fund, allowing them
to buy more stock.
Under normal circumstances, the presence of hedge
funds  dampens  volatility  in  the  value  of  the  stocks,  since
hedge fund trading should move the price of a stock
towards its intrinsic worth. However, there is a problem. To
contain their risk, the banks will limit the amount of money
that they will lend to a hedge fund. In the jargon of ﬁnance,
the banks cap leverage at a predetermined maximum value,
determined  by  the  wealth  of  the  hedge  fund.  A  problem
then arises if a stock’s value falls when a hedge fund is fully
leveraged. This can take the amount borrowed beyond the
predetermined cap. The hedge fund will have to sell oﬀ its
stock  to  pay  oﬀ  part  of  the  loan,  to  bring  it  back  to  the
predetermined maximum value. But selling oﬀ the stock in
this way can cause the value of the stock to fall further. In
extremis, this can lead to a death spiral that it is impossible
to  get  out  of,  leading  to  disaster  for  both  the  hedge  fund
and  potentially  the  bank  too.  Of  course,  this  is  a  very
simple example of an agent-based model. However, it can
relatively easily be extended, making it more realistic. For
example, the banks can themselves borrow money and be
limited by leverage caps.

Well,  we  seem  to  be  getting  somewhere  at  last.  Is  it
possible to perform a retrospective agent-based model
ensemble  forecast  of  the  2008  ﬁnancial  crash,  much  like
the  retrospective  ensemble  forecast  we  had  performed  of
the October 1987 storm? Would it show exceptional spread,
like the bottom example in Fig. 10? Or would the crash be
shown  to  have  been  very  predictable,  like  the  top  left
example in Fig. 10—an inevitable consequence of the
exceptionally  leveraged  positions  that  many  individuals,
hedge 
funds 
and 
banks 
had 
taken 
over 
subprime
mortgages?
I approached several agent-based modellers around the
world  and  was  again  disappointed  by  the  responses.  It
seemed my idea wasn’t intrinsically silly, it was just that the
agent-based  models  weren’t  suﬀiciently  sophisticated  to
answer such questions. However, unexpectedly, I was
emailed by a postdoctoral researcher, Juan Sabuco, at my
own  university,  Oxford,  who  said  that  he  was  using  an
agent-based  model  and  would  like  to  develop  it  to  have
ensemble  capability.  Would  I  like  to  work  with  him  to
explore this idea? And so, I began a small piece of research
with Juan.
In Sabuco’s highly idealised agent-based model, we can
think  of  the  agents,  of  which  there  can  be  as  many  as
100,000, as divided into two: ﬁrms and unemployed
workers.  The  agents  move  randomly  in  a  two-dimensional
space that simulates a virtual job market. Every “time step”
(which in this model has no speciﬁc linkage to real time),
the  workers  move  around  looking  for  a  job  opportunity.
Firms  also  move  around  in  this  marketplace  looking  for
new workers. When a ﬁrm hires workers, these workers are
removed from the unemployed pool of workers. Now ﬁrms
lose staﬀ for any number of reasons, and so for a particular
ﬁrm to be viable, it must be able to attract new labour. If it
doesn’t  attract  new  labour  over  a  predeﬁned  number  of
time  steps,  it  will  go  out  of  business.  In  addition,  it  is

assumed that unemployed workers appear every time step,
either due to workers being ﬁred or because of new
workers entering the market. These new workers are
placed randomly in the marketplace, but close to the other
unemployed workers already present in the simulation. It is
also  assumed  that  new  ﬁrms  are  created  in  the  market
every  time  step.  We  also  assume  that  the  newly  created
ﬁrms are placed in regions close to other existing ﬁrms9.
Fig. 37 shows a long run of Sabuco’s agent-based model
over  a  quarter  of  a  million  time  steps.  Shown  on  the
vertical  axis  is  the  employment  rate  of  the  workers,  with
100 percent representing full employment. The agent-
based model shows considerable internal variability in this
employment 
rate 
with 
a 
number 
of 
“crashes” 
in
employment rate. Economists would call such internal
variations “endogenous”, to contrast with externally forced
variations, which would be called “exogenous”. We will call
this  the  “truth”  run,  i.e.,  we  will  assume  this  is  what
actually happens in Sabuco’s agent-based model world. The
question is whether we can predict the endogenous
ﬂuctuations with ensemble forecasts.
Like weather prediction models and COVID models,
Sabuco’s agent-based model has a number of free
parameters, 
some 
of 
which 
are 
represented 
using
stochastic  formulae  (hence  involving  random  numbers).  It
is  straightforward  to  generate  large  ensembles  by  using
diﬀerent 
draws 
from 
the 
pseudorandom-number
generators. Fig. 38 shows some results from these
ensembles. The top left ﬁgure shows an economically
healthy situation where, according to the truth run,
employment rates are stable and stay high throughout the
forecast period. Some ensemble members predict drops in
employment,  but  the  bulk  of  the  ensemble  suggests  that
this will be a period of stability. The top right ﬁgure shows
a situation where, later in the forecast period, the truth run

does  show  a  dip  in  employment.  Some  of  the  ensemble
members  predict  this  (i.e.,  the  ensemble  predicts  the  dip
with  some  non-zero  probability),  but  most  do  not—at  this
range,  the  dip  in  employment  is  not  really  predictable,
according  to  the  ensemble.  The  bottom  two  ﬁgures  show
situations  where  there  is  an  employment  crash  relatively
early  on  in  the  forecast,  where  one  would  hope  for  some
predictability. One crash (bottom left) appears very
predictable  according  to  the  ensemble,  whilst  the  other
(bottom right) appears less so. If one tried to make a single
best-guess  deterministic  forecast  for  this  last  situation,  it
seems  quite  likely  that  the  forecast  would  underestimate
the  true  drop  in  employment  (and  indeed  predict  a  faster
recovery than actually occurred). In this case the ensemble
provides  an  alert  of  the  chance  of  a  deeper  and  longer-
lasting crash. If this were to occur, then with the aid of the
ensemble, the crash would not come as a complete
surprise.
FIG. 37. Output from a long truth run of Sabuco’s agent-based model. In
the next ﬁgure, ensemble forecasts are made from the four points marked
in the ﬁgure.

This was all quite encouraging. However, we were
looking at very idealised situations.
And  then,  when  I  had  all  but  given  up  on  real  agent-
based model forecasts, Doyne Farmer pointed me to a new
paper  in  which  a  group  of  economists  led  by  Sebastian
Poledna  from  Austria  had  used  an  agent-based  model  to
make retrospective predictions of the Austrian economy
10.
They had developed a simple data assimilation system for
inputting  the  observed  economic  data  into  their  model.
There  is  nothing  special  about  Austria  except  that  two  of
the authors’ home institutes are based there. The authors
say that their model could be applied to make predictions
for the UK or the US, for example.
A pure mathematician looking at the equations in
Poledna’s paper would not ﬁnd the mathematics very
endearing.  It’s  engineering  mathematics.  It’s  the  sort  of
mathematics  used  in  comprehensive  climate  models.  But
precisely because of this, I personally found myself drawn
to  the  paper.  It  seemed  to  me  to  be  exactly  the  type  of
inelegant  mathematics  you  need  to  represent  the  messy
realities 
of 
the 
real-world 
economy. 
In 
Poledna’s
predictions,  the  agent-based  model  is  run  ﬁve  hundred
times in ensemble mode, varying uncertain aspects of the
initial  conditions  and  sampling  the  pseudorandom-number
generators 
that 
drove 
the 
stochastic 
agent-to-agent
interactions in the model.
The proof of the pudding is in the eating, and the
authors put their model to the test with some retrospective
“out 
of 
sample” 
predictions. 
This 
means 
that 
the
predictions  were  for  years  which  weren’t  used  to  set  the
values of parameters. The authors report that the
ensemble-mean  forecasts  are  better  than  those  from  both
econometric models and the neoclassical equilibrium
models.

I was excited reading this paper. I emailed Poledna and
asked if he had looked at retrospective forecasts for 2008.
He  answered  that  he  had  literally  just  produced  some
results for 2008, but hadn’t started to write up the results.
This  was  too  good  to  be  true!  I  had  to  speak  to  him.  We
arranged to chat over the internet.
Fig.  39  shows  the  spread  in  retrospective  forecasts  of
Eurozone gross domestic product (GDP) growth in two ﬁve-
hundred-member ensembles from Poledna’s model. The
ﬁrst  is  for  a  normal  year.  The  second  is  for  the  ﬁnancial
crash year of 2008. The most likely predictions don’t really
show any diﬀerences between the two years. However, the
spread of the ensemble in 2008 is substantially larger and
the tail of the distribution extends to values twice as
negative as from the normal year. Like the ensemble
predictions of climate change and of COVID, the ensemble
distribution 
is 
skewed 
towards 
the 
dangerous 
end.
Nonlinearity is at work again.
FIG. 38. Ensemble “forecasts” from four diﬀerent initial states chosen from
the truth run in Fig. 37. The darker line itself shows the truth run.

Impressive  as  the  results  were,  the  ensemble  for  2008
did  not  actually  capture  the  observed  downturn  for  one
quarter,  which  was  around  −0.03.  I  suggested  to  Poledna
that  it  was  because  the  ensemble  was  not  large  enough;
perhaps he should try running ﬁve-thousand-member
ensembles instead of ﬁve-hundred-member ensembles.
However,  his  explanation  was  more  plausible.  He  did  not
feed into his model the economic downturn from the world
outside the Eurozone. He did not do this because he
wanted to see what would happen from purely endogenous
dynamical processes.
But  this  raises  an  extremely  important  question.  Since
the world is, of course, globally connected, we really need
to  extend  these  agent-based  models  to  cover  the  whole
world.  How  many  individual  agents  can  an  agent-based
model  handle?  Indeed,  Poledna  has  been  involved  in  the
development  of  an  agent-based  economic  model  with  331
million individual agents11, implemented and run eﬀiciently
on  a  supercomputer.  Is  that  the  limit?  Certainly  not.  As
discussed,  a  modern  weather  forecast  model  has  several
billion  variables,  about  the  same  number  as  there  are
people on the planet. It is therefore perhaps not completely
ridiculous to imagine an agent-based model with one agent
per  human  on  the  planet.  I  look  forward  to  seeing  some
ensemble results for 2008 when the agent-based model is
truly global in extent.
Sadly, 
Poledna 
conﬁrmed 
Farmer’s 
conclusions
concerning barriers to progress in economics. He believed
it would be impossible to get his paper considered by the
top  economics  journals.  Indeed,  he  said  that  traditional
economics  colleagues  had  largely  ignored  his  paper.  He
was  not  at  all  optimistic  that  his  work  in  this  area  would
help  him  get  a  tenure-track  position  in  a  top  economics
department.

Just  as  ensemble  weather  prediction  means  we  should
never again get these Michael Fish weather-forecast
moments,  so  perhaps  once  these  ensemble-based  agent-
based 
prediction 
models 
and 
their 
associated 
data
assimilation  schemes  have  been  developed  on  the  global
scale,  we  will  no  longer  have  the  Andy  Haldane/Michael
Fish economic-forecast moments either12.
FIG. 39. Histograms of predicted quarterly growth in Eurozone gross
domestic product for a “normal” year and for 2008, containing the ﬁnancial
crash.
Or  is  this  wishful  thinking?  As  I  complete  this  book,
inﬂationary pressures are increasing strongly and there is a
danger of a global economic recession. Was this predictable
a year ago? These economic impacts can be linked in part
to the fact that Russian forces have been shelling Ukrainian
cities, something most of us would hardly have believed a
year ago. These actions have led the West to impose
signiﬁcant  sanctions  on  Russia,  pushing  up  (already  high)
energy  prices  and  depressing  stock  markets  worldwide.
Hence the answer to the question above depends on
whether conﬂicts are predictable. We will look at this in the
next chapter.
Indeed, such events make it clear that the development
of ensemble economic systems based on agent-based
models  are  really  just  the  tip  of  the  iceberg.  We  need  to

develop  ensemble  systems  in  which  human  and  physical
systems (such as the climate system) are fully integrated on
a global scale. Welcome to the digital twin of planet Earth,
another topic for the next chapter.
...
