9
Deadly Conﬂict and the Digital
Ensemble of Spaceship Earth
WHO’S TO SAY WHY GENERAL OSKAR POTIOREK, AUSTRO-
HUNGARIAN  governor  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  didn’t
tell the driver that there had been a change to the planned
route for the archduke’s car. There had been an
assassination  attempt  on  Franz  Ferdinand  earlier  in  the
day, and changing the route seemed like a sensible
precautionary step. Perhaps Potiorek was about to tell the
driver, but was momentarily distracted by a butterﬂy
passing in front of him—we’ll never know.
But in any case, he didn’t tell the driver, and he and the
car’s occupants, including Potiorek, Archduke Franz
Ferdinand and his wife, turned right near the Latin Bridge
in Sarajevo. Realising his mistake, Potiorek ﬁnally shouted
to  the  driver  to  stop  and  reverse.  In  so  doing,  the  car
stalled.  Gavrilo  Princip,  still  a  teenager,  thought  he  had
missed his chance to assassinate the archduke earlier that
day. And then, to his amazement, the stalled car was right
in front of him. Princip shot the archduke dead.
If  only  the  butterﬂy  had  not  passed  by,  the  archduke
might  not  have  been  killed.  And  perhaps  the  First  World
War  would  not  have  happened.  And  perhaps  the  Second
World War would not have happened either. That is, if it’s
permissible to argue in this counterfactual way.

This is a real-world example of the parable of the
missing  horseshoe  nail.  Because  of  a  ﬂapping  butterﬂy
(perhaps),  the  driver  was  not  told  to  change  his  route.
Because  the  driver  was  not  told  to  change  his  route,  the
archduke was assassinated. Because the archduke was
assassinated, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia.
Because  of  this,  Russia,  an  ally  of  Serbia,  mobilised  its
army  against  Austria-Hungary.  Because  of  this,  Germany
declared support for Austria-Hungary and mobilised
against Russia and its ally France. Because of this, and as a
pre-emptive strike, Germany attacked France through
neutral  Belgian  territory.  Because  Britain  had  a  treaty  to
defend Belgium, it went to war against Germany and
Austria-Hungary. Because of this, the United States in 1917
joined the war, and Germany and Austria-Hungary (and the
Ottoman Empire, which had joined the war on the Austro-
Hungarian  side)  lost  their  empires—all  for  the  want  of  a
horseshoe  nail.  Indeed,  Britain  came  out  of  the  war  so
much poorer that this marked the beginning of the end for
its empire too.
However, as many historians have written over the
years, the fact that the countries of Europe were bound by
these various treaties and alliances, and that military
spending  was  generally  on  the  increase,  meant  that  the
transition  to  war  was  in  fact  quite  predictable.  Perhaps  if
the archduke had not been assassinated, some other
relatively  minor  incident  could  have  triggered  a  similar
sequence of events. Like with weather, pandemics and the
economy, it seems that the dynamics of conﬂict are
similarly nonlinear, varying from periods when its evolution
is stable to small perturbations, to periods when its
evolution is highly unstable.
Can we think about world wars in terms of the geometry
of chaos as shown in Fig. 10?  Let’s  now  imagine  that  the
left-hand lobe of the Lorenz attractor corresponds to states
of  the  world  where  the  nations  are  at  peace  with  one

another,  and  the  right-hand  lobe  corresponds  to  states  of
the world where the nations are at war. Is World War I a
situation like the top left—inevitable—or the bottom—
highly unpredictable? Does it make sense to imagine
ensemble forecasting being applied to conﬂict prediction?
If  ensembles  are  to  be  part  of  any  serious  attempt  to
predict conﬂict in the world, one needs to ask ﬁrst whether
conﬂict 
prediction 
is 
amenable 
to 
the 
methods 
of
mathematical  modelling.  This  question  fascinated  Lewis
Fry Richardson, whose seminal contributions to numerical
weather 
prediction 
were 
described 
in 
Chapter 
5.
Richardson felt strongly that war could be predicted using
mathematical equations. Coming from a Quaker family, he
felt that trying to develop a mathematical theory of conﬂict
could be his most important contribution to humanity.
We left Richardson in Chapter 5 as an ambulance driver
at the front in World War I. He had resigned his position at
the Meteorological Oﬀice, and during rest periods he
worked  not  only  on  performing  the  ﬁrst  weather  forecast
by  numerical  methods,  but  also  on  developing  what  he
called “the mathematical psychology of war”.
After  the  war,  Richardson  rejoined  the  Meteorological
Oﬀice. However, his paciﬁst principles caused him to resign
again, on grounds of conscience, when the oﬀice joined the
Air Ministry in 1920. Instead, he focussed on the two things
that fascinated him, turbulence and the causes of war. To
help with the latter he enrolled in psychology courses.
However, Richardson 
realised 
that 
to 
make 
real
progress, he needed data that would measure things like a
country’s preparedness for war—e.g., how much it spends
on armaments, its war weariness and its degree of
internationality (which could be gauged from the extent of
its  international  trading).  And  he  grouped  conﬂicts  using
the same logarithmic (Richter) scale that we use to group
earthquake  events.  In  this  way,  gang  conﬂict  and  world

wars are merely points on a continuous spectrum of deadly
conﬂict.
When he did this, Richardson found a phenomenon that
we have commented on in the context of weather,
turbulence,  networks,  economics,  pandemics  and  perhaps
even the universe as a whole—power-law structure. As we
noted in earlier chapters, power-law behaviour is an
indication  of  some  underlying  nonlinearity.  Here  was  an
indication that some rationality and nonlinear order could
be brought to the seemingly irrational world of conﬂict.
Based on his experience with weather, Richardson
sought a system of diﬀerential equations (equations using
calculus  which  included  rates  of  change  of  key  quantities
with time) similar in many respects to the types of
equations Lorenz sought years later. For example, he
posited  that  the  rate  of  change  of  a  nation’s  armament
build-up is directly proportional to the number of arms its
rival has and also to the grievances felt towards the rival,
and inversely proportional to the number of arms it already
has itself.
One  of  the  most  curious  spin-oﬀs  from  his  work  came
when  he  tried  to  include  in  his  equations  a  term  which
described the propensity of two countries to go to war as a
result  of  having  a  common  border.  Richardson  reasoned
that  the  longer  the  length  of  this  common  border,  the
greater  the  propensity.  In  trying  to  ﬁnd  data  that  would
support his hypothesis, he found that the books he
consulted  gave  wildly  diﬀerent  estimates  of  the  length  of
borders, e.g., between Spain and Portugal or between the
Netherlands and Belgium.
Richardson eventually realised that the estimated length
of  a  border  depends  strongly  on  the  resolution  of  the
measuring  system  used  to  determine  its  length.  Imagine
trying to measure the length of the coastline of Britain with
a 200-km ruler. It gives us some sort of estimate. But now
cut the ruler in half and measure with a ﬁner-scale 100-km

ruler.  The  estimate  increases.  Cut  the  ruler  in  half  again
and  remeasure—the  estimate  increases  yet  again.  We  cut
again and again and the estimate increases and increases.
Richardson 
imagined 
a 
mathematical 
coastline—
indistinguishable 
from 
Britain’s 
coastline 
on 
any
perceivable scale—whose length was literally inﬁnite.
What is going on here is a generalisation of the fractal
process we discussed in Chapter 2. There we discussed the
Cantor  set,  an  inﬁnite  set  of  points  characterised  by  a
fractional  dimension  between  0  and  1.  Richardson  had
found—in the idealised coastline of Britain—an example of
an inﬁnite set of points characterised by a fractional
dimension  between  1  and  2.  A  simpler  example  of  such  a
fractal  is  the  Koch  snowﬂake,  illustrated  in  Fig.  40.  We
start  with  an  equilateral  triangle  and  iterate  by  replacing
the middle third of each side with two sides of a
corresponding equilateral triangle.
Richardson’s work on fractal coastlines and borders
inspired the mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot. Recall that
it was Mandelbrot who coined the word “fractal”,
essentially  meaning  some  fractionally  dimensioned  object,
and  in  so  doing  discovered  one  of  the  most  intriguing
fractals known: the eponymous Mandelbrot set.
Lewis Fry Richardson died in 1953. His book The
Statistics  of  Deadly  Quarrels
  was  published  posthumously
in  1960.  In  some  ways,  he  reminds  me  of  Alan  Turing.
Whilst Richardson is best known for his work on turbulence
and weather prediction, his later work became the basis of
much that followed in conﬂict prediction. Similarly, whilst
Turing is best known for his work on computing and
cryptography, his later work forms the basis of many
studies 
in 
mathematical 
biology. 
Interestingly, 
the
mathematics behind Richardson’s work on conﬂict and
Turing’s work on biology are very similar. Both involve the
mathematics of nonlinear equations based on calculus—the
equations  on  which  the  geometry  of  chaos  is  based.  I  am

not  aware  that  Turing  and  Richardson  ever  met.  If  they
had,  I  expect  they  would  have  got  on  like  a  proverbial
house on ﬁre.
FIG. 40. The Koch snowﬂake at various levels of iteration. The length of the
edge of the snowﬂake increases with iteration number. Lewis Fry
Richardson found that a similar phenomenon made the length of nation
borders uncertain—complicating his theory of deadly conﬂict, but making
him aware of fractal geometry.
Today, appropriately perhaps, some of the important
work  on  conﬂict  prediction  has  been  taking  place  at  the
Alan Turing Institute, the UK institute for data science and
artiﬁcial intelligence (perhaps they need a Richardson wing
for their institute). Their work on deadly conﬂicts started in
2015 when team leader Weisi Guo began studying a map of
where ﬁghters of the so-called Islamic State were
operating.  He  found  that  there  was  some  overlap  with

places  along  the  old  Silk  Road.  He  started  to  notice  that
many  of  the  areas  prone  to  repeat  violence  were  along
ancient trade routes more generally. He realised that
regions  which  are  geographical  bottlenecks,  i.e.,  routes
travellers have no choice but to use, are inherently
unstable and prone to violence.
Guo  likened  this  to  a  chessboard,  whose  central  four
squares are contested by almost every signiﬁcant piece at
some point. Guo created a human connection network and
found the geographical equivalents of those key chess
squares for various locations around the world.
With  colleagues  at  the  Turing  Institute,  Guo  created  a
prediction  system  based  on  such  networks.  It  is  called
GUARD, which stands for “global urban analytics for
resilient  defence.”  In  this  model,  states  of  war  and  peace
are represented by what are called “potential wells”, a little
like  the  two  lobes  of  the  Lorenz  attractor  as  described
earlier  in  this  chapter.  In  between  these  are  states  of
instability, which Guo translates as meaning that countries
can’t be on the brink of war for long. Running the model in
ensemble mode, in order to try to estimate uncertainties in
its predictions, will I hope be a focus of future work at the
Turing Institute.
A project that has made progress with ensemble conﬂict
predictions is called ViEWS1: Violence Early-Warning
System (it seems to be a fact of modern-day science that all
projects  have  to  have  acronyms).  The  project  is  run  from
the  Department  of  Peace  and  Conﬂict  Research  at  the
University of Uppsala in Sweden. Currently, ViEWS
provides early warnings for three forms of political
violence: armed conﬂict involving states and rebel groups,
armed conﬂict between non-state actors, and violence
against civilians. The outputs from ViEWS are probabilistic
assessments  of  the  risk  and  likely  severity  of  the  three
types  of  conﬂict  events,  at  three  diﬀerent  spatial  scales:

national,  subnational  and  individual  actors.  Like  GUARD,
the prediction model makes use of key data that aﬀects the
likelihood of conﬂict in a given place: a history of conﬂict,
political 
institutions, 
timing 
of 
elections, 
economic
development, 
natural 
resources, 
demography 
and
geographical  proximity  to  conﬂict.  However,  the  ViEWS
researchers have developed a kind of multi-model ensemble
from which to make probabilistic forecasts. On the ViEWS
website they have analysed the skill of their forecasts from
the period of 2011 to 2013. One thing is completely in line
with  everything  written  so  far:  the  skill  scores  for  the
ensemble forecasts are much improved compared with any
of  the  single-model  forecasts.  Having  said  that,  I  haven’t
yet seen a convincing account of whether the spread from
the ViEWS ensemble is a good predictor of the skill of the
ensemble-averaged predictions. As with other applications
of ensemble prediction, this will provide a good indication
of whether the project’s ensemble predictions are reliable.
One  of  the  consequences  of  regional  conﬂicts  is  the
displacement  of  local  populations  who  then  seek  refugee
sanctuaries. Derek Groen from Brunel University has
developed  a  network-based  model  which  predicts  conﬂict
migration based on expected local conﬂicts. His predictions
are fed to the Save the Children charity. The network nodes
mark  potential  conﬂict  regions,  refugee  camps  and  other
settlements.
In Groen’s model, a conﬂict can be generated randomly
at a node, and the model then predicts the resulting
movement  of  the  displaced  population  along  a  simpliﬁed
travel  network.  In  this  way,  the  numbers  arriving  at  the
refugee  camps  can  be  estimated.  Alternatively,  a  conﬂict
can be speciﬁed deterministically and numbers of displaced
people arriving at the diﬀerent camps estimated as a
consequence  of  such  a  conﬂict.  The  diﬀerence  between
these two uses of the model is similar to the “prediction vs.
projection”  distinction  discussed  in  the  context  of  climate

and  pandemics.  Groen  makes  these  predictions  using  an
ensemble  of  estimates,  where  uncertain  parameters  are
varied.
As  mentioned  in  Chapter  8,  at  the  time  of  completing
this book, Russia invaded Ukraine. On timescales of months
this was predictable, at least in a probabilistic sense,
simply because Russia had begun amassing troops on the
Russia-Ukraine border a few months prior to invasion. But
more  than  that,  Richardson’s  conditions  for  conﬂict  were
met: a long common border, perceived grievances that the
Russian  president  felt  about  Ukraine  after  the  demise  of
the Soviet Union, and a general build-up of Russian
armaments in recent years. Weisi Guo conﬁrmed to me that
conﬂict models had identiﬁed Ukraine as a region of
concern for a number of years.
In thinking about the development of ensemble systems
for conﬂict prediction, perhaps some ideas can be
borrowed from the way in which operational weather
prediction ensembles are initialized. In particular, as
described in Chapter 5, the initial perturbations of a
weather 
ensemble 
deliberately 
target 
the 
dominant
instabilities 
in 
the 
atmospheric 
circulations, 
using
mathematical quantities known as singular vectors. These
are  perturbations  in  state-space  directions  which  can  be
expected  to  have  a  large  eﬀect  on  the  forecast.  Without
these  initial  singular-vector  perturbations,  the  ensemble
members would be too tightly clustered and the predictions
too  conﬁdent.  An  analysis  of  the  corresponding  “singular
vectors”  of  the  global  geopolitical  system  would  surely
identify Vladimir Putin’s actions and decisions (rather than
mine,  say)  as  being  critical  to  global  peace  and  security.
That  is  to  say,  in  developing  a  global  ensemble  conﬂict
model, uncertainty in what people like me—and billions like
me—think and do can be represented by general stochastic
noise. 
But 
Putin’s 
actions 
and 
decisions 
represent
geopolitical  singular  vectors,  and  need  to  be  considered
