explicitly.  Any  ensemble  system  which  purports  to  predict
conﬂict  probabilities  reliably  must  surely  focus  on  such
geopolitical singular-vector perturbations.
«  »
WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED from the diﬀerent contexts
discussed  in  Chapters  5  through  9?  First,  for  complex
nonlinear systems, ensemble prediction is vital if we are to
make reliable predictions which include estimates of
uncertainty.  Such  ensemble  prediction  systems  can  help
avoid the Michael Fish moments when a prediction of some
disastrous  event  fails  because  the  prediction  is  especially
sensitive  to  the  ﬂap  of  a  butterﬂy’s  wings,  or  a  missing
horseshoe 
nail. 
These 
ensemble 
forecasts 
provide
quantitative estimates of the probability of such events. As
discussed in the next chapter, prediction probabilities
provide the basis for making rational decisions about
whether  to  take  anticipatory  action  to  mitigate  the  worst
consequences of these possible disasters.
On the other hand, we have treated the various topics in
this part of the book as if they were completely
independent of each other. Clearly, they are not. For
example, one of the biggest drivers of forced migration and
conﬂict  in  future  years  is  likely  to  be  climate  change.  If
heatwaves exceed the level at which humans can maintain
their body temperature at safe limits, people may have no
alternative  other  than  to  move  polewards.  In  migrating
polewards, the migrants are likely to pass one or more of
the hotspots identiﬁed by Guo as places where conﬂicts will
emerge and develop.
So  how  do  we  go  about  bringing  all  these  elements
together in a more uniﬁed way? My answer to this question
is to ﬁrst step back in time to April 1970.

One  of  the  most  famous  phrases  uttered  during  the
Apollo space programme was from the commander of
Apollo  132.  “Houston”,  Jim  Lovell  said  to  ground  control,
“we have a problem.”
This isn’t exactly what he said, but that doesn’t matter.
Essentially, he reported, in a matter-of-fact way, that he had
heard a thud, apparently linked to a computer message of a
“Main B Bus Undervolt”. What did matter at the time was
that, unknown to both the astronauts and ground control,
an explosion in the spacecraft’s oxygen tanks had critically
damaged  their  main  engine  and  left  the  oxygen  supplies
leaking into space. With the explosion, the Apollo 13
service module had become a dangerously crippled
spacecraft  moving  farther  from  Mother  Earth  with  each
passing hour. On their current trajectory, if the astronauts
were  unable  to  perform  any  further  engine  burns,  they
would stay on an elliptical orbit for the best part of eternity,
never coming closer to the Earth than 70,000 km (43,500
miles).  The  key  question  was  whether  the  spacecraft  was
fatally crippled. How was mission control going to bring the
astronauts  home,  knowing  that  trying  possible  solutions
could well make matters worse?
Fortunately, NASA had created a number of simulators of
the Apollo spacecraft. These had been used to train
astronauts and mission controllers ahead of the space
missions. As Gene Kranz, the chief ﬂight director for Apollo
13, said, “These simulators were some of the most complex
technologies of the entire space programme: the only real
things in the simulation training were the crew, cockpit and
the  mission  control  consoles.  Everything  else  was  make-
believe, created by a bunch of computers, lots of formulas
and skilled technicians.”
These simulators had already proved their worth for the
Apollo 11 mission, which landed the ﬁrst men on the moon.
In the ﬁnal simulation of the Apollo 11 mission, the

guidance computer issued a “1201 alarm code”, which had
not been seen before. Thinking this meant that the
computers were somehow getting overloaded, the mission
controllers called for an abort. However, having later
consulted the team at MIT that had written the computer
software code, they realised that a “1201 alarm code” was
only  a  warning  and  did  not  indicate  a  critical  error.  If  it
were  not  for  that  ﬁnal  simulation,  it  is  likely  that  the
landing  of  the  Apollo  11  Eagle,  during  which  1201  and
1202  alarms  occurred  in  the  minutes  before  touchdown,
would similarly have been aborted.
In  the  case  of  Apollo  13,  the  simulators  proved  vital  to
the  safe  return  of  the  crew.  The  back-up  crews  had  to
develop  and  practise  the  three  manual  engine  burns—the
computers  had  not  been  programmed  to  do  these  burns
because  it  was  assumed  that  the  lunar  module  would  not
still be attached on the return journey. Perhaps one of the
most complex problems occurred after the astronauts had
powered  the  command  module  down  to  save  power  and
used the lunar module as a life raft. Now they had to power
the command module up again so that they could re-enter
Earth’s  atmosphere.  The  simulator  teams  worked  around
the  clock  to  deﬁne  a  power-up  sequence  using  the  tiny
amounts of energy left in the batteries. This involved
operating hundreds of switches, in precisely the right
order.  Any  mistake  could  instantly  deplete  the  remaining
electrical energy and thus be fatal.
What’s  the  point  of  this  story?  Well,  like  Apollo  13,  we
can think of planet Earth as a damaged spacecraft hurtling
through the emptiness of space. Unlike Apollo 13 with its
three astronauts, planet Earth holds many billions of
human  astronauts.  Unlike  Apollo  13,  there  is  no  external
Houston for us to call for advice.
Planet  Earth  has  not  been  damaged  because  of  some
design  ﬂaw,  as  was  the  case  for  Apollo  13;  it  has  been
damaged by its astronauts. As Partha Dasgupta’s inﬂuential

report3  to  the  UK  government  put  it,  we  have  failed  to
manage our global portfolio of national assets sustainably.
Between 1992 and 2014, produced capital per person
doubled. However, the stock of natural capital per person
declined  by  nearly  40  percent.  It  is  as  if  the  Apollo  crew
squandered the few precious joules of energy in the
spacecraft’s batteries needed for re-entry so that they
could  play  music  and  watch  videos  to  make  their  journey
back to Earth more comfortable. The problem with climate
change is one manifestation of this more general problem.
And  yet  at  the  same  time,  we  have  been  developing
weapons of unimaginable destructive power. We astronauts
have the power to annihilate ourselves almost overnight, if
we should so wish. Those that need reminding might wish,
as I did just a year or two ago, to read Nevil Shute’s On the
Beach, written in 1957. It’s a grim reminder of what could
be  in  store  for  us  if  we  reach  another  point  of  instability.
Indeed,  could  climate  change  trigger  such  an  instability?
Let’s  indulge  in  some  speculation  about  sometime  mid-
century.
We’ll suppose international climate-change talks fail and
carbon emissions keep rising. Attempts to cut emissions in
the developed world are half-hearted and developing-world
countries say they won’t seriously contemplate cutting
emissions  until  the  standards  of  living  of  people  in  their
countries have reached levels comparable with those in the
richer countries. Temperatures keep rising, but none more
so  than  in  the  western  half  of  the  United  States,  where
wildﬁres become a yearly fact of life. Temperatures
exceeding 50°C (122°F) are commonplace around the
world, 
including 
high-latitude 
regions, 
where 
such
temperatures  were  previously  unimaginable.  Lake  Mead
has  dried  up  and  the  Hoover  Dam  no  longer  produces
electricity for large parts of the year. Wheat yields
plummet,  not  just  one  year  in  ten,  but  pretty  much  every

year.  European  countries  are  suﬀering  similar  problems
with ﬂooding events, which also destroy crops.
A joint grouping of European and United States
ministers comes to a conclusion: something has to be done.
They  resort  to  Plan  B.  In  this  plan,  military  aircraft  from
these countries ﬂy continuously around the clock spraying
sulphuric  acid  vapour  into  the  lower  stratosphere.  From
this,  sulphate  aerosols  are  formed  which  reﬂect  sunlight
back to space. The atmosphere now has a haze of aerosols
which, it is hoped, will oﬀset the eﬀects of global warming
and  cool  the  atmosphere  down  again.  They  justify  this
action on the basis it will help humanity as a whole.
However, the impact of such “geoengineering” on
climate  isn’t  as  simple  as  it  might  seem  at  ﬁrst  sight.  As
discussed  in  Chapter  6,  the  global  warming  problem  is
caused because we are trapping electromagnetic radiation
in the infrared part of the spectrum. Sulphate aerosols in
the  stratosphere  increase  the  reﬂection  of  sunlight  in  the
visible  parts  of  the  spectrum.  The  one  is  not  precisely
oﬀsetting  the  other.  What  could  be  the  consequences  of
this? This is an area where estimates from current-
generation models are unreliable.
So,  back  to  the  story.  After  several  years  of  spraying,
both Russia and India ﬁnd that the atmospheric circulation
patterns over their countries have changed in such a way
that  rain-bearing  weather  systems  no  longer  track  across
the  main  agricultural  regions.  The  monsoons  start  to  fail,
and as a result the crops fail. India and Russia blame these
failures on the US/Europe policy of spraying aerosols into
the  stratosphere  and  tell  these  countries  to  stop  spraying
immediately.
There is a big international study which tries to
determine whether the Russian and Indian crop failures are
caused by the stratospheric spraying. The results are
inconclusive because the models’ resolution is too coarse to
give clear-cut results (the “CERN for climate change”

advocated  for  in  Chapter 6  hasn’t  been  built  because  the
nations of the world could not agree to pool resources on
this project). The US and Europe claim that climate models
show that the monsoon failures are just part of the natural
variability of climate and not caused by the spraying. India
and Russia claim that the model results are unreliable and
cite as evidence the fact that they typically fail to simulate
the  occurrence  of  extreme  climatic  and  weather  events
with anything like the frequency observed.
Eventually, Russia and India tell the US and Europe that
if  they  do  not  stop  spraying,  they  will  shoot  down  the
planes doing the spraying. The US responds that this would
constitute  an  act  of  war.  Russia  and  India  respond  by
saying that the destruction of their food supplies is already
an act of war.
The ﬁrst plane is shot down, leading to massive
economic  sanctions  by  the  US.  A  second  plane  is  shot
down,  leading  to  airﬁelds  in  India  being  bombed.  The  US
and Europe issue a ﬁnal ultimatum: desist or face the very
serious consequences. A third plane is shot down, and the
consequences, both immediate and knock-on, ensue.
Within a short time, a radioactive cloud spreads across
the world, cooling the planet by several degrees, reducing
the  population  of  Earth  to  one-tenth  of  what  it  was,  and
making  climate  change,  as  we  currently  understand  it,  a
thing of the past.
Oh Lord! How can we prevent such a situation
developing in the ﬁrst place?
Like Apollo 13, we need credible simulators with which
these  problems  can  be  played  out  and  addressed  at  the
international level before they spiral out of control.
The simulator system that Apollo 13 had would now be
called a “digital twin”. Even though not all aspects of the
Apollo  simulators  were  digital,  they  performed  the  tasks
that  today  we  would  expect  a  digital  twin  to  perform,
notably  of  providing  information  about  a  physical  system

that for various reasons can’t be directly studied by human
intervention. As with Apollo 13, it is too risky to try these
Plan B options directly. But we need the tools with which
we can reliably simulate the consequences of a Plan B.
Here  we  need  not  so  much  a  digital  twin  as  a  “digital
ensemble  twin”.  Clearly  the  climate  models  discussed  in
Chapter  6  would  be  a  critical  part  of  a  digital  ensemble
twin  of  planet  Earth.  However,  they  must  be  integrated
with  the  other  models  discussed  in  this  book:  economic,
health  and  conﬂict  models,  as  well  as  agronomic  models,
hydrological models, population growth models and so on.
In discussing 
these impact models, the unrealistic,
equilibrium-based  models  are  no  good  at  all.  We  need  to
move 
towards 
more 
agent-based 
models 
in 
which
individuals 
are 
represented 
and 
connected 
through
networks of interactions.
Could we extend the concept of an agent-based model of
global society with our 8 billion inhabitants? It’s not a crazy
idea. As we have discussed, a weather forecast model has
some  billions  of  degrees  of  freedom,  so  doubling  this  to
incorporate degrees of freedom of individuals is not
completely out of the question. Of course, individual agents
will have to be treated as having some inherent
stochasticity.  But  as  I  have  explained,  we  have  to  do  this
anyway for weather variables. AI will play a central role in
such an endeavor.
Of course, such a digital ensemble twin would not only
be  able  to  tackle  the  socioeconomic  problems  of  climate
geoengineering, it should be able to provide credible
estimates of future migration, future conﬂict, future health
risks, future food supplies, the future health of the oceans
and so on.
Clearly, such a project is not one that could or, I would
argue,  should  be  developed  at  a  national  level.  Its  output
would  have  to  have  the  imprimatur  of  the  international
community, likely the United Nations. It would be run using

literally  the  most  powerful  supercomputers  in  the  world.
We will very soon be in the era of the exascale computer,
which will be able to perform a billion billion calculations in
each  second  of  operation.  Completely  dedicated  exascale
computing would be needed to even contemplate building a
digital  ensemble  of  planet  Earth,  and  perhaps  it  won’t
really be a serious option until we have zettascale
computers, capable of performing one billion trillion
computations a second. Perhaps we will have these in the
2030s. Perhaps by then we will in part use quantum
computers, or photonic processors as well as silicon
processors, and high-performance low-power imprecise
chips that produce noise in hardware.
This would be an extraordinarily 
interdisciplinary
exercise;  perhaps  a  more  interdisciplinary  exercise  than
the scientiﬁc community has ever contemplated. And since
handling uncertainty underpins all sciences, the project to
build  a  digital  ensemble  of  global  society  would  bring
together 
the 
various 
approaches 
to 
representing
uncertainty 
that 
have 
developed 
in 
the 
diﬀerent
subdisciplines. This project really would recognise the
primacy of doubt.
A  ﬁrst  step  in  this  direction  is  the  European  Union’s
Destination Earth (DestinE) project4. Evolving from an
earlier  EU  ﬂagship  project  proposal,  ExtremeEarth,  that
some colleagues and I developed a few years ago,
Destination  Earth  will  see  not  only  the  construction  of
extremely high-resolution climate models, but also a range
of socioeconomic-impact models to which the global
climate  models  will  be  coupled.  DestinE  is  the  ﬁrst  step
towards building a digital ensemble of global society. Sadly,
the  UK  having  left  the  EU 5,  UK  scientists  will  not  be
contributing to DestinE.
...
