10
Decisions! Decisions!
AVERAGING  ONE  HUNDRED  INDEPENDENT  GUESSES  OF
THE NUMBER of jellybeans in a jar usually provides a better
estimate  of  the  actual  number  than  does  any  one  guess.
More  generally,  ensemble-averaged  forecasts  are  typically
better  than  best-guess  deterministic  forecasts.  However,
when we have to make decisions, simply knowing the
expected  outcome  is  often  not  good  enough.  We  need  to
know the likelihood of some plausible worst-case scenario.
If the consequences of a plausible worst-case scenario are
truly  dire,  we  should  try  to  avoid  such  a  scenario  at  any
reasonable  cost.  For  example,  COVID  lockdown  policies
were imposed, at great economic cost, to avoid a plausible
worst-case scenario in which hospitals were overwhelmed
and  unable  to  cope  with  the  number  of  patients  needing
treatment. But how plausible is “plausible”, and what do we
mean by any “reasonable” cost? In this chapter we will look
at the use of ensembles for decision-making. This is an area
where  really  exciting  new  approaches  to  disaster  relief
management are being developed and deployed.
«  »

A FEW YEARS AGO, before weather apps told us the
probability of rain, a friend of mine called. He was having a
garden party in ten days’ time and had an option to rent a
tent (what in British English would be called a “marquee”).
However,  he  had  to  let  the  owner  of  the  tent  know  by
lunchtime  that  day  whether  he  wanted  it  or  not.  So,  he
called me and asked: Is it going to rain in his back garden
next Saturday between 2 p.m. and 6 p.m.?
I told him that I would look at the latest forecast but it
would be in the form of a probability. I could hear the groan
at the other end of the phone line.
“How  on  earth  are  probabilities  going  to  help  me?”  he
complained.
“Well, who’s coming to your party?”
“What’s that got to do with it?” he replied.
“Suppose  the  Queen  is  coming.  You  would  not  want  to
risk  the  Queen  getting  wet,  would  you?  If  the  Queen  got
wet, your chances of that knighthood would go right down
the drain—along with the rainwater. So, even if the
probability of rain was as low as ﬁve percent, say, I guess
you would likely still rent the tent. Is the Queen coming?”
“No, of course not!”
“Well, what about the town mayor?”
I sensed he was losing patience. “Look,” I continued, “if
the town mayor is coming, you would not want him to get
wet  either.  However,  you  probably  wouldn’t  be  quite  as
bothered  about  him  getting  wet  as  you  would  the  Queen
getting wet. Let’s say that if the town mayor was coming,
perhaps  you  would  rent  the  tent  if  the  probability  of  rain
exceeded twenty percent, say. Is the town mayor coming?”
“No.”
“So,  who  is  the  most  important  person  coming  to  the
party?”
He thought about it for a while and replied, “The mother-
in-law.”

“And how much does it matter if she gets wet? That is to
say,  what  is  the  smallest  forecast  probability  that  your
mother-in-law will get wet above which you would decide to
rent  the  tent?  If  you  don’t  care  whether  she  gets  wet  or
not,  the  threshold  is  one  hundred  percent.  If  she’s  as
important as the Queen, the threshold is ﬁve percent. I’m
guessing your threshold probability is somewhere between
these two.”
Again,  he  thought  about  it  for  a  few  seconds  and  said,
“About ﬁfty percent.”
“Good, then we have made a decision. I’ll take a look at
the forecast. If the probability of rain exceeds ﬁfty percent,
then you hire the tent. If it does not exceed ﬁfty percent,
then you don’t. OK?”
I looked at the latest forecast. The probability was only
around 30 percent. He didn’t rent the tent/marquee.
Fortunately, it didn’t rain and everyone was happy.
What’s the essential idea from this story? It’s that
probabilities  aren’t  some  wishy-washy  things  that  make
forecasts imprecise and diﬀicult to use. In fact, these
probabilities help you make better decisions—providing the
probabilities are reliable.
Let’s generalise the story. Imagine some weather event
which I will call E.  E could represent the occurrence of rain
or  perhaps  freezing  temperatures  or  perhaps  storm-force
winds.  However  it  is  deﬁned, E  either  occurs  or  doesn’t
occur. In the story about the tent, E occurs if it rains.
If E  occurs,  then  Jim,  as  we  will  call  him,  will  incur  a
ﬁnancial  loss, L,  if  he  has  taken  no  measure  to  protect
himself. However, we will assume L can be avoided
altogether if Jim takes some kind of anticipatory action. But
this anticipatory action will cost him an amount, C. L and C
have values in real monetary units such as dollars or euros,
but the ratio C / L is just a dimensionless fraction which we
can assume lies between 0 and 1 (if it were greater than 1,
then there will be no point taking anticipatory action, since

it would cost more than the avoidable loss). We call 
C /  L
Jim’s “cost-loss ratio”.
If C  /   L  is  small  enough,  i.e.,  the  cost  of  anticipatory
action is cheap enough relative to the loss, Jim might just
as  well  take  anticipatory  action  regardless  of  what  the
weather is likely to be. Conversely, if C /  L is close enough
to  1,  then  Jim  might  just  as  well  never  take  anticipatory
action, and just suﬀer the loss when the bad weather hits.
But  if C  /   L  lies  between  these  two  extremes,  then  it’s
worthwhile for Jim to consult a weather forecast to decide
when to take anticipatory action.
If Jim has access to only an old-fashioned deterministic
weather 
forecast, 
then 
the 
decision 
process 
is
straightforward:  take  action  when  the  forecast  predicts
that E  will  occur;  otherwise  don’t  take  action.  This  is  all
well and good, except, as we have seen, these old-fashioned
deterministic forecasts can be unreliable. If 
E denotes the
occurrence  of  hurricane-force  gusts  in  southern  England
for the morning of October 16, 1987, then on the basis of
the  deterministic  forecast,  on  that  day  no  one  will  have
taken  anticipatory  action  (moved  cars,  secured  boats  and
aircraft, cancelled travel plans). Deterministic forecasts
have limited value because they are unreliable.
However,  if  Jim  has  access  to  probabilistic  forecasts
based  on  a  reliable  ensemble  prediction  system,  then  he
has  a  much  more  valuable  strategy  for  deciding  when  to
take  anticipatory  action.  Suppose  an  ensemble  forecast
system predicts E with probability p. Then the best decision
Jim can make is to take action when p exceeds his cost-loss
ratio, C /  L. For example, in the case where 
L is twice the
cost of C,  then  Jim  should  take  action  when E  is  forecast
with  a  probability  of  at  least  0.5,  or  50  percent.  On  the
other hand, if L is twenty times the cost of C, then it makes
sense for Jim to take precautionary action when E is
forecast with a probability of as low as 0.05, or 5 percent.

Fig.  41  shows  an  estimate  of  the  value  of  a  modern
weather forecast system for decisions based on whether it
will  rain  four  days  into  the  future.  The  horizontal  axis
shows  all  possible  values  of C  /  L  between  0  and  1.  The
vertical axis shows how valuable the forecast system is for
deciding  when  to  take  anticipatory  action.  A  value  of  0
means that the forecast system has no value (you can make
decisions that are just as valuable knowing only the
climatological likelihood that it will rain in your region). By
contrast, a hypothetical perfect oracle of truth has a value
of 1; nothing can be better than that. The solid line shows
the value of decisions using a deterministic forecast system
(i.e., one that predicts that it either will rain or won’t rain
with 100 percent likelihood). It can be seen that the
forecast system has value only for a limited range of cost-
loss  ratios C  /   L.  Outside  this  range,  it  is  useless.  The
dashed line shows the value of an ensemble forecast
system. It has value for almost the entire range of cost-loss
ratios. Not only that, for any cost-loss ratio where there is
value, the value is greater than for the deterministic
system1.
This  is  all  very  well,  but  does  it  really  matter  if  the
Queen gets wet? In any case, she will have an army of staﬀ
who, with umbrellas and the like, ensure she never actually
gets wet. Indeed. So, let’s instead think about a farmer in
Bangladesh.  We’ll  call  him  Ahmadul.  In  the  days  before
computer-based weather forecasts, individual tropical
cyclones  would  kill  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  like
Ahmadul;  as  many  as  half  a  million  individuals  on  one
occasion2.

FIG. 41. The potential economic value of operational forecasts from the
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts for the
European/North African region over the period October–December 2020 for
the event of rainfall over a six-hour period, four days into the forecast. The
lines show the value of two diﬀerent forecast systems for decision-making,
where losses L associated with the occurrence of rain can be mitigated at
cost C. The horizontal axis denotes the user’s C / L. The vertical axis shows
the value of the forecast, where 0 is useless and 1 is perfection. The solid
line is for a state-of-the-art high-resolution deterministic forecast system.
The dashed line is for a lower-resolution ensemble forecast system.
Because  modern  weather  forecasts  are  so  much  more
skilful,  far  fewer  people  get  killed  by  extreme  weather

events  today  than  in  decades  past.  However,  that  doesn’t
mean  that  we  are  making  the  best  use  we  can  of  these
forecasts.  Disaster  relief  and  humanitarian  aid  agencies
have tended to react to extreme weather events only after
they  have  hit.  It  can  take  many  days,  perhaps  a  week  or
more  sometimes,  for  emergency  food,  water,  shelter  and
medicines to reach a stricken region. And of course, once
an extreme weather event has hit, reaching aﬀected
communities is that much harder.
It would be so much better if these agencies were able to
be more proactive—to use the forecasts to target aid,
allowing  action  to  be  taken  before  the  event  hits.  The
problem is that aid agencies aren’t ﬂush with cash.
Because  the  old-fashioned  deterministic  forecasts  weren’t
reliable, if they acted every time such forecasts predicted
an  extreme  event,  valuable  resources  would  be  spent  on
weather events that never happened.
Because of ensemble forecasting, one can be much more
discerning about when to become proactive. Targeting aid
before  the  event  hits  is  called  “anticipatory  action”  by
humanitarian  and  disaster  relief  agencies.  Like  my  friend
deciding  whether  to  rent  a  tent  based  on  a  probability
threshold, 
aid 
agencies 
predetermine 
a 
probability
“trigger”,  based  on  cost/loss  estimates,  above  which  it
makes good sense to take anticipatory action.
The story starts over thirty years ago. It’s not just
tropical  cyclones  that  Ahmadul  has  to  worry  about.  His
life’s investments are bound up in cattle. Like many in the
country, Ahmadul lives in a low-lying area and the land on
which his cattle graze is prone to ﬂooding from the nearby
Brahmaputra  River.  The  ﬂooding  need  not  be  caused  by
local heavy rainfall; indeed, the rain may have fallen many
hundreds  of  kilometres  upstream.  But  if  a  major  ﬂood
occurs without warning, Ahmadul’s cattle, and thereby his
life savings, will be lost.

My colleague Professor Peter Webster from the Georgia
Institute  of  Technology  has  had  an  illustrious  research
career.  He  is  one  of  the  world’s  experts  on  the  theory  of
tropical  meteorology3.  He  led  a  number  of  observational
ﬁeld campaigns to improve our scientiﬁc understanding of
the climate of the tropics. However, in 1992, Webster spent
a sabbatical year working with me, and during this period
he completely changed his research direction. He became a
convert to the recently developed ensemble-based forecasts
and decided to spend the next years of his career showing
how this new way of doing weather forecasting could help
people in some of the poorest parts of the world.
Webster began by consulting with local oﬀicials in
regions in Bangladesh aﬀected by the Ganges and
Brahmaputra rivers. Whilst the national meteorological
services  provided  conventional  deterministic  forecasts  a
couple  of  days  ahead,  the  local  oﬀicials  wanted  forecasts
with more lead time, to allow meaningful anticipatory
actions to be taken ahead of possible ﬂooding events. They
needed  reliable  predictions  a  week  or  more  ahead.  With
such forecasts, families could store several days’ worth of
food and safe drinking water. Cattle and poultry, crop seed
and  other  belongings  could  be  secured  in  safer  higher
locations. Most important, plans could be made for
complete  evacuations.  Of  particular  concern  were  those
who lived on river islands called “chars”. It was diﬀicult to
make  such  plans  when  you  had  only  a  day  or  two  of
warning.
Webster showed it was possible to make skilful
probabilistic ﬂood forecasts for the Brahmaputra and
Ganges  as  much  as  two  weeks  ahead,  by  coupling  the
ensemble predictions of rainfall from the European Centre
for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to hydrological
models of these rivers. Flooding would occur when enough
rainfall fell in the catchment basins of these rivers. In this

way,  the  combined  weather/hydrological  ensemble  system
would  predict  the  probability  that  one  or  both  of  these
rivers would ﬂood.
However,  could  probabilistic  predictions  of  ﬂooding  be
used by the local communities? Would they be able to make
sense of probabilities? It wasn’t obvious. After all, when I
was  developing  these  ensemble  prediction  systems,  I  had
been told repeatedly by weather forecasters that the
British public would never understand the concept of
probability  (despite  the  fact  that  many  of  them  bet  on
horses, where the “odds of winning” are well understood).
Answering these questions would need a ﬁeld trial. With
support from the US Agency for International Development
(USAID)4, Webster began a pilot project to provide
probabilistic forecasts to local villages in some of the ﬂood-
prone districts in Bangladesh.
The  project  was  an  enormous  success.  It  ran  for  two
years—2007 through 2008. There were two prolonged
ﬂoods in 2007 and a third in 2008. For each of these there
was  a  strong  signal  in  the  ensemble  forecasts,  allowing
anticipatory action to be taken. The Asian Disaster
Preparedness 
Center5 
assessed 
the 
value 
of 
these
probabilistic forecasts. Farmers with ﬁsh farms or a focus
on ﬁshing saved about $130 per household (e.g., from ﬁsh
farm protection). Mainly agricultural households saved
about 
$190 
from 
early 
cropping. 
Households 
with
signiﬁcant  livestock  beneﬁtted  the  most,  with  an  average
savings  of  around  $500  from  advanced  warnings  to  move
livestock  to  higher  ground.  More  general  savings  of  $270
per household arose from the protection of household
assets. At the time, the average income in Bangladesh was
$470 per year and half the population existed on less than
$1.25 per day. As such, the savings were substantial
indeed.

Webster needn’t have worried that the farmers wouldn’t
understand probabilities. When he asked one farmer
whether he could cope with probabilities, the farmer
replied:
“That  is  ﬁne!  Only  God  knows  100  percent  what  will
happen, and he is not telling and you are not God!”
With probabilities, the farmer realised, he had something
more valuable than simple guesswork. Peter Webster’s
groundbreaking  study  showed  that  societies  faced  with
environmental  catastrophe  are  indeed  ready,  willing  and
able to accept and act on probabilistic forecast information.
The legacy of Webster’s work is the approach referred to
earlier 
as 
anticipatory 
action. 
This 
approach 
is
transforming the way in which disaster preparedness
agencies  operate.  In  collaboration  with  the  International
Federation  of  Red  Cross  and  Red  Crescent  Societies,  it  is
being geared up for application around the world.
Associated with such anticipatory action is a scheme called
“forecast-based ﬁnance” grounded in three essential
elements: disaster relief emergency funds, a forecast-based
probabilistic trigger to release such funds and a pre-agreed
action plan when the trigger conditions are met.
As an early example of this system in action, on July 4,
2020,  fed  by  ECMWF  ensemble  forecasts,  the  European
Commission’s Global Flood Awareness System (GloFAS)
predicted 
a 
high 
probability 
of 
severe 
ﬂooding 
in
Bangladesh  (which  occurred).  The  probability,  combined
with  an  independent  assessment  by  the  Government  of
Bangladesh’s  Flood  Forecasting  and  Warning  Centre,  was
high enough to trigger the United Nations Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) to release $5.2 million
of  funds  to  a  number  of  local  organisations,  who  then
prepared to distribute assistance including cash, livestock
feed, storage drums and hygiene kits. This was the fastest
allocation of funds since CERF was established in 2005 and
the  ﬁrst  time  it  had  been  done  before  the  peak  ﬂoods

occurred.  Ultimately  200,000  people  were  able  to  beneﬁt
from this anticipatory action.
In September 2021, opening a major conference on
anticipatory action, UN secretary-general António Guterres
said  that  CERF  had  invested  $140  million  to  scale  up
anticipatory action in twelve countries, noting that
“anticipatory  action  protects  lives”,  and  concluded  that
anticipatory action will become central to the UN’s agenda
in  the  humanitarian  sector  going  forward.  This  is  a  great
legacy  of  Webster’s  pioneering  ﬁeld  trial  and  one  that
would have been impossible without reliable ensemble
predictions.
Of course, communication issues remain critical. Most of
us  experience  severe  weather  in  one  form  or  other  from
time to time, and we need to know when to take notice: the
threat  to  life  notwithstanding,  such  weather  can  lead  to
property  damage,  to  travel  delays  and  cancellations  or  to
loss of electricity or water supplies. As a way to
communicate  the  risk  of  a  forecast  event,  the  UK  Met
Oﬀice  puts  out  “yellow”,  “amber”  and  “red”  warnings  of
severe weather based on what is called a “warning impact
matrix” (see Fig. 42). The weather event E is characterised
by its estimated impact and by its forecast likelihood. In the
warning impact matrix, impact varies along the horizontal
axis and likelihood varies along the vertical axis. In terms
of  the  cost-loss  model  described  earlier,  we  can  imagine
that moving along the horizontal axis, the loss, 
L, due to E
gets  bigger  and  bigger.  Moving  up  the  vertical  axis,  the
probability, p, of E gets bigger and bigger. Severe weather
warnings are based on the product pL. Hence, for example,
an  amber  warning  could  refer 
either  to  an  event  with
medium  impact  but  high  probability or  to  an  event  with
high impact but only medium probability. The probabilities
that determine such warnings are taken from the ensemble
forecast systems.

Of course, even when people are well informed, they do
not  always  take  action.  It  was  reported  that  some  people
did  not  leave  their  shoreline  homes  ahead  of  the  well-
forecast, deadly tropical cyclone Idai that hit Mozambique
in  2019,  for  fear  their  houses  would  be  burgled.  In  such
situations, anticipatory action could include the automatic
provision  of  insurance  coverage  or  of  guards  to  protect
houses.
Anticipatory action based on probabilistic thresholds
isn’t relevant only for ﬂooding events or storms. There is a
growing problem of developing and maintaining global food
security.  In  over  80  percent  of  the  world,  farming  is  rain-
fed,  meaning  that  water  for  agriculture  comes  principally
from  rainfall.  Many  farmers  around  the  world  know  the
importance  of  planting  and  harvesting  crops  when  there
will  be  rainfall  and  when  it  is  dry,  respectively.  Reliable
probabilistic  forecasts  can  help  them  decide  on  planting,
cropping and harvest strategies in ways for which
deterministic forecasts are useless.

FIG. 42. Risk matrix used to determine severe weather warnings in the UK.
Shown in the ﬁgure are boxes with four shades of grey, corresponding to
“no warning”, “yellow warning”, “amber warning” and “red warning”—the
latter being the most severe weather warning. The shading is determined
by the product of impact and likelihood of occurrence. For example, an
amber warning could mean either a high probability of a medium-impact
event or a medium probability of a high-impact event. The probabilities are
determined by ensemble forecast systems. The ticked box corresponds to a
“yellow warning”.
