«  »
CAN THE COST-LOSS MODEL  help  us  to  decide  whether  to
take anticipatory action in the light of the threat of climate
change?
Let’s summarise two possible arguments for and against
taking anticipatory action.
On the one hand:
The climate crisis is a manifestation of our overindulgent
and  proﬂigate  way  of  life.  We  sowed  the  wind;  nature  is
now reaping the whirlwind. As written by James Lovelock
in his Revenge of Gaia6 ,
“Like  an  old  lady  who  has  to  share  her  house  with  a
growing  and  destructive  group  of  teenagers,  Gaia  grows
angry,  and  if  they  do  not  mend  their  ways,  she  will  evict
them.”
We  have  to  rid  ourselves  of  our  dependence  on  fossil
fuels as quickly as possible and live a simpler life more in
harmony with nature.
On the other hand:
Decarbonising  the  economies  of  the  world  will  stunt
their economic growth, particularly in relatively poor parts
of  the  developing  world,  preventing  them  from  attaining
the standards of living which the developed world achieved
on  the  back  of  cheap  carbon-intensive  energy.  And  if  we
hinder the economic growth of these poorer countries, we
will lock in their high human fertility rates for many years
to come, exacerbating problems of growing population
levels and further degrading the planet. All this economic
pain  is  simply  not  worth  it—the  impact  of  unmitigated
climate  change  on  global  gross  domestic  product  will  be
minimal. And if climate change means we have to adapt to
new norms of weather, so be it—we can aﬀord it, it’s not a
big deal.

Perhaps the cost-loss model I’ve described could provide
a framework for trying to address these issues objectively.
Does the likelihood p of dangerous levels of climate change
exceed  the  cost C  of  cutting  greenhouse-gas  emissions  to
zero  divided  by  the  damages L  associated  with  climate
change? If the costs were small enough or the losses large
enough,  it  would  make  sense  to  take  action  even  if  the
probabilities  were  small.  But  are  they?  If  we  could  boil  it
down  to  a  seemingly  straightforward  calculation  like  this,
we’d have a clear-cut strategy on whether and how to deal
with climate change.
This  was  a  question  addressed  by  probably  the  most
authoritative study on the impact on the global economy of
climate change: the Stern Review7, published in 2006, and
authored by the distinguished economist Lord Nick Stern.
Using estimated losses L and costs C based on gross
domestic product (GDP), Stern’s main conclusion was that
the probability p of dangerous levels of warming is
suﬀiciently  great  that  it  is  certainly  worth  taking  action
now to cut our carbon emissions. But there were those who
criticised the basic assumptions of the Stern Review. These
critics  argued  that  the  science  of  climate  change  was  not
good 
enough 
to 
estimate 
p 
reliably, that 
L 
was
overestimated (particularly when the future is discounted,
as  one  has  to  do  in  any  economic  calculation  about  the
future), and that C was underestimated.
Let’s look at each of these issues in turn.
Whilst  I  fully  agree  that  we  could  do  a  better  job  in
estimating p—for example, by pooling human and computer
resources  to  build  much-higher-resolution  global  models
(e.g.,  at  a  “CERN  for  climate  change”  as  discussed  in
Chapter 6)—there is no evidence that climate models have
overestimated p. As discussed in Chapter 6, climate
projections from thirty or more years ago have done a good
job in predicting observed rates of global warming.

Let’s look at L—the avoidable damages caused by
climate change. We need to be able to quantify 
L in some
shape or form. If we can’t put a ﬁgure in dollars or pounds
on L, then we won’t be able to determine whether the cost
C of cutting emissions is worth it or not.
As we have seen, economists have tried to estimate the
impact of L on global GDP. According to the Stern Review,
without  action,  climate  change  could  reduce  GDP  by  5
percent  or  more  per  year.  Others  are  not  so  pessimistic.
The Nobel Prize–winning American economist William
Nordhaus has estimated that 3°C (5.4°F) of warming would
lead to only just over 2 percent reduction of GDP
altogether. These are massive diﬀerences. Who is right?
One  problem  is  that,  as  we  discussed  in  Chapter  8,
economic models tend to be rather simple. The impact L in
such  models  is  typically  determined  by  the  global-mean
temperature change predicted by the climate models. One
could argue that they should take the regional changes of
climate  into  account.  However,  as  we  have  discussed,  the
rather  coarse-resolution  climate  models  do  not  simulate
well the intensity of extreme weather events. On top of this,
the  economic-impact  assessment  models  do  not  have  the
complexity of the agent-based models discussed in Chapter
8, whose form allows them to be driven by regional
changes 
in 
weather 
patterns. 
I 
hope 
this 
rather
unsatisfactory state of aﬀairs will change with the
development  of  a  CERN  for  climate  change,  discussed  in
Chapter 6.
However, there is another issue. Let’s think again about
Ahmadul, our hypothetical representative farmer from
Bangladesh.  How  do  we  quantify  the  impact  of  climate
change in monetary terms on a representative of a
community  with  a  completely  negligible  impact  on  global
GDP?
We are edging towards a topic which some people might
feel  is  taboo.  How  much  is  a  human  life  worth?  This  is

certainly a distasteful topic, but nevertheless it is one that
has to be addressed if we are to make progress in this area.
One  could  of  course  take  the  view  that  a  human  life  is
priceless. However, there were just short of 25,000 people
killed on the UK roads in 2020. If we valued a human life as
literally  priceless,  then  it  would  make  sense  to  impose  a
ten-mile-per-hour  speed  limit  on  all  roads.  However,  most
of  us  probably  feel  that  the  extra  time  it  would  take  to
travel is not justiﬁed, even if it does save lives. That is to
say,  we  implicitly  put  a  value,  in  terms  of  our  time,  on  a
human life.
Statisticians have known that it is important to come up
with some value of a statistical life (VSL), as it is called, in
order to argue either for or against regulatory legislation.
In  his  book Pricing  Lives8,  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  one  of  the
pioneers in this ﬁeld, discusses an issue which arose during
the Reagan presidency in the 1980s: Should ﬁrms be
required to label dangerous chemicals in the workplace? At
the time, government agencies would estimate the value of
life  in  terms  of  a  person’s  lost  earnings  and  associated
costs  if  he  or  she  died.  On  this  basis,  the  US  Oﬀice  of
Management and Budget argued that the cost of adding the
labelling wasn’t worth it, and therefore didn’t recommend
the legislation that required companies to provide labelling.
Viscusi argued that the value of life was not being
calculated properly. Instead, he argued that VSL should be
estimated from evidence of how much extra money
individuals  would  require  to  accept  an  increased  risk  of
death  (or  some  life-changing  disability  which  could  make
life  a  misery).  Viscusi  presented  evidence  from  US-based
statistical data at the time that workers were prepared to
accept  an  annual  wage  premium  of  $300  for  a  job  where
the  extra  annual  worker  fatality  risk  was  1/10,000.  From
this,  we  can  use  the  cost-loss  model  described  earlier  to
estimate a value of life. That is, if we write 
C =  pL where

now C  =  $300  and p  =  1/10,000,  then  we  have L  =  $3
million.  That  was  in  1982.  Adjusted  for  inﬂation  we  get  a
modern ﬁgure of VSL in the US as perhaps a little less than
$10 million.
However,  we  have  to  face  the  uncomfortable  fact  that
VSL in the developing world is not as large as that in the
US 
or 
other 
wealthy 
countries. 
Sadly, workers 
in
developing  countries  will  accept  a  smaller  wage  premium
for this extra risk of death or disability. How can we adjust
for  this,  so  that  we  can  get  a  ﬁgure  that  applies  to  both
Ahmadul in Bangladesh and Jim in Seattle? Very roughly, a
formula  that  is  widely  used  deﬁnes  VSL  as  100  times  the
per capita GDP in the country of interest9. On this basis, we
can value Ahmadul’s life at 100 times the per capita GDP of
Bangladesh.
Remember  VSL  is  based  on  the  monetary  premium  not
only of death but of some life-changing disability. Based on
the discussion in Chapter 6, I would say that living in a 4°C
(7.2°F) or greater warmer world, a hell on earth (HoE) as
far as I can judge, is not too far oﬀ the equivalent of a life-
changing disability. Simply to be conservative, if VSL is 100
times the per capita GDP, let’s estimate the value of
avoiding HoE at 50 times the per capita GDP.
How  likely  is  it  that  we  will  experience  at  least  4°C  of
warming  if  we  do  nothing  to  cut  emissions?  According  to
what I have discussed, it is, I would say, around 0.3. It does
depend critically on these cloud feedbacks about which our
knowledge is currently rather limited. However, if we
multiply the probability, p = 0.3, by a loss, L, corresponding
to 50 times per capita GDP, we end up with the “risk”, 
pL,
of HoE at 15 times per capita GDP.
What  is  the  cost  of  avoiding  HoE?  For  many  years  the
cost of decarbonising a country’s economy was assumed to
be a few percent of the country’s GDP. However, according
to  analysis  performed  by  the  UK’s  Committee  on  Climate

Change in its Sixth Carbon Budget Methodology report10, it
seems that the phenomenal drop in the cost of renewable
energy  (wind  and  solar)  means  that  the  cost  could  be  as
low  as  1  percent  of  GDP
11.  But  let’s  assume  2  percent  of
GDP in general. Hence, for each person, this is a cost, C, of
1/50 of GDP, i.e., per capita.
On this basis, C is 750 times smaller than the risk, pL, of
HoE.  It  seems  overwhelmingly  worth  it  to  cut  our  carbon
emissions.
However,  this  conclusion  could  be  undermined  by  the
issue  of  discount  rates.  If  you  had  a  choice  of  receiving
$100  today  or  $100  in  ten  years’  time,  you  would  likely
prefer 
to 
receive 
it 
today 
(inﬂationary 
devaluation
notwithstanding). For example, you might invest your $100
in  some  business  that  you  hope  will  make  you  several
hundred dollars in ten years’ time. If one estimates
discount  rates  from  the  ﬁnancial  markets  (e.g.,  based  on
ﬁnancial  assets  such  as  shares),  then  one  might  discount
future losses, L, by as much as 6 percent per annum.
Hence, some economists argue that we should compare
C  not  with pL,  but  with pL  discounted  by  this  rate  of
around  6  percent  per  annum.  On  this  basis,  if L  occurs
suﬀiciently far in the future, 
pL will eﬀectively be
discounted to zero. Then no cost paid today will be worth it.
Does  the  application  of  a  ﬁnancial  discount  rate  make
sense? As far as I can see, the concept of human suﬀering
makes  a  mockery  of  the  notion  of  economic  discounting
based on ﬁnancial assets like shares. Human suﬀering ﬁfty
years  from  now  seems  no  less  troubling  to  me  than  if  it
occurs ﬁve years from now, or indeed tomorrow.
Some people argue that if we are wealthier, as we may
be in the future, then we will be able to cope better with
the hell on earth of a 4°C warmer world. I don’t buy this.
One  should  look  at  pictures  of  relatively  wealthy  German
couples crying on each other’s shoulders after their houses

were  swept  away  in  the  Rhine  Valley  ﬂoods  of  2021.  It
makes you realise that even if in the coming hundred years
we brought the standards of living of most of the
developing world to those in Germany today, a 4°C warmer
world would still be a hell on earth. Raising the per capita
income  in  the  developing  world  by  a  factor  of  ten,  say,  is
not  going  to  help  much  in  the  face  of  some  devastating
storm. And in any case, if the world is heading for a hell on
earth,  perhaps  we  will  not  be  wealthier  in  the  future.  If
that’s  the  case,  then  perhaps  the  discount  rate  should  be
negative.
Since we have left the strict domain of science, we need
to  ask  one  further  question:  Who  should  be  paying  to
mitigate the eﬀects of climate change? Should Ahmadul be
paying? Well, he played no role whatsoever in causing the
problem in the ﬁrst place. We in the rich, developed world
have beneﬁtted from cheap, carbon-rich energy. Perhaps it
is time for us to pay some of that back.
Indeed,  ethical  and  altruistic  issues  aside,  it  is  in  the
developed world’s interest to ensure that Ahmadul’s life is
not completely unbearable. This is because he and
potentially  billions  like  him  have  another  option:  rather
than 
suﬀer 
and 
potentially 
perish 
from 
existential
heatwaves, storm surges and extended drought, he and his
family can try to migrate polewards, where the weather is
likely  to  be  more  bearable.  Historically,  migration  is  how
civilisations 
coped 
with 
local 
changes 
in 
climate.
Nowadays,  such  mass  migrations  will  be  the  source  of
major  conﬂict,  as  we  have  discussed.  If  the  developed
world  does  not  like  this  option,  then  it  can  try  to  ensure
Ahmadul and his children can continue to live fulﬁlled lives
where they are currently living. One can think back to the
Marshall Plan, when the US provided ﬁnancial help to war-
torn  Europe,  not  necessarily  for  altruistic  reasons,  but  to

prevent Europe turning to communism. We need a climate
Marshall Plan for the future12.
Let’s summarise.
If  the  local  weather  forecast  predicts  an  intense  storm
with some signiﬁcant probability, it’s your decision whether
to act on it or not. The underlying science of meteorology
does not tell you that you must act if hurricane-force winds
are predicted for tomorrow. It’s not for the weather
forecaster  to  tell  you  what  to  do.  However,  coupling  the
meteorology  to  a  cost-loss  model  can  help  you  make  a
decision, for example, about whether to avoid travelling on
a day when hurricane-force winds are predicted with some
signiﬁcant probability.
We  can  look  at  climate  change  in  a  similar  way.  Does
burning of fossil fuel lead to an increase in carbon dioxide
concentration  in  the  atmosphere?  According  to  science,
certainly yes. Is carbon dioxide a greenhouse gas?
According to science, certainly yes. Will emissions of
greenhouse gases increase the risk of dangerous levels of
climate change? According to science, certainly yes. Should
we  therefore  cut  our  emissions  of  greenhouse  gases  as
quickly  as  possible?  Science  itself  is  agnostic  on  this  last
point. The activists who simply say, “Listen to the science”,
seem to have missed this point. The physicist Sabine
Hossenfelder  put  it  in  a  rather  graphic  way  (apparently
referring to something that drunken Germans do from
railway bridges): science does not tell you not to pee onto
high-voltage  electricity  lines;  it  tells  you  that  urine  is  a
good conductor of electricity.
Just as with weather prediction, a cost-loss analysis can
help you make a decision about whether to take
anticipatory action regarding climate change. However,
this requires putting a value on things which do not have
an unambiguous value, like living in a future hell on earth.
Based  on  the  way  we  value  our  own  existence  in  other

areas of life, there does indeed seem to be a strong
argument that we should act now, uncertainties about
future 
climate 
change 
notwithstanding. 
But 
this 
is
ultimately a decision which each of us must make, e.g., in
deciding which politicians to vote for.
...
