11
Quantum Uncertainty
Reality Regained?
WE  LEFT  OUR  ANALYSIS  OF  QUANTUM  UNCERTAINTY  IN
CHAPTER 4 in a state of confusion. Einstein had proposed
that  the  quantum  wavefunction  describes  an  ensemble  of
possible  worlds.  As  an  illustration,  he  imagined  a  photon
moving towards a point on a phosphorescent hemisphere.
According to Einstein, in each ensemble member, the
photon takes a diﬀerent path to the hemisphere. We don’t
know which of the ensemble of possible worlds is the real
world until we make some macroscopic measurement, such
as  observing  a  ﬂash  from  the  phosphorescent  material.
From Einstein’s perspective, quantum uncertainty is
epistemic—it reﬂects our own uncertainty, not the photon’s
uncertainty. Bohr, on the other hand, believed that quantum
uncertainty was inherent to a quantum system—it is
ontological  in  nature.  The  experiment  Bell  proposed  and
that was later successfully performed using entangled
photons casts severe doubt on Einstein’s ensemble
interpretation  and  in  so  doing  supports  Bohr’s  position.
Seemingly  even  the  particles  don’t  know  where  they  are
going until they get there. Whatever that means.

What  to  do?  For  years,  the  answer  was  to  shrug  one’s
shoulders and say, “Get over it”. Epistemic or ontological—
frankly, who cares? Such issues were considered a matter
for philosophers with their fancy words, but not for
physicists with hard equations to solve. The mantra was to
“Shut  up  and  calculate”.  And  in  astrophysics,  condensed
matter  physics,  quantum  computing,  high-energy  physics
and other cutting-edge areas of research, quantum
mechanics works well without worrying about these
seemingly esoteric issues. In climate physics, for example,
one has to think about how photons absorb and scatter in
the atmosphere. But one never worries about the nature of
uncertainty in these radiative processes. One just gets on
and solves the Schrödinger equation, or an approximation
for it, for the problem at hand.
Nowadays, physicists are ﬁnally starting to question the
mantra. There are a number of reasons for this.
Firstly, string theory, our leading candidate for unifying
quantum mechanics and gravity (and hence for providing a
so-called  theory  of  everything)  is  beginning  to  lose  its
lustre. 
String 
theory 
utilises 
a 
concept 
called
supersymmetry. If 
nature 
were 
supersymmetric, 
the
diﬀerence  between  the  elementary  particles  which  carry
forces,  such  as  the  photon,  and  the  elementary  particles
which feel these forces, such as the electron, would not be
fundamental.  Supersymmetric  theories  predict  new  types
of elementary particles (e.g., so-called photinos and
selectrons).  Although  string  theory  does  not  predict  the
masses of these supersymmetric particles, many physicists
hoped  they  would  have  been  found  by  the  Large  Hadron
Collider  at  CERN.  So  far,  no  such  particles  have  been
observed.
On top of this, it has become clear in recent years that
over 80 percent of the matter in the universe is in the form
of what is called dark matter: matter of which we observe
only its gravitational pull, but about which we know

nothing  else.  Dozens  of  experiments  have  searched  for
diﬀerent types of hypothetical particles that might make up
dark matter, but none has found even a trace. Currently, no
one knows what dark matter is made of, if indeed it is made
of anything1.
Dark energy is another mystery. It causes the universe’s
expansion 
to 
accelerate, 
seemingly 
consistent 
with
observations. Quantum ﬁeld theory—the extension of
quantum  mechanics  needed  to  describe  the  elementary
particles—actually predicts a possible value for this
acceleration. However, the predicted value 2 is too large by
a factor of 10 120. If the universe accelerated according to
the value predicted by quantum ﬁeld theory, then stars and
galaxies  would  not  have  had  enough  time  to  form  before
the expansion of the universe ripped them apart. Hence, we
would not exist. Quantum ﬁeld theory’s prediction of dark
energy  is  sometimes  called  the  worst  prediction  in  the
history of science3. It makes Michael Fish’s weather
forecast virtually perfect by comparison!
As a result of all this, some physicists are beginning to
ask a question that few previously had dared ask: Is there
something wrong with quantum mechanics itself? Perhaps
we  will  not  properly  synthesise  gravity  with  the  other
fundamental  forces  of  nature  until  we  have  understood
what is wrong. One world-renowned physicist who, over the
years,  has  dared  raise  this  possibility  is  Nobel  laureate
Roger Penrose—see the quote at the beginning of this part
of the book.
Emboldened,  let’s  return  to  the  Bell  experiment.  It’s
worth recapping by showing Fig. 26 again (see Fig. 43) and
replicating the particles’ so-called look-up table in Table 2
(see Table 3).
Fig.  43  shows  the  Bell  experiment,  in  which  Alice  and
Bob measure the spin of pairs of entangled particles. Table
3 can be considered part of a hypothetical look-up table for

Alice’s  particles.  The  existence  of  such  a  look-up  table  is
implied by a standard deterministic hidden-variable model
of quantum physics of the type Einstein would have
favoured. The rows of the table correspond to three
possible orientations of the SG devices. Each column of the
table  represents  the  outcomes  of  spin  measurements  on,
say, one of Alice’s particles. In principle the number of rows
and columns in the look-up table may be much larger than
this. However, three rows suﬀice for our purposes.
FIG. 43. The famous Bell experiment, using pairs of entangled particles
moving in opposite directions. In this experiment, Alice’s and Bob’s SG
devices can be oriented arbitrarily. However, if they are oriented in the
same direction and Alice measures her particle to be spin up, Bob will
measure his particle to be spin down.

TABLE 3. A hypothetical look-up table for the spin of 12 of Alice’s particles
in a Bell experiment, for 3 possible choices of orientation of Alice’s SG
device. The statistics of these +s and −s necessarily satisfy a mathematical
inequality known as Bell’s inequality, described in the text. The look-up
table for Bob’s 12 particles is exactly the same, except each + is replaced
with a − and vice versa. Experimentally, Bell’s inequality is violated for
certain choices of measurement orientation. This casts doubt on the
existence of such look-up tables, and hence casts doubt on hidden-variable
theories of quantum physics.
Recall the quantities A, B and C calculated from Table 3,
described in Chapter 4. A is the number of columns where
there is a + in the ﬁrst row and a + in the second row. B is
the  number  of  columns  where  there  is  a  −  in  the  second
row and a + in the third row. 
C is the number of columns
where there is a + in the ﬁrst row and a + in the third row.
As mentioned (and proved in endnote 11 of Chapter 4), it is
simple  to  show  mathematically  that A  + B  will  always  be
bigger  than  or  equal  to C,  no  matter  how  we  ﬁll  in  the
entries to this table with +s and −s. This result is known as
Bell’s inequality.
Let’s look again at how the experiment is performed to
test whether this equality is satisﬁed in nature. In practice
the  experiments  that  are  performed  test  a  slightly  more
complicated  version  of  Bell’s  inequality.  However,  what  I
am about to draw attention to here applies equally to this
more complex version.

For each particle pair in Fig. 43, Alice and Bob have to
decide, independently, whether to measure the spin of their
particle in the “1”, “2” or “3” directions. We don’t need to
worry  what  exactly  these  directions  are,  except  that  they
are  directions  in  which  quantum  mechanics  predicts  that
Bell’s inequality is violated.
From  the  sub-ensemble  of  measurements  where  Alice
chose 1 and Bob chose 2, we calculate the quantity A. To do
this calculation, we must invoke the fact that the total spin
of the two entangled particles is 0, which means that if Bob
chose 2 and got +, then for this particle pair Alice would
have got − if she had measured the spin of her particle in
the  2  direction.  Similarly,  we  can  calculate B  from  the
measurements where Alice chose 2 and Bob 3. Finally, we
can  calculate C  from  measurements  where  Alice  chose  1
and  Bob  3.  I  have  shown  some  possible  such  results  in
Table 4.
TABLE 4. A partial look-up table for Alice based on (possible) results from a
Bell experiment. For example, the ﬁrst column is constructed from a pair of
measurements where Alice measured + in the 1 direction and Bob + in the
2 direction (which means Alice would have measured − if she had chosen
the 2 direction). Similarly, the twelfth column is constructed from
measurements where Alice measured + in the 1 direction and Bob − in the
3 direction (which means Alice would have measured + if she had chosen
the 3 direction).
The  ﬁrst  point  to  notice  in  Table  4  is  that  there  are
blanks. There are no columns which contain three entries,

as there are in Table 3. It is easy to violate Bell’s inequality
from incomplete look-up tables. For example, from Table 4,
A = 0, B = 0, C = 4, which clearly violates Bell’s inequality
since here A + B is less than C.
This demonstrates that estimates of A +  B and C based
on experimental data which generate partial look-up tables,
like  Table  4,  don’t necessarily  invalidate  hidden-variable
theories.  To  be  able  to  use  the  results  of  experiments  to
rule  out  hidden-variable  theories,  we  need  an  additional
assumption about the nature of the three experimental sub-
ensembles  of  particle  pairs  from  which A,   B  and C  are
estimated experimentally. This assumption is that the three
sub-ensembles  of  particles  are  statistically  equivalent  to
one another. If they have this property, then we can assume
that the experimental estimates of A,  B and C are the same
as  if  we  obtained A,   B  and C  from  a  full  look-up  table,
providing  we  have  a  big  enough  statistical  sample  (i.e.,
enough columns in the look-up table).
This  assumption  seems  quite  reasonable  at  ﬁrst  sight.
Suppose we were performing a blind trial of a drug (e.g., a
possible  COVID-19  vaccine)  for  possible  use  in  society.  In
the trial, one group of volunteers gets the drug and another
a placebo. If we have devised the test properly, it shouldn’t
matter which group gets the drug and which group gets the
placebo. For the drug trial to have validity, the two groups
of volunteers should be statistically equivalent in terms of
their  ages,  genders,  ethnic  origin,  eye  colour  and  other
relevant characteristics.
When it comes to particles, however, it’s not clear what
we mean by saying that the sub-ensembles are statistically
equivalent—the  particles  don’t  have  genders,  ages  or  eye
colours to compare and contrast. In fact, the only knowable
thing  that  uniﬁes  the  members  of  one  sub-ensemble  over
another is the type of spin measurement performed on the
particles  in  that  sub-ensemble  (e.g.,  that  Alice’s  particles
were all measured in the 1 direction).

What is the key reason why physicists typically assume
that  the  sub-ensembles  are  statistically  equivalent?  It  is
because of the conclusion that although Alice actually
measured a particular particle in the 1 direction, she might
just as well have measured it in the 2 or the 3 direction. For
example,  suppose  Alice  decided  to  measure  a  particle  in
the 1 direction on the basis that her grandmother was born
in the ﬁrst third of a month. Since the grandmother might
just as well have been born in the last third of the month,
so the argument goes, Alice might just as well have
measured that same particle in the 3 direction.
In the quantum foundations community, asserting some
physical  link  between  the  intrinsic  properties  of  particles
and  whimsical  determinants  of  measurement  settings  is
viewed as implausibly conspiratorial. For this reason, it is
typically assumed that the diﬀerent sub-ensembles are
indeed statistically equivalent. If we make this assumption,
then  we  are  faced  with  the  uncomfortable  fact  that  the
violation of Bell’s inequality can be explained only by giving
up  the  notion  of  reality  as  something  deﬁnite  or  by  the
equally ghastly notion of quantum action-at-a-distance.
Despite  this  entirely  plausible  argument  in  favour  of
statistical equivalence, I want to argue in this chapter that,
based on the geometry of chaos, there may be an implicit
physical linkage between a particle’s hidden variables and
the  measurement  settings,  and  this  linkage  is  not  in  the
least ridiculous or conspiratorial.
To understand this, let’s rewind the clock to the previous
millennium and imagine a counterfactual world where
Alice’s  great-grandmother’s  pregnancy  was  for  forty-two
weeks instead of forty weeks. In this counterfactual world,
Alice’s grandmother was born in the last third of the
month, and as a result Alice’s particle was measured in the
3 direction, rather than the 1 direction.
A key question I want to ask is this: Is the world where
the great-grandmother had a forty-two-week pregnancy

necessarily consistent with the laws of physics? We can put
this  a  little  more  explicitly.  Given  the  actual  state  of  the
universe, consider a mathematical state seemingly close to
the 
actual 
state 
where 
Alice’s 
great-grandmother’s
pregnancy was forty-two weeks long. Is this mathematical
state of the universe necessarily consistent with the
mathematical laws of physics?
Suppose  for  some  reason—which  we  will  come  to—it
isn’t consistent. Then the counterfactual world where Alice
actually measured in the 3 direction would also be
inconsistent with the laws of physics. If this were so, then
instead of treating as conspiratorially implausible a
physical  link  between  the  intrinsic  properties  of  Alice’s
particle  with  the  actual  measurement  setting  1,  the  link
would instead be wholly inevitable4!
Indeed,  the  only  reason  quantum  foundations  experts
believe that the three sub-ensembles of particles are
statistically 
equivalent 
is 
because 
of 
the 
implicit
assumption  that  Alice  and  Bob  might  just  as  well  have
measured their particles in a diﬀerent way from how they
actually 
measured 
them. 
Take this 
away 
and 
the
assumption of the statistical equivalence of the sub-
ensembles disintegrates. And without that assumption, we
do not have to assume spooky action-at-a-distance or
indeﬁnite  reality  to  explain  the  experimental  violation  of
Bell’s inequality!
We  tend  to  think  about  counterfactual  worlds  all  the
time, but, I suspect, we rarely ask the question of whether
the  counterfactual  worlds  we  envisage  might  actually  be
consistent with the laws of physics. In Chapter 9 we
discussed 
how 
Archduke 
Franz 
Ferdinand’s 
driver
mistakenly  took  the  wrong  route.  If  he  had  taken  the
correct 
route, 
the 
archduke 
would 
not 
have 
been
assassinated by Princip and the whole history of the
twentieth  century  could  have  worked  out  diﬀerently.  A

world where the archduke was not assassinated is a
counterfactual world. Is such a world necessarily consistent
with the laws of physics?
According  to  the  laws  of  classical  physics,  it  is.  For
example,  in  Lorenz’s  equations  of  chaos  or  the  Navier-
Stokes equation for a ﬂuid, there is nothing preventing you
making an arbitrarily small change to the starting
conditions for these equations. Similarly, there is nothing in
the classical laws of physics preventing you hypothesising a
tiny change to the world—the ﬂap of a butterﬂy’s wings—
that would have made the archduke’s driver take a
diﬀerent route. As such, we can describe the laws of
classical physics as “counterfactually deﬁnite”. Because of
this,  we  frequently  use  the  notion  of  counterfactuality  to
infer causality5. If I had not thrown the stone, the window
would  not  have  broken.  Hence,  because  in  reality  I  did
throw the stone, I caused the window to break.
But this does not imply that some counterfactual worlds
might be inconsistent with the laws of physics in an as-yet-
to-be-discovered theory of quantum physics. Such a theory
would  be  counterfactually  indeﬁnite  and  an  example  of
what is called a superdeterministic 6 theory. A good way to
think  about  the  diﬀerence  between  a  deterministic  model
and a superdeterminist model—of the type I am proposing
at least—is like this. In a deterministic model, the future is
predetermined  by  the  laws  of  physics  from  a  given  initial
condition.  The  Navier-Stokes  equation  is  an  example  of  a
deterministic  model.  Despite  such  determinism,  we  can
envisage  slightly  altered  initial  conditions  (e.g.,  a  small
change to a small eddy in the turbulent ﬂuid). The
deterministic  evolution  from  the  altered  initial  conditions,
although diﬀerent from what actually happened in the real
world, is mathematically allowed in this deterministic
model.  By  contrast,  in  a  superdeterministic  theory,  one
cannot assume that such altered initial conditions are

consistent  with  the  theory’s  equations.  And  therefore  one
cannot assume that evolution from this altered initial
condition is consistent with the theory’s equations.
The assumption of counterfactual deﬁniteness is not
given  the  prominence  it  deserves  in  quantum  foundations
discussions  because  it’s  not  immediately  obvious  how  to
formulate a model of quantum physics which has the
property of counterfactual indeﬁniteness. One leading
quantum expert who did understand the critical importance
of counterfactual deﬁniteness was the Russian Israeli
mathematician Boris Tsirelson, who died in 2020. Tsirelson
made a very important contribution to our understanding of
Bell’s inequality. He quantiﬁed the extent to which
quantum mechanics violates the Bell inequality through the
eponymous Tsirelson bound. It is important that any
putative theory of quantum physics does not violate Bell’s
inequality  beyond  the  Tsirelson  bound.  In  his  pedagogical
description of Bell’s inequality, Tsirelson states clearly why
counterfactual deﬁniteness is a vital assumption if a
hidden-variable theory is to satisfy Bell’s inequality7.
It  turns  out  that  counterfactual  indeﬁniteness  can  also
explain  the  puzzle  of  the  sequential  SG  experiment  of
Chapter 4. The key issue is whether a counterfactual
experiment  where  we  reverse  the  last  two  SG  devices  in
Fig.  25b—keeping  the  particle  and  its  hidden  variables
ﬁxed—is  consistent  with  our  theory  of  physics.  A  theory
where the counterfactual does not exist provides an
explanation  of  what  in  quantum  mechanics  is  called  the
“non-commutativity”  of  spin.  In  ordinary  language,  non-
commutativity implies that we can’t treat the sequential SG
experiment as made of completely independent SG
subcomponents—we  can’t  simply  reverse  the  order  of  the
SG components with the same ﬁxed particle; the whole is
not simply the sum of its parts. An ensemble-based hidden-
variable theory which has this type of counterfactual
