indeﬁniteness can explain the sequential SG experiment. I
describe one ahead.
It  seems  quite  satisfactory  that  there  may  be  a  single
common  explanation  to  both  the  Bell  experiment  and  the
sequential SG experiment. Both illustrate an important
property  of  the  quantum  world:  its  inherent  indivisibility.
This notion was emphasised in the title of David Bohm and
Basil Hiley’s inﬂuential book discussing hidden-variable
theories  of  quantum  physics 8: The Undivided Universe.
This title, and the message it conveys—that the universe as
a whole is much more than the sum of its parts—provides
an important guide for the next part of the argument.
«  »
WHAT FORM COULD THE laws of physics take which would
render 
inconsistent 
with 
the 
laws 
certain 
key
counterfactual  quantum  worlds?  Here  I  claim  that  laws
based  on  the  geometry  of  chaos,  such  as  we  discussed  in
Part I, do this.
If  we  are  to  respect  the  inherent  indivisibility  of  the
quantum  world  as  we’ve  discussed,  we  need  to  think  big,
very big. We’ll take Lorenz’s insight and apply it, not just to
a ﬂuid-dynamical system on planet Earth but to the whole
universe,  with  all  of  its  stars,  galaxies  and  clusters  of
galaxies. That is to say:
Conjecture A: The whole universe is a nonlinear
dynamical  system  evolving  on  some  fractal  attractor
9   in
cosmological state space.
Cosmological state space is just like trouser state space,
or the Lorenz model’s state space, but on steroids.
Cosmological state space describes all the degrees of
freedom  of  all  the  objects  in  the  universe.  It  has  a  huge

number  of  dimensions.  And  like  the  Lorenz  attractor,  our
cosmological attractor will have fractal gaps on all scales.
The  quantum  counterfactual  worlds  that  we  have  been
discussing lie in these fractal gaps.
I call conjecture A the “cosmological invariant set
postulate”. The phrase “invariant set” is just another
mathematical  way  of  saying  “attractor”10.  The  conjecture
can be reframed in a diﬀerent way:
Conjecture B: The laws of physics at their deepest
describe the geometry of a fractal invariant set in
cosmological state space.
The hypothetical counterfactual quantum worlds, if they
do not lie on the invariant set, are inconsistent with
conjectures A and B. This ﬁnally provides a possible
mathematical  way  to  understand  the  violation  of  Bell’s
inequality without giving up on deﬁnite reality and without
having to accept spooky action-at-a-distance.
How would we formulate this postulate mathematically?
We can’t use ordinary “real” numbers to do this. As
mentioned in Chapter 2, real numbers are linked to
Euclidean geometry, and the geometry of fractals is
fundamentally diﬀerent to Euclidean geometry. Instead, we
need the mathematics of p-adic numbers—the numbers that
pure  mathematicians  use  to  understand  the  “quantum”
nature of mathematics—i.e., the whole numbers: 1, 2, 3…
In the theory of p-adic numbers, a point which does not lie
on  its  corresponding  fractal  is  necessarily  distant  from  a
point  which  does,  even  though  in  terms  of  the  familiar
Euclidean distance, such points might look close together.
That is to say, from the p-adic perspective, a change which
moves a point oﬀ the cosmological invariant set is a large
change,  even  though  it  may  seem  small  from  the  familiar
Euclidean perspective11.
In  a  series  of  papers12,  I  constructed  a  mathematical
model for this cosmological invariant set described in these

conjectures. I call the general framework which underpins
this 
model 
“invariant 
set 
theory”. 
What 
does 
the
cosmological invariant set look like? Is it like the Lorenz or
Rössler attractors of Chapter 2?
At present, the mathematics of invariant set theory tells
us only about the fractal structure of the trajectories on the
cosmological invariant set, not its global structure (see the
very  last  sentences  in  this  book).  The  fractal  structure  of
trajectories  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  44.  Here,  instead  of  a
state-space  trajectory  being  described  by  a  single  one-
dimensional  curve  as  in  Fig. 5,  it  is  instead  described  by
something rather akin to a piece of rope (Fig. 44a). That is
to  say,  what  looks  from  a  distance  like  a  single  curve  is
actually  a  helix  of  trajectories  twisted  around  themselves
(cosmic  DNA  perhaps13).  In  turn,  each  of  these  smaller
trajectories  is  itself  a  helix  of  trajectories  twisted  around
themselves.  If  we  take  a  cross-section  through  this  rope-
like trajectory segment, it has the fractal structure shown
in Fig. 12 for p-adic numbers, also shown in Fig. 44b. When
a  quantum  system  interacts  with  the  environment,  in  a
process  called  quantum  decoherence,  the  rope  starts  to
unravel (Fig. 44c). Finally, the decohered trajectories
cluster together (Fig. 44d). The clusters are associated with
the discrete measurement outcomes (e.g., spin up/spin
down) in standard quantum mechanics.
A key mathematical 
result is that the quantum
counterfactual worlds described earlier, for either the
sequential SG experiment of Fig. 25 or the Bell experiment
of  Fig.  43,  necessarily  lie  in  the 
gaps  in  between  the
strands of rope, and therefore cannot be characterised by
p-adic  numbers.  These  worlds  do  not  lie  on  the  invariant
set.  The  key  geometric  ideas  that  lead  to  this  result  are
described 
in 
the 
endnotes14. 
They 
make 
use 
of
mathematical properties of spherical triangles and the
distinction between rational and irrational numbers 15. The

key result means, by conjecture A, that such counterfactual
experiments are inconsistent with the laws of physics. But
this means that antecedent worlds in which the causes of
these counterfactual experiments occur similarly cannot lie
on  the  invariant  set.  This  is  why  we  can  be  sure  that  the
counterfactual world where Alice’s great-grandmother’s
pregnancy lasts two weeks longer is inconsistent with the
laws 
of 
physics—not 
directly 
because 
of 
processes
happening  in  the  last  millennium,  but  indirectly  because
these  processes  were  the  cause  of  a  particular  quantum
measurement  setting  in  this  millennium.  There  is  no  way
that  Alice’s  great-grandmother  could  know  this,  not  least
because the invariant set is, by the discussion in Part I of
this book, non-computable—there is no algorithm for
determining whether a point in state space lies on a fractal
set or not.

FIG. 44. a) Instead of a trajectory describing a simple curve in state space
(c.f., Fig. 5), in invariant set theory, a trajectory, on magniﬁcation,
resembles a piece of rope, comprising a helix of smaller-scale state-space
trajectories, each trajectory of this helix itself comprising a further helix and
so on. b) A cross-section through the helix is a geometric representation of
the p-adic numbers, discussed in Chapter 2. c) When a system interacts
with the environment, the helix “decoheres” into its smaller strands. d)
Finally, the decohered strands evolve into discrete clusters, a nonlinear
process which we associate with the phenomenon of gravity. The clusters
correspond to measurement outcomes in quantum mechanics.
In  a  nutshell,  failure  of  counterfactual  deﬁniteness  is
exactly what is necessary to reconcile the violation of Bell’s
inequality with Einstein’s ensemble interpretation, but

without  giving  up  on  the  notion  of  a  deﬁnite  reality,  and
without  invoking  the  spooky  action-at-a-distance  that  he
hated so much.
The  same  reasons  (the  ideas  in  note  14)  explain  why
when we try to determine which path a photon took
through  the  two  slits  in  Fig.  22,  the  interference  pattern
disappears. Here, a counterfactual world where we
measure 
which 
slit 
the 
particle 
took, 
keeping 
the
interference pattern ﬁxed, lies oﬀ the invariant set.
There is another way to understand invariant set theory.
Quantum mechanics arose from a bold speculation by the
German  physicist  Max  Planck:  that  light  energy  does  not
vary continuously, but in discrete packets which he called
“quanta”.  In  order  to  accommodate  this  idea,  the  state
space  of  quantum  mechanics  (quantum  trouser  space,  if
you like) has to be of a particular type. We call it Hilbert
space, named after the mathematician David Hilbert,
whose “halting problem” was discussed in Chapter 2.
Quantum trouser space is itself continuous—you can move
from one point in Hilbert space to another through a series
of inﬁnitesimal steps. In invariant set theory, we take
Planck’s idea one step further—we discretise Hilbert space.
For this to work, the discretisation has to be done in a very
speciﬁc  way16.  The  gaps  in  the  discretised  Hilbert  space
correspond  to  counterfactual  measurements  which  might
have been performed on a quantum system but weren’t.
Not all counterfactual worlds are inconsistent in
invariant set theory—there are plenty of neighbouring
counterfactual  trajectories  which  also  lie  on  the  invariant
set. According to conjecture B, the laws of physics describe
what happens along the real trajectory using laws built on
the collective geometric properties of both real and
counterfactual trajectories. From this point of view, we can
interpret the two-slit experiment of Fig. 22 as follows: even
though in reality the photon travelled through only one slit

in  Fig.  22,  there  exist  counterfactual  trajectories  on  the
invariant set where the photon travelled through the other
slit. 
If 
the 
real 
trajectory 
is 
the 
yin17, 
then 
the
counterfactual 
trajectories 
are 
the 
yang. 
Like 
the
counterweight  on  the  crankshaft  in  a  piston  engine,  the
counterfactual  trajectories  ensure  the  smooth  running  of
the  real  quantum  world.  The  ensemble  of  counterfactual
and real trajectories—collectively describing the geometry
of the invariant set—gives the appearance of an interfering
quantum wave in space-time.
Quantum mechanics treats the ontology of the real and
counterfactual  trajectories  as  the  same.  That’s  why  the
notion  of  reality  (a  particle  in  two  places  at  once)  is  so
incomprehensible  in  quantum  mechanics.  In  invariant  set
theory,  by  contrast,  real  and  counterfactual  trajectories
have  a  distinct  but  interdependent  ontology:  they  are  not
the same, but equally one cannot ignore the counterfactual
trajectories  if  one  wants  to  understand  evolution  on  the
real trajectory 18.  In  the  next  part  of  this  chapter,  we  will
conclude  that  the  counterfactual  trajectories  are  in  fact
real  trajectories,  but  for  earlier  or  later  epochs  of  the
universe. 
Hence, 
according 
to 
invariant 
set 
theory,
quantum physics ties together real-world evolutions of
multiple  diﬀerent  epochs  of  the  universe.  Not  only  is  the
spatial  universe  undivided,  so  too  are  the  epochs  of  the
universe.
The yin and yang of invariant set geometry can also help
explain  the  power  of  quantum  computers  over  traditional
classical computers. The latter process information on only
our own single classical trajectory, whilst the former
additionally 
process 
information 
on 
the 
many
counterfactual  trajectories  in  the  neighbourhood  of  our
trajectory on the invariant set. Later on I will explore the
possibility that this quantum yin and yang can also explain
our visceral feeling of free will and consciousness.

Is there an experimental test for the cosmological
invariant set postulate? I am working on this with
physicists at the University of Bristol19. The key idea is that
invariant set theory is based on ﬁnite mathematics (the “ p”
of “ p-adic” is a ﬁnite whole number). This has a number of
consequences, one of which is that the number of ways you
can vary a quantum system comprising 
n elemental
systems (called qubits) will not be as large as predicted by
quantum mechanics as n approaches the logarithm of 
p20.
The quantum computing industry has indeed found it
diﬀicult  to  entangle  a  large  number  of  qubits  arbitrarily
because 
qubits 
can 
easily 
interact 
with 
the 
noisy
environment.  Here  I  am  suggesting  that  this  obstruction
may  be  inevitable  once  a  large  enough  number  of  qubits
are mutually entangled. It may be that this idea is linked to
the notion of gravitational decoherence, discussed further
on.
«  »
DOES  WHAT  WE  KNOW  about  the  large-scale  structure  of
the universe support the cosmological invariant set
postulate (conjectures A and B)?
The  universe  evolved  from  a  state  of  extremely  high
density and temperature known as the Big Bang. We know
this partly for theoretical reasons. Not least, Roger Penrose
won  the  Nobel  Prize  for  work  (with  Stephen  Hawking)
showing that an initial cosmological space-time singularity,
a  point  in  space-time  where  the  laws  of  general  relativity
actually  break  down,  is  a  robust  prediction  of  general
relativity theory. We also know from the observational work
of  American  astronomer  Edwin  Hubble  in  the  1930s  that
the universe is expanding, and therefore began from a very

condensed state. The cosmological microwave background,
discovered  in  1965  by  American  radio  astronomers  Arno
Penzias and Robert Wilson, is a relic of the condensed Big
Bang.
What is the fate of the universe? Will it ﬁnally collapse
into a “Big Crunch”? If it does, can we then envisage that
the current period of evolution of the universe from the Big
Bang  is  just  one  epoch  of  a  multi-epoch  universe,  where
time  has  no  beginning  and  no  end,  as  in  Fig.  45?  The
cosmological  invariant  set  postulate  requires  the  universe
to  evolve  through  these  multiple  epochs.  Neighbouring
trajectories on the invariant set correspond to either future
or  past  epochs  of  the  universe,  evolving  similarly  but  not
identically to ours.
But there is a problem with such a scenario. It is
conventionally 
believed from observations 
of distant
supernovae  that  the  universe  is  not  only  expanding  but
accelerating.  Such  acceleration  is  linked  to  the  notion  of
dark energy. If the universe continues to accelerate, then it
will never recollapse to a Big Crunch and hence to a multi-
epoch universe. In such a situation we are not on a fractal
invariant set but on some transient adjustment to a
profoundly  uninteresting  invariant  set  devoid  of  stars  and
life.

FIG. 45. A multi-epoch universe evolving from repeated Big Bangs and Big
Crunches. A key question one could ask is this: What sort of geometry do
these repeated epochs trace out in cosmological state space? I argue that
such a universe could evolve on a fractal invariant set in state space,
perhaps like the Lorenz attractor but in a much-higher-dimensional state
space. If this is correct, it may explain some of the deepest mysteries of
quantum mechanics, such as quantum nonlocality. This would contradict
the notion of methodological reductionism, that to understand the
mysteries of the universe, we necessarily need to probe smaller and
smaller scales. Here, quantum nonlocality is explained by the structure of
the universe on the largest conceivable scales.
Fortunately, there are three scenarios where this
possibility  does  not  happen.  The  ﬁrst  is  that  this  dark
energy will eventually reverse, aiding the ultimate collapse
of  this  epoch  of  the  universe
21.  The  second  is  linked  to  a
proposal by Roger Penrose that all the mass in the universe
will end up in the form of massless particles like photons.
Such massless particles have no concept of spatial or
temporal  scale.  As  such,  the  asymptotic  end  state  of  the
universe can be seamlessly patched onto a condensed Big-
Bang  state  of  a  new  epoch  of  the  universe,  through  a
mathematical procedure known as conformal scaling22.
In  view  of  the  discussions  in  this  book,  I  ﬁnd  the  third
possibility the most interesting. The notion that the
universe  is  accelerating  depends  on  an  assumption—the
cosmological  principle—that  the  universe  is  homogeneous
on the very largest scales. In this book we have discussed
nonlinear systems (from turbulence, to networks of
individuals, to economic systems, to fractals) which exhibit

power-law 
behaviour. 
Such 
power-law 
behaviour 
is
indicative  of  structures  that  look  the  same  on  diﬀerent
scales.  The  ubiquity  of  such  power-law  behaviour  might
indeed extend to the universe on the largest scales. Recent
discoveries of unexpectedly large structures in the universe
suggest  that  this  could  be  the  case23.  If  this  is  so,  then
perhaps the expansion of the universe is not accelerating—
it’s  just  an  illusion24.  Then  it  certainly  becomes  possible
that the universe will ultimately collapse to a “Big Crunch”
singularity.
I  recall  as  a  child  watching  British  cosmologist  Fred
Hoyle on TV arguing for his steady state theory of
cosmology.  In  this  theory,  there  is  no  Big  Bang.  Hoyle
argued that the notion of a beginning of time was a rather
inelegant  concept.  It  somehow  suggested  the  need  for  a
god to provide just the “right” initial conditions from which
the  universe  could  start.  Indeed,  Hoyle  coined  the  phrase
“Big Bang” as a pejorative way to describe what he saw as
an  artiﬁcial  beginning  of  the  universe.  However,  Penzias
and Wilson’s observations rather killed Hoyle’s theory. On
the  other  hand,  if  the  Big  Bang  merely  represents  the
beginning  of  our  current  epoch,  then  Hoyle’s  idea  that
there is no beginning to time might be right after all.
«  »
LET’S  DISCUSS  SOME  CONSEQUENCES  of  the  cosmological
invariant set postulate.
For  example,  it  can  shed  light  on  one  deep  problem  in
contemporary  physics:  the  origin  of  the  second  law  of
thermodynamics.  When  we  drop  a  glass  onto  the  ﬂoor,  it
smashes into small pieces. We never see the time reverse of
this. 
This 
is 
attributed 
to 
the 
second 
law 
of

thermodynamics: that entropy, a measure of disorder in the
universe, increases with time. But for entropy to increase
with time, it must have been small at the time of the Big
Bang. Why should this be?
We can see the phenomenon of increasing entropy in the
dynamics of simple chaotic systems. Fig. 10 showed how a
simple  ring  of  points  in  state  space  evolves  into  a  more
complex 
irregular 
banana/boomerang 
shape. 
If 
we
continued the simulation, we would see the banana shape
deform  further  and  become  less  and  less  like  the  original
small ring. Eventually the distorted ring would spread
across the whole fractal attractor. We can deﬁne a quantity
which  measures  the  distortion  of  the  ring  and,  like  the
entropy of a thermodynamic system, it would typically
increase with time, reaching a maximum when the ring of
points has spread right across the entire attractor.
This characterises well the increase in entropy when we
drop  a  glass  and  it  smashes  into  a  hundred  small  pieces.
Think of the initial ring in Fig. 10 as describing an
ensemble of initial conditions in each of which we have a
glass. For all practical purposes, the glass looks the same
in all initial members of the ensemble, though the detailed
arrangement of atoms in each of the ensemble of glasses is
diﬀerent. Because of these diﬀerent arrangements of
atoms, each glass will shatter in completely diﬀerent ways
and the shards of glass will spread out to form completely
diﬀerent patterns. The ensemble will have spread out in a
chaotic fashion. Chaotic and thermodynamic systems have
much in common.
However, and this is the key point, the top left of Fig. 10
shows that there are regions of state space where there is
very little change in the shape of the initial ring. Indeed, in
these  regions,  the  initial  ring  can  actually  get  smaller.
These regions denote stable parts of the attractor—where,
in this analogy, dropping a glass wouldn’t lead to noticeably

diﬀerent conﬁgurations of smashed glass because the glass
wouldn’t shatter.
Now, if the universe is evolving on a cosmological
attractor, then we would similarly imagine that there would
be speciﬁc regions of state space where an initial ring (of
universes) would get closer to each other as time
progressed.  In  such  regions,  the  entropy  of  the  universe
would be decreasing. Put another way, the heterogeneous
geometry  of  the  invariant  set  leads  naturally  to  a  picture
where in most regions of state space entropy is increasing,
but in some regions, entropy is actually decreasing.
For this to be relevant to understanding the low entropy
of the universe at the time of the Big Bang, then we would
expect regions of state space where entropy is decreasing
to 
correspond 
to 
periods 
when 
the 
universe 
is
gravitationally  collapsing  towards  a  Big  Crunch.  If  this  is
so,  then  the  entropy  at  the  interface  between  one  Big
Crunch and the next Big Bang would be at a minimum25.
What are the implications of this? Could it be that what
we call “gravity” is actually a phenomenon associated with
the heterogeneous geometry of the cosmological invariant
set? In particular, is “gravity” a manifestation of the
tendency of trajectories to cluster together on the invariant
set, as shown in Fig. 44d? If this is so, then gravity will be
associated  with  the  quantum  measurement  process.  This
has already been suggested independently by Roger
Penrose  and  Lajos  Diósi 26.  Trying  to  establish  whether
gravity really does play a role in quantum measurement is
in my view one of the most important unresolved
experiments in contemporary physics. Because such
clustering is preceded by a “decoherent” unravelling of the
trajectories  on  the  invariant  set  (Fig.  44c),  invariant  set
theory supports the idea that gravity and decoherence are
inherently linked.

Whether  thinking  about  quantum  decoherence  or  the
entropy of the universe, we are being led to the idea that
gravity  is  of  a completely diﬀerent  character  to  the  other
forces of nature. In some sense, we know this already—in
general relativity theory, gravity is not a force at all, but a
manifestation  of  the  curvature  of  space-time.  If  this  is
correct,  it  suggests  it  is  misguided  to  try  to  unify  gravity
with  the  other  forces  of  nature  using  the  principles  of
quantum ﬁeld theory. If the cosmological invariant set
postulate is correct, quantum ﬁeld theory is not the path to
uniﬁcation. Indeed, going further, I would argue that trying
to  “quantise  gravity”,  which  is  the  way  most  physicists
think  about  the  problem  of  synthesising  our  theories  of
quantum  and  gravitational  physics,  is  rather  putting  the
cart  before  the  horse.  Instead  of  a  quantum  theory  of
gravity,  we  might  make  more  progress  trying  instead  to
develop a gravitational theory of the quantum27.
If such an idea is correct, then there is no such particle
as  a  graviton—the  particle  associated  with  quantum  ﬁeld
theories  of  gravity,  like  string  theory.  That’s  a  prediction,
albeit  not  one  that  will  be  directly  testable  for  some  time
yet.
We noted before that quantum ﬁeld theory implies, when
coupled to Einstein’s theory of general relativity, an
acceleration of the universe that is 120 orders of
magnitude  bigger  than  what  is  observed.  In  invariant  set
theory, there is no reason to suppose the eﬀects of quantum
physics  would  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  large-scale
acceleration  of  the  universe.  In  this  sense,  invariant  set
theory  appears  much  closer  to  what  is  observed  than  is
quantum ﬁeld theory.
And what of dark matter? In Einstein’s theory of general
relativity, the curvature of space-time is determined by the
distribution of matter in space-time. It is possible to modify
the ﬁeld equations of general relativity so that the

curvature of our space-time is determined not only by the
distribution  of  matter  in  our  space-time  but  also  by  the
distribution  of  matter  in  space-times  associated  with  the
neighbouring trajectories on the cosmological invariant set.
If this idea is correct, then there may be no particle of dark
matter; instead, dark matter would simply be the eﬀect on
space-time  curvature  from  matter  in  neighbouring  space-
times on the invariant set.
And  it  is  plausibly  the  case  that  so-called  space-time
singularities which form in black holes and at Big Bangs in
standard classical general relativity would not occur if the
curvature of space-time is inﬂuenced by matter in
neighbouring trajectories on the invariant set. Solving the
singularity problem has long been seen as a sine qua non
for 
any 
putative 
uniﬁed 
theory 
of 
quantum 
and
gravitational physics.
One  of  the  key  philosophies  that  has  underpinned  the
development of theoretical physics over the twentieth
century  and  into  the  twenty-ﬁrst  is  that  “smaller  is  more
fundamental”—sometimes 
called 
“methodological
reductionism”.  Particle  physicists  want  to  build  a  bigger
particle collider under Lake Geneva so that particles can be
accelerated  to  higher  speeds,  and  therefore  to  greater
energies, to allow the physics of smaller scales to be
probed.  It’s  assumed  that  we  necessarily  need  to  probe
these smaller scales to improve our understanding of
nature. My own belief is that methodological reductionism
is  a  ﬂawed  philosophy,  and  that  fundamental  physics  is
going 180° in the wrong direction because of that. See the
caption for Fig. 45.
In  conclusion,  we  do  not  necessarily  have  to  accept
either  indeterminism  or  action-at-a-distance  in  describing
the world of quantum physics. Using the geometry of
chaos,  Einstein’s  picture  of  an  ensemble  of  deterministic
worlds may be right after all. If this is so, we conclude that
we  do  live  in  a  world  in  which  elementary  particles,  and

indeed the notion of reality, are certain and deﬁnite.
Perhaps this picture of the world will provide a better basis
for synthesising quantum and gravitational physics. On the
other  hand,  before  these  ideas  will  be  accepted,  we  need
clear-cut experiments in favour of invariant set theory over
quantum  mechanics.  Until  then,  one  should  of  course  be
quite  doubtful  about  the  ideas  I  have  discussed  in  this
chapter.
...
