12
Our Noisy Brains
IN CHAPTER 11, I ARGUED THAT ULTIMATELY THE LAWS OF
PHYSICS  may  well  be  deterministic,  and  that  these  laws
describe the geometry of the attractor/invariant set of the
highest-order system imaginable—the universe as a whole.
In Chapter 3,  we  noted  that  if  we  want  to  model  a  high-
order  deterministic  system  with  a  low-order  deterministic
system, we should truncate the high-order system and add
noise to represent the parts of the system we cannot model
explicitly. We also observed that in many nonlinear
situations, noise is a useful resource and not the nuisance
we often imagine it to be; noise can amplify weak signals,
for example. In this chapter I propose that, consistent with
this,  the  human  brain  makes  constructive  use  of  noise  in
trying to create a low-order model of the high-order world
around us. I will argue that such noise is a key element in
making us the creative, innovative beings we are. However,
unlike  in  the  earlier  examples  I  discussed,  noise  is  not
made  by  mathematical  pseudorandom-number  generators;
it is made in hardware. The presence of such noise appears
to  be  a  consequence  of  the  brain’s  extraordinary  energy
eﬀiciency—that it can run on just 20W of power.
«  »

THE  GREEK  PHILOSOPHER  EUCLID  is  commonly  attributed
with  giving  the  ﬁrst  proof  that  there  are  inﬁnitely  many
prime numbers. A prime number is a whole number greater
than 1 that is divisible only by itself and 1; numbers such as
2,  3,  5,  7,  11  and  13  are  prime.  Euclid’s  proof  goes  as
follows:
1. Suppose there are only ﬁnitely many prime
numbers.
2. Hence there is a largest prime number. Call it P.
3. Form the product 2 × 3 × 5 × 7 × 11 × 13 ×… × P
of all the prime numbers, and add 1 to the result.
Call this number Q.
4. By construction, Q is not divisible by any of the
prime numbers up to P, since such division leaves a
remainder of 1.
5. But all numbers, including Q, must be divisible by
some prime number (possibly Q itself).
6. Hence there must exist a prime greater than P.
7. Hence the supposition in step 1 must be false.
8. Hence there are inﬁnitely many prime numbers.
For  example,  suppose  we  thought  that  5  is  the  largest
prime number. Then Euclid says—think about Q = 2 × 3 ×
5 + 1 = 31. Now, 31 is not divisible by 2 or 3 or 5—there is
always  a  remainder  of  1.  Hence  there  must  be  a  larger
prime  number  than  5.  In  this  case,  31  is  itself  a  prime
number.
What  is  the  creative  step  in  this  proof?  Well,  step  1  is
based on a commonplace technique in mathematics called
reductio  ad  absurdum:  assume  the  opposite  to  what  you
want to prove and show that this leads to a contradiction.

Reductio ad absurdum was, at some stage in the history of
mathematics,  a  creative  step.  It  was  known  to  be  one  of
Euclid’s  favourite  tricks.  Hence,  we  can  imagine  that  he
simply  pulled  this  out  of  his  bag  of  useful  tricks  when  he
started  to  construct  his  proof.  As  such,  it  is  not  the  key
creative step for this particular proof. Step 2 is manifestly
not  a  creative  step—it  follows  immediately  from  step  1.
Rather, the creative step is step 3. Once Euclid had the idea
of  forming  the  number Q,  steps  4–8  followed  in  a  fairly
deductive, mechanical way.
Let’s try to create a computer that spontaneously
creates mathematical theorems. We’ll load up two “tricks”
taken from Euclid’s proof. The ﬁrst is 
reductio ad
absurdum: assume the opposite of what you want to prove
and  show  that  this  leads  to  a  contradiction.  The  second
trick  will  be  step  3  of  Euclid’s  proof:  if  you  have  some
numbers, multiply them together and add 1.
So, have we made our computer creative? Well, let’s see
if it can come up with another classical mathematical
theorem from ancient Greece: Pythagoras’s proof that the
square  root  of  2  is  an  irrational  number,  i.e.,  cannot  be
written as a fraction a /  b (such as 983 / 765) where a and  b
are whole numbers.
The  computer  can  reasonably  start  by  ﬁrst  using  the
reductio ad absurdum trick: assume the square root can be
written as a fraction a /  b. Perhaps the computer knows the
rules  of  arithmetic  and  assumes  that a  and b  have  no
common factors.
It  now  needs  to  ﬁnd  a  contradiction.  It  has  one  more
trick up its sleeve—it’s now time to apply it: multiply a and
b together and add 1. But that’s a complete dead end. In
fact, to ﬁnd Pythagoras’s proof, the computer needs a new
trick (which is to square the numbers 
a and b)1. But that
trick is not in its library of tricks.

The  computer  hasn’t  exactly  got  nowhere—using  the
reductio ad absurdum trick is a good ﬁrst start. But it’s as
if  it  has  climbed  a  minor  peak  on  the  route  to  the  main
goal, and then has simply got stuck not knowing where to
go from there.
We could add the new trick into the computer’s memory,
so that it now has three tricks to play with. With a little bit
of extra help, that might enable the computer to prove that
the square root of 2 is irrational. But are these tricks going
to  be  suﬀicient  to  prove  some  other  theorem,  like  the
Navier-Stokes Millennium Prize problem mentioned in
Chapter 3?
Of  course,  lots  more  tricks  will  be  needed  up  one’s
mathematical sleeves to have any chance of cracking one of
these big problems. However, the very fact that these are
unsolved problems raises a rather interesting thought.
Perhaps we will always need new tricks to prove important
new theorems: having some ﬁxed memory bank of tricks is
never going to be good enough. Perhaps there is simply no
end to the tricks needed to prove all mathematical
theorems. This is (eﬀectively) what Gödel’s incompleteness
theorem, which we met in Chapter 2, suggests. If this is so,
computers  may  have  a  hard  job  coming  up  with  really
interesting new mathematical theorems.
How did Euclid get this idea of forming the number 
Q?
He didn’t tell us. However, other mathematicians have told
us how their eureka moments have arisen, and something
very interesting emerges from them.
Here is what Henri Poincaré (whose work was discussed
in  Chapter  1)  said  about  the  moment  when  he  had  a
creative ﬂash of insight2:
Just at this time, I left Caen, where I was living, to go
on  a  geologic  excursion  under  the  auspices  of  the
School of Mines. The incidents of the travel made me

forget 
my 
mathematical 
work. 
Having 
reached
Coutances, we entered an omnibus to go some place
or  other.  At  the  moment  when  I  put  my  foot  on  the
step,  the  idea  came  to  me,  without  anything  in  my
former thoughts seeming to have paved the way for it,
that  the  transformations  I  had  used  to  deﬁne  the
Fuchsian  functions  were  identical  with  those  of  non-
Euclidian geometry. I did not verify the idea; I should
not  have  had  time,  as,  upon  taking  my  seat  in  the
omnibus, I went on with a conversation already
commenced,  but  I  felt  a  perfect  certainty.  On  my
return  to  Caen,  for  convenience  sake,  I  veriﬁed  the
result at my leisure.
Here is how the critical idea which led to Roger
Penrose’s 
Nobel 
Prize–winning 
work 
on 
space-time
singularities  came  to  him3.  Penrose  was  walking  to  work
with a colleague and they were deep in conversation. They
crossed  the  road  and  stopped  talking  to  watch  out  for
traﬀic. When they got to the other side, they started talking
again. When the colleague had left, Penrose had a strange
feeling  of  elation,  but  couldn’t  work  out  why.  He  went
through all the things he had done that day, including what
he had for breakfast. Finally, he thought about the moment
when  he  was  crossing  the  road  and  realised  that  in  that
moment he had had the crucial idea about how to
characterise  extreme  gravitational  collapse  in  a  generic
way. This idea led to the 1965 paper that was the basis of
his Nobel Prize.
Let  me  quote  Andrew  Wiles,  perhaps  the  most  famous
mathematician  alive  today,  whose  work  was  mentioned  in
Chapter 2. Here is what Wiles says4 about creative
moments:

In  particular,  when  you  reach  a  real  impasse,  when
there’s  a  real  problem  that  you  want  to  overcome,
then the routine mathematical thinking is of no use to
you. Leading up to that kind of new idea there has to
be a long period of tremendous focus on the problem
without any distraction. You have to really think about
nothing but that problem—just concentrate on it. Then
you  stop.  Afterwards  there  seems  to  be  a  kind  of
period  of  relaxation  during  which  the  subconscious
appears  to  take  over  and  it’s  during  that  time  that
some new insight comes.
And  it’s  not  just  creativity  in  mathematics  and  physics
research. Comedian John Cleese, part of the famous Monty
Python  team,  makes  much  the  same  point  about  artistic
creativity—it 
occurs 
when 
you 
relax 
and 
let 
your
unconscious mind wander5.
In all these cases, the key creative insight comes during
a moment of relaxation. Now, few of us have been fortunate
enough to have such moments of creativity as those
mentioned earlier. However, perhaps an example we can all
relate  to  (particularly  those  of  us  of  advancing  years)  is
when  we  have  completely  forgotten  some  person’s  name.
We  can  see  their  face  in  our  heads,  or  perhaps  even  in
reality. Perhaps we know them extremely well. Simply
trying  harder  and  harder  to  remember  the  name  doesn’t
work. Often the best thing to do is stop trying and just let
your  mind  relax.  Then,  out  of  nowhere,  the  name  will
suddenly and mysteriously pop out of the ether.
But what’s going on here from a physical perspective? If
we want to create genuinely creative AI systems, should we
tell  the  AI  program  to  stop  working  ﬂat  out  on  some
problem and just idle for a few minutes, hoping for
inspiration?

That seems a silly idea, for the simple reason that digital
computers are ultimately just on-oﬀ switches. It’s possible
to express arithmetic operations such as 1 + 1 or 24 × 37
in  terms  of  switches;  this  is  called  Boolean  logic,  named
after  Victorian  mathematician  George  Boole.  And  modern
computers  perform  these  switching  processes  amazingly
quickly. However, “relaxing” and doing the switching more
slowly, for example, is clearly not itself going to make the
computer creative.
How, by contrast, do our brains add 1 + 1 and make 2?
Perhaps the answer is so ingrained that we just know that 1
+ 1 = 2. So, let’s try something harder: What’s 24 × 37?
How would I go about answering that?
At a very young, preschool age, I would go for walks in
our local woods with my father. We would take a path up to
a high point and admire the vista across the neighbouring
countryside.  We  would  then  walk  down  via  a  diﬀerent
route, one which was a little steeper and had steps cut into
the path. There were about twenty steps in all. As we went
down the steps, we would both count them out loud: one,
two,  three,  four…  I  learned  to  count  by  repeating  the
numbers  as  we  walked  down  the  steps  week  after  week
until they were embedded in my head.
And  then,  at  my  elementary  school,  the  “times  tables”
were drummed into my head. After a while I could
eﬀortlessly recall that “four sevens are twenty-eight”. So, if
I was later asked by my teacher what 4 × 7 is (on pain of
having to write out the 7 times table 100 times), I wouldn’t
set up a biological circuit of Boolean switches in my brain; I
would simply access my memory and quickly reply “twenty-
eight”. 
The 
external 
sound 
“four 
times 
seven?”
automatically triggered the rather mindless response
“twenty-eight!” in my head.
Later in school I learned the mechanics of long
multiplication. As an adult, it’s something I hardly ever use,
and  although  the  technique  is  in  my  memory  somewhere,

it’s not as readily accessible as it was when I was seven or
eight years old.
And so, if I were forced to multiply 24 by 37, I wouldn’t
use Boolean logic at all. I would simply try as best I could
to retrieve the relevant patterns from memory: the patterns
that  describe  the  algorithm  for  doing  long  multiplication,
then the pattern associated with the “times tables”. Finally,
I would need some “scratchpad” memory (of which I
deﬁnitely  don’t  have  enough  these  days)  for  storing  the
intermediate steps. All in all, it’s a totally diﬀerent process
to that of a digital computer.
The eﬀort of retrieving data from memory takes energy.
If a friend insisted I do this multiplication calculation when
walking along the road with him (don’t ask me why), then I
would  have  to  stop  talking,  stop  walking,  close  my  eyes,
possibly put my hands over my ears and do nothing else but
focus  on  the  problem  at  hand.  Presumably,  I  do  this  in
order  to  channel  all  the  available  energy  into  performing
accurately the required data transfers from memory. To do
this,  I  shut  down  all  other  tasks  that  may  be  consuming
energy and focus all available energy to the task in hand.
Of  course,  this  is  an  unusual  state  to  be  in.  Before  my
friend asked me to multiply these numbers together, I was
happily multitasking: walking down the road (unthinkingly
putting  one  leg  in  front  of  the  other),  chatting  about  the
latest news, looking up and admiring the clouds in the sky
and the leaves on the trees, listening to the birds chirping
and wondering what I might have for lunch. In this state,
the available energy being fed to my brain was being used
for a multitude of tasks.
In his renowned book Thinking, Fast and Slow, the
psychologist Daniel Kahneman has famously described the
brain  in  a  binary  way  rather  similar  to  this
6.  Most  of  the
time  (when  walking,  chatting,  looking  around)  it  operates
in a mode he calls “System 1”. System 1 denotes a rather

fast,  automatic,  eﬀortless  mode  of  operation.  By  contrast,
with eyes closed, focussing on one speciﬁc task, the brain is
in  what  Kahneman  calls  System  2,  a  much  slower,  more
deliberate mode of operation.
This  notion  of  a  binary  mode  of  operation  had  in  fact
been  described  some  years  earlier  by  cognitive  scientist
Guy Claxton in his book 
Hare Brain, Tortoise Mind7 . Here
“tortoise  mind”  describes  a  more  playful,  leisureful  and
dreamy state, somewhat akin to Kahneman’s System 1. By
contrast,  “hare  brain”  describes  the  type  of  thinking  that
requires reason, logic and deliberate thinking, as in
Kahneman’s System 2. The key point of Claxton’s book, one
that seems completely consistent with the experiences
described earlier, is that the leisurely tortoise mind, for all
its apparent aimlessness, is just as intelligent as the more
logical hare brain.
Here I want to think about energy as a way of describing
this bimodal operation of the brain.
Every  second,  the  brain  consumes  about  20  joules  of
energy. That is, it uses the same amount of power, 20W, as
an electric light bulb. This is tiny compared with the power
used  by  a  supercomputer  that  runs  a  weather  forecast
model—about 20MW, six orders of magnitude more. It
seems from studies of blood ﬂow into the brain that there
isn’t much variation in the total amount of power consumed
whether we are in System 1 or System 2. However, the fact
that we can multitask when in System 1 suggests that, in
this mode, power is spread between many active tasks, so
that  power per  active  task  is  especially  low.  By  contrast,
when operating in System 2 mode, all the available power
is perhaps focussed on a single task, making the power per
active task that much higher. For this reason, I will refer to
the  two  modes  as  the  low-power  mode  and  the  power-
intensive mode.

Now,  there  are  some  80  billion  neurons  in  the  brain.
Information propagates along the slender axons of a
neuron  (see  Fig.  46)  by  means  of  spiky  electric  signals.
However, the axons are so long that these electric signals
would  have  completely  dissipated  long  before  they  got  to
the  end  of  an  axon,  were  it  not  for  “protein  transistors”
which boost the spikes at regular intervals along the axon.
These protein transistors comprise small channels in the
membrane,  which  otherwise  act  as  an  insulating  sheath
around the axon. Electrically charged ions—essentially
atoms  such  as  sodium  or  potassium  with  the  electron  in
their outer shell stripped oﬀ—ﬂow through these channels
in  response  to  the  voltage  ﬂuctuations  from  the  signal
propagating  along  the  axon.  By  being  correlated  with  the
signal  propagating  along  the  axon,  the  ﬂow  of  ions  can
amplify the signal.
FIG. 46. The diﬀerent parts of a neuron. Electric “spike” signals are carried
along the axon. The signals are ampliﬁed by “protein transistors”
associated with ﬂows of ions across voltage-gated channels known as
“nodes of Ranvier”.
As  I  mentioned  in  Chapter 3,  if  we  start  to  reduce  the
voltage across regular silicon transistors, they start acting
unreliably and the switching process starts to become
susceptible  to  thermal  noise.  Could  it  be  that  in  the  low-
power mode, there is insuﬀicient energy to ensure that the
protein transistors operate completely deterministically?

The  answer  seems  to  be  yes.  There  is  evidence  that
slender  axons  with  a  diameter  less  than  about  1  micron
(10−3mm) are indeed susceptible to noise8. Now, the
median  size  of  axons  in  the  human  brain  is  about  0.5
microns9. Hence, particularly in situations when the
available  20W  of  power  is  being  spread  around  the  80
billion  neurons  in  the  brain—i.e.,  in  the  low-power  mode
when the brain is multitasking—the operation of any one of
the active neurons will be susceptible to noise.
There are advantages and disadvantages to such slender
neurons. A disadvantage is that an electrical signal travels
more slowly along an axon as the axon diameter decreases.
If  it  is  vital  to  have  a  super-  fast  reaction  time  to  evade
predators,  then  a  decrease  in  axon  diameter  may  be  an
evolutionary dead end. On the other hand, if one can take
advantage  of  social  groupings  to  fend  oﬀ  predators,  then
the  disadvantage  of  slower  reaction  times  may  be  more
than  compensated  by  the  extra  processing  power  arising
from being able to cram more neurons into a given space.
If fast reaction time is not vital, could a susceptibility to
noise 
arising 
from 
neuron 
miniaturisation 
have 
an
evolutionary advantage? Let’s look at some of the
processes discussed in Chapter 3, in which noise was found
to be beneﬁcial, and see if these might apply to the way the
brain works.
For example, consider the process of stochastic rounding
—using  noise  to  truncate  a  signal  comprising  many  bits.
With reference to Fig. 17, if stochastic rounding was being
performed on the raw visual data that was being received
by  our  eyes,  and  the  truncated  data  was  sent  along  our
neurons to the part of the brain responsible for our
cognitive  perceptions,  then  perhaps  we  would  be  able  to
perceive the full grey shading, even though the brain was
receiving only the 1-bit black-and-white bits.

The  simulated  annealing  algorithm  appears  to  describe
well  how  we  humans  go  about  ﬁnding  a  solution  to  a
problem. We start by applying some well-known tricks (like
reductio ad absurdum) that have helped us in the past. This
gets  us  some  way  to  the  solution,  but  then  we  become
completely stuck. We rack our brains for new ideas that will
help  us  out  of  the  rut.  If  the  ideas  take  us  forward,  we
accept  them.  However,  in  the  initial  phase  we  are  quite
prepared to go back to step 0 if it will help us ﬁnd a better
route  to  the  ﬁnal  solution.  In  these  early  stages,  we  are
potentially prepared to accept any old idea, however crazy
it  might  seem.  But  when  we  have  made  a  lot  of  progress
and feel that we are getting close to the ﬁnal solution, we’ll
be much more discriminating with the ideas that come to
us,  accepting  only  the  really  promising  ones  for  further
analysis.  Remarkably,  the  simulated  annealing  algorithm
also describes quite well the process of evolution by natural
selection.
However,  in  order  to  generate  random  new  ideas,  the
brain must be susceptible to noise, and this appears
possible only when the brain is in its low-power mode. This
could  explain  why  eureka  moments  occur  when  we  are
relaxing and not concentrating hard on a problem. It is in
such a relaxation mode that the presence of noise can help
us  jump  out  of  a  cognitive  roadblock  and  in  this  way
advance our understanding.
By  contrast,  when  the  brain  operates  in  the  power-
intensive mode, i.e., when other units are disabled to allow
as  much  of  the  20W  of  power  to  be  focussed,  then  it
appears  there  is  enough  energy  available  to  the  active
neurons  that  they  operate  deterministically.  This  is  when
we can check whether the crazy ideas the low-power mode
provides us are actually any good.
The theoretical physicist Michael Berry has dubbed
creative ideas which seemingly arise out of nowhere
“claritons”—mysterious  particle-like  units  of  creativity.  It

would seem that the clariton is a product of the low-power
mode. However, Berry notes that more often than not, the
appearance of a clariton is, in the cold light of day,
annihilated by an “anti-clariton”. It would appear that the
anti-clariton is the product of the power-intensive mode of
thinking, triggered when you apply some logical thinking to
the idea that has popped out of the blue. It’s just as well we
have the capability to check all the crazy ideas that come
out of our head.
If these ideas are right, then the process we call
creativity—what otherwise might be called inductive
reasoning10—involves  a  synergy  between  the  low-power
and  the  power-intensive  modes:  in  other  words,  a  close
interplay between stochasticity and determinism. Being
susceptible  to  noise,  the  low-power  mode  is  producing  a
stream of sometimes bizarre, sometimes useful ideas. The
more deterministic power-intensive mode then ﬁlters these,
rejecting the more bizarre ones and retaining the ones that
stand up to scrutiny. Like the simulated annealing
algorithm,  the  closer  we  come  to  the  ﬁnal  solution,  the
more discriminating we are about the crazy ideas that we
will pursue.
In The Emperor’s New Mind11, Roger Penrose famously
asked  what  it  is  that  makes  us  capable  of  understanding
Gödel’s  theorem,  the  famous  twentieth-century  theorem
described in Chapter  2, that there are mathematically
sound statements that assert their unprovability. He makes
the point that if our brains worked by algorithm, we would
not be able to understand the concept that there are
mathematical truths that cannot be proved algorithmically.
The  fact  that  we  do  understand  this  could  perhaps  be
explained  if  random  noise,  something  not  describable  by
algorithm, is a necessary element of cognition. Of course,
you  may  complain  that  in  Chapter  11  I  was  arguing  that
even the most fundamental type of noise, quantum noise, is

not  truly  random,  but  is  associated  with  some  kind  of
chaotic 
determinism 
described 
by 
the 
cosmological
invariant set postulate. However, as discussed in Chapter 2,
a fractal invariant set is itself algorithmically undecidable.
Hence, if the brain is susceptible to this most fundamental
type  of  noise,  then  it  truly  is  not  fully  describable  by
algorithm.
I’m not the ﬁrst to appeal to randomness in this way. In
his  inﬂuential  paper  “The  Imitation  Game12”  Alan  Turing
himself commented, “It is wise to include a random
element  in  a  learning  machine”,  and  cited  yet  another
simple example where noise can be used to ﬁnd the
solution to a problem eﬀiciently.
In this context, it is interesting to note that if the
miniaturisation 
of 
transistors 
continued, 
quantum
tunnelling eﬀects would make the transistors unreliable as
switches. But if we take the view that noise is a necessary
resource  for  creativity,  then  taking  at  least  some  of  the
transistors into this noisy quantum regime, and at the same
time reducing the voltage across them, could be an
important step in making a creative AI system capable, for
example, of coming up with interesting new mathematical
theorems.
Perhaps  future  AI  devices  will  comprise  two  classes  of
chip:  the  conventional  power-intensive  chips,  performing
computations deterministically, where determinism is vital
(you don’t want a computer to send money to an incorrect
bank  account  because  it  got  the  last  digit  of  the  account
number wrong), and a new class of low-power noisy chips,
performing computations stochastically. Data transfer
between these chips and to memory would be performed at
low numerical precision, using the stochastic rounding
ideas we’ve discussed.
