«  »
LET’S  LOOK  AT  SOME  possible  practical  consequences  of
regarding the brain as a noisy energy-eﬀicient organ.
Every  day  we  have  to  make  decisions,  some  35,000  of
them  according  to  some  sources.  Most  are  unimportant—
whether  to  watch  TV  this  evening  or  read  a  book—and
barely require much eﬀort. A few are important and
require careful thought before we can decide what to do.
If  we  simply  characterise  decisions  as  important  ones
and  unimportant  ones,  then  probably  most  of  us  follow  a
simple  strategy  in  making  decisions:  let  the  low-power
mode make the many unimportant decisions in our life, and
our analytic power-intensive mode make the fewer diﬀicult
decisions. Hence, we clearly don’t weigh the pros and cons
of  putting  the  left  foot  forward,  having  just  put  the  right
foot forward, whilst walking down the street. By contrast,
for  the  agonising  decisions,  we  typically  set  out  the  pros
and cons as carefully as we can. We think hard about each
of  these,  and  how  much  weight  to  give  them.  The  power-
intensive mode is hard at work for these diﬀicult types of
decisions.
This partition of decisions to the low-power and power-
intensive modes makes good use of the available energy in
the brain. It allows us to process those thousands of
decisions we make each day rather eﬀiciently. It means that
the default mode the brain uses for making a decision is the
low-power mode. We might call this strategy “lazy”, but if
we dealt with each decision using our power-intensive
mode,  we  would  hardly  get  to  decision  ﬁfty  before  it  was
time  to  go  to  bed  at  the  end  of  the  day.  Defaulting  most
decisions  to  the  low-power  mode  is  manifestly  a  rational
strategy.

There  are  some  consequences  of  this.  One  is  that  it
makes  us  appear  irrational,  even  though  I  believe  we  are
not being irrational. Here is a now famous example of our
seeming  irrationality.  A  bat  and  ball  cost  $1.10.  The  bat
cost one dollar more than the ball. How much does the ball
cost?
The obvious answer, the one that most people intuitively
respond with, is 10 cents. However, this is not the correct
answer.  If  the  ball  cost  10  cents,  then  the  bat  would  cost
$1.10 and the total cost would be $1.20. The correct
answer is 5 cents.
According to Kahneman, in his book 
Thinking, Fast and
Slow,  more  than  50  percent  of  students  at  Harvard,  MIT
and Princeton gave the incorrect answer. Kahneman found
these  results  shocking—seemingly  proving  we  are  not  the
rational  species  we  think  we  are.  But  this  conclusion  is
wrong  in  my  view.  These  are  the  top  students  in  the  US.
They were selected by highly competitive exams and
interviews. There must be something deeper going on.
Some  commentators  feel  that  these  examples  are  too
artiﬁcial for any useful conclusions to be drawn. However, I
disagree. I believe the key to resolving this dilemma is to
think about energy. The question of how much energy it is
rational to assign to making a decision, or to answering a
question, is surely going to be important when energy per
second is limited to 20W.
Suppose I came up to you in the street and asked you the
bat  and  ball  question.  How  much  energy  would  you  be
willing  to  expend  answering  it?  If  you  were  a  student
walking  to  the  local  examination  hall  to  take  some  exam,
you might well decide not to expend any energy at all. You
don’t  want  to  exhaust  your  brain  before  you  have  even
started the exam. In this circumstance the rational answer
is  no  answer,  and  you  politely  respond  that  you  are  sorry
but you don’t have time to answer the question.

On  the  other  hand,  suppose  it’s  your  professor  asking
the  question  during  one  of  your  classes:  then  you  might
decide that you should expend a little energy answering it.
However,  if  she  has  told  you  that  the  answers  will  be
anonymised,  and  that  there  are  no  credits  for  answering
correctly, then perhaps you might conclude that there is no
good reason to expend a lot of energy answering the
question, not least because you have other homework
assignments  to  complete,  for  which  you  will  get  credits.
Under  these  conditions,  your  answer  to  the  bat  and  ball
question  may  well  be  10  cents.  It’s  the  rational  answer,
given the rational decision to expend only a small amount
of  energy  answering  the  problem.  That  is  to  say,  it  is
perfectly rational to give the wrong answer.
By contrast, if it mattered to you that the answer should
be right—for instance, if it was a question on your exam—it
would  be  rational  to  utilise  all  available  energy  to  try  to
answer  correctly.  You  analyse  the  question  carefully  in
power-intensive mode. Now 5 cents is the rational answer.
The problem with a strategy based on maximising
energy eﬀiciency is that it can lead to a bias in the use of
the low-power mode on decisions to problems that lie on a
borderline between being important and unimportant. As a
result, we end up bitterly regretting some decisions which
we  made  too  glibly,  not  giving  them  enough  care  and
attention. I can think of examples in my own life.
So, what is the solution to this type of problem? I believe
that  it  is  to  become  aware  that  for  many  of  us,  our  brain
has 
a 
tendency 
to 
systematically 
downgrade 
the
importance of decisions that lie near the interface between
being  important  and  unimportant  by  sending  them  to  the
low-power mode to sort out. If we are aware of this, then
we  can  potentially  become  more  sensitive  to  the  small
alarm  bells  that  might  ring,  and  not  simply  dismiss  them
without  further  thought.  We  can  then  start  to  engage  the
power-intensive mode a little more on the problem.

Essentially, it’s about making a little more use of that all-
important synergy between the low-power and the power-
intensive modes—the synergy that makes us the intelligent,
creative species we are.
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  some  decisions  that  are
obviously important, when we know we have to engage our
power-intensive analytic mode. The problem here is a
diﬀerent one. It is that being overly analytic can paralyse
us  with  indecision.  Like  Buridan’s  donkey,  stuck  midway
between a bale of hay and a pail of water, we cannot ﬁgure
out which way to turn. This was me when I was trying to
decide  whether  to  change  ﬁelds  at  the  end  of  my  PhD
studies.
Perhaps here we can learn from the eureka moments of
those eminent scientists. The creative steps on the route to
their breakthroughs came from a subtle interplay between
the  two  modes.  The  power-intensive  mode  had  taken  the
creative  process  only  so  far.  The  crucial  eureka  moment
actually  occurred  in  low-power  mode,  it  seems,  precisely
because the brain was susceptible to noise.
Learning  from  the  eureka  moments  suggests  that  we
should  certainly  start  by  listing  the  pros  and  cons  and
thinking hard about them, maybe for several days, for these
diﬀicult and important decisions. Indeed, it makes sense to
try to construct an ensemble of worlds where these
diﬀerent  pros  and  cons  are  realised.  One  doesn’t  need  to
actually derive probabilities from such an ensemble. Merely
constructing “storylines” portrayed in individual ensemble
members  is  itself  an  important  step.  In  fact,  the  idea  of
ensemble  members  as  plausible  “storylines”  is  becoming
important 
in 
climate 
science, 
in 
situations 
where
probabilities are diﬀicult to compute13.
But  then  we  should  try  to  get  on  with  the  rest  of  our
lives, as far as this is possible. Like with the eureka
moments, the hope would be that in moments of relaxation,

our  instinctive  side  will  tell  us  what  is  the  right  decision.
Again, the idea is to make constructive use of noise in low-
power  mode  to  provide  new  perspectives  which  our  more
analytic,  deterministic  power-intensive  mode  is  failing  to
give us.
The order in which we engage the two cognitive systems
is  crucially  important  here.  If  we  engage  the  low-power
mode ﬁrst and come to an instinctive preliminary
conclusion, this could colour and distort the way in which
we  do  the  analytic  thinking  when  engaging  the  power-
intensive mode. This is where we are susceptible to
“conﬁrmation bias”: we simply ﬁnd evidence that supports
our gut instinct and disregard the rest. The power-intensive
mode is no longer the dispassionate, disinterested analyser
of  information.  Rather,  we  should  engage  the  low-power
mode after we have got as far as we can with the power-
intensive mode. That’s the way the great eureka moments
were made.
For example, if you start with a gut feeling that climate
change is for woke tree huggers and that its importance as
a  problem  facing  humanity  is  overblown,  then  you  will
simply  seek  out  naysayer  websites  and  other  sources  of
information that support this instinctive view. Conversely, if
you come to the problem from the intuitive perspective that
we have polluted the planet with our carbon emissions and
are reaping the inevitable catastrophic consequences, then
similarly,  you  are  likely  to  read  only  alarmist  websites
about  climate  change.  This  is  why  I  think  that  the  IPCC
assessment reports are probably the best disinterested
source 
of 
information 
on 
climate 
science—though,
unfortunately, they are not the easiest to read. The
scientists  I  have  worked  with  on  IPCC  are  typically  not
politically  motivated—they  merely  want  to  present  their
science as accurately and as accessibly as possible.
If  there  is  a  bottom  line  here,  it  is  that  in  decision-
making,  whether  with  relatively  unimportant  decisions  or

important 
decisions, 
we 
should 
be 
aware 
of 
the
extraordinary  capabilities  we  have  when  we  make  use  of
that interplay between the low-power stochastic and
power-intensive deterministic modes of our brain—the
modes that appear to be central in making us the creative,
imaginative species that we are.
...
