13
Free Will, Consciousness and
God
IT SEEMS THE BRAIN IS AN ENERGY-EFFICIENT ORGAN.
LET’S TAKE  this  argument  a  bit  further.  Apart  from  noise,
what other physics might arise in the brain as a
consequence of its energy eﬀiciency?
Let’s return to the issue of signal propagation along the
long, slender axons of neurons. As mentioned, these signals
have to be boosted by protein transistors as they propagate
from one end of the axon to the other. These transistors are
powered  by  the  ﬂow  of  ions  in  the  neuronal  membrane
walls of the axons.
Scientists from the University of Salzburg 1 conclude that
there  isn’t  enough  available  energy  to  explain  these  ion
ﬂow rates if the physics of ion transfer is entirely classical.
Instead, they have proposed a quantum process that will do
the job using much smaller amounts of energy. The idea is
to think of an ion not as a little particle but instead as an
extended 
quantum 
wavefunction. 
The 
front 
of 
the
wavefunction  can  then  manipulate  the  electrical  potential
in the ion channel in such a way as to allow the rest of the
wavefunction to propagate through eﬀiciently and without
hindrance. The timescale for this process to work has to be
very  small  indeed  and  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  very

fast  quantum  decoherence  timescales  that  operate  in  the
brain.
If this is correct, then we can’t think of the brain as if it
were  a  conventional  classical  computer.  It  must  be  some
kind of noisy, classical/quantum-hybrid computer. What
does  this  mean  in  practice?  The  hallmark  of  a  quantum
computer is that it can perform certain types of
calculations much faster than a conventional classical
computer. This is called quantum supremacy and has
already been established for somewhat arcane and useless
types  of  computation2.  In  Chapter  11,  I  described  brieﬂy
how invariant set theory could explain this speed-up: if the
laws  of  quantum  physics  describe  the  geometry  of  the
invariant  set,  then  a  quantum  computer,  driven  by  these
geometric laws, can access information in the neighbouring
trajectories  on  the  invariant  set.  By  contrast,  a  classical
computer  can  access  information  only  on  a  single  state-
space trajectory, the one that corresponds to the world of
classical physics.
As  we  humans  don’t  have  the  prodigious  computing
capability  of  quantum  computers,  we  are  manifestly  not
pure 
quantum 
computers. 
However, 
perhaps 
we
nevertheless have some residual capabilities associated
with  a  weak  cognitive  perception  of  these  neighbouring
trajectories  on  the  invariant  set—what  could  be  called  a
“sixth” sense. This might help explain some of the
diﬀerences  between  us  and  conventional  computers.  This
idea is speculative. But let’s run with it for a while and see
where  it  gets  us.  How  might  such  a  sixth  sense  manifest
itself?
I am not the ﬁrst to propose a role for quantum physics
in  the  brain.  Roger  Penrose  and  Stuart  Hameroﬀ3  have
proposed  microtubules  inside  neurons  as  a  place  where
quantum cognition takes place. Perhaps that’s right,
though I’m not enough of an expert to have a ﬁrm view on
