this. In any case, I don’t think that anything I discuss ahead
is inconsistent with Penrose and Hameroﬀ’s basic proposal.
Rather, I believe what I am proposing builds on these ideas.
«  »
THE TOPIC OF FREE will is one that has vexed philosophers
for millennia. The twelfth-century Persian poet Jalāl al-Dīn
Rūmī wrote4, “There is a disputation that will continue until
mankind 
is 
raised 
from 
the 
dead, 
between 
the
necessitarians and the partisans of free will.” Here a
necessitarian  is  a  determinist,  one,  like  me,  who  believes
that  the  laws  of  physics  are  ultimately  deterministic  in
form.
Over the centuries, debate on free will has focussed on
whether 
determinism 
is 
compatible 
with 
free 
will.
Compatibilists believe that if free will is deﬁned in terms of
an absence of constraints preventing you from doing as you
want to do, then a belief in free will is indeed compatible
with  a  belief  in  determinism.  From  this  perspective,  free
will  is  not  a  contentious  topic.  For  some  decisions—what
holiday to take, what car to drive, what house to live in—I
am not a free agent; ﬁnancial constraints limit my choice.
And of course, I am not free to break the laws of physics. I
am not free to ﬂap my arms up and down and ﬂy away from
an unpleasant situation. On the other hand, I play golf on
Sunday mornings of my own free will—there are no
constraints that I am aware of that make me so do.
However,  incompatibilists  believe  that  free  will  cannot
be  explained  in  this  way.  For  them,  free  will  somehow
denotes an ability “to have done otherwise”. Such an ability
would appear to be incompatible with determinism since it
seems to imply that the world could evolve in multiple ways

from a given state—one way in which I did what I did, and
one or more other ways in which I did otherwise.
I  don’t  like  the  idea  of  indeterminacy  at  a  fundamental
level,  even  though,  as  mentioned,  noise  is  necessary  for
modelling  complex  systems  at  a  practical  level.  But  that
doesn’t make indeterminism wrong. In fact, one of the key
arguments  that  incompatibilists  bring  to  the  table  has,  in
the past, made me question my belief in determinism. The
argument  is  that  determinism  undermines  any  claim  that
we  are  moral  beings.  The  philosopher  Peter  van  Inwagen
has summarised the argument like this5:
“If determinism is true, then our acts are the
consequences  of  the  laws  of  nature  and  events  in  the
remote past. But it is not up to us what went on before we
were  born;  and  neither  is  it  up  to  us  what  the  laws  of
nature  are.  Therefore,  the  consequences  of  these  things
(including our own acts) are not up to us.”
Imagine a man, convicted of murder, about to be
sentenced. When the judge asks the man if he has any ﬁnal
comments  before  he  passes  sentence,  the  convict  says:
“But I had no choice in whether to commit the crime. It was
already  determined  that  I  would  commit  the  crime  at  the
time of the Big Bang”. Is this enough for the judge to set
him free?
You see the problem. Do we excuse Hitler for his crimes
against  humanity  because  it  was  predetermined  in  the
cosmic initial conditions that he would be a mass
murderer? 
Compatibilist 
philosopher 
Daniel 
Dennett
argues6 that we simply do not exempt someone from blame,
or indeed praise, because we think he could not do
otherwise.  Dennett  cites  Martin  Luther,  who  initiated  the
Protestant Reformation declaring, “Here I stand, I can do
no  other.”  According  to  Dennett,  Luther  was  taking  full
responsibility for acting of his own free will, whatever free
will means.

Despite being a compatibilist like Dennett, I don’t think
the  moral  argument  against  determinism  can  be  simply
swept away as Dennett states. This is an issue about which
there  is  a  vast  literature  to  which  I  can’t  do  justice  here.
Instead, I am simply going to try to add something to the
discussion, based on ideas from the geometry of chaos.
Indeed, I want to focus on a question which I don’t see
addressed  much  in  discussions  of  free  will,  but  which  I
believe is important. Why is it that people feel so strongly,
so  viscerally,  that  they  could  have  done  otherwise?  I  feel
this every Sunday morning when I play golf. I drive home
almost always disappointed with my eﬀorts. I chastise
myself with thoughts like “If only I hadn’t rushed my swing
on the sixth, I wouldn’t have hit the ball out of bounds on
the  left.”  And  yet  I  am  an  unashamed  determinist,  for
whom the notion that I could have done otherwise—that I
could  have  not  rushed  my  swing  on  the  sixth—makes  no
sense. It’s as if my power-intensive mode, my careful
analytic mode of thinking, says, “The idea that I could have
done otherwise makes no sense.” However, my low-power
intuitive mode of thinking says, “Oh yes it does!” So, what
is going on here? Computers, I suppose, do not have these
feelings. Why do we?
This problem is not solved by indeterminism. If it were
randomness in the laws of physics that made me do what I
did, then that wouldn’t explain why I feel so strongly that I
could  have  done  otherwise.  It  seems  the  problem  rather
transcends the issue of determinism vs. indeterminism.
Perhaps there is a simple explanation. We have
memories of past occasions when, in similar circumstances,
we did otherwise—when we didn’t rush our golf swings, for
example. Does the feeling that we could have done
otherwise merely reﬂect such memories of previous, similar
occasions? Whilst this is a possible explanation, I am
somehow not convinced. More importantly, I don’t think it
would  convince  those  who  have  a  strong  belief  that  they

could  have  done  otherwise.  As  such,  I  don’t  think  this
explains the very visceral nature of a belief in free will.
Here  is  another  possible  way  of  looking  at  the  issue.
Suppose our cognition is inﬂuenced by the yin and yang of
quantum physics, as described in Chapter 11. In particular,
suppose 
we 
have 
some 
cognition 
of 
neighbouring7
counterfactual  worlds  on  the  invariant  set  (the  strands  of
rope  in  Fig.  44a  that  are  close  to  the  strand  of  rope
corresponding to our current reality). These neighbouring
trajectories correspond to worlds in which we did
otherwise than what we actually did. With a weak
perception  of  these  neighbouring  worlds,  the  brain  would
interpret them as implying an ability to have done
otherwise. My suggestion is that it is our weak perception
of these neighbouring worlds—related to the fact that
energy eﬀiciency demands that quantum physics does
operate in the brain—gives us this extraordinarily visceral
feeling that we could have done otherwise, even though we
couldn’t  have actually  done  otherwise.  A  purely  classical
computer could never experience this, of course. A
quantum  computer  experiences  it  much  more  strongly,  I
would contend, every time it performs a nonclassical
computation.
There  is  a  corollary  to  all  this.  It  could  be  that  our
perception of these neighbouring worlds is suﬀiciently
weak 
that 
we 
are 
unable 
to 
distinguish 
between
neighbouring trajectories that lie on the invariant set and
hypothetical trajectories that lie in the fractal gaps of the
invariant set. If this is right, our brain extends the feeling “I
could  have  done  otherwise”  to  all  counterfactual  worlds,
irrespective of whether they do or do not satisfy the
invariant  set  postulate.  As  discussed  in  Chapter  11,  in
quantum contexts, counterfactual reasoning can sometimes
be  ﬂawed  reasoning.  However,  perhaps  our  sixth  sense
isn’t  suﬀiciently  well  honed  to  distinguish  neighbouring

trajectories on and oﬀ the invariant set. This is why, in my
view, quantum physics can sometimes seem intuitively
weird. Theories of counterfactual causation8—models of the
world which permit more or less unlimited use of
counterfactual reasoning—should therefore be treated with
extreme caution. Even though they 
seem reasonable, they
may not be, especially when being used to describe
quantum physics.
Let’s return to the more important conundrum, the
diﬀiculty  of  explaining  how,  under  determinism,  we  can
have a sense of moral responsibility. Recall the man
convicted  of  murder,  about  to  be  sentenced.  He  has  just
said to the judge that he had no choice in whether or not to
commit 
the 
crime, 
simply 
because 
it 
was 
already
determined what he would do at the time of the Big Bang.
However,  the  judge  (let’s  say)  has  read  this  book  and
replies to the accused:
“I’m  afraid  that  what  happened  at  the  time  of  the  Big
Bang  isn’t  relevant.  Your  actions  are  determined  by  the
geometry of the cosmological invariant set.”
The 
convict 
immediately 
responds, 
as 
the 
judge
suspected he would:
“All right then. If the cosmological initial conditions
didn’t make me do it, then the invariant set made me do it.
I don’t care, the argument is still the same.”
But now the judge can deliver the knock-out blow:
“But it’s not the same! You are part of the invariant set.
Your  behaviour  determines  the  geometry  of  the  invariant
set as much as the geometry of the invariant set
determines  your  behaviour.  That  is  to  say,  you do  have
some  moral  responsibility  for  what  you  did,  determinism
notwithstanding!”
The  convict  is  dumbfounded.  What  on  earth  does  the
judge mean?

There is something very important here that needs
unpacking. In classical physics, e.g., as discussed in
Chapters  1  through  3,  we  treat  the  initial  conditions  as
completely  separate  from  the  dynamical  laws  of  physics
that evolve systems in time. Compared with other states of
the universe, the Big Bang initial conditions are considered
fundamental in determining, alongside the dynamical laws,
how the universe will evolve. This is why Inwagen refers to
conditions in the remote past.
However,  in  invariant  set  theory,  the  initial  conditions
and the dynamical laws are not independent of each other:
they  are  both  subservient  to  the  geometry  of  the  fractal
invariant set. Because of this, the Big Bang initial
conditions  are  no  more  fundamental  than  any  other  state
on the invariant set. As such, the invariant set is timeless:
no  point  on  the  invariant  set,  corresponding  to  a  state  of
the universe at a particular time, is more fundamental than
any other point.
An  aphorism  for  Einstein’s  theory  of  general  relativity
was formulated by American physicist John Archibald
Wheeler. He said of general relativity that “[the geometry
of]  space-time  tells  matter  how  to  move,  and  matter  tells
space-time how to curve.” I like to think of the invariant set
postulate in a very similar way. That is, we can say that the
geometry of the invariant set tells matter how to evolve in
time,  whilst  matter  tells  the  invariant  set  how  to  shape
itself. But we are part of the matter that evolves in time on
the invariant set, and how we evolve in time in part
describes  our  behaviour.  Hence,  we  can  say  in  a  self-
referential way, the invariant set geometry determines how
we behave, whilst our behaviour determines the geometry
of the invariant set.
This  is  the  duality  to  which  the  judge  is  referring.  The
argument “the invariant set made me do it,” whilst true, is
incomplete. The other part of the argument is that what we
do determines the geometry of the invariant set. That may
