sound like we have abandoned the notion of determinism.
But  in  fact,  all  we  are  abandoning  is  the  notion  that  our
behaviour  is  that  of  a  computational  automaton.  We  can
appeal to the discussion in Chapter 2, that a fractal
invariant set is algorithmically undecidable. As a result, any
attempt to emulate our behaviour computationally must be
inherently  stochastic.  In  this  sense  we  are  not  mindless
automata—we do have moral responsibility. This is entirely
consistent  with  Penrose’s  assertion  that  conscious  minds
are not algorithmic.
This 
could 
be 
a 
plausible 
explanation 
of 
why
determinism does not absolve us from moral responsibility.
«  »
LIKE FREE WILL, THE meaning of consciousness continues to
baﬄe us. And also like free will, the literature on this topic
is vast and would take a separate book to review properly.
In  recent  years,  for  example,  a  theory  of  consciousness
based on what is called “integrated information theory” has
developed9—the  more  so-called  integrated  information  a
system has, the more the system is said to be conscious. As
in  the  case  of  free  will,  I  do  not  seek  to  challenge  these
theories,  but  merely  ask  whether  the  geometry  of  chaos
could add to them.
Here I want to focus on two aspects of this problem. The
ﬁrst is how the geometry of chaos might help deﬁne
consciousness  in  an  objective  way.  The  second  is  to  know
how, even in principle, something like consciousness could
emerge 
from 
a 
collection 
of 
otherwise 
inanimate
elementary particles. For many people it seems implausible
that the works of Mozart, Shakespeare and Einstein could
emerge from such a collection of particles. Following ideas
formulated by Plato and Descartes, maybe there really are

two  diﬀerent  worlds:  the  physical  world  and  the  spiritual
world. As a physicist, I would ﬁnd it hard to accept such a
notion  since  it  would  imply  there  is  a  core  aspect  of  the
world  that  cannot  be  studied  by  the  scientiﬁc  method.  Of
course,  this  might  be  the  case,  but  I  am  not  currently
inclined to give up the idea that science can explain such
matters.  Nevertheless,  I  completely  understand  why  the
idea  of  emergence  of  conscious  creative  creatures  from
elementary particles seems completely implausible. As one
scientiﬁc colleague put it, do the electrons and protons in
the brain somehow know that Mozart was a superior
composer  to  Mendelssohn  (or  the  Beatles  to  the  Rolling
Stones, in my currency)?
However,  perhaps  this  scepticism  about  the  emergence
of consciousness from elementary particles reﬂects not so
much the domain of applicability of the scientiﬁc method as
scepticism 
about 
methodological 
reductionism—that
“smaller” is necessarily “more fundamental”, which is
certainly  part  of  the  credo  of  contemporary  science.  In
Chapter 
11, 
I 
argued 
that 
such 
methodological
reductionism  is  leading  us  into  problems  with  trying  to
understand 
the 
nature 
of 
elementary 
particles. 
To
understand  these  particles,  I  argued,  it  is  necessary  to
consider, as equally fundamental, the structure of the
universe on the very largest scales of space and time. That
is a key message of the invariant set postulate.
Could  the  same  type  of  top-down  argument  also  help
explain the mystery of consciousness? Well, let’s try to be a
little 
more 
concrete. 
Rather 
than 
ask, 
“What 
is
consciousness?,” let me instead ask, “What does it mean to
be conscious of something speciﬁc?”
If I look up from my laptop screen, the ﬁrst thing I notice
is  a  cactus  plant  in  a  white  pot  which  my  son  bought  my
wife  and  me  as  a  small  present  to  mark  our  wedding
anniversary  (how  nice  of  him!).  The  plant  pot  sits  on  the
windowsill just behind my desk. Next to it is a small clock

also  sitting  on  the  windowsill,  a  short  distance  from  the
cactus.
When I am focussing on my laptop screen, trying to think
what to write next, I am not at all conscious of either the
cactus  or  the  clock,  even  though  they  are  in  my  ﬁeld  of
vision. That is to say, even though photons from the sun are
bouncing  oﬀ  the  cactus  and  entering  my  brain,  I  am  not
aware of the cactus. In terms of the model my brain has of
the  world,  when  I  am  focussing  on  the  laptop  screen,  the
world 
comprises 
simply 
the 
laptop 
screen 
and 
an
undiﬀerentiated set of other objects. As far as this model is
concerned, neither the cactus nor the clock has an
existence  independent  of  each  other,  or  of  the  rest  of  the
world.
On  the  other  hand,  if  I  stop  writing  and  look  straight
ahead, perhaps hoping for some inspiration, then, and only
then, I may become conscious of the cactus. My model of
the world now includes a cactus, and perhaps a clock, and
the rest of the external world.
What is going on? It seems to me that it is only when I
am conscious of the cactus and the clock that I sense they
have  an  existence  independent  of  each  other,  and  of  the
other objects in the universe. What does this mean? Well,
as  with  so  much  else  in  this  book,  let’s  think  about  the
cactus and the clock as two objects in “cactus-clock” state
space. If we are attributing an existence to the cactus that
is independent of the clock, it means that it is possible, in
principle  at  least,  that  the  position  of  the  cactus  can  be
altered independently of the clock’s in “cactus-clock” state
space. Now, when I (very occasionally) clean the windowsill
in  my  study,  I  will  move  the  cactus  relative  to  the  clock.
Perhaps  my  sense  that  the  cactus  has  an  independent
existence from the clock comes from a memory of moving
the cactus relative to the clock during such window-
cleaning moments.

However, perhaps there is another explanation. Perhaps
my sixth sense, the one that gave me such a visceral feeling
of free will, could also explain this notion of the cactus as
an object with an independent existence. I argued that our
visceral  feeling  of  free  will  arises  from  a  perception  of
trajectories on the invariant set that are close to the
trajectory 
on 
which 
we 
evolve. 
On 
these 
nearby
trajectories, I did indeed “do otherwise”. In a similar way,
on the nearby trajectories on the invariant set, the position
of the cactus may indeed vary relative to the clock. Perhaps
the diﬀerence in relative position on the neighbouring
trajectories  is  tiny,  but  nevertheless  is  enough  for  me  to
sense that the cactus and the clock are independent
objects,  both  relative  to  each  other  and  to  the  external
world more generally. It’s the quantum yin and yang of real
and  counterfactual  trajectories  on  the  invariant  set  once
again.
I am reminded of a feature of smartphone cameras that
lets the camera take a tiny piece of movie—just a fraction
of a second—before ﬁxing on the still photo shot. When you
see  the  photo,  you  also  see  the  short  movie  sequence
preceding it. Even though the movie lasts for only a
fraction of a second, it makes the objects in the static photo
seem  much  more  lifelike.  It’s  a  kind  of  augmented  reality
that the photo alone does not have.
In  short,  I  am  suggesting  that  to  be  conscious  of  an
object  is  to  be  aware  that  the  object  has  an  existence
independent of the rest of the world. I am speculating that
this awareness is itself a consequence of two claims: that
for reasons of energy eﬀiciency quantum physics does play
a role in cognition, and that the laws of quantum physics at
their most fundamental describe the geometry of the
cosmological invariant set. This awareness gives us a
visceral augmented sense of reality that mere memories do
not have.

With this in mind, let us return to the question of what
distinguishes  us  from  AI  systems.  We  concluded  in  the
previous chapter that noise in the brain is a necessary part
of the answer. But is it suﬀicient? Is consciousness a
necessary part of understanding, as Penrose argues it must
be?  I  don’t  know  for  sure,  but  if  it  is,  then  developing
creative AI will require a close synergy between quantum
and classical computing, in addition to the synergy
discussed in the previous chapter between power-intensive
and low-power classical computing.
If  this  is  so,  then  we  have  a  long  way  to  go  before  we
create truly intelligent machines. “The singularity”, the day
when  machines  completely  take  over,  is  likely  not  a  few
years  away,  as  some  commentators  believe;  it  is  many
decades, potentially centuries away. We will need our
creative brains for quite some time yet.
«  »
IN  THE  LAST  PART  of  this  ﬁnal  chapter,  I  want  to  discuss
something  that  would  be  taboo  in  a  scientiﬁc  paper:  to
relate the ideas I have been discussing on uncertainty and
the geometry of chaos with the concept of spirituality and
religion.
The idea that there is more to us humans than a
collection  of  inanimate  atoms  is  surely  an  understandable
response to the notion that the laws of physics are uncaring
mathematical 
equations 
and 
the 
universe 
vast 
and
impersonal. Perhaps if one could show how a human being
is an emergent property of the Schrödinger equation, then
one would have to admit that spirituality is merely a prop
for coping with the challenges of life, with nothing deeper
underpinning the Schrödinger equation. But science cannot
show such a thing. Not by a long way.

From  spirituality  comes  the  concept  of  a  caring  god,  a
supreme  and  yet  personal  creator.  Many  of  those  who
believe in such a god do so because they seek a purpose to
life. The idea that each of us is merely a random
thermodynamic  ﬂuctuation  with  a  mean  lifetime  of  some
three score years and ten can make our lives seem rather
pointless. Indeed, according to contemporary cosmological
models with ﬁxed dark energy, humanity is restricted to an
inﬁnitesimally short blip near the beginning of the
universe,  after  which  nothing  happens  at  all.  It’s  as  if  all
the wonders of nature, the works of Einstein, Shakespeare,
the Beatles and Beethoven, literally count for nothing—they
are an irrelevance for the utterly dilute state of the
universe that will dominate almost all of its existence. As a
dispassionate  scientist,  perhaps  I  should  simply  shrug  my
shoulders and say that if that’s the way it is, then that’s the
way  it  is.  But  it’s  such  a  depressing  scenario.  If  we  were
truly certain that this is the state to which the universe will
evolve, then why bother doing anything? Why bother
having children—it’s only prolonging the agony. Why bother
to write this book, other than to pass the time of day? It’s
no wonder that many people seek a more meaningful
reason for living.
The concept of a god, with whom we will spend eternity
after  we  die,  is  somewhat  comforting,  though  the  idea  of
spending  an  inﬁnite  amount  of  time  in  perfect  happiness
does  sound  like  it  might  get  slightly  boring  after  a  while
(there  are  only  so  many  rounds  of  golf  you  can  play  in
which  you  and  your  playing  partners  score  twenty  under
par before the game gets tedious). But leaving these details
aside, the concept of an afterlife is especially appealing as
it provides an opportunity to meet loved ones who departed
life before you do.
As scientists we can mock such views for their naivety or
for their quaint anthropomorphic character (God as a wise
old  man  with  a  white  beard,  for  example).  However,  the

fact of the matter is that there are many profound
uncertainties about the nature of physical reality. We have
discussed  some  of  them  here.  How  can  scientists  dismiss
views about religion and spirituality when their own
theories are riddled with such deep uncertainties?
In science we insist on evidence and revise beliefs when
evidence shifts. In religion one is asked to have faith
without compelling evidence. From this point of view,
science and religion seem incompatible. However, it’s often
not as straightforward as this. Scientists and nonscientists
alike ponder the meaning of their lives. Are we just
irrelevant  random  ﬂuctuations  in  a  universe  destined  for
some bland heat death, or do our lives have some deeper
purpose?  Indeed,  could  we  collectively  play  an  important
role in the evolution of the universe? Science cannot
answer  these  questions  and  so  people  look  elsewhere  for
answers. With this in mind, perhaps the geometry of chaos
might also provide new insights into these questions and in
so  doing  might  help  bridge  the  rift  that  exists  between
science, spirituality and religion.
For  example,  in  the  cosmological  invariant  set  model,
there is an afterlife. We and our loved ones will be coming
back  in  future  epochs  of  the  universe  on  trajectories  in
state space close to the present one, but none precisely the
same as the present one. We will have an opportunity not to
make the same mistakes again. Equally, we will likely mess
up  some  of  the  successes  we  have  made  of  our  lives  this
time  round.  Perhaps  it  will  be  better  next  time  round,
perhaps  it  will  be  worse.  Who  knows?  That  makes  it  all
quite exciting and something to look forward to (arguably
much  more  exciting  than  a  future  of  perfect  bliss  and
happiness). For each epoch there will be such an afterlife:
there  is  no  ending  to  the  number  of  trajectories  on  the
cosmological invariant set.

Indeed, as someone who rejected the Catholic religion of
his childhood10, I tend in my more metaphysical moments
to  think  of  the  cosmological  invariant  set  as  a  logical
alternative to the god of my early years. Each point in the
set is a synthesis of everything that is, has been and will be,
indeed  of  everything  that  might  be,  might  have  been  and
could  be  in  the  future.  It  is  an  omniscient  structure:  it
knows which states of the universe are physically real and
which are not, even though we, constrained by the notion
of  algorithmic  decidability,  cannot  know  this.  In  addition,
the invariant set lies completely outside the constraints of
time: as an entity it is literally timeless11. Does the
invariant set listen if we pray to it? Well, our hopes,
aspirations and indeed prayers are part of the self-
referential  process  discussed  earlier  in  this  chapter,  the
process that gave us moral responsibility, so in some sense
the answer is yes.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the Lorenz attractor looks like a
butterﬂy. This is coincidentally apposite, as by studying this
attractor, Lorenz discovered the butterﬂy eﬀect. If we could
ﬁnally construct a picture of the global fractal geometry of
the cosmological invariant set, something I have not been
able to do, and indeed something that will not be possible
to do precisely because such a set is algorithmically
undecidable, 
what 
would 
it 
look 
like? 
Well, as 
a
multidimensional object it would have many diﬀerent
guises  depending  on  which  dimensions  in  state  space  we
decide  to  probe.  To  what  would  these  diﬀerent  guises
correspond?
Perhaps the multifaceted face of God?
It feels like an intriguing idea. But of course I have my
doubts.
...

Discover Your Next Great Read
Get sneak peeks, book recommendations, and news about
your favorite authors.
Tap here to learn more.
...

© DAVID FISHER
TIM PALMER is a Royal Society research professor in the
Department of Physics at the University of Oxford.
Following a PhD in general relativity theory, Palmer spent
much of his career working on the predictability and
dynamics of weather and climate, developing probabilistic
ensemble prediction systems across a range of weather and
climate timescales. For this work he was elected a fellow of
the  Royal  Society  and  an  international  member  of  the
United States National Academy of Sciences. He was also a
lead  author  for  the  IPCC  climate  assessment  reports.  In
addition,  Palmer  researches  the  foundations  of  quantum
physics and the role of noise and quantum processes in the
brain. For this he was elected a member of the
Foundational  Questions  Institute  and  the  Association  for
Mathematical Consciousness Science.
...
