Notes
Epigraphs
1. Feynman (1999).
2. Gleick (1992).
Author’s Note
1. In my ﬁrst year of graduate research, I was supervised
by one of Sciama’s earlier students, John Miller, who tried
to  get  me  interested  in  solving  the  equations  of  general
relativity by computer. At the time, ironic in the light of my
later  research  in  weather  and  climate,  this  didn’t  interest
me at all—I wanted to do something more theoretical. For
the remaining years of my graduate research, I was
supervised directly by Sciama.
2. My main contribution to general relativity theory was
the formulation of some of the ﬁrst quasi-local descriptions
of gravitational energy momentum in general space-times.
See Palmer (1978a, 1978b).
3. Isham et al. (1975).
4. Paltridge (1978).
5. Gleick (1987).
6. Palmer (1995).
7. Palem (2014).
8. Palmer (2015).
Introduction

1.  Who  was  this  woman  who  called  the  BBC  Weather
Centre?  It  seems  she  had  a  sister  living  in  France.  The
sister had been listening to the weather forecasts from the
French Weather Service, Météo-France. A few days before
the hurricane hit, Météo-France was warning of an
exceptional gale in the English Channel region. Then,
mysteriously, as the time got closer to the expected arrival
of  these  gales,  the  warnings  from  Météo-France  stopped.
What was going on? It was the butterﬂy eﬀect at work. For
all  its  sophisticated  use  of  supercomputers  and  satellite
technology, weather forecasting in the 1980s had not
embraced the concept of uncertainty. Like with the
astrologers, there were no attempts to estimate error bars
for the forecasts.
2.  BBC  News,  January  6,  2017:  Crash  was  economists’
“Michael 
Fish” 
moment, 
says 
Andy 
Haldane.
www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38525924.
3. Kay and King (2020).
4. 
Oxford 
Learner’s 
Dictionary, 
n.d.: 
doubt.
www.oxfordlearnersdiction
aries.com/deﬁnition/english/doubt_2.
Part I: The Science of Uncertainty
1. Stewart (1997).
Chapter 1: Chaos, Chaos Everywhere
1. To construct an ellipse, ﬁrst choose two ﬁxed points in
the  plane.  These  are  called  the  foci.  Then  the  ellipse  is
deﬁned as the set of points where the sum of the distances
between each point and the two foci is a ﬁxed constant.
2. Wikipedia, accessed February 8, 2022: Laplace’s
demon. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace%27s_demon.

3. For example, an ellipse can be deﬁned as the locus of
all points which satisfy the formulas x( t) = a cos t and y( t)
= b  sin t,  where  cos  and  sin  are  standard  trigonometric
functions.
4. Tardivel, S. (@simon_tardivel), January 10, 2020, 3:14
p.m.: 
Par 
exemple.… 
Twitter.
https://twitter.com/simon_tardivel/status/12157286590
10670594.
5. Tremaine, S., 2011: Is the solar system stable?
Institute 
for 
Advanced 
Study.
www.ias.edu/ideas/2011/tremaine-solar-system.
6. Indeed, in November 2021, NASA launched a mission
to deliberately strike an asteroid with a spacecraft to test
whether we can divert a small asteroid which might
otherwise hit Earth.
7. A ﬂuid can be a liquid or a gas.
8.  In  fact,  a  model  which  is  a  ﬁnite  truncation  of  the
Navier-Stokes equation will eventually repeat itself, unless
it is perturbed with random noise.
9. Lorenz (1993).
10.  “Angela”,  September  2020:  Chaotic  waterwheel  by
Harvard Natural Sciences Demonstration. Go Science Girls.
https://gosciencegirls.com/chaotic-waterwheel-harvard-
natural-sciences-lecture.
11. Lorenz (1963).
12. May (1976).
13. xn + 1 = axn(1 − xn). Here xn denotes the population
of the nth generation, “normalised” so that xn = 1 denotes
a  situation  where  the  population  is  as  large  as  it  can
possibly be given the ﬁnite environmental resources, and xn
= 0 denotes a situation where the population has crashed
to  zero.  The  number a  is  a  constant.  When a  >  3.57,  the
population  varies  chaotically  and  is  impossible  to  predict
for a long time ahead.

14. There is a ﬁeld called “quantum chaos” which tries
to understand how classical chaos can emerge from
quantum mechanics.
Chapter 2: The Geometry of Chaos
1. However, if we measure positions and velocities
relative  to  one  of  the  bodies  (e.g.,  the  sun),  that  reduces
the  dimension  of  state  space  to  12.  And  it  turns  out  that
there are various additional 
constraints 
implied by
Newton’s  laws  of  motion  which  reduce  the  dimension  of
state space to just 7.
2. Technically the state space of the Navier-Stokes
equation  is  inﬁnitely  dimensional.  However,  this  assumes
that scales can become inﬁnitesimally small. In practice the
Navier-Stokes equation would break down due to quantum
eﬀects  before  this  limit.  However,  even  if  we  assume  the
equation applies to only macroscopic non-quantum scales,
the  dimension  of  the  state  space  of  weather  could  be  as
large as 1050, certainly much, much larger than could ever
be represented explicitly in a weather model.
3. Actually, there is a subtlety here. If you use a
computer  to  solve  Lorenz’s  equations,  then  in  fact  the
trajectories  will  be  closed  1-dimensional  curves.  This  is
because on a computer, the states X, Y and Z are
represented by a ﬁnite number of binary digits, or bits, as
they  are  known  in  computer  science  jargon.  In  scientiﬁc
computation one typically represents variables like X, Y and
Z  with  64  bits.  With  this  ﬁnite  representation,  the  Lorenz
attractor will be a rather complicated closed 1-dimensional
curve.  If  instead  you  allow X, Y  and Z  to  be  represented
with 128 bits, the 1-dimensional curve will be longer before
it again joins up to be a closed 1-dimensional curve. Go to
256  bits  and  the  closed  curve  will  be  longer  still.  What
happens in the limit when we imagine a hypothetical

computer  where X, Y  and Z  can  be  represented  by  an
unlimited  number  of  bits?  Being  based  on  calculus,  the
mathematical 
forms 
of 
Lorenz’s 
equations 
do 
not
themselves put any restrictions on the number of bits used
to represent X, Y and Z.
4. Vallin (2013).
5.  The  so-called  Hausdorﬀ  dimension  is  equal  to  ln(2)/
ln(3) where ln denotes the logarithm to the natural base of
e. This is an irrational number.
6. Who got his inspiration from the work of L. F.
Richardson, who showed that the coastline of Britain
approximated well to a fractal—see Chapter 9.
7. Rössler (1976).
8. During World War II, Cambridge mathematicians Mary
Cartwright and J. L. Littlewood (the distinguished number
theorist)  had  found  hints  of  chaos  in  what  are  called  the
van 
der 
Pol 
oscillator 
equations. 
In 
1960, 
MIT
mathematician Norman Levinson had contacted celebrated
topologist  Steve  Smale  about  this,  since  it  appeared  to
contradict a conjecture of Smale’s about the behaviour of
dynamical systems. By way of clariﬁcation, Smale realised
that there may be dynamical systems exhibiting the type of
folding geometry described in Fig. 9. Smale’s fractal
construction  is  called  Smale’s  horseshoe.  However,  until
Lorenz,  Smale  did  not  know  of  speciﬁc  equations  which,
based  on  Newton’s  calculus,  would  generate  this  type  of
geometric structure.
9. Stewart (1997).
10. See Stewart (2000).
11. If dX/ dt = F[ X] is a nonlinear dynamical system, so
that F is at least quadratic in X, then the so-called Jacobian
operator ( dF/ dX)  in  the  linearised  form  of  the  dynamical
system dδ X/ dt = ( dF/ dX)δ X depends at least linearly on X.
In this way, the growth of small perturbations depends on
the initial conditions.

12. 
The 
Liouville 
equation 
for 
a 
time-reversible
Hamiltonian system can be written in the form ∂ϱ/ ∂
t = −
[ϱ, H] where [. . , . .] is the so-called Poisson bracket and H
the  Hamiltonian.  In  this  form  the  Liouville  equation  is
formally very similar to the Schrödinger equation of
quantum theory.
13. Epstein (1969).
14. Here a constant “forcing term”, C, has been added to
the original Lorenz equations, giving
dX/ dt = σ( Y − X) + C, dY/ dt = X(ρ − Z) − Y + C , dZ/ dt
= XY − β Z.
15. In pure mathematics, it is usually a prime number—a
whole number greater than 1 only divisible by itself and 1.
16. Technically, a 2-adic “integer”.
17. Technically, the 5-adic “integers”.
18. There are no integers X, Y and Z greater than 2, with
Xn + Yn = Zn.
19. Quarmyne, Nyani, June 28, 2016: The oracle of
arithmetic. 
Quanta 
Magazine.
www.quantamagazine.org/peter-scholze-and-the-future-of-
arith metic-geometry-20160628.
20. E.g., Penrose (1989).
21.  Penrose  (1989).  Some  have  argued  that  since  non-
computability concerns properties of inﬁnite sets, it should
play no role in physics. I disagree with this. Non-
computability can be thought of as a limiting case of ﬁnite
systems 
that 
are 
called 
computationally 
irreducible.
Computational irreducibility is a concept proposed by
Wolfram  (2002).  The  idea  is  that  you  can’t  fully  describe
the behaviour of a computationally irreducible system
using  a  computationally  simpler  model  of  that  system.  In
such  a  situation,  the  computationally  simpler  system  will
always be an incomplete representation of the full system.
Non-computability  can  be  thought  of  as  describing  the

incompleteness  of  a  system  whose  simpler  representation
is algorithmic but otherwise as complex as we like.
22. Penrose (1989).
23. Dube (1993).
24. Barnsley (2006).
25.  However,  Blum  et  al.  (1998)  were  able  to  show
directly that the problem of ﬁnding an algorithm which will
halt  if  a  chosen  point  in  state  space  lies  on  a  fractal
attractor, like the Lorenz attractor, is algorithmically
impossible.
Chapter 3: Noisy, Million-Dollar Butterﬂies
1.  Because  of  the  rotation  of  the  Earth,  Kolmogorov’s
theory has to be modiﬁed somewhat to describe large-scale
turbulence in the atmosphere.
2. Inspired by a satirical poem by Jonathan Swift about
the politics of his day.
3. Woollings (2019).
4. The Navier-Stokes equation is often referred to in the
plural,  i.e.,  as  “equations”.  However,  it’s  essentially  the
same  equation  for  each  of  three  diﬀerent  directions  in
physical space. For conceptual simplicity I will describe it
in the singular.
5. Lorenz (1969).
6. Palmer et al. (2014).
7. This means that the two horizontal sides have a size of
100  km.  The  vertical  side  of  the  volume  would  be  much
smaller than this, say 1 km.
8.  The  Navier-Stokes  equation  is  not  the  only  equation
you need to forecast the weather, but it is certainly central.
9.  The  process  of  using  observations  to  construct  the
initial 
state 
for 
a 
weather 
model 
is 
called 
“data
assimilation”. It is in fact a mathematically complex
procedure.

10.  In  fact,  a  doubling  of  resolution  in  this  way  will
typically take up to sixteen times more computing
resources: 
eight 
times 
because 
a 
volume 
is 
three
dimensional,  and  on  top  of  this  the  ﬁnite  time  steps  over
which  the  solution  is  calculated  have  to  be  reduced  to
prevent 
the 
model 
from 
becoming 
computationally
unstable.
11. 
Clay 
Mathematics 
Institute, 
n.d.: 
Millennium
problems. www.clay math.org/millennium-problems.
12.  One  problem,  the  famous  Riemann  hypothesis,  is
common to both lists.
13. Palmer (2019).
14. Palmer (2015).
15. Paxton et al. (2022).
16. Since writing this, I have discovered that a company
called  Graphcore  is  producing  a  computer  processor  with
just such a capability.
17. This eﬀect was ﬁrst described in Kwasniok (2014).
Chapter 4: Quantum Uncertainty: Reality Lost?
1. Indeed Richard Feynman said it was the only quantum
mystery,  though  not  all  quantum  foundations  researchers
agree with him on this (Catani et al., 2021).
2. Their square roots to be more precise.
3. 
Now 
discovered 
by 
the 
Laser 
Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO).
4.  That  is  to  say,  many  researchers  think  Einstein  was
referring 
to 
entanglement 
when 
complaining 
about
“spooky” quantum action-at-a-distance. This example shows
that this is not so.
5. Becker (2018).
6. Originally the experiment was done using silver atoms
with a single electron in their outer shell. It is much more
diﬀicult to do the experiment with free electrons. However,

for conceptual purposes, let’s imagine the particles are free
electrons.
7. 
We could 
hypothesise, 
for 
example, 
that 
the
intermediate  SGx  device  somehow  randomises  the  hidden
variables of the particles.
8. Bell (1993).
9.  The  European  Organization  for  Nuclear  Research,
home of the Large Hadron Collider.
10. Bell (1964).
11. Here is a proof of Bell’s inequality, taken from Rae
(1986).
Let n(+  ,  −,  .  )  denote  the  number  of  times  in  a  table,
like Table 2, that there is a + symbol in the ﬁrst row, a −
symbol  in  the  second  row,  and  either  symbol  in  the  third
row.  Similarly,  for  example,  let n(−,  .  ,  +)  denote  the
number of times there is a − symbol in the ﬁrst row, either
symbol in the second row, and a + symbol in the third row.
Generalising in an obvious way we have
A = n(+, +, . ) = n(+, +, +) + n(+, +, −)
B = n( . , −, +) = n(+, −, +) + n(−, −, +)
C = n(+, . , +) = n(+, +, +) + n(+, −, +)
Adding the ﬁrst two equations together we get
A + B = n(+, +, +) + n(+, +, −) + n(+, −, +) + n(−, −,
+)
Now  the  ﬁrst  and  third  terms  of  this  equation,  added
together, give C. Hence,
A + B = C + n(+, +, −) + n(−, −, +)
Since the last two terms are never negative
A + B ≥ C
QED.
12. In practice the experiment is performed with
photons. The SG devices correspond to photon polarisers.
13. For example, if a source sends out a red ball in one
direction and a blue ball in an opposite direction, and I see
the red ball coming towards me, then I will know for sure

that the blue ball is going away from me, even if I don’t see
it.
14. Clauser et al. (1969).
15. There is now an overwhelming body of experimental
results  on  the  violation  of  Bell’s  inequality,  starting  with
Clauser and Horne (1974) and Aspect et al. (1981).
Part II: Predicting Our Chaotic World
1.  Pyarelal,  1958: Mahatma  Gandhi:  The  Last  Phase.
Navajivan Publishing House.
2. Krebs et al. (2021).
Chapter 5: The Two Roads to Monte Carlo
1.  Oceans  also  typically  warm  less  at  the  surface  than
land because ocean eddies can mix heat from the sun down
to the subsurface much more eﬀectively than is possible on
land.
2. Credit also has to be given to Austrian meteorologist
Felix Exner, who also developed prediction schemes using
physically based models around this time.
3.  Peter  Lynch  once  sent  me  an  email  in  which  he  had
set the history of meteorology to verse. He asked for
further contributions. I sent him this about Lewis Fry
Richardson:
Although LFR was quite bright
Some said that his forecasts were sh*te.
Till Lynch went and built a
Smart digital ﬁlter
Which made the predictions just right!
in  the  hope  it  might  be  included  in  his  anthology.  Alas,  I
don’t  think  it  made  it  because  of  an  injudicious  choice  of
word in line two. I include it here as a way of

acknowledging Peter’s work in this area (Lynch and Huang
[1992]).
4. It is a sad fact that the main use of the most powerful
supercomputers today is nuclear weapons testing. I argue
later that these top-of-the-range supercomputers should be
dedicated to weather and climate prediction.
5.  I  can  recall  being  at  a  scientiﬁc  meeting  where  we
were discussing a recently discovered phenomenon: when
in  some  years  the  upwelling  got  stronger  than  normal
rather than weaker. We named this phenomenon the Anti–
El Niño event, until a colleague pointed out that if El Niño
stood for “the Christ Child”, then Anti–El Niño would
presumably stand for “the Antichrist Child”! After that, we
switched to the term “La Niña”, and the name has stuck.
6. Horel and Wallace (1981).
7.  On  the  other  hand,  with  Europe  so  far  from  the
tropical  Paciﬁc,  these  teleconnections  can  be  quite  noisy,
akin  to  trying  to  hear  someone  speaking  at  the  opposite
end of a room at a party full of noisy people.
8.  One  of  the  achievements  I  am  most  proud  of  during
this period was working with ﬂuid dynamicist Michael
McIntyre,  from  Cambridge,  and  discovering  the  largest
breaking  waves  in  the  atmosphere.  These  occur  in  the
northern  hemisphere  stratosphere  and  much  less  in  the
southern  hemisphere  stratosphere—due  primarily  to  the
diﬀerent distribution of mountains in the two hemispheres
—and  this  provides  an  explanation  of  why  the  ozone  hole
was  discovered  in  the  southern  hemisphere  and  not  the
northern hemisphere.
9. Shukla (1981).
10. Murphy and Palmer (1986).
11. From My Fair Lady, a 1964 movie based on a 1956
stage musical, itself based on George Bernard Shaw’s stage
play Pygmalion.
12.  The  development  of  this  system  was  the  work  of
many colleagues: see this book’s acknowledgements.

13.  There  is  always  a  chance  of  tossing  10  heads  in  a
row  with  a  coin  whose  heads  and  tails  are  equally  likely.
However, the more often this happens, the more likely it is
that the coin is biased.
14. Cane et al. (1986).
15. Palmer et al. (2004).
Chapter 6: Climate Change: Catastrophe or Just Lukewarm?
1. My thanks to Peter Webster for this suggestion.
2. Oreskes and Conway (2011).
3.  This  is  not  actually  the  mechanism  that  makes  air
inside  a  greenhouse  warm.  There  the  sun  shines  through
the glass and warms the ground, which heats the air. The
glass is a physical barrier preventing the currents of warm
air  from  escaping  from  the  greenhouse.  But  the  term  has
stuck, so we have to live with it.
4. Detecting photons in what would be called the
broadband infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum.
5. Atmospheric circulations, e.g., in the form of
thunderstorm clouds, help adjust the surface temperature
to the greenhouse gas warming aloft.
6.  A  typical  column  of  air  might  contain  about  2.5  mm
(0.10  inches)  of  water  vapour,  but  only  0.1  mm  (0.004
inches) of cloud liquid or ice water.
7.  Such  a  negative  cloud  feedback  eﬀect,  because  it
cools  the  surface  but  warms  the  mid-atmosphere,  could
have an undesirable eﬀect on the hydrological cycle, i.e., on
rainfall around the world.
8. Though the relationship between the degree of
subsidence and depth and extent of cloud amount is
complex. See van der Dussen, J. J., S. R. de Roode and A. P.
Siebesma, 2016: How large-scale subsidence aﬀects
stratocumulus transitions. 
Atmospheric Chemistry and
Physics, 16, 691–701. doi: 10.5194/acp-16-691-2016.

9.  Since  the  strength  of  the  Walker  circulation  also
depends on sea surface temperature in the tropical Paciﬁc,
knowing how marine stratocumulus clouds react to
increasing greenhouse gases also depends on how the
tropical Paciﬁc Ocean reacts to increasing greenhouse
gases. Climate is a very interactive system.
10.  Suki  Manabe  won  the  Nobel  Physics  prize,  along
with fellow climatologist Klaus Hasselmann, in 2021. It was
a  great  moment  for  climate  scientists  like  me  to  see  our
ﬁeld recognised as part of mainstream physics.
11. Manabe and Wetherald (1975).
12. The warming values illustrated are those that arise
in  the  models  when  the  climate  system  has  come  into
balance  with  the  extra  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in  the
atmosphere.
13.  See  Zelinka,  M.,  April  2,  2021:  Eﬀective  climate
sensitivity. 
Github.
https://github.com/mzelinka/cmip56_forcing_feedback_ecs/
blob/master/ECS6_histogram_gavin1.pdf.
14. Roe and Baker (2007).
15. It is “fat” compared with a Gaussian or Bell-shaped
probability distribution.
16.  Although  my  curve  suggests  substantial  non-zero
probabilistic values greater than 6°C (10.8°F), such values
are  not  supported  by  paleoclimatic  data  from  the  distant
past and should likely be discounted.
17. Mandelbrot (2008).
18. See Roe and Baker (2007). There are other feedback
eﬀects which I have not discussed here. However, the most
important is the cloud feedback.
19. And the related eﬀect of aerosols.
20. These scenarios take other factors into account, like
changes in land use and in aerosol emissions.
21. Hausfather et al. (2020).
22. Dockrill, P., November 5, 2015: Middle East may be
uninhabitable this century due to deadly heat, study ﬁnds.

Science Alert. www.sciencealert.com/middle-east-may-be-
uninhabitable-this-century-due-to-deadly-heat -study-ﬁnds.
23. The polewards shift of the jet streams is predicted by
many contemporary climate models, but is one of the
regional  predictions  about  which  we  are  not  completely
conﬁdent. I discuss the need for developing much- higher-
resolution models later in the chapter.
24. It’s not a priori obvious that increased carbon
dioxide concentrations will make such heatwaves more or
less 
likely. 
Although 
increased 
carbon 
dioxide
concentrations  will  warm  the  air,  they  could  conceivably
make  the  circulation  patterns  that  lead  to  heatwaves  less
likely. This is one reason why it is vital to develop reliable
physics-based models to study such questions.
25. Allen, M., 2003: Liability for climate change. Nature,
421, 891–892. www.nature.com/articles/421891a.
26.  Currently  we  put  more  computing  resources  into
simulating  nuclear  weapons  than  we  do  into  simulating
climate change.
27. A phenomenon called Rayleigh-Bénard convection.
28. Palmer and Stevens (2019).
29. Turing (1950).
30.  Of  course,  we  should  coarse-grain  the  real-world
data  onto  gridboxes  the  same  size  as  the  model  before
doing the comparison.
31.  National  Academies  of  Sciences,  Engineering,  and
Medicine, 2021: Reﬂecting sunlight: Recommendations for
solar  geoengineering  research  and  research  governance.
The 
National 
Academies 
Press.
www.nap.edu/catalog/25762/reﬂecting-sunlight-
recommendations-for-solar-geoenginee 
ring-research-and-
research-governance.
32.  Hossenfelder,  S.,  and  T.  Palmer,  December  9,  2021:
An international institute will help us manage climate
change. 
Scientiﬁc 
American.

www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/an-international-
institute-will-help-us -manage-climate-change.
33.  Deser,  C.,  2020:  Certain  uncertainty:  The  role  of
internal climate variability in projections of regional
climate  change  and  risk  management. Earth’s  Future,  8.
doi: 10.1029/2020EF001854.
Chapter 7: Pandemics
1. Barabási (2016).
2. Mandelbrot (2008).
3. Herrmann and Schwartz (2020).
4.  MRC  Centre  for  Global  Infectious  Disease  Analysis,
July 
19, 
2021: 
Eﬀective 
climate 
sensitivity. Github.
https://github.com/mrc-ide/covid-sim.
5. Edeling et al. (2021).
6.  In  writing  this  book,  I  was  told  that  in  some  circles,
the  words  “doubt”  and  “ignorance”  tend  to  go  hand  in
hand. I tend to think of ignorance as a blanket term for a
complete lack of knowledge. However, that is not the way it
is used in epistemological philosophy, and that the
Rumsfeld quote is a way to distinguish “recognised
ignorance” (known unknowns) from “total ignorance”
(unknown unknowns).
7. Edeling et al. (2021).
8.  Based  on  models  from  Imperial  College,  the  London
School  of  Hygiene  and  Tropical  Medicine,  and  Warwick
University.
9.  Cramer,  E.  Y.,  E.  L.  Ray,  V.  K.  Lopez,  J.  Bracher,  A.
Brennen et al., 2021: Evaluation of individual and ensemble
probabilistic  forecasts  of  COVID-19  mortality  in  the  US.
medRXiv.
www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.03.21250974v1.
10. Vallance, P., December 23, 2021: It’s not true Covid
modellers look only at worst outcomes. 
The Times.

www.thetimes.co.uk/article/its 
-not-true-covid-modellers-
look-only-at-worst-outcomes-5c9pcpdwr.
11. Maher, M. C., et al., January 11, 2022: Predicting the
mutational drivers of future SARS-CoV-2 variants of
concern. 
Science 
Translational 
Medicine. 
doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.abk3445.
Chapter 8: Financial Crashes
1.  BBC  News,  January  6,  2017:  Crash  was  economists’
“Michael 
Fish” 
moment, 
says 
Andy 
Haldane.
www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38525924.
2. Kay and King (2020).
3.  Bank  of  England,  November  2021:  Bank  of  England
monetary 
policy 
report.
www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/ﬁles/monetary-
policy-report/2021/november/monetary-policy-report-
november-2021.pdf.
4. Gabaix et al. (2008).
5. Gleick (1987).
6. Hossenfelder (2018).
7. Bookstaber (2017).
8. Thurner et al. (2012).
9. Emergent properties from Sabuco’s agent-based
model resemble those of the so-called Goodwin class
struggle model of endogenous economic ﬂuctuations.
10. Poledna et al. (2020).
11. Gill et al. (2021).
12. Indeed, perhaps things are changing. In 2018 Andy
Haldane  published  a  paper  (Haldane  and  Turrell  [2018])
assessing  the  value  of  agent-based  models.  He  and  his
coauthor 
concluded 
that 
agent-based 
models 
are
complementary  to  existing  approaches  and  are  suited  to
answering macroeconomic questions where complexity,

heterogeneity,  networks  and  heuristics  play  an  important
role.
Chapter 9: Deadly Conﬂict and the Digital Ensemble of
Spaceship Earth
1.  Department  of  Peace  and  Conﬂict  Research,  n.d.:
ViEWS: A political violence early-warning system. Uppsala
University. www.pcr.uu.se/research/views.
2.  Ferguson,  S.,  April  14,  2020:  Apollo  13:  The  ﬁrst
digital 
twin. 
Siemens 
Blog.
https://blogs.sw.siemens.com/simcenter/apollo-13-the-ﬁrst-
digital-twin.
3. Dasgupta, S. P., 2021: Final report—The economics of
biodiversity: 
The 
Dasgupta 
review. 
HM 
Treasury.
www.gov.uk/government/publications/ﬁnal-report-the-
economics-of-biodiversity-the-dasgupta-review.
4. European Commission, last updated February 1, 2022:
Destination 
earth. 
https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/destination-earth.
5.  The  UK  decided  not  to  contribute  to  Digital  Europe,
the European Commission’s programme which funds
DestinE, after leaving the EU.
Chapter 10: Decisions! Decisions!
1. The value averaged over all cost-loss ratios is equal to
a common skill score used to evaluate probability forecasts:
the so-called Brier skill score.
2. Cyclone Bhola in 1970.
3. His book (Webster [2020]) is a masterpiece.
4. President John. F. Kennedy created the United States
Agency for International Development to lead the US
government’s international development and humanitarian
eﬀorts.

5. Webster et al. (2010).
6. Lovelock (2006).
7. See Stern (2015).
8. Viscusi (2018).
9. This would actually translate to a VSL less than $10
million in the US.
10.  Committee  on  Climate  Change  6th  Budget  Report
(2021).
11.  Although  the  price  of  solar  and  wind  power  has
dropped and will likely continue to drop, these sources of
energy are subject to the vagaries of weather. Of particular
relevance in the UK are the persistent high-pressure
systems which can form over northern Europe and last for
weeks,  or  even  months.  At  the  time  of  writing,  the  wind
turbines  in  the  North  Sea  have,  for  many  months,  been
producing signiﬁcantly less electricity than expected due to
a  “wind  drought”  caused  by  such  persistent  atmospheric
high pressure. This has in part contributed to a big
increase in the price of gas. Although the current spell of
weak winds is surely temporary, we cannot be certain that
these wind droughts won’t get more frequent in the future
due to climate change (as part of a phenomenon known as
“global 
stilling”)—such 
uncertainty 
is 
due 
to 
the
inadequacy  of  current-generation  climate  models  on  the
regional scale, as discussed in Chapter 6. For this reason,
an over-reliance on wind energy is fraught with risk. Such
risk can be mitigated by developing plentiful energy
storage capability, and one idea being considered is storing
hydrogen in underground caverns. However, we will need
plentiful hydrogen to decarbonise transport, home heating
and industry (e.g., cement manufacture), and diverting
hydrogen to storage may end up meaning we do not have
enough capacity in total. For this reason, I am personally in
favour of a much stronger role for modern nuclear energy
in  the  renewable  mix,  even  though  at  present  nuclear
power is more expensive than wind and solar. In fact, the

high  temperatures  produced  by  nuclear  reactors  can  be
used  to  coproduce  hydrogen  along  with  electricity.  At  the
time of writing, China is about to switch on a new type of
nuclear reactor based on the thorium cycle. Thorium-based
reactors  have  few  of  the  disadvantages  of  the  traditional
uranium (U235) reactors. Putting all this together, the
estimate  that  decarbonisation  will  cost  only  1  percent  of
GDP  may  turn  out  to  be  an  underestimate.  However,  this
does  not  undermine  the  conclusion  that,  based  on  a  cost-
loss analysis based on VSL, decarbonisation is worth it.
12. Palmer (2020a).
Part III: Understanding the Chaotic Universe and Our Place in
It
1. Penrose (1997).
2. Turing (1947).
Chapter 11: Quantum Uncertainty: Reality Regained?
1.  Another  possibility,  discussed  further  ahead,  is  that
the theory of general relativity needs a little modiﬁcation.
2. Wikipedia, accessed February 20, 2022: Cosmological
constant.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmological_constant.
3.  In  practice  it  can  be  assumed  that  there  is  another
term  in  Einstein’s  ﬁeld  equations  for  general  relativity,
known  as  the  cosmological  constant,  that  almost  but  not
quite  cancels  this  quantum  acceleration.  Although  adding
the cosmological constant might technically solve this
seeming incompatibility of dark energy and quantum
mechanics, it leaves a feeling that something isn’t right.
4. At the very end of his paper “Free Variables and Local
Causality”  (collected  in  Bell  [1993]),  John  Bell  writes,  “Of

course it might be that these reasonable ideas about
physical  randomisers  are  just  wrong—for  the  purpose  at
hand.  A  theory  may  appear  in  which  such  conspiracies
inevitably  occur,  and  these  conspiracies  may  then  seem
more  digestible  than  the  nonlocalities  of  other  theories.
When that theory is announced, I will not refuse to listen,
either on methodological or other grounds.” Sadly, Bell was
not able to listen when my paper (2020b) was published; he
died  in  1990.  How  I  would  have  liked  to  discuss  this
material with him.
5. Pearl (2009).
6. Hossenfelder and Palmer (2020).
7. Tsirelson wrote about Bell’s inequality in the
“Counterfactual deﬁniteness” section of a Knowino article
titled 
“Entanglement 
(Physics)”:
www.tau.ac.il/~tsirel/dump/Static/knowino.org/wiki/Entangl
ement_(physics).html#Counterfactual_deﬁniteness.
8. Bohm and Hiley (1993).
9. Like the Lorenz attractor, I assume, the cosmological
attractor  lies  in  a  bounded  region  of  cosmological  state
space.
10. This is a mathematical way of saying that if a state
lies on the attractor now, then the evolved state will always
lie on the attractor in the future, and has always lain on the
attractor in the past. Conversely, if a putative state does not
lie on the attractor now, then it will never lie on it in the
future, and has never lain on it in the past. In this sense the
points  of  the  attractor  are  invariant  under  the  dynamical
laws which evolve states from one time to another.
11. It is for this reason my model is not “ﬁne-tuned”, an
objection sometimes raised about this model.
12. Palmer (1995, 2009, 2020b, 2021, 2022).
13. Curiously, it becomes a double helix if one includes
antimatter eﬀects.
14. I will describe some of the key ideas in this footnote.
Whether we are discussing Bell’s experiment or a

sequential  SG  experiment  with  three  SG  devices,  we  are
dealing  with  look-up  tables  with  three  directions  which  I
will write as “1”, “2” and “3”. These three directions can be
represented  by  three  points  on  the  celestial  sphere  (the
sphere  on  which  the  ancients  used  to  think  the  stars  all
lay).  Consider  the  spherical  triangle  whose  vertices  are
these three points. In invariant set theory, the angle
between  two  arcs  of  such  a  triangle  must  be  a  rational
angle of the form ( n/ p) × 360°. In addition, the cosine of
the  angular  arc  length  of  any  of  the  sides  of  this  triangle
must be a rational number of the form m/ p. Here, m, n and
p  are  all  whole  numbers,  and  cosine  is  the  elementary
trigonometric  function  taught  in  high  school.  It  turns  out
that, using the so-called cosine rule for spherical triangles,
together  with  Niven’s  theorem  from  number  theory,  it  is
impossible to satisfy these conditions for such triangles if p
is a prime number greater than 11. The situation is similar
to  Penrose’s  “impossible”  triangle—the  tribar.  That  is  to
say, it is possible to implement the constraints of invariant
set  theory  for  any  two  sides  of  the  spherical  triangle,  but
not the full three.
In  the  case  of  Bell’s  experiment,  this  has  the  following
implications. Suppose Alice measures her particle’s spin in
the 1 direction and Bob measures his particle’s spin in the
2  direction.  By  requiring  that  the  cosine  of  the  angular
distance  between  the  1  vertex  and  the  2  vertex  of  our
spherical triangle be rational—no problem with that—Alice
can deduce that had she measured her particle in Bob’s 2
direction,  the  spin  would  have  been  the  opposite  to  what
Bob observed. So far so good. In addition, Bob can assert
counterfactually that although he actually chose the 2
direction, he might have chosen the 3 direction. This
assertion requires the cosine of the angular distance
between  the  2  and  3  vertices  to  be  rational.  Again,  no
problem with that. But now Niven’s theorem kicks in to say
that the cosine of the angular distance between the 1 and 3

vertices—of the third side of the triangle—cannot be
rational. This means that Alice cannot deduce that had she
measured her particle in Bob’s counterfactual 3 direction,
she would have got the opposite result to Bob’s. Following
the logic of this is a bit of a mental stretch, but it implies
that  it  is  impossible  for  Alice  and  Bob’s  particles  to  have
complete 
look-up tables 
for 
all 
three 
measurement
directions. And without complete look-up tables, it is
impossible  to  assert  that  invariant  set  theory  must  satisfy
Bell’s inequality, even though invariant set theory is
deterministic and locally causal.
In the case of the sequential SG experiment, the
“impossible triangle” rule means that a counterfactual
experiment  in  which  we  reverse  the  order  of  the  last  two
SG devices (keeping the particle ﬁxed) similarly cannot lie
on the invariant set. The latter situation illustrates what in
quantum mechanics is called the non-commutativity of spin.
It means that we cannot treat the individual SG devices as
single independent apparatuses.
See Palmer (2022) for more details.
15.  And  so,  as  Galileo  said,  the  language  of  nature  is
written in the geometry of triangles.
16. Making use of number-theoretic properties of
trigonometric functions, c.f., Niven’s theorem.
17.  In  ancient  Chinese  philosophy,  yin  and  yang  is  a
concept that describes how obviously opposite or contrary
forces may actually be complementary, interconnected and
interdependent  in  the  natural  world,  and  how  they  may
give  rise  to  each  other  as  they  interrelate  to  one  another
(from  Wikipedia,  accessed  April  3,  2022:  Yin  and  yang.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yin_and_yang).
18. At least until the trajectories decohere by the
process illustrated in Fig. 44c.
19. Hance et al. (2021).
20. A crucial question is, What actually is the numerical
value  of p?  There  are  good  reasons  to  suppose 
p  will

depend on the energy, E, of the quantum bits (qubits) being
described.  For  example,  if  each  qubit  is  associated  with
some 
energy, 
E, 
then, 
using 
the 
Planck-Einstein
relationship E = hυ, where h is Planck’s constant, we can
naturally  associate  a  timescale h/ E  with  that  qubit.  My
proposal is that the dimensionless number p (for that qubit,
and hence for the helix in that subset of state space) is the
ratio h/ E to the Planck time √hG/ c5 where G is the
gravitational constant and c is the speed of light. This has
two consequences: 1) The larger is E the smaller is p. That
is to say, the more energetic they are, the fewer the qubits
can  be  entangled  together  before  they  become  inherently
decoherent.  2)  The  larger  is G  the  smaller  is p,  i.e.,  the
stronger is gravity, the fewer the qubits that can be
entangled 
together 
before 
they 
become 
inherently
decoherent. This means that my proposal for decoherence
(when the number of entangled qubits exceeds the
logarithm  to  base  2  of p)  will  broadly  coincide  with  the
Penrose/Díosi 
criterion 
for 
gravitationally 
induced
decoherence. This makes sense if gravity is a manifestation
of  the  heterogeneity  of  the  invariant  set  geometry.  For
example,  if  heterogeneous  clustering  is  very  weak,  you
would  need  a  very  large  number  of  trajectory  segments
(large p)  to  diagnose  the  existence  of  discrete  clusters.
Conversely,  if  clustering  is  very  strong,  you  would  see  it
with relatively few trajectories (small p).
21. Steinhardt and Turok (2007).
22. Penrose (2010).
23.  Wood,  C.,  December  13,  2021:  Cosmologists  parry
attacks on the vaunted cosmological principle. Quanta
Magazine. www.quantamagazine.org/giant-arc-of-galaxies-
puts-basic-cosmology-under-scrutiny-20211213.
24. Colin et al. (2019).
25. Corresponding to a “Janus point” in the language of
Julian Barbour—see Barbour (2020).

26. See, e.g., Penrose (2004).
27. Palmer (2017).
Chapter 12: Our Noisy Brains
1. What you do is write 2
b2 = a2 and deduce from this
that a2 is an even number and hence a is an even number—
if a was odd, then its square would be odd. This means we
can write a  =  2c,  and  substituting  into  2b2 =  a2  one  can
deduce that b must be an even number. But this contradicts
the assumption that a and b have no common factors, and
hence the original assumption is false.
2. Poincaré (1904).
3.  Nobel  Prize  Outreach,  accessed  February  19,  2022:
Roger 
Penrose—Interview. 
The 
Nobel 
Prize.
www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2020/pen
rose/interview.
4. Singh (1997).
5. Cleese (2021).
6. Kahneman (2011).
7. Claxton (1998).
8. Faisal et al. (2008); Rolls and Deco (2010); Palmer and
O’Shea (2015).
9. Liewald et al. (2014).
10.  And  perhaps  abductive  reasoning  too:  Wikipedia,
accessed 
February 
20, 
2022: 
Abductive 
reasoning.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abductive_reasoning.
11. Penrose (1989).
12. Turing (1950).
13. Shepherd et al. (2018).
Chapter 13: Free Will, Consciousness and God
1. Summhammer et al. (2018).

2. Wikipedia, accessed February 19, 2022: Quantum
supremacy.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_supremacy.
3. Wikipedia, accessed February 19, 2022: Orchestrated
objective 
reduction.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orchestrated_objective_reduct
ion.
4. See Kane (2002).
5. van Inwagen (2002).
6. Dennett (2002).
7.  These  would  be p-adic  neighbourhoods  as  shown  in
Fig. 44.
8. Pearl (2009).
9.  Wikipedia,  accessed  February  19,  2022:  Integrated
information 
theory.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_information_theory
.
10. I was taught by Jesuits. I still recall being taught one
of their proofs of God. “Hands up, those who have been to
Australia,”  said  the  priest.  No  one  put  their  hand  up.
“Hands up, those who doubt the existence of Australia.” No
one  put  their  hand  up.  “There  you  are,”  concluded  the
priest. “You do not physically need to experience something
to believe in it.” If any Jesuits read my book, even though
they  won’t  agree  with  my  comments  about  God,  they  will
probably recognise the type of logic I have employed in the
book. In this respect, their teaching style has rather
profoundly rubbed oﬀ on me.
11. As is the so-called Wheeler-DeWitt equation for
quantum cosmology.
...
