



Contents Title Page Contents Copyright Dedication Memos from Howard Marks Introduction Why StudyCycles? The Nature of Cycles The Regularity of Cycles The Economic Cycle Government Involvement with the Economic Cycle The Cyclein Profits The Pendulum of Investor Psychology The Cyclein Attitudes toward Risk The Credit Cycle The Distressed Debt Cycle The Real EstateCycle Putting It All Together—The Market Cycle How to Cope with Market Cycles CyclePositioning Limits on Coping The Cyclein Success The Future of Cycles The Essence of Cycles Index Aboutthe Author Connect with HMH

This book presentsthe ideas of its author. It is not intended to be financial professional. The publisher and the author disclaim liability for any directly or indirectly from information contained in this book. Copyright © 2018 by HowardMarks All rights reserved For information about permission to reproduce selections from this boo trade.permissions@hmhco.com or to Permissions, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Park Avenue, 19th Floor, New York, New York 10016. hmhco.com Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Marks, HowardS., author. Title: Mastering the market cycle : getting the odds on your side / Description: Boston : Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2018. | Includes index. | 2018006867 (print) | LCCN 2018008133 (ebook) | ISBN 9781328480569(ebook) | 9781328479259(hardback) Subjects: LCSH: Investments. | Finance, Personal. | BISAC:BUSINESS & Finance/ Investing. Classification: LCC HG4521 (ebook) | LCC HG4521 .M32142018 (print) | D LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018006867 All graphs courtesy of the author Cover design by Mark R. Robinson Author photograph © Peter Murphy v2.0918

With All My Love to Nancy Jane, Justin, Rosie and Sam Andrew and Rachel

“When I see memos from Howard Marks in my mail, they’re the firstthing I open and read. I always learn something.” —Warren Buffett To access the full archive of memos and videos from Howard Marks, please visit www.oaktreecapital.com/insights.

INTRODUCTION Seven years ago I wrote a book calledThe Most Important Thing: Uncommon Sense for the Thoughtful Investor, regarding whereinvestors should direct their greatest attention. In it I said “the most impo being attentive to cycles.” The truth, however, is that I applied most important thing” to nineteen other thingsas well. Thereis no most important thing in investing. Everyone of the twenty elements discussed in The Most Important Thingis absolutely essential for anyo wishes to be a successful investor. VinceLombardi, the legendary coachof the GreenBay Packers, is fam for having said, “winning isn’t everything, it’s the only thing.” I’ve been able to figureout what Lombardi actually meantby that statement, there’s no doubt he considered winning the most important thing. Likew can’t say an understanding of cycles is everything in investing, thing, but for me it’s certainly right near the top of the list. Most of the great investors I’ve known over the years have had an exceptional sense for how cycles work in general and wherewe stand current one. That sense permits them to do a superior job of portfolios for what lies ahead. Good cycle timing—combined with an effective investment approach and the involvement of exceptional peop —hasaccounted for the vast bulk of the success of my firm, Oakt Management. It’s for that reason—and because I find something particularly int about the fluctuations of cycles—and because wherewe stand in the one of the thingsmy clients ask about most—and finally because been written about the essential nature of cycles—that I decid Most Important Thingwith a book devoted entirely to an exploration cycles. I hope you’llfind it of use. ∾ Some patterns and events recur regularly in our environment, influ behavior and our lives. The winter is colder and snowier than and the daytime is lighter than the night. Thus we plan ski trips

and sailing trips for the summer, and our work and recreation for and our sleeping at night. We turn on the lights as evening draw turn them off when we go to bed. We unpack our warm coats as approaches and our bathing suits for the summer. Whilesome people the oceanin winter for exhilarationand some elect to work the night free up their days, the vast majority of us follow the normal patterns, making everyday life easier. We humans use our ability to recognize and understand patterns our decisions easier, increase benefits and avoid pain. Importantly, on our knowledge of recurring patterns so we won’thave to recon decision from scratch. We know hurricanes are more likely in September, we avoid the Caribbean at that time of year. We New Yorkers sched visits to Miami and Phoenix for the winter months, when the differential is a positive, not a negative. And we don’t have to in January and decide anew whether to dress for warmth or Economies, companies and markets also operate pursuant to patterns. of these patterns are commonly calledcycles. They arise from naturally occurring phenomena but, importantly,also from the ups and downs of human psychology and from the resultant human behavior. Because psychology and behavior play such a big part in creating them, these aren’tas regular as the cycles of clock and calendar, but they better and worsetimes for certain actions. And they can profoundly affec investors. If we pay attention to cycles, we can come out ahead past cycles, understand their origins and import, and keep alert for one, we don’t have to reinvent the wheelin order to understand every investment environment anew.And we have less of a chance of blindsided by events. We can master these recurring patterns for betterment. ∾ It’s my primary message that we should pay attention to cycle should say “listen to them.” Dictionary.com supplies two close distinct definitions for the word “listen.” The first is “to attendclose purpose of hearing.” The second is “to heed.” Both definitions what I’m writing about. In order to properly position a portfolio for what’s going on environment—and for what that implies regarding the futureof the the investor has to maintain a high level of attention. Events to everyone who is operating in a given environment. But not to them equally in the sense of paying attention, being awareof thus potentially figuring out their import.

And certainly not everyone heeds equally. By “heed” I mean “o mind, be guided by or take to heart.” Or, in other words, and follow its dictates.” Perhaps I can better convey this “heed listening by listing its antonyms: ignore, disregard, discount, rejec neglect, shun, flout, disobey, tune out, turn a deaf ear to, or be Invariably, investors who disregard wherethey stand in cycles are boun sufferserious consequences. In order to get the most out of this book—and do the best job with cycles—an investor has to learn to recognize cycles, assessthem for the instructions they imply, and do what they tell him to do. author’s note belowregarding my use of male pronouns.) If an inves in this sense,he will be able to convert cycles from a wild, force that wreaks havoc, into a phenomenon that can be unde advantage of: a vein that can be mined for significant outperform ∾ A winning investment philosophy can be created only through the combination of a number of essential elements: A technical education in accounting, finance and economics provid foundation: necessary but far from sufficient. A view on how markets work is important—you should have you set out to invest, but it must be addedto, questioned, reshaped as you proceed. Some of your initialviewswill come from what you’ve read, so readin is an essential building block. Continuing to read will enable increase the efficacy of your approach—both embracing those ideas find appealing and discarding those you don’t.Importantly, it’s great read outside the strict boundaries of investing. Legendary investor Charlie Munger often pointsto the benefits of reading broadl and processes in other fields can add greatly to effective invest approaches and decisions. Exchangingideas with fellow investors can be an invaluable source growth. Giventhe non-scientific nature of investing, there’s thing as being finished with your learning, and no individual has monopoly on insight. Investing can be solitary, but I think practice it in solitude are missing a lot, both intellectually interpersonally. Finally, there really is no substitute for experience. Everyyear I come to view investing differently, and every cycle I’ve lived through has taught me something about how to cope with the next one. recommend a long careerand see no reason to stop any time

Writing my bookshas given me a wonderful vehicle for acknowl people who have contributed to my investment insight and the textu working life. I’ve gained a great deal from reading the work of Peter Bernst Kenneth Galbraith, Nassim Nicholas Taleb and Charlie Ellis. I’ve continued to pick up pointers from the people I cited Important Thingand others, including Seth Klarman, Charlie Mung Warren Buffett, BruceNewberg, Michael Milken, Jacob Rothschild, Todd Combs, RogerAltman, Joel Greenblatt, Peter Kaufman and Doug Kass. And since Nancy and I moved to New York in 2013 kids, I’ve been fortunate to add OscarSchafer, Jim Tisch and Ajit this circle. Each of these people’s way of looking at things mine. Finally I want to returnto the most important collaborators, co-founders: BruceKarsh, Sheldon Stone, Richard Masson Keele. They honored me by adopting my philosophy as the for Oaktree’s investment approach; applied it skillfully (and thus recognition for it); and helped me add to it over the thirtywe’vebeen associated. As indicated in what follows, Bruceand I exchanged ideas and backed each other up almost daily over that and my give-and-take with him—especially in the most difficult —hasplayed a particularly indispensable part in the developmen approach to cycles on whichthis book is based. I also want to thank the people who played important parts in creation: my talented editorat HMH, Rick Wolff; my resourceful Levine, who brought me to Rick; my great friendKarenMack Goldsmith, who pushed me at every turn to make the book more appealing; and highly supportive long-time assistant, Caroline Heald. I particularly cite Prof. Randy Kroszner of the University of Chicago’s BoothScho helped out by reviewing the chapters on the economic cycle and interventionwith it. ∾ Since knowledge is cumulative but we never know it all, I look forw learning more in the years ahead. In investing, there is nothing works, since the environment is always changing, and investors’ respond to the environment cause it to change further. Thus thingsin the futurethat I don’t know now, and I look forward to in memos and booksyet to come.

Author’snotes: 1. As I did in The Most Important Thing, I want to issue apology for my consistent use of male pronouns. It can be habit for someone who started to write more than sixty years ago. it much easierand more attractive to write “he” than “he/she.” Alternating between “he” and “she” seemsforced. And I dislike of “they” when the subject is a singleperson. The exce I’ve been privileged to work with over the course of my caree absolutely think every bit as much of them as professionals and investors as I do their male counterparts. 2. Also as in The Most Important Thing, in order to make my will borrow from time to time from the client memos I’ve writt the years starting in 1990. I will also borrow from my first could go to the trouble of reinventing the wheeland writing subjects anew,but I won’t. Instead, I’ll lift key passages and memos that I think make their point clearly. I hope my won’tmake those who buy this book feel they’ve received less than their money’s worth. In order to advance the purposes of this book, I will occa few wordsto or deletea few from the passages I cite, or paragraphs in an order different from that in whichthey appeared original. Since they’re my passages, I think it’s okay to do noting it in every case. But I do it only to increase to alter their meaning or make them more correct with the bene hindsight. 3. And finally as in The Most Important Thing, I’ll be deali topic that—like investing in general—is complex and involves elements that overlap and can’t be neatlysegregated into discrete chapters. Since some of those elements are touched on in mult places, you’lllikewise find some instances of repetition whereI noteworthy quotations from othersor citations from my book and memos that I can’t resist using more than once. 4. Please note that when I talk about “investing,”I’ll assume the is buying, holding or, as we say, “being long” in the certain assetswill appreciate. This is as opposed to selling securities that one doesn’t own in the hope they’ll decline. aren’talways “long” ratherthan “short,” but most of the time The number of people who sell stocks short or ever get that is, whose short positions have a total value exceeding that stocks they own—is tiny relative to those who don’t.Thus, in

I’m going to speak exclusively about investing in thingsbecause they’re expected to rise, not selling assetsshort in the hope 5. Lastly, whereas I first conceived of this book as being just cycles, as I wrote I came up with ideas on lots of other asset selection and “catching falling knives.” Rather than disca I’ve included them, too. I hope you’llbe glad they’re here: prov bonusratherthan straying from the mission.

I WHY STUDYCYCLES? The odds change as our position in the cycles changes. I change our investment stance as these thingschange, we’re being passive regarding cycles; in other words, we’re ignoring the c tilt the odds in our favor.But if we apply some insight regardi cycles, we can increase our bets and place them on more aggress investmentswhen the odds are in our favor,and we can take money off the table and increase our defensiveness when the odds are a us. Investing is a matter of preparing for the financial future. define the task: we assemble portfolios today that we hope will bene the events that unfold in the years ahead. For professionalinvestors, success consists of doing this better than the average investor, or outperforming an assigned market benchmark performance of whichis determined by the actions of all the But achieving that kind of success is no small challenge: although easy to generate average investment performance, it’s quite hard to aboveaverage. One of the most important foundational elements of my investme philosophy is my conviction that we can’t know what the “macro futur in store for us in terms of thingslike economies, markets or geop put it more precisely, few people are able on balance to know macro futurethan others. And it’s only if we know more than other that consists of having better data; doing a superior job of interp we have; knowing what actions to take on the basis of or our having the emotional fortitude required to take those actions) that forecasts will lead to outperformance. In short, if we have the same information as others, analyze it way, reach the same conclusions and implement them the same way, we shouldn’t expect that process to result in outperformance. And it’s difficult to be consistentlysuperior in those regards as relates

So, in my view, tryingto predict what the macro futureholds is help investors achieve superior investment performance. Very few inves are known for having outperformed through macro forecasting Warren Buffett once told me about his two criteria for a de information: it has to be important, and it has to be know “everyone knows” that macro developments play a dominant role determiningthe performance of markets these days, “macro investors” wholehave shown ratherunimpressive results. It’s not that the macr matter, but ratherthat very few people can master it. For most knowable (or not knowable well enough and consistentlyenough for to outperformance). Thus I dismiss macro prediction as something that will bring inv success for the vast majority of investors, and I certainly inclu that group. If that’s so, what’s left? Whilethere are lots of detai nuances, I think we can most gainfully spendour time in three gene tryingto know more than othersabout what I call “the knowable”: the fundamentals of industries, companies and securities, being disciplined as to the appropriate price to pay for a partici those fundamentals, and understanding the investment environment we’re in and deciding strategicallyposition our portfolios for it. A great deal has been written on the first two topics. Together constitute the key ingredients in “security analysis” and “value inves judgments regarding what an asset can produce in the future—usually terms of earnings or cash flow—and what those prospects make the asset worthtoday. What do value investors do? They strive to take advantage of discrepa between “price” and “value.” In order to do that successfully, quantify an asset’s intrinsic value and how it’s likely to change (b) assesshow the current market price compares with the asset’s value,past pricesfor the asset, the pricesof other assets, and “theoretica fair” pricesfor assetsin general. Then they use that information to assemble portfolios. Most of the tim their immediate goal to hold investmentsoffering the best available value propositions: the assetswith the greatest upside potential and/or of upside potential to downside risk. You mightargue that assembling portfolio should consist of nothing more than identifying the asset highest value and the ones whose pricesmost understate their value.That be true in general and in the long term, but I think another

profitably enter into the process: properly positioning a portfolio for likely to happen in the market in the years immediately ahead In my view, the greatest way to optimize the positioning of a given point in time is through deciding what balance it should aggressiveness and defensiveness. And I believe the aggressiveness/defensiveness balance should be adjusted over time in response to changes in the state of the investment environment number of elements stand in their cycles. The key word is “calibrate.” The amount you have invested, your allocation of capital among the various possibilities, and th of the thingsyou own all should be calibrated along a continu runs from aggressive to defensive. . . . Whenwe’re getting v cheap, we should be aggressive; when we’re getting value expensi we should pull back. (“Yet Again?,” September 2017) Calibrating one’s portfolio position is what this book is mostly abou ∾ One of the key wordsrequired if one is to understand the reaso cycles is “tendencies.” If the factors that influence investing were regular and predictab example, if macro forecasting worked—we would be able to “will happen.” Yet the fact that that’s not the case doesn’t mean we’re helpless in contemplating the future. Rather, we can talk abou mighthappen or should happen, and how likely they are to happ thingsare what I call “tendencies.” In the investment world, we talk about risk all the time, but the universal agreement about what risk is or what it should implyfor behavior. Some people think risk is the likelihood of losingmoney, (including many finance academics) think risk is the volatility of asset or returns. And there are many other kinds of risk—too many to cove I lean heavily toward the first definition: in my view, risk is likelihood of permanent capital loss. But there’s also such a thing opportunity risk: the likelihood of missing out on potential gains.Put together and we see that risk is the possibility of thingsnot going want. What is the originof risk? One of my favorite investment philosop late Peter Bernstein, said in an issue of his Economics and Portfolio newsletter titled “Can We Measure Risk with a Number?” (June 2007):

Essentially risk says we don’t know what’s going to happen. . . walk every moment into the unknown. There’s a range of outcom and we don’t know where[the actualoutcome is] going to fall within the range. Often we don’t know what the range is. You’ll find belowa few ideas (summarized very briefly from the treatment provided in my memo “Risk Revisited Again” of June think follow directly from the starting point provided by Bernstein. mighthelp you understand and cope with risk. As retired London Business School professor Elroy Dimson sai means more thingscan happen than will happen.” For each event in economics, business and markets (among other things), if only one could happen—if there could be only one outcome—and if it was predi there would, of course, be no uncertainty or risk. And with no regarding what was going to happen, in theory we could know exact position our portfolios to avoid loss and garner maximum gains.But and in investing, since there can be many different outcomes, uncertainty risk are inescapable. As a consequence of the above, the futureshould be vie fixed outcome that’s destined to happen and capable of being predi a range of possibilitiesand—hopefully on the basis of insight into respective likelihoods—as a probability distribution.Probability distributions reflect one’s view of tendencies. Investors—or anyone hoping to deal successfullywith the future— form probability distributions, either explicitly or informally. If it’s done those probabilities will be helpful in determiningone’s proper cours action. But it’s still essential to bear in mind that even if we probabilities, that doesn’t mean we know what’s going to happen. Outcomes regarding a given matter may be governed by a pro distribution in the long run, but with regard to the outcome of there can be great uncertainty. Any of the outcomes included in a can occur, albeit with varying probabilities, since the process throu the outcome is chosen will be affected not only by the merit randomness. To invertDimson’s statement, even though many thingscan happen, only one will. We may know what to expect “on average,” may have no connection with what actually will happen. In my way of thinking about it, investment success is like the lottery winner. Both are determined by one ticket (the outcome) being from a bowlful (the full range of possible outcomes). In each case, outcome is chosen from among the many possibilities. Superior investors are people who have a better sense for what tic in the bowl, and thus for whether it’s worthparticipating in the

other words, while superior investors—like everyone else—don’t know exactly what the futureholds,they do have an above-average understand of futuretendencies. As an aside, I want to add a thought here. Most people thi deal with the futureis by formulating an opinion as to what’s happen, perhaps via a probability distribution.I think there are actua requirements, not one. In addition to an opinion regarding what happen, people should have a view on the likelihood that their prove correct. Some events can be predicted with substantial confidence will a given investment grade bond pay the interest it promises?), some uncertain (will Amazon still be the leaderin online retailing in some are entirely unpredictable (will the stock market go up or month?) It’s my point here that not all predictions should be treate likely to be correct, and thus they shouldn’t be relied on equally. most people are as awareof this as they should be. ∾ A good way to think about the superior investor described aboveis someone whose insight into tendencies permits him to tilt the favor. Let’s say there are 100 balls in a jar, some black and some white. color should you bet will come up? If you don’t know anything about the contents of the jar, betting be just a matter of guessing: uninformed speculation.The situati similar if you know there are 50 black and 50 white. You wisely bet on black as white, but doing either wouldn’t give than a 50:50 chance of being right. Thus betting would be you’re offered odds that are at least even—and unless you’re avoid paying an admission charge (in investing, a commission asked spread) to play. Betting on black or white at even odds very profitable other than if you got lucky, and luck isn’t somet can count on. Betting in the absence of a knowledge edge contents of the jar wouldn’t be dependably profitable. But what if you do have special insight regarding the conten Let’s say you know there are 70 black balls and 30 white. That allow you to win more often than you lose. If you can bet $10 against someone who gives you even odds, you’llwin $10 70% of time and lose $10 only 30% of the time, for an expected profit 10 picks.(Note: these will be the outcomes on average over number of trials, but they are subject to significant variation run due to randomness.)

Of course, your betting partner will only give you even odds black (a) if he doesn’t know the balls are 70% black and 30% (b) if he doesn’t know that you do know. If he knew about the contents of the jar, he would give you only 30:70 on black,and the bet would be back to being profitless. In other words, in order to win at this game more often than you have to have a knowledge advantage. That’s what the superi investor has: he knows more than othersabout the futuretendencies. Yet it’s important to remember what I said earlier: even if probabilities—that is, even if you do have superior insight tendencies—you still don’t know what’s going to happen. Even if ratio of balls in the jar is 70 black to 30 white, you color the next one picked will be. Yes, it’s more likely to be white, but it’ll still be white 30% of the time. Whenthere are as well as black in the jar, and especially when random and forcesare at work when the next ball is chosen, there can be regarding the outcome. But all this being said, there doesn’t have to be certainty in game to be worthplaying. A knowledge advantage regarding the tendencies is enough to createsuccess in the long run. And that brings us to the payoff from understanding cycles. investor doesn’t know much about it: He doesn’t fully understand the nature and importance of cycles He hasn’tbeen around long enough to have lived through many He hasn’tread financial history and thus learned the lessons cycles. He sees the environment primarily in terms of isolated events than taking note of recurring patterns and the reasons behind Most important, he doesn’t understand the significanceof cycles what they can tell him about how to act. The superior investor is attentive to cycles. He takes note of patterns seem to be repeating, gains a sense for wherewe stand in cycles that matter, and knows those thingshave implications for This allows him to make helpful judgments about cycles and wher in them. Specifically: Are we close to the beginning of an upswing, or in the If a particular cycle has been rising for a while, has it we’re now in dangerous territory?

Does investors’ behavior suggest they’re being driven by greed fear? Do they seem appropriately risk-averse or foolishly risk-tolerant? Is the market overheated (and overpriced),or is it frigid (and because of what’s been going on cyclically? Taken together, does our current position in the cycle imply should emphasize defensiveness or aggressiveness? Attention to these elements gives the superior investor an edge tha him to win more often than he loses. He understandsthe tendencies or thus he knows something that othersdon’t about the color of the balls jar. He has a sense for whether the chances of winning excee losing; thus he is able to investmore when they are favorable and they aren’t. Importantly, all these thingscan be assessed on the observations regarding current conditions. As we’ll see in later chap can tell us how to prepare for the futurewithout requiring that predict the future. Remember, wherewe stand in the various cycles has a strong the odds. For example, as we’ll see in later chapters, opportunities investment gains improve when: the economy and company profits are more likely to swingupwar down, investor psychology is sober ratherthan buoyant, investors are conscious of risk or—even better—overly concerned risk, and market priceshaven’t moved too high. Thereare cycles in all these things(and more), and knowing wh stand within them can help us tilt the odds in our favor.In short movement through the cycle repositions the probability distribution governing futureevents. Perhaps I should illustrate with regard to inves Whenour position in the various cycles is neutral, the ou “normal.”

Whenthe cycles are positioned propitiously, the probability distribut shifts to the right, such that the outlook for returns is now tilted Our favorable position in the cycles makes gains more likely and so. But when the cycles are at dangerous extremes, the odds are ag meaning the likelihoods are less good. There’s less chance of gain chance of loss.

The same is true when our position changes in only a singlecy example, regardless of what’s going on with regard to the econ company profits (that is, as the academics say, ceteris paribus thingsbeing equal”), the outlook for returns will be better when inves depressed and fearful (and thus allow asset pricesto fall) and worsewhen they’re euphoric and greedy (and drive pricesupward). The odds change as our position in the cycles changes. If our investment stance as these thingschange, we’re being passive regar cycles; in other words, we’re ignoring the chance to tilt the But if we apply some insight regarding cycles, we can increase place them on more aggressive investmentswhen the odds are in our favor and we can take money off the table and increase our defensiven odds are against us. The student of cycles doesn’t know for a fact what’s go —anymore than someone with insight regarding the balls in the jar what color ball will come out next. But both have a knowledge advantage regarding what’s likely. The student’s knowledge of cycles and for wherewe stand at a point in time can make a big contributio that must be present in order for an investor to achieve super ball-chooser who knows the ratio is 70:30 has an advantage. So investor who knows better than otherswherewe stand in the cycle.It’s purpose of this book to help you become that person. In that interest, I’ll describe a number of cyclical processe take place in real time. The oscillations mightseem extreme, and in fact may be, since they’re chosen from the experience of a half-centur point. And they may give the impression that the events under discussion were compressed in time, whereas in truth they took months and years

develop. But these examples are real, and I hope they’ll make my clear.

II THE NATURE OF CYCLES Most people think of cycles in terms of a series of events. people understand that these events regularly follow each other in usual sequence: upswings are followed by downswings, and then eventually by new upswings. But to have a full understanding o cycles, that’s not enough. The events in the life of a c be viewed merely as each being followed by the next, but—m more importantly—as each causing the next. When I meet with Oaktree clients, they almost always ask them make sense of what’s going on in the worldor in the mark usually want to know about one particular cycle or another and wher stand in it. I invariably pull out a sheet of paper and make a discussion. There’s usually a line that stretches from lower left to upper rig line fluctuates up and down around it. Together they look like this.

WhenI started to organize for the task of writing this bo my Oaktree bag and founda large number of such drawings. I them in the course of describing several different phenomena,and annotated differently. But each one related to a cycle worthy of The chapters in this book will generally be devoted to those cycli phenomena. Before moving aheadwith my discussion of cycles, I want to something I mentioned in The Most Important Thing. I confess between discussing the ups and downs of cycles and the sideoscillations of pendulums, applying the cycle label to some phenomena and (as seen in chapter VII) the pendulum label to others(usually those to psychology). Sometimes I’ll talk about a given phenomenon as sometimes as a pendulum. But when pressed, I find it hard to between the two or to say why one gets one label and not the I tend to think about thingsvisually, so perhaps I can use an describe the connection between cycles and pendulums. As I will length later, cycles oscillate around a midpoint (or a secul pendulums hang over a midpoint (or norm)and swingback and forth from there. But if you take the hang-point of the pendulum, turn it on drag it from left to right as it oscillates, what do you get? A Therereally is no fundamental difference. I’ll even admit that a pe is little more than a special case of a cycle,or perhaps just make reference to particular cycles. My reasons for referring to as cycles and othersas pendulums are clear to me. I hope they clear to you as well. Or, at minimum, I hope my use of the detract from what you take from this book. The bottom line is that, in the worldinvestors inhabit, cycles and pendulums swingback and forth. Cycles and pendulum swings come many formsand relate to a wide variety of phenomena,but the unde reasons for them—and the patterns they produce—have a lot in they tend to be somewhat consistent over time. Or as Mark Twain to have said (although there’s no evidence he actually said it), doesn’t repeatitself, but it does rhyme.” Whether Twain said it or not, that sentence sums up a lot is about. Cycles vary in terms of reasons and details, and but the ups and downs (and the reasons for them)will occur forev producing changes in the investment environment—and thus in the that’s calledfor. The central line in my drawings constitutes a midpoint around cycle oscillates. It sometimes has an underlying direction or secular (“secular” as in “of or relating to a long term of indefinite Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary),and that’s usually upward. So, over

time and in the long run, economies tend to grow, companies’ profits increase and (largely because of those things) markets tend to these developments were scientific or wholly natural, physical proce economies, companies and markets mightprogress in a straight line constant rate (at least for a while). But of course, they’re The fact is that the performance of these thingsis heavily inf short run by, among other things, the involvement of people, far from steady. Rather they fluctuate from time to time, often becau thingswe can lump under the broad heading of “psychology.” Thus peop behavior varies. . . certainly as the environment varies, absence of changes in the environment, too. It’s the oscillation of thingsaround the midpoint or secular tre book is largely about. The oscillation bedevils people who don’t it, are surprised by it or, even worse, partake in and contr I’ve said before, it often presents profit opportunities for those who understand, recognize and take advantage of cyclical phenomena. ∾ It’s clear from looking at my drawings for a few seconds that of cyclical phenomena can be understood as taking place in a identifiable phases: a) recovery from an excessively depressed lower extreme or “low” toward the midpoint, b) the continued swingpast the midpoint toward an upper extrem “high,” c) the attainment of a high,

d) the downward correction from the high back toward the midpo mean, e) the continuation of the downward movement past the midpo toward a new low, f) the reaching of a low, g) once again,recovery from the low back toward the midpoint, h) and then, again,the continuation of the upward swingpast midpoint, toward another high. It’s important to note from the abovethat there cannot be said to “starting point” or “ending point” for a cycle.Any of the can be described as representing the beginning of a cycle . any stage in between. The simplistic narrator may find it easy to talk about the beginnin cycle,but someone a bit more sophisticated can find that extremely Here’s what I wrote on this subject in “NowIt’s All Bad?” Henry Kissinger was a member of TCW’s board when I w and a few times each year I was privileged to hear him hold f worldaffairs. Someone would ask, “Henry, can you explain yesterday’s events in Bosnia?” and he’d say, “Well, in 1722 . point is that chain reaction-type events can only be understood in context of that whichwent before. If someone asks, “Howdid we get to this point?” or “What reach that high (or low)?” invariably the explanation has to be based events that went before. But that being said, it may not be easy just how far back to reach for the starting point for your narrative. People often ask me “whatcaused the cycle to begin?” or “a the end of the cycle?” I consider these improper questions, since neither begin nor end. Betterquestions mightbe: “whatcaused the curre leg to begin?” or “how far have we gone since the beginning of cycle?” or “are we close to the end of the down-leg?” You migh whether we’re close to the end of a cycle,as long as you defin from one peak to the next, or from trough to trough. But—in such a definition—cycles do not have a defined beginning, and will never end. ∾ The cycle oscillates, as I mentioned, around the midpoint. The midp cycle is generally thought of as the secular trend, norm,mean,avera “happy medium,” and generally as being in some sense as “rightand

The extremes of the cycle,on the other hand, are thought of as excesses to be returned from, and generally they are. Whilethe thing cycling tends to spendmuch of the time aboveor belowit, eventual movement back in the direction of the mean is usually the rule. movement from either a high or a low extreme back toward the often described as “regression toward the mean,” a powerful and reasonable tendency in most walksof life. But, thinking back to the stageslisted above, it can also be seen that the cyclical pattern consists as much of movement from the reasonable midpoint toward potentially imprudent extreme (phases b, e and h in the prece it does going from an extreme back toward the midpoint (a, d The rational midpoint generally exertsa kind of magnetic pull, bri thing that’s cycling back from an extreme in the direction of “norm usually doesn’t stay at normal for long, as the influences respo swingtoward the midpoint invariably continue in force and thus cause swingback from an extreme to proceed through the midpoint and further, toward the opposite extreme. It’s important to recognize and accept the dependability of thi details vary—the timing, duration, speed and power of the swin importantly,the reasons for them—and that’s likely what’s behind Twai remark regarding history not repeating. But the underlying dynamics usually similar. In particular, that means the swingback from a almost never halts at the midpoint . . . regardless of how “appropriate” the midpoint may be. The continuation of the move the midpoint and toward the opposite extreme is highly depe example, markets rarelygo from “underpriced” to “fairly priced” there. Usually the fundamental improvement and rising optimism that markets to recover from depressed levelsremain in force, causing continue right through “fairly priced” and on to “overpriced.” to happen, but usually it does. ∾ Cycles have more potential to wreakhavocthe further they progress midpoint—i.e., the greater the aberrations or excesses. If the swin one extreme goes further, the swingback is likely to be more viole more damage is likely to be done, as actions encouraged by the operation at an extreme prove unsuitable for life elsewhere in the In other words, the potential for havocincreases as the moveme from the midpoint increases: as economies and companies do “too well” stock pricesgo “too high.” Advances are followed by mere corrections bull markets by bear markets. But booms and bubbles are follo more harmful busts, crashes and panics.

∾ What is this midpoint around whichthingscycle? As I said, it’s astride a secular trend. For example, an economy’s gross domestic may exhibit a secular annual growth rate of, say, 2% for growth will be faster in some years and slower—even negative—in The performance in individual years is usually part of a cycle underlying secular trend. Importantly, the secular growth rate may be subject to a longer-term, more gradual one. You have to step back further to example, societies tend to follow long-term patterns of rise and the Roman Empire, for example—and the short term we talk abou ups and downs around the long-term trend (see pages 48–51). The same can be true for industries. But since long-term cycles oc decades and centuries, ratherthan quarters and years—and thus they can entail time frames that exceed any observer’s lifetime—they can be detectin real time and hard to factorinto a decision process. Here’s what I wrote on the subject in my memo “The Lo 2009): There’s an old story about a groupof blind men walking down th road in India who come upon an elephant. Each one touches a different part of the elephant—the trunk,the leg, the tail or th and comes up with a different explanation of what he’d encoun based on the small part to whichhe was exposed. We are those b men. Even if we have a good understanding of the events w we don’t easilygain the overall view needed to put them togethe to the time we see the wholein action, our knowledge is li parts we’vetouched. . . . . . . some of the most important lessons concern the study and remember the events of the past and (b) be conscio cyclical nature of things. Up close, the blind man may mistake elephant’s leg for a tree—and the shortsightedinvestor may think a uptrend (or a downtrend) will go on forever. But if we s view the long sweep of history, we should be able to b the long-term cycle also repeats and understand wherewe stand in it ∾ This is a good time for me to make one of the most important nature of cycles. Most people think of cycles in terms of aboveand recognize them as a series of events. And most people

that these events regularly follow each other in a usual sequence: are followed by downswings, and then eventually by new upswings. But to have a full understanding of cycles, that’s not enough. the life of a cycle shouldn’t be viewed merely as each being next, but—much more importantly—as each causing the next. For example: As the phenomenon swings toward an extreme, this movem energy, whichit stores. Eventually its increased weight makes for the swingto continue further from the midpoint, and it maximum beyond whichit can no longer proceed. Eventually it stops moving in that direction. And once it does, then pulls it back in the direction of the central tendency with the energy it has amassed powering the swingback. And as the phenomenon in question moves from the extrem toward the midpoint, the swingimparts momentum to it that overshoot the midpoint and keep moving toward the opposite In this way, a cycle in the economic or investment worldconsists series of events that give rise to their successors. The process descr three bullet pointsabovesounds like a physical one, governed by force as gravity and momentum.But as I mentioned aboveand we’ll see the most important deviations from the general trend—and the variation those deviations’ timing, speed and extent—are largely produced by fluctuations in psychology. If you consider the human psyche—rather than physical attribute the source of much of the energy or momentum,these three point good job of also explaining the swings and oscillations that investors challenged to deal with. In the chapters that follow, some of the important content will consist of descriptionsof ways in whichthe each type of cycle generate their successors. Owing to this view of cycles as progressions of causative contains several step-by-stepaccounts of progressions that took place past. The goal with each progression will be to illustrate what caused event in the progression,what it meantin the progression,and how it contributed to the events that followed. The recounting of progression feel repetitive, and some of the ones covered actually will be touch than once (although with reference to different aspects). But hopefully real-world examples will help readers achieve the goal of understand cycles and how to position for them. ∾

It’s extremely important to note this causal relationship: that the talking about consist of series of events that cause the ones that it’s equally significant to note that while cycles occur in a varie to these serial events, cyclical developments in one area also influ in others. Thus the economic cycle influences the profit cycle.Corporate announcements determined by the profit cycle influence investor attitudes. Investor attitudes influence markets. And developments in markets the cycle in the availability of credit . . . whichinfluences econ companies and markets. Cyclical events are influenced by both endogenousdevelopments (including the cyclical events that precede them)as well exogenous developments (events occurring in other areas). Manyof the latter from all—are parts of other cycles. Understanding these causative intera isn’t easy, but it holds much of the key to understanding and copin investment environment. It must be understood that while I will describe cycles as sep discrete, this is not entirely realistic. I will provide a smoo describes the operation of each type of cycle in isolation. I will impression that each cycle has an independentlife of its own. I may the impression that the swingin a given direction of one type of before the start of a corresponding or resultant swingin a type—i.e., that they operate sequentiallyand independently. In other word will attempt to discuss each type of cycle in isolation . . they don’t operate in isolation. My description mightsuggest that the different cycles are independ each other and self-contained. It may seem that something happens in A, whichaffects cycle B, whichaffects cycle C, whichmightfeed all back to influence cycle A. This may give the impression that cycle A hold after it has influenced cycle B, and while cycle B’s influence on takes place.But that’s not the way it is. The interrelationships among the various cycles are nowhere ne my descriptionswill be. The various cycles operate on their own, also continuously affect each other. I try to tease out the various mind and treat them separately, and that is the way this book will be organized. But the well-behaved, isolated cycles I’ll describe are analytical concept. In life they’re really a jumble of interrelated that can’t be separated entirely. A affects B (and C), and B and they all influence D, whichinfluences all of them. They’re all with each other, but we must think about them in an orderly fashion to understand cycles and their effects. ∾

Finally, perhaps under the heading of “miscellany,” I want to more thingsabout the nature of cycles that are essential for a understanding (starting here with a few observations from my Nove 2001 memo, “You Can’t Predict. You Can Prepare.”): Cycles are inevitable. Everyonce in a while, an upor for a long time and/or to a great extreme, and people time it’s different.” They cite the changes in geopolitics, institutions, technology or behavior that have rendered the “old rules”obsolete. make investment decisions that extrapolate the recenttrend. But then it usually turns out that the old rules do still apply, and the In the end, trees don’t grow to the sky, and few thingsgo to most phenomena turn out to be cyclical. Cycles’ clout is heightened by the inability of investors to past. As John Kenneth Galbraith says, “extreme brevity of the memory” keeps market participants from recognizing the recurring nature of these patterns, and thus their inevitability: Whenthe same or closely similar circumstances occur again, sometimes in only a few years,they are hailedby a new, oft youthful, and always supremely self-confident generation as a brilliantly innovative discovery in the financial and larger economic world. Therecan be few fields of human endeavor whichhistory counts for so little as in the worldof fin experience, to the extentthat it is part of memory at all dismissed as the primitive refuge of those who do not ha insight to appreciate the incredible wonders of the present. Short History of Financial Euphoria, 1990) Cycles are self-correcting, and their reversal is not necessarily on exogenous events. The reason they reverse (rather than forever) is that trendscreatethe reasons for their own reversal. like to say success carries within itself the seeds of failure the seeds of success. Seen through the lens of human perception, cyclesare often viewed less symmetricalthan they are. Negative price fluctuations are called “volatility,” while positive price fluctuations are called“profit.” Collapsing markets are called“selling panics,” while surges receiv more benign descriptions(but I think they may best be seen as panics”; see tech stocks in 1999, for example). Commentators “investor capitulation” at the bottom of market cycles, capitulation at the top, when previously prudent investors throwin towel and buy.

Although this may be underestimated and overlooked, in my experien financial cycles generally are largely symmetrical. Everycycle move an “other side,” meaning every upswing is invariably followed by— perhaps better said, leads to—a downswing,and vice versa. “Boom/bust”—that’s a phenomenon that’s widely talkedabout and generally understood, and it’s a good illustration of cycle symmetry. Most people understand that busts follow booms. Somewhat fewer grasp the that the busts are caused by the booms. From the latter, it make booms usually won’tbe followed by modest, gradual and painl adjustmentsand (b) on the other hand, we’re unlikely to have a bust haven’t had a boom. It must be noted, however, that this symmetry only applies de direction, not necessarily to the extent, timing or pace of move the point that Nick Train makes—you’ll meet him in the next chapter.) an upward movement may be followed by a downward movement greater or lesser magnitude. The downward turn may commence just after apex is reached, or thingsmay stay at a high for a long time to correct. And, perhaps most importantly,it can take years for a grow to its full extent. But the bust that follows may seem like freight train; as my long-time partner Sheldon Stone says, “The air of the balloon much faster than it went in.” Let’s returnto what Mark Twain is supposed to have said: “History repeatitself, but it does rhyme.” Grasping this concept is absolutely an understanding of cycles. What Twain must have meantby this if he indeed was responsible for it—is that whereas the details event to another in a given category of history (say, the ascen demagogues), the underlying themes and mechanisms are consistent. This is true of cycles in finance, and absolutely true of fin you’llsee later, the Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08 occurred large because of the issuance of a huge number of unsound sub-p and that took place in turn because of an excess of optimism, risk aversion, and an overly generous capital market, whichled behavior surroundingsub-prime mortgages. Thus the narrow-minded literalist would say, “I’ll definitely turn cautious the next time mortgage finan made readily available to unqualified home buyers.” But that aspect Crisisneed never recur for the lessons of the Global Financial Crisi valuable. Rather, the themes that provide warning signals in are the general ones: that excessive optimism is a dangerous thing aversion is an essential ingredient for the market to be safe; generous capital markets ultimately lead to unwise financing, and danger for participants.

In short, the details are unimportantand can be irrelevant. But the are essential, and they absolutely do tend to recur. Understanding that tendency—and being able to spot the recurrences—is one of the most important elements in dealing with cycles. Finally, I want to bring in the definition of insanity that Al credited with: “doing the same thing over and over and expecting diffe results.” Whenpeople investin thingsafter they’ve been carried aloft “everyone knows” they’re both flawless and underpriced—thinking they high returns without risk of loss—that’sinsanity. Such beliefs have defrocked in the aftermath of every bubble. But many people—either that bubbles tend to be followed by crashes, or blinded to eagerness to get rich quickly—buy into the next one nevertheless. Securities and markets that have benefitted from fabulous appreciation much more likely to succumb to a cyclical correction than they are appreciate ad infinitum. Try telling that to the eager investor who “it’s different this time.” ∾ The length of this chapter and the large variety of topicscove indicative of the multi-faceted and challenging nature of cycles. reason, cycles have to be understood both analytically and intuitively. many other aspects of investing, those who possess the latter ability addition to the former will go the furthest. Can an intuitive taught? Yes, to some degree, but most fully to those who start off of insight. In short, some people just tend to “get it” (whatever and some don’t. Courses in accounting, finance and security analysis will equip the with the technical knowledge that is necessary for success but, in those courses are far from sufficient. The main element missing from an understanding of cyclical phenomena and how they develop as this book. Some cues will be foundin the newlyestablished fields of behavioral economics and behavioral finance, and I commend them to attention. Psychology is an essential component in understanding the that matter so much to investors. The greatest lessons regarding cycles are learned through ex in the adage“experience is what you got when you didn’tget what you wanted.” I know so much more about this today than I did when I young security analyst at First National City Bank 48 years ago. However, since we usually see only one majorcycle per decade, an who’sgoing to rely solelyon the amassing of experience for his progr better have a lot of patience. I hope what you read here will add understanding and speed your education.

The ancient Greekhistorian Thucydides statedin History of the Peloponnesian War that he would be satisfied “if these wordsof judged usefulby those who want to understand clearly the events happened in the past and which(human nature being what it is) time or other and in much the same ways, be repeated in the futur good description of my goal here as well.

III THE REGULARITY OF CYCLES This effort to explain life through the recognition of patterns—and thus to come up with winning formulas—is complicated, in la because we live in a worldthat is beset by randomnessand in people don’t behave the same from one instance to the next, e when they intend to. The realization that past events were largely affected by these things—andthus that futureevents aren’tfully predictable—is unpleasant, as it makes life less subject to anticipation, rule-makingand rendering safe. In the fall of 2013, in response to something I’d written in Important Thing, I received an email from Nick Train of Lindsell London-based money management firm. Nick took issue with my use word “cycle” to describe phenomena like those I’m discussing here. Nick I had a healthy email colloquy regarding the issue and met for spirited lunch. By the time the main course arrived, it had become clear tha motivated Nick to write was his conviction that for something to be as cyclical, its timing and extenthave to be regular and thus radio cycle or sine wave,for example, rises and falls in a regular, pattern, with the same amplitude, frequency and ending point every time. Dictionary.com defines a cycle in physics as “a complete alt whicha phenomenon attains a maximum and minimum value,retur final value equal to the original one,” and a cycle in mathematics permutationof a set of elements that leaves the original cycli elements unchanged.” In other words, these scientific and mathematic cycles follow patterns so regular that they end up back wher that happens because the timing and path of the fluctuations is same. Score one for Nick. But economies, companies and markets—and certainly investors’ psyches and behavior—are not regular in this way. I asserted at our

Nick eventually agreed, that thingscan be cyclical without exhibiting degree of consistency.It’s all a matter of your definition of Here’s part of what I wrote to Nick to follow up: What I claim is that, usually, thingsrise and fall. Most natural th have a birth/death cycle,and investor psychology has a very pronounced cycle of rising optimism (and price appreciation) followed by rising pessimism (and price declines). You may think that’s simplistic and unhelpful. But one of the main pointsis that when something rises, investors have a tendency to think it’ll never fall (and vice versa). Betting against those tendencies can be v profitable. . . . Little in the world—andcertainly not in the investment world—is regular enough in time to profit from applying a mechanistic p But that doesn’t mean you can’t take advantage of up-and-down cycles. . . . I don’t think fluctuations have to end up back wherethey started be calleda cycle.Manycycles end up higher than they started— is, they are cycles around an underlying secular uptrend—but doesn’t mean they’re not cyclical, or that it’s not desirable to up-cycle and avoid the down-cycle,as opposed to staying on throughout. The Cambridge Dictionary’s definition of a cycle—for use in the non-technical world—is “a groupof events that happen in a one following the other, and are often repeated.” I’m happywith that one; reflects the sense in whichI think about cycles and oscillations in ∾ WhileI don’t agree with Nick Train’s objection that the irregularity of phenomena I’m discussing disqualifies them from being described as cyclical, there is a great deal to be understood about their irregularity and what learned from it. The most important thing to note here is that, as I said in the the thingsI call cycles do not stem completely—or sometimes at the operation of mechanical,scientific or physical processes. They woul much more dependable and predictable if they did—but much less potentially profitable. (This is because the greatest profits come from seeing than othersdo, and if cycles were totally dependable and predictable would be no such thing as superiority in seeing them.) Some underlying principle (and sometimes not), but much variation is attributable the role of humans in creating cycles. The involvement of

process enables their emotionand psychology-induced tendencies to influence cyclical phenomena.Chance or randomnessalso plays a big some cycles, and human behavior contributes to their existence, too. are a big part of the reason these cycles exist, but also—alon randomness—for their inconsistency and thus their undependability. ∾ We humans have to live in the real world. As described earlie patterns and rules that will permit us to live more easilyand profi Perhaps it started with early man’sexperience with daily and annual He may have learned the hard way that it was unsafe to visit at the time of day when mother lions went there with their cubs. And he learned through experimentation that certain crops did better when in the spring than in the fall. The more absolute the rules, the be. It now seemsto be ingrained in the human brain to look patterns. But this effort to explain life through the recognition of patterns— to come up with winning formulas—is complicated, in large part, live in a worldthat is beset by randomnessand in whichpeople the same from one instance to the next, even when they intend to. realization that past events were largely affected by these things—an that futureevents aren’tfully predictable—is unpleasant, as it makes subject to anticipation, rule-makingand rendering safe. Thus people for explanations that would make events understandable . . beyond that whichis appropriate.This is as true in investing as aspects of life. I foundsome interesting statements on this subject in The Drunkar Walk, a 2008 book about randomnessby Leonard Mlodinow, a faculty member at Caltech. Here’s the first, from his book’s prologue: To swim against the current of human intuition is a d The human mind is built to identify for each event a definite and can therefore have a hard time accepting the influence of unrelated or random factors. And so the first step is to r success or failure sometimes arises neither from great skill nor f great incompetence but from, as the economist Armen Alchian w “fortuitous circumstances.” Random processes are fundamental in nature and are ubiquitous in our everyday lives, yet most people not understand them or think much about them. In a chapter about the unpredictability and capriciousness of su movie industry, Mlodinow describes producer William Goldman’s view

the subject: Goldman didn’tdeny that there are reasons for a film’sbox office performance. But he did say that those reasons are so comple path from green light to opening weekend so vulnerable to unforeseeable and uncontrollable influences that educated guesses about an unmade film’spotential aren’tmuch better than the flips of a coin. Mlodinow goes on to discuss how random elements apply to a baseball: The result of any particular at bat (that is, an opportunity for s depends primarily on the player’s ability, of course. But it depends on the interplay of many other factors: his health; th the sun, or the stadium lights; the quality of the pitches the game situation; whether he correctly guesses how the pitcher throw; whether his hand-eye coordination worksjust perfectly a takes his swing; whether that brunette he met at the bar k too late or the chili-cheese dog with garlic fries he had for breakfa soured his stomach. If not for all the unpredictable factors, would either hit a home run on every at bat or fail to d at bat]. We know that a variety of factors influence outcomes in all many of them are random or unpredictable. That certainly includes developments in economics and investing. Even if one’s income is individual’spropensity to consume may be affected by the weather, whichcountry wins the World Cup (and that, in turn, by how a off a defender’s shin). A company may issue a favorable earnings whether its stock rises or falls as a result will be influenced by competitors do, whether the central bank chooses that week for an rate increase, and whether the earnings announcement comes in week in the market. Giventhis degree of variability, the cycles with certainly aren’tregular and can’t be reduced to reliable decis rules. I can give you an example from the worldof high yield bonds: I’ve foundquite annoying. At one point in my experience, a view arose bondstend to default around the second anniversary of their issua that would be a very helpful bit of knowledge: to avoid defau would have to do is sell all bondsas they approach that anniv back the ones that have survived it. (Of course, this rule ignores

of what price sellers would receive for bondsthat are nearing date—since everyone knows it poses risk—and how much they’d have to buy back the ones that have cleared it.) Perhaps a cluster of second anniversary defaults occurred aro that notion became popular. But coincidence is very different from Is that phenomenon dependable? What were the reasons for it? repeat? Should you bet on it? In particular, the history of probably covered only twenty years or so at that time, making whether the experience and sample size were sufficient to justify that observation.Rather than intellectual rigor, I preferto think the two-y rule was based more on people’s thirst for simple, helpful rules, and excessive tendency to extrapolate without any real foundation. I think it would be better to recognize that bondsdefault in wide variety of influences—like those that contribute to the success of a hitter in baseball—and that most defaults have absolutely nothi with the number of years that have elapsed since the bondswere issue invertMark Twain’s purported remark, history may rhyme, but it repeats exactly. ∾ I’m firmly convinced that markets will continue to rise and fall, know (a) why and (b) what makes these movements more or less immi But I’m sure I’ll never know when they’re going to turn up or down they’ll go after they do, how fast they’ll move, when they’ll the midpoint, or how far they’ll continue on the opposite side. great deal to admit uncertainty about. I have found, however, that the little I do know about cycle tim me a great advantage relative to the majority of investors, who even less about cycles and pay less heed to them and their implication appropriate action. The advantage I’m talking about is probably all can achieve, but it’s enough for me. It’s been the source of that my Oaktree colleagues and I have enjoyed over the last 22 a lot of what I want to pass on in this book.

IV THE ECONOMIC CYCLE The output of an economy is the product of hours worked per hour; thus the long-term growth of an economy is determi primarily by fundamental factors like birth rate and the rate o productivity(but also by other changes in society and environment) Thesefactors usually change relatively little from year to year, a only gradually from decade to decade. Thus the average rate o growth is rathersteady over long periods of time. Giventhe relative stability of underlying secular growth, one be tempted to expect that the performance of economies w consistent from year to year. However, a number of factors a to variability, causing economic growth—even as it follows th underlying trendline on average—toalso exhibit annual variability. The economic cycle (also known—mostly in the past—as “the busine cycle”) provides much of the foundation for cyclical events in worldand the markets. The more the economy rises, the more likely it companies will expand their profits and stock markets will rise. I’ll briefly here on the factors that influence economic cycles. But I want to make the confession I volunteer whenever I discuss it a proudproclamation?): I’m no economist. I took courses in economics as both an undergraduate and a student. I think about economics. I deal with economics as a profe investor. And I consider myself to be largely an “economic most decisions for logical reasons based on the relationship between value,risk and potential return. But my thinking about economics is largely on common sense and experience, and I’m sure I’ll write thing with whichmany economists will disagree. (Of course, they also disagree with each other. The workings of economics are quite unclear and impr and thus it’s for good reason that it’s called“the dismal science.”) The main measure of an economy’s output is GDP, or gross do product, the total value of all goodsand services produced for final

economy. It can roughly be viewed as the result of multiplying hours people spendworking by the value of the output produced (Earlier in my careerit was calledgross national product, but that gone out of style. The distinction between the two lies in the treatm foreign manufacturers operating in a given country: GDP includes that country’s output, while GNP does not.) The main questions most people (and certainly most investors) care ab with regard to the economy are whether we’ll have growth or given year, and what the rate of change will be. Both of these are of what I call the short-term economic cycle.(I’ll introduce other considerations shortly.) Whenwe think about U.S. GDP growth in a given year, we usually with an assumption in the range of 2% to 3% or so and then for the specific circumstances. But the starting point for each year’ growth is invariably positive. For example, as last year beganthere of discussion about the rate at whichGDP would grow. The optimists it’d be nearly 3%, and the pessimists thought it mightnot reach about everyone thought it would be positive. The official defin recession is two consecutive quarters of negative growth, and very thought GDP growth would fall into negative territory—last year thereafter. Long-Term Economic Trends Manyinvestors are concerned about year-to-yeareconomic growth: high or low, positive or negative. The developments they’re asking abou term considerations. They’re important, but they’re not everything. In long run their importance fades and long-term considerations become more relevant. As I mentioned early on, most of the cycles that attract inv consist of oscillations around a secular trend or central tende oscillations matter a great deal to companies and markets in the changes in regard to the underlying trendline itself will prove to greater overall significance. The oscillations around the trend will in the long run (admittedly after causing much elation or distress years), but changes in the underlying trend will make the biggest our long-term experience. In January 2009, I wrote a memo entitled “The Long View” this subject. I’m going to quote extensively from it here.

First, I described a number of “salutary secular trends” tha markets had been ridingover the preceding decades. I’ll list them below omit the descriptionsthat accompanied them in the memo: macro environment corporate growth the borrowing mentality popularization of investing investor psychology The developments enumerated aboveconstituted a strong tailwind behind the economy and the markets over the last several d and they produced a long-term secular uptrend. Yet, despite the underlying uptrend, there’s been no straight li economy and markets were punctuated every few years by cyclical bouts of short-term fluctuation. Cycles around the trendline made f frequent ups and downs. Most were relatively small and brief, but in the 1970s, economic stagnation set in, inflation reached 16%, th average stock lost almost half its value in two years,and Busines Week magazine ran a cover story trumpeting “The Deathof Equities” (August 13, 1979). No, my forty years in the market haven’t wine and roses.

From time to time we saw better economies and worse—slowdown and prosperity, recession and recovery. Markets, too, rose and fell. Thesefluctuations were attributable to normal economic cycles and to exogenous developments (such as the oil embargo in 1973 and th emerging market crisis in 1998). The Standard & Poor’s 5 few down years in the period from 1975 to 1999, but none in w lost more than 7.5%.On the upside, however, 16 of those 25 y showed returns above15%, and seven times the annual gain exceed 30%. Despite the ups and downs, investors profited overall, inves became a national pursuit, and Warren Buffett, one of A richest men, got that way by buying common stocks and w companies. A serious general uptrend was underway, reaching it zenithin 2007. . . . Until mid-2007, my 39 years of experience as a money mana had been limited to part of the long-term story. Perhaps what lo like an underlying long-term uptrend should have been viewed in as the positive part of a long-term cycle incorporating downs as ups. Only when you step back . . . can you gaugeits f proportions.

The main thing I want to discuss here is my realization that th cycles in the long-term trend, not just short-term cycles around we’vebeen livingthrough the positive phase of a big one. Before I progress to a discussion of the short-term economi most investors concern themselves with, I’m going to spendsome more time on the long term: the factors that shape it and the current outlo that I’ll turn to the matter of the short-term economic cycle. I have mentioned that one of the main determinants of each ye economic output is the number of hours worked. In turn, the fundamental factorunderlying increases in hours worked is population growth. Growth in the population means there are more people year to make and sell products (and also more people to buy and them, encouraging production).More production equals more GDP. If the population is growing, hours worked tend to grow, and so does GDP births are one of the main reasons for the usual presumption that growth will be positive. On the other hand, if the population is positive GDP growth faces a significant headwind. Population growth doesn’t vary much from year to year. The number people of child-bearing age doesn’t change much in the short does their tendency to have children. Thesethingsdo change over decad longer, however, so they cause changes in long-term population. What are the kinds of the thingsthat can alter a nation’s birth rat average number of children each couple has)? rules like China’s longstanding but recently revised one-child

wars (like World War II, whichdepressed the birth rate but gave the Baby Boomwhen it ended), economic conditions, which, among other things, alter people’s about whether they can affordto have children, and socialmores, like the recenttendency of young Americans to family formation Changes in birth rates generally take place over long periods of tim when they do, they require years to affect GDP growth. Take China’s child policy, for example. You mightsay the shift was sudden: one 2015 the policy was in full force, and the next day its phase-out announced. True as far as it goes. But while people who already certainly mighthave gotten busy producing another on that new day, take roughly twenty years for that second child to become a able to contribute to China’s economic output. Thus the bottom year-to-yearchanges in GDP are unlikely to be attributed significantl changes in the birth rate. The other principal element in the GDP equation—the value of the produced in each hour of labor—is determined by “productivity.” Chan productivityare fundamental determinants of changes in the longof GDP. Whatever the rate of population growth mightbe, GDP will faster if productivityis rising or slower if it’s falling. And looki derivatives, the rate of growth in GDP will accelerate if the rate productivityis rising and decelerate if it’s falling. It’s all just math Changes in productivity, like changes in birth rate, take place in degrees and gradually, and they require long periods to take effec primarily from advances in the productive process. The first big gains occurred during the Industrial Revolution of roughly 1760 to 1830 human labor was replaced by machines driven by steamand wate when large factories replaced the work that was done less efficiently in shops and at home. The second majorgains occurred in the late 20th centuries, when electricity and automobilesreplaced older and lessefficient formsof power and transportation. The third majorchange in the latter half of the 20th century, when computers and other form automated control beganto take the place of humans in guiding machinery. And, of course, the fourthwave is underway now, during InformationAge, as massive advances in information acquisition, storage application—and such activities as metadata and artificial intelligence—are permitting tasks to be accomplished that weren’t dreamed of in Remember, each of these changes took place gradually, over decades. Ea made a massive difference in GDP, but even with these, there weren’t accelerations and decelerations from year to year. The rate of gain

productivitytends to remain relatively steady for years,and certainly short-term cycles of economic recession and recovery generally aren’ attributed to changes in it. It’s clear that trendsin hours worked and in output per hour co determine long-term trendsin national output. But what factors produ changes in those two? Here’s a partial, indicative list: Demographic movements—The migration of millions of Chine farms to cities is an example of what I’m talking about here. increasing the availability of workers, this migration fueled China as a site of low-cost manufacturing, and it is contributing expansion of China’s consumer class. Another example is immig from Latin America to the United States. America, like other nations, is experiencing a declining birth rate. But ongoing from south of the border—some of it illegal—takes the place expanding the U.S.’s supply of productive labor and rate of consumption. Determinants of inputs—The number of hours worked can from the number of people working, and certainly from the interested in working. “Workforceparticipation” reflects the percentage of people o working age who are either employed or looking for work. The unemployment rate (the percentage of people participating the workforce who don’t have a job) rises and falls in respons changes in consumer and business spending (and thus to c demand for goods, and in the need for workers to p The number of hours worked by each person with a jo varieswith economic conditions—businesses shorten work weeks when demand for goodsis low, and they authorize overtime w demand is high (until demand is strong enough to c hiringor another shift). Aspiration—The profit motive and the desireto live better are among the forcesthat drive workers (and thus societies) to work harder produce more. It mightbe tempting to think of these thingsas but they aren’t. For example, the profit motive was prettymuch from the economic system under the Soviets, and the willingness more is constrained in other economies (to wit, I’ve watched worke clock out at European banks—not to prove that they had worked 5:00 as in the U.S., but ratherthat they had left by 5:00 and exceeded the 35-hour work week).

Education —The deterioration of public education in the to have a negative effect on workers’ ability to contribute economy in the future, as well as their ability to genera incomes with whichto consume. Thesenegative trendsare likely to work counter to the positive effects from the influxof immig Technology —Innovation causes new businesses to come into but brings about the demise of old ones. It both creates eliminates them. In short, it provides a hyper-example of the nature of economic evolution: it creates winners and losers technologies overtake human effort as well as old technologies are not in any way “safe,” as they, too, can be displaced today’s terminology—disrupted. Technologyepitomizes the pattern rise and fall, life and death . . . and rebirth. Automation —The ability to replace human labor with particularly interesting factor. On the one hand, automation can be viewed as additive to the economic cycle,since it increases or the amount of output that is generated per hour of mechanization of agriculture, for instance, allowed many fewer farme to produce much more food at much lower cost than ever before. the other hand, automation decreases the hours of labor applied to production. Today we see factories run by just a few worke years ago mighthave had a hundred. Thus the net effect of autom on GDP mightbe neutral or positive but, since it has the eliminate jobs, automation mighthave the effect of reducing employment, and thus incomes, and thus consumption. Globalization —The integration of nations into a worldecono add to total worldeconomic output, in part because of benefi specialization, or it may not, leaving it a zero-sum (or exercise. But clearly, globalization can have differential effects individual nations’ economies (and createwinners and loserswithin nation). The massive increase in the number of factory described abovecertainly accelerated China’s economic growth over last thirty years by permitting it to become a leading export of the world. However, that same trend caused developed nation a lot of goodsfrom Chinathat they otherwise mighthave produced themselves, thus curtailing their own GDP. The few million manufacturing jobs estimated to have been lost to Chinasince 2000 certainly made U.S. economic growth lower than it otherwise would have been, although one would need to take into account the importing low-priced goodsfrom Chinato estimate the total impact the U.S. economy.

∾ The U.S. was blessed with an intact infrastructure coming out of II, and it benefitted greatly from the Baby Boomin post-war birth created a massive upsurge in economic growth. American produ the best in the world, and American corporations were wildly the yet-to-globalize world, American workers could remain the bestfrom competitionfrom goodsproduced more cheaply elsewhere. Improving management techniques and rapid increases in productivitywere further contributors. Thus secular economic growth in the U.S. was rapid contributingto demand for consumption and thus creating a virtu from whichmany benefitted . . . but it was not one that could continue unchanged. More recently, economic growth appears to have slowed in the well as elsewhere). Is this a short-term cyclical change relative underlying long-term trend, or a change in the long-term trend itself take many years before we know definitively.But there has arisena schoo thought blaming it on “secular stagnation”—that is, a fundamenta the long-term trend. Gainsin population and productivityhave declined in the U.S., as the have in other developed nations. Taken together, these two thingssugg GDP will grow more slowly in the U.S. in the coming years than years following World War II. It is postulated that the majoradva productivityof the recentpast will not be replicated in the future. the availability of much-cheaper labor elsewhere makes it unlikely U.S. will be able to compete on price to produce the manufactur requires; this has obviously negative implications in the U.S. for among less-skilled and less-educated Americans, income inequality, and standards of livingrelative to people in other countries. Theseissue course, played an obvious part in the 2016 presidential election. Changes in population growth and productivitygrowth can require to take effect, but clearly they can affect countries’ economic grow the 20th century, the U.S. surpassed Europe as an economic powe Japan seemed to sprint forward in the 1970sand 1980s, threatening over the world, until the late ’80s, when it fell back into negligible The emerging markets—and especially China—were the site of rapid over the last few decades, and while their growth is slower at they may well outgrow the developed worldin the next few decades. has human resources that can make it a rapid-growth economy increase its efficiency and reduce corruption. And frontier nations and Bangladesh stand behind the emerging nations, waiting for their rapid growers.

Societies rise and fall, and they speed up and slow down in terms of economic growth relative to each other. This underlying trend in grow clearly follows a long-term cycle,although the short-run ups and around it are more discernible and thus more readily discussed. Short-Term Economic Cycles As I mentioned earlier, economic forecasters and the consumers of product are usually preoccupiedby the rate of GDP growth in year or two. In other words, they’re concerned about the growth in the upward swingof the short-term economic cycle and its durat well as whether it’ll go negative for two quarters in the down thus be termed a recession. Thesethingsrepresent short-term fluctuation around the long-term growth trend as illustrated a few pages back factors that produce the long-term trend change little from quarter and year to year, why should short-term changes be of great conc why should they even occur? Why isn’t there just growth at the —say2%—every year? Thesequestions provide a good opportunity to introduce some of thi book’s protagonists: psychology,emotion and decision-making processes. Birthsand productivityoften tend to be viewed as independentand almo mechanical variables. Birthsresult from procreation,and the reasons for it and the rate at whichit takes place are usually quite steady over Likewise, the rate of change in the level of productivity—in outpu labor—is viewed as being dictated largely by technological gains dissemination. In other words, although economies are made up of level of economic growth isn’t thought to be highly reflective people’s ups and downs. But, in fact, it is. Whilethe long-term trend sets the potential ec growth rate, the actuallevel of each year’sGDP will vary relative to whichthe trend dictates . . . largely because of the invol Birth rate may determine the long-term trendsin the number of ho worked, but other factors can introduce variation in the short run. willingness to work is not constant. Theremay be times when conditions discourage people from seeking a place in the workforce, as previ mentioned, and also times when worldevents alter the level of consumptio The most obvious example is the ability of worldevents to discourages economic activity. The sub-prime mortgage crisis and financial institution meltdown that reached its apex with the bankruptcy of Lehm Brothers in September 2008 discouragedconsumers from buying, investors

from providing capital, and companies from building factories and expa workforces. Thesecutbacks occurred even among people who hadn’t jobs, suffered home foreclosure or seen declines in the value of their portfolios. Thesedevelopments quickly affected the overall economy, result was a serious recession lasting from December 2007 to June If the number of workers working and the amount they ea constant, we mightexpect the amount they spendon consumption similarly constant. But it isn’t. Spending fluctuates more than employmen and earnings because of variation in something called“the marginal propensity to consume”: of every additional dollarearned, it determines percentage that will go to consumption. Because this propensity is the short run, consumption can vary independently of income. Earners may choose to spenda higher percentage of their ea consumption because: the daily headlines are favorable; they believe election results presage a stronger economy, or lower taxes; consumer credit has become more readily available; asset appreciation has made them feel richer; or their team won the World Series. The fourthof these factors—the so-called “wealth effect”—is particula noteworthy.Asset owners (a) are probably unlikely to fund consumptio selling their stocks or homes and (b) should recognize that can prove ephemeral and thus aren’ta good reason to alter spending Yet asset appreciation does tend to lead them to spendmore. This phenomenon demonstrates the contributionof psychology to behavior, behavior to short-term economic variation. It’s particularly important in this vein to note the extentto whichec expectations can be self-fulfilling. If people (and companies) belie futurewill be good, they’ll spendmore and investmore . . . and will be good, and vice versa.It’s my belief that most companies concluded that the Crisisof 2008 wouldn’t be followed by a V-shaped recov been the rule in the last few recessions. Thus they declined to expa factories or workforces, and the resulting recovery was modest and the U.S. (and even more anemic elsewhere). Another reason for short-term variation concerns inventories. Business may overestimate the demand for their products in a given perio increase production such that it exceeds the amount they can sell. may hold production constant but encounter surprisinglysoft demand. In either case, more goodswill be produced than sold. The excess will be

to inventories. That, in turn, is likely to cause production in subsequent periods to be adjusted downward until inventories are restored to levels. In this way, additions to and reductions in inventories often short-term ups and downs in economic output. Theseare only a few examples of the factors that can cause the economy to vary in a given quarter or year from the growth output that birth rate and productivitygains mightsuggest. They are the of factors that are not “mechanical” or reliable in nature. from human behavior, and thus they are uncertain and unpredictable. ∾ This leads me to add a few wordsabout economic forecasts. Manyinves predicate their actions on forecasts that they make themselves or obtai economists, banksor the media. And yet I doubt many such forecasts information that’s likely to add value and lead to investment success. (For more extensive discussion of “whatwe don’t know,” see chapter 14 Most Important Thing.) Here’s how I view the foundation for considering this issue: In investing, it’s easy to achieve performance that is equal average investor or a market benchmark. Since it’s easy to be average, real investment success must consis outperforming other investors and the averages. Investment success largely a relative concept, measured on the basis of relativ Simply being right about a coming event isn’t enough to ensure relative performance if everyone holds the same view and as everyone is equally right. Thus success doesn’t lie in being ratherin being more right than others. Similarly, one doesn’t have to be right in order to be succes wrong than others. Success doesn’t come from having a correct forecast, but superior forecast. Can such forecasts be obtained? Most economic forecasts consist of extrapolations of current lev long-term trends. And since the economy usually doesn’t depart those levelsand trends, most extrapolation forecasts turn out to be But those extrapolation forecasts are likely to be commonly shared, reflected in the market pricesfor assets, and thus not generators performance—even when they come true. Here’s how NobelPrize–winning economist Milton Friedman put it:

All these people see the same data, read the same material, and s their time tryingto guess what each other is going to say. [Their forecasts] will always be moderately right—and almost never of m use. The forecasts that are potentially valuable are those that correctly for deviation from long-term trendsand recentlevels. If a forecaster make non-conforming, non-extrapolation prediction that turns out to be correct, outcome is likely to come as a surprise to the other market they scramble to adjusttheir holdings to reflect it, the result is gains for the few who correctly foresaw it. There’s only one catch majordeviations from trend (a) occur infrequentlyand (b) are hard to correctly predict, most unconventional, non-extrapolation forecasts turn out be incorrect, and anyone who invests on their basis is usually belowaverage. So these are the possibilitiesI see with regard to economic for Most economic forecasts are just extrapolations. Extrapolations are usually correct but not valuable. Unconventional forecasts of significant deviation from trend would very valuable if they were correct, but usually they aren’t. forecasts of deviation from trend are incorrect and also not valuab A few forecasts of significant deviation turn out to be correc valuable—leadingtheir authors to be lionized for their acumen—bu hard to know in advance whichwill be the few right ones. Since overall batting average with regard to them is low, uncon forecasts can’t be valuable on balance. Thereare forecasters who famous for a singledramatic correct call, but the majority forecasts weren’t worthfollowing. Taken together, these three conclusions on economic forecasting aren’t very encouraging. Thus it’s not for nothing that John Kenneth Galb “We have two classes of forecasters: those who don’t know—and those who don’t know they don’t know.” Secular changes in long-term economic cycles are hard to pre correctness of forecasts of such changes is hard to assess. The of short-term economic cycles, too, are hard for any one person consistentlypredict better than others. It’s tempting to act on econ predictions, especially since the payoff for correct ones theoretically high. But the difficulty of being able to do so correctly and consi mustn’t be underestimated.

∾ Here is what I believe to be the bottom line on economic The output of an economy is the product of hours worke hour; thus the long-term growth of an economy is determined by fundamental factors like birth rate and the rate of gain (but also by other changes in society and environment). These usually change relatively little from year to year, and only gradua from decade to decade. Thus the average rate of growth over long periods of time. Only in the longest of time frame secular growth rate of an economy significantly speed up But it does. Giventhe relative stability of underlying secular growth, one tempted to expect that the performance of economies would consistent from year to year. However, a number of factors variability, causing economic growth—even as it follows the trendline on average—toalso exhibit annual variability. Thesefactor can perhaps be viewed as follows: Endogenous—Annual economic performance can be influenced b variation in decisions made by economic units: for consumers to spendor save, for example, or for businesses to expand o to add to inventories (calling for increased production) or s inventories (reducing production relative to what it mightotherwi have been). Often these decisions are influenced by the state o mind of economic actors, such as consumers or the manage businesses. Exogenous—Annual performance can also be influenced by ( man-made events that are not strictly economic, such as th occurrence of war; governmentdecisions to change tax rates o adjusttrade barriers; or changes caused by cartels in th commodities, or (b) natural events that occur without th involvement of people, such as droughts, hurricanes and earthquakes. Long-term economic growth is steady for long periods of subject to change pursuant to long-term cycles. Short-term economic growth follows the long-term trend on averag it oscillates around that trendline from year to year. People try hard to predict annual variation as a source investing profit. And on average they’re close to the truth time. But few people do it right consistently; few do it

than everyone else; and few correctly predict the majordeviations trend. ∾ I often find—miraculously—that just as I’m just about to conclude I’m writing, the perfect example pops up in real life or in Thus, as I was completing the first draft of this chapter on June was reported that a majority of votersin the United Kingdom leave the European Union. This decision was generally unexpected:the British pound and Lo stock market had strengthened in the days leading up to the London bookmakerswere giving odds that Brexit would be voted much for forecasting. This decision may have significant ramifications—economic, socialand political—for the U.K. and Europe, but also for the rest of the negative impact on the psyches of consumers, investors or busin may cause near-term economic growth to slow. So may increases in barriers and reduced global efficiency. Further, there’s a chance that this event (and follow-ons such as possible departure of Scotland and Northern Ireland from the Unite Kingdom) will alter long-term growth for the nations directly invol possibly for others. This event may be cited fifty years from now as changed the growth trajectory of majorparts of the worldeconomy, the whole, and as having contributed to a redirection of the Certainly there’s a good chance the economic environment wi in the years aheadfrom what it would have been if the Brexit the other way—that is, that Brexit will cause a turn in Britain’s economic cycle.We just can’t be sure how, to what extent, or what on effects on other economies will be.

V GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT WITH THE ECONOMIC CYCLE Extreme economic cyclicality is considered undesirable.Too much strength can kindle inflation and take the economy so high th recession becomes inevitable. Too much weakness, on the other hand, can cause companies’ profits to fall and can cost people their jo Thus it is part of the job of central bankers and Treasur manage cycles. Since cycles produce ups and downs that can be excessive, for dealing with them are counter-cyclical and applied with a c their own—ideally inverse to the economic cycle itself. However, li everything else involving cycles, managing them is far from easy. I weren’t, we wouldn’t see the extremes we do. In most of the world, capitalism and free markets are accepted constituting the best system for allocating economic resources and encouraging economic output. Nations have tried other systems, such socialism and communism, but in many cases they have either switched wholesale to or adopted aspects of free markets. Despite the widespread acceptance of the free-market system, markets rarelyleft entirely free. Government involvement takes many forms, from the enactment and enforcement of laws and regulations to direc participation in the economy through entities like the U.S.’s agencies. Perhaps the most important form of governmentinvolvement, however, comes in the attempts of central banksand national control and affect the ups and downs of economic cycles. Central Banks

Over the centuries, significant power and responsibility has been veste central bankssuch as the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank.Whereas in their primary roles may have been to issue currency and exchange it request for gold or silver, today central banksare concerned prim managing economic cycles. Early on, many central banksissued currency. As time passed an bankstook responsibility for cycles, their primary concern usually with inflation. In particular, the worldwent through periods of hype with inflation running in the hundreds of percent per year, as Germany during the post–World War I Weimar Republic. Thus centr turned to managing inflation. The goal wasn’t to eliminate inflat is accepted as (a) having a variety of salutary aspects unavoidable—but to control it. The reasons for inflation are somewhat mysterious and, like many oth processes described here, unreliable and sporadic. Sometimes a given set circumstances will give rise to inflation, and at other times the same circumstances will lead to more or less inflation, or to none at general, inflation is viewed as a result of a strong upwa economic cycle. Whenthe demand for goodsincreases relative to the supply, “demand-pull” inflation. Wheninputsto production such as labor and raw materials increase price, there can be “cost-push” inflation. Finally, when the value of an importing country’s currency declin relative to that of an exporting country, the cost of the can rise in the importing country. The cost of goodscan escalate for any of these reasons. That’s But, as I just said, sometimes these events can occur without an accompanying accelerationof inflation. And sometimes inflation can incre without these thingsbeing present. Thereis a large psychological comp that influences all of this. Since inflation results from economic strength, the efforts of ce bankers to control it amount to tryingto take some of the economy. They can include reducing the money supply, raising and selling securities. Whenthe private sectorpurchases securities from central bank, money is taken out of circulation; this tends to reduc demand for goodsand thus discourages inflation. Central bankers who strongly dedicated to keeping inflation under control are called“haw They tend to do the thingslisted abovesooner and to a greater

The problem, of course, is that actions of this kind are an They can accomplish the goal of keeping inflation under control, but restrain the growth of the economy, with effects that can be beneficial. The issue is complicatedby the fact that in the last few decades, central bankshave been given a second responsibility. In addition controlling inflation, they are expected to support employment, and, course, employment does better when the economy is stronger. So banksencourage this through stimulative actions such as increasing the money supply, decreasing interest rates, and injecting liquidity into economy by buying securities—as in the recentprogram of “qua easing.” Central bankers who focus strongly on encouraging empl lean toward these actions are called“doves.” The bottom line is that most central bankers have two jobs: to inflation, whichrequires restraining the growth of the economy, and support employment, whichcalls for stimulating economic growth. In words, their dual responsibilities are in opposition to each other, and their job requires a delicate balancing act. We have discussed the fact that the economy is cyclical, growing at some times and weakly (or contracting)at others. An economic tends to encourage employment but can cause inflation to accelerate. Stagnation or contraction, on the other hand, discourages inflation but can into employment. So the job of the central banker is to counter-cyclically: that is, to limit the extentof cycles, slowing in times of prosperity in order to keep inflation under control, and the economy during slowdowns to support employment. But just as the investor’s insight into cycles is limited an the central banker’s. His two tasks—stimulating the economy and it—obviously can’t both be done at once. Is it time for stimulus Whichever one is chosen, how much of it? If interest rates are have been since the Global Financial Crisis, in order to provide economic growth is weak (also as it has been), can rates be an increase in inflation without choking off the economy’s tepid cycles are challenging for investors to understand and predict, they easierfor central bankers to manage. Governments Governments have a greater variety of responsibilities than centr only a small portion of whichare related to the economic matte

central banks, they also are charged with stimulating the economy appropriate,albeit not directly with controlling inflation. In their work with the economy, treasuries, too, are concerned with regulating the cycle:not fast and not too slow. Governments’ main tools for managing the economic cycle are fiscal, defined as being concerned primarily with taxing and spending. Thus governments want to stimulate their countries’ economies, they can cut increase governmentspending and even distribute stimulus checks, maki more money available for spending and investment. On the other hand they think economies are growing so fast as to be at risk of setting the scene for a resulting slowdown—governments can incre or cut spending, reducing demand in their economies and thereby economic activity. The ultimate topic under this heading concerns national deficits. In distant past, most governments ran balanced budgets. In short, they able to spendmore money than they brought in through taxes (or But then the concept of national debt arose,and the ability to introduced the potential for deficits: that is, for governments to than they take in. I seem to remember from my youth that there was activedebate reg the propriety of countries having national debt, but we no longe resistance on that subject. It is generally accepted that countries money, although questions do arise from time to time about how much prudent. The answer generally seemsto be “not too much more than now.” The economic theory propoundedby John Maynard Keynes in the dwelled heavily on the role of governments vis-à-vis cycles. economics focuses on the role of aggregate demand in determinin of GDP, in contrast with earlier approaches that emphasized the role supply of goods. Keynes said governments should manage cycle by influencing demand. This, in turn, could be accomplished throu the use of fiscal tools, including deficits. Keynes urged governments to aid a weak economy by stimulati by running deficits. Whena government’s outgo—its spending—excee income—primarily from taxes—on balance it puts funds into the econ This encourages buying and investing. Deficits are stimulative, and thus Keynes considered them helpful in dealing with a weak economy. On the other hand, when economies are strong, Keynes said governm should run surpluses, spending less than they take in. This removes from the economy, discouraging spending and investment. Surpluses are contractionary and thus an appropriate response to booms. However, of surpluses to cool a thriving economy is little seen these days

to be a wet blanket when the party is going strong. And spend you bring in attracts fewer votes than do generous spending programs. surpluses have become as rare as buggy whips. ∾ Extreme economic cyclicality is considered undesirable.Too much strength can kindle inflation and take the economy so high that a reces inevitable. Too much weakness, on the other hand, can cause companies’ profits to fall and cost people their jobs. Thus it is part of the job of central bankers and Treasury manage cycles through the techniques described above. Since cycle ups and downs that can be excessive, the tools for dealing with counter-cyclical and applied with a cycle of their own—ideally inver economic cycle itself. However, like everything else involving cycles—such as knowing wh we are and what to do about them—managing them is far from easy. weren’t, we wouldn’t see the extremes we do.

VI THE CYCLE IN PROFITS The process that determines a company’s profits is complex a multivariate. The economic cycle has a profound effect on some companies’ sales but less on others. Largely because of differen operating and financial leverage, a given percentage change in s has a much greater impact on profits for some companies th others. These days, as I said earlier, the normal growth rate for U be about 2–3%per year. Growth mightcome in at 1% or so in or hit 4% or 5% in boom times (or during a recovery from annualized growth rate mighteven turn negative by a couple of tough times,and if it stays negative for two successive quarters, be recession. So there are fluctuations, but they are moderate: annual U.S. GDP almost always falls between 5% and minus2%, and even extremes are seen only once every decade at most. Does that mean companies’ profits also are stablefrom year to year? Fa from it. Profits can gain much more than 5% in good times and decli more than 2% in bad. They, too, follow a cycle—one that is influ economic cycle,but that rises and falls much more than the economy as whole. So profits are more volatile than GDP. The question is factors cause the profit cycle to perform differently from the economic First, the ups and downs of the economy absolutely are very im determiningthe rise and fall of corporate profits. More GDP means—m than anything else—more consumption, and thus stronger demand for That, in turn, means greater volumes sold and higher selling work and higher wages, and thus still more consumption. All those together mean increased revenues for businesses. By definition, the collective sales of all businesses are one and the GDP, and they reflect the same rate of change. But that doesn’t companies follow the same pattern.

Sales are responsive to the economic cycle in some industries, and in they aren’t. And some respond a lot, while othersrespond just a Sales of industrial raw materials and componentsare directly respon to the economic cycle.Whenbusiness collectively increases its output that is, when GDP expands—ittakes more chemicals, metals, plastic, energy, wire and semiconductors to do so, and vice versa. On the other hand, everyday necessities like food, beverages and medicine aren’thighly responsive to the economic cycle.People generally consume them regardless of what’s going on in the (But demand isn’t absolutely constant: people trade down in recess —buying cheaper food and eatingat home ratherthan in restaurants— and they trade up in times of prosperity. And, sadly,people who struggling financially may cut down even on their consumption of “necessities” when forced to choose between food, medications payments.) Demand for low-cost consumer items (like everyday clothing, newspapers and digital downloads) isn’t very volatile, while demand luxury goodsand vacation trips may be. Purchases of big-ticket “durable goods”—things like cars and homes individuals and trucksand factory equipment for businesses—are highly responsive to the economic cycle.First, the fact that they’re durabl means they last a long time, so replacementcan be deferred economic weakness. Second, because they cost a lot, they’re affordin bad times and easierto affordgood times.And third, businesses generally need more of them when business is good and less when isn’t. Thesethingsmake the demand for durables highly responsive the economic cycle. Demand for everyday services generally isn’t volatile. If they’r necessary (like transportation to work)and low-priced (like haircuts), demand won’tbe highly sensitive to changes in the econo services like these have a limited shelf life and can’t be stored have to be purchased continually. But demand still can vary based economic conditions: for example, a haircut can be made to weeks ratherthan three. In addition, sales of some products respond to cycles other tha Because durables are expensive and can be paid for over their long demand for them can go up and down (everything else being equal) fluctuations in the credit cycle make financing more and less readily available. And some thingsare influenced by non-cyclical developments:

example, the demand for new cell phones and laptops responds reductions, new product introductions and improvements in technology For the most part, however, economic growth dominates the process through whichsales are determined. Sales generally rise strongly when GDP growth is strong and less so (or they decline) when it isn’t. ∾ But the linkage between economic growth and profit growth is imperfect. This is because the movements of the economic cycle aren’ only thing that influences sales (as just shown), and also because a sales doesn’t necessarily result in an equivalent change in profits. main reasons for this latter phenomenon is the fact that most busin characterized by leverage of two types.Theseare elements that magn response of profits to a change in sales. The meaning of more immediately obvious from the British word for it: gearing. First, businesses are subject to operating leverage. Profits equal rev minuscosts (or expenses). Revenues are the result of sales, and we know sales fluctuate for a large number of reasons. So do costs, and of costs fluctuate in different ways, particularly in response to chan sales. Most businesses have some costs that are fixed, some that are semi-fixed, and some that are variable. For example, take a taxicab company: It has its headquarters in an officebuilding, but when ridersh a bit, it doesn’t need to add more officespace. This is fixed cost. It has a fleet of taxis. The current fleet can accommodate increase in ridership, but if trips increase enough, it may additional cabs. Thus the expense for cabs is semi-fixed. Its cabs are powered by gasoline. If an increase in busine cabs to go x% more miles,their consumption of gasoline is increase by that same x%. For the taxi company, then, the cost gasoline is variable. The sum of the abovemeans that if the company’s ridership (an revenues) increases by 20%, its spending on officefacilities won’tincre its spending on cabs probably won’tincrease initially, but may later; spending on gasoline will increase immediately and proportionately. taxicab company’s total costs will increase with an increase in rider usually less than its revenues. This will cause its profit margin to meaning the increase in operating profits will be considerably increase in sales: that’s operating leverage. In general, it’s higher

companies for whom a largerpercentage of costs are fixed and lowe ones whose costs are more variable. Operating leverage is great for companies when the economy does we sales rise. But when the opposite happens, it’s less good: profits can than sales, and if conditions are bad enough, profits can turn into Companies can, however, take actions to limit the effect on profits decline. Thesecan include laying off employees and closing store economy measures usually need time to take effect; (b) they some increased expense in the short run, as in the case of severance generally can limit the negative effect but not eliminate it; and (d) work as well as projected. The second form of leverage affecting most companies is financial leverage. Let’s say a given company’s operating profits decline by 33%),from $3,000 to $2,000. If the company’s $30,000 capital has been sourced entirely through equity, meaning it hasn’tborro its capital and doesn’t have to make any interest payments, that flow through to the company’s net income—the “bottom line”—and would fall by 33%. But most companies are financed with a combination of equity Debtholdersoccupy a seniorposition relative to the equity inves said to be in the “first-loss” position; this means the equity declines in profits, and then all losses, until the equity is time any further lossesfall to the debtholders.As long as there’s company, the outcome for the debtholders remains unchanged—they mere receive the interest payments they were promised. (That’s why bond notes are called“fixed income securities”: the outcome is fixed.) Let’s assume the capital structure of this company consists of debt (requiring annual interest payments of $1,500) and $15,000 That means the $1,000 decline in operating profits reduces from $1,500 ($3,000 of operating profit before interest payments, $1,500 of interest) to $500 ($2,000 minus$1,500). In other word decline in operating profit (from $3,000 to $2,000) causes this income to decline by 67% (from $1,500 to $500). The magn decline in operating profit on the net income illustrates financial work. ∾ The process that determines a company’s profits is complex and The economic cycle has a profound effect on some companies’ sales but on others. Largely because of differences in operating and finan a given percentage change in sales has a much greater impact some companies than for others.

And, of course, idiosyncratic developments can have a very sig impact on profits. Thesecan include thingslike management’s decis regarding inventories, production levels, and capital investment; technologic advancements (on the part of a company, its industry competitor companies in competing industries—see below); changes in regulation taxation; and even developments exogenous to the industry, or even business world, such as weather, war and fads. The economic cycle the backdrop for changes in companies’ sales and profits, but the deviation from the cycle-based expectation is vast. Idiosyncratic developments are the main reason. I’ll take a moment here to deal with the subject of technolo devote a separate chapter to it). “Disrupt” is the word of ability of new technologies to disrupt traditional industries can competitionand dismantle the incumbents’ profit margins. Take, for exam the newspaper industry. As recently as the 1990s: Newspaperswere considered an indispensable source of information. Most people bought a newspaper daily—or maybe one on work and another on the way home—and the cost was small. Even if you bought the newspaper on Monday, you still had another on Tuesday; there was no “shelflife” or protracted useful Newspaperswere one of the very few ways local businesses like movie theaters and used-car dealers could reach their customers, and a newspaper from one city generally couldn’t compete for local advertising from another. Competition came primarily from other newspapers,television and radio. Once a newspaper was strongly established in a city, howev would be hard to displace—thus newspapers were viewed as with strong “moats.” Because this combination of factors was seen as making ne position largely impregnable, newspaper company stocks were thoug “defensive,” benefiting from highly stablerevenues and profits. Who would have thought that the Internet and other formsof on communication would significantly impact the fortunes of news than twenty years? Today many companies compete to bring infor directly to consumers. Newspapersare struggling to maintain their mark share and profitability, as “free”has come to characterizemany aspects digital world, knocking newspapers’ business models off stride Newspapersprovide an excellent example of the ability of an factorto influence a company’s sales and profits, completely apart from economic and traditional profit cycle.But isn’t technology cyclical itself?

Technologies are born, they prosper, and then they are replaced by ones. The innovation of a few years ago can be supplanted more rapid ever these days, and the list of industries that are perceived as being to disruption seemsto shrink every day. Thirty or forty years ago, it seemed as if the worldwas a provided a relatively unchanging backdrop for life, and economic developments—including cycles—played out against that unchanging backdrop. Today, largely because of technological developments socialand cultural), nothing seemsunchanging.In fact, much appears to changing too fast for most of us to keep up with it.

VII THE PENDULUM OF INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY In business, financial and market cycles, most excesses on th —andthe inevitable reactions to the downside, whichalso tend to overshoot—are the result of exaggeratedswings of the pendulum o psychology.Thus understanding and being alert to excessive swings is an entry-level requirementfor avoiding harm from cyclical extremes, and hopefully for profiting from them. So far we have discussed the economic cycle,governments’ efforts influence the economic cycle,and the profit cycle.To a great extentthese thingsprovide the backdrop or environment for investing. And they to be exogenous to investing—independent processes that operate on own. But anyone who thinksthese thingsare “mechanical” in their opera and in full control of investment results underestimates the role or, I tend to say interchangeably, emotion. (Psychology and emot certainly different elements, but I see no meaningful way to distin between the two in terms of their effect on the investment environmen First, swings in emotion/psychology strongly influence the economi corporate profit cycles, as indicated. And second, they play a very part in causing ups and downs in the investment world—especiall short run. As I noted in chapter I, there is no fundamental distinctio and pendulum swings. In fact, I could have made life easierfor all titlingthis chapter “The Cyclein Psychology” and fittingthis phenomeno within a consistent nomenclature. But, for some unspecified reason, introduced the notion of the “pendulum”in emotion/psychology in second memo to clients, “First Quarter Performance” (April1991 I haven’t founda reason to distance myself from it in going to continue to refer to it here. To introduce the pendulum, I’m going to borrow from what I wr 1991:

The mood swings of the securities markets resemble the movem a pendulum. Although the midpoint of its arc best describes th location of the pendulum “on average,” it actually spends v its time there. Instead, it is almost always swinging toward from the extremes of its arc. But whenever the pendulum is n either extreme, it is inevitable that it will move back toward th midpoint sooner or later. In fact, it is the movement toward extreme itself that supplies the energy for the swingback. Investment markets make the same pendulum-like swing: between euphoria and depression, between celebrating positive developments and obsessing over negatives, and thus between being overpriced and underpriced. This oscillation is one of the most dependable features of the investment world, and investor psychology seemsto spendmuch more time at the extremes than it does at a “happy medium I returned to the topic in “It’s All Good” (July 2007). Be make a new observation,I listed a half-dozen additional elements in pendulum swings are seen: between greed and fear, between optimism and pessimism, between risk tolerance and risk aversion, between credence and skepticism, between faith in value in the futureand insistence of concrete value in the present, and between urgency to buy and panic to sell. I find particularly interesting the degree to whichthe polarities li aboveare interrelated.Whena market has been rising strongly for a while, we invariably see all nine of the elements listed first. A the market’s been declining, we see all of the elements listed s Rarely do we see a blend of the two sets, given that the c each are causally related, with one giving rise to the next. A lot of what I wrote then about the pendulum correspondsdirectly what I wrote about cycles back in chapter I. There’s a swin extreme or the other;then the attainment of an extreme that can’t exceeded; and then a swingback toward the midpoint, fueled by

of momentum.It mightbe said that the pendulum also tends to regre the mean or midpoint, but—like most cycles—it usually overshoots and continues toward the extreme opposite from whence it came. ∾ Why is the pendulum important? In essence, the too-strong upward downward swings of the cycles I’m covering in this book large —andrepresent—psychological excesses in action. The trendline rate of growth in economic output and corpor moderate, and when participants’ pro-cyclical decisions cause growth be abnormally rapid (otherthan in times of recovery from recession), this usually represents a too-optimistic expansion from whichthere be a retreat. Likewise, it seemsrational that, in the long run, stocks overal provide returns in line with the sum of their dividends plus growth in corporate profits, or something in the mid-to-high digits. Whenthey returnmuch more than that for a while, that likely to prove to have been excessive—borrowing from the futureand thus rendering stocks risky—meaning a downward correction is order. In business, financial and market cycles, most excesses on the the inevitable reactions to the downside, whichalso tend to overshoot— the result of exaggeratedswings of the pendulum of psychology.Thus understanding and being alert to excessive swings is an entry-level requirementfor avoiding harm from cyclical extremes, and hopefully for profiting from them. The norms in terms of growth and appreciation are in so and “healthy.” And if the participants built their behavior around those —instead of occasionally building up hopesfor more and thus settin stage for eventual moves toward less—the worldwould be a tempestuous, and less-error-prone place.But that’s not the nature of I touched on the inapplicability of norms in “The Happy July 2004, but now with data brought up to date through 2016): Putting it all together, fluctuations in attitudes and behavior c to make the stock market the ultimate pendulum. In my 47 f calendar years in the investment business, starting with 1970, the annual returns on the S&P 500 have swung from plus 37% to 37%. Averaging out good years and bad years,the long-run returnis

usually statedas 10% or so. Everyone’s been happywith that typical performance and would love more of the same. But remember, a swinging pendulum may be at its midpoint average,” but it actually spends very little time there. The same is of financial market performance. Here’s a fun question ( illustration): for how many of the 47 years from 1970 through 2 was the annual returnon the S&P 500 within 2% of “norma is, between 8% and 12%? I expected the answer to be “not that often,” but I learn that it had happened only three times!It also surprised me to learn that the returnhad been more than 20 percentage pointsaway from “normal”—either up more than 30% or down more than 10%— more than one-quarter of the time: 13 out of the last 47 years.S thing that can be said with total conviction about stock market performance is that the average certainly isn’t the norm.Market fluctuations of this magnitude aren’tnearly fully explained by the changing fortunes of companies, industries or economies. They’re largely attributable to the mood swings of investors. Lastly, the times when returnis at the extremes aren’trandomly distributed over the years.Rather they’re clustered, due to the f investors’ psychological swings tend to persist for a while— paraphrase Herb Stein, they tend to continue until they stop. Most of those 13 extreme up or down years were within a year or tw another year of similarly extreme performance in the same d How about an example of the pendulum in action? One of the most time-honored market adages says that “markets between greed and fear.” There’s a fundamental reason for this: people fluctuate between greed and fear. In other words, sometimes feel positive and expect good things, and when that’s the case, they greedy and fixate on making money. Their greed causes them to make investments, and their bidding causes markets to rise and appreciate. But at other times,they feel less good and their expectations turn ne In that case, fear takes over. Rather than enthuse about making mone worryabout losingit. This causes them to shrink from buying—eliminat the upward impetus beneath asset prices—andperhaps to sell, push down. Whenthey’re in “fear mode,” people’s emotions bring nega to bear on the markets. Here’s part of the discussion of the swingbetween greed and fea “The Happy Medium” (July 2004):

WhenI was a rookie analyst, we heard all the time that “ market is driven by greed and fear.” Whenthe market environ in healthy balance, a tug-of-war takes place between optimists in on making money and pessimists seeking to avoid losses. T want to buy stocks, even if they have to pay a price a b yesterday’s close, and the latter want to sell them, even if it’s on a downtick. Whenthe market doesn’t go anyplace, it’s because the senti behind this tug-of-war is evenly divided, and the people—or f —on the two ends of the rope carry roughly equal weight. The optimists may prevail for a while, but as securities are b become more highly priced, and then the pessimists gain sway a sell them down. . . . It didn’ttake long in my early days, however, for me to reali often the market is driven by greed or fear. At the times th count, large numbers of people leave one end of the rope f Eitherthe greedy or the fearful predominate, and they move th market dramatically. Whenthere’s only greed and no fear, for example, everyone wantsto buy, no one wantsto sell, and few p can think of reasons why pricesshouldn’t rise. And so they do—of in leaps and bounds and with no apparent governor. Clearly that’s what happened to tech stocks in 1999. Greedwas dominant characteristic of that market. Thosewho weren’t participating were forced to watcheveryone else get rich. “Pruden investors” were rewarded with a feeling of stupidity. The buyers moving that market felt no fear. “There’s a new paradigm,” w battle cry, “get on board before you miss the boat. And by the w the price I’m buying at can’t be excessive, because the market always efficient.” Everyone perceived a virtuous cycle in favor o tech stocks to whichthere could be no end. But eventually something changes. Eithera stumbling block materializes, or a prominent company reports a problem, o exogenous factorintrudes. Pricescan also fall under their own weight or based on a downturn in psychology with no obvious cause. Certainly no one I know can say exactly what it was that b tech-stock bubble in 2000. But somehow the greed evaporated and fear took over. “Buy before you miss out” was replaced by “Sell before it goes to zero.” And thus fear comes into the ascendancy.People don’t worryabou missing opportunities; they worryabout losingmoney. Irrational exuberance is replaced by excessive caution. Whereas in 1999 p the-sky forecasts for a decade out were embraced warmly, in

investors chastened by the corporate scandals said, “I’ll never trust management again” and “Howcan I be sure any financial s are accurate?” Thus almost no one wanted to buy the bondso scandal-plagued companies, for example, and they sunk to giveaway prices. It’s from the extremes of the cycle of fear and greed th the greatest investment profits, as distressed debt demonstrated in 2003. “Greed/fear” is the most obvious psychological or emotional co along whichinvestors swing, and in many ways the most illustrative. Wha are some of the other key emotional or psychological swings? Most a manner similar to the greed/fear pendulum, and usually this coincidence. The various parameters are interrelated.Here are a few examples. Underlying the swingbetween greed and fear is the swingbetween euphoria and depression. As previously described, for example, it may simply that positive events give rise to greed. Rather, posit encourage euphoria, whichabets greed (and vice versa for negative events, depression and fear). Euphoria and depression are the foundation emotions that give rise to the swings that follow. Euphoric investors may be excited about current developments an that may arise in the future, and this may accentuate their fixation expectation of—profit. On the other hand, depressed investors are unlikely feel positive enough to be greedy. If you think about it, euph inconsistentwith fear, and depression is inconsistentwith greed. In a similar vein, investors also swingbetween optimism and pe Positive events generally give rise to expectations of further and positive outcomes . . . a state better known as optim underlie greed; it makes no sense to think people can be forward to investwhen their expectations are negative. Clearly, optim pessimism encourage other emotions and influence behavior. ∾ The next phenomenon I want to touch on is the tendency of between credulousness and skepticism, and to fluctuate between being entranced by the possibility of profit in the futureand insistent on value in the here and now. Sometimes—usually when thingsare going well in the worldand asset pricesare rising—investors become willing to swallow favorable storie regarding futuredevelopments, buy into appreciated assets, and shoulder elevated risk. But when thingstake a turn for the worse, they beco likely to reject even reasonable projections and decline to buy, largely

because pricesare down (even though that increases the likelihood that are cheap). Some investors spendtheir time working hard to quantify this year’s earnings and the growth thereafter. Others strive to value real a intellectual property and business advantages (and predict what others will pay for them). Still otherstry to deduce the value implica mergers and acquisitions, balance sheet restructurings and private public transactions. In all of these ways and many more, it’s th those in the investment business to predict the futureand put a on it. Let me give you an example. In 2000–01, our distressed debt invested a few hundred million dollars in bankrupt telecom companies. In each case, the purchase price implied a value for th company that was a small fraction of the amounts that had b invested in hard assetssuch as switching gear or fiber-optic cable.I we could resell the equipment for a higher percentage of its c we had paid, the investment would be profitable. The first sale went well, and we made a quick 50%. But soon thereafter, people stopped showing up to bid on these assets. the party to whom we had sold the first company thought h bargain, in later instances the possible buyers shied away from a that were turning out to be in heavyoversupply. And that brings my point. In 1999, investors accepted at face value their telecom companies’ rosy predictions of the future, and they were willing to pay handily for that potential. But in 2001, they saw the potenti largely empty and wouldn’t pay a dime for it, given that th capacity vastlyexceeded its current needs and no one could imagin the excess being absorbed in their lifetime. This cycle in investo willingness to value the futureis one of the most powerful cycles exists. A simple metaphor relating to real estate helped me to this phenomenon: What’s an empty building worth? An e building (a) has a replacementvalue,of course, but it (b) th no revenues and (c) costs money to own, in the form of ta insurance, minimum maintenance, interest payments and opportunity costs. In other words, it’s a cash drain. Wheninvestors are in a pessimistic mood and can’t see more than a few years out, they can only think about the negative cash flows and are unable to imagin time when the building will be rented and profitable. But when th mood turns upward and interest in futurepotential runs high, investo

envision it full of tenants, throwing off vast amounts of c salable at a fancy price. Fluctuation in investors’ willingness to ascribe value to possible futuredevelopments represents a variation on the full-or-empty c Its swings are enormously powerful and mustn’t be underestimate (“TheHappy Medium,” July 2004) ∾ The superior investor is mature, rational, analytical, objective and unemotional. Thus he performs a thorough analysis of investment fundamentals and the investment environment. He calculates the intrin value of each potential investment asset. And he buys when any discount the price from the current intrinsic value,plus any potential increases intrinsic value in the future, together suggest that buying at a good idea. In order to be able to do all the above, the superior inv appropriate balance between fear (which is shorthand for risk avers for loss, and respect for uncertainty and randomness) and greed (a.k.a aspiration, aggressiveness and acquisitiveness). All people feel emotions, the superior investor keeps these conflicting elements in balance. The presence of the two offsetting forcesleads to responsible,wise and even keeled behavior. But the important pointsare these: Few people are always even-keeledand unemotional. For this reason, few investors are capable of staking out position that balances greed and fear—and staying there—as moreless-positive developments arise. To the contrary, most investors swingbetween being greedy when they’re optimistic and fearful when they’re pessimistic. Most swingto those positions at the wrong time—becoming greedi after the emergence of positive developments has caused prices become elevated, and becoming more fearful after negative events caused pricesto become depressed. Here’s some of what I wrote about the swingof psychology in “O Couch” (January 2016): Thereare many more ways in whichnon-objective, non-rational quirks commonly affect behavior. As Carol Tavris pointed out in May 15, 2015 Wall StreetJournal review of Prof. Richard Thaler’ book Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics (2015):

As a socialpsychologist, I have long been amused by economists and their curiously delusional notion of the “rational man.”Rational? Where do these folks live? Even 50 years ago, experimental studies were demonstrating that people stay with clearly wrong decisions ratherthan change them, throwgood money after bad, justify failed predictions ratherthan admit they were wrong, and resist,distort or actively reject information that disputes their beliefs. The difficulty of understanding events, their significanceand their potential ramifications comes in good part from the kinks in in psyches, and it contributes to—and feeds back to exacerbate— investors’ responses. Thus investors tend to emphasize just the positives or the negatives much more often than they take a balance objective approach. And they tend to become optimistic and eager to buy when good news, positively interpreted, has forced pricesup . . and vice versa.All of this is obvious (especially in retrospect). T equally obviously, understanding and dealing with it presents a potential way to improve results. The basic point is that psychology does swing, and most people’s be swings with it. The fluctuation between greed and fear is typical of the psychological pendulum. In fact, it explains not only the most investors, but also—taking investors collectively—the behavior of markets. Markets move upward when events are positive and psych turns up, and they fall when events are negative and psychology turns The pendulum spends only a little of the time at the midpoint Rather, the pendulum is usually swinging toward one extreme first recovering from one psychological extreme—either too high or too —andthen continuing toward the other. The superior investor resists psychological excesses and thus ref participate in these swings. The vast majority of the highly super I know are unemotional by nature. In fact, I believe their is one of the great contributorsto their success. This is one of my most persistent observations and—in a rel of the questions I’m most often asked is whether people can learn unemotional. My answer is “yes and no.” I think it’s possible on the lookout for potential emotional influences and to try to effect. But I also think people who are inherently unemotional much easier. A lack of emotionality is a gift (in investing, not in other areas, like marriage). It’s not my point that emotional peop

can’t be good investors, but it will require a great deal of self-a self-restraint. ∾ In addition to the interrelatedness of the various emotional swin on the last few pages, it’s also important to note the causal phenomena.Just as positive events give rise to euphoria, and euph rise to optimism, and optimism abets an increase in greed, swin of all these elements cause the way investors perceive thingsto fluctu between rosy and dark. Investors’ perception of events is colored swings along the various emotional or psychological arcs. And this perception feeds back, creating more euphoria, optimism and greed. Here’s how I put it in “On the Couch” (January 2016): One of the most significant factors keeping investors from reachin appropriate conclusions is their tendency to assessthe worldwith emotionalism ratherthan objectivity. Their failings take two primary forms: selective perception and skewed interpretation. In other w sometimes they take note of only positive events and ignore th negative ones, and sometimes the opposite is true. And sometimes they view events in a positive light, and sometimes it’s negativ rarelyare their perceptions and interpretations balanced and neutral. Ever since the events of August 2015 in China, I’ve repea foundmyself harking back to one of the oldestcartoons in m and still one of the very best:

“Everything that was good for the market yesterday is no good f © BERNARD SCHOENBAUM The bottom line is that investor psychology rarelygives equal weight to both favorable and unfavorabledevelopments. Likewise, investors’ interpretation of events is usually biased by their emotion whatever is going on at the moment. Most developments have b helpful and harmful aspects. But investors generally obsess a or the other ratherthan consider both. And that recalls another c cartoon:

“On Wall Street today, news of lower interest rates sent the stock market up, but that these rates would be inflationary sent the market down, until the realization stimulate the sluggish economy pushed the market up, before it ultimately overheated economy would lead to a reimposition of higher interest rates.” B © BOB MANKOFF; WWW.BOBMANKOFF.COM It all seemsso obvious: investors rarelymaintain objective, rational, neutral and stablepositions. First they exhibit high levelso optimism, greed, risk tolerance and credulousness, and their resultin behavior causes asset pricesto rise, potential returns to fall, a to increase. But then, for some reason—perhaps the arrival of a tipping point—theyswitch to pessimism, fear, risk aversion and skepticism, and this causes asset pricesto fall, prospective returns to rise, and risk to decrease. Notably, each groupof phenomena tends to happen in unison, and the swingfrom one to the other often g beyond what reason mightcall for. That’s one of the crazy things: in the real world, thing fluctuate between “pretty good”and “not so hot.” But in the w investing, perception often swings from “flawless” to “hopeless.” The pendulum careens from one extreme to the other, spending almost time at “the happymedium” and ratherlittle in the range of reasonableness. First there’s denial, and then there’s capitulation.

The worldis full of positive and negative events, and on mo some of each. And some of the events that occur are ambiguous, havin elements of both good and bad, making them subject to either posit negative interpretation. Take the example of the second cartoon. Low interest rates are because they stimulate business activity and increase the discounted value of futurecash flows. But they’re also bad, since the stronger activity they abet can give rise to inflation and thus signalthe centr that rates should be raised, withdrawing stimulus from the econ Interpretation may not fluctuate between the extremes several times the cartoon suggests. But it does fluctuate excessively,and in fact on a dime. A few years ago my friendJon Brooks supplied this great illustrati skewed interpretation at work. Here’s how investors react to even they’re feeling good about life (which usually means the mark rising): Strong data: economy strengthening—stocks rally Weakdata: Fed likely to ease—stocks rally Data as expected: low volatility—stocks rally Banks make $4 billion: business conditions favorable—stocksrally Banks lose $4 billion: bad news out of the way—stocks Oil spikes: growing global economy contributingto demand—st rally Oil drops: more purchasing power for the consumer—stocks Dollar plunges: great for exporters—stocks rally Dollar strengthens:great for companies that buy from abroad—stocks rally Inflation spikes: will cause assetsto appreciate—stocks rally Inflation drops: improves quality of earnings—stocks rally Of course, the same behavior also applies in the opposite dir psychology is negative and markets have been falling for a while is capable of being interpreted negatively. Strong economic data is likely to make the Fed withdraw stimulus by raising interest rates data is taken to mean companies will have trouble meeting earnings In other words, it’s not the data or events; it’s the interpretati fluctuates with swings in psychology. At the greatest extremes of the pendulum’s swing, a process

appearance of a virtuous circle or a vicious circle. Wheneven predominantly positive and psychology is rosy, negative developments to be overlooked, everything is interpreted favorably, and thingsare often thought to be incapable of taking a turn for the worse. expectation of further advances appears irresistible; past constraints and norms are ignored or rationalized away;and anyone imagining limit the positive futureis dismissed as an old fogey lacking imagination potential for gains comes to be viewed as infinite. Asset price encouraging further optimism. But on the other hand, when thingshave been going badly for months or years and psychology is highly negative, it’s the potential for impr that can be forgotten. Unpleasant events are emphasized and positive ignored. The case for further deterioration seemsrock-solid, its error imagined, and now it’s the downside that seemsto be unlimited. Price resulting in further pessimism. The virtuous circle and the vicious circle are both unrealistic exaggera Whilethey’ve been dreamed up many times in the past, they’ve neve out. But that fact doesn’t enable most people to resist them while rampant. Again, the superior investor—who resists external influences, rem emotionallybalanced and acts rationally—perceives both positive and negative events, weighs events objectively and analyzes them dispa But the truth is that sometimes euphoria and optimism cause most inves view thingsmore positively than is warranted, and sometimes depression and pessimism make them see only bad and interpret events with a nega Refusing to do so is one of the keys to successful investing. ∾ For a bullish phase to hold sway, the environment has to b characterized by greed, optimism, exuberance,confidence, credulity, daring, risk tolerance and aggressiveness. But these traits will not govern a market forever. Eventually they will give way to f pessimism, prudence, uncertainty, skepticism, caution, risk aversion and reticence. . . . Busts are the product of booms, a it’s usually more correct to attribute a bust to the excesse preceding boom than to the specific event that sets off the correcti (“Now What?,” January 2008) Usually, when either set of polar extremes is in the ascendancy fact is readily observable, and thus the implications for investo should be obvious to objective observers. But of course, th the market pendulum to one extreme or the other occurs f

reason that the psyches of most market participants are moving same direction in a herd-like fash-ion. Few of the people involved actually are objective. To conti thread from my memo “Everyone Knows” (April2007), expecti widespread clinical observation during a market maniamakes a as much sense as saying “everyone knows the market has g far.” If many people recognized that it had gone too far, it w there. (“It’s All Good,” July 2007)

VIII THE CYCLE IN ATTITUDES TOWARD RISK The rational investor is diligent, skeptical and appropriately r averse at all times,but also on the lookout for opportunities potential returnthat more than compensates for risk. That’s the id But in good times,we hear most people say, “Risk? What risk? I don’t see much that could go wrong: look how well thingshave been going. And anyway, risk is my friend—the more risk I take, th money I’m likely to make.” Then, in bad times,they switch to something simpler: “I don’ if I ever make another pennyin the market; I just don’t w any more. Get me out!” Now that we’vemoved on from considering cycles in the abstra discussing their operation in the investment world, I’m going to provi brief aside regarding the fundamental nature of investing, in order a foundation for the discussion that will follow. Some of this admi be familiar from earlier chapters. What is investing? One way to think of it is as bearing ris profit. Investors try to position portfolios so as to profit from developments ratherthan be penalized by them. The superior investor simply someone who does this better than others. Do we know what will happen in the future? Some investors thi —or think they have to act as if they do, because if they don’t their jobs and their clients—or they have been pursuing profit through forecasts for so long that they’ve brainwashed themselves into belie possible to be right about the future(and have become conditioned to their low past success rates). Other investors—the smarter, more self-a ones, I think—understand that the futureisn’t knowable with certainty. may form opinions regarding futureevents, but they don’t bet heavily those opinions will prove correct. Since (a) investing consists of dealing with the futurebut (b) the isn’t knowable, that’s wherethe risk in investing comes from. If futur

were predictable, investing would be easy and profit would be sure. general level of returns mightbe low in that case because so involved; that’s a topic for another day.) But the fact that events predictable introduces risk. Because the events that actually occur may different than those that were predicted, or the market’s reaction to may differ from what was expected, a portfolio may be positioned incor for the futurethat unfolds. Since risk (that is, uncertainty with regard to futuredevelopments, an possibility of bad outcomes) is the primary source of the chall investing, the ability to understand, assessand deal with risk is the the superior investor and an essential—I’m tempted to say the requirementfor investment success. Finally as to foundation, it’s important to recognize that while the investment environment variesover time, at any particular point in time given. What I mean is that we can accept the environment or we can reject it and stay on the sidelines, but we don’t have of saying, “I don’t like the environment as it is today; one.” Or ratherwe can demand another, but of course that won’ materialize. My view that risk is the main moving piece in investing makes conclude that at any given point in time, the way investors collectively viewing risk and behaving with regard to it is of overwhelm shaping the investment environment in whichwe find ourselves. And of the environment is key in determininghow we should behav to risk at that point. Assessing whereattitudes toward risk stand in is what this chapter is about—perhaps the most important one in ∾ One of the luckiest breaks I received in my lifetime came opportunity to attendthe University of Chicago’s Graduate School of Business (sincerenamed the BoothSchool) in 1967–69. I, like many in those days, went straight from college to graduate school, perha most efficient route to success, but with the addedincentive provided Vietnam War and accompanying draft. Over the four prior years,I had received a nuts-and-bolts educatio finance at Wharton: practical, non-theoretical and qualitative. My choic graduate school was most fortuitous, as Chicago had just begunto new theory of finance and investment that had been developed, large in the early 1960s. Thus my Wharton training was paired with— juxtaposed against—further study in finance that was almost entirely academic, theoretical and quantitative.

Soon after arriving at Chicago, I was exposed to a graphic much of the foundation for the new theory of investment, and that as the starting point for much of my thinking and writing ever This graphic has become ubiquitous in the investment worldin the since my first exposure to it fifty years ago. Its essence lies in line slopes up and to the right, indicating a positive relationship and return. This is usually misinterpreted, in my view, as mean assetsproduce higher returns,” and thus “if you want to make more the answer is to take more risk.” This formulation cannot be corre riskier assetscould be counted on to produce higher returns, definition wouldn’t be riskier. The linearity with whichthe relationship between risk and returnis presented in the graphic aboveignores the fact that at every level is a range of potential outcomes regarding return, and thus it reliability of the relationship. That’s what makes people say investmentsproduce higher returns. Instead, I think the graphic interpreted as saying, “Investments that seem riskier have to appe promise higher returns, or else no one will make them.” Word and “appear” are the right ones, since they indicate that risk and poten returncan only be estimated, and that the investment worlddoesn’t work a machine. That makes those wordshighly appropriate—actually, comp

—for use when discussing investing. (For a more thorough discussion, see chapter 5 of The Most Important Thing.) People who immediately “get” concepts like risk and risk/return us have an intuitive sense that prepares them to be good investors. I reasons behind my interpretation of the graphic will become clear once I have prompted you to think about it. Let’s suppose a logical investor is offered two investmentswi expected return, but in one case the returnis virtually assured it is highly uncertain. We would expect him to choose people prefercertainty over uncertainty. If a Treasury bond and a startup both seemed likely to return7%, for example, the vast majo people would go with the Treasury. Why take the extra risk assoc the startup if no potential increase in returnis offered to incremental risk? Well, that’s the point:most people would prefera sure 7% over a 7%. In other words, most people are risk-averse. That’s the essen assumption that underlies the “Chicago school” of finance. To describe risk aversion, I say most people prefersafetyand dis —even though I’ve never seen the word “disprefer” in a dictionary. big difference of opinion regarding the propriety of that word, with linguistic establishment railing against it, but I think it’s a doesn’t exist, it should.) The widespread dislike for risk and the resultant insistence on inc potential returnif incremental risk is to be borne are the reasons term Treasurys carry higher yieldsthan short-term Treasurys; why high yield bondspromise higher returns than investment grade bonds; why stock generally expected to returnmore than bonds; and why venture capit investing is expected to provide higher returns than public I’m only talking here about “expectations” and “promises”—or what “may happen” or “should happen”—rather than thingsthat “will happen” or sure to happen.” But that expectation of incremental returngenerally has present in order for most people to voluntarily take on addedrisk. Because of the natural dispreference for risk, it’s entirely rea expect that if they’re going to bear it, investors have to be possibility of an incremental reward. Non-daredevils will do risky thing if they expect a generous reward for doing so. Nothing else Risk aversion is an essential element in investing. People’s av causes them to policethe markets. Because most people are avers they approach investing with caution, they perform careful analysis when considering investments, and especially risky ones,

they incorporate conservative assumptions and appropriate skepticism into their analysis, they demand greater margins of safetyon risky investmentsto against analytical errorsand unpleasant surprises, they insist on healthy risk premiums—the expectation of incremental returns—if they’re going to undertake risky investments, and they refuseto investin deals that make no sense. Theseare all essential parts of the investment process. Because ris investors perform them, investing is a rational field in whichreaso propositions are offered. In short, risk aversion is the main elem markets safe and sane. Please note, however, that the aboveis a normative description, or description of how thingsshould be. Theseare thingsthe superior inves does, and that all investors should do. But the bottom line is does them, and certainly not all investors do them equally at all It’s one of the absolute truths that attitudes toward risk change, doing they alter the investment environment. That’s what the rest of chapter will be about. ∾ Here’s another aside:How is the investment environment formed? is the result of discussions that take place in the marketplace—either each investor’s consciousness or among investors, spoken or signa their actions. Here’s how I described the creation of the inves environment in “Risk and Return Today” in October 2004: I’ll use a “typical” market of a few years back to illustrat worksin real life: The interest rate on the 30-day T-bill mighth been 4%. So an investor says, “If I’m going to go out five y want 5%. And to buy the 10-year note I have to get 6%.” H a higher rate to extend maturity because he’s concerned a to purchasing power, a risk that is assumed to increase w maturity. That’s why the yield curve, whichin reality is a the capital market line, normally slopes upward with the in asset life. Now let’s factorin credit risk. “If the 10-year Treasury pays 6%, I’m not going to buy a 10-year single-A corporate unless I promised 7%.” This introduces the concept of credit spreads. Our hypothetical investor wants100 basis pointsto go from a “guvvie a “corporate.”If the consensus of investors feels the same, that’s w the spread will be.

What if we depart from investment grade bonds? “I’m not goin touch a high yield bond unless I get 600 over a Treasury n comparable maturity.” So high yield bondsare required to yield 12%, for a spread of 6% over the Treasury note, if they’re g buyers. Now let’s leave fixed income altogether. Things get tougher, because you can’t look anywhere to find the prospective returnon investmentslike stocks (that’s because, simply put, their returns conjectural, not “fixed”). But investors have a sense for these things. “Historically S&P stocks have returned 10%, and I’ll only buy th I think they’re going to keep doing so.” So in theory, the c stock investor determines earnings per share,earnings growth rate a dividend payout ratio and inputsthem into a valuation model to at the price from whichS&P stocks will return10% (although I’m n sure the process is nearly that methodical in actuality). “And r stocks should returnmore;I won’tbuy on the NASDAQ unless think I’m going to get 13%.” From there it’s onward and upward. “If I can get 10% from I need 15% to accept the illiquidity and uncertainty associated w real estate. And 25% if I’m going to investin buyouts . . induce me to go for venture capital, with its low success That’s the way it’s supposed to work, and in fact I think does (although the requirements aren’tthe same at all times). T result is a capital market line of the sort that has become many of us, as shown below.

The process described aboveresults in the formation of the ris continuum or “capital market line.” The process establishes the gene of returnrelative to risk, as well as the quantum of incrementa return—or the “risk premium”—that will be expected for the bearing incremental risk. In a rational world, the result will be as follo Investmentsthat seem riskier will be priced so that they appea higher returns. The increase in returnper unit of incremental risk will be reason appropriate. The increase in expected returngenerally will appear to be proportional to the incremental risk (that is, bearing a unit risk at one point on the continuum will appear likely to bring amount of incremental returnas bearing a similar unit of elsewhere on the continuum). Thus there won’tbe particular pointson the continuum whereriskbearing is rewarded much more or much less than at others(that investmentswhose promised risk-adjusted returnis obviously superi the rest). In a rational world, any violations of these provisions would to move such that the pricesof mispriced assetsare bid up or push As a result: the violations would be corrected, all investmentswould offer risk-adjusted returns that are fair each other, and investors could increase their returns only by increasing the amoun risk they bear. If investors always behaved that way, their actions would ca to be marked by “efficient markets” whereno investment offersa adjusted returnthan any other. Of course markets don’t always opera they’re supposed to—things certainly aren’talways priced right—but general suggestion of efficiency is too logical to be disregarded efficiency is another essential topic, but I won’tgo into it furth 2 of The Most Important Thing, as well as the latter half of from January 2014.) ∾ The key thing to note is that fluctuations in attitudes toward risk exceptions to the principles described here. Sometimes investors become

risk-averse, and sometimes they relax their risk aversion and become too tolerant. Whenpositive events occur as described in the last chapter an optimism and greed rise, investors tend to become less risk-averse than and less risk-averse than they should be. What are the effects (follo from the list of the functions investors perform on page 106–107)? Since they feel better about the environment and are more optimistic about likely outcomes, they reduce the amount of caution they the investing process. Since they no longer consider investing to be risky, they don’t need for painstaking analysis. They tend to make assumptions that are more generous, and they skepticism with credulousness. They’re willing to make do with a reduced margin of Viewing risk as less worrisome, they no longer demand risk cushyas in the past. They behave less as sticklers, since they’re more attracted to on risky investmentsand less leery of the risk they involve. It is for these reasons that, as you’llsee in the next chapter, financings are completed in the most buoyant economies and financial markets. Good times cause people to become more optimistic, jettison caution, and settle for skimpy risk premiums on risky investments. since they are less pessimistic and less alarmed, they tend to lose intere the safer end of the risk/return continuum. This combination of elem makes the pricesof risky assetsrise relative to safer assets. Thus come as a surprise that more unwise investmentsare made in good in bad. This happens even though the higher priceson risky inves mean the prospective risk premiums offered for making those riskier investmentsare skimpier than they were in more risk-conscious times. The reduced insistence on adequate risk premiums causes the slo capital market line to flatten. Going back to high school that the slope of a line on a graph is the distance traveled per unit change along the horizontal axis. The slope of the capital reflects the amount of incremental potential returnthat is offered incremental risk borne. Thus it is a direct indication of the degre aversion present in the market. In times of obliviousness toward risk—or high risk tolerance—the demand in terms of risk premiums causes the slope of the line the amount of risk compensation to shrink.

The lower slope of the capital market line means, by definitio there’s less of a returnincrement per unit increase in risk. In the payoff for risk-bearingis sub-par. In my opinion, all of the abovefollows logically from direct ob The process is as follows: positive events lead to increased optimism, increased optimism makes people more risk-tolerant, an increase in risk tolerance causes lower risk premiums to demanded, a reduction in demanded risk premiums equates to lower deman returns on risky assets, a reduction of demanded returns on risky assetscauses their rise, and higher pricesmake assetseven riskier (but also attract buying of “momentum investors” who chase rising stocks). It follows from the abovethat risk is high when investors feel ris And risk compensation is at a minimum just when risk is at (meaning risk compensation is most needed). So much for the ration investor!

For me, the bottom line of all of this is that the greatest investment risk is the belief that there is no risk. Widespreadrisk tolera or a high degree of investor comfort with risk—is the great subsequent market declines. But because most investors are following progression described just above, this is rarelyperceived at the time perceiving it—and turning cautious—is most important. ∾ Since the other side of the coin should be obvious, I won’tbelab will take a minute to talk about what happens when the downward the cycle in attitudes toward risk makes investors more risk-averse One of the most important characteristics of psychological cycles extremeness. Cycles swingnot only in directions and degrees that sense,but also in wacky ways and to excess. For example, inves from time to time and say, “Let’s disregard risk. We’ll all get rich.” ardor and excitement cause them to bid pricesto levelsthat are so high— to accept tales that clearly are so unrealistic—that after the fact laughable if the damage done weren’t so great. And after they have committed these sins of excess—and lost a lot money in the resultant downswing toward greater prudence—they themselves for their excesses of greed and credulousness. They wonder they could have behaved so foolishly. They confess that they never really understood the exoticand exciting investment activities in whichthey had engaged. And they vow never to do it again. Just as the inadequacy of their risk aversion allowed them to pu and buy at the top—egged on by the visionof easy money in they couldn’t discern any risk—now they push pricesdown and sell at bottom. Their unpleasant recentexperience convinces them—contrary to what they had thought when everything was going well—that investing is a field in whichthey shouldn’t engage. And, as a consequence, their aversion goes all the way from inadequate to excessive. Giventheir recentpainful experience and the negativity they’ve developed about what lies ahead, they amp up their caution. Since they now associate investing with loss ratherthan profit, their process comes to emphasize the avoidance of further loss prospecting for opportunity. They ensure that their assumptions are conservative enough all potential for disappointment, and they apply extreme skepticism. They find it impossible to identify—even to imagine—investments offer an adequate margin of safety.

Since they see risk everywhere,they consider even the current swolle risk premiums insufficient. They become worrywarts.Just as risk tolerance had positioned them become buyers of overpriced assetsat the highs,now their scream risk aversion makes them sellers—certainly not buyers—at the bottom That’s the point. Under these circumstances, the perception of ris exaggeratedand the slope of the capital market line becomes exces In precisely the reverse of my description of the flat capital higher slope of this one means the expected returnincrement per in risk is unusually generous. This is a risk-averse market, and exaggeratedpayoff for risk-bearing. Thus the reward for bearing risk is greatest at just the moment when—no, rather, just becau absolutely refuseto bear it. As risk attitudes swingfrom high to low, so do opportunities for loss. Wheneverything’s going well and asset pricesare soaring, investors tend to view the futureas rosy, risk as their friend, and profit as achieved. Everyone feels the same, meaning little risk aversion is incorporated in prices, and thus they’re precarious. Investors beco tolerant just when they should increase their risk aversion.

And when events are down, so are investors. They think of the place to lose money, risk as something to be avoided at all depressingly likely. As I described at the end of the last excess of caution that prevails, (a) no one will accept possi incorporate any optimism at all and (b) they likewise cannot coun possibility that an assumption could be “too bad to be true.” Just as risk tolerance is unlimited at the top, it is non-exis This negativity causes pricesto fall to levelsfrom whichlossesare highl unlikely and gains could be enormous. But the sting of the prior decli tends to increase risk aversion and send investors to the sidelines (and thus risk) are at their lowest. ∾ I’d like to provide a real-life example of changing attitudes, of some quantification, taken from “The Happy Medium” (July 2004): The prevalence of risk-tolerance (or risk-obliviousness) in the la 1990swas clear. I personally heard a prominent brokerage house strategist say, “Stocks are overpriced, but not enough to keep th from being a buy.” And we all heard the man on the street say, “ up so much in my 401(k), it wouldn’t bother me if it (Where was that guy two or three years later?) No, those risk-tolerantattitudes will not persist forever. Eventually something will intrude, exposing securities’ imperfections and toohigh prices. Priceswill decline. Investors will like them less at $ than they did at $100. Fear of losingthe remaining $60 will overtak the urge to make back the lost $40. Risk aversion eventually will reassert itself (and usually go to excess). How about some quantification of this cycle? In mid-1998, just before the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management brough investors other than techies to their senses, only $12.5 billion o defaulted bondsyielded more than 20% (one possible threshold for the label “distressed debt”). Because investors weren’t very worried about risk, they demanded ultra-high returns from relatively few nondefaulted bonds; the word “blithe” mightbest describe their attitude But Long-Term’s demise awakened investors to the existence risk, and a year later, the amount of bondsyielding more than 2 had more than tripled to $38.7 billion. By mid-2002, when the corporate scandals held the debt market in a grip of terror, yielders had grown to $105.6 billion, eight and a half ti just four years earlier. Risk aversion had come a long way from inadequate and, as later events showed, had become excessive. B

March 31, 2004, this figurehad fallen 85%, back to just $16.2 billion; risk aversion had subsided (and possibly had become inadequate again). I’m sure that fundamentals didn’tfluctuate anywhere near th degree reflected in prices, yieldsand thus the distressed debt ta usual,reality was greatly exaggeratedby swings in psychology. Wheninvestors in general are too risk-tolerant, security price embody more risk than they do return. Wheninvestors are too r averse, pricescan offer more returnthan risk. The title of the memo cited above—“The Happy Medium”—wa by my mother’s wisdom and her constant reminders that we shou extremes in behavior. Rather we should tend toward the midd things—toward a reasonable balance between too much and too little But my experience as an investor convinces me that the happyme rarelyseen. If you reflect on what I said about the graph of a back on page 25, you may be impressed to find that in stages“a,” “g,” cyclical phenomena tend to returnfrom extremes and move toward more reasonable mean.What a rational thing that is! But then, as I pointed out, it’s usually the case that those “c extremes” continue past the fair midpoint in stages“b,” “e” and “h,” the opposite extreme. A statistician who looks at the abovegraphic will tell you that on the phenomenon charted is at the central value or astride But the rest of us see it as almost always in motion: back toward those midpoints. In fact, it spends about as much time

highs and lows as it does at the happymedium. Most investors’ attitu toward risk do the very same. What’s the greatest source of investment risk? Does it come fro economic developments? Corporate events that fall short of forecasts? Companies whose products become uncompetitive? Earnings declines? creditworthiness? No, it comes when asset pricesattain excessively high levelsas a result of some new, intoxicatinginvestment rationale that can’t justified on the basis of fundamentals, and that causes unreasonab valuations to be assigned. And when are these pricesreached? Whenrisk aversion and caution evaporate and risk tolerance and optimism take This condition is the investor’s greatest enemy. What Happens When RiskAversion Is Insufficien The Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08 represented the greatest finan downswing of my lifetime, and consequently it presents the best to observe, reflect and learn. The scene was set for its occurrence of developments. Here’s a partial list: Government policies supported an expansion of home ownership— whichby definition meantthe inclusion of people who historically couldn’t affordto buy homes—at a time when home priceswere soarin The Fed pushed interest rates down, causing the demand yielding instruments such as structured/levered mortgage securities to increase; Therewas a rising trend among banksto make mortgage loans,packa them and sell them onward (as opposed to retaining them); Decisions to lend, structure, assign credit ratings and investwere on the basis of unquestioning extrapolation of low historic default rates; The abovefour pointsresulted in an increased eagerness to extend mortgage loans,with an accompanying decline in lending standa Noveland untested mortgage backed securities were developed that promised high returns with low risk, something that has great appea non-skeptical times; Protective laws and regulations were relaxed, such as the Glass-Steaga Act (which prohibited the creation of financial conglomerates), uptick rule (which prevented traders who had bet against forcing them down through non-stop short selling), and the rules limited banks’ leverage, permitting it to nearly triple;

Finally, the mediaran articles stating that risk had been elimin combination of: the adroitFed, whichcould be counted on to inject stimulus whenever economic sluggishness developed, confidence that the excess liquidity flowing to Chinafor it and to oil producers would never fail to be recycled b markets, buoying asset prices, and the new Wall Streetinnovations,which“sliced and diced” risk s finely, spread it so widely and placed it with th bear it. The existence of all the aboveelements indicated the presence of tolerance. In fact, they couldn’t have arisenif risk tolerance hadn’t the psyches of investors, lenders, borrowers and regulators. The exist risk tolerance like that seen in the years immediately preceding the should be very worrisome, as it implies an absence of worr skepticism. It is inescapable that these developments—and the risk tolerance or obliviousness that was behind them—ultimately would lead to unsaf financial behavior, particularly via the issuance of financial instruments were unsound and likely to fail. The ability to borrow large amou at low interest rates caused asset buyers to consider the perio But it wasn’t marked by the availability of sound, bargain-pri Rather, the ready availability of leverage made it easy to investheav assetswhose priceshad risen a great deal, and in innovative, untested, synthetic, levered investment products, many of whichwould go on Perhaps most importantly among the contributingfactors, the period marked by risky behavior on the part of financial institutions. Whe is characterized by benign macro events, hyper-financial activ innovation, there is a tendency for providers of capital to comp share in a process I call “the race to the bottom” (I’ll make to a memo of that name). The mood in the years 2005–07 Citigroup CEO Charles Prince in June 2007, virtually on the eve Financial Crisis, in a statement that became emblematic of the musicstops, in terms of liquidity, thingswill be complicated. But as the music’s playing, you’ve got to get up and dance. We’r In other words, bankshad to do—and were doing—things that de for their success on the continuation of abnormally favorable cond that would turn into problems if those conditions normalized. But no could decline to participate for fear of losingmarket share.The instru were untested and potentially defective, but no one was willing to

share.That’s the kind of crowd behavior that typifies . . exacerbates cycles. In theory a bank CEO could have declined to join in this fol the realities of the times,anyone who sat out the dance, lost failed to rake in the “easy money” that his competitors were reaping forced out of his job by activist investors. Thus banksbid aggre opportunity to provide capital as if the musicwould never stop. cognizance of cycles makes it clear that eventually it will. This tolerance and risk obliviousness plays an essential part in the up-ph precedes—and sets the scene for—every dramatic down-phase. As the period 2005–07 was rolling along, it presented a observe events that made manifest market participants’ attitudes and to reach helpful conclusions. I believe the following excer Race to the Bottom,” a memo I wrote on the subject in few months before the first indication that bad times were coming—p an excellent example. It demonstrates the potential value of infer from isolated and perhaps anecdotal experiences: Whilethe last few years have given me many opportunities to marvel at excesses in the capital markets, in this case the one th battle cry—“that calls for a memo”—hit the newspapers in Englan during my last stay. As the Financial Timesreported on Novem 2006: Abbey, the UK’s second-largest home loans provider, has raisedthe standard amount it will lend homebuyersto five times either their singleor joint salaries, eclipsing the traditional borrowing levelsof around three and a half times salary. It followed last week’s decision by Bank of Irel Mortgages and Bristol and West to increase standard salary multiples from four to 4.5 times. In other words, there had been a traditional rule of thumb s borrowers can safelyhandle mortgages with a face amount equal to three-plus times their salaries. But now they can have five times— roughly 50% more. What inference should be drawn? Thereare a least four possibilities: the old standard was too conservative, and the new one’s right; conditions have changed, such that the new standard is as conser for today as the old one was for its times;

it’s reasonable for mortgage lenders to accept higher defaul and thus lower net returns, because their cost of capital has the rush to place money has caused a supplier of capita standards. Now, I am no expert on the U.K. mortgage market, and it intention in this memo to comment on general capital m not any one sector. Further, it’s certainly true that today’s lo interest rates mean a given salarycan support a bigger mortga that’s likely to hold true so long as (1) borrowers keep their jobs a (2) their mortgages carry fixed rates). But if you think Abbey’s r for taking this step mightbe a logical one like that, the q is “why now?” Logical reasons and sober decision making mightbe involved But so mightcompetitionto put out money and the usual late-sta belief that “it’s different this time.” Lenders and investors invariab depart from time-honored disciplines when cycles move to extrem out of a belief that current conditions are different from those th prevailed in the past, when those disciplines were appropriate.And just as invariably, they’re shown that cycles repeatand nothing changes. What did we see in the U.S. mortgage market as home price and interest rates declined? First, low teaserrates. Then higher loanto-value ratios. Then 100%financing. Then low-amortization loans. Then no-amortization loans.Then loans requiring no documentation of employment or credit history. All these thingsmade it possibl more buyers to stretch for more expensive homes, but at th time they made mortgages riskier for lenders. And these developments took place when home priceswere sky-high and interest rates were at multi-generation lows. In the end, buyers to out the biggest mortgage possible given their incomes and prevaili interest rates. Such mortgages would land them in the houses o dreams . . . and leave them there for as long as conditi deteriorate, whichthey invariably do. Do you remember the game Bid-a-Note from the TV show Name That Tune?Contestant x said, “I can name that tune in six notes.” Then contestant y said, “I can name that tune in five notes.” T contestant x said, “I can name that tune in four notes.” The c who eventually got the chance to guess the name of the tune w one who was willing to accept the riskiest proposition—to tr basis of the least information.

So the Bank of Ireland entered the competitionto lend mon home purchases and said, “I’ll lend four and a half times the borrower’s salary.” And Abbey said, “I’ll lend five times.” The s calledwinner in this auction is the one who’ll put out th with the least safety. Whether that’s really winning or losingwill become clear when the cycle turns, as it did in the U.S. last y certainly there’s a race to the bottom going on . . . the institution that’llmake loans with the slightest margin for error. . . . Any way you slice it, standards for mortgage loans have dropped recentyears,and risk has increased. Logic-based? Perhaps. Cycleinduced (and exacerbated)? I’d say so. The FT quoted John-P Crutchley, a banking analyst at Merrill Lynch, as saying Abbey are [sic] lending a multiple of five times salary, th perfectly sensible—or it could be tremendously risky.” Certain mortgage lending was made riskier. We’ll see in a few years w that was intelligent risk taking or excessive competitive ardor.. . Today’s financial market conditions are easilysummed up: Ther a global glut of liquidity, minimal interest in traditional in little apparent concern about risk, and skimpy prospective returns everywhere.Thus, as the price for accessing returns that are potentially adequate (but lower than those promised in the past), investors are readily accepting significant risk in the form of heightened leverage, untested derivatives and weak deal structures. The current cycle isn’t unusual in its form, only its extent. T little mystery about the ultimate outcome, in my opinion, but a point in the cycle it’s the optimists who look best. As is often the case, I could have made this a shorter mem simply invoking my two favorite quotations, both of whichhave a place here. The first is from John Kenneth Galbraith, who passed away last year. I was fortunate to be able to spenda few hours with M Galbraith a year and a half earlier and to have the benefit wisdom firsthand. This quote, once again,is from his invaluable b A Short History of Financial Euphoria. It seemsparticularly apt u the current circumstances: Contributing to . . . euphoria are two further fac noted in our time or in past times.The first is the extreme brevity of the financial memory. In consequence, financial disaster is quickly forgotten. In further consequence, wh same or closely similar circumstances occur again,sometimes

in only a few years,they are hailedby a new, often youthful, and always supremely self-confident generation as a brilliantly innovative discovery in the financial and larger economic world. Therecan be few fields of human endeavor in whichhistory counts for so little as in the worldof Past experience, to the extentthat it is part of memory at dismissed as the primitive refuge of those who do not hav insight to appreciate the incredible wonders of the present. The second is Warren Buffett’s bedrock reminder of the n adjustour financial actions based on the investor behavior playing around us. Fewer words, but probably even more useful: The less prudence with whichothersconduct their affairs, the greater the prudence with whichwe should conduct our ow affairs. This memo can be summed up simply: there’s a race to going on, reflecting a widespread reduction in the level of pruden on the part of investors and capital providers. No one can p point that those who participate will be punished, or that their longrun performance won’texceed that of the naysayers. But that is usual pattern. If you refuseto fall into line in carefree markets like today likely that, for a while, you’ll(a) lag in terms of returnand (b like an old fogey. But neither of those is much of a p means keeping your head (and capital) when otherseventually lose theirs. In my experience, times of laxness have always been f eventually by corrections in whichpenalties are imposed. It may n happen this time, but I’ll take that risk. In the meantime, Oaktree its people will continue to apply the standards that have served well over the last twenty years. Warren Buffett puts it well in the abovequote; it’s one I think it aptly sums up this phenomenon, as well as the contrarian that is required as a result. Whenothersfail to worryabout risk apply caution, as Buffett says, we must turn more cautious. But it be said that when other investors are panicked and depressed and can’t imagine conditions under whichrisk would be worthtaking, we shou aggressive.

What Happens When RiskAversion Is Excessive The symmetry of financial cycles, described at length in chap guaranteed that the risk-tolerantenvironment of 2005–07—and the boom financial instrument issuance that it abetted—would be followed by correction. And, of course, such a correction materialized. As I said earlier, the Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08 pro hope will turn out to be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to witness irrational swingof the pendulum of emotion to total negativity, and the cycle in attitudes toward risk in the direction of excessive The actions that had been abetted by excessive risk tolerance in as just described—were exposed as having been foolhardy, and as they brought great pain and loss: It became clear that the effort to expand home ownership had purchases of homes by many people who couldn’t affordthem. Thousands lost the money they had put into home equity, along moving costs and any improvements they made. Sub-prime mortgages that had been issued without proof of incom employment were shown to have been unwise. Weakmortgage lending practices—along with extensive mortgage fraud that those practices failed to catch—turned out, not surprisingly, led to the issuance of many mortgages on whichborrowers were to make the required payments. The extrapolation of low historic default rates on mortgages have ignored the possibility that weakened mortgage lending practic would result in defaults at unprecedented rates. Since actualdefaults exceeded the historic rates that had been the for security structuring decisions, debt ratings and loss projections, structured and levered securities that had been built from sub-prime mortgages also defaulted in stunning numbers, proving their high to have been erroneous. Levered mortgage backed securities (and financial derivatives, most whichcontain high levelsof built-in leverage) generally switched being return-enhancing tools to weapons of financial mass destruction, as levered funds and securities breached loan covenants, and issuer ultimately proved unable to service their debt. Of course, the new financial products demonstrated—as usual—that financial innovations promising high returns with low risk rarelykeep that promise.

As for the relaxed regulations, the financial conglomerates permit revocation of the Glass-Steagall Act had extensive problems; the of the uptick rule allowed the stocks of financial institu down relentlessly;and several banksproved unable to survive high levelsof leverage that had been allowed. Because of everything that had gone before, the consequences inc massive mortgage defaults and home repossessions; downgradings and failures on the part of mortgage backed securities; collapsing home the inability to sell existing homes; collapsing stock and corporate markets and the disappearance of liquidity; a total drying up availability;and failures, bailouts and bankruptcies at a number Of course, it’s improbable events that brought on the credit c Lots of bad thingshappened that had been considered unlikely (if n impossible),and they happened at the same time, to investors who’d taken on significant leverage. (“TheLimits to Negativism,” Octobe 2008) What was the cumulative psychological effect of all of the aboveon investors and other financial-system participants? In short, it scared death.Whentotal fear replaces a high degree of confidence, excessive aversion takes the place of unrealistic risk tolerance. And that’s what happened in late 2008 following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. came forward in droves, exhibiting a high degree of urgency. the sidelines. Asset pricescollapsed. And market liquidity went to zero. All these thingsresulted from the replacementof high risk tolerance wi high risk aversion. And they all contributed to still more fear, still more aversion, further negative events, and widespread fear of more of The same people who had bought untried instruments on the basis assumptions and promises that were too good to be true now were that the entire financial system mightmelt down. To provide an example of the swingtoward excessive risk av impact, I’ll share the story of something that happened a few week Lehman bankruptcy. It’s the event that inspired me to write my low-p memo quoted above, “The Limits to Negativism.” Participating to a minordegree in the general trendsthat we Oaktree formed its first levered funds in the years just preceding We used less leverage than others—for example, four times equity in European seniorloan fund versus the more conventional seven or eight we tried to be conservative about what assetswe bought, but even nevertheless brought us to the brink of a meltdown. Prior to

or “leveraged” loans—even those with credit problems—had rarelytraded pricesbelow96 cents on the dollar. Thus we felt we were well insul the possibility of margin calls (demands from lenders for additional capital) that, under our borrowing agreement, could come only if the avera market price of the loans in the portfolio got down to 88. But in the aftermath of the Lehman bankruptcy, loan pricesfell to unprecedented levels, pressured by, among other things, banks’ portfolios abandoned by levered holders who received margin calls own and failed to meet them. Thus 88—and a margin call and meltd became a real possibility for us. We were able to get time to lender, and we set about raising additional equity from the fund with whichto reduce the fund’s leverage from 4-to-1to 2-to-1. asked the investors to put up more additional equity, they understood represented an opportunity to retain loans at discounted pricesratherthan give up on them; to enjoy the loans’high implied yields; and to bene fund’s low-cost leverage. Thus most of them came forward with the equity we requested. At the newlyreduced level of leverage, the protected from a margin call unless the average price of our unimaginable 65. But with the total absence of buyers and the continuation of and hedge-fund-withdrawal-related selling, the loan market continued spiral downward, as the notion of “the right price”gave way to wide concern that no price could be counted on to hold. Thus the avera our loan portfolio neared 70. It fell to me to get the lever 1 to 1-to-1, in whichcase we could completely eliminate the contr covenant that introduced the risk of a margin call. Now I was offering the fund’s investors a chance to pa loans at yieldsto maturity that were well into double digits, and returns on the overall fund in the 20s (before fees and poten defaults). Of course, if a pre-existinginvestor failed to put up share of the additional equity and allowed someone else to do would be tantamount to selling off part of his interest in those yields. And yet, the combination of non-stop price declines, portfolio liq and a total absence of buyers made it challenging for some fund take the step of again adding capital. Some were fatigued from havin with the issuespopping up everywhere in their portfolios. Some viewed chance not as rescuing their investments, but as possibly “thro money after bad.” Some didn’thave liquidfunds on hand. And some just didn’thave the willingness to defend additional investment to their bosse bottoms, it can be extremely hard to take actions that require staunchness. And that led to the event I’m going to describe.

I went to a pension fund that was an investor in the fun for an additional equity investment. The yieldsI laid out were attrac admitted, but they were worried about the possibility of loan defaults. conversation went like this: Pension fund: What about the potential that defaults will render the investment unsuccessful? HM: Well, our average default rate over the last 26 years in hig bonds—which are juniorin the capital structure to loans like the has been about 1% a year (and bear in mind that there are recoveries case of default, meaning our credit losseshave been less than a perce year). Thus defaults at our historic rate would do little to dimin promised returnin the 20s. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: The worst five-year period we’veever had showed defaults av 3% per year; obviously not a problem relative to the yieldswe’re about. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: The average default rate in the high yield bond universe—with assuming any ability to avoid defaults through skillful credit selec been 4.2% per year. Resulting credit lossesof 2–3%clearly wouldn’t do much to jeopardize the results on this investment. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: The worst five years in history for the universe averaged 7.3 not a problem. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: The worst one-year default rate in high yield bond history wa That still leaves plenty of returnhere. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? HM: One and a half times the worst year in history would be would still make a little money given the portfolio yield in the such a minimal returnto be the result, defaults of that order would have to happen every year—not just once. Pension fund: But what if it’s worsethan that? At this point I asked, “Do you have any equities?” and I tol did—and really believed the doomsday scenarios toward whichthey had pushing me—they’dbetter leave the room immediately and sell them all. My point is that, in a negative environment, excessive risk av cause people to subject investmentsto unreasonable scrutiny and negative assumptions (just as they may have performed little or no and applied rosy assumptions when they made investmentsin the prece headytimes). During panics, people spend100%of their time maki

there can be no losses. . . at just the time that they shou about missing out on great opportunities. In times of extreme negativism, exaggeratedrisk aversion is likely to pricesto already be as low as they can go; further lossesto and thus the risk of loss to be minimal. As I’ve indicated earlie thing in the worldis the belief that there’s no risk. By the same safest (and most rewarding) time to buy usually comes when everyone convinced there’s no hope. If I could ask only one question regarding each investment I ha consideration, it would be simple: How much optimism is facto price?A high level of optimism is likely to mean the favorable possi developments have been priced in; the price is high relative to and there’s little margin for error in case of disappointment. But is low or absent, it’s likely that the price is low; expectations negative surprises are unlikely; and the slightest turn for the bette result in appreciation. The pension fund meeting described abovewas important for the simple reason that it indicated that all optim wrung out of investors’ thinking. After that meeting, I practically ran to my officeto write “The Li Negativism” at roughly the point in that cycle when one could have the most debt at the lowest prices. In it I shared the Lots of bad thingshappened that had been considered unlikely (if n impossible),and they happened at the same time, to investors who’d taken on significant leverage. So the easy explanation is that the people who were hurt in the credit crisis hadn’t been skeptical—or pessimistic—enough. But that triggered an epiphany: Skepticism and pessimism aren’t synonymous. Skepticism calls for pessimism when optimism is excessive. But it also calls for optimism when pessimism is excessi I’ll write some more on the subject, but it’s really as simple a Contrarianism—doing the opposite of what othersdo, or “leaning against the wind”—is essential for investment success. But as th credit crisis reached a peak last week,people succumbed to the w ratherthan resisting. I foundvery few who were optimistic; most were pessimistic to some degree. Some became genuinely depressed—even a few great investors I know. Increasingly negative tales o coming meltdown were exchanged via email. No one applied skepticism, or said “that horror story’s unlikely to be true.” Pessimism fed on itself. People’s only concern was bullet-proofing their portfolios to get through the coming collapse, or raising cash to meet redemptions. The one thing they weren’t doing last w

was making aggressive bids for securities. So pricesfell and fell several pointsat a time—the old expression is “gapped down.” Hopefully this contemporary account will give you a sense for wh excessive, unreasonable risk aversion feels like, and also a sense for should be doing under circumstances like those. Postscript: a few of the fund’s investors (including the one I day) declined to post the additional equity. Feeling I should could to keep the fund afloat, I put it up in their place.The a levered portfolio of depressed seniorloans at a time of highl aversion made that one of the best investmentsI’ve ever made . . unwillingness of othersto participate in that market had rendered absurdly cheap. ∾ This chapter regarding the cycle in attitudes toward risk has grow of the longest in this book. There’s a good reason for that: one of the most important cycles. In The Most Important Thing, talks about the importance of knowing wherewe stand in the various Understanding how investors are thinking about and dealing with risk perhaps the most important thing to strive for. In short, excessive risk tolerance contributes to the creation of danger, and the swingto aversion depresses markets, creating some of the greatest buying opportunities. The rational investor is diligent, skeptical and appropriately ris all times,but also on the lookout for opportunities for potential more than compensates for risk. That’s the ideal. But in good times most people say, “Risk? What risk? I don’t see much that could go look how well thingshave been going. And anyway, risk is my frien more risk I take, the more money I’m likely to make.” Then, in they switch to something simpler: “I don’t care if I ever make in the market; I just don’t want to lose any more. Get me out!” It’s essential to note that since rational, unemotional investors are much in the minority, the totality of investors rarelyachieve equil regarding their attitudes toward risk, or any of the other aspects or emotion as to whichthe cycle oscillates or the pendulum swin not to maintain a healthy balance between the risk aversion to be cautious and the risk tolerance that urges them on: usually other is in the pronounced ascendency.The same is very much true with regard to greed and fear, skepticism and credulousness, the willingness sometimes see only positives and sometimes only negatives, and many other

things. The cycles in psychology amply demonstratethat investors little of their time at the happymedium. The fluctuation—or inconstancy—in attitudes toward risk is both the of some cycles and the cause or exacerbator of others. And it on, since it seemsto be hard-wired into most people’s psyches to more optimistic and risk-tolerantwhen thingsare going well, and then more worried and risk-averse when thingsturn downward. That means they’re willing to buy when they should be most cautious, and most reluc when they should be most aggressive. Superior investors recognize this strive to behave as contrarians.

IX THE CREDIT CYCLE Superior investing doesn’t come from buying high-qualityassets, b from buying when the deal is good, the price is low, the potenti returnis substantial, and the risk is limited. Theseconditions are much more the case when the credit markets are in the less-euphoric more-stringent part of their cycle.The slammed-shut phase of the credit cycle probably does more to make bargains available than any other singlefactor. Now our foundation is complete. We’ve covered the economic cycles that provide the fundamental backdrop for investment activ also the psychological and attitudinal swings that occur in response changes in fundamentals (and that tend to exaggerate them). Now to take up some specific types of financial cycles. You will note fluctuations in all the abovestrongly affect the cycles covered in following chapters. As we’vealready discussed, some activities—like home buying—are highly responsive to movements in the economic cycle,and others—lik purchasing food—are not. Some cycles have a profound effect on other aspects of the economy and on other cycles, and some do not. this chapter, the credit cycle,is in each case the former: it is responsive to economic developments and highly influential. Lastly, extremely volatile. Thus its movements are powerful and extreme, and greatly affect activity in many other areas. And all these thingsare exacerbated by the swings of psychology described in chapters VII Please note that the subject here is sometimes referred to as market cycle ratherthan the credit cycle.I don’t find the distinction important. Strictly speaking, “capital” refers to all the money used a business, while “credit” refers to that portion of a company’s made up of debt ratherthan equity. In practice, these two cycle name be used interchangeably, although I do find many fewer references to capital market cycle.I’m going to stick to “the credit cycle” when

talking about debt markets, and I may lapse into “the capital mark when I’m talking about the general availability of financing. But eithe and most importantly,the considerations that apply to one apply equally the other. The following passage from my memo “Open and Shut” (Decemb calls on some of what I wrote earlier and places the credit cycle within the range of cycles: Consider this: the ups and downs of economies are usually b fluctuations in corporate profits, and fluctuations in profits for th and fall of securities markets. However, in recessions and recover economic growth usually deviates from its trendline rate by o few percentage points. Why, then, do corporate profits increase a decrease so much more? The answer lies in thingslike financi leverage and operating leverage, whichmagnify the impact on p of rising and falling revenues. And if profits fluctuate this way—more than GDP, but still relatively moderately—why is it that the securities markets soar a collapse so dramatically? I attribute this to fluctuations in p and, in particular, to the profound influence of psychology on th availability of capital. In short, whereas economies fluctuate a little and profits a the credit window openswide and then slams shut . . . thus th this memo. I believe the credit cycle is the most volatile o and has the greatest impact. Thus it deserves a great deal o And here’show I put it, more succinctly, in “You Can’t Predict. Yo Prepare.” (November 2001): The longer I’m involved in investing, the more impressed I a power of the credit cycle.It takes only a small fluctuation in th economy to produce a large fluctuation in the availability of c with great impact on asset pricesand back on the economy itself. Changes in the availability of capital or credit constitute one of fundamental influences on economies, companies and markets. Even thoug the credit cycle is less well-knownto the man on the street than most other cycles discussed in this book, I consider it to be of importance and profound influence. As suggested in the citation just above, the credit cycle can be understood through the metaphor of a window. In short, sometimes and sometimes it’s closed. And, in fact, people in the financial

frequent reference to just that: “the credit window,” as in “the place borrow money.” Whenthe window is open, financing is plentiful obtained, and when it’s closed, financing is scarce and hard to it’s essential to always bear in mind that the window can go to slammed shut in just an instant. There’s a lot more to this cycle—including the reasons for these cyclical movements and their impact—but that’s the bottom line. ∾ Why does this cycle have the importance I ascribe to it? First, capit is an essential ingredient in the productive process. Thus the abilit companies (and economies) to grow usually depends on the availability incremental capital. If the capital markets are closed, it can growth. Second, capital must be available in order for maturing debt to refinanced. Companies (as well as most other economic units, such as governments and consumers) generally don’t pay off their debts.Most of time they merely roll them over. But if a company is unable at the time that its existing debt comes due, it may default bankruptcy. Where we stand in the credit cycle—whether credit is readi available or difficult to obtain—is the greatest determinantof whet can be refinanced at a given time. Manycorporate assetsare long-term in nature (like buildings, machine vehicles and goodwill). Yet corporations often raise the money with buy those thingsby issuing short-term debt. They do this because the borrowing is generally lowest on short maturities. This arrangement —“borrowing short to investlong”—works out well most of the time, the credit market is open and fully functioning,meaning debt can be over with ease when it comes due. But the mismatch between longassetsthat can’t be easilyliquidated and shorter-term liabilities can easily bring on a crisis if the credit cycle turns negative so that maturing be refinanced. This classic mismatch, when combined with stringency in financing markets, is often the cause of the most spectacular financial meltdowns. Whenthe Global Financial Crisisbeganto build in 2007 and the cre markets froze up, the U.S. Department of the Treasury took the unprecedented step of guaranteeing all commercial paper. If it these debt instruments—which have maturities of 270 days or less—migh not have been capable of being rolledover, and thus could have caused defaults among even the strongest of companies. In fact, the defau well have been concentrated among top companies, since they issue commercial paper in billions precisely for the reason that their stron

creditworthiness gives them easy access to the commercial paper market. (The importance of the market being open—and of the ability to maturing paper—underlines the essential difference between positive worthand liquidity. Even a wealthy company can get into trouble have cash on hand and can’t obtain enough to meet its debt matu and other calls on cash as they arise.) Third, financial institutions represent a special, exaggeratedcase of on the credit markets. Financial institutions are in the business of money, and they need access to financing to keep that business also are often the site of the greatest short/long mismatches and poten meltdowns. Consider, for example, the bank that takes deposits that can withdrawn any day and uses them to make mortgage loans that won’tbe repaid for thirty years.What happens if all the depositors demand back on the same bad day (a “run on the bank”)? If there’s credit market (and no governmentbailout), that bank may fail. Fourth and finally, the credit market gives off signals that ha psychological impact. A closed credit market causes fear to of proportion to businesses’ negative realities. Difficult conditions can the capital market to close . . . and closed capital impact on business conditions (as well as on market participants businesses).This kind of “vicious circle” is part of most financial The Credit Cycle in Operation By now you should have an understanding of the nature and credit cycle.The next topic to tackleis why credit cycles occur: what credit to be more available at some times and less available at other The credit window doesn’t have a mind of its own, opening an its own accord. Rather, it follows events elsewhere. In “You You Can Prepare.” (November 2001), I put the expand-and-contract in context and explained it in some detail: The process is simple: The economy moves into a period of prosperity. Providers of capital thrive, increasing their capital base. Because bad news is scarce, the risks entailed in lending investing seem to have shrunk. Risk averseness disappears.

Financial institutions move to expand their businesses—that is, to provide more capital. They compete for market share by lowering demanded returns (e.g., cutting interest rates), lowering credit standards, providin more capital for a given transaction, and easing covenants. At the extreme, providers of capital finance borrowers and p that aren’tworthy of being financed. As The Economist said earlier this year, “the worst loans are made at the best of times.” This le capital destruction—that is, to the investment of capital in p wherethe cost of capital exceeds the returnon capital, and e to cases wherethere is no returnof capital. Whenthis point is reached, the up-leg is reversed. Losses cause lenders to become discouragedand shy away. Risk averseness rises, and along with it, interest rates, credit restrictions and covenant requirements. Less capital is made available—and at the trough of th only to the most qualified of borrowers. Companies become starved for capital. Borrowers are unable roll over their debts,leading to defaults and bankruptcies. This process contributes to and reinforces the economic contraction. Of course, at the extreme the process is ready to be r Because the competitionto make loans or investmentsis low, high returns can be demanded along with high creditworthiness. Contrarians who commit capital at this point have a shot at h returns, and those tempting potential returns begin to draw in c In this way, a recovery begins to be fueled. Sometimes people are eager to put money to work, and that ma credit window open wide. But when circumstances cause them to change minds, financing can become unavailable.As with so many other thing this book, it’s essential that the reader gain a clear understanding workings of the cycles, and especially of the way in whicheach to the next. Thus the thorough, step-by-stepexplanation provided here is essential and must be absorbed. But in “You Can’t Predict. You Can Prepare.” I went on to red process to just a few words. They truly do constitute the botto credit cycle,and they make clear the never-ending chain-reaction nature the cycle:

Prosperity brings expanded lending, whichleads to unwise lending whichproduces large losses, whichmakes lenders stop lending, w ends prosperity, and on and on. A market is an auction housewherethe item being offered go person who’ll pay the most for it. The financial markets are opportunity to make an investment or provide a loan goes to the participant who’ll pay the most for that opportunity.The bidding takes price to higher dollarlevelsand higher valuation parameters (such as price/earnings ratios). In the credit market, a high price or high parameter translates directly into a low yield on the debt instrument question, and the chance to provide capital goes to the lende the lowest yield. My memo “The Race to the Bottom,” published in February 20 primarily about the eagerness of providers of capital to expand business” in good times,and its effect: It helps to think of money as a commodity.Everyone’s money prettymuch the same. Yet institutions seeking to add to loan volume and private equity funds and hedgefunds seeking to increase th fees, all want to move more of it. So if you want to place m —that is, get people to go to you instead of your c financing—you have to make your money cheaper. As with the o commodities, low price is the most dependable route to increased market share. One way to lower the price for your money is by reducing interest rate you charge on loans.A slightly more subtleway is agree to a higher price for the thing you’re buying, such a a higher p/e ratio for a common stock or a higher to price when you’re buying a company. Any way you slice it, y settling for a lower prospective return. But there are other ways to cheapen your money, and they’re the primary subject of th With debt, structure is important. Thus easierterms for the borrower ca bring addedrisk for the lender. For example, lenders would like protective covenants that limit the extentto whicha borrower can enga certain actions that increase the risk that is present. They may debt the borrower can assume, limit the cash it can pay out in require that it maintain a certain minimum net worth. But, credit market is heated, the “best buyer” of debt—the most eager

mightbe willing to accept a structure with fewer covenants, and risk. So in an auction, the chance to make a loan or buy a the provider of capital who’swilling to accept a combinatio and the riskiest structure. Whenrisk aversion is present and the lending opportunities is reasonable relative to the supply of opportunities, the bidding is usually prudent. But when risk tolera over and lenders compete avidly for opportunities, the bidding become overheated. The resulting opportunity to lend is likely to be high a price: a yield that’s too low and/or risk that’s excessive. Thus overheated auction in the credit market—as elsewhere—is likely to produ “winner” who’sreally a loser. This is the process I call the race On the other hand, there are times when buyers show up for auctions small numbers, and the few who do attendare interested in buying giveaway prices. The bidding stalls, and the result is low prices, yields, and loan structures that affordexcellent protection. Unlike the overheated climate that spawns the race to the bottom, ice-cold whichno one’s eager to lend can createreal winners. The degree of openness of the credit window depends almost whether providers of capital are eager or reticent, and it has impact on economies, companies, investors, and the prospective returnand riskiness of the investment opportunities that result. In the short term, the effect of generous capital market conditi make more money available to more companies for more reasons, a lower rates of interest and with fewer covenants. This leads to higher levelsof acquisitions, buyouts and corporate expansion (not to mention rapid recapitalizations of buyout companies and thus high short-term rates of return). In the short run, this contributes to a level of general financial activity. Another effect is to forestall financial stringency at weak companies. Whenlenders are strict and covenants are tight, operating problems can lead quickly to both technical defaults (violations o covenants) and “money defaults” (non-payment of interest or principal). But looserconditions can permit default to be forestal if covenants are lax or absent; if borrowers have the option cash-pay bondsinto payment-in-kind bonds(through a recent innovation, “toggle bonds”); or if they can raise new money a postpone the day of reckoning. Eventually, many of the forestalled defaults will demonstratetheir inevitability, with the companies falling from more highly leverag heights. And certainly the capital markets’ willingness to finance

than-deserving companies will lead ultimately to a higher level o corporate distress. Thus, everything else being equal,the bigger the boom—and the greater the excesses of the capital markets in upward direction—the greater the bust. Timing and extentare n predictable, but the occurrence of cycles is the closest thing I inevitable. (“TheRace to the Bottom,” February 2007) The Impact of the Credit Cycle One of the main pointsin this book is the extentto whichevents cycle have influence in other fields and on other kinds of cycles. Now this clearer than in the credit cycle. In “Genius Isn’t Enough” on the subject of Long-Term Capital Management (October 1998), I wrote “Look around the n there’s a crisis;you’llprobably find a lender.” Over-permissive providers of capital frequently aid and abet financial bubbles. T have been numerous recentexamples whereloose capital markets contributed to booms that were followed by famous collapses: r estate in 1989–92; emerging markets in 1994–98; Long-Term Capital in 1998; the movie exhibition industry in 1999–2000;venture c funds and telecommunications companies in 2000–01. In each case, lenders and investors provided too much cheapmoney and the r was over-expansion and dramatic losses. In the movie Fields Dreams KevinCostner was told, “If you build it, they will come.” the financial world, if you offer cheapmoney, they will borrow and build—often without discipline, and with very negative consequences. The capital cycle contributed tremendously to the tech bubble. Money from venture capital funds caused far too many compan be created, often with little in terms of business justificationor p prospects. Wild demand for IPOs caused their hot stocks to r meteorically, enabling venture funds to reporttriple-digit returns a attract still more capital requiring speedy deployment. The g of the capital markets let telecom companies sign on for h projects that were only partially financed, secure in the knowle that more financing would be available later, at higher p/e’s a interest rates as the projects were further along. This ease c more optical fiber capacity to be built than was needed at th lot of whichis sitting idle. Muchof the investment that went in

may never be recovered. Once again,easy money has led to capital destruction. In making investments, it has become my habit to worr the economic future—which I’m sure I can’t know much about—than I do about the supply/demand picture relating to capital. B positioned to make investmentsin an uncrowded arena conveys vast advantages. Participating in a field that everyone’s throwing money is a formula for disaster. (“You Can’t Predict. You Can P To restate, here’sfurther proof from “The Happy Medium” (July 20 a lengthy and important description like that abovewith regard to process can be summed up in fewer words: From time to time, providers of capital simply turn the spigoto off—as in so many things, to excess. Thereare times when a can get any amount of capital for any purpose, and times w the most deserving borrowers can’t access reasonable amounts for worthwhile projects. The behavior of the capital markets is a indicator of wherewe stand in terms of psychology and a great contributor to the supply of investment bargains. I went on in that memo to discuss the way in whichthe contributes to the creation of excess: Looking for the cause of a market extreme usually require the videotape of the credit cycle a few months or years.Most r bull markets are abetted by an upsurge in the willingness to capital, usually imprudently. Likewise, most collapses are precede by a wholesale refusal to finance certain companies, industri entire gamut of would-be borrowers. My goal in what follows is to describe the effect of the cre do so I’ll returnagain to the Global Financial Crisis(GFC), since the best teaching moments. In the late 1960s, in my early years as an equity analyst, of the economic cycle and the way corporate profits rise and fall to it. WhileI had a lot more to learn, I already knew a psychology and risk attitudes (and about their importance). But I had no appreciation for the role or operation of the credit cycle.In to fully understand most phenomena in the investment worldunless you’v lived through them. Now I’ve come to the conclusion that the credit cycle

really big deal. In fact, when asked about the causes of the Global Crisisof 2007–08, I put it right at the top of the list. The very choice of the name “Global Financial Crisis” for the 2007–08 experience reflects the fact that it was essentially a finan phenomenon—caused almost entirely by events within the finan —andnot one with primarily economic or other origins. Here are the attitudinal and behavioral factors in the financial worldthat led to reaching crisis: The existential cause was the too-liberal attitudes toward financial described on pages 119–120. Thosecarefree attitudes were inflamed by strong demand for yielding investmentsthat resulted from the Fed’s lowering of genera interest rates. Thosetwo factors led to, among other things, an excessive on the part of investors to accept innovative financial produ swallow wholethe favorable extrapolation of history and the optimistic assumptions on whichthose products were based. The predominance of mortgage backed securities among those innovations gave rise to a rapidly increasing need for mortgages whichto fashion the new securities. That demand facilitated the selling onward of mortgages, which allowed mortgage lenders to be careless in choosing the home buyers to whom they would lend. Since mortgage origin wouldn’t be retaining the mortgages they created, they didn’thave worryabout their soundness. In an extreme example of this trend, category of “sub-prime” mortgages was created for borrowers couldn’t satisfy traditional lending standards in terms of emplo income, or who chose to pay higher interest rates ratherthan these things. The fact that weak borrowers like these could borrow sums was indicative of irrational credit market conditions. Relaxed credit diligence on the part of mortgage lenders, and availability to home buyers of generous sub-prime financing, made ownership possible for more Americans than ever, including many who wouldn’t have been able to affordit under the tighter traditional mortgage standards. Seduced by potential profits from ratingvast numbers of securi backed by sub-prime mortgages (and enabled by their own naivet perhaps their greed), the credit-rating agencies competed for offering inflated ratings, in a race to the bottom of Homeaffordability increased substantially, fueled by the fact interest rates are low on short maturities, as originators hit upon

initialmonthly payments as a way to maximize mortgage issuan contributed to the widespread use of floating-rate mortgages entaili low starting monthly payments based on low initial“teaser” rates interest. Obviously, these non-fixed rates poseda potential risk to borrowers who could barely affordtheir payments before they increa But borrowers were assured that, thanks to the generous capita conditions, they would always be able to refinance into yet mortgage, again with a sub-market teaserrate. Investment bankswere eager to turn the raw material of plentiful primemortgages into tranched mortgage backed securities with the highest average credit rating, in order to maximize their salabi ardor for this activity at just the time that “financial engineering” into favor gave rise to ratings for tranches that turned out totally divorced from how they actually would perform under The investment banksthat created and sold these securities often were willing to retain the equity layer at the bottom of the in order to facilitate a high volume of issuance or simply to hold high-yielding assets(i.e., even they were oblivious to the nature of their product). And other bankstook advantage of the levelsof permissible leverage to createassetsat very favorable yield spreads by using low-cost borrowings to buy the risky, high-yieldin equity and juniordebt tranches of structured mortgage securities. As you can see from the above, virtually all the conditions on GFC was built were endogenousto the financial system and the credi The developments that constituted the foundation for the Crisisweren’t caused by a general economic boom or a widespread surge in profits. The key events didn’ttake place in the general business or the greater worldbeyond that. Rather, the GFC was a large phenomenon that resulted entirely from the behavior of financial main forcesthat created this cycle were the easy availability of capital; of experience and prudence sufficient to temper the unbridled enthu pervaded the process; imaginative financial engineering; the separation lending decisions from loan retention; and irresponsibility and downright greed. It must be noted, however, that this chain reaction was abetted officials who were eager to expand the American dream of home and naively thought it would be great if everyone was enab In a speech in October 2002, President George W. Bush repea been told by one of his friends: “You don’t have to have a lousy first-time home buyers. If you put your mind to it, the first-time the low-incomehome buyer can have just as nice a houseas anybody

wonder if the people who heard that statement at the time found as it seemstoday. After the GFC hit, Congressman Barney Frank, formerly one of strongest proponents of broadened home ownership, said: “Home ownership is a good thing. But we have made a great mistake in this socie people in the society who should not be allowed to borro home. And we have pushed people into home ownership who shou there.” (As you can see, political rhetoric is cyclical, too.) In other words, the events that provided the basis for the GF all about money. The pursuit of money took a powerful upsw economic realities that reflect on and constrain the attainment of often ignored. And the caution and risk aversion that usually bear willingness of market participants to provide money were largely Thus the capital cycle rose to an irrational extreme, the consequenc whichare generally foreseeable. Whenthe cycle rises to an extreme, it invariably can’t stay there for Sometimes it corrects under its own weight, and sometimes this happ because of events outside the cycle.In this case it was more the laying of the foundation for the Crisis, the unraveling of essentially all financial in nature, although the first step came from world.” Most influentially, in 2006, sub-prime mortgage borrowers beganto default in large numbers. Some of the borrowers, who had receiv without proving their ability to make payments, turned out unable. Some loans,secured through fraud,went bad when fictitious borrowers disappeared. Other loans,for the full home purchase price— whichhad allowed home buyers to gamble on continued home appreciation without risking any money of their own—were when the market stopped rising. Regardless of the reason, the historic basis that allowed sub-pr mortgage backed securities to achieve high leverage and high insistence that there wouldn’t be a nationwide wave of mortgage —failed to hold. As it turned out, lending decisions had unwisely, with unduereliance on that history. Importantly, lender investors had ignored the chance that such reliance would lending behavior so careless that it in itself would render irrelevant. Largenumbers of mortgage defaults led to downgradings, coven breaches and payment defaults on mortgage backed securities. The downgradings, breaches and defaults caused the pricesof backed securities to collapse, and the resultant loss of confid

the market liquidity for these instruments to dry up. With terrified buyers taking to the sidelines—and terrified increasinglyeager to sell (or forced to sell by margin calls)— was a dramatic downward spiral in the pricesof mortgage backe securities. Thesenegative developments collided head-on with new regulations, designed to increase transparency, whichrequired banks’ assets “marked to market.” But with pricesin free-fall and liquidity existent, it was hard to have faith in any price chosen. When marked down their assetsto be appropriately conservative, the lossesshocked investors, contributingto further panic,whichcaused pricesto decline further, and so on. In many cases the very viability of bankscame into question. Many to be absorbed by other banks(with support from the government) bailedout by the government. Each bank failure, acquisition (at pennies on the dollar) or brought lossesto investors and further sapped confidence. In the interlockingrelationships among bankscaused grave concern regarding the remaining ones’ ability to rely on amounts due others. “Counterparty risk” became the newest source of Banks reported massive losses. The rising pricesquoted for swaps—derivatives used to bet against banks’ creditworthiness— increased odds of insolvency. Shareholders dumped bank stocks response, forcing down their prices. Short sellers sold unremittingl adding to the downward pressure, rendering their pessimistic predic self-fulfilling, and further extending the vicious circle. Ultimately, Lehman Brothers was denied absorption or bailout, to its bankruptcy. That collapse, when addedto the many other unsett events taking place simultaneously, led to nothing short of Whereas the markets had reacted adversely to the problems in mid-2007 but overlooked the potential for contagion to other late 2008 everyone threw in the towel on everything. The pricesof assetsother than Treasurys and gold collapsed. Fundsthat had invested using borrowed capital—“leverage” or “margin”—saw asset values marked down precipitously and receiv demands from lenders to post additional capital. Whenthey appea the banksfor more time, the banksgenerally couldn’t or wouldn’t it. The result was distressed selling of portfolios en masse, increased the downward pressure on prices. The capital markets slammed shut in this environment, meani financing became virtually impossible in all quarters of the markets, even those totally unrelated to homes and mortgages.

Giventhe sum of the above, all economic units pulled back, buy, investor expand. The result was an economic retrenchment been labeled “the Great Recession.” Taken to its extreme in the last fifteen weeks of 20 the credit cycle seemed universal and unstoppable. Few people were imagine any forcescapable of arresting it or—as described in —anyhypothetical scenario that was too dire to come true. A total of the financial system was considered a real possibility. The bottom line is that the willingness of potential providers o to make it available on any given day fluctuates violently, with a profound impact on the economy and the markets. There’s n that the recentcredit crisis was as bad as it was because the c markets froze up and capital became unavailable other than from governments. (“Open and Shut”) I truly believe a system meltdown—with ramifications like tho the Great Depression—could have occurred. Former Treasury secretary Timothy Geithner’s book StressTest bears this out. Fortunately,however, the U.S. governmenttook steps that turned the tide. Theseincluded the guaranteeing of commercial paper, mentioned earlier, as well as market funds. The bank bailouts showed that help was available, September 2008 bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers suggested that the governmentwas differentiating between the banksthat were worthsaving those that weren’t. Whereas panicky market participants were convinced Morgan Stanley was next in line for collapse after Lehman—and Goldman Sachswould follow that—the downward spiral was arrested Japan’s Mitsubishi UFJ went through with a promised $9 billion in Morgan Stanley. Importantly, events in the credit markets eventually demonstrated cycles can’t go in one direction forever, even given widespread catac events. Debt priceswere generally in free-fall from the time of the bankruptcy on September 15 through the end of 2008. By the end however, the ingredients for a solid market recovery were in place The over-levered funds that had received margin calls either raised additional capital, sold assetsto de-lever as required, or liquid Fundsand investment managers that received notices from investors desiring to withdraw at year-end either put up “gates” postpo withdrawalsor completed the asset sales needed to meet them.

The pricesof debt securities reached a point wherethey implied so high that selling was unpalatable and buying became attract And, ultimately, market participants demonstrated that when negative psychology is universal and “things can’t get any worse,” they Whenall optimism has been driven out, and panicked risk aversi everywhere,it becomes possible to reach a point wherepricescan’t any lower. And when priceseventually stop going down, people feel relief,and so the potential for a price recovery begins The quoted pricesfor debt continued downward in the first quarter as composure, confidence and a “base” of buying power had full. But the ability of investors to buy in large scale dried up began, because of the factors listed just above. And when buyin materialized in the second quarter—perhaps because distressed debt came to the realization that they had shrunk unreasonably from the task of “catching a falling knife”—the dearth of supply for a powerful move to the upside. The Global Financial Crisisshows the credit cycle at the greatest since the Great Depression. Debt markets historically had been marked by general conservatism, meaning excesses on the upside were limit bubbles took place in the equity market. Certainly it was the Crashof 1929. But the creation of the high yield bond market in the late 19 liberalization of debt investing, and the generally positive economic environment of the subsequent three decades provided those who ventu with a favorable overall experience. This combination led to a toward acceptance of low-rated and non-traditional debt instruments. Therewere periods of weakness in debt in 1990–91 (related to bankruptcies among the highly levered buyouts of the 1980 (stemming from excessive borrowing to fund overbuilding in the telec industry, whichled to prominent downgradesthat coincided with several high-profilecorporate accounting scandals). But the effects of these were limited because of the isolated nature of their causes. It that the financial markets witnessed the first widespread,debt-induced with ramifications for the entire economy. Thus the GFC provided the ultimate example of the credit cycle’s full effect. ∾ As I described it in “Open and Shut,” the capital mark operation, and its message is easy to perceive. An uptight, cauti market usually stems from, leads to or connotes thingslike these:

fear of losingmoney heightened risk aversion and skepticism unwillingness to lend and investregardless of merit shortages of capital everywhere economic contraction and difficulty refinancing debt defaults, bankruptcies and restructurings low asset prices, high potential returns, low risk and excessive premiums Taken together, these thingsare indicative of a great time to in course, however, because of the role played by fear and r in their creation, most people shy away from investing while they a in force. That makes it difficult for most people to investw capital cycle is negative, just as it is potentially lucrative. On the other hand, a generous capital market is usually with the following: fear of missing out on profitable opportunities reduced risk aversion and skepticism (and, accordingly, reduced diligence) too much money chasing too few deals willingness to buy securities in increased quantity willingness to buy securities of reduced quality high asset prices, low prospective returns, high risk and skimpy premiums It’s clear from this list of elements that excessive generosity in th capital markets stems from a shortage of prudence and thus s give investors one of the clearest red flags. The wide-open capital market arises when the news is good, asset pricesare rising, optimis is ridinghigh, and all thingsseem possible. But it invariably brings the issuance of unsound and overpriced securities, and the incurre of debt levelsthat ultimately will result in ruin. The point about the quality of new issue securities in a wide capital market deserves particular attention. A decrease in r aversion and skepticism—and increased focus on making sure opportunities aren’tmissed ratherthan on avoiding losses—makes investors open to a greater quantity of issuance. The same f make investors willing to buy issuesof lower quality. Whenthe credit cycle is in its expansion phase, the statistics new issuance make clear that investors are buying new issuesin greater amounts. But the acceptance of securities of lower quality

bit more subtle. Whilethere are credit ratings and covenants to lo at, it can take effort and inference to understand the significanceo these things. In feeding frenzies caused by excess availab funds, recognizing and resisting this trend seemsto be beyond th ability of the majority of market participants.This is one o reasons why the aftermath of an overly generous capital m includes losses, economic contraction, and a subsequent unwillingness to lend. The bottom line of all of the aboveis that generous credi usually are associated with elevated asset pricesand subsequent losses, while credit crunches produce bargain-basement pricesand great profit opportunities. (“Open and Shut”) ∾ The ultimate purpose of this book isn’t to help you understand cycle they’ve taken place,like the Global Financial Crisisas described at length. Rather it is to enable you to sense wherewe stand cycles in real time, and thus to take the appropriate action. The key to dealing with the credit cycle lies in recognizing that it its apex when thingshave been going well for a while, news has been risk aversion is low, and investors are eager.That makes it easy to raise money and causes buyers and investors to compete opportunity to provide it. The result is cheapfinancing, low credit stand weak deals, and the unwise extension of credit. Borrowers hold the when the credit window is wide open—not lenders or investors. The implications of all of this should be obvious: proceed with The exact opposite becomes true at the other extreme of the cre nadir is reached when developments are unpleasant, risk aversion is heightened, and investors are depressed. Under such circumstances, no wantsto provide capital, the credit market freezes up, and propo go begging. This puts the cards into the handsof providers of capit than the borrowers. Because borrowing is difficult and capital is generally unavaila who possess it and are willing to part with it can apply rigor insist on strong loan structures and protective covenants, and demand prospective returns. It’s thingslike these that provide the margin of required for superior investing. Whenthese boxescan be ticked, inves should swinginto an aggressive mode. Superior investing doesn’t come from buying high-qualityassets, bu buying when the deal is good, the price is low, the potential retur substantial, and the risk is limited. Theseconditions are much more the when the credit markets are in the less-euphoric, more-stringent part

cycle.The slammed-shut phase of the credit cycle probably does more to make bargains available than any other singlefactor.

X THE DISTRESSED DEBT CYCLE Few lenders and bond buyers are imprudent enough to advanc money that won’tbe repaid if conditions remain as they a sober times,they insist on a margin of safetysufficient to ensure interest and principal will be paid even if conditions for the d deteriorate. But when the credit market heats up—when the race to the botto causes avid lenders to finance less-deserving borrowers and a weaker debt structures—bondsare issued that lack that margin o safetyand won’tbe able to be serviced if thingsget a little w This is the unwise extension of credit. This process, as w Oaktree, “stacks the logs in the fireplace” for the next bonfire I was fortunate to partner with BruceKarshthree decades ago, an in 1988 we formed our first fund for distressed debt investing, whic believe was one of the very first from a mainstream financial instit took us into a highly specialized investment niche. Rather than companies that are doing well or have brightfutures, ou distressed debt investmentsare generally in companies that are doing so poorly that they’ve defaulted on their outstanding debt or are consi highly likely to do so: they’re either in bankruptcy or viewed To be clear, our typical company isn’t challenged operationally, just overloaded with debt; thus our mantra is “goodcompany, bad balance Normally investors buy debt securities or make loans because they ex to be paid interest periodicallyand have their principal repaid when matures. With distressed debt, however, the consensus is that these thing won’toccur: instead it is expected that the debt won’t“stay curre serviced.” So if interest and principal aren’texpected to be paid, distressed debt investor’s motivation? The answer is that debtholders who aren’tpaid as scheduled have a “creditor claim” against the debtor. In short—and to over-simpl company goes through bankruptcy, the old owners are wipedout and

creditors become the new owners. Each creditor receives his share value of the company—depending on the amount and seniority of holds—in some combination of cash, new debt and ownership of the company going forward. A distressed debt investor tries to figureout (a) what the bankrupt is worth(or will be worthat the time it emerges from bankruptcy that value will be divided among the company’s creditors and other and (c) how long this process will take. With correct answers to questions, he can determine what the annual returnwill be on a company’s debt if purchased at a given price. Getting our start in distressed debt investing in 1988 was extremel advantageous, as there were few competitors and the field was little know and little understood—two conditions that can help make for superior retur possible in any field. As a result, our funds have been able to average returnover the 29 years since. But, as with many things, the is of only limited significance. The funds we formed at less-t generally have yielded good returns, but the results on funds form right times have been superlative. In other words, the opportunities for top returns in distresse go. Giventhe subject matter of this book, what I’ll review here that makes the opportunities rise and fall. Unsurprisingly, the answ the fluctuations in the distressed debt cycle.What,in turn, causes those fluctuations? ∾ The opportunities to profit in distressed debt are highly cyclical determined by developments in other cycles. Thus they are illustrative workings of cycles and ripe for discussion here. In the beginning—in 1988, 1989 and early 1990—our funds benefitted from the often-ignored benefits of distressed debt investing, and our were good. But in the latter half of 1990, the market for sub-investm debt collapsed in the first of the three majorcrises Bruceand I have through together. In addition to creating the low purchase price our 1990 funds above-average gainers, this episode was highly educ it gave us our first glimpse of the process through whichsuper opportunities arise in distressed debt. The first of the two essential ingredients in their creation consists unwise extension of credit.” Giventhe discussion in the last chap should have an understanding of what I have in mind and how I’ll explain through the example of high yield bonds:

At the start, appropriately risk-averse investors apply stringent credit standards to the issuance of high yield bonds. The same healthy economic environment that facilitates bond issuan makes it easy for companies to service their existing debt defaults are scarce). Thus high yield bonds—with their generous interest coupons and damage from defaults—provide solid realized returns. Thosereturns convince investors that high yield bond investing is attracting increased capital to the market. Increased capital for investment translates into increased demand bonds. Since Wall Streetnever allows demand to go unmet, in increased bond issuance. The same condition that allows largeramounts of bondsto be strong investor demand—invariably also allows bondsof lesser creditworthiness to be issued. Few lenders and bond buyers are imprudent enough to advance won’tbe repaid if conditions remain as they are. And in sober insist on a margin of safetysufficient to ensure, as I said and principal will be paid even if conditions for the debtor deter But when the credit market heats up—when the race to the bottom avid lenders to finance less-deserving borrowers and accept weak structures—bondsare issued that lack that margin of safetyand won’ to be serviced if thingsget a little worse. This is the unwi credit. This process, as noted earlier, “stacks the logs in the next bonfire. But that’s only the first half the process. Even after the fuel for a has been assembled, there won’tbe a conflagration until the second arrives: an igniter. It usually comes in the form of a corporate profits to decline. This is often accompanied by a the slamming shut of the credit window—such that existing debt can’t refinanced and goes into default instead. And often conditions are exace by exogenous events that sap confidence and damage the economy financial markets. In 1990 these consisted of: the Gulf War, whichwas set off by the Iraqi invasion of Kuwa the bankruptcy of many of the prominent, highly levered buyou 1980s; and the imprisonment of Michael Milken (the principal investment behind high yield bonds) and the collapse of Drexel Burnh employer and the investment bank most closely associated with high yield bonds). With Drexel and Milken gone from the scene,

exchanges that had helped weakened companies avoid default were to effect. Whenthe igniter arrives, bondsthat shouldn’t have been issued—and perhaps even some that should have—begin to fail. A slower economy makes it harder for companies to With the credit market closed, refinancing can’t be accomplished, meaning defaults rise. Rising defaults damage investor psychology. Investors who were risk-tolerantwhen thingswere going well now become risk-averse. Advancing capital to financially distressed companies—which seeme like a good idea just a short time earlier—now goes out of Potential debt buyers back away,refusing to “catch a falling saying they’ll wait until the uncertainty has been resolved. Capital that is mobile flees from the market. Buyers becom sellers predominate. Selling of bondsincreases; bond pricescascade downward; funds that receive withdrawalsbecome forced sellers; and eventually bonds available for sale at any price. Theseare the conditions that give rise to the ability to effect ba purchases of distressed debt, and thus to opportunities for elevated Of course, the cycle doesn’t go in just one direction. Eventual economy begins to recover and the credit market reopens. Thes developments cause the default rate on high yield bondsto recede. combination of an improving economy and a declining default selling to abate.Thus the downward pressure on bond priceseases,and buying begins. Pricesrise ratherthan fall, and balance sheet restructurin restore companies to viability, remove stumbling blocks and unloc Whengains on bond purchases made at the bottom begin to be notic additional capital is attracted to the market. The combination and increased capital causes the demand for bondsto grow. And we’vegone full cycle:we’re back to the beginning. A while back I put together a concise synopsis of the wa issuance underlays the rise and fall of the distressed debt cycle.Here Risk-averse investors limit quantities issued and demand high quality High-quality issuance leads to low default rates. Low default rates cause investors to become complacent and risktolerant.

Risk tolerance opensinvestors to increased issuance and lower quality Lower-quality issuance eventually is testedby economic difficulty gives rise to increased defaults. Increased defaults have a chilling effect, making investors once more. And so it resumes. This is a cycle I’ve seen in actionrepeatedly. My 29 years of ex distressed debt tells me its themes definitely do rhyme. And the description of the cycle gives me an excellent opportunity to make my that each event in a cycle causes the one that follows. In fact, description specifically to achieve that goal. Take a look at the progr just described: you’llsee that the final wordsof each line are the same first wordsof the line that follows. This is a true chain reaction, expect to continue in the future. ∾ As you can see, the rise and fall of opportunities in the mark debt stems from the interaction of other cycles: in the economy, inves psychology,risk attitudes and the credit market. The economic cycle influences investor psychology,company profitabilityand the incidence of default. The cycle in psychology contributes to fluctuations in credit market conditions and the desireof investors to lend, buy and sell. The cycle in attitudes toward risk facilitates the issuance of at the top and denies capital for refinancing at the bottom The credit cycle has a profound effect on the availability of refina and the degree to whichwould-be debt issuers are subjected credit standards. Hopefully it’s clear that multiple underlying cycles have effects on distressed debt market that are far from discrete and isolated. As earlier, each of these cycles rises and falls; each causes the other fall; and each is affected by the rise and fall of others. But this is a dramatic cycle in distressed debt opportunities, and one to explanation.

XI THE REAL ESTATE CYCLE Muchof investing is subject to gross generalizations and sweepin statements—usually stressing the positives, because of humans’ tendency toward greed and wishful thinking—and for some reason this seemsparticularly true in real estate. Over the course of m careerI’ve heard investment in real estate rationalized by easily digested statements like “they’re not making any more” (in connection with land), “you can always live in it” (in connection w houses), and “it’s a hedgeagainst inflation” (in connection with properties of all types). What people eventually learn is that regardless of the merit behind these statements, they won’tprotect a investment that was made at too high a price. The cycle in real estate has a lot in common with other cycles one that controls the provision of capital or credit. Positive events and increased profitabilitylead to greater enthus optimism. Improved psychology encourages increased activity. That includes doing more of something; doing it on the basis of rosier assumptions; higher pricesto do it; and/or lowering the standards that if one is to do it. All of these thingstend to entail the greater risk. The combination of positive psychology and the increase in causes asset pricesto rise, whichencourages still more activity, furthe price increases, and greater risk-bearing. Inevitably this virtuous circle takes on the appearance of being unstoppable, and this appearance causes asset pricesand the level activity to go too far to be sustained. But when the news eventually turns less positive and the environment becomes less hospitable, the levelsof psychology,activity and risk-bearin prove to have been excessive, and the same goes for asset prices. The

resulting price correction causes psychology to become less positive, causes disinvestment, whichputs further downward pressure on price forth. Theseare all elements that most financial cycles have in common includes the cycle in real estate. But the real estate cycle incorporate ingredient that the othersgenerally don’t share:the long lead times required for real estate development to take place. In the credit market, for instance, good news and rosy psychology wi to increased lending as soon as investment bankers can line up borrowers and print prospectuses. Thus lenders’ increased ardor translates almost instantaneously into increased demand for securities, lower dema yields, lower lending standards, and increased levelsof lending and issuance. But in the market for physical real estate—the worldof so-called and mortar”—there can be significant delays. Before a new build come to market, adding to the supply of space (and thus puttin pressure on pricesfor space if demand does not increase apace), feasibility studies have to be performed; a site has be foundand the building has to be designed; environmental impact studies performed; permission to build has to be secured from authorities, and sometimes zoning modifications; financing has to be obtained; and construction has to be completed. This process can run to sever the case of a majorproject it can exceed a decade. But change very significantly in the interim. I’ll use a description of the cycle in real estate development fro (January 2013)to illustrate. As I said there, “it’s usually clear, simp regularly recurring”: Bad times cause both the level of building activity to be low the availability of capital for building to be constrained. In a while the times become less bad, and eventually even go Bettereconomic times cause the demand for premises to rise. With few buildings having been started during the soft pe and now coming on stream, this additional demand for sp causes the supply/demand picture to tighten and thus ren sale pricesto rise. This improves the economics of real estate ownership, reawakening developers’ eagerness to build. The better times and improved economics also make providers of capital more optimistic. Their improved state of mind causes financing to become more readily available.

Cheaper, easierfinancing raises the pro formareturns on potential projects, adding to their attractiveness and increasin developers’ desireto pursue them. Higher projected returns, more-optimistic developers and moregenerous providers of capital combine for a ramp-up in starts. The first completed projects encounter strong pent-up demand. They lease up or sell out quickly, giving their developers go returns. Thosegood returns—plus each day’s increasinglypositive headlines—cause still more buildings to be planned, financed and green-lighted. Cranes fill the sky (and additional cranes are ordered fro factory, but that’s a different cycle). It takes years for the buildings started later to reach completi In the interim, the first ones to open eat into the unmet The period between the start of planning and the opening building is often long enough for the economy to transitio boom to bust. Projects started in good times often open in ba times,meaning their space adds to vacancies, putting downward pressure on rents and sale prices. Unfilled space hangsover th market. Bad times cause the level of building activity to be low an availability of capital for building to be constrained. Note that as in the case of many of the other cycles discusse step leads to the next. In particular, the step at the bottom of the one that kicks off the next iteration. This is a good example whichcycles are self-perpetuating. ∾ In lending, since the time lags inherent in the process are brief and business conditions in force at the time that the will to lend loan is conceived generally are still in force when the loan is funde conditions change materially in the relatively brief interim, the lende able to pull his commitment under a “material adverse change” the contract. Thus there’s relatively little risk in general lending from the gap between idea and action. But given the many years that can pass between a building’s concepti and its opening, conditions can change enormously, as just descr adds an element to real estate development that makes it poten Developers hope this risk will be offset by the fact that they can utiliz

extensive external financing (and thus they risk relatively little of their money and are able to lever up the returnon it to a great WhenI moved to Los Angeles in 1980, steel skeletons stood alo “Wilshire corridor” in Westwood, wheregleaming condominium buildings had been imagined. The developers who had initiated these projects in 1970sboom were caught out. The positive conditions that had supported initiation of those projects had turned negative, as the economy and as supply created by quicker builders sopped up what Some of those rusting skeletons remained uncompleted for years.Th developer who had dreamed of a high returnon a project’s $100 cost instead lost his $5 million or $10 million of equity good part of the construction loans they had extended for those proje illustrates the downside of the real estate cycle and the effect of the time lags. But investors who bought those haltedprojects (oftenfrom lenders tha repossessed them)and completed them often benefitted from: the ability to buy them for less than the developers had invest planning, entitling and construction of the framework, the reduced cost to complete them at lower pricesfor labor and in a non-boom environment, the shorter period remaining between the onset of their involv the completion of the building, and the possibility that—just as they had been approved in good times run into bad times—stalled projects purchased in bad times might onto the market in good times. The long lead time in real estate development gave rise to this po and my team participated in it. It illustrates the impact of cycle potential. Initiating projects in boom times can be a source of them in weak times can be very profitable. It all depends on what when you do it. Or as they say in golf, “Every putt makes ∾ There’s another aspect of cycles that can be seen clearly arena—although it affects cycles in many other areas as well—and fact that people’s decisions often fail to take into account what other doing. Here’s an example: Whenprosperity is rolling along and wealth and good feelings are there generally will be increases in the demand for homes—resulting increases in the price of homes—and increases in the availability financing to home buyers. Often this causes a housing shortage

demand for homes increases relative to supply, whichadjusts home pricescombine with eager lenders’ financing of homebuilders to encourage the construction of new homes to meet the demand. A homebuilder mightconclude there is unmet demand for 10 town. Out of an abundance of caution—and because of the limit and his access to funds—he decides to build just 20 new home good. But what if ten homebuilders all make the same decision? In tha homes will be built. First, more homes will be built than there’s And second, by the time those homes come on the market, the have cooled; people may not feel as prosperous; and thus demand mightbe sharply lower. In that case, the 200 new homes may dearth of demand, meaning they’ll go unsold or sell for on whichthe developers had based their decision to build. Now conditions have reversed. The economy is slow. Access to fin dries up, making it hard for would-be home buyers to obtain there’s a sizable inventory of unsold homes. Clearly the builders to stop building. So they all do so at the same time next time the economy improves, there may not be enough homes increase in demand. And so forth. This is a straightforward description of one aspect of a cy it isn’t hypothetical. At the 2012 Oaktree Conference,my partner showed one of the most compelling graphs I’ve ever seen: This graph presents the record of annual housing starts in the 1940 through 2010. The reason it made such an impression on me whereas it showed that 2010 housing starts were at the lowest wartime 1945 (and just equal to 1940’s slightly less-depressed level observation tells only part of the story. It fails to take into account since the ’40s in the U.S. population, the source from whichlong-run increases in demand for housing arise.

Thus, while the number of starts in 2010 was the same as in 19 of starts to population—arguably a far more meaningful figure—was half the highly depressed 1940 level. The explanation is that practically one had resumed building homes following the sub-prime mortgage housing bust, and Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08. The key infer draw from this observation was that the supply of new homes in immediately following clearly would be insufficient to meet a demand for homes. Of course, “conventional wisdom” at the time held that there co be a pickup in demand for homes. Instead, most people the American dream of home ownership was over; demand for home remain depressed forever; and thus the overhang of unsold home absorbed only very slowly. They cited the trend among young peop having been burnt by the collapse of the housing and mortgage rent ratherthan buy, and as usual they extrapolated it ratherthan quest durability. As in so many of the examples in this book, for most psychology-driven extrapolation took the place of an understanding belief in cyclicality. It was clear to me and my Oaktree colleagues, from the graph an knowledge of the data behind it, that because the greatest econ almost eighty years had haltedadditions to the housing supply, could recover strongly if there was any material increase in dema rejecting conventional wisdom, we were convinced that housing dema would prove cyclical as usual,and thus would pick up sometime intermediate-term future. This conclusion—supported by other data and analysis—contributed to our decision to investheavily in non-perform home mortgages and non-performing bank loans secured by land for residential construction, and to purchase NorthAmerica’s largest priva

homebuilding company. Theseinvestmentsworked out quite well. (It’s interesting in this context to note what the Wall StreetJournal said 12, 2017 article headlined “Generationof Renters Now Buying”: “In time home buyers] have accounted for 42% of buyers this year, up in 2015 and 31% at the lowest point during the recenthousing So much for extrapolating widespread abandonment of home ownership. This is an example of a case whereawareness of the nature our position in the current one permitted a profitable inference. case wherea cycle standing at an extreme—this time housing starts trough—sent a signalcalling for a highly profitable action. The proper course seemsclear now, when we look back on the ev The reasons behind successful decisions invariably are obvious in But in this case, dispassionate analysis of cyclical data permitted conclusion to be reached in real time . . . whichis when ∾ WhileI’m on the subject of cycles in real estate, I want time but not the last—on the way people occasionally conclude financial phenomenon has ceased being cyclical, and to that end, one of the greatest cases.Whenthingsgo well, people tend to think times will roll on forever. In fact, not much time has to have elaps last correction before cyclical history is overlooked in its entire appropriate to again cite John Kenneth Galbraith’s observation regarding attitudes toward history: Therecan be few fields of human endeavor in whichhistory c for so little as in the worldof finance. Past experience, to th that it is part of memory at all, is dismissed as the p those who do not have the insight to appreciate the incredible w of the present. Muchof investing is subject to gross generalizations and sweeping statements—usually stressing the positives, because of humans’ tende toward greed and wishful thinking—and for some reason this seem particularly true in real estate. Over the course of my careerI’ve investment in real estate rationalized by easilydigested statements like “they’re not making any more” (in connection with land), “you can live in it” (in connection with houses), and “it’s a hedgeagainst connection with properties of all types). What people eventually learn regardless of the merit behind these statements, they won’tprotect an investment that was made at too high a price.

In the late 1990sand early 2000s, as I mentioned earlier, a elected officials decided that as a step toward benefitting socie increasing access to the American dream, it would be swell owned homes. As a result, government-sponsored mortgage lende message that home financing should be made more easilyavailable, and complied. The combination of this message, the resulting increase mortgage availability, and the sharp decline in interest rates that was place at the time had a powerful stimulative effect on potential home The flow of money for mortgages was strongly encouraged by an estate platitude: “mortgage lending is safe.” This was based on conviction a nationwide wave of mortgage defaults couldn’t happen. The comb strong economic growth, generally moderate economic fluctuations, prudent mortgage lending practices had prevented the occurrence of wave in the period since the Great Depression . . . long enou such episode to be forgotten, as Galbraith says. But that didn’tmean were incapable of lapsing into lending practices so generous and that a powerful recession could bring on such a wave of defaults. In the early years of the 21st century, the combination of str homes and plentiful mortgage money—abetted by optimistic mediacove —caused home pricesto rise strongly. Thus we started to hear yet sweeping generalization concerning real estate: “home pricesalways (see the section that follows). I hope by now you’ve caught on to the fact that the me question matter only so much, and certainly they can’t be stron always carry the day. Human emotion inevitably causes the price even worthwhile assets—to be transported to levelsthat are extreme and unsustainable: either vertiginous highs or overly pessimistic lows. In short, conscientious belief in the inevitabilityof cycles like I’m means that a number of wordsand phrases must be excluded intelligent investor’s vocabulary. Theseinclude “never,” “always,” “forever,” “can’t,” “won’t,” “will”and “has to.” ∾ In the years leading up to the sub-prime mortgage crisis of 2007 Financial Crisisof 2007–08, a great deal of bullish behavior (whic shown to have been reckless) was underlaid by the belief that home depended on to appreciate steadily and not prove cyclical. As part contributingto—the bullish trend, some researchers rendered supportive statements and optimistic projections: According to a New York TimesMagazine article from March titled “This Very, Very Old House,” a vice president of the Federa

Reserve Bank of New York had concluded that “the sharp rise in pricesis in line with economic conditions . . . not a reality.” It even quoted him as saying, “We sometimes wonde home priceshaven’t increased much more, given the tremendous increase in the size of mortgage the average family can The article also mentioned “like-minded experts [from Columbia University and the Wharton School] who focus on what they call ‘superstar cities,’ places so desirable that they not only are for a correction but they also can sustain ‘ever-increasing’ prices compared with less-sought-after cities.” (Of course, willingness to employ terms like “ever-increasing” should serve as an absolute for the alert investor.) But there was a lot to question regarding the reasonableness of conclusions: the brevity of the data on home prices, the fact that statements made about the trend in the price of the home sold in a given year don’t necessarily say anything about the performance of a given home or of all homes standing adjustment for physical changes in the average houseover time, mix of homes sold that year relative to all homes), and likewise, there is no adjustment for the fact that neighborhoods wholecities go in and out of favor over time, affecting the value homes. For this reason, statements about homes in a given neighborhood wouldn’t necessarily be applicable to homes in Thus I foundit very interesting when “This Very, Very Old House” wa published in 2006. It reported on a study that solved many of methodological problems by following the price of a singlehousein Amsterdam: one that PieterFransz built in 1625. It had stood since virtually unaltered, and had changed handssix times,but its location Herengracht canal neighborhood had remained Amsterdam’s most desir throughout. Thus the article provided insight not as to whether average home had risen, but how the price of a particular home had performed. In contrast to the long-term optimists on housing quoted ea Robert Shiller said of the Fransz houseand its neighbors, “Loo Herengracht data is very instructive, because you can see 50-year growth, then it turns around. That’s more realistic than the super argument.” The author of the study,Piet Eichholtz, was described as “skeptical of those who claim that property values can continue to

infinitum.” He considered the economic arguments for it being “different time” but said, “you can see similarly rosy assessmentsmade over and over, whichare then quashed by circumstances.” Amen. Here’s more from the Timesarticle: “There is a myth whichsays that real-estate values go up s over time, . . .” Eichholtz said, “. . . but the data e that myth.” That is to say, whereeveryone from your wise old uncle to the broker who sold you your households it as gospel that real e one of the best long-term investments, this longest of long-te indices suggests that, on the contrary, it sort of stinks. B and 1973 (the period of Eichholtz’s original study), real propert values on the Herengracht—adjusted for inflation—went up a m 0.2 percent per year, worsethan the stingiest bank savings accoun As Shiller wrote in his analysis of the Herengracht index, pricesdid roughly double, but took nearly 350 years to do s . . . It’s only in recentyears,Shiller says, that huge incre real-estate priceshave become the norm and that people have come to expect them. . . . if this description of the past few years [in whic went up amazingly”] typifies the brave new worldwe live in, p it into the perspective of time—rise, fall, rise, fall—leads us back to what may be the oldesthistory lesson of all: it tends to r [emphasis added] The long-term data on home pricesis valuable, but the most importan lesson is that, in times of rising asset prices, people turn bullis commentators provide authoritative support. That’s only natural. rationalization for price appreciation that has taken place (and prediction still more to come) invariably occurs at highs,not lows. For real to commentators who issue sober statements in bullish times,or who against negativity when markets are down. ∾ The real estate industry is subject to cyclical ups and downs But real estate cycles can be amplified by special factors: the time lags between conception and readiness for sale, the extremely high financial leverage that is typical, and the fact that the supply is generally too inflexible to be demand fluctuates. (That is, a manufacturer can eliminate a

lay off workers or reduce production if demand for his But a landlord, hotelier or real estate developer has a much reducing the premises he has on offer if demand falls short.) The cycle in real estate illustrates and exemplifies the ways in which cyclical factors lead to and cause each other, as well as the tende to go to extremes. It’s not for nothing that they often say cynic tougher times,when optimistic generalizations can no longer be summ forth—that “only the third owner makes money.” Not the developer conceived and initiated the project. And not the banker who loane for its construction and then repossessed the project from the deve down-cycle.But ratherthe investor who bought the property from the amid distress and then rode the up-cycle. Of course this is an exaggeration, like all generalizations. Bu as a reminder of the relevance of cyclicality to the real estate especially of the way cyclicality can function in the less-good times

XII PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER—THE MARKET CYCLE The first time an inexperienced investor lives through an upward market cycle,the beginnings of the progression may seem logical, a the positives compound in a bull market or bubble. The f much good news and good feeling can end in lossescan come as a surprise. It is inescapable that it will seem so to the uninitia course, because if the progressions weren’t permitted to g extremes on the basis of errorsin judgment, markets wouldn’t r bull market tops to collapse from (or bear market bottoms to from). Our job as investors is simple: to deal with the pricesof wherethey stand today and making judgments regarding how they will change in the future. Pricesare affected primarily by developme areas:fundamentals and psychology. Fundamentals, whichI’ve been calling “events,” can largely be to earnings, cash flow, and the outlook for the two. They are many things, including trendsin the economy, profitabilityand the availability of capital. And psychology—howinvestors feel about fundamentals and value them—is likewise affected by many things, particularly investors’ of optimism and attitude toward risk. Thereare cycles in the elements mentioned above, and several each cycle.The themes behind the cycles’ behavior—and the ways they interact and combine—have a repeating, understandable pattern, have discussed at length. They all come together—and they combine idiosyncratic and random influences—to cause the behavior of the market.

It’s my goal in this chapter to give you a feel for the cy downs of the market. Not for the fact that it rises and falls, so in the past, or what these movements were in reaction to. But forces—andspecifically the non-fundamental, non-economic forces—that cause it to go up and down, often in manicfashion. If the market were a disciplined calculator of value based exclusiv company fundamentals, the price of a security wouldn’t fluctuate than the issuer’s current earnings and the outlook for earnings fact, the price generally should fluctuate less than earnings, since quart quarter changes in earnings often even out in the long run and, necessarily reflect actualchanges in the company’s long-term potential. And yet security pricesgenerally fluctuate much more than earnings. Th reasons, of course, are largely psychological, emotional and non-f Thus price changes exaggerate and overstate fundamental changes. Here shorthand version as to why: Events in the economy and in corporate profits turn increa positive. Positive events feed investor psychology.Emotion, so-called “anim spirits” and investors’ tolerance for risk all rise with those positiv events (or sometimes despite negative ones). Rising psychology causes investors to be less demanding in protection and prospective return. The combination of positive events, strengthening psychology lowering of investors’ returnrequirements causes asset pricesto Eventually, however, the process goes into reverse. Events fail to expectations, perhaps because the environment that produ becomes less hospitable, or perhaps because expectations were unrealistically high. Investors eventually prove that psychology can’t remain positive foreve Cooler heads conclude that priceshave reached levelsthat are unjustified, or psychology may softenfor any of a million possib reasons (or for no apparent reason). Pricesfall when events are less positive or come to be viewe positively. Sometimes it happens simply because priceshave reache levelsthat are unstainable,or because of negative developments environment. Having turned downward, asset pricescontinue to decline until so low that the stage is set for their recovery. It’s important to understand the way fundamentals and psychology int as described above. But it’s essential that I repeatsomething abou

process: while the description aboveis of one that is orderly and the process is nowhere as neat as this description may make it sequence in whichthese thingsoccur is subject to change, as is direction of causality. Sometimes events cause psychology to strengthen, and sometimes improving psychology has a positive impact on events (for bolstering the economy and corporate profits). And while it’s obvious that improved investor psychology makes pricesrise, it’s just as obvious that rising pricesmake investors feel wealthier, smarter and more optimistic. So, in other words, these relationships can work in both direction even do so simultaneously. And each can cause the other. The speed at thingsplay out is highly variable from cycle to cycle and over the given cycle.And lastly,cycles don’t necessarily progress smoothly; rather, they can be marked by dips, recoveries and feints along the way. It’s for reasons like these that investing can’t be described as sci can’t be depended on to work the same every time. I keep coming Mark Twain’s observation that “history doesn’t repeatitself, but it does rhyme.” The reasons and results are never the same as in the usually reminiscent of developments we’veseen before. Regardless of the imprecision of the process, it’s clear that past ev expected futureevents combine with psychology to determine asset price Events and psychology also influence the availability of credit, and availability of credit greatly affects asset prices, just as it feeds influence events and psychology. In sum, these thingsall come together to createthe market cycle.W about it every day, most prominentlyin connection with the ups and down the stock market, but also with regard to markets for thingslike and currencies. This is wheremany cycles intersect, and it’s the subje chapter. ∾ Financial theory portrays investors as “economic men”:objective, ration optimizers. Thus it suggests that the market they collectively form is author and investor (and Warren Buffett’s teacher) Ben Graham “weighing machine”: a disciplined assessor of the value of assets. In stark contrast, however, the truth is that financial facts and fig only a starting point for market behavior; investor rationality is not the rule; and the market spends little of its time calmly data and setting pricesfree of emotionality.

Investment fundamentals are ratherstraightforward. Past events have already taken place and been recorded, and many people have the quan skills required to analyze them. Current performance is captured statements, whichsometimes present an accurate picture and sometimes require skillful adjustment. And futureevents are unknown to every (although some investors are better able than othersto foresee them). Fundamentals aren’tthe most variable part of investing or the part intrigues me most. And anyway, I can’t write a book telling you more than othersabout futureevents. Doing a superior job of that elements of foresight, intuition and “second-level thinking” that I be reduced to paper or taught. The part of investing that fascinates me—that I find myself thi most, and wheremy Oaktree colleagues and I have made some of our contributions to our clients’ welfare—regards the ways in whichinves deviate from the assumption of rationality, and the contributionof those to the oscillation of cycles. A large number of elements play parts in this aspect of inv making, interfering with the process of arriving at purely econ They may come under the headings of human nature, psychology or —the distinction isn’t straightforward or important for our purposes here— and they absolutely are capable of dominating investor behavior and markets. Some but not all vary cyclically, and they all can affect or cycles. Here are the most important influences: the way investors fluctuate ratherthan hold firmly to rational and the resulting rational decisions; the tendency of investors to hold distorted viewsof what’s engaging in selective perception and skewed interpretation; quirks like confirmation bias, whichmakes people accept confirms their thesis and reject that whichdoesn’t, and the tendency toward non-linear utility, whichcauses most people to value more highly than a dollarmade (or a dollarof potential profit the gullibility that makes investors swallow tall tales of profit good times,and the excessive skepticism that makes them reject all possibility of gains in bad times; the fluctuating nature of investors’ risk tolerance and risk aversi thus of their demands for compensatory risk premiums; the herd behavior that results from pressure to fall into line othersare doing, and as a result the difficulty of holding positions; the extreme discomfort that comes from watching othersmake money doing something you’ve rejected;

thus the tendency of investors who have resisted an asset bubble ultimately succumb to the pressure, throwin the towel and buy though—no, because—the asset that is the subject of the appreciated substantially); the corresponding tendency to give up on investmentsthat are and unsuccessful, no matter how intellectually sound, and finally, the fact that investing is all about money, whichintrod powerful elements such as greed for more, envy of the money making, and fear of loss. Bulls and Bears Investors have been characterized for at least a hundred years as (optimists who think stocks will rise and behave aggressively as “bears” (pessimists who think they’ll fall and who thus behave defen Consequently, people apply the label of “bull market” to a mark risen, is rising or will rise (it’s quite imprecise) and “bear market” to opposite. About 45 years ago—in the early 1970s—I received one of the gifts I was ever given, when an older and wiser investor introduced three stagesof a bull market”: the first stage, when only a few unusually perceptive people believ thingswill get better, the second stage, when most investors realize that improvement actually taking place,and the third stage, when everyone concludes thingswill get better forever. The arrival of this simple truth opened my eyes to the no psychological extremes and the impact of those extremes on mark Like many of the great quotations and adages, it captures disproporti wisdom in a few simple words. It’s all about the changeabil pattern they follow over the course of a cycle,and how they error. In the first stage, because the possibility of improvement is inv most investors and thus unappreciated, security pricesincorporate little or optimism. Often the first stage occurs after priceshave been pounded in crash,and the same downtrend that decimated pricesalso has wipedout psychology,turning the members of the crowd against the mark them to swearoff investing forever.

In the last stage, on the other hand, events have gone well for so have been reflected so powerfully in asset prices, further liftingthe the market—that investors extrapolate improvement to infinity and pricesto reflect their optimism. Trees generally don’t grow to the sky, this stage investors act as if they will . . . and pay up they perceive. Few thingsare as costlyas paying for potential that have been overrated. It follows from the abovethat someone who invests in the fir when almost no one can see a reason for optimism—buys asset pricesfrom whichsubstantial appreciation is possible. But someone who in the third stage invariably pays a high price for the market’s exces enthusiasm and loses money as a result. The description of the three stagesof the bull market offersa lot with great economy. But not long after learning about the three stages, across something even better and briefer—essentially the same message just 14 words: “What the wise man does in the beginning, the end.” I consider this the number-onepiece of investment wisdom and an incredible distillation of the import of cycles. Again, the early who by definition has to be that rare person who sees the futur othersand has the inner strength to buy without validation from the garners undiscovered potential at a bargain price. But every inves eventually is overdone and bid up too far, so that the buyer in for potential that is overrated. He ends up with capital punishmen appreciation. “What the wise man does in the beginning, the fool does in the you 80% of what you have to know about market cycles and their Warren Buffett has said much the same thing even more concisely: “Firs innovator, then the imitator, then the idiot.” Of course, cycles work in both directions, and the depths of Financial Crisisgave me an opportunity to invertthe old saying and the three stagesof a bear market in “The Tide Goes Out” (March the first stage, when just a few thoughtful investors recognize that, despite the prevailing bullishness, thingswon’talways be rosy, the second stage, when most investors recognize that thingsare deteriorating, and the third stage, when everyone’s convinced thingscan only get worse. I’ve mentioned capitulation before. It’s a fascinating phenomenon, an there’s a dependable cycle to it, too. In the first stage of eithe market, most investors refrain (by definition) from joining in on

only a tiny minority does. This may be because they lack the speci that underlies that action; the ability to act before the case and othershave flocked to it (after whichit’s no longer unapprecia reflected in market prices); or the spine needed to take a the herd and behave as a non-conforming contrarian. Having missed the opportunity to be early, bold and right, investors continue to resist as the movement takes hold and gathers steam. has resulted in market movement, they still may not join in. With discipline, they refuseto buy into the market, asset class or industry that has been lifted by bullish buyers, or to sell once selling caused pricesto fall belowintrinsic value.It’s not for them to join late. But most investors do capitulate eventually. They simply run out of resolve needed to hold out. Once the asset has doubled or triple the way up—or halved on the way down—many people feel wrong, and are so envious of those who’ve profited from the stepped the decline, that they lose the will to resist further. My on this subject is from Charles Kindleberger: “There is nothi to one’s well-being and judgment as to see a friendget rich” (Man and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, 1989). Market pained by the money that othershave made and they’ve missed they’re afraidthe trend (and the pain) will continue further. They conc that joining the herd will stop the pain, so they surrender. Eventually the asset well into its rise or sell after it has fallen a great deal. In other words, after failing to do the right thing in stage on compound the error by taking that actionin stage three, when it has the wrong thing to do. That’s capitulation. It’s a highly investor behavior during cycles, and a great example of psych error at its worst. Of course, when the last resister has given up and bought we —or sold well into the decline—there’s no one left to fall in line. buyers means the end of the bull market, and vice versa.The makes the top or bottom and sets the scene for a cyclical direction. He is the “fool in the end.” The following account from history shows that even the most bri among us can fall prey to capitulation: Sir Isaac Newton, who was the Master of the Mint at the ti “South Sea Bubble,” joined many other wealthy Englishmenin investing in the stock [of the SouthSea Company]. It rose from £ in January of 1720 to £1,050 in June. Early in this rise, h Newton realized the speculative nature of the boom and sold h

£7,000 worthof stock.Whenasked about the direction of the market he is reported to have replied “I can calculate the motion heavenly bodies, but not the madness of the people.” By September 1720, the bubble was punctured and the stock price fell below£200, off 80% from its high three months earlier. It tu out, however, that despite having seen through the bubble e Isaac, like so many investors over the years,couldn’t stand the pressure of seeing those around him make vast profits. He b back the stock at its high and endedup losing£20,000. Not even o of the world’s smartest men was immune to this tangible le gravity! (“bubble.com,” January 2000) Bubbles and Crashes We’ve always had rising and falling markets, and we always continue to a significant extent, they’re calledbull markets and Even further and they’re calledbooms, manias and crazes; busts panics. The most popular terms today for describing extreme bull and markets are “bubble” and “crash.” Theselatter terms have been around for a long time. The “South Se Bubble” cited above, a maniafor investing in the company that would pay off the national debt by exploiting a monopoly to America, caught England by storm in 1720. And the market colla kicked off the Great Depression is calledthe Great Crashof 1929. But the “tech bubble,” “Internet bubble” and “dot-com bubble” of 1995 and the housing and mortgage bubbles that endedin 2007, bringing significant crashes in markets around the world—thatbrought the “bubble” into everyday use. As a result of the foregoing, there’s a tendency these days—es the part of the media—to call any big market rise a bubble. in fall 2017, the S&P 500 index of U.S. stocks has roughly quad (including dividends) from its low in March 2009, and the yield on yield bondshas fallen to a piddling 5.8%.Thus I’m often asked whether we’re in a new bubble of one kind or another, perhaps imply imminent. That’s why I want to spendsome time on my conviction every big rise is a bubble. For me, the term “bubble” has speci psychological connotations that should be understood and looked I’ve lived through bubbles much older than those in tech stocks an housing mentioned on the preceding page. One of the best examples 1960smaniafor the “Nifty Fifty”stocks—the shares of the highest-qua

fastest-growing companies in America. As far as I’m concerned, there common thread that runs through bubbles and was exemplifiedby Fifty: conviction that, as far as the subject asset is concerned, “ther thing as a price too high.” And of course it follows that you pay, you’re sure to make money. There’s only one form of intelligent investing, and that’s figuring ou something’sworthand buying it for that price or less. You can’t have intelligent investing in the absence of quantification of value and on an attractive purchase price. Any investment movement that’s built aroun a concept other than the relationship between price and value is irrati The idea of “growth stocks” beganto be popularized in the ea based on the goal of participating in the rapidly growing profi benefitting from advances in technology, marketing and management techniques. It gathered steam, and by 1968, when I had a summ investment research department of First National City Bank (the predecesso of Citibank), the Nifty Fifty stocks—the fastest growing and best—had appreciated so much that the bank trust departmentsthat did most of the investing in those days generally lost interest in all other stocks. Everyone wanted a piece of Xerox, IBM, Kodak, Polaroid, M Hewlett-Packard, TexasInstruments, Coca-Cola and Avon. Thesecompanies were considered to be so great that nothing bad could ever happen And it was accepted dictum that it absolutely didn’tmatter what paid. If it was a little too high, no matter: the companies’ fast-r would soon grow into it. The result was predictable. Whenever people are willing to invest regardless of price, they’re obviously doing so based on emotion and popularity ratherthan cold-blooded analysis. So Nifty Fifty stocks that been selling at 80–90 times earnings in 1968, in the vanguard bull market, came down to earth when ardor cooled. Thus many sold at times earnings in the much weaker stock market of 1973, meaning in “America’s best companies” had lost 80–90% of their money. And that several of the “flawless” companies mentioned have since gone bank or experiencedserious brushes with distress. So much for “no price too high.” No asset or company is so can’t become overpriced. Certainly that notion must have been banished forever. But lest you think this lesson truly was learned, let’s fast-forward 1990s. Now it was technology stocks that were commanding wide attention. Just as corporate innovation had sparked the growth stock gains in telecommunications (cell phones and transmission via optic media(including the limitless demand for “content” to fill the new

entertainment channels), and information technology (especially the Internet) were firing investors’ imaginations. “The Internet will change the world,” was the battle cry, followed by “for an e-commerce stock,there’s no price too high.” Whe Fifty stocks had sold at inflated multiples of their companies’ earni wasn’t a problem with Internet stocks: these companies had no only was the investing purely conceptual, but so were many of the So instead of p/e ratios, the stocks sold at multiples of any) or “eyeballs”: the number of consumers visiting their websites. Just as with the Nifty Fifty, there was a grain of truth underlying the investment fad; one is usually required in order for a bubble investors slipped the moorings of reason and discipline when they that price didn’tmatter. They were right; the Internet certainly did chan world, whichis unrecognizable today from what it was twenty years the companies behind the vast majority of the Internet stocks 2000 no longer exist. The Nifty Fifty lossesof 80–90% are enviable; companies’ investors lost 100%. The bottom line is clear: I think “pricedoesn’t matter” is a component—and a hallmark—of a bubble. Likewise, in bubbles, often conclude that you can make money by borrowing money to mania. No matter what the interest rate is on your loan, the appreciate at a rate abovethat. Clearly this is another example suspension of analytical disbelief. “No price too high” is the ultimate ingredient in a bubble, an foolproof sign of a market gone too far. Thereis no safe way a bubble, only danger. It should be noted, however, that from synonymous with “going down tomorrow.” Manyfads roll on well the time when they first reach bubble territory. Several prominent inves threw in the towel in early 2000 because their resistance to the tech had proved so painful. Some saw clients withdraw a large part some became dispirited and quit the business, and othersgave up and into the bubble . . . just in time to see it collapse, ∾ The following progression serves to sum up regarding the upswing market cycle.It shows how cycles in economics, profits, psych aversion and mediabehavior combine to move market priceswell beyo intrinsic value,and how one development contributes to the next. The economy is growing, and the economic reports are positiv Corporate earnings are rising and beating expectations. The mediacarry only good news.

Securities markets strengthen. Investors grow increasinglyconfident and optimistic. Risk is perceived as being scarce and benign. Investors think of risk-bearingas a sure route to profit. Greedmotivates behavior. Demand for investment opportunities exceeds supply. Asset pricesrise beyond intrinsic value. Capital markets are wide open, making it easy to raise money over debt. Defaults are few. Skepticism is low and faith is high, meaning risky deals can be No one can imagine thingsgoing wrong. No favorable developmen seemsimprobable. Everyone assumes thingswill get better forever. Investors ignore the possibility of loss and worryonly about missin opportunities, No one can think of a reason to sell, and no one is Buyers outnumber sellers. Investors would be happyto buy if the market dips. Pricesreach new highs. Media celebrate this exciting event. Investors become euphoric and carefree. Security holders marvel at their own intelligence; perhaps more. Thosewho’ve remained on the sidelines feel remorse; thus they capitulate and buy. Prospective returns are low (or negative). Risk is high. Investors should forgetabout missing opportunity and worryonly about losingmoney. This is the time for caution! The most important thing to note is that maximum psychology,maximum availability of credit, maximum price, minimum potential returnand maximum risk all are reached at the same time, and usually these coincide with the last paroxysm of buying. Likewise, the following progression outlines what happens in a ma downswing. The economy is slowing; reports are negative. Corporate earnings are flat or declining, and falling short of Media reportonly bad news.

Securities markets weaken. Investors become worried and depressed. Risk is seen as being everywhere. Investors see risk-bearingas nothing but a way to lose money Fear dominates investor psychology. Demand for securities falls short of supply. Asset pricesfall belowintrinsic value. Capital markets slam shut, making it hard to issue securities debt. Defaults soar. Skepticism is high and faith is low, meaning only safe deals can or maybe none at all. No one considers improvement possible. No outcome seemstoo to happen. Everyone assumes thingswill get worseforever. Investors ignore the possibility of missing opportunity and worry about losingmoney. No one can think of a reason to buy. Sellers outnumber buyers. “Don’t try to catch a falling knife” takes the place of Pricesreach new lows. The mediafixate on this depressing trend. Investors become depressed and panicked. Security holders feel dumb and disillusioned. They realize they really understand the reasons behind the investmentsthey made. Thosewho abstained from buying (or who sold) feel validated and celebrated for their brilliance. Thosewho held give up and sell at depressed prices, adding the downward spiral. Implied prospective returns are sky-high. Risk is low. Investors should forgetabout the risk of losingmoney and worry about missing opportunity. This is the time to be aggressive! In the reverse of the “top” that results from the upswing of cycle,now we see that the nadir of psychology,a total inability to credit, minimum price, maximum potential returnand minimum risk all coincide at the bottom, when the last optimist throws in the The progressions outlined here are simplistic. In fact, they can see cartoonish depictions of the road to failure. But they are not imag exaggerated. It is absolutely logical that each event will bring on

in both directions . . . until an illogical extreme is reach cards collapses. The events don’t always occur in the same order,and not all of necessarily present in every market cycle.But these behaviors are real, they certainly are elements that rhyme in the markets from decad The first time an inexperienced investor lives through an upward cycle,the beginnings of the progression may seem logical, as the posit compound in a bull market or bubble. The fact that so much good feeling can end in lossescan come as a surprise. It is will seem so to the uninitiated, of course, because if the progr permitted to go on to extremes on the basis of errorsin judgm wouldn’t reach bull market tops to collapse from (or bear market recover from). ∾ On pages 19–21, I discussed the relationship between wherewe stand cycles and what that implies for prospective returns. Now, to close chapter, I want to further illustrate that connection. In the last few weeks—while on the verge of submitting my fin this book—I hit upon a way to show the relationship I have in assume first that the market cycle is at its midpoint. That usual economic growth is on-trend, profits are normal, valuation metri reasonable in the context of history, asset pricesare in line with value,and emotions aren’textreme. Givenall the above, the outlook returns, too, is “normal,” meaning the probability distribution governing futurereturns looks like the one on page 19.

But what happens if the market is, instead, at a cyclical what’s going on in terms of fundamentals, that means valuations stretched, pricesfar exceed intrinsic value,and a high level of optim bakedin. At such a point, the outlook for returns is sub-par the negative, as shown by the new distribution below.

And how about at a cyclical low? Now, thanks to depressed inv psychology,valuation metrics are at historically low levelsthat suggest presence of bargains, and thus asset pricesare well belowintrinsic value Now the distribution regarding futurereturns is shifted well to the implying unusually high potential for profit.

This conceptual depiction indicates the relationship between cycle level and potential for return. It’s far from scientific, but everything I it’s right.

XIII HOW TO COPE WITH MARKET CYCLES What’s the key in all of this? To know wherethe pendulum o psychology and the cycle in valuation stand in their swings. To r to buy—and perhaps to sell—when too-positivepsychology and the willingness to assign too-high valuations cause pricesto soar to p levels. And to buy when downcast psychology and the desertion o valuation standards on the downside cause panicky investors to c bargains by selling, despite the low pricesthat result. The investor’s goal is to position capital so as to benefit developments. He wantsto have more invested when the market rises when it falls, and to own more of the thingsthat rise more or fall of the others. The objective is clear. The question is how to The first step is to decide how you will deal with the future. believe in economic and market forecasting, and in taking the such forecasts demand. Thus they investmore aggressively when forecasts call for favorable events, and vice versa. As I’ve made clear, I don’t believe in forecasting. Very few people know enough about what the futureholds for it to add to their retur record of most forecasters—in terms of both predicting events bette othersand having better investment performance than othersas a resul quite lackluster. A few people become famous in each period spectacular successes, but usually their next correct forecast doesn’t many years. In the absence of the ability to see the future, how ca portfolios for what lies ahead? I think much of the answer lies understanding wherethe market stands in its cycle and what that its futuremovements.As I wrote in The Most Important Thing, “we never know wherewe’re going, but we’d better have a good idea wherewe are.” To do that requires an understanding of the basic nature of general: what gives rise to their movements,what causes them to progr

toward peaks and troughs, and what causes them to retreat from extremes? We’ve touched on the key elements that concern us: the tendency of basic themes to repeatand of history to the tendency of thingsto rise and fall, especially those determined human nature, the way each development in a cycle has implications for the way the various cycles interact and influence each other, the role of psychology in pushing cyclical phenomena beyond levels, thus the tendency of cycles to go to extremes, their tendency to move from extremes back toward a midpoint, the regularity with whichthat movement continues past the midpoint, toward the opposite extreme. Theseare the generalities that affect cycles of all kinds.In addition, have to bear in mind the specific elements that influence the mark the economic and profit cycles that shape the investment environment the tendency of psychology to overreact to developments in environment, the way risk is considered non-existent and benign at some then enormous, inescapable and lethal at others, and the way market pricesreflect only positives and overstate them point, and then reflect only negatives and ignore all the positiv another. Theseare the fundamentals—the basicsregarding cycles in general specific ways they work in the markets—that we must perceive, atten obey. We must use the insights we garner to assesswherethe mark positioned, what that implies for its futuremovements,and what we shou do as a result. ∾ Equipped with a deep understanding of the above, we turn to figuring out wherewe stand in the cycle. What’s the key in all of this? To know wherethe pendulum of and the cycle in valuation stand in their swings. To refuseto buy— perhaps to sell—when too-positivepsychology and the willingness to assig too-high valuations cause pricesto soar to peak levels. And to buy downcast psychology and the desertion of valuation standards on the downside cause panicky investors to createbargains by selling despi

pricesthat prevail. As Sir John Templeton put it, “To buy when other despondently selling and sell when othersare greedily buying requi greatest fortitude and pays the greatest reward.” The upward movement of pricesfrom fair value to excess usually to the presence of some combination of important elements: generally good news, complacency regarding events, uniformly upbeat treatment by the media, the unquestioning acceptance of optimistic accounts, a decline in skepticism, a dearth of risk aversion, a wide-open credit market, and a positive general mood. Conversely,the collapse of pricesfrom fair value to bargain levelsis usually marked by some or all of the following: generally bad news, rising alarm regarding events, highly negative mediaaccounts, the wholesale acceptance of scare stories, a strong rise in skepticism, a significant increase in risk aversion, a credit market that has slammed shut, and a mood of general depression. The question is how we can tell wherethe market stands in Importantly, the elements that contribute to the market’s rise mani themselves via valuation metrics—p/e ratios on stocks, yieldson bond capitalization ratios on real estate, and cash flow multiples on buyo are elevated relative to historic norms. All of these thingsare low prospective returns. The reverse is true when a market colla asset pricesto bargain valuations. Thesethingscan be observed and quantified. In addition, our understanding of cycle positioning can be greatly an awareness of how investors are behaving. To respond to mark understand their message, one realization is more important than all other the risk in investing doesn’t come primarily from the economy, the companies, the securities, the stock certificates or the exchange buildings. comes from the behavior of the market participants.So do most opportunities for exceptional returns.

Wheninvestors act in a prudent manner, reflect risk aversion skepticism and restrain their positive emotions, security pricestend to reasonable relative to underlying value,making the market a safe place.On the other hand, when investors become euphoric, their overenthusiastic buying lifts pricesto dangerous levels. And when they’ despondent,their panicked selling takes pricesto bargain lows. Warren Buffett tells us, “The less prudence with whichothersconduct affairs, the greater the prudence with whichwe should conduct affairs.” Whenothersare euphoric, we should be terrified. And when are terrified, we should turn aggressive. It’s not what you buy that determines your results, it’s what you pa And what you pay—the security’s price and its relationship to intrinsic —is determined by investor psychology and the resulting behavior. The to being able to behave in a way that’s appropriate given the mark lies significantly in assessing psychology and the behavior of other have to know whether the market is red-hot and thus overpriced, thus a bargain. In “It Is What It Is” (March 2006)—andalso in The Most Im —I included what I calleda guide to market assessment. I can’t reason not to include it again here, or of a better substitute. these pointsare non-scientific, non-quantitative and non-quantifiable, and even somewhat jocular. But they should give you a sense for the watchout for: Economy: Vibrant Sluggish Outlook: Positive Negative Lenders: Eager Reticent Capital markets: Loose Tight Capital: Plentiful Scarce Terms: Easy Restrictive Interest rates: Low High Yield Spreads: Narrow Wide Investors: Optimistic Pessimistic Sanguine Distressed

Eager to buy Uninterested in buying Asset owners: Happy to hold Rushing for the exits Sellers: Few Many Markets: Crowded Starved for attention Funds: Hard to gain entry Open to anyone New ones daily Only the best can raise money GeneralPartnershold the cards on terms LimitedPartnershave bargaining power Recent performance: Strong Weak Asset prices: High Low Prospective returns: Low High Risk: High Low Popular qualities: Aggressiveness Cautionand discipline Broad reach Selectivity The right qualities: Cautionand discipline Aggressiveness Selectivity Broad reach Available mistakes: Buying too much Buying too little Paying up Walking away Taking too much risk Taking too little risk As I said in introducing the guide, “for each pair, checkoff the think is most descriptive of the current market. And if you find your checkmarksare in the left-hand column, hold on to your walle Thesesorts of markers can tell us wherewe stand in the cycle an that’s likely to implyfor the future. Thus they help in what I call temperatureof the market.” Here’s how I described the process Important Thing:

If we are alert and perceptive, we can gaugethe behavior of th around us and from that judge what we should do. The essential ingredient here is inference, one of my favorite words. Everyone sees what happens each day, as reported in th media. But how many people make an effort to understand what th everyday events say about the psyches of market participants,th investment climate, and thus what should be done in response? Simply put, we must strive to understand the implications of going on around us. Whenothersare recklessly confident and buying aggressively, we should be highly cautious; when othersare frightened into inaction or panicked selling, we should become aggressive. So look around, and ask yourself: Are investors optimistic or pessimistic?Do the mediatalking heads say the markets should b piled into or avoided? Are novel investment schemes readily accepte or dismissed out of hand?Are securities offerings and fund opening being treated as opportunities to get rich or possible pitfalls credit cycle rendered capital readily available or impossible to o Are price/earnings ratios high or low in the context of history yield spreads tight or generous? All of these factors are important, and yet none of them entai forecasting. We can make excellent investment decisions on the basis of present observations, with no need to make guesses about th future. The key is to take note of thingslike these and let them tell what to do. Whilethe markets don’t cry out for actionalong these lines every day, they do at the extremes, when their pronouncements are highly important. At any time, lots of thingsare happening in the world, the ec investment environment. No one can study,parse,understand and incorporate all of them into investment decisions. And no one need try. At any different events occur in each cycle,and in a different sequence, different results. My point here is that not all the details are important. Rather, (a) figureout whichare the important ones, (b) make inferences about what going on from the important ones (and then perhaps consider as many less-important ones as we can), and (c) conclude from those inferences are the one or two thingsthat most characterizethe investment environmen and what actionthey call for. In other words, being attuned to cycli developments and their significance.

In particular, however, you can’t have the extremes of market cy without a departure of valuation metrics from their norms. Valu result—and thus symptomatic or indicative—of investor psychology. The psychological and emotional elements I’ve listed have their primary impact by convincing investors that past valuation standards have beco irrelevant and can be departed from. Wheninvestors are flyinghigh and making money, they find it easy to come up with convenient reaso assetsshould be untethered from the constraints of valuation norms. explanation usually begins with, “it’s different this time.” Watch ominous sign of the willing suspension of disbelief. Likewise, when pricescollapse in a crash,it’s usually because of an assumption the thingsthat supported value in the past can be trusted to work So the key to understanding wherewe stand in the cycle depends formsof assessment: The first is totally quantitative: gauging valuations. This is appropriate starting point, for if valuations aren’tout of line with the market cycle is unlikely to be highly extended in And the second is essentially qualitative: awareness of what’s around us, and in particular of investor behavior. Importantly, possible to be disciplined even in observing these largely nonquantitative phenomena. The key questions can be boiled down to two: how are thingspri how are investors around us behaving? Assessing these two elements— consistentlyand in a disciplined manner—can be very helpful. The will give us a sense for wherewe stand in the cycle. In closing on this subject, I want to repeatsomething I’ve be even the best of temperature-taking can’t tell us will happen next tendencies. Since market cycles vary from one to the next in terms of the pace and duration of their fluctuations, they’re not regular enou us to be sure what’ll happen next on the basis of what has from a given point in the cycle,the market is capable of movi direction: up, flat or down.

But that doesn’t mean all three are equally likely. Where we influences the tendencies or probabilities, even if it does not deter developments with certainty. All other thingsbeing equal,when the market high in its cycle,a downward correction is more likely than continued and vice versa.It doesn’t have to work out that way, of course, safer bet. Assessing our cycle position doesn’t tell us what will happ just what’s more and less likely. But that’s a lot. ∾ The best way to teach the recognition of cyclical excesses is throu examples of how it can be done at the extremes, whereit matte over the following pages I’m going to review the formation of two bubbles and the crash that followed the second of them. Even the were different, but each of these three market events illustrates the of assessing the market’s temperature. First, let’s review the meteoric rise of stocks in the late 19 2000, and especially the formation of the Internet bubble. What shou alert investor have noted during that time? In the decade of the 1990s, the U.S. economy enjoyed peacetime expansion in its history. In December 1996, when the S&P 500 index of equities stood at Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan asked, “Howdo we know when irratio exuberance has unduly escalated asset values?” But he was never

from again on this subject, even as the S&P more than doubled of 1527 in 2000. In 1994, Prof. Jeremy Siegel of the Wharton School publis Stocks for the Long Run, in whichhe pointed out that there been a long period of time in whichstocks had failed to bonds, cash and inflation. Whereas researchers at the University of Chicago had earlier that the normal returnon U.S. equities was in the vicinity in the 1990sthe average returnon the S&P was nearly 20%. The better stocks performed, the more capital investors allocated them. This was especially true of technology stocks, whichwere the clear market leaders. More tech stocks were addedto equity indices like the S&P meaning index and quasi-index investors had to buy more of them— whichmade them go up—which attracted still more capital to them. was a classic “virtuous circle,” and no one could imagine The absence of earnings at most “new-economy” companies elimin any requirementthat their stocks should sell at reasonable price/e ratios. In the latter stagesof the bubble, the pricesof some dot-com increased several hundred percent on the day of their initial offerings. To be willing to buy the new stocks at their prices, buyers who thought about it would have to have either (a) the companies’ founders had been happyto sell the stocks fraction of their true value or (b) the founders knew less about stocks’ value than the buyers did. Both of these conclusions were tenuous. In order to share in this miracle—and to avoid the pain of othersprofited—investors took part in IPOs of companies that had earnings (and in some cases no revenues) and about whose busine models they knew little or nothing. The year 1999 saw the publication of Dow 36,000, a book whose authors, JamesGlassman and KevinHassett, argued that because were so low in risk (see Siegel on page 217), they needn’t a risk premium as they historically had. That meanttheir pricesshould immediately rise to levelsfrom whichthey would offer appropriatel reduced prospective returns. Thus the Dow Jones Industrial Average deserved to more than triple from just over 10,000 at the time. The p/e ratio on the S&P 500—fueled by rampaging growth technology stocks—reached a high of 33 during the tech-stock fully double the post-war norm and the highest valuation in history up to that point in time.

So what ingredients actually were present? good economic news, favorable articles and books, carefree, risk-oblivious behavior on the part of investors, unusually strong investment returns, extremely high valuations relative to history, widespread willingness to pay pricesthat could not be justified analytically,and belief in a perpetual motion machine that would never stop. This last point is particularly important. Everybubble starts with a gra truth, as I noted earlier. But the import and profit potential of overestimated in bubbles; disbelief is suspended; and it is wide that the gains can roll on forever. Certainly an objective temperature-taker could have known the pieces in place for a substantial bubble that was likely to fall to earth of phenomena as I described them in “bubble.com” (January 2000 Webvan Group, whichstarted in business in 1999, had sales million and a $350,000 profit in the September quarter. The currently values it at $7.3 billion. On December 9, VA Linuxwent public at 30 and soared to $239, for a market value of $9.5 billion, half that of date, the company’s 1999 sales were $17.7 million and it had lost million (versus Apple’s profit of $600 million in the most months). Because the price/earnings ratios of Internet companies are so —usually negative—one may be forced to look to the price/s order to speak about valuation. Red Hat, for example, sells at about 1,000 times its annualized revenues in the August 1999 quarter. Among non-Internet tech companies, Yahoo! is worth$119 billion than General Motors and Ford together. At the current stock $432, its p/e ratio on 1999 estimated earnings is just over 1,000. Under these unusual circumstances, the Wall StreetJournal wrote o December 10, 1999 that “stock valuations take on an unusually la importance in gauging a business’s performance.” In other words— the absence of other signs—people must look to the share price f indication of how the company is doing. Isn’t that backwards? I old days, investors figured out how the business was doing and th set the share price to reflect it.

In this valuation parameter vacuum, a “lottery ticket mentality” seemsto govern the purchase decision. The model for investm the tech and dot-com companies isn’t the likelihood of a 20% o annual returnbased on projected earnings and p/e ratios, but a a 1,000% gain based on a concept. The pitch may be, “We’re for first-round financing for a company valued at $30 million think can IPO in two years at $2 billion.” Or maybe it’s “ be priced at $20. It may end the day at $100 and be a months.” Would you play? Couldyou stand the risk of saying no and wrong? The pressure to buy can be immense. Therehave always been ideas, stocks and IPOs that produced great profits. Yet the pressure to participate wasn’t as great as it because in the past the winners made millions, not billions, a years,not months. The upside in the deals that’ve worked s been 100-to-1 (give or take a zero). With that kind of potential, ( upside becomes irresistible and (b) it doesn’t take a very h probability of success to justify the investment. I have said in that while the market is usually driven by fear and greed, the biggest motivator is the fear of missing out. Neverwas th as today. This only intensifies the pressure to join in and c out on that limb of risk. The bottom line is that in an extreme bubble like this on investor doesn’t have to make fine distinctions.All you have to be is identify nutty behavior when you see it. To me—as an obser in detached fashion from the sidelines, ratherthan someone with skin tech-investing game—the events of the tech/Internet craze had the of a Hans Christian Andersen tale. Thosewho participated in it so roll on that no one would step forward to say the emperor Developments like those just described were signs of the mass hysteria part of every bubble. Thosewho were enriched by the performance of equities in the especially by the tech and Internet stocks—took it to foretell prosperity and wealth creation, and they responded to the returns enjoyed by ratcheting up their expectations for futurereturns. (As Munger quotes the ancient Greekstatesman and oratorDemosthenes, what each man wishes, that he also believes to be true.”) But concluded that euphoria-driven buying in the 1990shad overpaid for and borrowed from futureperformance, with highly negative implication just took a couple of years for them to be proved right.

The eventual result in 2000–02 was (a) the first three-year decline stock market since 1929–31, with a 49% drop in the S&P 500 from bottom (ignoring income), (b) massive declines in tech stocks, of 100%on many Internet and e-commerce stocks. ∾ Usually one would expect that the painful deflating of such had been driven by excesses of optimism and credulousness—would serious instructional impact, meaning it would take a decad another such bubble to arise. But that was not to be the case. important, I’m going to repeatonce more what John Kenneth Galbraith said about the learning of financial lessons: Contributing to . . . euphoria are two further factors time or in past times.The first is the extreme brevity of th memory. In consequence, financial disaster is quickly forgotte further consequence, when the same or closely similar circum occur again,sometimes in only a few years,they are hailedby a n often youthful, and always supremely self-confident generation as a brilliantly innovative discovery in the financial and largereconomic world. The events that only a few years later beganto lead to the su mortgage boom—adequately described earlier in this book—provided example of the way cyclical excesses are built on error: As I wrote on page 119, some U.S. leaders decided that only come from increased home ownership. The federal agencies charged with issuing mortgages got the and ramped up the availability of mortgages. Declining interest rates made mortgages—and thus home ownership— increasinglyaffordable. Increased home affordability and increased mortgage availability allowed home buying to increase and the demand for homes This increased demand caused the pricesof homes to increa substantially. The canard that “home pricesonly go up” becam accepted truth, feeding back to produce still more demand for The further platitude that “therecan never be a nationwide wave mortgage defaults” caused mortgage backed securities to be primecandidates for investment, particularly by financial institutions. Wall Streetcame forward with a model for securitizing prosaic, home mortgages into tranched collateralized debt obligations—the next

high-return, low-risk thing. The construction and selling of CDOs and other mortgage securities (MBS) addedgreatly to bank profits. With relaxed regulations allowing banksto employ materially greate leverage, large amounts of capital were available for investment equity required for MBS creation. The meteoric growth of MBS packaging created rapidly increa demand for the essential raw material in the process: newly mortgages. In order to expand the volume of mortgages they issued, novel ways to increase their appeal to borrowers: interest-only that minimized monthly payments by eliminating the traditional requirementthat the principal balance be paid down; adjustable-ra mortgages that allowed borrowers to benefit from the ultra-low rates at the short end of the yield curve; and, most importantly, prime” mortgages (sometimes called“liar loans”) that didn’trequire applicants to document income and employment. With sub-prime mortgages being packaged into securities and sold onward, as opposed to being retained as in the past, lender shifted from borrowers’ creditworthiness to loan volume. With lender being paid fees simply for making loans—and able to sell them immediately and thus retain no risk of default—there was no them to worryabout the creditworthiness of their borrowers. Clearly gave them perverse incentives. (Incentives like these—which allow participants to engage in pro-risk behavior without having about the consequences—were described in the Global Financial as creating “moral hazard,” a term that came into widespread it’s heard less often these days, the concept survives, and it remain dangerous.) The key to the purported success of sub-prime mortgage backe securities lay in “financial engineering” performed by “quants” Ph.D.’s, many of them in their first jobs. They modeled risk based flawed assumption that mortgage defaults would remain uncorr and benign as in the past. The creation of large amounts of sub-prime MBS meantthere was of business for the ratingagencies whose imprimatur was essent these profitable assignmentswould go to the agency that provid highest rating. This led to ratings shopping and created incentives, this time supporting widespread ratings inflation. Thesetrendscaused the ratingagencies to issue many thousands of triple-A ratings to mortgage backed securities (as compared U.S. companies enjoying triple-A ratings at the time).Rating

personnel clearly lacked the ability to fully understand the they were assessing. Banks and other financial institutions bought huge amounts of abetted by “risk-management” techniques such as Valueat Risk relied heavily on the short, benign history and overly genero and thus vastlyunderstated the risk buyers were assuming. All of the aboveoccurred in and was facilitated by risk-obliviou attitudes characterized by risk-is-gonerhetoric (see page 120). So what was at the root of the formation of this bubble? Ac “NowIt’s All Bad?” (September 2007): . . . a standard combination that proved perfectly in underlying greed, good returns in the up-leg of the cycle, euphoria and complacency, a free-and-easy credit market, Wall Street’s inventiveness and salesmanship, and investors’ naiveté. The resulting developments that fed the upswing are clear: a huge decrease in risk aversion, and thus the disappearance skepticism, the acceptance of sweeping positive generalizations regarding homes mortgages, excessive faith in new tools like financial engineering and risk management, and widespread blindness to the impact of improper incentives on participants in the process. In addition to short memories, psychological excesses and logical the bubble that arose in mortgage backed securities was abetted additional factors: Because this new bubble arose in mortgage-land—apart of the markets completely separate from that whichhad been visited by tech and Internet bubble—the fixed income investors and financ institutions it appealed to were ones who hadn’t been affected by the other, and hadn’t learned from it. The terrible recentperformance of equities had so discouraged investors—and interest rates brought low by the dovish Fed

diminished the yieldsavailable on fixed income investments—that investors gave up on obtaining strong returns from stocks That rendered them highly susceptible to the promise of a returnwithout risk: mortgage backed securities. This is a good time for a valuable aside. Falling for the su asset that will provide returnwithout risk, or what I call the “silv (dating back to The Lone Ranger, a 1950sTV Western about a gunshots never missed)—isone of investors’ greatest recurring failings. exemplifies “whatevery man wishes,” as Demosthenes said, but it make sense.If there were a silver bullet: Why would the purveyor offer it to you ratherthan buying And wouldn’t everyone else buy it and drive up its price to whereit’s no longer a sure thing? I’ve seen dozens of silver bullets touted over the course of career. Not one has proved out. No investment strategy or tactic deliver a high returnwithout risk, especially to buyers lacking investing skill. Outstandinginvestment results can only come from exceptional skill (or perhaps in isolated moments from good luck). As I said earlier, bubbles generally spring from a grain of all taken too far, and their eventual puncturing brings the greatest investment world. Beliefin a silver bullet underlies many bubbles. The that investors are willing to swallow a promise of returnwitho infallible indicator that skepticism is in short supply, psychology is overheated, and the subject asset is overestimated and thus probably overpriced. Watch out for it, and resist if you can. By definition, comes to bubbles, few people do. I would sum up the key conclusion this way: The sub-prime mo bubble arose from broad acceptance that phenomena would work that had never before been seen in action. The analysis of investment vehic entail (a) the application of skepticism and conservative assumptions examination over a long history that includes some tryingtimes.Thes were clearly missing. In fact, most bubbles, if not all, are characterized by the un acceptance of thingsthat have never held true in the past; of valuations are dramatically out of line with historic norms; and/or of techniques and tools that haven’t been tested. ∾

The sub-prime mortgage bubble demonstrated an extremely important principle in actionthat I haven’t touched upon before now. The investment environment—and the performance of investment techniques instruments—is not immutable. Rather, as I’ve said many times with regar cycles, these thingsare affected by the involvement of people. Thereis no such thing as a market that is separate from—a —the people who make it up. The behavior of the people in changes the market. Whentheir attitudes and behavior change, the will change. In the case at hand: market forceschanged the participants’ motivations, as just these changed motivations changed their behavior, and their changed behavior clearly determined the results. An essential progression was at work, as is clear to see: History was taken as saying there couldn’t be a nationwide mortgage defaults. Acceptance of this benign history caused vast sums to be mortgage backed securities. It permitted the securities to be structured aggressively. It also caused ratingagencies to extrapolate the benign experi grant high ratings. Most importantly,the strong demand for mortgage backed securi created a need for the raw material—mortgage loans—and led eagerness to issue them that caused lending standards to deterio Thesedevelopments, taken together, virtually guaranteed that there wouldbe a nationwide wave of mortgage defaults. As I mentioned earlier, because of the impact of careless —the import of whichwent largely unnoticed and unremarkedat the the default experience on mortgages issued from the late 1990sthrou turned out to be much worsethan it historically had been; worsethan security structurers and ratingagencies had thought possible; and wors buyers’ models had said it would be. Ignoring this possibility significant contributionto the creation of the sub-prime mortgage bubb occurrence caused the resulting crisis. The key is to understand that the behavior of investors can alt changing the results that investors can expect the market to reflects George Soros’s theory of reflexivity:

In situations that have thinking participants,the participants’ . . distorted viewscan influence the situation to whichthey relate because false viewslead to inappropriate actions. (“Soros: Genera Theory of Reflexivity,” Financial Times, October 26, 2009) People tryingto understand how thingswork in the economic and fin worlds should take this lesson very much to heart. ∾ All it takes for the perpetual motion machine to grind to a one or two assumptions and the operation of some general rules Interest rates can go up as well as down. Platitudes can fail to hold. Improper incentives can lead to destructive behavior. Attempts to quantify risk in advance—particularly as to novel products for whichthere is no history—will often be unavailing. The “worst case” can indeed be exceeded on the downside. The error in all these thingsis always clear in hindsight. But the practices with regard to mortgages and mortgage backed securities— became so prominent and important—were taking place in an obscu of the financial world. Thus they were invisible to chief investment portfolio strategists, equity investors, alternative investment managers, traditional bond buyers, and seemingly even mortgage investors. We at Oaktree were fortunate in the years in whichthe mortgag arose—leading up to the Global Financial Crisis—to understand that credit cycle was becoming extended in the upward direction, and thus markets were increasinglyprecarious. This led us to sell assets; repla liquidating distressed debt funds with smaller ones; increase our level of consciousness and conservatism; and raise a stand-by fund several largest ever in order to take advantage of the distressed debt oppo felt mightmaterialize. What was the basis on whichwe did this? In retrospect it was ea although it never seemsas easy in real time. All you really had to 07 was make the following general observations: the Fed had reduced the base rate of interest to very low to ward off the depressing effects of the tech bubble’s burstin as concern over Y2K; because of the low yieldsavailable on Treasurys and high grade as well as the disenchantment with equities that had resulted

three-year decline in 2000–02, investors were eager to put money alternative instruments; investors had shrugged off the pain of the collapse of the 2000 and the telecom meltdown and corporate scandals of 2001– thus little risk aversion was present (especially in areas other than equities, whichremained out of favor), rendering investors genera eager for investmentsin exotic, structured and synthetic instruments; as a result of all the above, the markets were wide open of low-quality debt, poorly structured instruments and untested alternatives. Thesewere our observations, and it was the last that most calledou attention to the negative trendsthat were afoot. It felt like there wasn on whicheither BruceKarshor I didn’tvisit each other’s officeto comp about a newlyissued security, saying, “It shouldn’t be possible piece of junk like this. The fact that it is means there’s some the market.” Thoserisky deals told us fear, skepticism and risk aversion insufficient,and greed, gullibility and risk tolerance were in the ascen The implications of this combination are never good. All the pointsnoted here were obvious and not subject to debate. mattered is whether you made these observations and drew the appro conclusions. You didn’thave to fully understand what was wrong with primemortgages or deconstruct mortgage backed securities and highly structured collateralized debt obligations. We certainly didn’t. And, by the way, in those years when the mortgage bubble was bu stocks weren’t doing well or selling at lofty multiples, and the wasn’t booming (and thus necessarily heading for a recession). But made the observations just listed,you likely would have concluded, as that it was time to reduce the quantum of risk in your portf all it took. And here are the results of the bursting of the mortgage bu associated contagion, as shown in the performance of some of investment indices in 2008, the year it all came apart. Clearly it whichit was enormously important to have reduced risk. Standard & Poor’s 500 Stocks (37.0)% Dow Jones Industrial Average (31.9) NASDAQ Composite (40.0) MSCI Europe,Australasia, Far East Stocks (45.1) Citigroup High Yield Market Index (25.9) Merrill Lynch Global High Yield European Issuer Index (in Euro) (32.6) Credit Suisse Leveraged Loan Index (28.8) Credit Suisse Western European Loan Index (in Euro) (30.2)

∾ Finally in discussing how to detectand respond to market cycle want to returnonce more to the widespread panic that followed the bankruptcy filing by Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Although the sub-prime mortgage crisis originated in a small corner financial and investment world, the impact was soon felt widely, by the financial institutions that had underestimated the risk in mort backed securities and thus invested too heavily in them. As a threat to these essential institutions, the impact metastasized to the bond markets in all countries—and then to economies all around in the form of the Global Financial Crisis. Thus, as I described earlier, money market funds and commerc to be guaranteed by the U.S. government. A number of prom financial institutions failed or had to be bailedout/rescued/absorbed. No knew how far the carnage would spread. The equity and debt collapsed. Now the generalizing was on the negative side: “the finan system could totally melt down” in a vicious circle without Since the generalizations were on the downside, the error-making ma went into reverse. No greed, only fear. No optimism, only pessimism. tolerance, only risk aversion. No ability to see positives, only nega willingness to interpret thingspositively, only negatively. No ability to imagine good outcomes, only bad. Thus we reached the day on whic the discussion mentioned back on pages 131–132, in whichthe pension head was unable or unwilling to accept that any assumption regar possible defaults could be conservative enough. What was the essential observation? Here’s what I wrote in “T Negativism” (October 2008): Contrarianism—doing the opposite of what othersdo, or “leaning against the wind”—is essential for investment success. But as th credit crisis reached a peak last week,people succumbed to the w ratherthan resisting. I foundvery few who were optimistic; most were pessimistic to some degree. Some became genuinely depressed—even a few great investors I know. Increasingly negative tales o coming meltdown were exchanged via email. No one applied skepticism, or said “that horror story’s unlikely to be true.” P fed on itself. People’s only concern was bullet-proofing their portfolios to get through the coming collapse, or raising e to meet redemptions. The one thing they weren’t doing last week w

making aggressive bids for securities. So pricesfell and fell, several pointsat a time—the old expression is “gapped down.” The key—as usual—was to become skeptical of what “everyone” was saying and doing. One mighthave said, “Sure, the negativ may turn out to be true, but certainly it’s priced into the m there’s little to be gained from betting on it. On the o turns out not to be true, the appreciation from today’s depress will be enormous. I buy!” The negative story may have looked compelling, but it’s the positive story—which few believed—that held, and still holds,the greater potential for profit. At this market cycle extreme, all the news truly was negative . certainly not imaginary. The only questions I received were “Howfar go?” and “What will be the effects?” Giventhat asset pricesreflected but abjectpessimism regarding these things—I’d say near-suicidal thinking— the key to profiting lay in recognizing that even in the face of news and a very poor outlook, pessimism can be overdone, and thus can become too cheap. It was the excessiveness of the prevailing pessimism that led me “The Limits to Negativism” at the credit market’s low ebb in In it I pointed out, as mentioned in the chapter on attitu the superior investor’s essential skepticism “calls for pessimism when optimism is excessive. But it also calls for optimism when pessimism excessive.” That variety of skepticism was totally lacking in the darkest days, of course. Shortly after Lehman’s bankruptcy filing on September 15, 2008, Bruce Karshand I reached the conclusion that (a) no one could know how financial institution meltdown would go, but (b) negativity was certa rampant and very possibly excessive, and assetslooked terribly cheap Thinking strategically, we decided that if the financial worldende no one could rule out—it wouldn’t matter whether we’d bought the worlddidn’tend and we hadn’t bought, we would have failed job. So we bought debt aggressively. Oaktree invested more than a dollars a week over the fifteen weeks from September 15 throu the year. Some days we thought we were going too fast, and some days slow; that probably meantwe had it about right. The worlddidn’tend; the vicious cycle of financial institution implosion stopped with Lehman Brothers; the capital markets reopened; the financial institutions came life; debt was again able to be refinanced; bankruptcies turned out few relative to history; and the assetswe bought appreciated subst short, paying heed to the cycle was rewarded.

∾ Whilewe’re reviewing the climate in late 2008, this is an appropriate a discussion of investor behavior on the way to, and at, mark First, what is a bottom? It’s the point when the lowest pricesof are reached. Thus a bottom can be viewed as the day the sells, or the last day on whichsellers predominate relative to whatever reason, it’s the last day pricesgo down, and thus the their nadir. (Of course these definitions are highly exaggerated. The expression “a bottom”—like “a top”—describes a period of time, Thus the phrase “the last day” is mostly a figureof speech.) pricesrise, since there are no holders left to capitulate and sell, or buyers now want to buy more strongly than the sellers want to The question I want to touch on here is, “When should on made reference in earlier chapters to “falling knives,” whichconst important concept. Whena market is cascading downward, investors often be heard to say, “We’re not going to try to catch a fallin other words, “The trend is downward and there’s no way to know stop, so why should we buy before we’re sure the bottom has What I think they’re really saying is, “We’re scared—in particula buying before the decline has stopped, and thus of looking going to wait until the bottom has been reached, the dust has settle uncertainty has been resolved.” But hopefully by now I’ve made it abun clear that when the dust has settled and investors’ nerves have stead bargains will be gone. At Oaktree, we strongly reject the idea of waiting for the bo buying. First, there’s absolutely no way to know when the bottom has reached. There’s no neon sign that lights up. The bottom can recognized only after it has been passed, since it is defined before the recovery begins. By definition, this can be identif after the fact. And second, it’s usually during market slides that you can quantities of the thing you want, from sellers who are throwing towel and while the non-knife-catchers are hugging the sidelines. once the slide has culminated in a bottom, by definition there sellers left to sell, and during the ensuing rally it’s buyers predominate. Thus the selling dries up and would-be buyers growing competition.

We beganto buy distressed debt immediately after Lehman filed for bankruptcy protection in mid-September 2008 as described on page 235, we continued through year-end, as priceswent lower and lower. By quarter of 2009, other investors had collected themselves, caught on values that were available, and gathered some capital for investment the motivated sellers done selling and buying having begun, them to buy in size without pushing up prices. Like so many other thingsin the investment worldthat mightbe tried on the basis of certitude and precision, waiting for the bottom to great example of folly. So if targeting the bottom is wrong, buy? The answer’s simple: when price is belowintrinsic value.What if price continues downward? Buy more, as now it’s probably an even great bargain. All you need for ultimate success in this regard is intrinsic value,(b) the emotional fortitude to persevere, and (c) even have your estimate of value proved correct. ∾ Here’s how the prominent investment indices did the following year. returns that were available in 2009 show the importance of having a cycle at a negative extreme and having bought in (or through) the accompanying chaos. Standard & Poor’s 500 Stocks 26.5% Dow Jones Industrial Average 22.7 NASDAQ Composite 45.4 MSCI Europe,Australasia, Far East Stocks (in US$)27.8 Citigroup High Yield Market Index 55.2 BofA Merrill Lynch Global High Yield European Issuer Index 83.0 Credit Suisse Leveraged Loan Index 44.9 Credit Suisse Western European Loan Index (in Euro) 47.2 It’s time for another aside:If you look at the last two tables—t showing big lossesin 2008 and big gains in 2009—it’s easy to conc the two years together were something of a non-event. For example, put $100 into the Credit Suisse Leveraged Loan Index on the first 2008, you would have lost 29% over the course of the year and left at the end. But then you would have gained 45% in 2009 with $103 at the conclusion of the two-year period, for a net two-year results in the asset classes listed aboveranged from mode lossesto moderate net gains. It matters enormously, however, what you did in between. Ye would have enabled you to recoup most or all of your losse

with results as described above. But if you lost your nerve and trough—or if, having bought with borrowed money, you received call you couldn’t meet and saw your positions sold out from under you— experiencedthe decline but not the recovery, and your net result in event” two-year period was disastrous. For this reason, it’s important to note that exiting the market —andthus failing to participate in a cyclical rebound—is truly sin in investing. Experiencing a mark-to-market loss in the down of a cycle isn’t fatal in and of itself, as long as you hold throu upward part as well. It’s converting that downward fluctuation into a permanent loss by selling out at the bottom that’s really terrible. Thus understanding cycles and having the emotional and financial wherewithal needed to live through them is an essential ingre investment success. ∾ Before I declare victory in the Global Financial Crisisand state firmly that the success my colleagues and I enjoyed in this cycle wasn’t inevitable. That’s because—reflecting Elroy Dimson’s theme—the good outcome we got wasn’t the only outcome that could materialized. I’m convinced that if Hank Paulson, Tim Geithner and Bernanke hadn’t acted when they did, or if they had acted differently, their actions hadn’t been as successful as they were, a financial replay of the Great Depression absolutely could have occurred. In that our actions wouldn’t have been cause for celebration. I fear that people may look back at the decline of 2008 an that followed and conclude that declines can always be depended recouped promptly and easily, and thus there’s nothing to worr down-cycles. But I think those are the wrong lessons from the the outcome that actually occurred was so much better than some of “alternative histories” (as Nassim Nicholas Taleb calls them)that could have occurred instead. And if those incorrect lessons are the ones that as I believe they may have been, then they’re likely to bring on increases the amplitude of another dramatic boom/bust cycle someday, one with more serious and long-lastingramifications for investors and of society. But thingsdid break for us in the recovery from the Crisis, an “long” investors. Certainly we positioned our clients’ portfolios corre the futurethat materialized, and a lot of it was because of way in whichpsychological and market cycles operate. Giventhe predict the future, that’s the best anyone can do.

∾ Bubbles and crashes have a pattern all their own: a logic—or essence of whichrhymes from one instance to the next. The three reviewed here show the oscillation of the cycle at its most extreme, hopefully they provide an indication of how cycles can be recog dealt with. I want to make a few last, essential points. First, every element in the progressions I’ve described was clear the time, providing investors could keep their emotions and distorted perception from getting in the way. Second, drawing the essential inferences—and thus taking the appropriate actions—didn’t require any forecasting at all. The descriptionsof the actualprogressions are compelling, with no guesse needed regarding the future. The events and resulting cyclic dictated profitable behavior. Finally, however, while I say the events were self-evident and implications obvious, I want to state definitively that nothing the time. Even the best and least emotional among us are subjec same inputsand stimuli as everyone else. We were never sure, but did the right thing nevertheless. And while the errorsleading up Global Financial Crisiswere easilyrecognizable, the timing of correcting was absolutely beyond predicting. The best investors can act in light of what they see in the environment. But they mind what John Maynard Keynes is reputed to have said: “The can remain irrational longer than you can remain solvent.” ∾ To close on the subject of dealing with cyclical events, I more example, from 1991. Leveraged buyouts had boomed in the 1980 thanks to the ability of buyers of companies to access debt capital, often ranging up to 95% of the total purchase price many of the subject companies being saddled with debt they wouldn’t to service in the recession that followed; to large numbers of bankruptcies; and thus to high yield bonds’ first crisis.Thesedevelopme came to a head just after we formed our FundsII and IIb for Here’s how I assessed the environment in a letter to their 23, 1991:

In general, the market pricesof distressed company debt decline during 1990. Some of this was driven by fundamentals, as th value of all assetsweakened along with the economy, and some was due to “technical conditions,”meaning the supply of this sort o ballooned and buyers were discouragedand withdrew. The worsening economic and psychological climate gives us the opportunity to pick and choose among a large number of p investmentsat bargain prices. The environment is dreary, a what one buys is soon quoted lower, and there is no ebullien Theseare exactly the conditions under whichwe want to be working. Whenbuyers are enjoying themselves, and when they are exchanging “high fives”because everything they buy goes higher the next day and makes them feel smart, the “pain index” is to buyers are emboldened. Today’s conditions tell me we are more likely to be getting bargains than if we were having fun. Thereare few competing b to drive up the pricesof the thingswe want to buy. Each purchas price is more likely to turn out to have been a “low”than a “ short, this is a good time to be putting money to work in investment area such as ours. We cannot presume to begin investing on the day the econ market hit bottom. Our greatest hope is that the low point w sometime during the period when we are actively investing a and that we will buy on the way to, during, and after that m This is a good example of taking the temperatureof the ma time . . . not just because it was me who took it, and out to be right (the distressed debt funds we were investing at that some of the highest returns we’veever achieved). Rather, it was it detected and pushed back against the depressing emotional influ were keeping othersfrom buying. It shows we knew the “dreary” and mark-to-market lossesthat were driving buyers away were more likely have favorable ratherthan unfavorableimplications for subsequent returns, and that declining pricesare good for buyers, not bad. Understanding what thingsreally mean—rather than how they make investors feel—is the first step toward doing the thingsthat are right times. ∾ Having allowed this chapter to reach great length, I’m going to general discussion of how to think about positioning a portfolio as moves through its cycle.

I think it’s helpful to take an organized approach to what I risks.” What I’m talking about here is the fact that investors have with two possible sources of error. The first is obvious: the risk money. The second is a bit more subtle: the risk of missi Investors can eliminate either one, but doing so will expose them entire the other. So most people balance the two. What should an investor’s normal stance be regarding the tw balanced, or favoring one or the other? The answer depends goals,circumstances, personality and ability to withstand risk (and on same thingswith regard to one’s clients, if any). And separate and apart from his normal posture, should the inv the balance from time to time? And if so, how? I think investors appropriately adjusttheir stance if they (a) feel they have the requi and (b) are willing to expend effort and bear the risk of being should do this based on wherethe market is in its cycle.In market is high in its cycle,they should emphasize limiting the losingmoney, and when the market is low in its cycle,they shou reducing the risk of missing opportunity. How?Try to travel into the futureand look back. In 2023, do you thi you’re more likely to say, “Back in 2018, I wish I’d been more “Back in 2018, I wish I’d been more defensive”? And is there anyth about whichyou’dbe likely to say, “In 2018, I missed the chance to buy xyz”?What you think you mightsay a few years down the road help you figureout what you should do today. The abovedecisions relate directly to the choice between aggressiv and defensiveness. Whenan investor wantsto reduce his chance money, he should investmore defensively.More worried about missing opportunity? In that case, increased aggressiveness is calledfor. Vary one’s stance should be done in response to wherethe market cycle and, again,this can be approached in terms of how the market and how other investors are behaving—the two elements in assessing market mentioned earlier. Whenmost investors are behaving aggressively, that’s a good signaltha the market is a risky place,since little risk aversion is being appli investors’ aggressiveness is likely to have resulted directly in eleva prices. In both ways, as I mentioned on page 211, the aggressiven makes the market risky for us. A good way to think about this decision is to consider whichatt right for the current market environment. In late 2008/early 2009 needed only two thingsto make a lot of money: money to to investit. If he had those two things, he made a lot of that followed. In retrospect, what he didn’tneed was caution, conservativ

risk control, discipline, selectivity and patience; the more of those thing had, the less money he made. Does that mean “money and nerve” is always a surefire for investment success? Absolutely not. If an investor had money and early 2007, he bore the full brunt of the Global Financial Crisis. he needed caution, conservativism, risk control, discipline, selectivity patience. Moreover, even in late 2008/early 2009, intelligent investors couldn’t completely abandon caution and discipline, because there was way for them to know that the recovery from the GFC would be the aftermath so relatively painless for investors. At Oaktree, we lot, but we emphasized the seniordebt of high-qualitycompanies, not the juniordebt and weaker issuers in which, as it turned out, even more money. Among the many factors that make investing interesting is the fac there’s no tactic or approach that always works. The only way correctly positioned as the cycle moves is to make well-reasoned and adjustthe attributes employed. But it’s not easy. One way people tend to respond to the challenges these days is “What inning are we in?” Ever since the financial meltdown in encounteredthis question on a regular basis. What people really mean “Where do we stand in the cycle?” In the fourthquarter of wondered, “Howmuch of the pain has been felt already, and how much lies ahead?” More recently they’ve been inquiring primarily about the cycle:how much longer will it continue on the upswing—making borrow—and when will credit availability begin to tighten? I consider these questions in the light of my sense for how far gone, and I answer in the form the questioners want: second innin getting started), fifth inning (game half over),or eighth innin end). But recently I’ve become more conscious of the limitation of approach: unlike a normal baseball game,we have no way to a particular cycle will go on. Thereis no regulation length. A game will last nine innings, but an economic or market cycle could nine, twelve or fourteen. Thesethingsare not knowable. None of these approaches offersa foolproof technique for deciding ho position portfolios. There’ll all just ways to think systematically abou something that isn’t subject to easy answers. But hopefully they sugg route that’s superior to deciding on the basis of emotion, guesswork following the herd. How you deal with cycles is one of the most important thingsin Cycles will happen to you. What you do in response is key.

XIV CYCLE POSITIONING Successfully positioning a portfolio for the market movements th aheadis dependent on what you do (turning aggressive or defensi and when you do it (based on a superior understanding o implyfor futuremarket moves). I once knew a man who was congenitally optimistic and aggressiv perhaps because he’d had the good sense to be born rich and had charmed life. He never exhibited self-doubt or seemed to question accuracy of his forecasts or the likelihood that his stratagems woul He was aggressive as long as I knew him, in what turned out time for aggressiveness. That experience inspired me to coin a phras describe the forcesat work: Thereare three ingredients for success—aggressiveness, timing and skill—and if you have enough aggressiveness at the right time, y don’t need that much skill. ∾ In February 2017, I foundmyself working on the final chapters while on vacation in India. One day I visited one of the world Jaipur’s Amer Fort—and attempted to capture a small fraction of photos. Whilereviewing my photos afterwards, I had the good luck stumble on some I had taken a few months earlier in anoth China. In the course of that visit, a Beijing-based client had asked me provocative questions, and in answering them I made some scribbles, as often do, on a whiteboard. Answers came to me that day that hadn my mind before. Recognizing that, I took photos of the board before leaving. (What an innovation: twenty years ago I woul had a camera at a presentation.) Threemonths later, while revie photographic handiwork at the Amer Fort, I came across those photo

Chinaand thought back to those ideas for the first time. They’ll provi of the grist for this chapter. Now I foundmyself in bed in India, after a night’s sleep cu 10½-hour time difference from New York. For some reason, a connection dawned between the abovesaying about success, my photos from and the question of how to deal with cycles. In short, I had how to parse the main componentsof investment skill. (Note that I say “a connection dawned” ratherthan “I made a co I consciously choose the passive form here, because I often do that ideas “come to me,” ratherthan feeling I develop them throu effortful, intentional process. That’s how many of my insights arise aided by the reduction of a thought to a graphic representat made in China. That’s just how my mind works.) Back when I first arrived at the explanation of success statedab word “timing” I had meant“lucky timing.” After all, what could be than being aggressive at a fortuitous time? But lying in bed in India that good timing doesn’t have to be exclusively the result of luck. good timing in investing can come from diligently assessing wherewe a cycle and then doing the right thing as a result. The study of about how to position your portfolio for the possible outcomes that That, in one sentence, is what this book is about. ∾ I’d like to returnto that simple sentence and apply a little more regarding the formula for investment success. I conclude that it considered in terms of six main components, or ratherthree pairings: Cyclepositioning—the process of deciding on the risk posture portfolio in response to your judgments regarding the principal Asset selection—the process of deciding whichmarkets, market and specific securities or assetsto overweight and underweight Positioning and selection are the two main tools in portfolio managem It may be an over-simplification, but I think everything investors under one or the other of these headings. Aggressiveness—the assumption of increased risk: risking more of capital; holding lower-quality assets; making investmentsthat reliant on favorable macro outcomes; and/or employing financ leverage or high-beta (market-sensitive)assetsand strategies Defensiveness—the reduction of risk: investing less capital and cash instead; emphasizing safer assets; buying thingsthan can

relatively well even in the absence of prosperity; and/or shunn leverage and beta The choice between aggressiveness and defensiveness is the pri dimension in whichinvestors position portfolios in response to wher think they stand in the cycles and what that implies for futuremark developments. Skill—the ability to make these decisions correctly on balance certainly not in every case) through a repeatable intellectual proces on the basis of reasonable assumptions regarding the future. this has come to be known by its academic name:“alpha” Luck—what happens on the many occasions when skill and reason assumptions prove to be of no avail—that is, when randomness effect on events than do rational processes, whether resulting breaks” or “tough luck” Skill and luck are the primeelements that determine the success of portfolio management decisions. Without skill on an investor’s part, shouldn’t be expected to produce success. In fact, there’s some negative skill, and for people who are saddled with it, flipping abstaining from decisions would lead to better results. And luck is wildcard; it can make good decisions fail and bad ones succeed, but the short run. In the long run, it’s reasonable to expect skill to Part of my Indian awakening—stemming from my ruminationsin Ch concerned the dichotomy between selection and positioning, and the way skill influences the outcome of those two pursuits. A market will do what it will do. Some of the outcome wi economic events and corporate profitability; some will be determined investor psychology and the resulting behavior; and some will be deter by randomnessor luck. We may have some ideas about what the futurewill bring in terms of market performance, they may be based on soun defective reasoning, and they may prove to be right or wrong. But the market’s futureperformance—whateverit will be, whether knowable not—as the starting point for our discussion here. Let’s express the expectation for a market’s behavior as a probability distribution:

This is the starting point or baseline—the canvas, if you wi investor’s actions. The question is whether he has the skill requi improve on the market’s performance through activedecision maki whether he should give up on doing so and instead investpassi for market performance. I mentioned abovethe two main ways in whichan investor can ad returns: cycle positioning and asset selection. I’ll start by going into great depth regarding the first. As I also said, I believe cycle positioning primarily consists of between aggressiveness and defensiveness: increasing and decreasing exposure to market movements. Let’s say you conclude you’re in a propitious environment: the economic and profit cycle are on the rise and/or likely to exceed people’s expectations, investor psychology and attitudes toward risk are depressed (or sober) ratherthan feverish, and thus asset pricesare moderate to low relative to intrinsic value. In such a case, aggressiveness is calledfor. So you increase yo commitments and add to your portfolio’s risk posture and “beta” sensitivity). The dotted line in the graphic belowshows the outlo performance. You have increased your potential for gains if the mark well and for lossesif it does poorly.

If your judgments are validated by a market rise, your aggressiv positioned portfolio, with its enhanced market sensitivity, will rise even making you an outperformer, as shown in the following graph The recipefor success here consists of (a) thoughtful analysis of market stands in its cycle,(b) a resulting increase in aggre being proved right. Thesethingscan be summed up as “skill” or cycle positioning. Of course, “c”—being proved right—isn’t fully a matte within anyone’s control, in particular because of the degree

subject to randomness. So being proved right won’thappen every to skillful investors who reason thingsout well. On the other hand, your analysis mighttell you the cycle positioning is poor—the economy is tiring,psychology is excessively optimistic, and thus so are asset prices—meaning you should tend toward defensiveness. case, you should take some capital off the table and otherwise cut with a portfolio described by the graphic at the top of the Now you’ve cut your beta and prepared for bad times.If you’re the cycle,the market’s performance will be drawn from the left-h the probability distribution,and your defensive positioning will make you an outperformer in that market, losingless, again as shown by the the graph below. Your portfolio, being defensive, is less exposed to movements and thus right for a weak market:

Of course not everyone has a superior understanding of cy efforts at positioning are successful. Suppose an investor who lacks regarding positioning decides to turn defensive and cuts his market as shown. If the market surprises on the upside, he turns his investmentsunderperform:

In the first chapter I introduced the subject of “tendencies.” the market should be considered via a probability distribution,and distribution—if constructed accurately—will give you a sense for its likely tendency. The market’s movement through the cycle repositions the distribution and thus influences its likely futuretendency, as I showed pages 204–206. Whenthe market is low in its cycle,gains are more likely than us lossesare less likely. The reverse is true when the market is Positioning moves, based on whereyou believe the market stands amount to tryingto better prepare your portfolio for the events Whileyou can always be unlucky regarding the relationship between logically should happen and what actually does happen, good posit decisions can increase the chance that the market’s tendency—and chance for outperformance—will be on your side. In 1977, New York City experienceda wave of lovers’ lane murders perpetrated by a serial killer labeled “the Son of Sam.” In 2014 obituary of Timothy Dowd, the detective who caught him. I whereit quoted him as saying it was his job “to prepare my view of the futureas indeterminate and subject to considerab randomness, I think that’s a great way to think about it. Whileit like I’m advocating being passive and leaving thingsto chance, the that superior investors have favorably skewed distributions of outco not batting averages of 1.000. They still need favorable outcomes: the right tickets to be drawn from the bowl. One of the best ways to enjoy the skewed distribution of outcome markssuperior investors is to get the market’s tendency on your outcome will never be under your control, but if you investwhen the tendency is biased toward favorable, you’llhave the wind at your the tendency is biased toward unfavorable, the reverse will analysis of cycles can give you a better-than-average understand market’s likely tendency and thus enable you to improve your chan properly positioning your portfolio for what lies ahead. ∾ What follows is completely unrelated to the subject of cycles, you’re interested in, you needn’t read it. But I want to comp of the actions investors can take to improve performance by other component of portfolio management: asset selection. Asset selection consists of identifying markets, market sectors an individual assetsthat will do better or worsethan the rest, and over- and underweighting them in portfolios. The higher an asset’s price is intrinsic value,the less well it should be expected to do (all

equal), and vice versa.The key prerequisite for superior performance regard is above-average insight into the asset’s intrinsic value futurechanges in that value,and the relationship between its intrinsic and its current market price. All investors who follow a given asset have (or should have) op regarding its intrinsic value.The market price of the asset reflects consensus of those opinions, meaning investors collectively have set the price. That’s wherebuyers and sellers agree to transact. The buye because they think it’s a smart investment at the current price, and sell because they think it’s fully priced or overpriced there. What do about the accuracy of those views? Theoretical—The efficient market hypothesis states that all availa information is incorporated into prices“efficiently,” so that the assetsare fair and investors can’t “beat the market” by choosing them. Logical—What we’re talking about is the ability to make those judgments better than the average investor and thus achieve above average performance. Yet the one thing we know for sure is average, all investors are average. Thus logic tells us they can’t above-average judgments. Empirical—Performance studies show that very few investors are consistentlymore right than othersabout those judgments. Most investors do worsethan the markets, especially after the subtraction transaction costs, management fees and expenses. That’s the reason the rising popularity of passive index investing. That’s not to say no one beats the market. Lots of people but usually no more than would be the case under an assumption randomness. A few do it more consistentlythan randomnesswould and some of those become famous. The essential ingredient—superior into intrinsic value—is what gives them that ability. I call it “seco thinking”: the ability to think differently from the consensus and bette I’m not going to go any further regarding intrinsic value,the rel price to value,or second-level thinking, since they’re all covered The Most Important Thing. But the bottom line is that the super who’scapable of second-level thinking—is able to pick more outpe assetsthan underperformers, and thus to investmore in the former and the latter. The recipefor superior asset selection is that simple. And what is the hallmark of that superiority?Asymmetrical results. The investor who has no skill at selection has the same ratio of losersas the market. Thus he does well when the market does well,

poorly when it does poorly: An investor with negative skill at selection picks proportionally mo than winners and thus does worsethan the market, both when it goes when it goes down, as shown below. In other words, his distribution is shifted to the left of the market’s: But the skillful selector has a better ratio of winners to los market; he is able to investmore in his winners than his loser winners are more successful than his losersare unsuccessful.

The holdings of a habitually aggressive investor who is capab superior selection will go up more than the market when the up and may go down more than the market when it goes down. margin of superiority on the upside will exceed his degree on the downside, as it comes from his ability to select upside potential without entailing commensurate downside risk. result he’ll do better than the market when it goes up, but not when the market goes down as his aggressiveness would sugge an example of the asymmetry that marksthe superior investor: Likewise, the habitually defensive investor with superior selection will do better than the market when it goes down, but his selection will keep him from underperforming in rising markets to full extentthat his defensiveness alone would suggest. His skill selection enables him to find defensive assetsthat have upside participation that is disproportionate to their downside risk. It an asymmetrical distribution as well:

Both of the investors with superior selection skill—the aggressive on the defensive one—exhibit asymmetry relative to the market. That both have performance distributions that are biased favorably. Both upside potential that is disproportional to their downside risk (altho different ways). That’s how alpha in asset selection manifests itself Finally, the investor who is neither habitually aggressive nor ha defensive—but who possesses skill at both cycle positioning and asset selection—correctly adjusts market exposure at the right time and asymmetrical performance that comes from a better-than-average winners to losers. This is the best of all worlds: Almost anyone can make money when the market rises and los when it falls, and almost anyone can have the same ratio of winn

as the market overall. It takes superior skill to improve in produce the asymmetry that marksthe superior investor. Please note that in this discussion I have separated skill at cy from skill at asset selection. This bifurcation is somewhat artificial. I describe the two elements that influence performance, but many great investors have both, and most of the rest have neither. Investors who capable of both have a better sense for the market’s likely tendency put together portfolios that are better suitedfor the market environmen likely lies aheadin terms of the ratio of winners to losers. That them great . . . and rare. ∾ My epiphany in India taught me that successfullypositioning a portf the market movements that lie aheadis dependent on what you do aggressive or defensive) and when you do it (based on a super understanding of what cycles implyfor futuremarket moves). It’s this book to help in those regards.

XV LIMITS ON COPING In my opinion it’s entirely reasonable to try to improve lo investment results by altering positions on the basis of an understanding of the market cycle.But it’s essential that you a understand the limitations, as well as the skills that are required a how difficult it is. I undertook to write this book to give myself an opportunity to what I know about cycles, and because I enjoy writing, but main above—to help the reader deal with the market’s ups and downs. In the preceding pages, I have covered many of the consider on the process of understanding cycles, as well as the vaga restrain the confidence anyone should have regarding his ability goal here is to repeatthese considerations and sum up. Investing, as I’ve said, consists of positioning capital so as to futureevents. I also said we never know what the futureholds,and thus wherewe’re going. But we should do all we can to know wher since the current position of the cycle has powerful implications should cope with its possible future. Where we stand in cycles has a profound influence on the tendencies: on what is likely to happen, and perhaps even when.As discussed in chapter I and illustrated in the last chapter, our shifts the probability distribution governing the future. Manythingscan happen. We know we face uncertainty and risk. All we can know about the future—at best—is what the probabilities are. Know the probabilities can help us be more right than otherson average. essential to remember that knowing the probabilities is far from knowing precisely what’s going to happen. We generally have no choice but to be content with knowing probabilities. But the sample in terms of each outcome (e.g., each growth or each stock’s gain next year) will often be limited to —oneexperience—meaning many thingscan happen but only one will. Ther

won’tbe enough observations to allow us to assume that the be the one the probabilities say is most likely . . . and most likely thing will happen any time soon. For example, let’s take the correction of a euphoria-driven bubble. Theoretically, it doesn’t have to happen ever. But the realities that (a) it will happen eventually and (b) the more time that passe happening—and the longer the cycle continues to move upward—the likely (and usually the more imminent) the expected correction becomes. Of course, the more time that passes before this logical ev the further that the cycle swings in the upward direction—the will conclude that the rules of cycles have been somehow suspended the called-for correction will never happen. This can lead to the kind buying we saw in 2000, and eventually to an extremely painful We have to safeguard our portfolios (and our investment management businesses) against the danger stemming from the fact that the thing most likely to happen—which our understanding of cycles can tell not happen until long after it first becomes likely. And we have ourselves emotionallyso as to be able to live through the poten lag between reaching a well-reasoned conclusion and having it correct. ∾ How about a review of history? In the mid-1990s, the galloping rocketing tech sectorpresented an opportunity for conservative investors conclude that stocks were highly overvalued. The reasoning mighthave solid—based on an effective interpretation of the relevant data— for caution may have been strong. However, it would have taken market to prove those investors right, and as one of the most impo investment adages says, “Being too far aheadof your time is indis from being wrong.” The fact that their conclusions were well-founded woul have done the investors only limited good; before the correction of finally set in, they mighthave lost much of the capital under their management. However, the keen intellect that had led those investors to their conclusions, combined with sufficient conviction, should have allowed to stick to their guns. Hopefully they would have remained cautious than capitulate and buy in higher. If so, they would have been few years later and recovered their reputations and their assets. But the interim they lived through certainly would have been painful. Fast-forward to the current decade and the chance for mo Cautious investors have been provided another chance to conclude stocks are overheated, reduce holdings, and thus miss out on more

gains.Clients mighthave bailedagain,and cautious firms’assetscould have shrunk (in a rising market). Is caution appropriate again? Will it be proved appropriate by events? Will a correction come soon enough for cautious investors the benefits of being right?Will they be viewed as perma-bears are validated every once in a while by downturns? Or as brilliant who are right in principle but so far thwarted by the undependab and effect in the investment world? Thesequestions are largely unan But the most important thing is for the reader to note this key positioning for cycles isn’t easy. ∾ In my opinion it’s entirely reasonable to try to improve longresults by altering positions on the basis of an understanding cycle.But it’s essential that you also understand the limitations, as well skills that are required and how difficult it is. Importantly, I want to call attention to the obvious fact tha the everyday ups and downs of the market—the clear examples in chapter XII all concerned “once-in-a-lifetime” cyclical extremes these days seem to happen about once a decade). First, the extremes and crash—and,in particular, the process through whichthey arise—mos clearly illustrate the cycle in actionand how to respond to it. when dealing with pronounced extremes that we should expect the likelihood of success. Here’s how I think about the impact of market movements on investment environment we work in. It’s admittedly a simplistic visio suggests a worldthat is discernable and much more regular than the But it has worked for me for decades as a general fram heck out of tryingto understand the worldas a series of irregular, and zags:

Between the extremes of “rich”and “cheap”—when the cycle is in middle ground of “fair”—the state of the relationship between price is, by definition, nowhere as clear-cut as at the extremes. As It’s hard to make frequent distinctions and hard to do so correc Thus distinctions in the middle ground aren’tas potentially profita at the extremes, and those distinctions can’t be expected to work dependably. Detecting and exploiting the extremes is really the best we can ho And I believe it can be done dependably—if you’re analytical, experienced(or well-versed in history) and unemotional. That means, however, that you shouldn’t expect to reach profitable conclusions daily monthly or even yearly. We can’t creategreat opportunities to time the market through ou understanding of cycles. Rather, the market will decide when them. Remember, when there’s nothing cleverto do, the mistake lies to be clever. The reasonableness of the effort at cycle timing depends simply you expect of it. If you frequently try to discern wherewe the sense of “what’s going to happen tomorrow?”or “what’s in next month?” you’re unlikely to find success. I describe such “trying to be cute.”No one can make fine distinctions like those often or consistentlyright enough to add materially to investment results. one knows when the market developments that efforts at cycle label “probable” will materialize.

On the other hand, positioning portfolios for the majorcycles has be big contributor to Oaktree’s success. My colleagues and I became in 1990–93, 2002 and 2008, and we turned cautious and pulled 1994–95 and 2005–06, and to some extentin the last few years.We to use the cycle to our advantage and to add value for our clien we got the positioning largely right on those occasions. Also, there were any majoropportunities to do so that we missed. So thus far our majorcycle calls have all proved correct. The wo makes it soundlike this is a battle that’s consistentlywinnable. But personal “all” consists of four or five times in 48 years.By maki only at the greatest cyclical extremes, I’ve maximized my chances right. No one—and certainly not I—can succeed regularly, other than at extremes. So please note—as I always try to remind people—that don’t want to give the impression that readers should expect to be disappointed when they don’t.As I said in “On the Couch” 2016): I want to make it abundantly clear that when I call for caution 2006–07, or activebuying in late 2008, or renewed caution in or a somewhat more aggressive stance here in early 2016, I d considerable uncertainty. My conclusions are the result of my reasoning, applied with the benefit of my experience (and collaboration with my Oaktree colleagues),but I never consider th 100%likely to be correct, or even 80%. I think they’re right, o course, but I always make my recommendations with trepidation. I read the same newspapers as everyone else. I see the same economic data. I’m buffeted by the same market movements.The same factors appeal to my emotions. Maybe I’m a little m confident in my reasoning, and certainly I have more experience th most. But the key is that—for whatever reason—I’m able to s to my emotions and follow my conclusions. None of my c can be documentedor proved. If they could be, most intelligent people would reach the same conclusions, with the same degree confidence. I tell you this only to communicate my feeling th should fear he’s not up to the task just because he’s unsure conclusions. Thesearen’tthingsabout whichcertainty is attainable. Peter Bernstein contributed some usefulwisdom on this subject. I’ll conclude this chapter with his thoughts:

After 28 years at this post, and 22 years before this in money management, I can sum up whatever wisdom I have accumu way: The trick is not to be the hottest stock-picker, the w forecaster, or the developer of the neatest model; such victorie transient. The trick is to survive! Performing that trick requires a strong stomach for being wrong because we are all going to more often then we expect. The futureis not ours to know. B helps to know that being wrong is inevitable and normal, not s terrible tragedy, not some awful failing in reasoning, not even b luck in most instances. Beingwrong comes with the franchise o activity whose outcome depends on an unknown future. . “Being Wrong and Still Making Money,” Seeking Alpha, M 2017, emphasis added)

XVI THE CYCLE IN SUCCESS The important lesson is that—especially in an interconnected, informed world—everything that produces unusual profitabilitywill attract incremental capital until it becomes overcrowded and f institutionalized, at whichpoint its prospective risk-adjusted return will move toward the mean (or worse). And, correspondingly, thingsthat perform poorly for a while eventually will become so cheap—dueto their relative depreciation and the lack of investor interest—that they’ll be primed to outperform. Cycles like these hold the key to success in investin trees that everyone is assuming will grow to the sky. Hopefully you’re now equipped for the task of recognizing, responding to cycles. That can contribute substantially to your inves success. But as Peter Bernstein said, even the best investors won’tbe successful all the time. Understanding that is an important part of to live with the effort. Success, like the other thingsmentioned in comes and goes. In fact, over the course of my career, I’ve detected a cy large degree, the ebb and flow of success—like the other cycles described—stems from the role played by human nature. And, once each development in the cycle leads to the next. I’ve long held the I mentioned back on page 34—and it’s been strongly reinforced over years of involvement with distressed debt and distressed companies—that “success carries within itself the seeds of failure, and failure success.” Peter Kaufman, Charlie Munger’s biographer and the CEO of Glenair, exceptional producer of aerospace components, describes the workings dialectical materialism as follows: “As any system growstoward its maximum or peak efficiency, it will develop the very internal contr and weaknesses that bring about its eventual decayand demise” (his essay

#49: “The Perpetual See-Saw,” 2010). This captures the process that guarantees that success will prove cyclical. The Role of Human Nature Another way I put it is that “success isn’t good for most peop success can change people, and usually not for the better. people think they’re smart. That’s fine as far as it goes, negative ramifications. Success also tends to make people richer, lead to a reduction in their level of motivation. In investing there’s a complex relationship between humility an confidence. Since the greatest bargains are usually foundamong thing are undiscovered or disrespected, to be successful an investor enough confidence in his judgment to adopt what DavidSwensen, the successful head of Yale’s high-performing endowment,describes as “uncomfortably idiosyncratic portfolios, whichfrequently appear downright imprudent in the eyes of conventional wisdom” (PioneeringPortfolio Management, 2000). By definition, pronounced bargain pricesare most to be foundamong thingsthat conventional wisdom dismisses, that most investors uncomfortable, and whose merits are hard to comp Investing in them requires considerable inner strength. Whenone of those positions initially fails to rise as the investor or perhaps goes in the opposite direction—the investor has to confidence to hold on to his position or even add to it. He decline as a sure “sell” signal; in other words, it can’t be that the market knows more than he does. But, on the other hand, the investor also has to know his limitatio assume he’s infallible. He has to understand that no one knows the macro futureholds.Whilehe’s likely to have opinions regarding the futurecourse of economies, markets and interest rates, he should acknowledge that they’re not necessarily correct. And, counter to he mustn’t always assume that he’s right and the market’s wron hold or add without limitation and without rechecking his facts and reasoning. That’s hubris. As successes accrue, it’s common for people to conclude tha And after making a lot of money in a strongly rising mark they’ve got investing mastered. Their faith increases in their own opini and instinct. Their investing comes to reflect less self-doubt, mean think less about the possibility of being wrong and worryless about the of loss. This can cause them to no longer insist on the full marg

that gave rise to their earlier successes. This is the reason for and most important investment adages: “don’t confuse brainswith a market.” The plain truth is, there’s little of value to be learned from su who are successful run the risk of overlookingthe fact that they were or that they had help from others. In investing, success teaches making money is easy, and that they don’t have to worryabout risk— particularly dangerous lessons. They may conclude that the small opportunity that gave them their big winner is infinitely scalable, whichmost are not. And many people— including investors who became famous for having had a singl conclude that they can branch out into any number of other fields intelligence that produced that first epic success must be broadly appli Factors like these make investment success hard to replicate, meaning can prove cyclical ratherthan serial.In fact, ratherthan implythat another coming, one success may in and of itself make a second one quote Henry Kaufman, formerly Salomon Brothers’ chief economist: “The are two kinds of people who lose a lot of money: those who those who know everything” (“Archimedes on Wall Street,” Forbes, Octo 19, 1998). It’s not for nothing that there are famous jinxes, such as sh cover of Sports Illustrated or Forbes magazine. A cover appearance the result of a singular accomplishment that may have resulted from break, a unique, non-replicable opportunity,or the bearing of Or the good outcomes that land people on a magazine cover—inc successful investors lauded by Forbes—may cause them to become confident and cocksure, and less disciplined and hardworking . . a formula for success. The Role of Popularity One of the principal ways in whichsuccess carries the seeds of failure is through increased popularity. I wrote just before that most often foundamong those thingsthat are hard to comprehend, uncomfortable and easilydismissed by the crowd. Short-term investment performance is largely a popularity contest, and most bargains simple reason that they haven’t yet been taken up by the herd popular. On the contrary, assetsthat have performed well are usually that have gained in popularity because of their obvious merit and become high-priced.

Let’s think about investment strategies. It’s essential to grasp that nothing will work forever: no approach, rule or process can outperform all First, most securities and approaches are right for certain environments parts of the cycle,and wrong for others. And second, past succe itself render futuresuccess less likely. In the 1960s, when the idea of investing in stocks was fir popularity among Americans, the emphasis was on industry leaders called“blue-chip” securities. Small-capitalization stocks were largely overlooked at first, but eventually they were noticed and bought. This them to do better than large-caps. Whenpeople noticed small-cap stock superior returns in this “catch-up” phase, their buying produced for them . . . until it caused them to be fully priced that point, interest rotated to large-caps, whichthen regained the lead. Likewise, growth and tech stocks did far better than more-mundane stocks in the late 1990s. This divergence reached a maximum growth stocks outperforming value stocks that year by almost points. But growth stocks’ dramatic outperformance rendered them overpriced, and when the stock market corrected in 2000–02, they lost more than value stocks, whichpreviously had languished cheap. In other words, “outperformance” is just another word for one thi appreciating relative to another. And, clearly, that can’t go on Regardless of how great its merits may be, “a” is unlikely to more valuable than “b.” That means if “a” keeps appreciating relati there has to be a point at whichit will become overvalued relati just when the last person gives up on “b” because it’s been perfo poorly and jumpsto “a,” it will be time for “b” (now compelling relative to “a”) to outperform. Strong forcescreatea tendency for strategies, investors or investme management firms that succeed for a while to cease doing so. I abovethat most ideas aren’tinfinitely scalable. One essential truth about investing is that, generally speaking, good results will bring more mone “hot” money managers and strategies, and if allowed to grow unch more money will bring bad performance. In the mid-2000s, convertible arbitrage rapidly gained in popularit Investors without a view on the prospects for a given stock were buy bondsconvertible into it, as long as they were able to short the shares in an appropriate “hedge ratio” (see my memo “A Case 2005). Convertible arbitrageursreported outstanding risk-adjusted returns all kinds of market environments . . . until so much mone competitors were attracted to the strategy that no one could find posit attractively priced as those of the past.

The important lesson is that—especially in an interconnected, inf world—everything that produces unusual profitabilitywill attract incre capital until it becomes overcrowded and fully institutionalized, at point its prospective risk-adjusted returnwill move toward the mean (or worse). And, correspondingly, thingsthat perform poorly for a while eventual will become so cheap—dueto their relative depreciation and the investor interest—that they’ll be primed to outperform. Cycles the key to success in investing, not trees that everyone is assum to the sky. It’s all a matter of ebb and flow. In investing, thingswork un Or as Ajit Jain of Berkshire Hathaway told me about investing the “it’s easy until it isn’t.” Cheap small-caps outperform until they reach the point wherethey’re longer cheap. Trend-following or momentum investing—staying with the winners— worksfor a while. But eventually rotation and buying the over as the winning strategy. “Buying the dips” lets investors take advantage of momentary weakn up until the time when a majorproblem surfaces (or the marke no longer recovers), causing price declines to be followed price declines, not quick rebounds. Riskyassetsoutperform—coming from valuations wherethey were excessively penalized for their riskiness—until they’re priced more safe assets. Then they underperform until they once again offer adequ risk premiums. The bottom line is clear: nothing worksforever. But it’s essential recognize that when everyone becomes convinced that something will keep working forever, that’s the very time when it’ll become certain not “In investing, everything that’s important is counter-intuitive, and everything that’s obvious to everyone is wrong.” Perhaps the greatest example of the influence of popularity (in seen in 1979, and few investors who were around at the time have it. On August 13 of that year, after almost a decade of performance on the part of stocks, Business Week magazine publi story entitled “The Deathof Equities.” Its conclusion—that stocks were for—was based on the opposite of everything recommended in this The article cited a litany of reasons why the poor performance would continue unabated:

Sevenmillion people had given up on investing in stocks. Manyother formsof investment had done better. Pension funds were turning to “hard assets” like gold. Inflation had sapped corporations’ ability to increase profits It went on: Even institutions that have so far remained in the financial market are pouring money into short-term investmentsand such “alternate equity” investmentsas mortgage-backed paper, foreign securities, venture capital, leases, guaranteed insurance contracts, indexed b stock options, and futures. And here was its conclusion: Today, the old attitude of buying solid stocks as a c one’s life savings and retirement has simply disappeared. Says a young U.S. executive: “Have you been to an American stockho meeting lately? They’re all old fogies. The stock market is wherethe action’s at.” In short, what “The Deathof Equities” said was that stocks had be unpopular that they would never do well again.It takes a highly first-level thinker to conclude that poor past performance has led unpopularity today, whichimplies poor performance tomorrow. Rath insightful second-level thinker says poor past performance has led unpopularity today, whichimplies low pricestoday, whichin turn good performance tomorrow. “The Deathof Equities” was published just a few years before—and essence laid out the entire case for—the 1982 kickoff of the great market in history. At the time it was published, the S&P 500 in March of 2000 it reached 1527. That’s a price gain of or 13.7% per year for almost 21 years (and those figures ignor whichtook the total gain to more than 28 times and the annualized total to 17.6%). The lesson is simple: investors should be leery Rather, it’s unpopularity that is the buyer’s friend. The Role of Companies

Companies, too, are subject to ups and downs in terms of succe on a series of cause-and-effect events. One of the most pronounced processes I’ve witnessed took place at Xerox. The office-copying giant—the first to make it possible to avoid the process of photostatting, whichrequired that documents be sent out lab to be duplicated—was one of the first companies I visited office-equipment analyst in the late 1960s. At that time, Xerox monopoly on “dry” copying and appeared to be in full command destiny. My senioranalyst and I used to meet with Xerox’s “anal and for each copier model in the product line he would the company’s projections in terms of the number of machines it in the field in the coming year and the annual rental revenue Because of Xerox’s dominant market position, it was largely those projections come true. It could charge monopolistic pricesthat enab it to fine-tune the size of its rental fleet and that gave it very margins. It also insisted on a rental-only model, refusing to machines and lose control of them. What a perpetual motion mach But Xerox management may have ignored the possibility that tho margins would prove unsustainable. In 1975, Xerox resolved an complaint over control of the copier market by entering into requiring it to make its powerful portfolio of patents available Competitors beganto produce and sell their own copiers. They were undercut Xerox’s pricesand displace part of its rental population. This reduced Xerox’s U.S. market share in copiers from nearly 100% teens, and it ate significantly into Xerox’s profits. As the incum had trouble responding to the price competition, as this would existing business. The competitors did so in an early example of calleddisruption. In 1968, thanks to its monopolistic position, strong growth profitability, Xerox was a leaderof the Nifty Fifty I described companies that were considered so strong and so fast growing that bad could happen” and “no stock price was too high.” But trees rarely the sky, and success is rarelyunending. Because Xerox’s behavior had invited competitionthat it was un to respond to—and for other reasons as well—by the early years century it was experiencing serious difficulty. Companies, like people, have the potential to respond to success behavior that dooms that very success. Thus companies can: get complacent and become “fat and happy,” become bureaucratic and slow-moving, fail to take actionto defend their positions,

cease to be innovative and non-conforming, and join the crowd mediocrity, and/or conclude that they can do prettymuch anything, and thus venture areas beyond their competence. In these ways and more, success truly carries the seeds of failure. good news—as I said earlier—is that failure also carries the seeds Once under attack, companies can regain their motivation and sense purpose. They can shed bureaucratic fat and get serious about meeting competitionand making money. And in the ultimate form of unsuccess, they can go through slim down, and shed losingbusiness lines, unprofitablelocations, onerous contracts and burdensomedebt. (Of course, however, the owners of companies that go into bankruptcy usually lose their positions.) Thus Jahan Janjigian wrote about Xerox in 2002: [In 2000,] a new management team implemented a number restructuring initiatives aimedat returning the company to profitability. Theseincluded aggressive cost cuts and the elimination of 13,600 positions. Xerox also sold off its Chinese and H operations, as well as 50% of Fuji Xerox to Fuji PhotoFilm. Furthermore, Xerox allowed GE Capital to take over the f receivables, for whichit already has received $2.7 billion. And X has exitedthe struggling small-officeand home-officebusiness. In April,Xerox agreed to pay $10 million to settle the year investigation. It later restated all of its past financial r required under the agreement. Additionally, the company was successful in working with creditors in renegotiating its debt obligations to more manageable terms. Perhaps most important, the company’s products are now more competitive in terms of price and quality. Due to the success of these efforts, Xerox returned to sooner than expected. . . . Givensignificant operational improvements, we think Xerox makes for a compelling buy a levels. (“Xerox Back from the Brink,” Forbes Growth Investo October 2002)

Because companies don’t last as long as economies and markets do long-term cycle in company success may not take as long either. their lifetimes, companies’ gains can lead to losses, and lossescan lay groundworkfor gains.Thereis a cycle in business success. The Role of Timing Among the factors that can contribute greatly to an individual’ company’s success is timing. Among other things, it helps to thingsat an above-average time. That’s what put Xerox on the 1960s, and it helped me out as well. In August 1978, shortly after shifting from running Citibank’s eq research department to managing bond portfolios, I got the phonecall changed my life. “There’s a guy named Milken in California,” “and he’s involved in something calledhigh yield bonds. A client want portfolio of those bonds. Can you figureout what that means?” It was just in 1977 or 1978 that high yield bond investing had its institutionalinception. That’s when Michael Milken achieved his first in convincing investors that it’s okay for below-investment grade companies to issue bonds—andfor institutions to buy them—if the interest rate enough to compensate for the risk. The high yield universe consisted than $3 billion of bondsat the time I first got involved. The investing organizations had a rule against buying bondsrated below investment grade, whichwere commonly called“junk bonds.” And Moody’s categorically rejected B-rated bonds, saying they “fail to posse characteristics of a desirable investment.” How could these unpopular bondsnot have been underrated bargains? How could early participation not have been a boon? And then, a decade later, BruceKarshbrought his legal skills and str insight to my team, complementing Sheldon Stone’s expertise in we organized one of the first distressed debt funds from a majorfinan institution. What could be more risky and thus more unseemly than investing in the debt of companies in bankruptcy or considered destined for idea could people be more averse? In other words, whereelse could money be made so safely? In both these instances and more, I’ve been lucky to come across ass classes when they were still undiscovered, uncrowded and thus bargainpriced. There’s little that can make investing as easy as having largely to oneself. It beats the heck out of tryingto wringdecen a market that everybody has discovered, figured out, taken to and

into. The latter is far from a formula for success. The latecomer crowded field isn’t “the wise man in the beginning”; rather, he’s more likely to be “the fool in the end.” Thoseof us who’ve been lucky early ratherthan late know—or certainly should know—that our success wasn’t all our doing. The times have to cooperate. And that brings me to a great observation from Henry Phipps, celebrated partner of Andrew Carnegie and Henry Clay Frick,two century’s greatest businessmen. In 1899, Phipps wrote as follows: Good times like the present, make bad times;a law sure as the s of the pendulum. We have experience to know these elementary truths. Have we the sense to put them into practice? (George H Henry Clay Frick: The Man, 2002) As with people—whose successes may constitute isolated instances rat than indicators of great thingsto come as they mightbe wont to belie times may not remain conducive to continued success. Good times can encourage investment decisions that depend on the perpetuation of in order to succeed. But those good times can lead instead to bad test the decisions in ways they can’t withstand. Not only are good times followed sooner or later by bad times,bu with so many other examples of cycles—good times often produce bad Good times can lead to unwise debt issuance (as we saw in the the distressed debt cycle)or to overbuilding (as we saw in the the real estate cycle). Likewise as Ruchir Sharma, chief global strategist at Morgan Investment Management, wrote in his book The Rise and Fall of Natio regarding the effect of fresh new reformers, “Reform leads to growth good times,and good times encourage an arrogance and complacency that leads to a new crisis.” Phipps pointed out that history shows these trendsclearly. Th question is whether we are astuteand unemotional enough to times don’t necessarily lead to further good times,and thus that success can be cyclical. Let’s returnto Charlie Munger’s quote from Demosthenes: “For that wh a man wishes, that he will believe.” In other words, wishful takes hold. This can cause investors to believe that good times will be followed by more good times.But that ignores the cyclical nature and especially of success.

XVII THE FUTURE OF CYCLES The tendency of people to go to excess will never end. A since those excesses eventually have to correct, neither will the occurrence of cycles. Economies and markets have never moved in straight line in the past, and neither will they do so in th that means investors with the ability to understand cycles w opportunities for profit. Thus far I’ve covered a lot of the past and a bit of t conclude, I want to turn to the future. Over the course of my career, I’ve witnessed numerous occasion pundits said the occurrence of one type of cycle or another had end. Whether because of economic vitality, financial innovation, astut corporate management, or the supposed omniscience of central heads of Treasury, they observed that the fluctuations of either the econ cycle or the cycle in profits would be seen no more. I spent some time on this subject in “Will It Be Different Th (November 1996). First I described a newspaper article that had few days earlier: It recounted the case currently being made for this remaining a continuous, recession-free economic expansion. As its lead paragraph says: From boardroomsto livingrooms and from government offices to trading floors, a new consensus is emerging big, bad business cycle has been tamed. The current expansion, at 67 months, has already far exceed post-war average. Nevertheless, 51 of the 53 “top economists” surveyed by Blue Chip newsletter (my favorite experts and the s of my July 1996 memo, “The Valueof Predictions II”) predict g

next year of 1.5% or more. And the University of Michigan survey finds that among consumers, more expect five more good years than expect bad times to emerge. The Chairman of Sears states “There is no natural law that have to have a recession.” According to Amoco’s Chairman, “I d see any reason to believe [the recovery] can’t go on until th the century.” Sara Lee’s CEO says “I don’t know what could happen to make a cyclical downturn.” (“TheBusiness Cycleis Tamed, M Say, Alarming Others,” Wall StreetJournal, November 15, 1996) Clearly these statements, made in 1996, did not truly mark the end of cycles. Rather, there was a modest recession in 2001 and then, years later, the Great Recession of 2008–09, the most powerful cyclical ever experiencedby most people alive today. I went on in “Will It Be Different This Time?” to quote a assertions from other respected leaders: “There will be no interruption of our present prosperity.” “I cannot help but raise a dissenting voice to the statements prosperity in this country must necessarily diminish and recede in future.” “We are only at the beginning of a period that will go history as the golden age.” “The fundamental business of the country . . . is prosperous basis.” In assessing the reasonableness of these statements, it’s important to that they were made,respectively, by the president of the Pierce-Arro Car Company, the president of the New York Stock Exchange, the presi of the Bush Terminal Company, and the president of the United positions of the first and third should serve as a giveaway that statements came in the distant past, even without your knowing that president in question was Herbert Hoover. The timing of these 1928 and 1929—on the doorstep of the Great Depression that plagued worldfor more than a decade—was less than auspicious. So much, for prosperity without slowdowns, and for the end of cyclicality. But then, in the 2000s, the expectation of “permanent prosperity” rea head again.Whilenot specifically arguing that there would be no more cycles, a lot of investors, bankers and members of the medi embraced the belief that risk was gone—essentially the same thing. In his autobiography, StressTest, former Treasury secretary Tim Ge describes the climate when he arrived at the Fed in 2003:

Economists were starting to debate whether America’s long stretch stability constituted a new normal, a Great Moderation,a quasipermanent era of resilience to shocks. Therewas growing confide that derivatives and other financial innovations designed to hedgeand distribute risk—along with better monetary policy to respond to downturns and better technology to smooth out inventory cycles—had made devastating crises a thing of the past. The fact that this purportedly permanent prosperity was given a name lik “the Great Moderation” suggests it had entered the popular consc And thus it met my requirementfor the riskiest possible environmen whichthere’s widespread belief that there’s no risk. On page 120, I the mediaaccounts to that effect that enumerated the forcesthat had cause risk’s elimination:Fed omniscience, unremitting demand for securities from cash-flow-rich nations, and the latest inventions from Wall Street. Not only were all these “cycles are over” proclamations wrong, bu very much worthnoting that each of them coincided with—and certainly contributed to—the upward march to a cyclical high. And that followed those highs would be unusually painful: the Great Depression 1929–39, a three-year stock market decline in 2000–02 (the first since 1929)and the Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08. In “Will It Be Different This Time?” I went on from recalling Pollyanna statements just cited to drawing what I think are the essen conclusions on this subject: Of course, what these observations signaled wasn’t that cycles wouldn’t repeat, but ratherthat the onlookers had grown too confident. Cycles in economies, companies and markets will continu to occur at least as long as people are involved in making decisions—which I believe means forever. . . . Thereis a right time to argue that thingswill be that’s when the market is on its backside and everyone else is thingsat giveaway prices. It’s dangerous when the market’s at r levelsto reach for a positive rationalization that has never held tr the past. But it’s been done before, and it’ll be done again. “It’s different this time” are four of the most dangerous wordsin the business world—especiallywhen applied, as is often the case, to some that has reached what in prior times would have been calledan extre Whenpeople say “it’s different” in this case, what they often mean is the rules and processes that produced cycles in the past have been

But the cyclical behavior of the financial past did not result from operation of physical or scientific rules. In science, cause and effec dependable and repeatable relationship, so that it’s possible to say confidence, “if a, then b.” But while there are some principles that opera the worldof finance and business, the resulting truth is very diffe that in science. The reason for this—as I’ve harped on repeatedly—is the inv people. People’s decisions have great influence on economic, business market cycles. In fact, economies, business and markets consist transactionsbetween people. And people don’t make their decisions scientifically. Some take history, facts and data into account, and some approach the decisions as “economic men.”But even the most unemotional and stoic among them are subject to human influences and the loss of Richard Feynman, the noted physicist, wrote, “Imagine how much ha physics would be if electrons had feelings!” That is, if elect they couldn’t be counted on to always do what science expe rules of physics would work only some of the time. The point is that people do have feelings, and as such they are inviolable laws. They’ll always bring emotions and foibles to their and investing decisions. As a result, they’ll become euphoric time and despondent at the wrong time—exaggerating the upside when thingsare going well and the downside risk when thingsare going poorly—and thus they’ll take trendsto cyclical extremes. A few paragraphs from The Most Important Thingprovide a good foundation for a recap of the main pointsregarding cycles’ persistence The basic reason for the cyclicality in our worldis the involve humans. Mechanical thingscan go in a straight line. Time moves aheadcontinuously. So can a machine when it’s adequately powere But processes in fields like history and economics involve people, when people are involved, the results are variable and cyclica main reason for this, I think, is that people are emotional a inconsistent, not steady and clinical. Objective factors do play a part in cycles, of course—fa quantitative relationships, worldevents, environmental changes, technological developments and corporate decisions. But it’s the application of psychology to these thingsthat causes investors to overreact or underreact, and thus determines the amplitude of the cyclical fluctuations. Whenpeople feel good about the way thingsare going and optimistic about the future, their behavior is strongly impacted. T

spendmore and save less. They borrow to increase their enjoyment o their profit potential, even though doing so makes their financial position more precarious (of course, concepts like precariousness a forgotten in optimistic times). And they become willing to p for current value or a piece of the future. Investors tend to look at the processes that are afoot, attribute me dependability to them, rely on that dependability, and extrapolate the processes. What they overlook is the role of emotions: greed on the and fear on the downswing. Emotions operate on cycles two ways:they magnify the forcestha extremes that eventually require correction, and they cause market participants to overlook the cyclicality of cyclical thingsat just those moments when recognition of excesses is most essential and most poten profitable: stage three of the bull and bear markets described on page 192 and 193–194. The following passage from The Most Important Thingmay serve to wr up regarding the outlook for cycles’ recurrence: Cycles will never stop occurring. If there were such a thing as a completely efficient market, and if people really made decisions in calculating and unemotional manner, perhaps cycles (or at le extremes) would be banished. But that’llnever be the case. Economies will wax and wane as consumers spendmore or less, responding emotionallyto economic factors or exogenous events, geopolitical or naturally occurring. Companies will anticipate a rosy futureduring the up cycle and thus over-expand facilities and inventories; these will become burdensomewhen the economy turns down. Providers of capital will be too generous when the e doing well, abetting over-expansion with cheapmoney, and then they’ll pull the reins too tight when thingscease to look as good. Investors will overvalue companies when they’re doing well and undervalue them when thingsget difficult. . . . Ignoring cycles and extrapolating trendsis one of the most dangerous thingsan investor can do. People often act as if c that are doing well will do well forever, and investmentsthat are outperforming will outperform forever, and vice versa.Instead, it’s the opposite that is more likely to be true. A deep understanding of emotions and the overdoing they lead to key bottom lines of this book. Cyclical deviations from the trendline produced largely by overdoing and its eventual correction. This is

true in the securities markets, whichare nothing but a collection making decisions (oftenin a herd-like manner) that they hope will profitable. But it is no less true of economies and companies; they like independent, well-oiled machines, but they, too, are nothing but people making decisions, with all that implies. The first time rookie investors see this phenomenon occur, it understandable that they mightaccept that something that has never happened before—thecessation of cycles—could happen. But the second time or the third time, those investors, now experienced, should realize it’s never going to happen, and turn that realizat their advantage. The next time you’re approached with a deal predicated on cycle having ceased to occur, remember that invariably it’s a lo (The Most Important Thing) I was 22 years old and a newcomer to investing in 1968, the initialexposure to the Nifty Fifty. People far more experiencedthan I held forth regarding the companies’ greatness, their boundless potential for growth, the fact that nothing bad could ever happen to them, and absence of any limits on their stock prices. I swallowed those storie rate I don’t remember pushing back on the illogicality of their extre Thus I was lucky to learn my first lessons regarding cyclicality, value at an early age and with relatively little bet on the erroneous conc I was a little less naive when I organized Citibank’s response to oil embargo of 1973, when the price of oil went from $20 a barre energy analysts saw few impediments to continued increases. And wonders of computers led to the formation of far more disc-drive in the 1980sthan would turn out to be needed. But later, with a few decades of experience under my belt, I wa recognize the excesses of the tech/Internet/e-commerce bubble of 1990s, and of the unquestioning capital market behavior that the Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08. This learning process regar excesses in the markets—and their contributionto cycles—is an indis part of every investor’s education. ∾ The tendency of people to go to excess will never end. And excesses eventually have to correct, neither will the occurrence of Economies and markets have never moved in a straight line in neither will they do so in the future. And that means inves to understand cycles will find opportunities for profit.

XVIII THE ESSENCE OF CYCLES I’m going to conclude by pulling together some of the book’s paragraphs that I think hold the keys to understanding cycles, th genesis, and how they should be dealt with. I’ll alter them only a necessary to allow them to stand alone here, out of context. This won’tbe a summary of the book, but rathera recap of some o observations. (And for those who wish, reading just the bolded sentences will provide a good synopsis of the recap.) H.M. Investment success is like the choosing of a lottery winner. determined by one ticket (the outcome) being pulled from a bowlful (the full range of possible outcomes). In each case, one outcome is from among the many possibilities. Superior investors are people who have a better sense for what tic in the bowl, and thus for whether it’s worthparticipating in the other words, while superior investors—like everyone else—don’t know exactly what the futureholds,they do have an above-average understand of futuretendencies. (page 14) ∾ The odds change as our position in the cycles changes. If investment stance as these thingschange, we’re being passive regarding cycles; in other words, we’re ignoring the chance to tilt the But if we apply some insight regarding cycles, we can increase place them on more aggressive investmentswhen the odds are in our favor and we can take money off the table and increase our defensiven odds are against us. (page 21) ∾ In my view, the greatest way to optimize the positioning of a given point in time is through deciding what balance it should aggressiveness and defensiveness. And I believe the

aggressiveness/defensiveness balance should be adjusted over time in response to changes in the state of the investment environment number of elements stand in their cycles. The key word is “calibrate.” The amount you have invested, your all of capital among the various possibilities, and the riskiness own all should be calibrated along a continuum that runs from aggre defensive. Whenwe’re getting value cheap, we should be aggressive; we’re getting value expensive, we should pull back. Calibrating one’s portfolio position is what this book is mostly about. (page 12) ∾ In the worldinvestors inhabit, cycles rise and fall, and pendulums and forth. Cycles and pendulum swings come in many formsand relate wide variety of phenomena,but the underlying reasons for them—and patterns they produce—have a lot in common, and they tend to consistent over time. Or as Mark Twain is reputed to have said there’s no evidence he actually said it), “History doesn’t repea does rhyme.” Whether Twain said it or not, that sentence sums up a lot is about. Cycles vary in terms of reasons and details, and but the ups and downs (and the reasons for them)will occur forev producing changes in the investment environment—and thus in the that’s calledfor. The fact is that the performance of these thingsis heavily inf short run by, among other things, the involvement of people, far from steady. Rather they fluctuate from time to time, often becau thingswe can lump under the broad heading of “psychology.” Thus peop behavior varies. . . certainly as the environment varies, absence of changes in the environment, too. (pages 24–25) ∾ The cycle oscillates around the midpoint. The midpoint of a cycle thought of as the secular trend, norm,mean,average or “happy generally as being in some sense as “rightand proper.” The extremes cycle,on the other hand, are thought of as aberrations or excesses returned from, and generally they are. Whilethe thing that’s cycling tends spendmuch of the time aboveor belowit, eventual movement back in direction of the midpoint is usually the rule. The movement from or a low extreme back toward the midpoint is often described toward the mean,” a powerful and very reasonable tendency in life. But it can also be seen that the cyclical pattern generally

of movement from the reasonable midpoint toward a potentially impr extreme as it does going from an extreme back toward the midp The rational midpoint generally exertsa kind of magnetic pull, bri thing that’s cycling back from an extreme in the direction of “norm usually doesn’t stay at normal for long, as the influences respo swingtoward the midpoint invariably continue in force and thus cause swingback from an extreme to proceed through the midpoint and further, toward the opposite extreme. It’s important to recognize and accept the dependability of thi details vary, but the underlying dynamics are usually similar. (page ∾ The themes that provide warning signals in every boom/bust are ones: that excessive optimism is a dangerous thing;that risk aversion essential ingredient for the market to be safe; and that overly markets ultimately lead to unwise financing, and thus to danger participants.In short, the details are unimportantand can be irrelevant. the themes are essential, and they absolutely do tend to recur. Unde that tendency—and being able to spot the recurrences—is one of the important elements in dealing with cycles. (page 36) ∾ Cycles have more potential to wreakhavocthe further they progress midpoint—i.e., the greater the aberrations or excesses. If the swin one extreme goes further, the swingback is likely to be more viole more damage is likely to be done, as actions encouraged by the operation at an extreme prove unsuitable for life elsewhere in the In other words, the potential for havocincreases as the moveme from the midpoint increases: as economies and companies do “too well” stock pricesgo “too high.” Advances are followed by mere corrections bull markets by bear markets. But booms and bubbles are follo more harmful busts, crashes and panics. (pages 28–29) ∾ Most people think of cycles as series of events that follow usual sequence: upswings are followed by downswings, and then even by new upswings. But to have a full understanding of cycles, enough. The events in the life of a cycle shouldn’t be view being followed by the next, but—much more importantly—as each causing the next. (page 30) ∾

The thingsI call cycles do not stem completely—or sometimes at the operation of mechanical,scientific or physical processes. They woul much more dependable and predictable if they did—but much less potentially profitable. (This is because the greatest profits come from seeing than othersdo, and if cycles were totally dependable and predictable would be no such thing as superiority in seeing them.) Some underlying principle (and sometimes not), but much variation is attributable the role of humans in creating cycles. The involvement of process enables their emotionand psychology-induced tendencies to influence cyclical phenomena.Chance or randomnessalso plays a big some cycles, and human behavior contributes to their existence, too. are a big part of the reason these cycles exist, but also—alon randomness—for their inconsistency and thus their undependability. The effort to explain life through the recognition of patterns—and come up with winning formulas—is complicated, in large part, becau live in a worldthat is beset by randomnessand in whichpeople the same from one instance to the next, even when they intend to. realization that past events were largely affected by these things—an that futureevents aren’tfully predictable—is unpleasant, as it makes subject to anticipation, rule-makingand rendering safe. Thus people for explanations that would make events understandable . . beyond that whichis appropriate.This is as true in investing as aspects of life. (pages 41–42) ∾ Why is the pendulum of psychology important? In essence, the too-s upward and downward swings of the cycles I’m covering in result from—and represent—psychological excesses in action. In business, financial and market cycles, most excesses on the the inevitable reactions to the downside, whichalso tend to overshoot— the result of exaggeratedswings of the pendulum of psychology.Thus understanding and being alert to excessive swings is an entry-level requirementfor avoiding harm from cyclical extremes, and hopefully for profiting from them. The norms in terms of growth and appreciation are in so and “healthy.” And if the participants built their behavior around those —instead of occasionally building up hopesfor more and thus settin stage for eventual moves toward less—the worldwould be a tempestuous, and less-error-prone place.But that’s not the nature of (pages 85–86) ∾

It all seemsso obvious: investors rarelymaintain objective, rational, and stablepositions. First they exhibit high levelsof optimism, greed, tolerance and credulousness, and their resulting behavior causes asset to rise, potential returns to fall, and risk to increase. But then, —perhaps the arrival of a tipping point—theyswitch to pessi aversion and skepticism, and this causes asset pricesto fall, prospective returns to rise, and risk to decrease. Notably, each groupof phen to happen in unison, and the swingfrom one to the other often beyond what reason mightcall for. That’s one of the crazy things: in the real world, thingsge between “pretty good”and “not so hot.” But in the worldof inves perception often swings from “flawless” to “hopeless.” The pendulum caree from one extreme to the other, spending almost no time at “the medium” and ratherlittle in the range of reasonableness. First there’s and then there’s capitulation. (page 96) ∾ At the greatest extremes of the pendulum’s swing, a process appearance of a virtuous circle or a vicious circle. Wheneven predominantly positive and psychology is rosy, negative developments to be overlooked, everything is interpreted favorably, and thingsare often thought to be incapable of taking a turn for the worse. when thingshave been going badly for months or years and psychology is highly negative, it’s the potential for improvement that can be The superior investor—who resists external influences, remains emotionallybalanced and acts rationally—perceives both positive and negative events, weighs events objectively, and analyzes them dispassionately. But the truth is that sometimes euphoria and optimism most investors to view thingsmore positively than is warranted, and sometimes depression and pessimism make them see only bad and interpret events with a negative cast. Refusing to do so is one of investing. Usually, when either set of polar extremes is in the ascendancy,tha readily observable, and thus the implications for investors should to objective observers. But of course, the swingof the market one extreme or the other occurs for the simple reason that market participants are moving in the same direction in a herd- (pages 98–99) ∾ My view that risk is the main moving piece in investing makes that at any given point in time, the way investors collectively are view

and behaving with regard to it is of overwhelming importance investment environment in whichwe find ourselves. And the state of environment is key in determininghow we should behave with at that point. Assessing whereattitudes toward risk stand in their cycle perhaps the most important topic covered in this book. (page 103) ∾ Good times cause people to become more optimistic, jettison their cauti and settle for skimpy risk premiums on risky investments. Further, are less pessimistic and less alarmed, they tend to lose interest in of the risk/return continuum. This combination of elements makes of risky assetsrise relative to safer assets. Thus it shouldn’t come that more unwise investmentsare made in good times than in bad. Peop more inclined to make risky investmentsin good times even though the higher pricesoften mean the prospective risk premiums offered are skim than they were in more risk-conscious times.And when negative events occur, the lack of adequate risk premiums and margin for error investmentsto have been unwise. It follows from the abovethat risk is high when investors feel ris And risk compensation is at a minimum just when risk is at (meaning risk compensation is most needed). So much for the ration investor! For me, the bottom line of all of this is that the greatest investment risk is the belief that there is no risk. Widespreadrisk tolera or a high degree of investor comfort with risk—is the great subsequent market declines. But this is rarelyperceived at the time perceiving it—and turning cautious—is most important. (pages 111– ∾ Just as the inadequacy of investors’ risk aversion allows them to up and buy at the top—egged on by the visionof easy money whichthey can’t discern any risk—in less positive times they push price down and sell at the bottom. Their unpleasant experience convinces them contrary to what they had thought when everything was going well—that investing is a risky field in whichthey shouldn’t engage. And, as consequence, their risk aversion goes all the way from inadequate to excessive. They become worrywarts.Just as risk tolerance had positioned them to become buyers of overpriced assetsat the highs,now their screaming aversion makes them sellers—certainly not buyers—at the bottom. (page 114–115)

∾ During panics, people spend100%of their time making sure there losses. . . at just the time that they should be worrying out on great opportunities. In times of extreme negativism, exaggeratedrisk aversion is likely to pricesto already be as low as they can go; further lossesto and thus the risk of loss to be minimal. Thus, the safest time to comes when everyone is convinced there’s no hope. (page 132) ∾ As risk attitudes swingfrom high to low, so do opportunities for Wheneverything’s going well and asset pricesare soaring, investors tend view the futureas rosy, risk as their friend, and profit as easilyachie Everyone feels the same, meaning little risk aversion is incorporated prices, and thus they’re precarious. Investors become risk-tolerantjust they should increase their risk aversion. And when events are down, so are investors. They think of the place to lose money, risk as something to be avoided at all depressingly likely. Under the excess of caution that preva accept possibilitiesthat incorporate any optimism at all and (b) they cannot countenance the possibility that an assumption could be “too true.” Just as risk tolerance is unlimited at the top, it is non-exis This negativity causes pricesto fall to levelsfrom whichlossesare highl unlikely and gains could be enormous. But the sting of prior declines increase risk aversion and send investors to the sidelines just as thus risk) are at their lowest. (page 116) ∾ Understanding how investors are thinking about and dealing with risk perhaps the most important thing to strive for. In short, excessive risk tolerance contributes to the creation of danger, and the swingto aversion depresses markets, creating some of the greatest buying opportunities. The fluctuation—or inconstancy—in attitudes toward risk is both the of some cycles and the cause or exacerbator of others. And it on, since it seemsto be hard-wired into most people’s psyches to more optimistic and risk-tolerantwhen thingsare going well, and then more worried and risk-averse when thingsturn downward. That means they’re willing to buy when they should be most cautious, and most reluc

when they should be most aggressive. Superior investors recognize this strive to behave as contrarians. (pages 134–135) ∾ Changes in the availability of capital or credit constitute one of fundamental influences on economies, companies and markets. Even thoug the credit cycle is less well-knownto the man on the street than most other cycles discussed in this book, I consider it to be of importance and profound influence. Whenthe credit window is open, financing is plentiful and easilyob and when it’s closed, financing is scarce and hard to get. Final to always bear in mind that the window can go from wide open shut in just an instant. There’s a lot more to fully understand including the reasons for these cyclical movements and their impact—bu that’s the bottom line. (page 138) ∾ Prosperity brings expanded lending, whichleads to unwise lending, produces large losses, whichmakes lenders stop lending, whichends prosperity, and on and on. (page 143) ∾ Looking for the cause of a market extreme usually requires videotape of the credit cycle a few months or years.Most raging are abetted by an upsurge in the willingness to provide capit imprudently. Likewise, most collapses are preceded by a wholesale finance certain companies, industries, or the entire gamut of woul borrowers. (page 147) ∾ The key to dealing with the credit cycle lies in recognizing that it apex when thingshave been going well for a while, news has been good aversion is low, and investors are eager.That makes it easy for raise money and causes buyers and investors to compete for to provide it. The result is cheapfinancing, low credit standards, weak and the unwise extension of credit. Borrowers hold the cards when window is wide open—not lenders or investors. The implications should be obvious: proceed with caution. The exact opposite becomes true at the other extreme of the cre nadir is reached when developments are unpleasant, risk aversion is heightened, and investors are depressed. Under such circumstances, no wantsto provide capital, the credit market freezes up, and propo

go begging. This puts the cards into the handsof providers of capit than borrowers. Because borrowing is difficult and capital is generally unavaila who possess it and are willing to part with it can apply rigor insist on strong loan structures and protective covenants, and demand prospective returns. It’s thingslike these that provide the margin of required for superior investing. Whenthese boxescan be ticked, inves should swinginto an aggressive mode. Superior investing doesn’t come from buying high-qualityassets, bu buying when the deal is good, the price is low, the potential retur substantial, and the risk is limited. Theseconditions are much more the when the credit markets are in the less-euphoric, more-stringent part cycle.The slammed-shut phase of the credit cycle probably does more to make bargains available than any other singlefactor. (pages 159–160) ∾ The merits of the asset in question matter only so much, can’t be strong enough to always carry the day. Human emot causes the pricesof assets—even worthwhile assets—to be transported levelsthat are extreme and unsustainable: either vertiginous highs or overl pessimistic lows. In short, conscientious belief in the inevitabilityof cycles like I’m means that a number of wordsand phrases must be excluded intelligent investor’s vocabulary. Theseinclude “never,” “always,” “forever,” “can’t,” “won’t,” “will”and “has to.” (pages 179–180) ∾ About 45 years ago—in the early 1970s—I received one of the was ever given, when an older and wiser investor introduced me to stagesof a bull market”: the first stage, when only a few unusually perceptive people believ thingswill get better, the second stage, when most investors realize that improvement actually taking place,and the third stage, when everyone concludes thingswill get better forever. The arrival of this simple truth opened my eyes to the no psychological extremes and the impact of those extremes on mark Like many of the great quotations and adages, it captures disproporti wisdom in a few simple words. It’s all about the changeabil

pattern they follow over the course of a cycle,and how they error. In the first stage, because the possibility of improvement is inv most investors and thus unappreciated, security pricesincorporate little or optimism. Often the first stage occurs after priceshave been pounded in crash,and the same downtrend that decimated pricesalso has wipedout psychology,turning the members of the crowd against the mark them to swearoff investing forever. In the last stage, on the other hand, events have gone well for so have been reflected so powerfully in asset prices, further liftingthe the market—that investors extrapolate improvement to infinity and pricesto reflect their optimism. Trees generally don’t grow to the sky, this stage investors act as if they will . . . and pay up they perceive. Few thingsare as costlyas paying for potential that have been overrated. It follows from the abovethat someone who invests in the fir when almost no one can see a reason for optimism—buys asset pricesfrom whichsubstantial appreciation is possible. But someone who in the third stage invariably pays a high price for the market’s exces enthusiasm and loses money as a result. (pages 191–193) ∾ The most important thing to note is that maximum psychology,maximum availability of credit, maximum price, minimum potential returnand maximum risk all are reached at the same time, and usually these coincide with the last paroxysm of buying. (page 201) ∾ In the reverse of the “top” that results from the upswing of we see that the nadir of psychology,a total inability to access minimum price, maximum potential returnand minimum risk all coincide the bottom, when the last optimist throws in the towel. (page Since the generalizations at the lows of the financial crisis of 20 on the downside, the error-making machine went into reverse. No fear. No optimism, only pessimism. No risk tolerance, only risk aversion. ability to see positives, only negatives. No willingness to interpret positively, only negatively. No ability to imagine good outcomes, only (page 233) ∾ What is a bottom? It’s the point when the lowest pricesof the reached. Thus a bottom can be viewed as the day the last

sells, or the last day on whichsellers predominate relative to bottom, pricesrise, since there are no holders left to capitulate and because the buyers now want to buy more strongly than the seller sell. Whena market is cascading downward, investors can often be he “We’re not going to try to catch a falling knife.” In other downward and there’s no way to know when it’ll stop, so why shou before we’re sure the bottom has been reached?” What I think they’ saying is, “We’re scared—in particular of buying before the stopped, and thus of looking bad—so we’re going to wait until the been reached, the dust has settled, and the uncertainty has been resol hopefully by now I’ve made it abundantly clear that when the dust has and investors’ nerves have steadied, the bargains will be gone. It’s usually during market slides that you can buy the largest the thing you want, from sellers who are throwing in the towel and non-knife-catchers are hugging the sidelines. Once the slide has culm a bottom, by definition there are few sellers left to sell, and rally it’s buyers who predominate. Thus the selling dries up and buyers face growing competition. (pages 235–237) ∾ Exiting the market after a decline—and thus failing to partic rebound—is truly the cardinal sin in investing. Experiencing a market loss in the downward phase of a cycle isn’t fatal in and long as you hold through the beneficial upward part as well. It’s that downward fluctuation into a permanent loss by selling out at that’s really terrible. Thus understanding cycles and having the emotional and financial wherewithal needed to live through them is an essential ingre investment success. (pages 238–239) ∾ If the market were a disciplined calculator of value based exclusively company fundamentals, the price of a security wouldn’t fluctuate than the issuer’s current earnings and the outlook for earnings fact, the price generally should fluctuate less than earnings, since quart quarter changes in earnings often even out in the long run and, necessarily reflect actualchanges in the company’s long-term potential. And yet security pricesgenerally fluctuate much more than earnings. Th reasons, of course, are largely psychological, emotional and non-f Thus price changes exaggerate and overstate fundamental changes. (page 186)

The truth is that financial facts and figures are only a starting market behavior; investor rationality is the exception, not the rule; market spends little of its time calmly weighing financial data pricesfree of emotionality. (page 189) ∾ The investor’s goal is to position capital so as to benefit developments. He wantsto have more invested when the market rises when it falls, and to own more of the thingsthat rise more or fall of the others. The objective is clear. The question is how to In the absence of the ability to see the future, how ca portfolios for what lies ahead? I think much of the answer lies understanding wherethe market stands in its cycle and what that its futuremovements.As I wrote in The Most Important Thing, “we never know wherewe’re going, but we’d better have a good idea wherewe are.” (pages 207–208) ∾ What’s the key in all of this? To know wherethe pendulum of and the cycle in valuation stand in their swings. To refuseto buy— perhaps to sell—when too-positivepsychology and the willingness to assig too-high valuations cause pricesto soar to peak levels. And to buy downcast psychology and the desertion of valuation standards on the downside cause panicky investors to createbargains by selling despi pricesthat prevail. As Sir John Templeton put it, “To buy when other despondently selling and sell when othersare greedily buying requi greatest fortitude and pays the greatest reward.” (pages 209–210) ∾ The essential ingredient here is inference, one of my favorite word sees what happens each day, as reported in the media. But how make an effort to understand what those everyday events say about the psyches of market participants,the investment climate, and thus what be done in response? Simply put, we must strive to understand the implications of wh on around us. Whenothersare recklessly confident and buying aggre we should be highly cautious; when othersare frightened into inact panicked selling, we should become aggressive. Psychological and emotional elements have their primary impact by convincing investors that past valuation standards have become irrelevant can be departed from. Wheninvestors are flyinghigh and making mone they find it easy to come up with convenient reasons why assetsshou

untethered from the constraints of valuation norms. The explanation usual begins with, “it’s different this time.” Watch out for this omin willing suspension of disbelief. Likewise, when asset pricescollapse in crash,it’s usually because of an assumption that none of the thing supported value in the past can be trusted to work in the futur 215) ∾ “It’s different this time” are four of the most dangerous wordsin the world—especiallywhen applied, as is often the case, to something that reached what in prior times would have been calledan extreme. Whenpeople say “it’s different” in this case, what they mean is tha rules and processes that produced cycles in the past have been suspe the cyclical behavior of the financial past did not result from the physical or scientific rules. In science, cause and effect enjoy a depe and repeatable relationship, so that it’s possible to say with confi then b.” But while there are some principles that operate in the world finance and business, the resulting truth is very different from that The reason for this—as I’ve harped on repeatedly—is the inv people. People’s decisions have great influence on economic, business market cycles. In fact, economies, business and markets consist transactionsbetween people. And people don’t make their decisions scientifically. People have feelings, and as such they aren’tbound by inviolabl They’ll always bring emotions and foibles to their economic and decisions. As a result, they’ll become euphoric at the wron despondent at the wrong time—exaggerating the upside potential are going well and the downside risk when thingsare going poorly—and they’ll take trendsto cyclical extremes. (pages 288–290) ∾ Cyclepositioning is the process of deciding on the risk posture portfolio in response to your judgments regarding the principal cycle asset selection is the process of deciding whichmarkets, market specific securities or assetsto overweight and underweight. Theseare main tools in portfolio management. It may be an over-simplificatio think everything investors do falls under one or the other of these head (page 248) ∾ Cyclepositioning primarily consists of choosing between aggressiveness defensiveness: increasing and decreasing exposure to market movements

The recipefor success here consists of (a) thoughtful analysis of market stands in its cycle,(b) a resulting increase in aggre defensiveness, and (c) being proved right. Thesethingscan be summed “skill” or “alpha” at cycle positioning. Of course, “c”—being prove isn’t a matter fully within anyone’s control, in particular becau degree to whichit is subject to randomness. So being prove happen every time, even to skillful investors who reason thingsout (page 252) ∾ Whenthe market is low in its cycle,gains are more likely than usual lossesare less likely. The reverse is true when the market is Positioning moves, based on whereyou believe the market stands amount to tryingto better prepare your portfolio for the events Whileyou can always be unlucky regarding the relationship between logically should happen and what actually does happen, good posit decisions can increase the chance that the market’s tendency—and chance for outperformance—will be on your side. (pages 254–255) ∾ In my opinion it’s entirely reasonable to try to improve longresults by altering positions on the basis of an understanding cycle.But it’s essential that you also understand the limitations, as well skills that are required and how difficult it is. Importantly, I want to call attention to the obvious fact tha the everyday ups and downs of the market—the clear examples this book all concern “once-in-a-lifetime” cyclical extremes (which seem to happen about once a decade). First, the extremes of bubb —and, in particular, the process through whichthey arise—mostclear illustrate the cycle in actionand how to respond to it. And secon dealing with pronounced extremes that we should expect the highe likelihood of success. Between the extremes of “rich”and “cheap”—when the cycle is in middle ground of “fair”—the state of the relationship between price is, by definition, nowhere as clear-cut as at the extremes. As It’s hard to make frequent distinctions and hard to do so correc Thus distinctions in the middle ground aren’tas potentially profita at the extremes, and those distinctions can’t be expected to work dependably.

Detecting and exploiting the extremes is really the best we can ho And I believe it can be done dependably—if you’re analytical, experienced(or well-versed in history) and unemotional. That means, however, that you shouldn’t expect to reach profitable conclusions daily monthly or even yearly. The reasonableness of the effort at cycle timing depends simply you expect of it. If you frequently try to discern wherewe the sense of “what’s going to happen tomorrow?”or “what’s in next month?” you’re unlikely to find success. I describe such “trying to be cute.”No one can make fine distinctions like those often or consistentlyright enough to add materially to investment results. one knows when the market developments that efforts at cycle label “probable” will materialize. As Peter Bernstein said, “The futureis not ours to know. But it know that being wrong is inevitable and normal, not some terrible not some awful failing in reasoning, not even bad luck in most insta Beingwrong comes with the franchise of an activity whose on an unknown future. . .” (pages 265–269) ∾ The tendency of people to go to excess will never end. And excesses eventually have to correct, neither will the occurrence of Economies and markets have never moved in a straight line in neither will they do so in the future. And that means inves to understand cycles will find opportunities for profit. (page 293)

Index A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H X | Y | Z References in italicsrefer to figures. A Abbey Mortgage Bank,122–24 Alchian, Armen, 43 Altman, Roger, 5 B Bank of Ireland, 122, 124 Bernanke, Ben, 239 Bernstein, Peter, 5, 13, 268–69, 315 bond defaults, two-year rule, 44–45 Brooks, Jon, 97 bubbles and crashes extremes, 265, 297–98, 314 Internet bubble, 217–22 patterns, 240, 263 SouthSea Bubble, 195–96 tech bubble, 146, 196, 198–99, 231, 264–65, 292–93 See also Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08; sub-prime mortgage c of 2007 Buffett, Warren, 5, 10, 50, 125–26, 193, 211 bull and bear markets, 29, 99, 147 bear market stages, 193–96, 201–3, 219 “bubble” and “crash,” 196–99 bull market stages, 191–93, 200–201, 306–7 great bull market of 1982, 278 Bush, George W., 151 Business Week,49 “Can We Measure Risk with a Number?” (Bernstein), 13

C capital market closed, 139–40, 157–58 conditions, 36, 145–46 definition of, 137 effect of close off of credit, 139–40, 154, 304 capitulation, 34, 194–95, 201, 236, 264, 300, 308 cartoons, 95, 96 central banks employment stimulation, 70 forecasting economic cycles, 70–71 inflation management, 68–70 See also Federal Reserve Bank Combs, Todd,5 credit cycle,167 auction for lowest yield, 143–44 boom bust, 145–48, 159 credit window, 138, 141–42, 144–45 definition of, 137 excess or easy money, 147–52 influence of, 138–40 short-term debt, 139–40 workings of, 141–42, 147, 157–60, 304–6 See also capital market; Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08; s mortgage crisis of 2007 credit default swaps. See Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08 Crutchley, John- Paul, 124 cycles, 3 causation and progression,30–32, 283, 297–98 cessation of, 178, 180, 285–88, 290 cycle of success, 270–71 definitions of, 40–41 elements of, 18–19, 25–27, 208–10 excess and corrections, 29, 85–86, 293, 299, 307–9 interaction of, 32–33, 167, 186–89, 199–201 listening to, 3–5, 309 majorcycles, 267 midpoint and aberrations, 24–29, 266, 296–97 regularity and irregularity, 40–42, 172, 217, 244–45 timing and extent, 24, 39, 145, 282, 295–96

understanding, 17, 22–24, 118, 239, 314–15 See also credit cycle “Death of Equities, The,” 49, 277–78 D Demosthenes, 222, 227, 284 Dimson, Elroy, 13–14, 239 distressed debt investments, 161–62 credit crunch and, 164–66 role of high yield bonds, 163–64 understanding opportunities, 163, 166–67, 241–42, 282 Dow 36,000 (Glassman & Hassett), 219 Dowd, Timothy, 255 Drexel Burnham, 165 Drunkard’s Walk, The (Mlodinow), 42 E economic cycles, 46–47, 64–66, 167 long and short term, 29–30 repetition and fluctuation, 24–25, 97, 135 short-term, 47, 58, 61 economic forecasts, 61–63, 208 Economics and Portfolio Strategy, 13 Economist, The, 141 Eichholtz, Piet, 182 Einstein, Albert, 36 Ellis, Charlie, 5 emotion/psychology, 3, 31, 34, 37, 167 “bubble” and “crash,” 196–98 contrarianism, 133, 135, 142, 234, 244, 301–4 credulousness and skepticism, 90–91, 133, 227 definition of insanity, 36 effect on economic cycles, 83–86, 97–99, 211, 228, 289–92, 2 emotionalism or objectivity, 95–96 euphoria and depression, 89, 94, 99, 125, 211, 222, 305, 312 extremes, 113–16, 265 fear, effect on consumption, 59 fear and/or greed, 87–89, 92–93, 114, 221–22, 233–35, 3 humility and confidence, 271–73

investment psychology,40–42, 93–94, 186–88, 190–91, 214–15, 2 optimism and pessimism, 89–90, 133, 299–301, 302–3 “silver bullet,” 227 F falling knives, 8, 156, 202, 235–36 Federal Reserve Bank,68, 119, 180, 231 Feynman, Richard, 289 Financial Times, 122, 124 Frank, Barney, 151 Friedman, Milton, 62 fundamentals, 185–87, 189, 209 valuation metrics, 211 futureprediction macro prediction, 10 opinions and likelihood, 15, 102, 208, 263–65 qualitative awareness, 214–15 SouthSea Bubble, 195–96 G Galbraith, John Kenneth, 5, 34, 63, 125, 178–79, 222 Geithner, Timothy, 155, 239, 287 Glass-Steagall Act, 120, 128 Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08, 36, 59, 119–22, 127–32, 147– 233 bear market stages, 193–94 effect on real estate market, 177 lessons from, 239–40 Treasury guarantee of commercial paper, 139–40, 155, 233 Goldman, William, 43 Goldman Sachs, 155 government deficits and national debt, 71–73 economic management tools, 71–73 Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, 103 Graham, Ben, 189 Greenblatt, Joel, 5 Greenspan, Alan, 217 gross domestic product (GDP)

consumption, 59–60 definition of, 47 recession (negative growth), 48 See also productivity H high yield bonds, 44, 106, 108, 131–32, 157, 281–82 history and memory, 34, 42, 178 Arab oil embargo, 292 blue chips or small-capitalization, 274 brevity of, 222 convertible arbitrage, 275 growth and tech stocks, 274 mortgage defaults, 229 one housein Amsterdam,181–82 permanent prosperity, 288–89 poor performance of stocks, 276–77 projections of the future, 286–87, 311–12 History of the Peloponnesian War (Thucydides), 37–38 Hoover, Herbert, 287 I intrinsic value,11, 92, 133, 194, 200, 205 when to buy, 237 investing aggressive or defensive, 248, 250–53, 259–60, 295 asset selection, 248, 255–59 bargains or popularity, 273–78 capitulation, 34–35, 194–95 cycle positioning, 248, 250, 252, 254–55, 312–14 definition of, 101–2, 262 fluctuation in, 186–87 growth stocks, 197–98 long or short securities sales, 8 market cycle,return, 204–6 overpayment, 144, 169, 179 philosophy, 4–5, 197, 207 security analysis and value investing, 11 skill or luck, 249, 253–54, 258–59, 272–73

“weighing machine,” 189 See also fundamentals; psychology investment indices, 232t, 238t “it’s different this time,” 37, 197–99 J Jain, Ajit, 5, 276 Janjigian, Jahan, 280 junk bonds. See high yield bonds K Karsh, Bruce, 6, 161, 231, 235, 282 Kass, Doug, 5 Kaufman, Henry, 273 Kaufman, Peter, 5, 271 Keele, Larry, 6 Keynes, John Maynard, 72, 240–41 Klarman, Seth, 5 L Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, 59, 129, 154–55, 233, 235, 237 listen,definition, 3–4 Lombardi, Vince, 1 long term trends, 48–51, 63–64 Long-Term Capital Management, 117, 146 M market assessment guide to, 212–14 qualitative awareness, 216 valuation, 215, 220 market bottoms definition of, 235–37 identifying, 242, 308–9 market efficiency, 110 Marks, Howard—memos

“bubble.com,” 220 “Ditto,” 171 “Everyone Knows,” 100 “First Quarter Performance,” 83 “Genius Isn’t Enough,” 146 “Happy Medium, The,” 86–87, 90–91, 116–17, 147 “It Is What It Is,” 212 “It’s All Good,” 84 “Limits to Negativism,The,” 128–29, 133, 233–34 “Long View,The,” 29–30, 48 Most Important Thing, The, 1–2, 5, 7, 23, 39, 134, 208, 212–14 “NowIt’s All Bad?” 26, 225 “On the Couch,” 92–95, 267–68 “Open and Shut,” 137, 155, 157, 159 “Raceto the Bottom, The,” 122, 143, 145 “Risk and Return Today,” 107 “Risk Revisited Again,” 13 “Tide Goes Out, The,” 193 “Will It Be Different This Time?” 285–86, 288 “You Can’t Predict. You Can Prepare.” 33–34, 138, 141–42, 147 Masson, Richard, 6 Milken, Michael, 5, 165, 281–82 Misbehaving (Thaler), 93 Mlodinow, Leonard, 42–43 Morgan Stanley, 155 mortgage lending, 122–24, 127–28, 174–75 governmentrole, 179 See also Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08 Munger, Charlie, 4, 5, 222, 284 N New York TimesMagazine, 180 Newberg, Bruce, 5 Nifty Fifty, 197–99, 279, 292 “no price too high,” 198–99, 215, 288 O Oaktree Capital Management, 2, 6, 267 colleagues, 45, 126, 177, 190

distressed debt investments, 161 Global Financial Crisisof 2007–08, 230, 235–36, 244 levered funds, 129–32 Oaktree Conference (2012), 175 oscillation and secular trends, 24–25, 27–29, 31 cycle symmetry, 35–36, 45 secular stagnation, 57 P Paulson, Hank,239 pendulums definition of, 24, 83 positive and negative elements, 83–84 stock market average, 85–86 See also bull and bear markets; cycles Phipps, Henry, 283 population birth rate, 52–54, 59 demographic movement, 54 unemployment rate, 54 portfolio balancing aggressiveness and defensiveness, 12 twin risks, 242–43 Prince, Charles, 121 probability distributions, 14–15, 19–21 productivity, effects on aspiration, 54–55 education, 55 globalization, 56 population, 51–52, 57–58 productive process changes, 53, 55–58 productivity, post-World War II, 56–57 profits and sales cycles of, 74–77, 137–38 determiningprofit, 79–80 disruption by technology, 80–81 leverage, financial, 78–79 leverage, operating, 77–78 See also companies pronouns, he or she, 7

psychology.See emotion/psychology R randomness, 14, 41–44 real estate cycle cessation of, 178 characteristics of, 169–70 generalizations, 178–83 history of one old house, 181–82 influences on, 175–76 Los Angeles, 173–74 psychology,170, 177 special factors, 183–84 time lags in, 170–74 Rise and Fall of Nations, The (Sharma), 283 risk attitudes toward, 110–11, 116–17, 118–19, 134–35, 167 aversion, 36, 105–7, 114–15, 119, 126–32 capital market line, 108–9, 112 definition of, 13, 102–3 lottery comparison,14 returnand, 104–9, 112–13 tolerance, 120–22, 125–26 See also probability distributions risk and return, 107–8, 117 Rothschild, Jacob, 5 S Schafer, Oscar, 5 Sharma, Ruchir, 283 Shiller, Robert, 182 Short History of Financial Euphoria, A (Galbraith) 34, 125 Shourie, Raj, 175 Siegel, Jeremy, 217 Soros, George, 229–30 Stone, Sheldon, 6, 35, 282 StressTest (Geithner), 155, 287 sub-prime mortgage crisis of 2007, 36, 59, 149–50, 152, 176, 180, 223– 230–32

superior investors, 14–18, 92, 94, 99, 107 asymmetry, 250, 257–58, 260–61, 300, 309–10 bargain conditions, 160, 305–6 dealing with risk, 102 outcomes, 255 second-level thinking, 257–58 skepticism, 235 understanding tendencies, 255, 294, 309 Swensen, David, 271 T Taleb, Nassim Nicholas, 5 Tavris, Carol, 93 Templeton, John, 210, 310 tendencies, 12 insight and odds, 15–17, 21 Thaler, Richard, 93 theory of reflexivity, 229–30 “This Very, Very Old House,” 180–82 Thucydides,37–38 Tisch, Jim, 5 Train,Nick, 39 Twain, Mark,24, 35, 45, 296 W Wall StreetJournal, 93, 177, 220 wealth effect, 60 Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 103 “What the wise man does in the beginning . . . ,” 193 X Xerox, 278–81

About the Author HOWARD M ARKS is cochairman and cofounder of Oaktree Capital Management, a leading investment firm responsible for over $120 billio assets. His previous book on investing, The Most Important Thing: Uncommon Sense for the Thoughtful Investor, was a critically acclaimed bestseller. He lives in New York City.

Connect with HMH on Social Media Follow us for book news, reviews, author updates, exclusive conte giveaways, and more.