ii 
 
FOREWORD 
Ratemaking is a key driver of property and casualty (P&C) insurance profitability and hence a primary 
actuarial responsibility.  Actuaries employ a variety of ratemaking techniques depending on specific 
circumstances.  For example, techniques used to price short-tailed lines of insurance (e.g., personal 
automobile) are different than techniques used in long-tailed lines (e.g., workers compensation).  Even 
within the same insurance product, actuarial techniques may differ due to regulatory requirements and 
data limitations.  Furthermore, actuarial techniques are constantly evolving due to enhanced information 
and advances in technology. 
This text is not intended to document every technique used for P&C insurance ratemaking.  Instead, the 
purpose of this text is to provide an overview of basic ratemaking techniques used in the industry.  As 
such, actuaries should continue to increase the depth and breadth of their knowledge to be able to discern 
the most appropriate technique for a given situation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The completion of this text required significant effort from many individuals other than the primary 
authors.  The authors want to acknowledge the following individuals for researching and summarizing 
existing ratemaking material, offering alternative ratemaking techniques, and reviewing countless drafts:   
Catherine Taylor, FCAS, MAAA and her CAS committee, comprised of Nancy Braithwaite, 
FCAS, MAAA; Ginda Fisher, FCAS, MAAA; Chris Styrsky, FCAS, MAAA; Jane Taylor, 
FCAS, MAAA; Theresa Turnacioglu, FCAS, MAAA; and Ron Zaleski, Jr., FCAS, MAAA, 
dedicated to partnering with EMB to facilitate the successful completion of this text.  
The following associates of EMB:  Tom Hettinger, ACAS, MAAA; David Sommer, FCAS; 
Emily Stoll, ACAS, MAAA; Julie Walker, ACAS, MAAA; Sandy Wu, ACAS, MAAA; Harsha 
Maddipati; and Peter Quackenbush. 
The following actuaries who were consulted for their expertise in specific ratemaking topics:  
Joseph Palmer, FCAS, MAAA; James Guszcza, FCAS, MAAA; and Will Davis, FCAS, MAAA. 
All of the authors who developed the materials from the prior Ratemaking examination; EMB 
relied heavily upon that material when creating this text.   
 Howard Mahler, FCAS, MAAA for his valuable contributions to subsequent versions of the text. 
REFERENCE MATERIAL 
The objective of the CAS in creating a new basic ratemaking text was to replace the series of readings 
that existed on the syllabus of basic education as of 2007 with a single educational publication.  As such, 
the authors relied heavily on a series of published articles and texts that are contained in the Bibliography 
at the end of the text.  Specific references to each of these sources are also present in individual chapters. 

iii 
 
ROUNDING 
Rounding procedures have been applied in a manner consistent with the number of decimals shown in the 
text and tables (or per rounding procedures specifically outlined in the text).  Small discrepancies may 
exist between the text and table entries when the text is summarizing multiple calculations within a table 
or further dissecting calculations in a table for illustrative purposes. 
ORGANIZATION OF THIS TEXT 
This text is organized into sixteen chapters plus six appendices.  The chapters discuss various ratemaking 
concepts and techniques, and provide simple examples.  Each chapter concludes with a narrative 
summary as well as an outline of key concepts covered in the chapter.  The appendices provide in-depth 
practical examples of some of the techniques discussed throughout the text.  In order to reinforce the 
concepts and techniques discussed in the body of the text, the authors suggest Appendices A-D be read 
upon completion of Chapter 8, and Appendices E-F be read upon completion of Chapters 9-10.   
Below is a summary of the content of each chapter and appendix. 
Chapter 1 provides an overview of P&C insurance ratemaking, highlighting the unique relationship 
between price, cost, and profit.  This overview includes basic P&C insurance terms and commonly used 
insurance ratios.  This chapter also introduces the fundamental insurance equation, a key concept that is 
referenced frequently in other chapters.  This concept states that premium charged for policies written 
during a future time period should be appropriate to cover the losses and expenses expected for those 
policies while achieving the targeted profit. 
Chapter 2 discusses the P&C insurer rating manual, an aid for anyone who needs to understand the 
process of calculating an insurance premium.  The four main components of P&C insurer rating manuals 
are rules, rate pages, rating algorithms, and underwriting guidelines.  The chapter also includes three 
rating manual examples for different insurance lines of business. 
Chapter 3 discusses ratemaking data, both internal and external to the insurance company, and introduces 
methods of data organization.  An example of internal data requirements is provided, as well as sources of 
external data. 
Chapter 4 discusses insurance exposures, the basic unit that measures a policy’s exposure to loss and 
therefore serves as the basis for the calculation of premium.  The chapter outlines criteria for selecting 
exposure bases, methods and quantitative examples for defining and aggregating exposures, and 
circumstances requiring a measurement of exposure trend. 
Chapter 5 focuses on premium, the price the insured pays for the insurance product and one of the key 
elements of the fundamental insurance equation.  The chapter discusses different ways to define and 
aggregate premium (including quantitative examples) and introduces standard techniques to adjust 
historical premium data to make it relevant for estimating future premium in the context of ratemaking.  
These adjustments include current rate level, premium development in consideration of premium audits, 
and premium trend.  These adjustments to premium are relevant in loss ratio analysis. 

iv 
 
Chapter 6 is dedicated to losses and loss adjustment expenses.  Losses are amounts paid or owed to 
claimants under the provisions of the insurance contract.  This chapter outlines the different types of 
insurance losses, reviews how loss data is aggregated for ratemaking analysis, and defines common 
metrics involving losses.  This chapter also describes the various adjustments to historical loss data to 
make it relevant for estimating future losses.  These include adjustments for extraordinary events, changes 
in benefit levels, changes in loss estimates as claims mature, and changes in cost levels over time.  
Finally, the chapter discusses the treatment of loss adjustment expenses in ratemaking. 
 
Chapter 7 covers methods for projecting underwriting expenses and addresses how to incorporate the 
cost of reinsurance and an underwriting profit provision in the rates. 
 
Chapter 8 demonstrates how to combine the various estimated components of the fundamental insurance 
equation (i.e., premium, loss, expense) to ascertain the appropriate overall rate level (or rate level change) 
for the future policy period.  The two overall rate level methods discussed are the pure premium and loss 
ratio methods.  The methods are mathematically equivalent, but each offers advantages and disadvantages 
in certain circumstances. 
 
Chapter 9 covers rate adequacy at the individual risk (or risk segment) level.  The chapter discusses the 
concept of risk segmentation via rating variables and outlines criteria to consider when using a certain risk 
characteristic as a rating variable.  The chapter also reviews the application of univariate methods to 
historical data to calculate rate differentials (or changes to existing rate differentials) for each rating 
variable.  This process is known as classification ratemaking. 
 
Chapter 10 is an extension of Chapter 9 that specifically addresses multivariate classification ratemaking 
techniques.  The chapter discusses the benefits of multivariate approaches and provides a basic 
explanation of the mathematical foundation of one commonly used multivariate method, generalized 
linear models (GLMs).  Sample output with explanation is provided for GLM results as well as associated 
statistical diagnostics.  The chapter also reviews some commonly used data mining techniques. 
 
Chapter 11 addresses additional classification ratemaking techniques that were developed to address the 
unique qualities of some rating variables or risk characteristics.  These include territory boundary 
analysis, increased limits factors, deductibles, size of risk for workers compensation insurance, and the 
concept of insurance to value and how it affects the adequacy of rates. 
 
Chapter 12 provides a broad overview of the credibility procedures used in ratemaking.  This includes 
methods for incorporating credibility in an actuarial estimate, desirable qualities for the complement of 
credibility (the related data that is blended with the original actuarial estimate), and methods and 
examples for determining the complement of credibility. 
 
Chapter 13 explores other items company management should consider, along with the actuarial 
indications discussed in the previous chapters, to determine what rates to charge in practice.  These 
considerations include regulatory constraints, operational constraints, and market conditions. 
 
Chapter 14 discusses non-pricing and pricing solutions to an imbalanced fundamental insurance equation 
(i.e., current rates do not produce an average premium that is equivalent to the sum of expected costs and 
target underwriting profit).  In regards to pricing solutions, the chapter discusses how to calculate final 
rates for an existing product, as well as how to develop rates for a new product by referencing other data 
sources.  The chapter concludes with comments regarding the importance of communicating expected rate 
change results to key stakeholders and monitoring results after implementation. 
 

v 
 
Chapter 15 covers additional ratemaking methods commonly used by commercial insurers.  The methods 
are divided into two categories:  those that alter the rate calculated from the rating manual and those that 
are employed by insurers to calculate a premium unique to a particular large commercial risk.  The former 
category includes experience rating and schedule rating, and the latter category includes loss-rated 
composite risks, large deductible policies, and retrospective rating. 
 
Chapter 16 discusses the adoption of claims-made policies, with particular attention to the medical 
malpractice line of business.  This alternative to occurrence policies shortens the time period from 
coverage inception to claim settlement.  For the ratemaking actuary, this translates to a shorter forecast 
period and therefore reduced pricing risk. 
 
Appendices A-D provide illustrative examples of overall rate level analyses for personal automobile, 
homeowners, medical malpractice, and workers compensation lines of business.  The examples 
incorporate many of the ratemaking concepts and techniques discussed in Chapters 1-8. 
 
Appendices E-F provide illustrative examples of classification ratemaking analysis using the univariate 
and multivariate techniques discussed in Chapters 9 and 10, respectively. 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
TEXT NOTATION 
The text contains a significant number of formulae.  The following is a summary of the key notation that 
appears throughout the text.  Actual references in the text may specify more precise definitions (e.g., L 
could be used to describe accident year reported losses, policy year ultimate losses, etc.). 
X 
  = Exposures 
P
P;
 
  = Premium; Average premium (P divided by X) 
c
c P
;
P
 
  = Premium at current rates; Average premium at current rates (PC divided by X) 
I
I P
;
P
   = Indicated premium; Average indicated premium (PI divided by X) 
P
P P
;
P
   = Premium at proposed rates; Average premium at proposed rates (PP divided by X) 
L
L;
 
  = Losses; Pure Premium (L divided by X) 
L
L E
;
E
  = Loss Adjustment Expense (LAE); Average LAE per exposure (EL divided by X) 
F
F E
;
E
  = Fixed underwriting expenses; Average underwriting expense per exposure (EF divided by X) 
EV 
  = Variable underwriting expenses 
F 
  = Fixed expense ratio (EF divided by P) 
V 
  = Variable expense provision (EV divided by P) 
QC 
  = Profit percentage at current rates 
QT 
  = Target profit percentage 
BC 
  = Current base rate 
BP 
  = Proposed base rate 
,i
R C
1
 
  = Current relativity for the ith level of rating variable R1 
,i
R P
1
 
  = Proposed relativity for the ith level of rating variable R1 
AC 
  = Current fixed additive fee 
AP 
  = Proposed fixed additive fee 
 
 
 
