Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
13 
 
CHAPTER 2:  RATING MANUALS 
As stated in Chapter 1, the rating manual is the insurer’s documentation of how to appropriately classify 
each risk and calculate the applicable premium associated with that risk.  The final output of the 
ratemaking process is the information necessary to modify an existing rating manual or create a new one.  
In today’s highly computerized environment, most insurance premiums are calculated by an automated 
system, but a written rating manual is still a useful aid for anyone who needs to understand the process of 
calculating an insurance premium.  This includes insurance agents/brokers as well as insurance regulators 
who may require the manual as part of the rate regulation process.  This chapter addresses what rate 
manuals typically include and gives examples of the different components for various lines of business. 
The price a consumer pays for an insurance policy is referred to as the premium.  A consumer’s premium 
is generally calculated based on a given rate per unit of exposure.  This rate, however, can vary 
significantly for risks with different characteristics.  For most lines of business, the following information 
is necessary to calculate the premium for a given risk: 
 
Rules 
 
Rate pages (i.e., base rates, rating tables, and fees)  
 
Rating algorithm 
 
Underwriting guidelines 
 
Generally speaking, the first three items are found in a company’s rating manual, and the underwriting 
guidelines are maintained in a separate proprietary underwriting manual.   
The following sections provide more detail on each of the components and contain simple rating 
examples for several lines of business.     
RULES 
Rating manual rules typically contain qualitative information that is needed to understand and apply the 
quantitative rating algorithms contained later in the manual.  Since it is intended to be an aid in 
calculating premium, the manual and the rules therein are not meant to replicate the detail of the legal 
insurance contract itself.   
The rules often begin with definitions related to the risk being insured.  For example, rules for a 
homeowners insurer may define what is considered a primary residence.  The rules also provide a 
summary of policy forms offered to the insured (if more than one form is offered), summarize what is 
covered by each (e.g., types of liability or damage), and outline any circumstances for limitation or 
exclusion of coverage.  The rules may also outline various premium determination considerations (e.g., 
minimum premium, down payments, refunds in the event of cancellation).  
An important and often lengthy portion of the rules defines how to properly classify a risk before the 
rating algorithm can be applied.  As will be discussed in later chapters, classification ratemaking groups 
risks with similar characteristics and varies the rate accordingly.  These risk characteristics are 
represented by rating variables with categories pre-defined by the insurer.  In some cases, the categories 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
14 
 
are clear and need not be explained (for example, the limit of liability selected).  In other cases, further 
explanation for the classification is required; for example, a homeowners manual may need to clarify 
whether a recently renovated old home qualifies for the new home discount.  A workers compensation 
manual may list how to classify risks into specific classification codes (salespersons/outside, bank 
employees, janitorial services, etc.).  Without clear classification criteria, the rating algorithm will be 
ambiguous and could result in improper premium calculation. 
Rating manual rules may also contain information about optional insurance coverage, often referred to as 
endorsements or riders.  This includes a definition of the optional coverage, any restrictions on such 
coverage, and any applicable classification rules.  The rules may contain the rating algorithm for the 
optional coverage as well. 
In addition to these rules, a company may have a set of underwriting guidelines that specifies additional 
acceptability criteria (e.g., a company may choose not to write a risk with two or more convictions of 
driving under the influence).  While the underwriting guidelines can be contained in the rules, it is more 
common to include them in a separate underwriting manual.   
RATE PAGES 
For most lines of insurance, the rate varies significantly based on the characteristics associated with the 
risk.  The rate pages generally contain the numerical inputs (e.g., base rates, rating tables, and fees) 
needed to calculate the premium. 
A base risk is a specific risk profile pre-defined by the insurer.  The base risk often represents a set of risk 
characteristics that are most common, though it can also be chosen based on reasons more related to 
marketing objectives.  For example, the base risk selected by an insurer for personal automobile collision 
coverage may be an adult, married male, with a $500 deductible, who lives in a very populated area, etc.  
Though the company may have more policies with a $250 deductible, its objective is to encourage new 
insureds to purchase a deductible of $500 or higher.  If the base is set at the $500 deductible, the 
agent/broker will most likely use this deductible in the initial premium quote.  If the insured requests a 
comparison quote with a $250 deductible it will result in a higher premium, which may serve as a 
psychological deterrent to the insured.  Another example may be a multi-product discount for 
homeowners who have an auto policy with the same insurer.  Even if the majority of homeowner 
policyholders qualify for the discount, the insurer may choose not to use that as the base risk and hence 
the discount is not reflected in the initial quote.  By doing so, the company can offer and market a 
discount to those insureds with multiple products.  If, on the other hand, the company set the base equal to 
those who qualify for the discount, then there will be an increase in premium for those who do not qualify 
for the discount.  Although the premium charged is the same in either case, a discount has more positive 
appeal than an increase in premium.    
The base rate is the rate that is applicable to the base risk.  As such, it is not usually the average rate.  If 
the insurance product contains multiple coverages that are priced separately as in personal automobile 
insurance, then there is typically a separate base risk, base rate, and rating tables applicable to each 
coverage.   

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
15 
 
By definition, the rate for all risk profiles other than the base profile varies from the base rate.  The rate 
variation for different risk characteristics is achieved by modifying the base rate by a series of multipliers 
or addends or some unique mathematical expression as defined in the rating algorithm.  The 
characteristics are referred to as rating variables, and the rate variations are contained in rating tables.  
Certain rating variables may be referred to as discounts/surcharges or credits/debits.  The variations from 
the base rate are often referred to as relativities, factors, or multipliers (if applied to the rating algorithm 
multiplicatively) or addends (if applied to the base rate or some other figure in an additive or subtractive 
fashion). 
Table 2.1 provides some examples of typical rating variables used for various insurance products.  The 
number and nature of rating variables used varies significantly by line of business and from insurer to 
insurer. 
2.1 Typical Rating Variables 
Type of Insurance 
Rating Variables 
Personal Automobile 
Driver Age and Gender, Model Year, Accident History 
Homeowners 
Amount of Insurance, Age of Home, Construction Type 
Workers Compensation 
Occupation Class Code 
Commercial General Liability 
Classification, Territory, Limit of Liability 
Medical Malpractice 
Specialty, Territory, Limit of Liability 
Commercial Automobile 
Driver Class, Territory, Limit of Liability 
 
Prior to the use of the computers for quoting insurance rates, it was typical for companies to calculate the 
rate for several of the most common combinations of rating characteristics and produce a set of pre-
printed rates for the producer.  The math was simply done by the company to minimize the calculations 
required by the agent/broker.  As rating algorithms have become more complex and computers have 
become more common and powerful, this practice has become less common.  Rather than final rates, rate 
pages today contain all the building blocks necessary to calculate rates. 
In addition to varying risk characteristics, the premium charged must consider expenses incurred in the 
acquisition and servicing of insurance policies.  Some expenses vary by the amount of premium (e.g., 
commission is usually a percentage of the premium) and some expenses are fixed regardless of the 
premium (e.g., the cost of issuing a policy).  In some cases, a company will include an explicit expense 
fee in the rating algorithm to account for the fixed expenses and then incorporate a provision within the 
base rate to account for the variable expenses.  In other cases, a company may incorporate all expenses 
via a provision within the base rates.  When there is no explicit fee, the company may have a minimum 
premium that assures the premium charged is adequate to cover the expenses and perhaps some amount 
for minimal expected losses.   
RATING ALGORITHMS 
The rating algorithm describes in detail how to combine the various components in the rules and rate 
pages to calculate the overall premium charged for any risk that is not specifically pre-printed in a rate 
table.  The algorithm is very specific and includes explicit instructions, such as: 
 
the order in which rating variables should be considered 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
16 
 
 
how the effect of rating variables is applied in the calculation of premium (e.g., multiplicative, 
additive, or some unique mathematical expression) 
 
the existence of maximum and minimum premiums (or in some cases the maximum discount or 
surcharge that can be applied) 
 
specifics associated with any rounding that takes place.   
If the insurance product contains multiple coverages, then separate rating algorithms by coverage 
may apply. 
The nature and complexity of rating algorithms for insurance policies can vary significantly by insurer 
and by product.  A few simplified examples are included later in this chapter for illustrative purposes.   
UNDERWRITING GUIDELINES 
Underwriting guidelines are a set of company-specific criteria that can affect decisions made prior to 
calculating a rate (e.g., whether or not to accept the risk) or can alter aspects of the premium calculation.  
In particular, underwriting guidelines may be used to specify: 
 
Decisions to accept, decline, or refer risks.  The underwriting guidelines may specify that risks 
with a certain set of characteristics (e.g., a household with two or more losses in the last 12 
months) may not be eligible for insurance or the application must be referred to a senior 
underwriter. 
 
Company placement.  Some insurance groups utilize distinct companies within their corporate 
structure to sell similar products at different prices to risks with different underwriting 
characteristics.  For example, an insurance group may designate one of its companies to provide 
personal automobile insurance to preferred or low-risk drivers and another company to provide 
personal automobile insurance to nonstandard or high-risk drivers.  In this case, the underwriting 
guidelines will provide information necessary to place the insured in the most appropriate 
company within the group.  The practice of establishing separate companies to achieve this 
purpose is usually due to either regulatory issues (cannot get approval for the full spectrum of 
desired rates within one company) or different distribution systems (one company may sell 
through agents and another may sell directly to the consumer). 
 
Tier placement.  Companies may establish rating “tiers” in jurisdictions that permit companies to 
charge different rates within a single company to risks with different underwriting characteristics.  
The underwriting guidelines specify the rules necessary to properly assign the insured to the 
correct tier.   The rating algorithm and rate pages specify how the tier placement affects the 
premium calculation.   
 
Schedule rating credits/debits.  Commercial lines products often use schedule rating to vary 
premium from the manual rates.  The manual rate is the rate calculated directly from the rate 
tables and factors in the manual. Schedule rating involves the application of credits and debits to 
the manual rate for the presence or absence of characteristics.  In some cases, the schedule rating 
criteria is very specific and no judgment is required or permitted.  Other times, the schedule 
includes subjective factors allowing the underwriter to use judgment in the selection of credits or 
debits applied.   
 
Historically, underwriting criteria were subjective in nature (as opposed to the more objective rating 
variables) and required underwriters to personally assess the risk and make subjective judgments.  There 
has been a trend over time (especially for personal lines products) to designate new explanatory variables 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
17 
 
as underwriting criteria, which can then be used for placement into rating tiers or separate companies.  As 
such, the line between rating and underwriting characteristics has become blurred. 
While they are covered in this section of this chapter, the underwriting guidelines may not be part of the 
rating manual and may not be publicly available, unless required by statute.  When possible, insurance 
companies consider their underwriting guidelines to be proprietary and take steps to keep them 
confidential.  The trend to designate new explanatory variables as underwriting criteria has given some 
companies a competitive advantage by reducing the transparency of the rating algorithm.   
Table 2.2 provides some examples of typical underwriting characteristics that companies use for various 
insurance products.  The list is not intended to be exhaustive.  The number and nature of underwriting 
characteristics used varies significantly by line of business and from insurer to insurer. 
2.2 Examples of Typical Underwriting Characteristics 
Type of Insurance 
Underwriting Characteristics 
Personal Automobile 
Insurance Credit Score, Homeownership, Prior Bodily Injury Limits 
Homeowners 
Insurance Credit Score, Prior Loss Information, Age of Home 
Workers Compensation 
Safety Programs, Number of Employees, Prior Loss Information 
Commercial General Liability 
Insurance Credit Score, Years in Business, Number of Employees 
Medical Malpractice 
Patient Complaint History, Years Since Residency, Number of 
Weekly Patients 
Commercial Automobile 
Driver Tenure, Average Driver Age, Earnings Stability 
HOMEOWNERS RATING MANUAL EXAMPLE 
The following is an example of a simple rating algorithm2 for a homeowners policy with the Wicked 
Good Insurance Company (Wicked Good or WGIC).  Homeowners insurance covers damage to the 
property, contents, and outstanding structures, as well as loss of use, liability and medical coverage,  The 
perils covered and amount of insurance provided is detailed in the policy contract.  WGIC writes one 
home per policy.  WGIC’s homeowners rating manual can be used to calculate the premium for a 
homeowners insurance policy.  The following are excerpts from WGIC’s homeowners rating manual. 
Base Rates  
The exposure base for homeowners insurance is a home insured for one year.  Table 2.3 shows the base 
rate for WGIC.  This is the all-peril base rate.3 
                                  2.3 Base Rate 
Coverage 
Base Rate 
All Perils Combined 
$500 
                                                     
2 This algorithm contains many elements commonly used in the industry, but is not meant to represent all rating 
algorithms.  Insurers may use more variables or different variables, and combine them in different ways than 
expressed here. 
3 The rating plan described has a single base rate that is used for all perils and the relativities all apply to that one 
base rate.  Recently, homeowners companies have begun to implement rating plans that have separate base rates for 
each major peril covered and the individual rating variable relativities are applied to the applicable base rate (e.g., 
burglar alarm discount applies to the theft base rate only).   

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
18 
 
Rating and Underwriting Characteristics 
Amount of Insurance 
Amount of insurance (AOI) is one of the key rating variables for homeowners insurance.  AOI represents 
the amount of coverage purchased to cover damage to the dwelling and is the maximum amount the 
insurer expects to pay to repair or replace the home.  Table 2.4 shows the rate relativities to be applied to 
Wicked Good’s base rate depending on the amount of insurance purchased.  According to the table, the 
base rate corresponds to a home with an amount of insurance of $200,000, which consequently has an 
AOI rate relativity of 1.00.  
 
     2.4 Amount of Insurance (AOI) Rating Table 
AOI (in thousands) 
Rate Relativity  
$ 80 
0.56 
$ 95 
0.63 
$110 
0.69 
$125 
0.75 
$140 
0.81 
$155 
0.86 
$170 
0.91 
$185 
0.96 
$200 
1.00 
$215 
1.04 
$230 
1.08 
$245 
1.12 
$260 
1.16 
$275 
1.20 
$290 
1.24 
$305 
1.28 
$320 
1.32 
$335 
1.36 
$350 
1.39 
$365 
1.42 
$380 
1.45 
$395 
1.48 
$410 
1.51 
$425 
1.54 
$440 
1.57 
$455 
1.60 
$470 
1.63 
$485 
1.66 
$500 
1.69 
Additional $15K 
0.03 
 
If a policyholder purchases $425,000 of insurance for his home, a rate relativity of 1.54 will be applied to 
the base rate.  Straight-line interpolation is generally used for values not explicitly displayed in the table. 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
19 
 
Territory 
The location of the home is another major determinant of homeowners insurance risk and is, therefore, a 
key rating variable.  Homeowners insurers typically group similar geographic units (e.g., zip codes) 
together to form rating territories.  WGIC grouped zip codes into five distinct rating territories.  The rate 
relativities for each territory are shown in Table 2.5. 
 
 
       2.5 Territorial Rating  
Territory 
Rate Relativity 
1 
0.80 
2 
0.90 
3 
1.00 
4 
1.10 
5 
1.15 
 
Because Territory 3 is the base territory, the Territory 3 relativity is 1.00 and all other territories are 
expressed relative to Territory 3. 
Protection Class and Construction Type  
Wicked Good’s homeowners rates also vary by fire protection class and type of construction.  The 
protection class is a ranking based on the quality of fire protection and the availability of water in the 
district.  Class 1 indicates the highest quality protection while class 10 refers to the lowest quality 
protection. 
             2.6 Protection Class / Construction Type Rating Table 
Protection Class 
Construction Type 
Frame 
Masonry 
1-4 
1.00 
0.90 
5 
1.05 
1.00 
6 
1.10 
1.05 
7 
1.15 
1.10 
8 
1.25 
1.15 
9 
2.10 
1.75 
10 
2.30 
1.90 
 
Within each protection class, there is a separate relativity based on construction type.  The two 
construction types identified are frame and masonry.  Frame construction, which relies on lumber and 
wood products, is more susceptible than masonry to some types of loss, such as fire or hail loss; therefore, 
the frame relativities are higher than the masonry relativities across every protection class.  The base rate 
for this two-way variable is Protection Class 1-4 Frame (though Protection Class 5 Masonry 
coincidentally has a relativity of 1.00).    
Underwriting Tier 
WGIC uses numerous underwriting characteristics that are not explicitly shown in the rating manual.  The 
underwriting characteristics are used to place insurance policies into one of four distinct underwriting 
tiers based on the overall riskiness of the exposure to loss.  The following table shows the relativity for 
each of the four tiers:  

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
20 
 
        2.7 Underwriting Tier Rating Table 
Tier 
Rate Relativity 
A 
0.80 
B 
0.95 
C 
1.00 
D 
1.45 
 
Tier D, which is considered the most risky, has the highest rate relativity. 
Deductible  
The policyholder can choose the deductible, the amount of each covered loss the insured must pay.  The 
rate relativities for each deductible are displayed in the following table. 
         2.8 Deductible Rating Table 
Deductible 
Rate Relativity 
$250 
1.00 
$500 
0.95 
$1,000 
0.85 
$5,000 
0.70 
 
Miscellaneous Credits 
Wicked Good offers discounts for new homes, insureds who are claims-free in the previous five years, 
and insureds with multiple policies (i.e., they have an auto or excess liability policy with WGIC in 
addition to a homeowners policy).  The following table shows the discount applicable for each of these 
characteristics. 
  
 
        2.9 Miscellaneous Credits 
Miscellaneous Credit 
Credit Amount 
New Home Discount 
20% 
5-Year Claims-Free Discount 
10% 
Multi-Policy Discount 
7% 
 
Frequently, companies with a significant number of discounts will have a maximum discount percentage 
that can be accumulated.  For this example, Wicked Good does not limit the overall cumulative discount 
based on all miscellaneous credits. 
Additional Optional Coverages 
Homeowners policies place a limit on the amount of insurance by coverage (e.g., dwelling, contents, other 
structures, medical, and liability) though the policyholder can elect to purchase additional coverage.  It is 
also common for the policy to limit the amount of coverage provided for certain types of losses (e.g., 
jewelry, cash, electronic equipment); these are referred to as inside limits.  The limited coverage is 
considered sufficient for most policyholders.  Those with a greater exposure to specific types of loss are 
encouraged to buy additional coverage.  Also, policyholders may seek to extend the type of loss covered 
under the homeowners policy (e.g., to include coverage for the liability of operating a daycare in the 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
21 
 
home or to extend the perils covered for jewelry, watches, and furs losses).  There are numerous other 
examples of how policyholders may choose to increase (or even decrease) their coverage. 
In the following example, the basic homeowners policy includes a $100,000 limit for liability coverage 
and a $500 limit for medical coverage.  This is referred to as a split limit,4 and is often expressed as 
$100,000 / $500.  In addition, a $2,500 inside limit applies to jewelry losses within the contents coverage.  
Each of these is a limit for losses occurring from a single event.  If desired, the insured can purchase 
additional coverage.  The following tables show the additional premium charged if the policyholder elects 
to purchase additional higher limits: 
 
      2.10 Increased Jewelry Coverage 
Jewelry Coverage Rate 
Limit 
Additive 
$ 2,500 
Included 
$ 5,000 
$35 
$10,000 
$60 
 
      2.11 Increased Liability/Medical Limits 
Liability/Medical Rate 
Limit 
Additive 
$100,000/$500 
Included 
$300,000/$1,000 
$25 
$500,000/$2,500 
$45 
Expense Fee 
WGIC has an explicit expense fee in the rating manual that is intended to cover fixed expenses incurred in 
the acquisition and servicing of insurance policies. 
The expense fee is $50 per policy, as shown in Table 2.12. 
2.12 Expense Fee 
Policy Fee 
$50 
 
 
 
                                                     
4 Note that in other lines of business, split limits may refer to a per person (claimant) limit and a per occurrence 
limit, or may refer to a per occurrence and aggregate limit. 
 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
22 
 
Homeowners Rating Algorithm for WGIC 
The rating algorithm details how to combine all of the rate page information to calculate the final 
premium for a homeowners policy for WGIC: 
  
Total Premium =  
All-Peril Base Rate  
x AOI Relativity 
x Territory Relativity 
x Protection Class / Construction Type Relativity 
x Underwriting Tier Relativity 
x Deductible Credit 
x [1.0 - New Home Discount – Claims-Free Discount] 
x [1.0 - Multi-Policy Discount] 
+ Increased Jewelry Coverage Rate 
+ Increased Liability/Medical Coverage Rate 
+ Policy Fee. 
It is common for companies to designate a rounding procedure after each step.  WGIC rounds to the 
penny after each step and to the whole dollar at the final step. 
Homeowners Rate Calculation Example for WGIC 
WGIC is preparing a renewal quote for a homeowner currently insured with Wicked Good.  The policy 
has the following risk characteristics: 
 
Amount of insurance = $215,000 
 
The insured lives in Territory 4. 
 
The home is frame construction located in Fire Protection Class 7. 
 
Based on the insured’s credit score, tenure with the company, and prior loss history, the 
policy has been placed in Underwriting Tier C. 
 
The insured opts for a $1,000 deductible. 
 
The home falls under the definition of a new home as defined in Wicked Good’s rating rules. 
 
The insured is eligible for the five-year claims-free discount. 
 
There is no corresponding auto or excess liability policy written with WGIC. 
 
The policyholder opts to increase coverage for jewelry to $5,000 and to increase 
liability/medical coverage limits to $300,000/$1,000. 
 
 
 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
23 
 
The appropriate figures from Tables 2.3 - 2.12 in WGIC’s rating manual are shown in the following table: 
          2.13 Entries from Rating Manual 
Entries from Rating Manual 
Base Rate 
$500 
AOI Relativity 
1.04 
Territory Relativity 
1.10 
Protection Class / Construction Type Relativity 
1.15 
Underwriting Tier Relativity 
1.00 
Deductible Credit 
0.85 
New Home Discount 
20% 
Claims-Free Discount 
10% 
Multi-Policy Discount 
0% 
Increased Jewelry Coverage Rate 
$35 
Increased Liability/Medical Coverage Rate  
$25 
Expense Fee 
$50 
 
The rating algorithm from the rating manual can be applied to calculate the final premium for the policy:   
$501 = $500 x 1.04 x 1.10 x 1.15 x 1.00 x 0.85 x [1.0 - 0.20 - 0.10] x [1.0 - 0] + $35 + $25 + $50. 
MEDICAL MALPRACTICE RATING MANUAL EXAMPLE 
Rating algorithms for commercial lines policies can also vary significantly based on the insurer and the 
line of business.  Medical malpractice insurance is a type of professional liability policy that provides 
coverage to healthcare professionals in the event of a malpractice claim.   
The following is a simplified example of a rating algorithm for a medical malpractice policy issued by 
WGIC for its Nurses Professional Liability program.  WGIC’s rating manual can be used to calculate the 
premium.  The following are excerpts from WGIC’s medical malpractice rating manual. 
Base Rates 
The exposure base for medical malpractice insurance is a medical professional insured for one year.  The 
following table in Wicked Good’s rating manual shows the base rates for annual medical malpractice 
coverage for its nurses program.  WGIC’s base rates vary depending on whether the professional is 
employed or operates his or her own practice. 
2.14 Base Rates 
  
Annual Rate Per 
Nurse 
Employed 
$2,500 
Self-Employed 
$3,000 
 
As shown in Table 2.14, the base rate for a self-employed nurse is higher than the base rate for an 
employed nurse. 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
24 
 
Rating and Underwriting Characteristics 
Specialty Factor 
The policy premium varies based on the medical specialty.  A low-risk specialty requires a lower 
premium than a high-risk specialty due to the lower likelihood of incurring a loss and the decreased 
severity of potential losses.  Wicked Good varies the malpractice premium based on the specialties shown 
in Table 2.15. 
2.15 Specialty Rating Table 
Specialty 
Rate 
Relativity 
Psychiatric 
0.80 
Family Practice 
1.00 
Pediatrics 
1.10 
Obstetrics 
1.30 
All Other Specialties 
1.05 
 
Nurses practicing in obstetrics have the highest rate relativity due to their higher exposure to loss. 
Part‐time Status 
By rule, professionals who work 20 hours or less per week are considered part-time professionals.  For all 
part-time professionals, Wicked Good has determined that the rate should be 50% of the base rate shown 
in Table 2.16.  
2.16 Part-time Rating Table 
  
Rate Relativity 
Full-time 
1.00 
Part-time 
0.50 
Territory 
Wicked Good varies the rate based on the location of the medical professional’s practice.  Table 2.17 
shows the rate relativities that apply to the base rate to calculate the rate for a nurse in a specific territory. 
   2.17 Territory Rating Table 
Territory 
Rate Relativity 
1 
0.80 
2 
1.00 
3 
1.25 
4 
1.50 
Claims‐free Discount 
Individual insureds who have been a policyholder with WGIC for at least three consecutive years 
immediately preceding the effective date of the current policy may qualify for a claims-free discount.  To 
qualify for the claims-free discount, the individual insured cannot have cumulative reported losses in 
excess of $5,000 over the prior three years.  The amount of the claims-free discount is 15%. 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
25 
 
Schedule Rating 
Many commercial lines insurers incorporate a schedule rating plan into their rating algorithms to adjust 
the rate based on additional specific objective criteria or the underwriter’s judgment.  Typically, this 
adjustment is applied to the manual rate, which is the rate calculated based on the rate tables and factors 
in the manual. An underwriter will credit (i.e., reduce the manual rate) for characteristics that reduce the 
exposure to loss and debit (i.e., increase the manual rate) for characteristics that increase the exposure to 
loss.   
WGIC’s schedule rating plan includes the following credits and debits. 
A. Continuing Education – A credit of up to 25% for attendance at approved continuing 
education courses and seminars.  The total hours spent at courses and seminars must be at 
least 15 hours in the prior 12 months.  
B. Procedure – A debit of up to 25% for nurses who have professional licenses and/or scope of 
practice in high-risk exposure areas such as invasive surgery or pediatric care. 
C. Workplace Setting – A debit of up to 25% for nurses that work in high-risk workplace 
settings, such as surgical centers and nursing homes. 
 
Wicked Good also applies a maximum aggregate schedule rating credit or debit of 25%. 
Limit Factors 
The insured applying for coverage can choose different limits of coverage.  WGIC offers different per 
claim and annual aggregate limits for its Nurse’s Professional Liability program.  The per claim limit is 
the total amount the insurer will pay for all losses from a single claim covered during the policy period.  
The annual aggregate limit is the total amount the insurer will pay annually for all events covered in the 
policy period.  The limit options are often expressed in the rating manual as split limits (e.g., 
$100K/$300K implies $100K per claim and $300K annual aggregate).  The following are the relativities 
corresponding to each limit option: 
 
   2.18 Limit Rating Table 
 Limit Option 
Rate Relativity 
$100K/$300K 
0.60 
$500K/$1M 
0.80 
$1M/$3M 
1.00 
$2M/$4M 
1.15 
 
Since defense costs can be a significant expense in a medical malpractice claim, companies may choose 
to issue policies that specifically include or exclude loss adjustment expenses in consideration of the 
policy limit.  If the allocated loss adjustment expenses are included in the limit, then the total liability 
losses and allocated loss adjustment expenses paid by the insurer will not exceed the limit.  In this 
example, WGIC pays all such adjustment costs in addition to the limit shown. 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
26 
 
Deductible 
The insured can choose to have a deductible to reduce the professional liability premium.  The deductible 
represents the amount of each covered loss the insured must pay.  The following table shows the 
deductible options available and the associated credit. 
   2.19 Deductible Rating Table 
Deductible  
(Per Claim) 
Credit 
None 
0% 
$1,000 
5% 
$5,000 
8% 
Claims‐made Factor 
WGIC writes claims-made medical malpractice policies as opposed to occurrence policies.  The major 
difference between claims-made and occurrence coverage is that the coverage trigger is the date the claim 
is reported rather than the date the event occurs.  A policyholder who buys a claims-made policy for the 
first time is only offered coverage for claims occurring after the start of the policy and reported during the 
year.  When the claims-made policy is renewed, coverage is provided for claims occurring after the 
original inception date and reported during the policy period.  The claims-made maturity factors (also 
known as step factors) adjust the premium to recognize these coverage differences.  In addition, extended 
reporting coverage covers claims that occur during the coverage period but are reported after the policy 
terminates.  This coverage is generally purchased before a claims-made policy is going to terminate.  For 
example, a doctor who retires may purchase extended reporting coverage to cover claims reported after 
the medical malpractice policy terminates.  The additional premium for this coverage is calculated by 
applying the extended reporting factors to the otherwise applicable mature policy premium according to 
the years of prior claims-made coverage.  More detail on claims-made coverage is provided in 
Chapter 16. 
WGIC’s table of claims-made factors and extended reporting factors are as follows: 
2.20A Claims-Made Maturity Factors 
Maturity 
Factor 
1st Year 
0.200 
2nd Year 
0.400 
3rd Year 
0.800 
4th Year 
0.900 
5th Year 
0.950 
6th Year 
0.975 
Mature 
1.000 
 
2.20B Extended Reporting Factors 
Years of Prior Claims-made Coverage 
Factor 
12 Month 
0.940 
24 Month 
1.700 
36 Month 
2.000 
48 Month 
2.250 
60 Month 
2.400 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
27 
 
Group Credit 
Wicked Good offers a discount for medical practices that insure more than one nurse under one policy, 
such as a group practice.  The size of the credit depends on the number of nurses that are insured under 
the policy.  The credits are as follows: 
  2.21 Group Credit 
Number of 
Nurses 
Credit  
1 
0% 
2 – 14 
5% 
15+ 
10% 
 
The final premium including the group credit should be calculated for each nurse and aggregated for all 
professionals to determine the premium for the group policy.  
Minimum Premium 
The rating manual specifies that the minimum premium for each nurse, after the application of all 
discounts, is $100. 
Medical Malpractice Rating Algorithm for WGIC 
The rating algorithm specifies that the rating variables in the rating manual are to be applied 
multiplicatively, not additively, in consecutive order.  Also according to the manual, premium is rounded 
to the nearest penny after each step and to the nearest dollar amount at the end to determine the final 
premium per professional.  The rating algorithm is as follows: 
 
Total Premium per Professional = Higher of  
(Base Rate per Nurse 
 
x Specialty Relativity 
x Part-time Status Relativity 
x Territory Relativity 
x (1.0 - Claims-free Discount)   
x (1.0 +/- Schedule Rating Debit/Credit)  
x Limit Relativity 
x (1.0 - Deductible Credit) 
x Claims-made Factor 
x (1.0 - Group Credit )) 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
28 
 
 
 
      
 
         and  
Minimum Premium specified in the rating manual ($100  
for WGIC). 
The total premium for a policy with multiple professionals is the sum of the premium for the individual 
professionals on the policy.   
Medical Malpractice Rate Calculation Example for WGIC 
A practice of five nurses recently applied for medical malpractice coverage with WGIC.  Wicked Good’s 
quoted premium is $6,500 for a single policy covering the five professionals, after the application of all 
adjustments.  The practice has recently added a psychiatric nurse, and has requested a new quote from 
WGIC to cover all six professionals on a single policy.  Assume the following characteristics:  
 
The new nurse is an employed professional who works 15 hours per week. 
 
He was previously covered by an occurrence policy and is applying for a claims-made policy 
with WGIC. 
 
He practices in Wicked Good’s Territory 3. 
 
He attended five hours of approved continuing education courses in the prior 12 months. 
 
He holds a professional license in senior care, which is considered high risk.  He also works in a 
senior care facility.  The underwriter has chosen to apply debits of 25% for each of these criteria, 
but the maximum aggregate debit allowable is 25%. 
 
The policy has $1M/$3M of coverage with a $1,000 deductible per claim. 
 
The following rating tables from Wicked Good’s rating manual can be used to calculate the premium that 
should be charged for this policy: 
           2.22 Entries from Rating Manual 
Entries from Rating Manual 
Employed Annual Rate 
$2,500 
Specialty Relativity 
0.80 
Part-time Status Relativity 
0.50 
Territory 3 Relativity 
1.25 
Schedule Rating (subject to 25% maximum) 
0%+25%+25% (capped at 25%) 
Limit Relativity for $1M/$3M 
1.00 
Credit for $1000 Deductible 
5% 
Claims-made Factor 
0.20 
Group Credit 
5% 
Minimum Premium 
$100 
 
As per the rating algorithm from the rating manual, the premium for the individual nurse is calculated as 
follows: 
$282 = $2,500 x 0.80 x 0.50 x 1.25 x [1.00 + 0.25] x 1.00 x [1.00 - 0.05] x 0.20 x [1.00 - 0.05]. 
This amount is above the minimum premium per nurse of $100 so the minimum premium does not apply.  
The total premium for the six individuals combined is as follows: 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
29 
 
$6,782 = $6,500 + $282. 
U.S. WORKERS COMPENSATION RATING MANUAL EXAMPLE 
Workers compensation insurance is required for most U.S. employers5 to indemnify employees who are 
injured on the job.  Because employee welfare is so important, workers compensation is a heavily 
regulated line of business in every U.S. state.  As part of the regulation, insurers are required to submit 
statistical information on worker’s compensation losses and premium in significant detail.  The National 
Council on Compensation Insurance (NCCI) is a U.S. organization that collects workers compensation 
data from insurers and aggregates the data for ratemaking purposes.  The NCCI is the licensed rating and 
statistical organization for most states, but several states have independent bureaus or operate as 
monopolistic plans.  The NCCI provides workers compensation insurers with loss cost estimates, which is 
the portion of the rates that covers the expected future losses and loss adjustment expenses for a policy.  
Workers compensation insurers must calculate their own rates by adjusting the NCCI loss costs to 
account for their underwriting expenses and any perceived difference in loss potential.   
The end result of the workers compensation ratemaking analysis is a rate manual, showing the manual 
premium for each risk.  The premium actually collected by the insurer is referred to as net premium, and 
it incorporates the manual rates, premium discounts, individual risk rating modifications (e.g., schedule 
rating, experience rating), and expense constants.   
WGIC writes workers compensation insurance for small companies with 50 employees or less.  It relies 
heavily on NCCI for the overall loss costs as well as for many of the rating tables, but is able to determine 
the expense provision needed to profitably write the business.     
The following is a simple premium calculation example for a U.S. workers compensation policy. 
Class Rate 
The purpose of the classification system is to group employers with similar operations that have a similar 
exposure to loss based on the job duties performed by the employees.  There are over 400 different 
classes recognized by the NCCI for which they collect data.  Table 2.23 shows the class rates applicable 
for a specific operation (in this case, retirement living centers) that Wicked Good writes.  These class 
rates are based on the NCCI class rates, adjusted for WGIC’s expenses and perceived differences in loss 
potential.  
                                             2.23 Class Rates 
Class 
Rate per 
$100 of 
Payroll 
8810-Clerical 
0.49 
8825-Food Service Employees 
2.77 
8824-Health Care Employees 
3.99 
8826-All Other Employees 
3.79 
 
                                                     
5 Workers compensation eligibility requirements vary by state. 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
30 
 
The process of calculating a premium begins with determining which classes best describe the activities 
of the company seeking insurance.  Then, with data obtained for the prospective insured, Wicked Good 
estimates the amount of exposure ($100s of payroll) expected for each class during the policy period.  The 
premium for the class is determined by applying the rate per $100 of payroll from Table 2.23 to the 
estimated payroll for each class.  These results are aggregated across all classes for which the prospective 
insured has exposures, and the resulting premium is called the manual premium. 
Rating and Underwriting Characteristics 
Experience Rating  
Under manual rating, all insureds are grouped according to their business operation or classification.  The 
manual rates are averages reflecting the usual conditions found in each class.  Although each class 
contains similar risks, each risk within a class is different to some extent.  Experience rating is designed to 
reflect these differences in loss potential. 
Experience rating generally only applies for larger policies, which inherently are believed to have more 
stable loss experience.  In fact, NCCI designates minimum aggregate manual premium for a company to 
be eligible for experience rating.  Additionally, regulators mandate that experience rating be used if the 
employer meets the industry eligibility requirements.   
When experience rating is used, the insurer compares the policy’s prior loss experience to the expected 
statewide average for the same classes.  The manual premium will be adjusted upward if the actual losses 
for the company are higher than expected and downward if the actual losses are lower than expected.  The 
adjustment is referred to as the experience modification.  More detail on experience rating is contained in 
Chapter 15. 
Since WGIC only insures small companies, experience rating is not applicable to its insureds. 
Schedule Rating 
As described earlier for medical malpractice, schedule rating specifies a range of credits and debits that an 
underwriter can apply to modify the manual premium.  While some schedule rating schemes are very 
objective, WGIC has a set of potential credits and debits that require the underwriter to apply judgment in 
the underwriting process.  The underwriter uses judgment based on professional experience and internal 
guidelines to select a value between the maximum and minimum for each attribute.  The following table 
shows the range of schedule credits and debits that Wicked Good’s underwriters can apply: 
         2.24 Schedule Rating 
Range of Modification 
Premises 
Classification 
Peculiarities 
Medical 
Facilities 
Safety 
Devices 
Employees —
Selection, 
Training, 
Supervision 
Management —
Safety 
Organization 
+/-10% 
+/-10% 
+/-5%  
-5% - 0% 
+/-10%  
+/-5%  
 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
31 
 
The overall maximum credit or debit that an underwriter can apply to a single policy is 25%.  The policy 
must have an annual manual premium of at least $1,000 to qualify for schedule rating.  
Premium Credits 
Wicked Good offers various additional premium credits to its insureds for other factors that may reduce 
the risk of a workers compensation claim or limit the cost of a claim once an injury has occurred.    
            2.25 Premium Credits 
Factor 
Credit 
Pre-employment Drug Screening 
5% 
Employee Assistance Program 
10% 
Return-to-Work Program 
5% 
 
These credits are not subject to any overall maximum credit. 
Expenses 
Expense Constant 
Insurers may add a fixed fee to all policies to cover expenses common to all workers compensation 
policies.  This fee, often referred to as an expense constant, does not vary by policy size and covers 
expenses that are not included in the manual rate. 
Wicked Good’s expense constant is $150 per policy. 
Premium Discount 
The manual rate includes an allowance for administrative expenses that vary with the size of the policy.  
Not all expenses increase uniformly as the premium increases; for example, a company with $200,000 of 
payroll may not generate twice the administrative expenses for the insurer as a $100,000 payroll insured.  
To adjust for this expense savings, workers compensation insurers reduce the premium for large insureds 
through the use of premium discounts.   
Since Wicked Good only writes policies for small companies, it does not offer premium discounts. 
Minimum Premium 
The workers compensation rating manual specifies that the minimum premium for any policy is $1,500. 
 
 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
32 
 
Workers Compensation Rating Algorithm for WGIC 
The components of the rating manual can be combined using a single rating algorithm to calculate the 
final premium for a given policy. 
Total Premium = Higher of  
[
classes
 
of
number 
 
 
 where
)
100
/
class
for 
 
$Payroll
 x 
rate
Class
1



N
(
i
N
i
i
 
x (1.0+ Schedule Rating Factor)  
x (1.0- Pre-Employment Drug Screening Credit) 
x (1.0- Employee Assistance Program Credit) 
x (1.0- Return-to-Work Program Credit) 
+ Expense Constant] 
 
 
     and  
Minimum Premium specified in the rating manual ($1,500 in this  
example).  
Also according to the manual, premium is rounded to the nearest penny after each step and to the nearest 
dollar amount at the end to determine the total premium.  Note that experience rating factors and premium 
discounts do not appear in Wicked Good Company’s rating algorithm because these rating variables do 
not apply to its book of business.   
Workers Compensation Rate Calculation Example for WGIC 
A retirement living center has requested a quote.  The following are characteristics of the retirement 
living center: 
    2.26 Payroll by Class 
Class 
Payroll 
8810 – Clerical 
$35,000  
8825 - Food Service Employees 
$75,000  
8824 - Health Care Employees 
$100,000  
8826 - All Other Employees & Salespersons, Drivers 
$25,000  
 
 
The center has trained its entire staff in first aid, and first aid equipment is available throughout 
the building. 
 
The center has been inspected by Wicked Good, and the premises are clean and well-maintained. 
 
The center requires all employees to be drug-tested prior to employment. 
 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
33 
 
The first step in determining the premium is to compute the aggregate manual premium.  The following 
table shows the computation of the manual premium for each class: 
2.27 Manual Premium by Class 
Class 
Payroll 
Payroll/$100 
Rate per $100 of 
Payroll 
Class Manual 
Premium 
8810  Clerical 
$35,000 
   $350 
0.49 
   $171.50 
8825 - Food Service Employees 
$75,000 
   $750 
2.77 
$2,077.50 
8824 - Health Care Employees 
$100,000 
$1,000 
3.99 
$3,990.00 
8826 - All Other Employees 
$25,000 
   $250 
3.79 
   $947.50 
Total 
$235,000 
 
 
$7,186.50 
 
The manual premium for each class is calculated as the payroll divided by $100 multiplied by the 
applicable rate per $100 of payroll.  The total manual premium for the policy is the sum of the manual 
premium for each class: 
$7,186.50 = $171.50 + $2,077.50 + $3,990.00 + $947.50. 
The underwriter has determined that the following credits should apply based on the retirement living 
center’s characteristics: 
        2.28 Schedule Rating Modifications 
Modification 
Premises 
Classification 
Peculiarities 
Medical 
Facilities 
Safety 
Devices 
Employees —
Selection, 
Training, 
Supervision 
Management 
—Safety 
Organization 
-10%  
0% 
0% 
-2.5%  
-5% 
0% 
 
The total credit (i.e., reduction to manual premium) for schedule rating is 10% + 2.5% + 5% = 17.5%.  
The credit takes into account the first aid equipment, staff training, and cleanliness of the premises.  The 
credit is less than the maximum allowable credit of 25%; therefore, the entire 17.5% credit is applied to 
the manual premium.  The schedule rating factor that should be applied to the manual premium is: 
0.825 =1.000 - 0.175. 
The following other factors apply to the policy: 
                                     2.29 Entries from Wicked Good’s Rating Manual 
Entries from Rating Manual 
Pre-employment Drug Screening Credit 
5% 
Employee Assistance Program Credit 
0% 
Return-to-Work Program Credit 
0% 
Expense Constant 
$150 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
34 
 
The Employee Assistance Program credit and Return-to-Work credit do not apply to the policy because 
the center does not have those programs.  The following is the total premium for the policy: 
$5,782 = $7,186.50 x 0.825 x (1.0 - 0.05) x (1.0 - 0) x (1.0 - 0) + $150. 
Since $5,782 is greater than the minimum premium per policy of $1,500, the total premium for the policy 
is $5,782. 
SUMMARY 
The rating manual is an aid for anyone who needs to understand the process of calculating an insurance 
premium.  For most lines of business, the manual includes the rules, rate pages, rating algorithm, and 
possibly the underwriting guidelines.   
The rules contain items such as key definitions and summaries of what the contract covers, instructions on 
how to classify risks for premium rating, and information on optional coverages.  Rules may also contain 
underwriting guidelines, or these may be provided separately. 
The rate pages generally contain the numerical inputs needed to calculate the premium.  These include 
base rates, rating tables, and fees.   
The rating algorithm is the precise mathematical expression of how to calculate the premium using the 
inputs from the rate pages. 
Underwriting guidelines document company-specific rules around risk selection, risk placement, and 
additional premium adjustments from underwriting characteristics.  Underwriting guidelines are typically 
not part of the rating manual (and therefore not publicly available) unless required by statute. 
 
 

Chapter 2:  Rating Manuals 
 
35 
 
KEY CONCEPTS IN CHAPTER 2 
 
1. Basic components of a rate manual 
a. Rules 
b. Rate pages 
c. Rating algorithm 
d. Underwriting guidelines  
 
2. Simple rating examples 
a. Homeowners 
b. Medical malpractice 
c. U.S. workers compensation 
 
