Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
170 
 
CHAPTER 10:  MULTIVARIATE CLASSIFICATION 
As discussed in the previous chapter, classification ratemaking allows the insurer to price individual risks 
more equitably by analyzing the loss experience of groups of similar risks.  This protects the insurer 
against adverse selection, which can lead to unsatisfactory profits and loss in market share.  Effective 
classification ratemaking may provide insurers with a competitive advantage and may help expand the 
profile of risks the insurer is willing and able to write profitably. 
This chapter begins with a review of the shortcomings of the one-way classification ratemaking 
approaches outlined in the previous chapter.  It then discusses the advancement of iteratively standardized 
one-way approaches, such as the minimum bias procedures, which address some of the shortcomings of 
one-way approaches.  Much of this chapter is dedicated to the use of multivariate approaches, including: 
 
Circumstances that led to their adoption in classification ratemaking 
 
The overall benefits of multivariate approaches 
 
A basic explanation of the mathematical foundation of one particular multivariate method, 
generalized linear models (GLMs)  
 
A sample of GLM output 
 
Examples of statistical diagnostics associated with GLMs 
 
Finally, this chapter concludes with a brief discussion of practical considerations and two developments 
that have augmented multivariate analysis in the context of classification ratemaking:  data mining 
techniques and the use of external data sources. 
A REVIEW OF THE SHORTCOMINGS OF UNIVARIATE METHODS 
The previous chapter reviewed one-way, or univariate, approaches to classification ratemaking whereby 
the loss experience (either pure premium or loss ratio) of the levels within each rating variable is 
examined and compared in order to establish rate differentials to the base level.   
The shortcomings of univariate approaches were also discussed—the primary one being that they do not 
accurately take into account the effect of other rating variables.  The pure premium approach does not 
consider exposure correlations with other rating variables.  If the rating algorithm only contained a 
handful of rating variables, this shortcoming could be mitigated with two-way analysis or some manual 
adjustments.  Today, however, actuaries working on many lines of business are analyzing tens or 
hundreds of variables that make manual adjustment inefficient if not impossible.   
As an illustrative example of the distortion created with univariate methods, a one-way pure premium 
analysis may show for a personal auto insurance book of business that older cars have high claims 
experience relative to newer cars.  In reality, however, this analysis is distorted by the fact that older cars 
tend to be driven by younger drivers—who tend to have high claims experience.  The experience for both 
young drivers and old cars looks unfavorable despite the fact that this may be driven primarily by the 
youthful driver effect.   

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
171 
 
Conducting a loss ratio analysis adjusts for an uneven mix of business to the extent the premium varies 
with risk, but current premium is only an approximation as it most often deviates from true loss cost 
differentials.  Similarly, the adjusted pure premium approach attempts to standardize data for the uneven 
mix of business by multiplying exposures by the exposure-weighted average of all other rating variables’ 
relativities before calculating the one-way relativities.  Again, this is merely an approximation to a proper 
reflection of all exposure correlations. 
MINIMUM BIAS PROCEDURES 
Another classification ratemaking approach that was popular during the latter half of the 20th century is 
the family of minimum bias procedures.  Essentially these are iteratively standardized univariate 
approaches.  Each procedure involves the selection of a rating structure (e.g., additive, multiplicative or 
combined) and the selection of a bias function (e.g., balance principle, least squares, χ2, and maximum 
likelihood bias functions).  The bias function is a means of comparing the procedure’s observed loss 
statistics (e.g., loss costs) to indicated loss statistics and measuring the mismatch.  Both sides of this 
equation must be weighted by the exposures in each cell to adjust for an uneven mix of business.  The 
term “minimum bias” refers to the commonly used balance principle that requires that the sum of the 
indicated weighted pure premiums equals the sum of the weighted observed loss costs for every level of 
every rating variable.  This is referred to as “minimizing the bias” along the dimensions of the 
classification system.   
A simple example of the balance principle applied to a multiplicative personal auto rating structure is 
outlined below.  This example assumes only two rating variables:  gender and territory.  Gender has 
values male (with a rate relativity expressed as g1) and female (g2).  Territory has values urban (t1) and 
rural (t2).  The base levels, relative to which all multiplicative indications will be expressed, are female 
and rural (hence g2 = 1.00 and t2 = 1.00).  The actual loss costs (or pure premiums) are as follows: 
 
Urban 
Rural 
Total 
Male 
$650 
$300 
$528 
Female 
$250 
$240 
$244 
Total 
$497 
$267 
$400 
The exposure distribution is as follows: 
 
Urban 
Rural 
Total 
Male 
170 
90 
260 
Female 
105 
110 
215 
Total 
275 
200 
475 
As stated previously, the balance principle requires that the exposure-weighted observed loss costs equal 
the indicated exposure-weighted loss cost across every dimension of each rating variable (i.e., each 
gender and each territory).  The following four equations show the observed weighted loss costs on the 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
172 
 
left and the indicated weighted loss costs (represented as the product of the base rate, the exposure, and 
the indicated relativities) on the right.  The base rate is assumed to be $100. 
Males 
 
170 x $650 +   90 x $300 = $100 x 170 x g1 x t1 + $100 x   90 x g1 x t2. 
Females 
105 x $250 + 110 x $240 = $100 x 105 x g2 x t1 + $100 x 110 x g2 x t2. 
Urban 
 
170 x $650 + 105 x $250 = $100 x 170 x g1 x t1 + $100 x 105 x g2 x t1. 
Rural 
 
  90 x $300 + 110 x $240 = $100 x   90 x g1 x t2 + $100 x 110 x g2 x t2. 
These equations are not linearly independent; consequently, there is no closed form solution.  In order to 
solve for one variable’s unknowns, initial (seed) relativities for the other rating variable are chosen.  
Generally a sensible seed is the univariate pure premium relativities.  Hence, the urban relativity is the 
total urban loss costs divided by the total rural loss costs: 
t1 = 1.86 = ($497 / $267) 
t2 = 1.00. 
Substituting these seed values into the first two equations above, we are able to solve for the first values 
of g1 and g2: 
170 x $650 + 90 x $300 = ($100 x 170 x g1 x 1.86) + ($100 x 90 x g1 x 1.00) 
$137,500 = ($31,620 x g1) + ($9,000 x g1) 
$137,500 = $40,620 x g1 
g1 = 3.39. 
 
105 x $250 + 110 x $240 = ($100 x 105 x g2 x 1.86) + ($100 x 110 x g2 x 1.00) 
$52,650 = ($19,530 x g2) + ($11,000 x g2) 
$52,650 = $30,530 x g2 
g2 = 1.72. 
We can now use these seed values for gender, g1 and g2, and set up equations to solve for the new 
intermediate values of t1 and t2: 
170 x $650 + 105 x $250 = ($100 x 170 x 3.39 x t1) + ($100 x 105 x 1.72 x t1) 
$136,750 = ($57,630 x t1) + (18,060 x t1) 
$136,750 = $75,690 x t1 
t1 = 1.81. 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
173 
 
 
90 x $300 + 110 x $240 = ($100 x 90 x 3.39 x t2) + ($100 x 110 x 1.72 x t2) 
$53,400 = ($30,510 x t2) + ($18,920 x t2) 
$53,400 =$49,430 x t2 
t2 = 1.08. 
This same procedure is repeated, each time discarding the previous relativities and solving for new ones.  
The procedure is iterated until there is no material change in any of the values of g1, g2, t1, and t2.  Upon 
such convergence, it is common practice to normalize the base class relativities to 1.00.  For example, 
assume the relativities derived above represent the final iteration.  Normalizing the base class relativities 
to 1.00 would result in: 
g1 = 3.39 / 1.72 = 1.97 
g2 = 1.72 / 1.72 = 1.00 
 
t1 = 1.81 / 1.08 = 1.68 
t2 = 1.08 / 1.08 = 1.00. 
Recall from above that the univariate relativity for t1 was 1.86 (this was used to seed the initial value of t1 
in the minimum bias equations).  After one iteration of the minimum bias method, the replacement value 
for t1 is 1.68.  The minimum bias result reflects the fact that the cell for urban males has considerably 
more exposure than the other cells; consequently, the experience in that cell is given more weight. 
Finally, the base loss cost also needs to be adjusted to reflect the normalization: 
Base loss cost = $100 x 1.72 x 1.08 = $185.76. 
Now the reader should better understand the phrase iteratively standardized one-ways.  The method 
outlined above involves performing several iterations of univariate analysis on rating variables, each time 
adjusting for the exposure weight and the indication of the previous variable in the sequence.  Note that 
the simple example outlined above only considers one of the minimum bias methods (multiplicative 
structure with balance principle) using the pure premium statistic.  In addition, it considers only two 
rating variables each with two levels.  The computation required to incorporate several rating variables 
requires at the very least some spreadsheet programming.  Several papers have been authored on the 
various minimum bias procedures.  Detailed, intuitive explanations with simple illustrative examples are 
contained in “The Minimum Bias Procedures:  A Practitioner’s Guide” (Feldblum and Brosius 2002, pp. 
591-684).  Sequential analysis, a method related to minimum bias, may also be of interest to the 
ratemaking actuary.  It is currently mandated as the only classification ratemaking method allowed for 
pricing voluntary private passenger automobile insurance in the state of California.  In sequential analysis, 
the actuary performs a standard one-way analysis on the first variable selected to determine the indicated 
relativities.  The exposures are adjusted for the results of the first variable’s analysis (i.e., the adjusted 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
174 
 
one-way pure premium approach), and the indicated relativities are calculated for the second variable.  
This continues until the actuary has calculated the indicated relativities for every variable.  Sequential 
analysis involves making only one pass through the sequence of chosen rating variables (rather than 
iterating until convergence is achieved).  The main criticism of the non-iterative sequential approach is 
that it does not have a closed form solution; the results vary depending on the order of the rating variables 
in the sequence.  There is considerably more detail to the sequential analysis mandated in California, and 
the ratemaking actuary should seek additional references if working in that market. 
THE ADOPTION OF MULTIVARIATE METHODS 
The minimum bias procedures are not technically multivariate methods, and they were not necessarily 
based directly on statistical theory.  However, many of the minimum bias procedures are actually a subset 
of the statistical method, generalized linear models (GLMs).  In fact, iterating the minimum bias 
procedure a sufficient number of times may result in convergence with GLM results, though many would 
argue the minimum bias procedures involve less computational efficiency.  Stephen Mildenhall’s paper, 
“A Systematic Relationship between Minimum Bias and Generalized Linear Models” (Mildenhall 1999) 
demonstrates that many of the minimum bias procedures correspond directly to generalized linear models. 
Several things happened around the late 20th century and start of the 21st century that led to the adoption 
of statistical techniques, particularly generalized linear models, for classification ratemaking.  First, 
computing power greatly increased.  Data no longer had to be aggregated in order to be analyzed.  What 
previously was only achievable by large mainframe machines was now being accomplished by desktop 
PCs in a fraction of the time.  Second, insurers were instituting data warehouse initiatives that greatly 
improved the granularity and accessibility of data that could be analyzed for ratemaking purposes.  So 
despite the fact that sophisticated statistical techniques existed much earlier than this, it was the 
circumstances of enhanced computing power and better data that enabled their usage in classification 
ratemaking.  A final and perhaps the most important trigger in the widespread adoption of multivariate 
methods was competitive pressure.  As explained in the last chapter, when one or more companies 
implement improved classification ratemaking, they gain a competitive advantage and put the rest of the 
industry in a position of adverse selection and decreased profitability.  This occurred in the U.K. personal 
lines markets in the 1990s and in the U.S. personal auto markets in the early 2000s. 
THE BENEFITS OF MULTIVARIATE METHODS 
The main benefit of multivariate methods is that they consider all rating variables simultaneously and 
automatically adjust for exposure correlations between rating variables, which should now be understood 
as the primary shortcoming of univariate approaches.  Later in this chapter a graphical example (Figure 
10.1) shows a disparity in results between the univariate method and a particular multivariate method, 
when rating variables are correlated. 
Secondly, multivariate methods attempt to remove unsystematic effects in the data (also known as noise) 
and capture only the systematic effects (also known as signal) as much as possible.  This is not the case 
with univariate methods, which include both signal and noise in the results.  

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
175 
 
Third, many multivariate methods produce model diagnostics, additional information about the certainty 
of results and the appropriateness of the model fitted.  Statistical assumptions and model diagnostics will 
be discussed in more detail later in this chapter. 
A fourth benefit of multivariate methods is that they allow consideration of the interaction, or 
interdependency, between two or more rating variables.  Interactions occur when the effect of one 
variable varies according to the levels of another (e.g., the effect of square footage varies across different 
levels of amount of insurance).  Interactions are an important refinement to multivariate models that can 
improve the predictive value.  They also complicate the model and should therefore be analyzed with an 
eye for business considerations (e.g., ease of understanding and monitoring results). 
As a side note, it is important not to confuse interaction (sometimes referred to as response correlation) 
with exposure correlation, which describes a relationship between the exposures of one rating variable 
and another.  Gender exposures may be uniformly distributed across age (meaning at any age there is an 
identical distribution of men and women and no exposure correlation exists), but the two variables may 
interact if the loss experience for men relative to women  is distinctly different at the youthful ages than at 
the middle and senior ages.  Conversely, a variable’s exposures may be unevenly distributed across the 
levels of another rating variable (i.e., exposure correlation exists), yet no interaction is present.  The other 
scenarios of both exposure correlation and interaction being present or neither being present are less 
confusing. 
Other potential benefits vary considerably among the different types of multivariate methods.  For 
example, GLMs, which will be discussed later in this chapter, are widely accepted as a classification 
ratemaking method.  One of the main advantages of GLMs is that they are transparent; the model output 
includes parameter estimates for each level of each explanatory variable in the model, as well as a range 
of statistical diagnostics.  Other multivariate techniques, such as neural networks (also discussed briefly 
later in this chapter) are often criticized for a lack of transparency.  No matter how sophisticated the 
mathematics underlying a method, it is important for practitioners to be able to follow and communicate 
how the results were developed and be able to translate the results into something that can be 
implemented in the insurance company’s operations.   
So how do the methods mentioned thus far stack up to this list of benefits?  As discussed, the results of 
univariate approaches are distorted by distributional biases.  The results can also be heavily distorted by 
unsystematic effects (noise).  The result is a set of answers with no additional information about the 
certainty of the results.  Interactions can be incorporated but only by expanding the analysis into two-way 
or three-way tables.  Perhaps it scores high only in terms of transparency, but this is overshadowed by the 
inaccuracies of the method. 
In contrast, the minimum bias methods account for an uneven mix of business but, as stated previously, 
the iterative calculations are considered computationally inefficient.  As with one-way analysis, no 
diagnostics are included.  This method scores high on transparency and outperforms univariate analysis in 
terms of accuracy, but does not provide all of the benefits of full multivariate methods. 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
176 
 
GLMs  
The multivariate statistical technique that has quickly become the standard for classification ratemaking 
in many countries and for many lines of business is the generalized linear model, GLM.  This technique 
achieves each of the benefits of multivariate methods listed above.  Though less transparent than the 
cruder and less accurate univariate results, it still scores favorably in comparison to other multivariate 
methods such as neural networks.  Not only can the iterations of a GLM be tracked, but the output of a 
multiplicative GLM is a series of multipliers—much like the insurance industry is accustomed to using in 
rating algorithms and rating manuals. 
A Mathematical Foundation for GLMs:  Linear Models 
Though touted above as a relatively transparent method, many practitioners familiar with the traditional 
univariate approaches may not understand the statistical underpinnings of GLMs.  A good foundation for 
understanding GLMs is to first review linear models (LMs), something many actuaries may have studied 
in college coursework.  Both LMs and GLMs aim to express the relationship between an observed 
response variable (Y) and a number of explanatory variables, referred to as predictor variables.  For 
example, the response variable may be claim frequency for homeowners insurance, and the predictor 
variables may include amount of insurance, age of home, and deductible.  The observations in the data 
(e.g., claims on individual exposures) are considered a realization of the response variable. 
Linear models express the response variable (Y) as the sum of its mean (µ) and a random variable (ε), 
also known as the error term: 
ε.
μ
Y


 
They assume that the mean can be written as a linear combination of the predictor variables.  For 
example,  
ε,
)
X
β
X
β
X
β
X
 (β
Y 





4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
 
where X1, X2, X3, and X4 are each predictor variables, and β1, β2, β3, and β4 are the parameter estimates to 
be derived by the LM. 
Linear models also assume that the random variable, ε, is normally distributed with a mean of zero and 
constant variance, σ2.   
The aim of the linear model is to find the parameter estimates, which, when applied to the chosen model 
form, produce the observed data with the highest probability.  The function used to achieve this aim is 
usually the likelihood function (or equivalently the log-likelihood).  Maximum likelihood relies on linear 
algebra to solve a system of equations.  In practice, due to the high volume of observations in 
classification ratemaking datasets, numerical techniques such as multi-dimensional Newton-Raphson 
algorithms are employed.  These techniques find the maximum of a function by finding a zero in the 
function’s first derivative.  Also note that in the specific case of linear models, the likelihood function is 
equivalent to minimizing the sum of squared error between actual and indicated. 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
177 
 
Generalized Linear Models:  Loosening the Restrictions 
GLMs are a generalized version of linear models that remove the restrictions of the normality assumption 
and the constant variance.  They also allow a function, called the link function, to define the relationship 
between the expected response variable (e.g., claim severity) and the linear combination of the predictor 
variables (e.g., age of home, amount of insurance, etc.).  The choice of various link functions means the 
predictor variables do not have to relate strictly in an additive fashion (as they do with LMs).  For 
example, GLMs fit to insurance claims experience for ratemaking purposes often specify a log link 
function, which assumes the rating variables relate multiplicatively to one another.  There are other 
components of the GLM formularization (offset terms, prior weights) that are beyond the scope of this 
text. 
In order to solve a GLM, the modeler must: 
 
Supply a modeling dataset with a suitable number of observations of the response variable and 
associated predictor variables to be considered for modeling. 
 
Select a link function to define the relationship between the systematic and random components. 
 
Specify the distribution of the underlying random process, typically a member of the exponential 
family of distributions (e.g., normal, Poisson, gamma, binomial, inverse Gaussian33); this is done 
by specifying the mean and the variance of the distribution, the latter being a function of the 
mean. 
 
The maximum likelihood approach then maximizes the logarithm of the likelihood function and computes 
the predicted values for each variable. 
More comprehensive detail on the theory of GLMs is beyond the scope of this text, but may be found in 
Section 1 of “The Practitioner’s Guide to Generalized Linear Models” (Anderson , D. et al. 2005). 
SAMPLE GLM OUTPUT 
Unlike univariate analysis of claims experience that is typically performed on either loss ratios or loss 
costs, GLM analysis is typically performed on loss cost data (or preferably frequency and severity 
separately).  There are statistical and practical reasons supporting this practice: 
 
Modeling loss ratios requires premiums to be adjusted to current rate level at the granular level 
and that can be practically difficult.   
 
Experienced actuaries have an a priori expectation of frequency and severity patterns (e.g., 
youthful drivers have higher frequencies).  In contrast, the loss ratio patterns are dependent on 
the current rates.  Thus, the actuary can better distinguish the signal from the noise when building 
models. 
 
Loss ratio models become obsolete when rates and rating structures are changed. 
 
There is no commonly accepted distribution for modeling loss ratios. 
More details can be found about this in “GLM Basic Modeling: Avoiding Predictive Modeling Pitfalls” 
(Werner and Guven 2007, pp. 263-264).  Best practice also dictates that modeling be performed on a 
homogeneous body of claims.  For example, personal automobile models are generally performed at the 
                                                     
33 The Tweedie family of distributions is considered a special extension of the exponential family. 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
178 
 
coverage level but could even be more granular (e.g., subdividing comprehensive claims into theft and 
non-theft). 
A useful way to strengthen an understanding of GLMs is to view illustrative graphical output.  The 
following graph shows the effect of the rating variable vehicle symbol on claim frequency for the claim 
type personal auto collision.  This rating variable has seventeen discrete levels, and each level’s exposure 
count is represented by the yellow bars (the right y-axis).  Each symbol represents a group of vehicles that 
have been combined based on common characteristics (e.g., weight, number of cylinders, horsepower, 
cost).  Note that in addition to discrete variables (also known as categorical factors), GLMs can also 
accommodate numeric fields as continuous variables (referred to as variates).  Variates can take the form 
of polynomials or splines34 within GLMs. 
10.1 Effect of Vehicle Symbol on Automobile Collision Frequency 
 
This output is from a multiplicative model.  The base level, to which all other levels’ parameter estimates 
will be expressed relative, is vehicle symbol 4.  Consequently, its multiplicative differential is 1.00.  The 
base level is typically chosen as one with a fairly large, if not the largest, volume of exposure.  This 
ensures statistical diagnostics are expressed relative to something large and presumably stable.  The GLM 
output is shown as the green line with circle markers.  The GLM gives the statistical effect of vehicle 
symbol on collision frequency, all other variables being considered.  For example, the GLM indicates that 
vehicle symbol 10 has a 25% higher indicated collision frequency than vehicle symbol 4, all other 
                                                     
34 Splines are a series of polynomial functions with each function defined over a short interval. 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Exposure
One-way result
GLM Result

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
179 
 
variables being considered.  The pink line with the square markers on the graph represents the results of a 
univariate analysis.  The disparity suggests vehicle symbol is strongly correlated with another variable in 
the model (perhaps age of driver, prior accident experience, or some other variable), and the univariate 
results are distorted as discussed earlier. 
In a multivariate analysis, it is important to understand the phrase “all other variables being considered.”35  
The GLM results of one variable are only meaningful if the results for all other variables are considered at 
the same time.  So for example, the indicated relativity for vehicle symbol 10 discussed above will not be 
valid if the model is manipulated to remove or change other key predictor variables in the model.  
Consequently, the results of one variable are only valid if the results for all other key variables are also 
being used.  In other words, that indicated relativity for vehicle symbol 10 is dependent on the other 
relativities being considered.  Chapter 13 discusses how the company’s final rate relativities often deviate 
from the actuary’s indicated relativities for business reasons, but for now it is important to understand the 
statistical relevance of the comments above. 
A SAMPLE OF GLM DIAGNOSTICS 
Chapter 9 listed statistical significance as an important criterion for evaluating the appropriateness of 
rating variables.  A previous section of this chapter listed the statistical diagnostics to be a major benefit 
of GLMs.  These are tools that aid the modeler in understanding the certainty of the results and the 
appropriateness of the model.  Certain diagnostics can help determine if a predictive variable has a 
systematic effect on insurance losses (and should therefore be retained in the model).  Models should be 
refined until only such significant variables remain.  Other diagnostics assess the modeler’s assumptions 
around the link function and error term.  Diagnostics can be grounded in statistical theory or can be more 
practical in nature.  Examples of each will be given. 
One of the most common statistical diagnostics for deciding whether a variable has a systematic effect on 
losses is the standard errors calculation.  The mathematical concept is beyond the scope of this text, but 
“The Practitioner’s Guide to Generalized Linear Models” supplies a nice intuitive explanation:  “standard 
errors are an indicator of the speed with which the log-likelihood falls from the maximum given a change 
in parameter.”  Two standard errors from the parameter estimates are akin to a 95% confidence interval.  
This means the GLM parameter estimate is a point estimate, and the standard errors show the range in 
which the modeler can be 95% confident the true answer lies within.  The following graph is identical to 
the graph shown previously for vehicle symbol but now includes standard error lines for the non-base 
levels (i.e., +/- two standard errors from the differentials indicated by the GLM).  In this particular case, 
the upward pattern and narrow standard errors suggest this variable is statistically significant.  Wide 
standard errors, often straddling unity, might suggest the factor is detecting mostly noise and is worthy of 
elimination from the model.  In this example, symbol 17 shows wide standard errors, but that is mainly a 
function of the small volume present in that level.  It does not invalidate the strong results for symbols 1-
16, where most of the business volume exists.   
 
 
                                                     
35 This caveat may also be written as “all other variables being constant” or “all other variables at the base level.” 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
180 
 
10.2 Standard Errors for Effect of Vehicle Symbol on Automobile Collision Frequency 
 
Measures of deviance are an additional diagnostic to assess the statistical significance of a predictor 
variable.  Generally speaking, a deviance is a single figure measure of how much the fitted values differ 
from the observations.  Deviance tests are often used when comparing nested models (one is a subset of 
the other) to assess whether the additional variable(s) in the broader model are worth including.  The 
deviance of each model is scaled and the results are compared.  Statistical tests such as Chi-Square or F-
test are used to gauge the theoretical trade-off between the gain in accuracy by adding the variables versus 
the loss of parsimony in adding more parameter estimates to be solved.  Similarly, deviance tests such as 
Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) and BIC (Bayesian Information Criteria) can be applied to non-nested 
models. 
An example of a practical diagnostic in the modeling process is comparing the GLM results for individual 
years (assuming a multi-year dataset) to gauge consistency of results from one year to the next.36  The 
following graph shows the effect of vehicle symbol on automobile collision frequency separately for the 
two years present in the experience period.  The two lines show some random differences but in general 
the patterns are the same. 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
36 Consistency can also be tested on random subsets of data rather than individual years. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Exposure
GLM Prediction
GLM Prediction + 2 Standard Errors
GLM Prediction - 2 Standard Errors

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
181 
 
10.3 Consistency of Time for Vehicle Symbol 
 
In addition to reviewing these diagnostics for each factor, another best practice is to perform model 
validation techniques.  One such technique compares the expected outcome of the model with historical 
results on a hold-out sample of data (i.e., data that was not used in the development of the model so that it 
could be used to test the effectiveness of the model).  The extent to which the model results track closely 
to historical results for a large part of the portfolio is an indication of how well the model validates.  The 
following example output is a validation of a frequency model.  For most of the sample, the bands of 
expected frequencies from the GLM (ordered from lowest to highest) track very closely to the actual 
weighted frequency of each band in the hold-out sample of data.  The volatile results for the high 
expected frequency bands are a result of low volume of data. 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
2008
2009

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
182 
 
10.4 Model Validation 
 
Considerable disparity between actual and expected results on the hold-out sample may indicate that the 
model is over or under-fitting.  If the modeler retains variables in the model that reflect a non-systematic 
effect on the response variable (i.e., noise) or over-specifies the model with high order polynomials, the 
result is over-fitting.  Such a model will replicate the historical data very well (including the noise) but is 
not going to predict future outcomes reliably (as the future experience will most likely not have the same 
noise).  Conversely, if the model is missing important statistical effects (the extreme being a model that 
contains no explanatory variables and fits to the overall mean), the result is under-fitting.  This model will 
predict future outcomes (e.g., in the extreme case mentioned above, the future mean) reliably but hardly 
help the modeler explain what is driving the result. 
Appendix F includes additional examples and more details. 
 
 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Exposure
Weighted average frequency
Expected frequency from GLM
Exposure
Historical 
frequency
Expected 
frequency

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
183 
 
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
In practice, GLM routines are included in various commercial software packages, alleviating the burden 
of programming the underlying formulae and diagnostics.  This does not imply, however, that the 
ratemaking actuary’s role is at all diminished.  In fact, the use of such methods means the actuary should 
focus attention on areas such as: 
 
ensuring data is adequate for the level of detail of the classification ratemaking analysis (avoiding 
what is known as the GIGO principle:  Garbage In, Garbage Out) 
 
identifying when anomalous results dictate additional exploratory analysis 
 
reviewing model results in consideration of both statistical theory and business application 
 
developing appropriate methods to communicate model results in light of a company’s 
ratemaking objectives (e.g., policyholder dislocation, competitive position) 
 
This list is hardly exhaustive.  The nature of statistical modeling for classification ratemaking is such that 
more work can always be done.  The retrieval of data alone requires careful consideration of necessary 
volume of data; definition of homogeneous claim types; method of organization (e.g., policy year versus 
calendar-accident year); the treatment of midterm policy changes, large losses, underwriting changes 
during the experience period, and the effect of inflation and loss development.  Actuaries always have to 
balance stability and responsiveness as it relates to choice of experience period as well as to geographies 
to be included in the analysis (e.g., countrywide versus individual state analysis).  Most importantly, 
commercial considerations such as IT constraints, marketing objectives, and regulatory requirements have 
to be carefully incorporated into the statistical analysis before any results are implemented in practice.   
The ratemaking actuary is best served to have a solid background in the company’s data warehouses, to 
develop some understanding of statistical methods and diagnostics, and to work collaboratively with other 
professionals who have a solid understanding of the portfolio being analyzed.  The ratemaking actuary 
should also communicate effectively with various stakeholders and ensure that technical results are 
ultimately expressed in relation to the company’s business objectives. 
DATA MINING TECHNIQUES 
In addition to GLMs, many actuaries have become more familiar with various data mining techniques.  
The following is a brief, non-exhaustive survey of some methods used in practice.  Though these 
techniques might not necessarily be used directly for producing rate differentials, they are often used to 
enhance the underlying classification analysis in various ways as described below. 
Factor Analysis 
Factor analysis, of which principle components analysis may be the most commonly used, is a technique 
to reduce the number of parameter estimates in a classification analysis (such as a GLM).  This can imply 
a reduction in the number of variables or a reduction in the levels within a variable.   
An example may best illustrate how factor analysis works.  If one can summarize the exposure correlation 
between two variables in a scatter plot, a regression line can then be fit that summarizes the linear 
relationship between the two variables.  A variable can then be defined that approximates this regression 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
184 
 
line.  This combination variable essentially replaces the original variables and thereby reduces the 
parameter estimates of the model. 
This technique might be used in ratemaking to compress a long list of highly correlated variables into a 
score variable (or a small number of uncorrelated score variables) that represents linear combinations of 
the original variables.  For example, the vehicle symbols discussed earlier in this chapter may have been 
derived as a linear combination of correlated variables such as vehicle weight, vehicle height, number of 
cylinders, horsepower, cost when new, etc..  Another example is combining various geo-demographic 
variables, which are variables describing average characteristics of an area (e.g., population density, 
average proportion of home-ownership, average age of home, median number of rooms in the home, etc.) 
Cluster Analysis 
Cluster analysis is an exploratory data analysis tool that seeks to combine small groups of similar risks 
into larger homogeneous categories or “clusters.”  It generally aims to minimize the differences within a 
category and maximize the difference between categories. 
In practice, cluster analysis is most commonly used in rating for geography.  Actuaries generally start 
with small geographic units (such as postal code or zip code) that are often quite granular.  Cluster 
analysis applies a collection of different algorithms to group these units into clusters based on historical 
experience, modeled experience, or well-defined similarity rules.  This allows easier incorporation into 
GLMs. 
CART 
The purpose of CART (Classification and Regression Trees) is to develop tree-building algorithms to 
determine a set of if-then logical conditions that help improve classification. 
In personal automobile insurance, a resulting tree may start with an if-then condition around gender.  If 
the risk is male, the tree then continues to another if-then condition around age.  If the risk is male and 
youthful, the tree may then continue to an if-then condition involving prior accident experience.  The tree 
“branch” for females may involve a different order or in fact, a completely different set of conditions. 
Examination of the tree may help ratemaking actuaries identify the strongest list of initial variables (i.e., 
whittle down a long list of potential variables to a more manageable yet meaningful list) and determine 
how to categorize each variable.  CART can also help detect interactions between variables. 
MARS 
The Multivariate Adaptive Regression Spline (MARS) algorithm operates as a multiple piecewise linear 
regression where each breakpoint defines a region for a particular linear regression equation.  This 
technique is generally used to select breakpoints for categorizing continuous variables.  For example, in 
homeowners insurance, amount of insurance may be treated as a categorical factor despite being 
continuous in nature.  MARS can help select the breakpoints used to categorize the amount of insurance 
factor before using it in a GLM.  MARS can also help detect interactions between variables. 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
185 
 
Neural Networks 
Neural networks are very sophisticated modeling techniques though they are often criticized for their lack 
of transparency.  The neural network user gathers test data and invokes training algorithms designed to 
automatically learn the structure of the data.  This technique has been described as a recursion applied to a 
GLM.   
In practice, the results of a neural network can be fed into a GLM (or vice versa).  This process helps 
highlight areas of improvement in the GLM (e.g., a missing interaction). 
In general the data mining techniques listed above can enhance a ratemaking exercise by: 
 
whittling down a long list of potential explanatory variables to a more manageable list for use 
within a GLM; 
 
providing guidance in how to categorize discrete variables; 
 
reducing the dimension of multi-level discrete variables (i.e., condensing 100 levels, many of 
which have few or no claims, into 20 homogenous levels); 
 
identifying candidates for interaction variables within GLMs by detecting patterns of inter-
dependency between variables. 
 
 A full survey of these and other methods is beyond the scope of this text.  For more information, readers 
can reference “The Elements of Statistical Learning:  Data Mining, Inference and Prediction” (Hastie et 
al. 2009). 
AUGMENTING MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS WITH EXTERNAL DATA 
The adoption of GLMs also resulted in many companies seeking external data sources to augment what 
had already been collected and analyzed about their own policies.  This includes but is not limited to 
information about: 
 
geo-demographics (e.g., population density of an area, average length of home ownership of an 
area); 
 
weather (e.g., average rainfall or number of days below freezing of a given area); 
 
property characteristics (e.g., square footage of a home or business, quality of the responding fire 
department); 
 
information about insured individuals or business (e.g., credit information, occupation). 
 
This additional data can help actuaries further improve the granularity and accuracy of classification 
ratemaking.  Almost certainly there will continue to be more and more reliable data available publically 
for actuaries to analyze and use in classification ratemaking.  
SUMMARY 
Much of the early history of classification ratemaking was based on rudimentary methods such as 
univariate analysis and later iteratively standardized univariate methods such as the minimum bias 
procedures.  As computing power and data capabilities evolved, pioneering insurance companies 
employed multivariate methods in their classification ratemaking and moved the entire industry forward. 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
186 
 
Grounded in statistical theory, multivariate methods adjust for an uneven mix of business and reflect the 
nature of the random process of insurance.  They provide valuable diagnostics that aid in understanding 
the certainty and reasonableness of results.  They can be refined to incorporate interaction variables.  The 
litmus test of practicality is when multivariate methods are transparent and results can be incorporated in 
insurance company rating algorithms. 
Generalized linear models have become the standard for classification ratemaking in most developed 
insurance markets—particularly because of the benefit of transparency.  Understanding the mathematical 
underpinnings is an important responsibility of the ratemaking actuary who intends to use such a method.  
Linear models are a good place to start as GLMs are essentially a generalized form of such a model.  As 
with many techniques, visualizing the GLM results is an intuitive way to connect the theory with the 
practical use. 
GLMs do not stand alone as the only multivariate classification method.  Other methods such as CART, 
factor analysis, and neural networks are often used to augment GLM analysis.  Finally, the adoption of 
GLMs and data mining techniques influenced classification ratemaking in other ways as well—
particularly in the incorporation of external data to enhance analysis. 

Chapter 10:  Multivariate Classification 
187 
 
KEY CONCEPTS IN CHAPTER 10 
 
1. Shortcomings of univariate approach 
 
2. Minimum bias techniques 
 
3. Circumstances that led to the adoption of multivariate techniques 
a. Computing power 
b. Data warehouse initiatives 
c. Early adopters attaining competitive advantage 
 
4. Overall benefits of multivariate methods 
a. Adjust for exposure correlations 
b. Allow for nature of random process 
c. Provide diagnostics 
d. Allow interaction variables 
e. Considered transparent 
 
5. Mathematical foundation of generalized linear models (GLMs) 
 
6. Sample GLM output 
 
7. Statistical diagnostics, practical tests, and validation techniques 
a. Standard errors 
b. Deviance tests 
c. Consistency with time 
d. Comparison of model results and historical results on hold-out sample 
 
8. Practical considerations 
 
9. Data mining techniques 
a. Factor analysis 
b. Cluster analysis 
c. CART  
d. MARS 
e. Neural networks 
 
10. Incorporation of external data in multivariate classification analysis 
 
