FOREWORD
Ed Thorp’s memoir reads like a thriller—mixing wearable computers that
would have made James Bond proud, shady characters, great scientists, and
poisoning attempts (in addition to the sabotage of Ed’s car so he would have
an “accident” in the desert). The book reveals a thorough, rigorous,
methodical person in search of life, knowledge, ﬁnancial security, and, not
least of all, fun. Thorp is also known to be a generous man, intellectually
speaking, eager to share his discoveries with random strangers (in print but
also in person)—something you hope to ﬁnd in scientists but usually don’t.
Yet he is humble—he might qualify as the only humble trader on planet Earth
—so, unless the reader can reinterpret what’s between the lines, he or she
won’t notice that Thorp’s contributions are vastly more momentous than he
reveals. Why?
Because of their simplicity. Their sheer simplicity.
For it is the straightforward character of his contributions and insights that
made them both invisible in academia and useful for practitioners. My
purpose here is not to explain or summarize the book; Thorp—not
surprisingly—writes in a direct, clear, and engaging way. I am here, as a
trader and a practitioner of mathematical ﬁnance, to show its importance and
put it in context for my community of real-world scientist-traders and risk-
takers in general.
That context is as follows. Ed Thorp is the ﬁrst modern mathematician who
successfully used quantitative methods for risk taking—and most certainly the
ﬁrst mathematician who met ﬁnancial success doing it. Since then there has
been a cohort of such “quants”, such as the whiz kids in applied mathematics
at SUNY Stony Brook—but Thorp is their dean.
His main and most colorful predecessor, Girolamo (sometimes Geronimo)
Cardano, a sixteenth-century polymath and mathematician who—sort of—

wrote the ﬁrst version of Beat the Dealer, was a compulsive gambler. To put it
mildly, he was unsuccessful at it—not least because addicts are bad risk-
takers; to be convinced, just take a look at the magniﬁcence of Monte Carlo,
Las Vegas, and Biarritz, places ﬁnanced by their compulsion. Cardano’s book
Liber de ludo aleae (“Book on Games of Chance”) was instrumental in the
later development of probability, but, unlike Thorp’s book, was less of an
inspiration 
for 
gamblers 
and 
more 
for 
mathematicians. 
Another
mathematician, a French Protestant refugee in London, Abraham de Moivre,
a frequenter of gambling joints and the author of The doctrine of chances: or,
a method for calculating the probabilities of events in play (1718) could hardly
make both ends meet. One can easily count another half a dozen
mathematician-gamblers, including greats like Fermat and Huygens—who
were either indiﬀerent to the bottom line or not particularly good at mastering
it. Before Ed Thorp, mathematicians of gambling had their love of chance
largely unrequited.
Thorp’s method is as follows: He cuts to the chase in identifying a clear
edge (that is something that in the long run puts the odds in his favor). The
edge has to be obvious and uncomplicated. For instance, calculating the
momentum of a roulette wheel, which he did with the ﬁrst wearable computer
(and with no less a coconspirator than the great Claude Shannon, father of
information theory), he estimated a typical edge of roughly 40 percent per
bet. But that part is easy, very easy. It is capturing the edge, converting it into
dollars in the bank, restaurant meals, interesting cruises, and Christmas gifts
to friends and family—that’s the hard part. It is the dosage of your betting—
not too little, not too much—that matters in the end. For that, Ed did great
work on his own, before the theoretical reﬁnement that came from a third
member of the Information Trio: John Kelly, originator of the famous Kelly
Criterion, a formula for placing bets that we discuss today because Ed Thorp
made it operational.
A bit more about simplicity before we discuss dosing. For an academic
judged by his colleagues, rather than the bank manager of his local branch (or
his tax accountant), a mountain giving birth to a mouse, after huge labor, is
not a very good thing. They prefer the mouse to give birth to a mountain; it is
the perception of sophistication that matters. The more complicated, the
better; the simple doesn’t get you citations, H-values, or some such metric du

jour that brings the respect of the university administrators, as they can
understand that stuﬀ but not the substance of the real work. The only
academics who escape the burden of complication-for-complication’s sake
are the great mathematicians and physicists (and, from what I hear, even for
them it’s becoming harder and harder in today’s funding and ranking
environment).
Ed was initially an academic, but he favored learning by doing, with his
skin in the game. When you reincarnate as practitioner, you want the
mountain to give birth to the simplest possible strategy, and one that has the
smallest number of side eﬀects, the minimum possible hidden complications.
Ed’s genius is demonstrated in the way he came up with very simple rules in
blackjack. Instead of engaging in complicated combinatorics and memory-
challenging card counting (something that requires one to be a savant), he
crystallizes all his sophisticated research into simple rules: Go to a blackjack
table. Keep a tally. Start with zero. Add one for some strong cards, minus
ones for weak ones, and nothing for others. It is mentally easy to just bet
incrementally up and down—bet larger when the number is high, smaller
when it is low—and such a strategy is immediately applicable by anyone with
the ability to tie his shoes or ﬁnd a casino on a map. Even while using
wearable computers at the roulette table, the detection of edge was simple, so
simple that one can get it while standing on a balance ball in the gym; the
fanciness resides in the implementation and the wiring.
As a side plot, Ed discovered what is known today as the Black-Scholes
option formula, before Black and Scholes (and it is a sign of economics
public relations that the formula doesn’t bear his name—I’ve called it
Bachelier-Thorp). His derivation was too simple—nobody at the time realized
it could be potent.
Now money management—something central for those who learn from
being exposed to their own proﬁts and losses. Having an “edge” and surviving
are two diﬀerent things: The ﬁrst requires the second. As Warren Buﬀet said:
“In order to succeed you must ﬁrst survive.” You need to avoid ruin. At all
costs.
And there is a dialectic between you and your P/L: You start betting small
(a proportion of initial capital) and your risk control—the dosage—also
controls your discovery of the edge. It is like trial and error, by which you

revise both your risk appetite and your assessment of your odds one step at a
time.
Academic ﬁnance, as has been recently shown by Ole Peters and Murray
Gell-Mann, did not get the point that avoiding ruin, as a general principle,
makes your gambling and investment strategy extremely diﬀerent from the
one that is proposed by the academic literature. As we saw, academics are
paid by administrators via colleagues to make life complicated, not simpler.
They invented something useless called utility theory (tens of thousands of
papers are still waiting for a real reader). And they invented the idea that one
could get to know the collective behavior of future prices in inﬁnite detail—
things like correlation, that could be identiﬁed today and would never change
in the future. (More technically, to implement the portfolio construction
suggested by modern ﬁnancial theory, one needs to know the entire joint
probability distribution of all assets for the entire future, plus the exact utility
function for wealth at all future times. And without errors! [I have shown that
estimation errors make the system explode.] We are lucky if we can know
what we will eat for lunch tomorrow—how can we ﬁgure out the dynamics
until the end of time?)
The Kelly-Thorp method requires no joint distribution or utility function.
In practice, one needs the ratio of expected proﬁt to worst-case return—
dynamically adjusted (that is, one gamble at a time) to avoid ruin. That’s all.
Thorp and Kelly’s ideas were rejected by economists—in spite of their
practical appeal—because of economists’ love of general theories for all asset
prices, dynamics of the world, etc. The famous patriarch of modern
economics, Paul Samuelson, was supposedly on a vendetta against Thorp. Not
a single one of the works of these economists will ultimately survive:
Strategies that allow you to survive are not the same thing as the ability to
impress colleagues.
So the world today is divided into two groups using distinct methods. The
ﬁrst method is that of the economists who tend to blow up routinely or get
rich collecting fees for managing money, not from direct speculation.
Consider that Long-Term Capital Management, which had the crème de la
crème of ﬁnancial economists, blew up spectacularly in 1998, losing a
multiple of what they thought their worst-case scenario was.

The second method, that of the information theorists as pioneered by Ed, is
practiced by traders and scientist-traders. Every surviving speculator uses
explicitly or implicitly this second method (evidence: Ray Dalio, Paul Tudor
Jones, Renaissance Technologies, even Goldman Sachs!). I said every
because, as Peters and Gell-Mann have shown, those who don’t will
eventually go bust.
And thanks to that second method, if you inherit, say, $82,000 from uncle
Morrie, you know that a strategy exists that will allow you to double the
inheritance without ever going through bankruptcy.
—
Some additional wisdom I personally learned from Thorp: Many successful
speculators, after their ﬁrst break in life, get involved in large-scale structures,
with multiple oﬃces, morning meetings, coﬀee, corporate intrigues, building
more wealth while losing control of their lives. Not Ed. After the separation
from his partners and the closing of his ﬁrm (for reasons that had nothing to
do with him), he did not start a new mega-fund. He limited his involvement
in managing other people’s money. (Most people reintegrate into the comfort
of other ﬁrms and leverage their reputation by raising monstrous amounts of
outside money in order to collect large fees.) But such restraint requires some
intuition, some self-knowledge. It is vastly less stressful to be independent—
and one is never independent when involved in a large structure with powerful
clients. It is hard enough to deal with the intricacies of probabilities, you need
to avoid the vagaries of exposure to human moods. True success is exiting
some rat race to modulate one’s activities for peace of mind. Thorp certainly
learned a lesson: The most stressful job he ever had was running the math
department of the University of California, Irvine. You can detect that the
man is in control of his life. This explains why he looked younger the second
time I saw him, in 2016, than he did the ﬁrst time, in 2005.
Ciao,
Nassim Nicholas Taleb
