Chapter 3
PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS
In August 1949, as I was turning seventeen, I went oﬀ to the Berkeley
campus of the University of California. Now divorced, my mother sold our
house, moved away, and installed my twelve-year-old brother in military
school. It would be several years before I saw much of either parent again, an
echo of my father’s experience, as he was without parents and on his own
from age sixteen. He had joined the army, and I went oﬀ to university. Like
him, I was on my own from then on.
I found room and board a few blocks south of the campus. Shortly before
leaving for college, I learned that my mother had cashed the war bonds I had
paid for with my paper route and spent the money. Her unexpected betrayal
was an emotional blow that estranged us for years, and whether I could
support myself at the university was now in doubt. I survived with
scholarships, part-time jobs, and $40 a month for my ﬁrst year from my
father. I got by on less than $100 a month, including everything: books,
tuition, food, shelter, and clothes. On Sundays, when my boardinghouse did
not provide meals, I visited church open houses, where I consumed large
quantities of free hot chocolate and doughnuts.
The campus was overﬂowing with returning veterans on the GI Bill. Basic
science courses such as physics and chemistry were taught in classrooms of
several hundred, but the best professors were lecturing and quality was high.
In chemistry, my major, I was one of ﬁfteen hundred students. We were split
into four lecture sections of almost four hundred each. The course was taught
by a famous professor, and we were using his book. As he was then preparing
a revision, he oﬀered 10 cents per misprint to the ﬁrst student to report it. I

set to work and soon brought him a list of ten errors to see if he would pay.
He gave me my dollar. Encouraged, I came back with a list of seventy-ﬁve
more mistakes. That netted me $7.50 but he wasn’t happy. When I returned a
few days later with several hundred he explained that they needed to be
errors, not mere misprints. Despite my objections, he disqualiﬁed nearly all of
them. This unilateral retroactive change in the deal, which I would later
encounter often on Wall Street, done by someone for their beneﬁt just
because they could get away with it, violated my sense of fair play. I quit
reporting additional corrections.
As the semester wound to a close, I had missed only a single point out of
the hundreds given out for the written exams and the lab work, ranking me
number one. After my unfortunate experience with the chemistry exam in
high school, this was vindication. Part of our grade came when we were asked
each week to chemically analyze a sample that was not known to us. After
hearing that some students might sabotage others by secretly changing these
unknowns, I made a practice of holding back part of mine so that, if this
were done to me, I could prove that I had correctly analyzed whatever I had.
On the very last sample given us to evaluate that semester, I was told I got it
wrong. I knew better, and to prove it I asked that the part I had saved be
tested. The decision on my appeal was left to the teaching assistant for my lab
sections, who refused to act. The points I lost caused me to end the term in
fourth place rather than ﬁrst. Outraged, I did not enroll in chemistry the
second semester and changed my major to physics. Thus I missed organic
chemistry, the study of carbon compounds, and the basis for all living things.
It is fundamental for biology.
This rash decision, which led me to change my school and my major
subject, would change my whole path in life. In hindsight, it turned out for the
best, as my interests and my future were in physics and mathematics. Decades
later, when I wanted to know some organic chemistry to explore ideas for
extending healthy human longevity, I learned it as I needed to.
Although it wasn’t as good a school then in math and physics as Berkeley, I
transferred at the end of the year to UCLA. For one thing, I hadn’t made any
close friends at Berkeley, so it seemed cold and lonely, whereas Southern
California was familiar. My teacher Jack Chasson, almost a substitute parent,
along with my two best friends from high school, Dick Clair and Jim Hart,

added emotional support and a sense of belonging. Also, my living
arrangements up north were horrible. The second semester I lived in the
student co-op. It was by far the cheapest room and board. As I recall, it was a
building called Cloyne Court. Being a new member, I got the worst room,
with multiple entrances, and shared by ﬁve people. There was traﬃc in and
out, day and night. You couldn’t get anything done there. You couldn’t sleep.
Crucially, my UC scholarship was transferable to UCLA. Once there, I
moved into the University Cooperative Housing Association, another
independent student living group. Part of the national co-op movement, like
the Berkeley co-op, it was a miniature United Nations, with students from all
over the world. This branch, which then had two buildings, Robison Hall and
Landfair House, was founded in the Depression by a few students who pooled
their resources in order to attend UCLA. When I came it had grown to 150
members.
One of the ﬁrst people I met in that fall of 1950 was Vivian Sinetar. She
was slim, blond, and pretty, majoring in English literature. Best of all, she was
very smart. She had also transferred to UCLA as a sophomore, coming from
Los Angeles City College. We got to know each other through a student
group that advocated fair treatment for people of all religious beliefs, ethnic
groups, and political aﬃliations. We both liked to write so we volunteered to
produce a newspaper for the group.
One injustice aﬀecting students was that no barber in the area would cut
the hair of our black friends; another was that the upper-division UCLA
course on the Civil War was taught by a senior professor who claimed the
southern slavocracy was just one happy welfare state for underprivileged
blacks. Together Vivian and I distributed hundreds of copies of our broadside
against what we argued was an outrageous distortion of history. The enraged
professor spent an entire lecture defending himself and denouncing the
authors as anonymous cowards. The authors saw no point in identifying
themselves and risking expulsion.
During the evenings we spent working on the paper, Vivian and I talked
about everything, and learned how much we had in common. Each of us
would be the ﬁrst in our families to graduate from a university. We also
shared a sense of justice and fair play. Hers came partly because her parents
were immigrant Hungarian Jews who, along with their very large extended

families, had experienced centuries of persecution in Europe. Many of her
relatives perished in concentration camps during World War II, and they
continued to face anti-Semitism in America. But fair play was also a very
personal issue for Vivian. She was the oldest of three children, with a sister
who was born a little more than a year later, followed by a brother in two
years. Her sister aggressively demanded her way and, Vivian felt, as much
more than her share as she could get. Vivian’s mother, partly unwilling to
tangle with her sister and partly in admiration of her chutzpah, prevailed on
Vivian, as the oldest, to make peace by always giving in. Partly from that
came her deep conviction that everyone deserved a level playing ﬁeld, a
feeling I shared.
Cautious and choosy about dating, Vivian tried the patience of her
matchmaking mother and sister. One evening as I picked her up to work on
the paper, they took her aside and asked, “What’s wrong with this one?” I
think she answered (correctly), “He’s too young.” I was just eighteen when we
met, and she was nearly twenty-one. As she was much more mature for her
age than I was for mine, neither of us thought of the other as someone to
date. She majored in literature, and though my major was in physics, I chose
some of her classes for my electives. We became good friends. The years
passed and we dated others, while I slowly became less young.
With smart attractive coeds everywhere, the whole world of women was
opening up for me. After almost a year of going out with many diﬀerent girls,
I was at a party one night when, across the room, my attention was caught by
a stunning girl. A tall brunette with the ﬁgure of a fashion model,
“Alexandra” was a classic beauty with high cheekbones and large brown eyes,
her face framed by Cleopatra-styled hair. We were immediately attracted to
each other and dated exclusively and constantly for the next two years. As a
theater arts major, she got me a one-line part in a play she was in. I spent
most of the time standing at attention in a Roman legionnaire’s outﬁt thinking
the acting life was not for me.
My academic career almost ended during my junior year. It was often 2
A.M. by the time I got home from dates with Alexandra and I was working
long hours to support myself. I was frequently tired and irritable, especially
when I arrived at my 8 A.M. physics class.

The professor, the son of a famous physicist, was himself a mediocrity.
Because he was insecure and afraid of questions from the class, he copied his
lectures from a stack of note cards onto the board, turning his back to the
class to discourage interaction. Then we recopied them into our notebooks.
He had been doing this for years, and the content seldom changed. This
seemed stupid to me. Why not just hand out copies so we could read them in
advance and come to class with intelligent questions? Of course, he was
afraid someone might ask him a question he couldn’t answer.
Bored, I began to read UCLA’s student newspaper, the Daily Bruin, in
class. This damaged his self-esteem, which, as I came to understand later, is
an absolute no-no in human relationships unless you don’t mind creating an
inveterate enemy. He was piqued enough to periodically interrupt his copying
to suddenly ask me a question at a moment when I appeared to be totally
absorbed in my reading. I would give the correct answer and return to my
newspaper.
Matters came to a head one morning. I had been out late with Alexandra
and then stayed up during the early-morning hours completing a lengthy but
simple homework assignment due before the start of class. I rushed down the
stairs of the lecture hall to turn in the assignment and as I handed it to the
professor, the ﬁrst of eight chimes marking the hour reverberated. He looked
at me and said, “Uh-uh.” I threw my work on the table and shouted, “What do
you mean, uh-uh?” I went on to tell him what I thought of his teaching, while
a frightened class looked on. I took my seat, all was quiet, and the class went
on as before. Looking back, I realize that I had always been irritated by what
I viewed as petty, rigid mediocrities. Later I would understand the stupidity of
butting heads with them. I would learn to avoid them when I could and ﬁnesse
them when I couldn’t.
A week later I was summoned by the dean of students. He told me that as a
result of my disrespectful behavior, various options were being considered,
including expulsion. This would not only ruin my academic career but, as it
was 1951 and the Korean War was under way, end my 1S student deferment
from the draft. It would convert my status to 1A, the ﬁrst group to be drafted.
I would almost undoubtedly be in the military within weeks. As it was, the
draft board near UCLA was mostly ﬁlled with students holding 1S
deferments. The few 1A’s had been called ahead of them and were already

gone. Now the 1S students were going to war. Each week a few more
disappeared from the seats around me. Fortunately my draft board was for
the area where my father now lived, in a part of Los Angeles with lots of 1A
registrants and very few students. There, as a 1S, I would be among the last to
be called. This meant as long as I was enrolled at UCLA, my 1S status was
likely to keep me in school.
My case was referred for discipline to the assistant dean of students. By
this time the full consequences of my immaturity and bad behavior were
becoming evident to me. At my conference with the assistant dean, who was
surprisingly sympathetic, we worked out a deal. I would personally apologize
to the professor. I would be on probation for the rest of the academic year. I
would be on my best behavior from now on. I would not run for any student
body oﬃce. This last requirement puzzled me until I learned the dean of
students was concerned about politically independent and outspoken students
and, in the period of McCarthyism and loyalty oaths, wanted to limit possible
embarrassment to the administration from student government oﬃcials.
By the time I met with the professor in his oﬃce to apologize, I realized I
had behaved stupidly and rudely, and told him truthfully that what I did was
improper and I regretted my actions. But there was still the more serious
matter of what I had said about his teaching. I had damaged his self-esteem.
He would never forgive this unless he felt I retracted what I had said. My own
values and sense of self-worth made me unwilling to grovel and tell lies,
despite the personal stakes. I had to ﬁnd another way. I explained that I had
come to realize that his teaching methods were unique and that students,
though they may not always appreciate it, rarely encounter a professor of his
caliber. What I said was true but allowed more than one interpretation. He
picked the one I expected him to choose. He was beaming when I left, my
career was saved, and I would become a better-behaved and somewhat more
mature person.
My grades had suﬀered during this, my junior year, and though they
rebounded when I was a senior, I also had been put on probation, so my
election to Phi Beta Kappa came as a surprise. I was lucky to come oﬀ no
worse than I did. None of this would have happened if, as I wish I had done, I
had asked myself beforehand, If you do this, what do you want to happen?

and If you do this, what do you think will happen? I wouldn’t have liked either
answer. These two questions became valuable guides for me in the future.
Alexandra’s parents were upper-middle-class Jews with a successful
plastics business. They were gracious and polite when I visited but had higher
aspirations for their daughter than a penniless nondenominational student
without prospects. During our senior year, a few months before Alexandra
and I graduated, with me still too young, immature, and unready to oﬀer any
girl security or permanence, we tearfully ended our romance. I was so
depressed that I skipped my graduation ceremony. There was no one close to
share it with. Vivian, a casual friend of Alexandra’s, went to her graduation
party. I wasn’t invited. My friends graduated and dispersed.
As a reward to myself for getting my degree, I took six weeks oﬀ and, with
a friend, drove to Manhattan in my old inexpensive sedan. We slept in it while
on the road, and I had the loan of an apartment for the four weeks we spent in
New York. We got by cheaply, spending mainly on gas and food.
Beginning our drive across the country, we arrived in Las Vegas around
midnight and wondered where we could sleep in the car without being
harassed by the police. Finding a spacious and apparently deserted park, we
parked by the bathrooms. Needing showers, we stripped, drew water from a
hose bib, and scrubbed ourselves, lit up by the headlights of my car. Then we
heard voices—lots of them. The park was ﬁlled with the homeless, many of
them families, and as we learned the next morning, most had lost their money
gambling. Fortunately for them the summer nights were balmy. Before
leaving the next day we adventurously hung out poolside at one of the strip
casinos, where we met a group of three girls. They gave us nickels to play the
slot machines, which I did with some apprehension as—not yet twenty-one—
I wasn’t legally permitted to do so. I promptly hit a small jackpot. Bells rang,
lights ﬂashed, and a few dollars’ worth of nickels poured into the machine’s
tray. We spent the bounty on food and drink for the ﬁve of us.
This was the ﬁrst time I had seen Las Vegas and it left me with conﬂicting,
but vivid, images. The glitter and glamour of the strip, with its promise of
easy unearned riches, contrasted with the crowd of homeless in the park,
victims of the dark side of the dream. It was a memory that stuck: a glitzy
playground where suckers were induced to gamble at games that, I knew from
mathematics, they must collectively lose. The winners were celebrated as

poster-people to draw more suckers while a greater number, betting too much
or too often, were impoverished and sometimes even ruined. At the time I
didn’t realize I would someday turn the tables for some of them.
The friend traveling with me was one of a group of weight lifters with
whom I’d begun exercising a year earlier. It started one evening when, as I
walked by the basement furnace room behind the co-op, I heard the sound of
iron clanking. Curious, I ventured inside and found three muscular residents
hoisting barbells. When I suggested that this seemed like a lot of work for
who knew how much gain, they bet me a milkshake that if I worked out with
them for one hour, three times a week, for a year, it would double my
strength. Though I wasn’t the ninety-eight-pound weakling of the famous
advertisements by Charles Atlas, I accepted their challenge. When the year
ended, just before my drive to New York, I had more than doubled what I
could lift and gladly paid oﬀ the bet. This was the beginning of a lifelong
interest in ﬁtness and health.
After the trip, it was back to working and studying. During my ﬁrst
graduate year, 1953–54, I applied for and got a graduate fellowship in physics
at Columbia University. All I needed to do was come up with enough money
to live in New York. Unable to do so, I had to decline and continued on at
UCLA. One Sunday afternoon the following year, working on my master’s
degree, I was taking tea in the co-op dining area as a break from studying,
along with a few others. Someone who had been to Las Vegas was explaining
how no one could beat the casinos. This was the consensus view of the group.
It was also the view of the world in general, backed up by the painful
experience of generations of gamblers.
The Martingale system, or doubling-up system, is one of the many betting
schemes that gamblers had devised in an attempt to win. It was often used at
roulette for bets with even-money payoﬀs, such as “red” or “black.” The
standard American wheel has eighteen red numbers, eighteen black numbers,
and two green numbers for a total of thirty-eight. With an even-money
payoﬀ, for each thirty-eight spins, you can expect to win a bet on red or a bet
on black on average eighteen times and lose twenty for a net loss of two. In an
attempt to get around this disadvantage, you start the Martingale by betting
$1 on, say, red. After each loss, bet twice as much on the next spin of the
wheel, always on red. Eventually you win—red has to come up sometime—

and that win covers the previous string of losses, plus a proﬁt of $1. Then
start again by betting $1 and repeat the whole process, netting another $1
proﬁt each time when you ﬁnally win. The catch is that after many doublings,
your required bet can be so large that either you have run out of money or the
casino won’t allow it.
With an inﬁnite number of possible sequences of outcomes in a gambling
game, it was impossible to ever know through trial and error whether any
particular betting system worked. To analyze each scheme mathematically,
one at a time, was hopeless as well, as there was always a new one to test. One
of the triumphs of mathematics had been to prove with a single theorem that
all such systems must fail. Under fairly general assumptions, no method for
varying the size of your bets could overcome the casino’s advantage.
Recalling my old high school ideas for the physical prediction of roulette,
as I sipped my tea I argued with the others at the table that, despite all the
math to the contrary, you could beat roulette. Using what I had learned from
six additional years of physics, I explained that friction would gradually slow
the orbiting ball in its circular track until ﬁnally gravity would be enough to
cause it to spiral down and in toward the center. I argued that an equation
could forecast the ball’s position during this process. Although the descending
ball crosses onto the rotor, which spins in a direction opposite to the ball, a
second equation could also specify the position of the rotor. Limiting the
predictive power of my equations were random irregularities that can’t be
forecast, what mathematicians and physicists call noise. Conventional wisdom
said the noise was enough to ruin the prediction. I didn’t think so and decided
to ﬁnd out.
Fortunately, I didn’t know at the time that one of the greatest
mathematicians of the previous hundred years, Henri Poincaré, had “proven”
that physical prediction at roulette was impossible. His proof was sound, only
assuming a modest and plausible randomness in predicting the ﬁnal resting
place of the ball.
At this point I had done all the course work for my PhD in physics and
passed the written exams. Under the direction of Professor Steven Moskowski
I was halfway through the ﬁnal obstacle, my thesis (an original research
paper) on the shell structure of atomic nuclei. All that remained was to ﬁnish
the work and pass a ﬁnal oral exam on it, but I needed to learn much more

mathematics in order to complete the complex quantum mechanical
calculations. Physics students at UCLA at that time were required to take
very little mathematics, and my background in the subject was skimpy.
Quantum mechanics in particular requires advanced math, and I found that I
needed to learn so much for my research that I could equally well get a PhD
in mathematics. It appeared to me that I could ﬁnish in mathematics as soon
as or sooner than in physics, an especially tempting choice, since UCLA PhD
candidates in physics then frequently took ten years or more to ﬁnish.
Engrossed in graduate physics, I had drifted out of touch with Vivian, as
well as with most of my other friends. Then Vivian sent me a Christmas card
with the note “Don’t be such a stranger.” I called Vivian, and our ﬁrst date, a
few weeks later, was at a little art theater in Hollywood where we saw Jean
Renoir’s ﬁlm The River. Despite the rave reviews, it seemed dreary and
endless. As we left, we each thought this date might be a disaster. But during
a light meal afterward, as we talked we found our old camaraderie and
something new. By now we both had enough experience dating others to
realize how well suited we were. As in one of the Jane Austen books she
loved, we at last realized we wanted to be together. Luckily for me, despite
family pressure to marry, Vivian was still single because she would have the
right person or no one.
We had a lot in common. We both were avid readers and enjoyed plays,
movies, and music. As we both very much wanted children, we also agreed
on the principles for raising them. We planned to give them all the education
they wanted, teach them to think for themselves rather than simply accept
received wisdom from experts and authority, and encourage them to choose
their own calling in life. Both somewhat introverted, I more so, we looked
forward to an academic life with its collection of smart educated people,
teaching, research, and travel. There wouldn’t be a lot of money but it would
be enough. What was important to us was how we spent our time and the
people, family, friends, and colleagues, with whom we shared it.
Though we shared many interests, we also had diﬀerences that were
enriching. Vivian enjoyed literature, people, psychology, art, and drama,
rather than math and science. But she had a good scientist’s clear and logical
way of thinking, which she applied to people and society. I oﬀered a rational
and scientiﬁc understanding of the natural world, and she would help expand

my insights about the human world. I would teach her about things and she
would teach me about people.
Vivian’s parents, Al and Adele Sinetar, met in the 1920s in New York. As
Jewish immigrants, starting in America with no money and little education,
they worked hard in their new country, running successful businesses and
rising to middle-class comfort. They also contributed for decades to the
success of many relatives who also came to the United States, including about
ten siblings on each side plus parents and their eventual children. Vivian was
the ﬁrst in her large extended family to graduate with a university degree, and
now she was again breaking new ground: She would be the ﬁrst to marry
outside the Jewish faith. Fortunately, both her parents liked me.
Al and Adele were welcoming and accepting of me, but it may have been a
dinner at their house one night that closed the deal. Adele was a legendary
cook who served bountiful portions of borscht with sour cream, chicken
paprikash, stuﬀed cabbage, potato latkes with more sour cream, and on and
on. Having lived for years in the student co-op, where the ultimate entrée was
blue-veined oddly sweet-tasting horse meat, and canned peaches for dessert, I
was perpetually hungry. As she always did for everyone at meals, Adele urged
me to take additional helpings. Struggling between politeness and the
temptations of culinary heaven, I said yes often. Then, when I thought dinner
was over, Adele brought out a large platter of something I had never seen
before called cheese blintzes. I ate the two she oﬀered and waited. Sure
enough, two more were oﬀered. And again. And again. I ﬁnally stopped at…
twenty, pretty much wiping out the family reserves.
I got my MA in physics that June and shortly thereafter asked Vivian to
marry me. Vivian said yes, and her parents were willing to accept a son-in-
law who would be forever poor on an academic salary. However, we had to
have a Jewish wedding or the family would be scandalized. We agreed but
still had a problem: What rabbi would marry us? Finally we found the man
for the job: a young Reform rabbi named William Kramer. Five years earlier
he had been chaplain of the US Senate. Later, in 1960, he would perform the
ceremony for the black entertainer Sammy Davis, Jr., and the Swedish actress
May Britt—a wedding so politically polarizing that JFK himself asked them
(unsuccessfully) to wait until after the election. The marriage outraged
conservatives in America.

Davis had lost an eye in an auto accident a few years earlier. He also had
converted to Judaism. While they were playing golf one day, Jack Benny said
to Sammy, “What’s your handicap?” Davis famously replied, “My handicap?
I’m a one-eyed Negro Jew.”
A generation later, when Rabbi Kramer performed marriage ceremonies
for each of my daughters, he said at the ﬁrst of the two weddings, “I
appreciate the repeat business, but please don’t wait another thirty-four
years.”
All was well afterward at our wedding reception until a favorite high school
teacher whom I had invited proclaimed repeatedly and loudly, “I always knew
he would marry a landsman!” (In this usage, landsman is a Yiddish term
referring to a fellow Jew, especially one from the same region.) Fortunately,
the older relatives feigned hearing loss and once again all was well.
Luckily, my in-laws didn’t see the possessions I brought to the marriage.
My worn clothing ﬁt into a single suitcase with a broken clasp. Having been
washed regularly together, the colors shared a dishwater-gray commonality
with hints of purple, beige, and yellow. A couple of years earlier my
roommate and I had for $40 jointly purchased a Harris Tweed jacket, which
we would alternately use on dates. He gave me his half as a wedding present.
I did have boxes and boxes of books along with my own improvised
bookcases, the shelves consisting of planks separated by concrete blocks, a
student standard in those days.
After our marriage in January 1956, I began taking courses in
mathematics. Vivian supported my bold gamble, which was to skip the upper-
division math courses I needed as background and jump directly into
graduate work, sink or swim, ﬁlling in the gaps as best I could. When summer
came, even though Vivian was working to support us, we badly needed the
extra income I could provide from three months of full-time work. An
engineering student and friend from the co-op, Tom Scott, said that National
Cash Register (NCR) was hiring. I ﬁlled out the forms, passed the interview,
and was oﬀered a job at $95 a week! (Multiply by eight for the 2016
equivalent.) My job was to teach upper-division modern algebra to the
employees, using a text of my choice. The book I picked, A Survey of Modern
Algebra by Birkhoﬀ and MacLane, was legendary in the education of
mathematicians. Each day I learned the material, then lectured on it the next.

Vivian and I were invited to a house party by one of Tom Scott’s female
friends from NCR. We were introduced to her boyfriend, Richard Feynman,
who was sitting in an alcove, playing the bongo drums. A thirty-eight-year-old
professor at Caltech, he was already regarded as one of the world’s most
brilliant physicists. Feynman later won a Nobel Prize and subsequently
commanded national attention when he publicly explained the tragic
Challenger disaster that killed seven astronauts, using a glass of ice water and
a rubber ring.
I had been told this story about Feynman and roulette in Las Vegas:
Watching a man placing $5 bets on red or on black, Feynman told him
betting against the casino was a losing proposition and that he, Feynman,
would be happy to play the part of the casino. The two of them wandered
from wheel to wheel with the gambler betting against Feynman by calling out
“red” or black” before the spin, paying Feynman when he lost and getting
paid in turn when he won. As it happened, even with a disadvantage, the
gambler was lucky enough to get ahead by $80, at which point Feynman quit.
Though he was acting as the casino and would eventually come out ahead, he
wasn’t willing to risk further losses. Feynman was like a casino that only had
an $80 bankroll, one likely to be wiped out by a customer’s lucky run.
Assuming the truth of the story, even one of the world’s greatest physicists
may not have realized that he needed a much larger bankroll to cover the risk
he was taking. Understanding and dealing correctly with the trade-oﬀ
between risk and return is a fundamental, but poorly understood, challenge
faced by all gamblers and investors.
If anyone knew whether physical prediction at roulette was possible, it
should be Richard Feynman. I asked him, “Is there any way to beat the game
of roulette?” When he said there wasn’t, I was relieved and encouraged. This
suggested that no one had yet worked out what I believed was possible. With
this incentive, I began a series of experiments.
One evening not long after we married, Vivian’s parents arrived for dinner
and I wasn’t there. Their brief search found me in our bedroom with a funny
V-shaped wooden trough. One end was raised above the ﬂoor and I was
releasing marbles from a marked spot on the higher end and letting them roll
down the trough and across the ﬂoor, marking where each one stopped. I
explained this was an experiment to predict roulette. What had this

contraption to do with roulette? Imagine the circular track on the roulette
wheel “unfolded” so it is straight, then rotated so it is a “trough.” Now raise
one end and release a marble (the ball) from a measured height. The amount
the marble drops corresponds to a “push,” in this case from gravity rather
than from a hand. The marble rolling across the ﬂoor gradually slows from
friction just as the roulette ball is slowed as it orbits in its circular track. What
I wanted to know was how closely I could predict where the marble would
stop. The results from this crude test were encouraging to me but not so much
to my in-laws. They had hoped their daughter would marry “our son-in-law
the doctor” or “our son-in-law the lawyer.” What have we here? they mused.
A year or so later a wealthy older student whom I was tutoring, knowing of
my interest, gave me a new half-scale replica of a roulette wheel. With
Vivian’s help I made movies of the spinning ball and included a stopwatch
graduated in hundredths of a second in each ﬁlm to provide an accurate time
for every frame. The predictions were not good enough but the wheel and ball
had lots of defects; if these—as I expected—were not present on casino
wheels, it would allow me to win. Vivian was remarkably tolerant of my
roulette experiments, seeing as they diverted time from ﬁnishing my thesis
and getting a full-time job. Yet for me it was science play, just as when I was
younger. It was relaxing, much as others might ﬁnd a book or a movie. I
certainly wasn’t motivated by the hope of making big money. What drew me
was the chance of doing something people thought wasn’t possible, to be a bit
prankish—the fun of just pulling it oﬀ.
While my roulette experiments continued during bits of spare time, I
focused on my PhD thesis in mathematics. For my adviser, I was fortunate to
choose Angus Taylor, who was both a distinguished mathematician and a
gifted teacher. His coauthored book on calculus, known in the math world as
Sherwood and Taylor, had been widely used since its initial publication in
1942. I got to know him ﬁrst as a student in his advanced calculus course and
then as a reader (paper grader) for the class. A Scotsman with a twinkle in his
eye and an honest forthright way with people, he gave lectures that were
models of clarity, striking a balance among theory, examples, and problems.
The time came for me to apply for a teaching assistantship in the
Mathematics Department, and I asked for three letters of recommendation
from my teachers. When I borrowed my ﬁle from a department secretary a

few days later to check a detail, the letters were accidentally included. Two of
them were full of extravagant praise, but the one from Taylor was measured.
He mentioned that it took a while before I did everything to his complete
satisfaction, adding that I was mentally very quick but not always wholly
accurate. As I told Vivian, I was worried now that I would fail to get this
appointment.
At my interview with the department chairman to learn how I had fared, he
said that two of my letters of recommendation were excellent, as were my
qualiﬁcations, but it was the third, the one from Professor Taylor, that left no
question as to whether I should be awarded the assistantship. I felt sick. And
then he continued that rarely, if ever, had Professor Taylor written a letter
that was so positive. I was reminded of my father, a good man but also spare
with praise, who would ask, when I got ninety-nine on an exam, “Why didn’t
you get one hundred?” Thriving under Taylor, I ﬁnished my thesis earlier than
expected but too late in the spring of 1958 to apply for a postdoctoral
position elsewhere.
The Mathematics Department kept me on as an instructor for a year while
I applied for a job. This is how it happened that, partly to study real casino
wheels, Vivian and I spent the UCLA Christmas break later that year in Las
Vegas. While there, I looked at several roulette wheels and found that, at least
as far as I could tell without getting my hands on them, they were well
maintained, were more or less level, and didn’t show obvious imperfections.
These casino wheels convinced me more than ever that prediction was
possible. All I needed, I thought, was a full-sized wheel and some good
laboratory equipment.
