Chapter 5
CONQUERING BLACKJACK
It wasn’t the money that drew me to blackjack. Though we could certainly use
extra dollars, Vivian and I expected to lead the usual low-budget academic
life. What intrigued me was the possibility that merely by sitting in a room
and thinking, I could ﬁgure out how to win. I was also curious to explore the
world of gambling, about which I knew nothing.
Back from Las Vegas, I headed for the section in the UCLA library where
the mathematical and statistical research articles were kept. Grabbing from its
shelf the volume containing the article with the strategy I had played in the
casino, I stood and began to read. As a mathematician, I had heard that
winning systems were supposed to be impossible; I didn’t know why. I did
know that the theory of probability had begun more than four hundred years
earlier with a book on games of chance. Attempts to ﬁnd winning systems
over the following centuries stimulated the development of the theory,
eventually leading to proofs that winning systems for casino gambling games
were, under most circumstances, impossible. Now I beneﬁted from my habit
of checking it out for myself.
As my eyes gobbled up equations, suddenly I saw both why I could beat the
game and how to prove it. I started with the fact that the strategy I had used
in the casino assumed that every card had the same chance of being dealt as
any other during play. This cut the casino’s edge to just 0.62 percent, the best
odds of any game being oﬀered. But I realized that the odds as the game
progressed actually depended on which cards were still left in the deck and
that the edge would shift as play continued, sometimes favoring the casino
and sometimes the player. The player who kept track could vary his bets

accordingly. With the help of a mental picture based on ideas from an
advanced mathematics course, I believed the player edge must often be
substantial. Moreover, and this also was new, I saw how the player could
condense and use this information in actual play at the table.
I decided to begin by ﬁnding the best strategy to use when I knew which
cards had already been played. Then I could bet more when the odds were in
my favor and bet less otherwise. The casino would win more of the small
bets, but I would win a majority of the big wagers. And if I bet enough where
I had an advantage, I should eventually get ahead and stay ahead.
I left the UCLA library and went home to ﬁgure out the next steps. Almost
at once, I wrote to Roger Baldwin, one of the four authors of the blackjack
article, asking for details about the calculations, telling him I wished to extend
the analysis of the game. He generously sent me the actual computations a
few weeks later, consisting of two large boxes of lab manuals ﬁlled with
thousands of pages of calculations done by the authors on desk calculators
while they served in the army. During the spring of 1959, wedged in between
my teaching duties and research in the UCLA Mathematics Department, I
mastered every detail, my excitement mounting as I strove to speed up the
enormous number of calculations that lay between me and a winning system.
The Baldwin strategy was the best way to play the game when nothing was
known about which cards had already been played. Their analysis was for a
single deck because that was the only version played in Nevada at the time.
The Baldwin group also showed that the advice of the reigning gambling
experts was poor, unnecessarily giving the casinos an extra 2 percent
advantage.
Any strategy table for blackjack must tell the player how to act for each
case that can arise from the ten possible values of the dealer’s upcard versus
each of the ﬁfty-ﬁve diﬀerent pairs of cards that can be dealt to the player. To
ﬁnd the best way for the player to manage his cards in each of these 550
diﬀerent situations, you need to calculate all the possible ways subsequent
cards can be dealt and the payoﬀs that result. There may be thousands, even
millions of ways each hand can play out. Do this for each of the 550
situations and the computations just for the complete deck become enormous.
If you are dealt a pair, the strategy table must tell you whether or not to split
it. The next decision is whether or not to double down, which is to double

your bet and draw exactly one card to the ﬁrst two cards of a hand. Your ﬁnal
decision is whether to draw more cards or to stop (“stand”). Once I had
ﬁgured out a winning strategy, I planned to condense these myriad decisions
onto tiny pictorial cards, just as I had with the Baldwin strategy. This would
allow me to visualize patterns, making it much easier to recall what to do in
each of the 550 possible cases.
The Baldwin group’s calculations for the full deck were approximate
because the exact calculations could not be done with desk calculators in a
human lifetime. The work I faced in 1959 was much more extensive as I had
to deduce the strategy for each of the millions of possible partially played
decks. To see what I was up against, suppose, as was standard practice then,
the dealer begins by “burning” one card. This means taking it from the top of
the deck and placing it on the bottom faceup as a signal not to deal it later,
leaving ﬁfty-one cards still in play. There are ten cases to analyze,
corresponding to the ten diﬀerent card values of the missing card: Ace, 2…9,
10. What if, as often happens, we see the burned card and want to use the
knowledge that it’s gone? We could apply the Baldwin analysis for each of
these ten cases and make a strategy table for each of 550 playing situations.
We would then have eleven strategy tables, one for the full deck and one each
for the ten possibilities where one card is missing.
Next, suppose we identify two missing cards, so only ﬁfty cards are left to
play. How many diﬀerent such ﬁfty-card decks can arise? As there are forty-
ﬁve ways to take out two cards with diﬀerent values [(A, 2), (A, 3)…(A, 10);
(2, 3), (2, 4)…(2, 10); et cetera] and ten ways to take out two cards of the
same value [(A, A), (2, 2)…(10, 10)], the total is ﬁfty-ﬁve. This leads to ﬁfty-
ﬁve more calculations, and ﬁfty-ﬁve more strategy tables, each of which could
take twelve man-years if done on desk calculators as per the Baldwin group.
We could continue in this way to develop strategy tables for every such partial
deck. For one deck of ﬁfty-two cards there are about thirty-three million of
these partially played decks, leading us to a gigantic library of thirty-three
million strategy tables.
Facing four hundred million man-years of calculations, with a resulting
railroad car full of strategy tables, enough to ﬁll a Rolodex ﬁve miles long, I
tried to simplify the problem. I predicted that the strategies and player’s edge
for partly used decks depended mainly on the fraction—or, equivalently, the

percentage—of each type of card remaining rather than on how many there
were.
This turned out to be true, and it meant, for example, that the eﬀect of 12
Tens when, say, forty cards were left to be played, was about the same as 9
Tens with thirty cards left, and 6 Tens with twenty left, as all three of these
decks have the same fraction, 3⁄10, or 30 percent, of Ten-value cards. In
counting cards, it’s mainly the fraction remaining that matters, not the
number.
I started by looking at how the player’s strategy and edge changed when I
varied the percentage of each card. I planned to take out all four Aces, do the
calculations, and see what happened, then repeat this by removing only four
2s, then only the four 3s, and so forth.
I began this work during the spring semester of 1959. I was teaching then
at UCLA for the year after I received my PhD in June 1958. That happened
because I had gotten my degree sooner than either I or my adviser, Angus
Taylor, had expected. As a result I hadn’t applied for a postdoctoral teaching
position, thinking it would be another year before I was available. Professor
Taylor arranged for my interim appointment at UCLA and then helped me
ﬁnd possible positions for the following year. The oﬀers I liked best were a C.
L. E. Moore Instructorship at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), and a job at the General Electric Corporation in Schenectady, New
York. At GE I would be using my physics background to do orbital
calculations for space projects. This sounded like it would be interesting for a
while, but I didn’t think I would have the freedom I expected to ﬁnd in
academia to follow my interests wherever they led. Expecting that kind of life
as a professor in a university, I chose MIT as a ﬁrst step.
We moved to MIT in June 1959. To get there, I purchased a used black
Pontiac sedan for $800 at a police auction and drove it across the country
towing a two-wheeled U-Haul trailer loaded with our household goods. We
were expecting our ﬁrst child in two months, so Vivian stayed with her
parents in Los Angeles while I went to Cambridge, Massachusetts, to set up
our apartment and do mathematics research on a summer grant. As I was
obliged under the terms of the grant to work at MIT until mid-August and the
baby was due a few days later, I was very nervous about whether I would get

back in time. Vivian and I spoke almost daily that summer over the phone.
Fortunately, the results of her checkups were always excellent.
Two Japanese mathematicians who were visiting at UCLA needed a ride to
New York. I was happy to take them, in return for their sharing the driving.
But on a deserted highway somewhere in Ohio, I was startled from a sound
sleep about 1 A.M. as the brakes squealed and the car shuddered. We stopped
just feet from a large brown-and-white cow meandering placidly across the
road. Since the only set of brakes we had were on the car, and the loaded
trailer doubled our mass, it also doubled our stopping distance. I had
explained this carefully before we left, but apparently without success.
Fighting fatigue, I drove the rest of the way.
—
Once I reached Cambridge, I had a lot to think about. I had never been to the
Boston area and didn’t know anyone there. Most of the regular staﬀ and
faculty were away for the summer but the department did arrange a
marvelous rental, the ﬁrst ﬂoor of a grand old three-story family home in
Cambridge. Having taken it sight unseen, I was pleasantly surprised at how
large it was and at the graciousness of my landlady, an Irish widow who lived
there with the two youngest of her ﬁve sons.
By day I did academic research in mathematics, but after dinner I’d walk
through the nearly deserted buildings to the calculator room. Once there, I
would pound the Monroe calculators every night from eight o’clock until
shortly before dawn. These were noisy electromechanical beasts about the
size of a very large typewriter. They could add, subtract, multiply, and divide
and were equivalent in this to today’s simplest cheapest handheld digital
devices. As there was no air-conditioning, I worked shirtless, my ﬁngers ﬂying
over the clacking keyboard, the calculator whirring and rumbling in the
humid Cambridge summer nights.
One morning about three o’clock, I came out to ﬁnd my car was missing
from the spot where I regularly parked it. When I went back inside to call the
police, a friendly night owl graduate student told me that the oﬃcers of the
law might themselves be the problem. I phoned the police station and learned
my car had been towed. When I pointed out that it had been legally parked,

the oﬃcer on duty explained that since it was seen in the same spot every
night, they assumed it was abandoned. I hurried downtown to night court
where the judge to whom I appealed screamed and threatened to ﬁne me
$100 on the spot if I said another word. The friendly student, who had driven
me there, explained that the police had an arrangement with the tow yard and
that the impound charges for my car were going to go up quickly if I pressed
my case. The next morning I ransomed my car at the tow yard for about
$100. This was a week’s pay. Welcome to Boston. Fortunately my new
hometown was also a beautiful one, rich in science, education, culture, and
the arts.
The weeks wore on and the calculations piled up. However, even though I
had introduced shortcuts and eﬃciencies and was very fast, I was making
little progress. My hand calculations were going to take hundreds, perhaps
thousands of years. At that point I learned that MIT had an IBM 704
computer and, being a faculty member, I could use it. Using a book from the
computer center, I taught myself to program the machine in its language,
FORTRAN.
In August 1959 I ﬂew to Los Angeles four days before the birth of our ﬁrst
child. Knowing we were having a girl, we agonized over name choices for
weeks, ﬁnding many we liked but none that was a ﬁrst choice for both of us.
We enlisted the help of Vivian’s brother, Ray, a speech major at UCLA with
a gift for the English language, who would go on to a distinguished legal
career. He invented the name Raun, with its uplifting rhyming images, like
dawn and fawn. None of us had ever heard of it but we loved it and the search
was over.
I was back at MIT a month later with Vivian and our new baby, beginning
my teaching and research duties. MIT then, as now, had one of the best
mathematics departments in the world, and much was expected of its young
faculty members. I taught two classes each semester, which meant six hours
per week in the classroom, preparation that could run another twelve to
ﬁfteen hours a week, additional hours in my oﬃce to meet with and help
students, plus the giving and grading of homework and exams. We were also
expected to conduct and publish our own original research in scholarly
journals. When this was submitted, it was reviewed by anonymous experts,
known as referees, as a precondition of acceptance. Rejections were common.

Those of us who wanted to succeed in the academic hierarchy all knew the
mantra “Publish or perish.” Despite all this, I also continued to work on my
“arbitrary subsets” blackjack program for the IBM 704 computer, testing and
correcting the computer code for one module (or “subroutine”) at a time.
The 704 was one of the early mainframe electronic computers, one of a
series of increasingly powerful models developed by IBM. In those days,
users entered instructions via punched cards roughly the size of a $1 bill. A
card had eighty columns with ten oblong vertical marks in each column. I put
cards, one at a time, in a keypunch and typed as I would on a typewriter; each
time I hit a key the machine punched holes in a vertical line and shifted to the
next column. The pattern of holes represented the letter, number, or symbol
on that key.
I left batches of punched cards bound with a rubber band in the in-bin at
the computer center, where they were collected and read as instructions to be
carried out by the IBM 704. It took several days for me to get the results,
because MIT shared the computer with thirty New England universities (such
as Amherst, Boston College, and Brandeis).
The work went more quickly as I mastered the strange new language. I had
divided the problem of writing the computer program into sections, or
subroutines, each of which I tested, corrected, and then cross-checked. Weeks
passed, then months, as I completed one part after another. Finally, early in
1960, I put them together and submitted the complete program. The ﬁrst
results indicated that the casino advantage, when you played as perfectly as
possible without keeping track of the cards that have been played, was 0.21
percent. The game was virtually even for anyone. It wouldn’t take much in the
way of card counting to give the player an edge! However, because even the
IBM 704 was unable to do all the necessary calculations in the available time,
I used approximations for some parts of the calculations. I knew that the
results using these shortcuts were slightly pessimistic. This meant that the real
game was even better for the player than my computer results indicated.
As computers became more powerful, my approximations were removed
step by step. Twenty years later, around 1980, computers had ﬁnally become
powerful enough to show that the ﬁnal ﬁgure for one deck using the blackjack
rules as given in the book I would go on to write, Beat the Dealer, was +0.13
percent in favor of the player. Players using my strategy had had, all along, a

small edge over the casino even without keeping track of the cards. But the
real power of my method was that I could analyze the game not only for the
complete deck, but for any collection of cards. I could explore the impact on
the game as the cards were used during play.
Now I instructed the computer to venture into the unknown: Analyze the
game when all four Aces were missing. Comparing the results with those I
already had for the full deck, I would see the eﬀect Aces had on the game.
With anticipation I picked up my rather thick deck of punch cards a few days
later from the out-bin. (It occurred to me that I was using cards to evaluate a
card game.) The IBM 704 had done a thousand man-years of hand
calculations in just ten minutes of computer time. I looked at these results
with great excitement, for they would very likely either prove I was right or
dash my hopes. The result was a player disadvantage of 2.72 percent with all
the Aces gone—2.51 percent worse than the overall 0.21 percent casino edge.
Although this was a huge shift in favor of the casino, it was actually great
news.
It proved conclusively what I believed in that Eureka moment back in the
UCLA library when I thought I could beat the game, namely, that as cards
were played there would be huge shifts in the edge, back and forth, between
the casino and the players. The math also showed me that if removing a
speciﬁc group of cards from the deck shifted the odds in one direction,
adding an equal number of the same cards instead would move the odds the
other way about the same amount. This meant that with an Ace-rich deck
rather than an Ace-poor deck, the player should have a big advantage. For
instance, with twice the usual proportion of Aces, which happens when all
four Aces remain among the last twenty-six cards (half the deck), the player
ought to gain roughly 2.51 percent over his initial 0.21 percent disadvantage,
for a net edge of about 2.30 percent.
Every two or three days I went to the computer center and picked up
another completed calculation, each of which would have taken a thousand
man-years by hand. I now knew the impact of removing any four cards of one
type from the deck. Taking out four Aces was worst for the player, and
removing four Tens was next worst, adding 1.94 percent to the house edge.
But taking out the “small” cards, which are 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, helped the player

enormously. Removing four 5s was best, changing the casino edge of 0.21
percent to a huge player edge of 3.29 percent.
Now I could design a great variety of winning strategies based on keeping
track of the cards. My analysis using MIT’s IBM 704 had produced the basic
results that gave me the Five-Count System, most of the Ten-Count System,
and the ideas for what I called the ultimate strategy. The latter assigned a
point value to every card, proportional to its eﬀect on the game, with Aces
each counted as −9, 2s counted as +5, and so on, down to Tens counted as
−7. Though this was too diﬃcult for almost anyone to keep track of mentally,
many simpler counting systems worked quite well. One of the best
compromises between ease of use and proﬁtability was to count the small-
value cards (2, 3, 4, 5, 6) as +1 as they are seen during play, intermediate
cards (7, 8, 9) as 0, and large-value cards (10, J, Q, K, A) as −1. From the
results of my computer runs anyone could work out the details of nearly all
the blackjack card counting systems in use today.
Intuitively, these results make sense. For instance, when the dealer has a
total of 16 he has to hit. He loses if he draws a big card that puts his total
over 21 and survives if he draws a small card. A 5 gives him 21, best of all.
So he beneﬁts when the deck is richer in small cards and poorer in big cards.
On the other hand, when the deck has a higher percentage of Aces and Tens,
there will be more two-card totals of 21, or blackjacks. The player and the
dealer each win with a blackjack about 4.5 percent of the time but the player
gets paid 1.5 times his bet for this while the dealer gains only the player’s bet,
for a net beneﬁt to the player.
Keeping track of the 5s leads to a very simple winning system. Suppose the
player bets small whenever any 5s are left and bets big whenever all the 5s are
gone. The likelihood of all the 5s being gone increases as fewer cards remain.
When twenty-six cards are left, this will happen about 5 percent of the time,
and if only thirteen cards are left, 30 percent of the time. Since the player
then has a 3.29 percent edge on his bets, if these are very big compared with
his other bets he wins in the long run.
For actual casino play, I built a much more powerful winning strategy
based on the ﬂuctuation in the percentage of Ten-value cards in the deck,
even though my calculations showed that the impact of a Ten was less than

that of a 5, since there were four times as many Tens. The larger ﬂuctuations
in “Ten-richness” that resulted gave the player more and better opportunities.
During our family drive from Boston to California in the summer of 1960,
I persuaded a reluctant Vivian to stop brieﬂy in Las Vegas so I could test the
Tens strategy. We sat down to play blackjack in one of the casinos downtown
on Fremont Street. I had a $200 bankroll (worth about $1600 in 2016) and a
palm-sized card with my new strategy. I hoped not to use the card and so
avoid drawing attention to myself. This card was unlike anything before it.
Not only did it tell me how to play every hand versus each dealer upcard, but
it also showed how much to bet and how the playing decisions changed as the
percentage of Tens varied. Speciﬁcally, the complete deck had 36 non-Tens
and 16 Tens, so I started counting “36, 16,” which gives a ratio of non-Tens
to Tens of 36 ÷ 16 = 2.25.
Vivian and I sat down together, with her betting 25 cents a hand to keep
me company. As play progressed and I kept track of the non-Tens and Tens
that were used, I reduced the totals for those remaining. Whenever I had to
place a bet or make a decision on how to play my hand, I used the current
totals to recalculate the ratio. A ratio below 2.25 meant the deck was Ten-
rich, and when a ratio hit 2.0 the player had an edge of about 1 percent. For
ratios of 2.0 or less, which meant advantages of 1 percent or more, I bet
between $2 and $10 depending on the size of my edge. Otherwise I bet $1.
Vivian watched nervously as I gradually lost $32. At this point my dealer
said hostilely, “You’d better take out some more money, because you’re going
to need it.” Smelling a rat, Vivian said, “Let’s get out of here.” Even though I
lost, I was satisﬁed because I had shown that I could play the Ten-Count
System at casino speed without looking at the strategy card. The $32 loss was
well within the range of possible outcomes predicted by my theory, so it
didn’t lead me to doubt my results. With nothing more for me to learn that
day, I left, poorer once again but, I hoped, wiser.
Mathematical friends at MIT were astounded that fall when I told them of
my discovery. Some thought I should publish quickly to establish priority
before someone else either rediscovered my idea or stole it and passed it oﬀ
as their own. I needed little prompting, since I had already been burned once.
While I was at UCLA, my PhD thesis adviser, Angus Taylor, suggested that I
send some of my mathematical work to a well-known California

mathematician for his comments. I got no response. But eleven months later
at a Southern California meeting of the American Mathematical Society,
Taylor and I heard the great man talk. The subject was my discovery, in
detail, presented as part of his original work, and it was also about to appear
under his name in print, in a well-known mathematical journal. Both of us
were stunned. Taylor, who would later become academic vice president of the
entire University of California system, was an ethical and experienced
mathematician to whom I looked for guidance, but he didn’t know what to do.
So neither of us did anything.
It is also common in science for the time to be right for a discovery, in
which case it is made independently by two or more researchers at nearly the
same time. Famous examples include calculus by Newton and Leibniz, and
the theory of evolution by Darwin and Wallace. Five years before I did my
blackjack work, it would have been much more diﬃcult to accomplish. Five
years afterward, with the increasing power and availability of computers, it
was clearly going to be much easier.
Another reason to publish quickly is the well-known phenomenon that it is
typically much easier to solve a problem if you know it can be solved. So the
mere fact that the news was spreading through word of mouth meant others
would repeat my work, sooner rather than later. This point was made in a
science-ﬁction story I had read earlier in college. A professor at Cambridge
University has by far the most brilliant class of graduate physics students ever.
He divides the twenty of them into four teams of ﬁve and assigns his hardest
homework problems. Since the class knows he has the answers, they persist
until they can answer every question. Finally, to stump them, he says,
untruthfully, that the Russians have discovered how to neutralize gravity, and
their job is to show how it’s done. A week later two of the four groups present
solutions.
To protect myself from this happening with my work on blackjack, I
settled on Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, as it was the
quickest to publish of any journal I knew, taking as little as two or three
months, and was also very prestigious. This required a member of the
academy to approve and forward my work, so I sought out the only
mathematics member of the academy at MIT, Claude Shannon. Claude was

famous for the creation of information theory, which is crucial for modern
computing, communications, and much more.
The department secretary arranged a short appointment with a reluctant
Shannon at noon. However, she warned me that Shannon was going to be in
for only a few minutes, that I shouldn’t expect more, and that he didn’t spend
time on topics or people that didn’t interest him. A little in awe but feeling
lucky, I arrived at Shannon’s oﬃce to ﬁnd a thinnish alert man of middle
height and build, somewhat sharp-featured. I told the blackjack story brieﬂy
and showed him my proposed article.
Shannon cross-examined me in detail, both to understand the way I
analyzed the game and to ﬁnd possible ﬂaws. My few minutes turned into an
hour and a half of animated dialogue, during which we grabbed lunch in the
MIT cafeteria. He pointed out in closing that I appeared to have made the big
theoretical breakthrough on the subject, and that what remained to be
discovered would be more in the way of details and elaboration. He asked me
to change the title from “A Winning Strategy for Blackjack” to “A Favorable
Strategy for Twenty-One,” as this title was more sedate and acceptable to the
academy. Space in the magazine was tight, and each member could submit
only a limited number of pages per year, so I reluctantly accepted Shannon’s
suggestions for condensation. We agreed that I’d send him the revision right
away to forward to the academy.
As we returned to the oﬃce he asked, “Are you working on anything else
in the gambling area?” I hesitated for a moment then decided to spill my
other big secret, explaining why roulette was predictable, and that I planned
to build a small computer to make the predictions, wearing it hidden under
my clothing. As I outlined my progress, ideas ﬂew between us. Several hours
later, as the Cambridge sky turned dusky, we ﬁnally parted, excited by our
plans to work together to beat the game.
Meanwhile, I was planning to present my blackjack system at the annual
meeting of the American Mathematical Society in Washington, DC. I
submitted an abstract of my talk titled “Fortune’s Formula: The Game of
Blackjack” for the program booklet (The Notices), where it would appear
amid a large collection of typically technical and abstruse summaries of
presentations.

When the screening committee received my abstract, their near-unanimous
reaction was to reject it. I learned this later from John Selfridge, a number
theorist whom I had known at UCLA and a member of the committee. For a
while, he held the world’s record for ﬁnding the largest known prime number.
(A prime is a positive whole number divisible only by itself and one. The ﬁrst
few are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13…) Fortunately, Selfridge persuaded them that I was
a legitimate mathematician and that if I said it was true, it likely was.
Why would the committee reject my talk? Professional mathematicians
regularly receive claims that the sender has solved some famous problem,
claims that almost always turn out to be from cranks, from the
mathematically uneducated unaware of what’s already been done, or that
include proofs containing simple errors. The so-called solution often is to a
problem that has long ago been proven to be impossible, such as a method for
trisecting (dividing into three equal angles) any angle whatsoever with
compass and straightedge alone. On the other hand, students of plane
geometry learn a simple method for bisecting an angle this way. A small
change in the problem, from dividing an angle into two equal parts, to
splitting it into three equal parts, transforms an easy problem into an
impossible one.
The situation then was similar for gambling systems, since mathematicians
had proved that a winning system was impossible for most of the standard
gambling games. And obviously, if the casinos could be beaten they would
either change the rules of the game or go out of business. No wonder the
committee was inclined to reject my abstract. Ironically, their reason for
doing so—that mathematicians had apparently proven that winning gambling
systems were impossible—was my strongest motivation for showing it could
be done.
Two evenings before I left for the meeting, I was surprised by a call from
Dick Stewart of The Boston Globe, inquiring about my upcoming talk.
Meanwhile, the newspaper sent out a photographer. I explained the basic
ideas of my system on the phone. The next morning my picture and Stewart’s
article were on the front page. Within hours the news services released the
story and more photos to scores of papers across the country. As I left for the
airport Vivian was wearily logging an incoming wave of hundreds of

messages and, before long, our baby daughter, Raun, cried each time the
telephone rang.
