Chapter 6
THE DAY OF THE LAMB
I ﬂew into Washington, DC, with its leaden wintry skies and the ﬁrst snow
ﬂurries of what would become a gigantic storm. The city was still packed with
people after the recent inauguration of the new president of the United States,
John F. Kennedy.
The meeting of the American Mathematical Society was held in the old
Willard Hotel. Instead of the anticipated scholarly audience of forty or ﬁfty, I
found an animated standing-room-only crowd of hundreds. Scattered among
the mathematicians were others who were sporting sunglasses, gaudy
oversized pinkie rings and cigars, as well as reporters with cameras and
notepads. In the manner of mathematics meetings, I had prepared a matter-
of-fact talk, which I began with an explanation of how to win by counting 5s.
I went on to mention that counting Tens was much better, and then hinted at
the cornucopia of additional counting systems revealed by my methodology.
My terse technical presentation didn’t deter my audience. I ﬁnished and
placed a woefully inadequate ﬁfty copies of my speech on the table in front of
me. The group surged toward them like carnivores competing for fresh meat.
Responding to requests, the oﬃcials in charge of the meeting arranged a
press conference for me following my talk, after which I was televised by a
major network and interviewed on several radio programs. The scientists and
technical types generally understood and believed the winning strategy I
described, but the casinos and some of the press did not. In a cynical
editorial, The Washington Post said there was a mathematician in town
claiming to have a winning gambling system, which reminded them of this
ad: Send $1 for a sureﬁre weed killer. Back comes a note saying “Grab by the

roots and pull like hell.” One casino spokesman mockingly claimed they sent
cabs to the airport to meet players with systems. (I’ve waited over ﬁfty years
now for those cabs.) Another told of how I had sent a detailed questionnaire
asking about the precise blackjack rules used in his gaming house. He stated
that I was so ignorant, I didn’t even know the rules of the game. When
starting my calculations a couple of years earlier, I had, in fact, sent just such
an inquiry to twenty-six Nevada casinos. My object was to learn how the rules
varied from one establishment to another, in particular to see if some places
had rules even more favorable than usual. Thirteen of the twenty-six casinos
were kind enough to reply to an ignorant academic.
A young reporter for the Post named Tom Wolfe followed up after my talk
with an interview. The Post ran his story, “You Can So Beat the Gambling
House at Blackjack, Math Expert Insists.” He was curious rather than
skeptical, sympathetic but probing. Wolfe later became one of America’s
most famous authors.
By this time, Washington’s airports were buried in two feet of snow, so I
boarded a train for Boston. During the long ride back I wondered how my
research into the mathematical theory of a game might change my life. In the
abstract, life is a mixture of chance and choice. Chance can be thought of as
the cards you are dealt in life. Choice is how you play them. I chose to
investigate blackjack. As a result, chance oﬀered me a new set of unexpected
opportunities.
Ever since my ﬁrst meeting with Claude Shannon in September, we had
been working on the roulette project approximately twenty hours a week.
Meanwhile, I was teaching courses, doing research in pure mathematics,
attending department functions, writing up my blackjack research, and
adjusting to being a new father. Following a roulette work session at the
Shannons’, Claude asked me at dinner if I thought anything would ever top
this in my life. My thoughts then were much like I expected his to have been:
that acknowledgment, applause, and honor are welcome and add zest to life
but they are not ends to be pursued. I felt then, as I do now, that what matters
is what you do and how you do it, the quality of the time you spend, and the
people you share it with.
Meanwhile, the national AP wire service ran Tom Wolfe’s story, causing
thousands of letters and phone calls to pour into the MIT Math Department.

The secretaries were busy for weeks, trying the patience of everyone. I
decided it was wiser not to answer some of my correspondence. For instance,
one writer sent me an elaborate twenty-ﬁve-page “proof” that he was the
reincarnation of Ponce de León. Although I did not write back, there
followed another lengthy recitation of “connections” among him, me, and
Ponce de León demonstrating that I played a crucial role in his story. He
claimed it was my duty to get involved!
Another man oﬀered to be my bodyguard, assuring me that I was going to
need one if I went out to beat the casinos. When I didn’t answer him he sent a
hostile letter outlining his military and ﬁrearms skills, assuring me that he
could “put a bullet between your eyes at 25 yards” with a .45-caliber
automatic, and that he would work free just for the privilege of learning what
he could from being around me. This was followed by a ﬁnal letter warning
that when I learned, to my sorrow, that I needed his protection, he wouldn’t
be there. He expressed bitterness that I “was just like all the rest of them” to
whom he had oﬀered his services.
The greatest number of letters asked for copies of my paper and for
detailed instructions on “how to do it.” I manufactured and sent out hundreds
of copies of the talk and paper, in the academic spirit of freedom of
information, courtesy of the MIT Mathematics Department until,
overwhelmed, I gave up.
Before I gave my talk at the meeting, I hadn’t envisaged the clamor and the
sort of publicity that would follow. Instead, I’d expected scholars to look at
my work, be very surprised at the results, and eventually agree that it was
correct. But rather than this happening in a quiet, slow-paced academic way, I
was besieged by strangers all wanting a piece of me. This kind of “fame” I
didn’t need.
Oﬀers to back a casino test of my system ranged from a few thousand
dollars to $100,000. The decision was being thrust upon me as to whether or
not to prove my academic theory would really work at the tables. I ﬁnally
decided to go to Nevada, partly to silence that irritating jeer often leveled at
academics, “Well, if you’re so smart, why aren’t you rich?” As a matter of
personal pride and honor I felt that I owed my readers proof that the theory
really worked, despite scoﬀs from casinos that my claims were ridiculous. The
clincher was the casino spokesman on television who, speaking of my system

said, “When a lamb goes to the slaughter, the lamb might kill the butcher. But
we always bet on the butcher.”
The most promising oﬀer came from two New York multimillionaires
whom I called Mr. X and Mr. Y when I wrote about them later. After
repeated phone calls from Mr. X and much hesitation on my part about the
dangers of risking a bankroll provided by strangers in a place about which I
knew little, I ﬁnally agreed to a meeting.
It was a wintry February afternoon outside our Cambridge apartment,
framed by stark leaﬂess trees against a gunmetal-gray sky. Wooden multistory
houses lined the street, the pores of their wood sides and stoops permeated
with coal dust and a sooty crust covering the new snow. By 4 P.M. the light
was fading and our visitor was overdue. Then a midnight-blue Cadillac pulled
up with two good-looking young blondes inside, one visible through the front
passenger window and another who stepped out from behind the wheel. I
thought, Who are these people? Where is Mr. X? While the passenger-side
blonde held the door for him, a short white-haired man in a long black
cashmere overcoat emerged. They rang our bell and we realized this must be
Mr. X. He introduced himself as Emmanuel “Manny” Kimmel, then about
sixty-ﬁve, and said he was a wealthy businessman from Maplewood, New
Jersey, who knew his way around the gambling world. He explained that the
two mink-coated beauties were his nieces. I took this at face value, although I
could see from Vivian’s expression that she had a diﬀerent view.
Kimmel dealt blackjack to me for a couple of hours and quizzed me about
my research. Oﬀ to the side, Vivian, with our eighteen-month-old daughter,
talked to the “nieces.” At one point, just as the younger niece was naïvely
volunteering personal information, the other niece whispered out of the side
of her mouth, “Cool it.”
After our discussion, Manny was ready to plan a trip to Nevada. We agreed
to go as soon as I was free, which was during MIT’s one-week spring break in
April. As they were leaving he drew out a tangled handful of pearl necklaces
from a pocket of his overcoat and oﬀered a strand to Vivian. The pearls
stayed in the family and still, more than ﬁfty years later, are worn by Raun.
Vivian was both apprehensive and supportive about the casino test. On the
one hand, though the math details were incomprehensible to her and almost
everyone else, she knew that I generally didn’t make claims I couldn’t back

up, especially in math and science. Even though it was all calculations and
reasoning so far, she believed I would win in a fair ﬁght. But this was going to
take place in the real world, not a world of symbols and equations. Would the
casinos play fair or might they somehow cheat or render me incompetent,
perhaps with drugs or violence? What about those supposed nieces who she
saw clearly weren’t? I’d be entering a world of easy money and easy women,
and who knew what other perils. What about my backers? Were they
competent to protect me against any casino funny business? Could they last
through the temporary losses we were bound to incur sometime early in the
play?
In my view, after the whole country had heard my claims, backing down
would appear to validate the retorts that I was full of baloney. I was certain
that I was right. There was no way I would let my family, friends, and
colleagues think otherwise. Even though the Goliath I was challenging had
always won, I knew something no one else did: He was nearsighted, clumsy,
slow, and stupid, and we were going to ﬁght on my terms, not his. The
clincher was that Vivian, despite her reservations and her preference that I
play it safe, thought I could do it.
In preparation for our foray, I ﬂew from Boston to New York every
Wednesday, a day I had no classes to teach. I’d arrive in Manny’s Manhattan
penthouse; he dealt while I played the Ten-Count. Although I had several
card counting methods to oﬀer, Kimmel ﬁxated on the Ten-Count and would
hear of nothing else. Meanwhile, that suited me because I had already worked
out the strategy tables for the Ten-Count but hadn’t done so yet for the others.
The Ten-Count raises bets when the remaining deck is rich in Aces and Tens.
After a couple of hours Manny’s butler served lunch as we continued playing.
At the end of each session Kimmel would give me $100 or $150 to cover
expenses and, curiously, a salami. These salamis added an unmistakable
aroma to the cabin during my return ﬂight.
Kimmel’s friend and co-backer for our venture, Mr. Y, came to some of
the sessions. One of the nieces sometimes watched as well. Mr. Y was Eddie
Hand, a wealthy businessman from upstate New York. He was fortyish, dark-
haired, and of medium stature; he spoke with a curious mix of gruﬀ
complaint and humor. As the weeks passed, the chips piled up on my side of

the table and Manny became more and more enthusiastic. After half a dozen
sessions, we were ready for our Nevada adventure.
There were two main approaches we could adopt when we sat down to play
in the casinos. One, which I call wild, involved betting the table limit
whenever the advantage to the player exceeded some small ﬁgure, say 1
percent. This typically wins the most money, but ﬂuctuations in wealth may
be violent, and a large bankroll is required to ride out big losses. Kimmel and
Hand said that they would put up $100,000, and more if necessary. (This was
worth $800,000 in 2016 dollars, as the inﬂation conversion table in appendix
A indicates.)
I was not in favor of this strategy, since there was too much that I did not
know about the gambling world. Could they cheat or swindle me somehow?
And how would I react if I were to get behind $50,000, each minute having
to continue betting more than my monthly salary? Would Kimmel and Hand
stay the course if we lost this much? If they were to quit at that point, it
would mean we really had only a $50,000 bankroll but didn’t know it
beforehand and so should have been betting more conservatively from the
start. Besides, my goal was more to test my system than to make big money
for my backers. To better achieve this, I went for a nearly certain moderate
win rather than taking on more risk of loss to try for a big payout. I planned
to play conservatively, betting twice my lowest bet when the advantage for me
became 1 percent, four times as much with a 2 percent edge, and ﬁnally
leveling oﬀ at ten times my small bets when the game was 5 percent or more
in my favor. Varying bets from $50 to $500, the highest casino maximum
then generally available, I felt $10,000 should be an adequate stake.
Manny reluctantly agreed. During the MIT spring break we met at the
airport in New York on a cold April afternoon. We chatted for an hour, then
boarded our plane. At midnight, as we approached Reno, a garish patch of
light appeared ahead in the otherwise Stygian blackness. As we circled to
land I got my ﬁrst view of a city that looked like a bloody reddish neon spider
spread over the landscape. I wondered apprehensively about what would
happen to me over the next week. Vivian was more alarmed than I was about
my ﬂight into the unknown and wanted me to call every day. It relieved me to
know I was connected to her and, through her, to my familiar world. In those
days long-distance calls were expensive. To save money I called collect if

everything was okay, asking for “Edward __. Thorp,” the middle initial being
a code we had devised to tell how many thousands of dollars we were ahead
or, if the initial came before “Edward,” how many behind. The idea was
simple: The initial A meant less than $1,000, B meant between $1,000 and
$2,000, C between $2,000 and $3,000, and so on up to Z, which covered
$25,000 to $26,000. After hearing the name of the person being called,
Vivian would politely tell the operator that Mr. Thorp “wasn’t here at the
moment.”
After a few hours of sleep, we met for breakfast in the hotel. Sandy-eyed
and tired, I fortiﬁed myself with eggs Benedict and orange juice accompanied
by lots of black coﬀee, and the three of us headed for the tables. At our ﬁrst
casino, situated outside of town, I started small, betting from $1 to $10,
planning to increase my bet size as I became more comfortable with the level
of risk. Eventually I would bet $50 to $500. Before the trip I insisted on only
a $10,000 bankroll, but I knew that Manny favored bets ten times as big—
$500 bets whenever we had a 1  percent edge—backed by a $100,000
bankroll. I insisted on warming up by betting $1 to $10. I had explained
carefully to Manny that I needed to work up to big bets at my own pace, but
he couldn’t stand watching and waiting while I did it. Growing ever more
agitated, Manny’s pale complexion eventually ﬂushed bright red, a startling
contrast with his full head of white hair. I learned later that he typically won
or lost tens of thousands of dollars at casinos in the United States and in Cuba
before the communist takeover.
I won a few dollars in an hour or so of play, but then the establishment
closed for three hours because of Good Friday. Returning to downtown
Reno, we chose a casino with very favorable rules. They dealt to the last card
and allowed players to double down on any hand, and split any pair. If the
dealer’s ﬁrst card, always dealt faceup, was an Ace, some casinos, including
this one, allowed the player to “take insurance” against the dealer’s second
card being a 10 or a face card (giving him a “natural,” namely, a two-card
total of 21) by making an additional bet equal to one-half of his original
stake. If the dealer has a natural, the insurance bet pays 2:1.
After a lavish dinner and a rest, I continued playing for ﬁfteen or twenty
minutes at a time and then resting for a few minutes. When I sat down again,
as usual I chose the table with the fewest players. Playing slowly, I paused for

thought and stared at all the cards played. Management thought I was using
one of the many fallacious betting systems. These featured patterns of betting
that were supposed to somehow overcome the house edge. There are inﬁnitely
many of them. None work. Such players, common in the casinos, are
welcomed as long as they are losing. Whatever I was doing, playing at the
betting level of from $1 to $10, I gradually fell further behind until I was
$100 in the hole. All this had taken eight hours, during which time Manny
became in turns frantic, disgusted, excited, and ﬁnally close to giving up on
me as his secret weapon.
It was now 3 A.M. and during the last couple of hours most of the players in
the room had left. I was able to get a table completely to myself. My new
dealer was unfriendly, and I was tired and irritable. After a sharp exchange of
words, she dealt as rapidly as she could. Annoyed and feeling that I was
experienced enough to raise my bets, I moved up to the $2 to $20 range.
Coincidentally, the deck turned favorable, and I won the next several hands. I
recouped my losses and ﬁnished a bit ahead. I was exhausted so I stopped and
went oﬀ to bed. It was 5 A.M. but it could have been any time. Casinos don’t
have clocks and generally lack windows so the gamblers don’t notice day
changing to night and back to day. Perhaps the best clue as to where you are
in the dismal diurnal cycle of this detached surreal world is the people as they
ebb and ﬂow like the tides.
Still tired, I awoke about noon and called Vivian collect. Using our code I
asked for Edward A. Thorp, meaning “Everything is okay and we are ahead
but by no more than a thousand dollars.” I was buoyed by the tone of relief in
my wife’s voice as she told the operator that Mr. Thorp was not available.
After breakfast Manny and I again visited the casino outside of town.
Within minutes, now playing $10 to $100, I won two or three hundred
dollars. Then with me counting for both of us, my excitable backer decided
he wanted to play as well. After two hours, we had accumulated $650 and the
house began to “shuﬄe up”—that is, they would reshuﬄe the entire pack
after dealing only a few rounds. Since favorable situations come more often
toward the end of the deck, early reshuﬄing sharply reduces the rate of proﬁt.
We decided to go elsewhere.
My play was becoming fast and smooth, equal to any dealers’ speed. I was
also growing more comfortable with raising the stakes. Moving up to $25 to

$250 at the next gaming establishment we visited, after an hour I raised the
bets to the $50-to-$500 range. I had calculated this to be the highest we could
bet safely with our $10,000 bankroll. This plan, of betting only at a level at
which I was emotionally comfortable and not advancing until I was ready,
enabled me to play my system with a calm and disciplined accuracy. This
lesson from the blackjack tables would prove invaluable throughout my
investment lifetime as the stakes grew ever larger.
Eddie Hand arrived Saturday evening, in time for the three of us to visit
the famous Harold’s Club in downtown Reno.
Starting with a ﬂoundering bingo parlor in the 1930s, owner Harold Smith,
Sr., had built it into the most famous casino in the United States. In addition
to twenty-three hundred road advertisements on America’s highways and
promotion overseas by servicemen who had been well treated, Smith had
introduced the innovations of women dealers, twenty-four-hour operation,
and customer service directed at the everyday gambler. The strategy was
enormously proﬁtable, and the club was a destination for high-stakes gamblers
as well. Twenty years earlier, when my family drove to California from
Chicago, I had been intrigued as a ten-year-old by all the roadside signs
proclaiming HAROLD’S CLUB, RENO, OR BUST. Now here I was.
Manny, Eddie, and I walked into the ground ﬂoor of Harold’s Club, which
was light and spacious compared with the typical gaming establishment.
Passing rows of slot machines, I sat down to warm up at $25 to $250, as
Manny and Eddie watched closely. My backers then asked if we could get our
own $500-limit game to be free of the nuisance of players dropping in to
make small bets. At this point the pit boss invited us to the private area
upstairs for higher-stakes players. There I had my own dealer and one of the
three tables entirely to myself. I couldn’t have asked for better playing
conditions. But after about ﬁfteen minutes, when I was ahead a mere $500,
owner Harold Smith, Sr., with his son Harold Smith, Jr., in tow, slipped in
from a side door and came up behind our dealer. Looking back, I believe that
they knew who Manny and Eddie were and, in light of their high-rolling
history, were concerned that they had some scheme that could prove costly to
the casino. Pleasantries and politenesses were exchanged, but they made their
point: The deck would be shuﬄed as often as necessary to prevent me from
doing whatever it was that I might be doing.

The owners instructed our dealer to shuﬄe with twelve to ﬁfteen cards left
in the deck. I still won. They shuﬄed halfway through the deck. Finally, the
cards were shuﬄed after only two hands had been played. I squeezed out
another $80 and we left.
At our next stop, the maximum was only $300, but the rules were
excellent. Players could insure, split any pair, and double down on any set of
cards. Even so, the cards ran badly, I lost steadily, and after four hours I was
behind $1,700 and discouraged. Of course, I knew that just as the house can
lose in the short run even though it has the advantage in a game, so a card
counter can fall behind and this can last for hours or, sometimes, even days.
Persisting, I waited for the deck to become favorable just one more time.
It happened a few minutes later as the deck suddenly produced a 5 percent
advantage. I made the maximum bet of $300, which took all my remaining
chips. Thinking about whether to quit or buy more chips if I lost this one, I
picked up my hand and found a pair of 8s. They must be split. Why? Because
16 is a terrible hand. Draw and you probably bust, or stand and the dealer
probably beats you with 17 or more. But if you split, you start each of your
two new hands with an 8—a so-so ﬁrst card. I ﬂung three $100 bills from my
wallet onto the second 8. On one of the 8s the second card I received was a 3.
Doubling down was the right move, so I dropped another $300 onto this hand
and was dealt one more card. Nine hundred dollars, the largest bet I’d yet
made, was now lying on the table.
The dealer, showing a 6 up, had a Ten under and promptly busted, so I won
both hands for a gain of $900, leaving me only $800 down. This deck
continued to be favorable, calling for big bets, and the next deck quickly
became good as well. In a few minutes I had wiped out my losses and went
ahead $255. Then we quit for the evening.
For the second time, the Ten-Count System had shown moderately heavy
losses mixed with “lucky” streaks of the most dazzling brilliance. I learned
later that this was a characteristic of a random series of favorable bets. And I
would see it again and again in real life in both the gambling and the
investment worlds.
The next afternoon the three of us visited the casino outside of town again.
Before sitting down at the table, I called Vivian. When I came back my
friends told me the casino had barred us from play, but would be only too

happy to pick up our meal tab. I asked the ﬂoor manager what this was all
about. He explained, in a friendly and courteous manner, that they had seen
me playing the day before and were puzzled at my steady winning at a rate
that was large for my bet sizes. He said that they decided that a system was
involved.
I later read that Nevada casinos were able to bar players without cause
because—incredible as it sounds—they were considered to be private clubs,
not oﬀering themselves to the general public, and so could exclude whomever
they pleased. Skin color was among the criteria once used by some gaming
establishments.
The next afternoon, we drove to Stateline, Nevada, at the south end of
Lake Tahoe. The town was jammed against the Nevada side of the border
with California. Across the line, California looked normal, with motels,
coﬀee shops, and residential areas. But in Nevada, where gambling was legal,
casinos and hotels crowded as close to California as possible, to better their
chances of luring the tourists entering Nevada.
Amid the glitter and congestion, we arrived about 6 P.M. at a large, brightly
lit gambling factory. It was jammed. I was barely able to get a seat at the
blackjack tables.
I placed $2,000 worth of chips on the table, and Manny, unable anymore
to bear simply watching, insisted on playing beside me, with me calling his
plays and attempting to control the size of his bets. This was a bad idea
because he didn’t know the strategy and, playing the cards the way he was
used to doing, he lost the advantage. I was unable to correct him at the table
without making what we were doing obvious. Meanwhile, besides playing my
cards and trying to quietly instruct him, I was counting cards and determining
how much we each should bet. Excitable and a bad listener under normal
circumstances, he paid little attention to me, misplayed hands, and bet too
much for our $10,000 bankroll. Soon I had won $1,300. Betting wildly,
Manny won $2,000. Then a drooling pit boss invited us to dinner and the
show. Passing on the show, we enjoyed ﬁlet mignon and champagne. Within
hours, Destiny would present us with the bill. The charge? Eleven thousand
dollars in lost proﬁts.
After dinner we strolled over to the new glittering high-rise that housed
one of the biggest casinos, Harvey’s Wagon Wheel. It had evolved from a

one-room log cabin built in 1944 by Sacramento meat wholesaler Harvey
Grossman and his wife, Llewellyn, on the Nevada side of the border with
California. The name came from the wagon wheel they had nailed over the
door. Now the site held the ﬁrst tower on the south shore, featuring a casino
within a 197-room, twelve-story hotel. I bought $2,000 in chips from the
cashier’s cage and made my way to an empty table. Soon I was plagued by $1
bettors who came and went, slowing the game and concealing cards, which
made it harder to count.
Betting $50 to $500, I pointedly reduced my minimum bet to $1 whenever
another player arrived. After a few minutes the pit boss got the message and
asked if I would like a private table. I said it would transport me with ecstasy.
He explained that the club didn’t like the psychological eﬀect of a private
table on the other customers, but with a trace of a smile he added that a $25-
minimum game could be arranged and wondered if that would be
satisfactory. Indeed it would, and when the sign was posted it cleared the
table of all customers but me. A small crowd gathered. They were quiet,
perhaps anticipating the imminent slaughter of their ﬁscally plump fellow
lamb.
After I had won a few hundred dollars, Manny once again jumped in. He
had agreed not to do this after the last time. Again he wouldn’t listen; I tried
to make the best of it. I kept the count and again directed the play of the
hands for both of us. I tried to be subtle and he wasn’t paying close attention,
but he did know to follow me in moving his bet size up and down. Since this
is more important than exact play of the cards, he still had an edge. After
thirty minutes we emptied the table’s money tray—the blackjack version of
breaking the bank. No longer smiling, the pit boss was scared.
The employees began to panic. Our dealer begged her higher-up boyfriend,
who had been attracted by the commotion, “Oh, help me. Please, help me.”
The pit boss was trying to explain away our win to a nervous knot of
subordinates. While the money tray was being restocked, the crowd swelled.
They began to cheer their David on against the casino Goliath.
We played another two hours and broke the bank again. The great heaps of
chips in front of us included more than $17,000 in proﬁts. I won $6,000, and
Manny, again overbetting wildly, had added $11,000 to his stake. I was tiring
from the aftereﬀects of our huge dinner, the increased eﬀort in managing

Manny’s hand along with my own, and the fatigue from the previous few days.
It was getting harder to count properly and my partner was also wilting.
Insisting that we quit, I headed for the cashier. Stuﬀed with chips, my pockets
bulged like saddlebags. My bounty did not go unnoticed. Along the way, I
was startled to meet three or four lovely ladies wandering back and forth
across my path smiling aﬀectionately.
I cashed out and wended my way back to the tables to watch horror-
stricken as Manny, feeling lucky and refusing to stop, poured back thousands
of dollars. For me blackjack was a game of math, not luck. Any luck, good or
bad, would be random, unpredictable, and short-term. In the long run it
would be unimportant. Manny didn’t see it that way. When I tried to dislodge
him he cried excitedly, “I…will…not…leave…this…place!” In the forty-ﬁve
minutes or so that it took to pry him loose, he lost back the entire $11,000
that he had won. Even so, when we returned to our hotel that evening with
my winnings, we were ahead $13,000 so far on the trip. My daily calls to
Vivian had shown her that we were winning more each day. Now came the
best call of all: I asked dramatically for Edward M. Thorp (ahead between
$12,000 and $13,000). In a relieved and buoyant voice she told the operator I
wasn’t home.
On our last day we returned to the club where I had ﬁrst practiced. I put
$1,000 in chips on the table and began to win. Word had spread and within
minutes the owner was on the scene. In a panic, he gave the dealer and the pit
boss instructions. If I changed my bet size, the dealer was to shuﬄe the entire
deck before the next deal. Whenever I varied the number of hands I took (I
could now play from one to eight hands at a time, and faster than the best
dealers could deal), the cards were shuﬄed. The dealer whom I had last
played against in my little practice session was standing in the background
saying over and over, in reverent tones, how much I had advanced in skill
since the other night. When I happened to scratch my nose, the dealer
shuﬄed! Incredulous, I asked her whether she would shuﬄe each time I did
so. She said she would. I tested with a few more scratches. She meant what
she said. I asked if any unusual act, no matter how minute, would cause her to
shuﬄe. Again she said, “Yes.”
I was now playing merely even with the house, as shuﬄing all the cards and
starting each deal with a full deck destroyed my advantage. I asked for larger

chips—$50 or $100—as all I had were twenties. The owner stepped forward
and said that the house would not sell them to us. He then had a brand-new
deck of cards brought in. The dealer carefully spread it facedown, then again
faceup. I asked why they spread them facedown. Although this practice is
common, casinos seldom examine the backs of the cards but now they did,
for a full two minutes. Even though I wear glasses, the dealer explained that
they believed I had unusually acute vision, and could distinguish tiny
blemishes on the backs of the cards. This let me know what cards would
appear next. I scoﬀed, but the panicky owner brought in four fresh decks in
ﬁve minutes.
Changing decks didn’t matter to me, so they gave up on that. In whispers,
they formulated a new theory. I asked them what they now thought my secret
was. The dealer claimed I could count every card as it was played, so I always
knew exactly which cards had not yet appeared. It is well known to students
of mnemotechny (the science of memory training) that you can learn to
memorize in proper order a deck of cards as it is dealt. However, I am
familiar enough with the method involved to know that the information, when
so memorized, cannot be used quickly enough for play in blackjack. So I
challenged the dealer by rashly claiming that no one in the world could watch
thirty-eight cards dealt quickly oﬀ a pack and then tell me quickly how many
of each type of card remained.
She claimed the pit boss, standing next to her, could do just that. I oﬀered
$5 for a demonstration. They both looked down sheepishly and wouldn’t
answer. I made my oﬀer $50. They remained silent and ashamed. Eddie
Hand, who had been watching throughout, increased the oﬀer to $500. There
was no response. We left in disgust.
Spring break was ending at MIT, so our trip also was at an end. In thirty
man-hours of medium-to-large-scale play, our $10,000 grew to $21,000. At
no point did we have to go into our original capital further than $1,300 (plus
expenses). Our experiment was a success, and my system performed at the
tables just as the theory predicted. I was satisﬁed. Future blackjack trips, if
any, would have to ﬁt in around my academic schedule and my family life. I
made no plans for another trip with Manny and Eddie, and simply left the
possibility open.

On the plane back to Boston, I remembered the casino spokesman who,
upon hearing my claim that I could beat blackjack, scoﬀed, “When a lamb
goes to the slaughter, the lamb might kill the butcher. But we always bet on
the butcher.”
The day of the lamb had come.
—
Some thirty years later, author and investigative journalist Connie Bruck
ﬁlled me in on Manny Kimmel’s background when she called to interview me
for her book Master of the Game. The book details the story of how Steve
Ross “took his father-in-law’s funeral business and a parking lot company and
grew them into the largest media and entertainment company in the world,
Time Warner.” The parking lot company was Kinney Service Corporation,
started in 1945 by a hidden partner, Emmanuel Kimmel. Kimmel allegedly
made his fortune in the 1920s and ’30s from bootlegging and the numbers
racket, in company with Abner “Longie” Zwillman (chronicled in the book
Gangster #2 by Mark Stuart), the don of New Jersey and supposedly the
second most powerful mobster in the United States in 1935. Knowing this
now, I’m glad I decided to play with a $10,000 bankroll for an almost sure
moderate win, rather than with a $100,000 bankroll and any risk whatsoever
of a serious loss. It also makes me reﬂect on my own past naïveté, and the
greater wisdom of my wife, Vivian, in these matters.
Manny’s friend Eddie Hand was also a source for Connie Bruck. At the
time of our trip his company “shipped all the cars and trucks for Chrysler.”
Based in Buﬀalo, New York, he was battle-toughened through conﬂict with
the Teamsters Union. A few years later he sold his company to Ryder
Industries. During my stock market years I learned that he received Ryder
warrants that, on the day I checked their price, were worth $47 million. Once
when he, Kimmel, and I were ﬂying from Reno to Las Vegas, Eddie Hand
suddenly became nostalgic while reading the “Milestones” column in Time
magazine. The vignettes mentioned the upcoming marriages of two ladies
with whom he had been romantically involved. One was a Chilean copper
heiress and the other was tennis player “Gorgeous Gussy” Moran, who
scandalized Wimbledon by presenting herself for play in lace panties.

According to Bruck, Manny Kimmel died in Florida in 1982 at the age of
eighty-six, leaving a young widow named Ivi, the older of the two nieces who
had, with her younger sister and Manny, visited us so long ago on that dreary
winter afternoon in Boston. Manny told me he met her while she worked in a
jewelry store. They married after the death of his wife. In 2005, the History
Channel featured Vivian and me in a one-hour program about my blackjack
story. Ivi, who also appears on the program, still had a copy of a letter I’d
written Manny in 1964 with some of my new discoveries about baccarat.
When I last spoke with him, Eddie Hand was prospering in the wealthy
enclave of Montecito in Southern California. Later he retired to the south of
France.
Meanwhile, blackjack had still more to teach me, about both investing and
how the world worked.
