Chapter 7
CARD COUNTING FOR
EVERYONE
Back at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, I attracted attention in the
cafeteria when, once a week, I cashed yet another $100 bill from my casino
winnings. With the way our currency has depreciated since 1961, the impact
then was almost the same as if I were to pay today with $1,000 bills.
Meanwhile, my two-year appointment at MIT would end June 30, just
three months away. The department chairman, W. T. “Ted” Martin,
encouraged me to stay a third year at MIT and told me how highly I was
regarded by institute professor Shannon. There was a chance this could lead
to a permanent position either then or at a later date. Whether to try for this
was a diﬃcult decision. MIT had become one of the world’s great
mathematics centers, following its transformation by projects for the
government during World War II from a technical school to a scientiﬁc
powerhouse. Simply walking down the hall, I would chat with people like the
prodigy Professor Norbert Wiener (cybernetics) and the future Abel Prize
winner Isadore Singer. The C. L. E. Moore Instructorship program, of which
I was part, had brought in new PhDs like John Nash, who later won the Nobel
for economics, and future Fields Medal winner Paul Cohen. Though there’s
no Nobel Prize for mathematics, the Fields and the Abel prizes have that
status. Cohen had left a few days before I arrived; his name was just being
scraped oﬀ his door.
I ﬁnally decided not to stay on. From a career standpoint, I thought I had
the talent to keep up with the big boys but I felt I needed more mathematical

background. I also hadn’t collaborated on research with a senior faculty
mentor or other colleagues in my area of specialty, and such work with others
often is key to advancing in an academic department. Instead, I had spent
much of my time working on blackjack and on building a computer with
Professor Shannon to predict roulette. However, my work with Shannon
wasn’t part of any academic ﬁeld. It wasn’t mathematics per se and had no
constituency and no name. It couldn’t help my academic career. Ironically,
thirty years later MIT had become a world leader in the development of what
would be called wearable computers, and the time line placed on the Internet
by its Media Lab credited Shannon and me with building the ﬁrst one.
New Mexico State University was bidding for bright young faculty
members and subsidizing an incoming supply of good graduate students.
They had just received a $5 million post-Sputnik Centers of Excellence Grant
from the National Science Foundation, an amount equivalent to more than
$40 million today, with a mandate to build a PhD program over the next four
years. They proposed to jump my pay, from the $6,600 that both MIT and
the University of Washington oﬀered, to $9,000 a year and promote me to
associate professor with tenure. I would also have a six-hour-a-week teaching
load consisting of my choice of graduate courses. It provided the opportunity
I wanted to expand my mathematical background, learning through teaching,
doing my own research, directing doctoral theses, and collaborating with my
students.
The position in New Mexico seemed to me to be the best next career step,
even though my colleagues regarded it as an ill-advised gamble at what had
been a mathematical backwater. Most important, a move to New Mexico
would take Vivian and baby Raun to a much better climate and closer to our
families.
As I was making this decision I agreed to write a book about blackjack.
This came about after I mentioned my successful casino test to a few of my
friends. The MIT grapevine did the rest. Yale Altman, representing the
academic publisher Blaisdell (then a subsidiary of Random House), invited
me to propose a book. I gave him the ten chapter headings from an outline I
was already sketching, and he accepted it enthusiastically.
My working title was Fortune’s Formula: A Winning Strategy for Blackjack.
Then Random House took the project away from Blaisdell, over the strenuous

protest of its president. They wanted to distribute the book directly as a trade
book, and proposed the new title Beat the Dealer. It would appear in
November 1962, giving me time to exploit my strategies in the Nevada
casinos before publication, after which I expected to be given a hard time
whenever I showed up to play blackjack.
During the next few months I wrote the book. Vivian and I packed up with
Raun and spent that summer of 1961 in Los Angeles. It was a fury of writing,
doing mathematics research, going to Nevada on another blackjack trip,
preparing to move in the fall to New Mexico State University, working twenty
hours a week on roulette with Claude Shannon, and getting ready for the birth
of our second child, Karen. Looking back I don’t see how Vivian and I did it
all.
In August I traveled from Los Angeles to Las Vegas to play blackjack at
the invitation of “Junior.” I was writing my book and wanted to learn more
about the tactics casinos might use to prevent my readers from winning.
Junior (also known as Sonny) was a Harvard law student who had contacted
me while I was at MIT. He started playing casino blackjack on his twenty-
ﬁrst birthday, using a method called end play, a system discovered and
exploited by a few early players. The basic idea was to play single-deck games
that were dealt all the way down. Even though players of that era with their
imperfect strategies usually had the worst of it, sometimes the deck toward
the end would get very rich in Aces and Tens. Canny players would then
make huge favorable bets. They needed enormous bankrolls to withstand the
wild ﬂuctuations in capital that followed. Although the casinos might win big,
they also might lose a lot, so they did not like these players. Junior, for
instance, had been widely barred, cheated, or reshuﬄed on, so he went to a
Hollywood makeup artist who recast him to look Chinese. With his hair dyed
black and his hairline carefully revised with a razor, he sat down at a Las
Vegas blackjack table. Wearing a bulky body shell under his Chinatown
outﬁt, he looked like a diﬀerent person. Then the pit boss pointed at him,
laughed, and said, “Look at Junior, all dressed up like a Chinese.”
Vivian had helped me train for this trip by dealing hands at high speed,
blowing cigarette smoke at me, and engaging me in complicated
conversations. Meanwhile, I was keeping track of the cards, calculating the
percent advantage and my bet size, then playing out my hand using strategies

that varied depending on the count. The key was to take it one step at a time,
adding a new diﬃculty only after I became comfortable and relaxed with
what I was already doing. What had seemed daunting ﬁnally became easy.
Junior backed my play with a modest $2,500 bankroll, equivalent to about
$20,000 today. He followed me around Vegas with one eye open for cheating
and another eye on his bankroll. While I was playing in the Sands, a pit boss
who knew Junior told his friends that the kid was in town. Casino
management saw that whenever Junior was around, I was playing nearby.
Then my dealers stepped up the reshuﬄing and cheating. There was so much
crooked dealing that I worried about playing on my own in the future without
an expert to watch for it and warn me oﬀ. After a modest win, I returned to
Los Angeles. The following month, September 1961, Vivian, Raun, and I
moved to Las Cruces, New Mexico, where I began my duties at New Mexico
State.
Although I learned from Junior that cheating was a serious problem and
could make me a loser instead of a winner, he didn’t show me how it worked
or how to spot it. Meanwhile I was writing a book that might send thousands
of gamblers to the tables thinking they could win. If dishonest dealers wiped
them out, it would be a slaughter. I had to understand how the cheating was
done and explain it to my readers so they would have a chance to spot and
avoid it. That’s what led to my next visit to Nevada.
The opportunity arose because I had been corresponding with Russell T.
Barnhart, a magician and gambling scholar, who contacted me after my
Washington, DC, talk in January 1961. We became acquainted while I was
still at MIT and met in his apartment near Columbia University to talk about
gambling and magic. As a treat Russell invited Percy Diaconis, a seventeen-
year-old prodigy. Percy astounded me with card sleight of hand for an hour or
so, then at Russell’s suggestion we talked about Percy’s future. What did I
think about an academic career in mathematics as a professor versus being a
professional magician? What advice would I give?
I told of the glories of the life of the mind, to be able to think about
interesting problems as much as you wanted, as long as you wanted, to
interact with intellectually challenging colleagues and students, to learn about
any subject you chose, to have a lot of discretionary time with summers to
travel and do research. Whether or not our conversation inﬂuenced Diaconis,

he eventually became a full professor of mathematics at Harvard and also was
awarded a MacArthur Foundation “genius” grant. He studied the theory of
card shuﬄing, and the popular press widely reported his conclusion that seven
fairly thorough shuﬄes was enough for practical purposes to randomize any
deck of cards.
After the trip with Junior, when I told Russell of my problem with casino
dishonesty, he proposed that I take him and his friend Mickey MacDougall on
a blackjack foray. Mickey was perfect, being both a magician and a well-
known card detective. His book Danger in the Cards describes his adventures
detecting swindles in private games. He also had worked as a special
consultant to the Nevada Gaming Control Board for several years. This led to
the board citing several small casinos for cheating. Russell solved the bankroll
problem by raising $10,000 from anonymous backers, with any proﬁt—after
our expenses had been paid—to be shared.
We met in Las Vegas in January 1962, during the year-end academic break
at New Mexico State. Russell was a high-strung thirty-ﬁve-year-old bachelor
and Mickey, a sixtyish fun-loving extrovert.
When we picked a casino and I found a seat I liked at the blackjack tables,
our plan was for me to bet modestly until I got the go-ahead from Mickey.
Following this, I would raise the scale of my betting and play for an hour,
stopping sooner if I was warned oﬀ by Mickey or Russell. Stopping after an
hour gave me a break during which I moved to another casino. Changing
casinos after each session and varying the shifts on which we returned limited
the time we were observed by any one casino employee. To further avoid
notice, I stopped playing in any session before my wins became large, and I
also stopped after a moderate loss to limit the impact in cases of cheating that
we hadn’t detected. Mathematically, interruptions didn’t matter, because my
lifetime of playing was just one long series of hands, and chopping it into
sessions and playing them at various times and in various casinos should not
aﬀect my edge, nor the long-run amount I could expect to win. This principle
applies in both gambling and investing.
When Mickey and Russell signaled that I had been cheated, I quit and went
oﬀ with them for a lesson in how it was done. Mickey would demonstrate,
ﬁrst slowly then at casino speed. When I could see it or, more typically, infer
it from what poker players call tells, we would return to the same dealer and

resume play, brieﬂy and for low stakes, so I could get better at spotting the
crooked dealing at the table.
I saw this done with great skill at what had become my favorite strip hotel
casino. We had several winning sessions on this trip, bringing my lifetime
total to ﬁfteen winning rounds, no losses. As I began session number sixteen,
the pit boss walked up and asked us how we were doing. Mickey replied, “Up
and down, like an elevator.” Twenty minutes later, a man hurried through the
front door of the hotel, rushed to the table, and replaced our dealer.
Suspicious, I reduced my bets to the minimum, lost a couple of hands, and
was signaled by Mickey to leave. Back in our rooms, Mickey showed me the
virtually undetectable peek and second-card dealing that the new man had
used.
This, a common technique, was to peek at the next card to be dealt, the so-
called top card. Then, if that card was good for the player, deal the card just
below it instead, the second card, in the likelihood it was worse. On the other
hand, if the dealer was giving a card to himself, he would take the top card if
it was good for him, and otherwise deal himself the second. The dealer who
does this is a heavy favorite to beat the player. An expert cheat or magician
does this so well that even when you are told in advance and are watching
close up, you can’t see. It’s also nearly impossible to prove it ever happened.
Cheating was so relentless during those days in Las Vegas that I spent as
much time learning about the many ways it was being done as I did playing.
Everywhere we went, we reached a point where we were cheated, barred
from play, or the dealer reshuﬄed the cards after every hand.
For the last couple of days, we ﬂew to the Tahoe-Reno area, where we
visited Mickey’s contact at the Nevada Gaming Control Board. Invited to tell
our story, we recounted for two hours the litany of second dealing, stacked
decks, missing or marked cards, and more.
We named dozens of casinos and described the dealers and their methods.
Of course, our accusations ranged in authority from “dead certain” down to
“circumstantial but strongly suggestive.” Although the gaming control board
oﬃcial repeatedly invited us to guess or speculate, we made clear which
statements were facts and which inferences. I had the uncomfortable feeling
that we were being encouraged to speak carelessly and make exaggerated
claims. I wondered at the time if this might be natural impatience with my

academic habit of being careful and precise, or whether the board oﬃcial was
trying to get evidence to discredit what was in eﬀect our damning indictment
of the board itself.
After hearing our marathon account of rampant cheating, Mickey’s contact
at the board claimed he wanted to talk about additional consulting work, and
suggested that in the meantime I take the opportunity to play blackjack. For
some reason Russell didn’t come with me. When I balked at playing without
my cheating protectors, Mickey’s contact assigned one of the gaming control
board’s agents to watch over me. Mickey thought this was a good idea, and
had told me earlier that the dealers knew all the people the board used, so
whenever they showed up the cheating stopped until they left.
I started at the Riverside Hotel in downtown Reno (years later the casino
addition where I played was demolished, to my silent cheers), betting a
cautious $5 to $50. It was uncrowded and I sat down alone in the middle of
an empty table. My “protector,” pretending not to know me, wandered in a
minute later and sat down to play also. Our dealer, a young woman with a
low-cut blouse and heavily freckled skin, won the ﬁrst few hands against each
of us. On the next hand I was dealt a “stiﬀ” (10, 6) versus a dealer’s upcard of
9 or 10. I hit and, to my amazement the card meant for me emerged from the
deck and stuck twanging, held by its edge between the top card and the rest
of the deck. The dealer froze and blushed bright red from cheeks to
décolletage. The pit boss, watching the action from the end of the table to my
left, literally asked me if I wanted the top card or the second! I could see that
the second was a face card, which would bust me like it was supposed to. So
that the gaming control board agent could hear me even if he were nearly
deaf, and blind as well, I said loudly and distinctly, “The second busts me so
I’ll take the top card.” It was an 8 and busted me anyhow. I cashed in my
chips and left.
As my protector followed me outside, I said, “Did you ever see a second
card like that before?” He replied, “Second? What second?” This agent had
been sitting just three feet from the dealer. He saw everything and pretended
to see nothing. Realizing he was there to ﬁnger me for the casinos, I used the
restroom excuse to lose him and went to play at another casino. I was doing
well and a small crowd gathered, but eventually my dealer, and only my

dealer, was replaced. Looking around, I saw my now unwanted escort in the
crowd. I played hide-and-seek with him for another two and a half hours.
The following morning, it was time to go home. The three of us barely
escaped from Reno. Heavy snow closed the local airport, but there was a
plane leaving from a nearby air force base runway that was still open. We
caught it, learning later that it was the last plane out for eleven days.
Afterward I learned that our backers were William F. Rickenbacker, one of
two adopted sons of the famous ﬂying ace Eddie (who, as the ﬁrst man to
drive faster than a mile a minute, was the original “Fast Eddie”), and other
staﬀ members of the National Review.
This trip taught me that while playing well, even with experts to warn me
of dirty dealing, I could no longer openly win a signiﬁcant amount. On future
visits, I would need to change my appearance, be low-key, and generally
avoid drawing attention to myself. Mickey MacDougall told the gaming
control board that he saw more cheating in Nevada casinos while watching
my eight days of play than he had seen in all his previous ﬁve years of
working for the board. After his damning report he was never again asked to
consult by them. Russell Barnhart became fascinated with gambling and went
on to write several books on the subject.
I was beginning to realize Las Vegas had a scary underside. It has evolved
over the years. In 1947 mob elements, reportedly unhappy with his
management of the Tropicana casino, gunned down fellow gangster Bugsy
Siegel in Southern California. In 1960, the El Rancho Vegas mysteriously
burned to the ground two weeks after a well-known mobster was forcibly
ejected. When I played in the early 1960s, tens of millions of dollars in cash
were being taken from the counting rooms without being tallied. The hidden
proﬁt avoided taxes and funded mob operations throughout the nation.
Not long after I played, as numerous card counters began to appear, they
were jailed on pretexts, their money was taken, and some were beaten in back
rooms. A gang of employees at one strip casino robbed drunks in their spare
time. The 1970s weren’t as bad but, as portrayed in the nonﬁction book
Casino, by Nicholas Pileggi—later a movie of the same name—they were bad
enough.
Since then, Nevada has been dramatically transformed from mobster Bugsy
Siegel’s dream of a Disneyland for the maﬁa to a mainstream entertainment

destination run by corporations. Las Vegas now enshrines the old days with a
mob museum open to the public. The current consensus among professional
blackjack experts seems to be that cheating has become rare in the older
established areas like Nevada and Atlantic City, but players should be careful
in the smaller, less regulated, and more remote casinos in the United States
and abroad.
Beat the Dealer came out in November 1962. It sold briskly to favorable
reviews, and continued to show strong, steady sales, with a spurt after minor
bits of publicity. Readers were excited and enthusiastic. I believed that it
might really take oﬀ if there were some way to publicize it more widely.
Ralph Crouch, chairman of the Mathematics Department at New Mexico
State University, knew the science editor at Life magazine, and suggested they
do a story. A mathematical system for beating blackjack had both scientiﬁc
and public interest, and they enthusiastically agreed on a piece. But the story
was evergreen, meaning not time-sensitive, so they had no schedule.
Meanwhile David Scherman at Time Life’s associated publication Sports
Illustrated got permission to do a piece in advance of the Life article.
As time passed, blackjack players faced escalating casino countermeasures
in Nevada. Management watched us through the “eye in the sky,” a system of
one-way mirrors above the tables. Our faces were checked against a book of
photos of undesirables. Honest card counters were treated like player cheats
and other criminals. When a casino spotted an undesirable, it passed the word
around.
Countermeasures included reshuﬄing the pack of cards by the time half or
fewer of them had been played. This not only limits the card counter’s
chances to make favorable bets, but is also costly for the casino because it
slows the game down, ﬂeecing the ordinary players more slowly and reducing
casino proﬁts. If one likens a casino to a slaughterhouse for processing
players, then more time spent shuﬄing means less eﬃcient use of plant
capacity.
Cheating, on the other hand, not only makes money faster but can capture
proﬁts the house would otherwise miss. I saw this happening one night when I
walked into the lounge of a packed Las Vegas Strip hotel casino about 10 P.M.
Louis Prima, a famous musician of that era, and his lead singer, new wife Gia
Maione, were entertaining, and the adjacent blackjack tables were packed,

with crowds of players waiting. I had come to play blackjack and as I checked
all the tables, hoping to get a seat, I noticed that the players at every table
were losing at an astonishing rate. The dealers were all wearing glasses with
the same yellow-orange tint, through which they could see identifying marks
on the backs of the cards. If the card on top was good for the player, the
dealer dealt him the next card, or “second,” instead. Since players were wiped
out faster, with their vacated seats being immediately reﬁlled, proﬁts soared.
As a result, many who would have been discouraged by the wait and taken
their money elsewhere left it at this casino instead.
Often, a suspected card counter was simply barred from playing blackjack.
Apparently this was legal under Nevada law. Ironically, many innocent non-
counters found themselves barred, along with incompetent would-be card
counters. To get around this, I experimented with disguises, including contact
lenses, sunglasses, a beard, and drastic changes of wardrobe and table
behavior. This bought me extra playing time. Once, when I returned from a
trip still in my disguise, my children didn’t recognize me. Frightened by the
bearded stranger, they burst into tears. Though just ﬁve and three at the time,
Raun and Karen still remember this. It didn’t bother baby Jeﬀ, who was only
a year old.
I tested one such disguise in Reno, where I had arranged through mutual
friends to meet a couple who would keep an eye on me in the casinos in
return for the fun of watching me play. We had never met and they didn’t
know what I looked like. When I introduced myself at dinner, they saw a
bearded fellow wearing a brightly patterned Hawaiian shirt, wraparound
sunglasses, and jeans. Afterward, we headed for one of the big hotel casinos,
where I settled into a higher-limit table on the quieter second ﬂoor. I chose
the best seat for a card counter, known as third base, which is farthest to the
left as viewed from the player’s side of the table.
Sitting there, I was the last to act, so I would beneﬁt by having seen more
cards when it was time to play my hand. Flashing a roll of bills, I bought a
heap of chips. Seeing the money, my dealer, an attractive young woman,
found me interesting. As we chatted and the casino oﬀered drinks, which I
accepted not to relax me but to relax them, she told me her shift was over at 2
A.M. and maybe we could “do something” afterward. Meanwhile, my steady
winnings attracted the attention of the pit boss. He eventually decided I was a

card counter, after which a parade from management came to watch. By 1
A.M. they had had enough and told me, to the astonishment and
disappointment of my dealer, that I was no longer welcome at the tables.
They evidently spread the word. Wearing the same disguise, I was barred
from play the next day at several casinos.
That afternoon, I decided to put my disguise to the acid test. Before
meeting my companions for dinner, I shaved oﬀ the beard, replaced the
prescription sunglasses with contact lenses, and combed my hair diﬀerently.
A sports jacket and tie—cocktail attire—completed the transformation.
Opening their door to my knock, my companions, showing no signs of
recognition, said, “Yes-s-s?” Their astonishment was my delight.
After dinner, I went to the same casino and took the same seat I had the
night before. The same dealer looked up as I put a few chips from my pocket
on the table in front of me. She saw no cash roll and I was now wearing a
wedding ring—not a person of interest. To avoid being given away by my
voice, I didn’t talk. When the cocktail waitress oﬀered me a drink, I said in a
barely audible hoarse whisper, “Milk.” I won again and all was well—for a
while.
Then the pit boss came to watch as before, followed by the same
management parade as on the previous night. But instead of me, they were
focused on a player cheat who—worse luck—was seated next to me. After
betting and receiving his ﬁrst two cards, if he liked his chances he would add
to his wager, and take some of the bet back if he didn’t. For an hour or so,
they scolded him repeatedly, and when he wouldn’t either stop cheating or
leave, they escorted him out. With my pile of chips growing steadily, I played
on undisturbed. The next day I had no problem playing in the establishments
that had barred my bearded self just the day before.
It was becoming clear that there was more to beating blackjack than
counting cards and keeping cool as your bankroll went up and down. The
green felt table was a stage and I was an actor on that stage. A card counter
who wanted to be allowed to continue playing had to put on an eﬀective act
and present a nonthreatening persona. There are as many ways to do this as
there are to portray characters in the theater. You can be the drunken cowboy
from Texas or the wildly animated lady from Taiwan who can’t wait to get her
next bet down. You can be Caspar Milquetoast, the nervous accountant from

Indianapolis who has already lost too much down the street. Or Miss
Spectacular, who draws all the attention to herself, not to how she bets and
plays.
Dave Scherman’s full-length piece, “It’s Bye! Bye! Blackjack” appeared in
the January 1964 issue of Sports Illustrated—and Beat the Dealer sold out
everywhere. Two months later Life ran a nine-page story and the book moved
onto the New York Times bestseller list.
The publicity brought both expected and unexpected consequences. For
me, it was the pleasure of seeing my father’s silent pride in my fulﬁlling some
of his hopes for me. In addition, there was a contact from my father’s younger
sister, who had vanished from his life in 1904 along with his mother when
their parents divorced. The Life story led his sister to him through me and he
arranged to visit her in Iowa where she, her ﬁve children, and numerous
grandchildren now lived. Separated when he was six and she was four, my
father had dreamed for a lifetime that he would somehow ﬁnd her again. But
he never saw her. He died of a heart attack shortly before the trip.
After reading the articles, thousands of counters and would-be counters
headed for Las Vegas. The Nevada Resort Hotel Association met in a secret
emergency session. Twenty-nine years later, here is how longtime casino
executive Vic Vickrey described that meeting.
“How the heck do I know how he does it? I guess he’s got one
of them mathematical minds or photographic memories, or
something.”
This was Cecil Simmons, the casino boss at the Desert Inn,
talking on the phone with Carl Cohen, the Sands casino manager.
It was the mid-1960s and they were discussing a book that would
have a most profound impact on Las Vegas casinos and their
approach to the game known as 21 or blackjack.
“All I know,” Simmons roared, “is he wrote a book that
teaches everyone how to win every time they play blackjack. I’m
just telling you, this book-learning SOB has ruined us…we’re out
of the blackjack business.”…

Thorp’s book was the main topic of conversation whenever
and wherever casino bosses gathered back during the ’60s…
…A meeting was called [to ﬁnd] a solution…
We…gathered in…the Desert Inn. I still today do not know
why the boys from Back East thought we had to be so damned
secretive…I reminded them that this meeting was not exactly the
same as their Appalachia meeting in up-state New York that had
been raided by the feds years earlier.
…They could all have passed for actors who had just left an
old George Raft movie set. They began talking out of the side of
their mouths at the same time, with each one shouting out his
remedy to the problem.
Hard-Knuckle Harry’s solution was quite simple: “Break a few
legs…”
“No, Hard-Knuckles, no,” our chairman almost shouted.
“We’re all legit now and we gotta think like legit businessmen.”
…It was ﬁnally agreed that a number of rule changes must be
implemented…to thwart these card counters.
On April 1, 1964, April Fool’s Day—the Association
announced the result: for the ﬁrst time ever, it was changing the
rules of blackjack. Pair splitting and doubling down would be
restricted and the entire pack of cards would be reshuﬄed after
just a couple of deals.
As part of an orchestrated PR follow-up, a Las Vegas Sun editorial of April
3, 1964, assured us that “Anybody who has been around Nevada very long
knows that [casinos welcome] players with a system.” “Edward O. Thorp…
obviously doesn’t know the facts of gambling life. There has never been a
system invented that overcomes…the advantage the house enjoys in every
game of chance.” And for the clincher: “ ‘Dr. Thorp may be qualiﬁed at
mathematics, but he is sophomoric on gambling,’ is the way Edward A.
Olsen, Gaming Control Board chairman, put it.” In a nonconfrontational vein,
Gene Evans of Harrah’s Club explained that “…the club believes the player

may have a better chance when the deck is shuﬄed every time, because all
the Aces and face cards could come up on each deal.”
I told the press that the changes would hurt business badly and that skilled
counters would still win. As Vic Vickrey reported, “Our regular 21 players
who were not attempting to count cards…rebelled to such a degree that our
21 play began to decline at an alarming rate. [After several weeks] We had no
choice but to reinstate the original rules which were more favorable to the
player.” The casino bosses understood what their apologists denied. The
mocking from a few weeks earlier was replaced by headlines like these:
“Vegas Casinos Cry Uncle, Change Rules—Players Too Smart,” and “How
Wizard of Odds Beat Las Vegas Cards.”
From a mathematical idea in my head, I forged a system for beating the
game. Then I was ridiculed by the casino beast, which said that it sent cabs
for fools like me. Thinking they played fair and that I was taking my secret
weapon, a brain, to a sporting event, I found myself barred, cheated, betrayed
by a representative of the gaming control board, and generally persona non
grata at the tables. I felt satisfaction and vindication when the great beast
panicked. It felt good to know that, just by sitting in a room and using pure
math, I could change the world around me.
Rather than quit the ﬁeld, I launched an army with Beat the Dealer. Thus
continued the great blackjack war between the casinos and the players that
still rages, more than ﬁfty years after the invention of card counting.
