Chapter 8
PLAYERS VERSUS CASINOS
After my book appeared, legions of blackjack players hit the tables in
Nevada. Anyone could bring the book’s palm-sized strategy cards and ﬁnd a
game with rules good enough to let them play on level terms with the casino,
even without counting cards. Then there were the card counters and would-be
card counters. Many were good and some would go on to make their living
from blackjack, but for the majority the eﬀort and persistence required to
practice card counting, the restraint and discipline needed, to say nothing of
the temperament, were obstacles to success.
Still, the fact that blackjack could be beaten led to an upsurge in play. As a
result, during the next few decades blackjack displaced craps as the dominant
table game. However, the casinos were in a bind: Should they let the minority
of players who were counters beat them in return for the vastly increased
revenues from the great majority of players who couldn’t or wouldn’t count,
or should they try to choke oﬀ the card counters with countermeasures, even
if this would slow the boom in blackjack play?
When the casinos ﬁrst tried a rules change and lost more in revenues than
they gained in beneﬁts, they went back to the old rules. Next, they brought in
dealing boxes known as shoes, which allowed the use of four, six, or even
eight decks. This was supposed to make card counting more diﬃcult. But for
those who used the High–Low System, it wasn’t much harder. That was
because the correct play of the hand was pretty much the same for various
numbers of decks and because the High–Low System already adjusted for the
number of unused cards, whether the game was played with one or several

decks. The good players, who were getting better with practice, continued to
win.
The most widely used photo gallery of undesirables was developed for the
casinos by Griﬃn Investigations, Inc., a private detective agency founded in
1967 by Beverly and Robert Griﬃn. The usual collection of criminals, player
cheats, and public nuisances was rapidly expanded by the addition of ever
more card counters. They were barred on sight, and their descriptions were
shared among the casinos. However, dealers and pit bosses often couldn’t
ﬁgure out who was counting and who wasn’t. Non-counters who inadvertently
aroused suspicion were, to their baﬄement, forbidden to play. Players were
cheated and beaten in back rooms. Eventually the Griﬃn agency was
successfully sued by two top card counters, one of whom was James
Grosjean, a member of the Blackjack Hall of Fame, and the ﬁrm ﬁled for
bankruptcy in 2005.
Card counters formed informal networks and developed new and improved
techniques. Beat the Dealer had introduced the idea of a team. Suppose
several players, say ﬁve, each with a $10,000 bankroll, are playing separately,
winning at an average rate of 1 percent or $100 an hour. Then the ﬁve players
together will gain an average of $500 an hour. If instead they pool their
money into one $50,000 bank, when one of them plays he can bet ﬁve times
as much as he could safely risk on his own $10,000. Consequently he expects
to win ﬁve times as much, namely, 1 percent of $50,000 or $500 per hour,
rather than $100. But it gets better. The four other players can all be playing,
too, typically at diﬀerent tables or casinos, acting as though they each have a
$50,000 bankroll, so the group makes $2,500 per hour when all are playing
whereas, playing without pooling their bankrolls, they would make
collectively only $500 an hour.
The next step was obvious. Entrepreneurs went into the blackjack business
by recruiting and training players, providing a bankroll, and sharing the
proﬁts between the players and the ﬁnancier. Notable teams include Tommy
Hyland’s and the now famous MIT group, chronicled in the book Bringing
Down the House, which inspired the 2008 movie 21. Al Francesco pioneered
the creation of blackjack teams, and the idea was well publicized by one of
his recruits, Ken Uston (1935–87). Uston’s books Million Dollar Blackjack
and The Big Player inspired the formation of other teams as well as

intensifying casino eﬀorts to stop them. Ken Uston was one of the more
colorful characters in blackjack history. One-quarter Asian, with a Japanese
grandfather, he was born Kenneth Senzo Usui. Starting his career in the
securities business, he became the youngest senior vice president ever at the
Paciﬁc Stock Exchange. Drawn by the allure of blackjack he then left the
securities industry to play professionally.
Card counters wish to bet as little as possible when the casino has the edge,
then make a large bet when the cards favor them. Ideally, a player with a
bankroll large enough to allow $1,000 bets when the deck is favorable would
bet the table minimum, say $5, when it isn’t. Such a wide betting spread of
200:1 is a red ﬂag to casino personnel. But to bet $1,000 on good situations
with a narrower betting spread of, say, 4:1 requires $250 bets when the deck
is unfavorable. This cuts back the overall gain.
The remedy was to use what was called a Big Player. Teams placed
members at several blackjack tables to track the deck, meanwhile betting the
minimum. When a deck became favorable they signaled the Big Player, who
seemed to wander randomly from table to table, putting down sizable bets
erratically. Since he hadn’t been at the table before he bet, he couldn’t be
counting. All this was disguised with an act. The Big Player might appear to
be a drunken ﬂamboyant high-roller, often with a beautiful companion.
Meanwhile, the blackjack community was exploring and developing the
various possible counting methods. These followed directly from my original
computations showing the eﬀects of removing various cards from the deck. A
counting system assigns points to each card that reﬂect the card’s impact upon
removal. The closer these points correspond to the actual eﬀects of the cards,
the more accurately that particular counting method estimates the player’s
current edge.
To illustrate this basic idea I presented what I called the ultimate strategy,
which assigned a whole number value to each card in close proportion to its
impact on the odds. The numbers in table 1 are from the 1962 edition of Beat
the Dealer. The second line shows the change in the player’s edge upon
removing one card. The third line, obtained by multiplying by 13 and
rounding to the nearest whole number, gives the point count for the ultimate
strategy, a good approximation to a perfect point count. Because of the
diverse point values, I expected this system to be used by computers, not

people. I intended it only to illustrate the basic principle for constructing
point-count systems—the closer the point assignments were to the eﬀects of
the corresponding cards, the more powerful the system. On the other hand,
the more diverse the point values used for a particular card counting system,
the harder that count was to use.
Table 1: Eﬀect of Removing One Card from One Deck and the Ultimate
(Point-Count) Strategy
Card
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
A
Change In
Edge
0.36
0.48
0.59
0.82
0.47
0.34
0.03
-0.23
-0.54
-0.68
Points
5
6
8
11
6
4
0
-3
-7
-9
Perhaps the best compromise between power and simplicity is the High–
Low, or the Complete Point Count, which appears in the 1966 revised edition
of Beat the Dealer. Still used today by top professionals, this is the simplest
possible point count in that cards get values of −1, 0, or +1 only. You start
with the count at 0. As the “small” cards 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 are used, they each add
+1 to the cumulative count. The intermediate cards 7, 8, and 9 are counted as
0 so their appearance doesn’t aﬀect the total count. Big cards—Aces and Ten-
value cards—count as −1 so they each reduce the total by one.
Suppose the player using the High–Low count sees these cards in the ﬁrst
round of play: A, 5, 6, 9, 2, 3. Then the count, which started with zero,
becomes −1 + 1 + 1 + 0 + 1 + 1 = +3. With this count in a one-deck game—
and with reasonably favorable rules—the player has an edge on the next deal.
As cards are dealt, the count goes up and down around zero. When the count
is positive the player beneﬁts, and when it is negative it helps the casino. The
impact of any particular value of the count is greater when fewer cards are
left. Good players simply estimate this by seeing how many cards are in the
discard tray.
How hard is it to keep the point count? A typical test is to shuﬄe the deck,
remove one to three cards facedown, then count through the rest of the deck.
The player declares the result, then the missing card or cards are turned over

to see if he is right. For example, suppose after one card has been set aside
without its face being shown, the count for the rest of the deck is zero. Then,
since the total count must come out to zero (as you may have already noticed,
the complete point count has 20 negative points and 20 positive points in each
ﬁfty-two-card deck), the unseen card must be a 0-point card, namely, a 7, 8,
or 9. This can lead to some surprises.
One night I was playing in Puerto Rico with the comedian and TV
personality Henry Morgan, who was well known in the 1950s and ’60s. I had
been losing for an hour or so. At the end of a two-deck shoe, my dealer had a
Ten up. As the casino betting limit was $50 per hand, I could get more money
on the table and keep out other players by betting on all seven spots. I was
using the variation of the point count where the cards 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 are +1, 8
is 0, and 9, 10, A are −1, as they appear. The cards had run out on the deal,
and the point count was zero. Therefore the one unseen card, which was the
dealer’s hole card, had to be a 0. So the dealer had an 8 in the hole for a total
of 18. The deck was reshuﬄed so I could ﬁnish playing my seven hands.
Since I had several hands of hard 17 that I alone knew were to be sure losers
if I did nothing, I hit them. This is a disastrous choice unless you know the
dealer’s hole card, and that he has you beat. Unlucky, I busted every one of
them.
The dealer looked up scornfully, saying to me with a laugh, “So you count
the cards, amigo. Why, I’ll bet you even know what I’ve got.” As the other
dealers grinned, I said, “Why, you have an 8 under there.” The dealer
laughingly summoned several other dealers and the pit boss. He explained
contemptuously that the Americano expert said that he had an 8 in the hole.
A babble of uncomplimentary remarks in Spanish passed back and forth.
I was tired and ready for a break. I had made an occasional counting error
over the last hour. There was a chance I would be wrong (better for me if I
was, probably). Then the dealer turned over his hole card. It was an 8. The
torrent in Spanish raged anew.
How hard is it to count? The more I practiced, the better my times, and I
found that if I was able to count one deck in twenty to twenty-ﬁve seconds I
could easily keep up in any game I was in, so I simply checked to be sure I
was up to this standard each time before I played. One of the members of the
Blackjack Hall of Fame impressed the professionals by counting two decks in

thirty-three seconds. But the most amazing performance I have seen was at
the third World Game Protection Conference at the Paris Hotel in Las Vegas.
A highlight of one evening’s entertainment was a card counting contest. The
choice of technique for handling the cards was crucial for attaining really low
times. The winner, among scores of contestants from the casino industry, had
the fastest time I ever saw, 8.8 seconds.
The casinos introduced technology to stop the counters. Cameras and
observers followed the action through one-way mirrors above the tables.
Currently, this is automated, incorporating face-recognition software. RFID
chips keep track of a player’s bets, and machines can track the cards and
check the play of the hands, searching for patterns characteristic of counters.
Machines that continually reshuﬄe the cards proved to be a perfect defense
without slowing the game down, but the casinos pay fees to the vendors of the
machines.
Meanwhile the card counters were developing more techniques for
winning. One of these methods was based on the fact that the players are
dealt two cards each and the dealer also typically receives two cards, the ﬁrst
faceup and the second facedown and hidden under the ﬁrst. If the dealer’s top
card is an Ace or Ten-value card (K, Q, J, 10) then the dealer checks his
hidden card to see if he has a natural, or a blackjack, in which case he shows
it and all bets are settled at once. A dealer blackjack beats all player hands
except another blackjack. A dealer making this hole-card check would
typically bend up the corner of his two cards to see what was hidden
underneath. Eventually the Aces and Tens would get slightly warped. If the
dealer was especially careless or if decks weren’t changed often enough, the
savvy player could spot the warps before they were dealt and know where the
Aces and Tens were, a huge advantage.
Mining the same ore were the so-called spooks, confederates strategically
placed to see the hole-card of a dealer who was careless in checking it. If the
dealer does not have blackjack, the play of the hands continues and a player
whose spook tells him the value of the dealer’s hidden card gets a huge edge.
Some casinos prevent players from using spooks and warps by having the
dealer wait to draw his second card until after all the players ﬁnish playing
their hands. Then the dealer’s second card can be dealt faceup.

In the 1970s, several people developed concealed computers to play
blackjack. The casino industry’s response was to have the Nevada legislature
pass a law in 1985 outlawing devices that assisted players in calculating odds.
But the ingenious players weren’t done yet. When one deck of cards or a
multideck pack of cards is shuﬄed, the shuﬄing may not be thorough enough
to randomize the deck. A deck that isn’t well shuﬄed may have predictable
patterns that can be exploited.
This was a natural evolution from my early thoughts about non-random
shuﬄing back in 1961 and 1962. I realized that the type of shuﬄe that was
used could substantially aﬀect the odds of many games. I designed a two-
pronged attack: I would build mathematical models to approximate real
shuﬄing, and do empirical studies of real shuﬄing.
As a ﬁrst simple approach for exploiting this, I came up with a way to
locate the Aces in single-deck blackjack. To see how this works, shuﬄe the
deck and spread it faceup. To track the Ace of Spades, for example, notice
the card just ahead of it. Suppose it is the King of Hearts (KH). You are
going to shuﬄe and cut the deck and follow what happens to the pair of cards.
Just to help you keep track, turn over the Ace of Spades and the card just
ahead of it so they are faceup in the otherwise facedown deck. Now cut and
shuﬄe once. One or more cards may get in between the Ace and the card that
was just ahead, which we’re taking to be the King of Hearts, separating them.
But if you were to play blackjack now with this deck, as soon as you saw the
King of Hearts you would know that the Ace of Spades was likely to be close
behind. As you successively cut and shuﬄe, still more cards crowd between
the two cards. Sometimes, because the deck is cut for each shuﬄe, the order
reverses and the Ace of Spades will appear ﬁrst, in which case there is no
prediction. If the deck is not shuﬄed well, the player can frequently tell that
the corresponding Ace has a more-than-average chance of appearing soon.
Applied to all four Aces, this is a powerful advantage.
Ace-locating led to the notion of following where groups of cards ended up
after shuﬄing. Casinos typically use standardized shuﬄing techniques, which
can be analyzed. Players, often with the aid of computers, learned to keep
track of where chunks of cards rich in Aces and Tens were redistributed in
the deck. The advantage gained from this could be substantial. The
camouﬂage was eﬀective as well since shuﬄe-trackers frequently found an

advantage at the start of the ﬁrst deal, betting big before having seen any
cards. Other times, they raised their bets when the count was bad if they
knew the next cards to be dealt had more than their share of Aces and Tens.
In 1997 Vivian and I went to St. George, Utah, where I ran in their annual
marathon. On the way there and also coming back, we passed through Las
Vegas. My friend Peter Griﬃn (no relation to the Griﬃn agency or its
founders) of The Theory of Blackjack fame arranged with Joe Wilcox, who
was then the casino manager at Treasure Island, to pay for (“comp”) our stay
there. Joe agreed, if in return I would not play blackjack in any of Steve
Wynn’s casinos. Joe was a gracious host and the room, food, and shows were
excellent. He mentioned that the casinos were losing signiﬁcant amounts to
the shuﬄe-trackers and indicated that no one seemed to have found a shuﬄe
that gave eﬀective protection. After watching the dealers at Treasure Island
and at two other casinos, and seeing what was wrong, with a little math I
found a new shuﬄe that prevented tracking. I kept it to myself.
The players and the casinos fought not only at the tables and in the back
rooms, but also in the courts. Nevada casinos were permitted to bar players,
whereas New Jersey–ruled casinos could not. In both states, gaming
establishments could always protect themselves by making the rules of the
game more favorable to themselves or by reshuﬄing the cards at will. As to
whether card counting was cheating, the statutes in Nevada clearly deﬁned
cheating as “to alter the selection of criteria which determine: (a) the result of
a game; or (b) the amount or frequency of payment in a game”; using your
brain to play well is clearly allowed. Introducing loaded dice would be
cheating under clause (a), and adding or subtracting chips after you see your
cards in blackjack would be cheating according to clause (b).
As the war between casinos and counters has evolved, so Las Vegas itself
has been transformed. The early mob-dominated period was described in the
bestselling 1964 book The Green Felt Jungle. Mob control gave way during
the corporate transformation of the 1980s, the subsequent rise of the
corporate gambling billionaires, and the ongoing expansion of gaming
worldwide. Today the best players still thrive, but opportunities are
increasingly limited and newcomers ﬁnd success much more diﬃcult.
The professional players share their stories each year at a private gathering
in Nevada known as the Blackjack Ball. Hosted by professional card counter

Max Rubin and sponsored by the Barona Casino, which is located hundreds
of miles away in Southern California, many of the past and present best
players in the world gather. Members of the Blackjack Hall of Fame are
honored attendees. They also are featured in a picture gallery at the Barona,
where they can stay for free but not play. The Barona beneﬁts from the ball
because any expert who attends must pledge never to play blackjack there—
one of the most proﬁtable investments ever by a casino.
My children, Raun, Karen, and Jeﬀ, attended the ball with me in 2013,
mixing with pseudonymous legends like James Grosjean, the Harvard
mathematics graduate who has continued to develop and use new methods for
“advantage play.” We spoke with the Holy Rollers, a card counting team of
young Christians whose Robin Hood–like mandate is to transfer money from
the casinos (“bad”) to their church (“good”) and themselves. Among the 102
guests, nearly half had net professional winnings of more than $1 million.
The rest were family, spouses, and signiﬁcant others. One of the champions
was Blair Hull, who parlayed a fortune from running a blackjack team into
several hundred million dollars at the Chicago Board Options Exchange. Bill
Benter used his blackjack winnings to bankroll and build a billion-dollar
worldwide business betting on horse races. A cheerful Taiwanese wearing the
name tag B. J. TRAVELER sat down next to me with a shopping bag full of
books he had written for the Chinese public about his adventures. He had
played in sixty-four countries over six years, netting almost $7 million. Most
amazing was that he survived a year in Moscow dodging thieves as he carted
money from the casinos.
The next day, I had lunch on the strip with John Chang, a star of the MIT
team featured in the movie 21, and an expert friend of his. Afterward, at a
nearby casino, the three of us asked to have our picture taken in front of a
blackjack table. Not allowed. So we sat down to play a hand or two at a $100-
minimum/$10,000-maximum table with good rules. Chang and his friend
whipped out rolls of $100 bills, peeled oﬀ $5,000 each, and bought in. “Our
pockets are our banks,” they said. Our dealer, a friendly older woman from
Eastern Europe, with no clue as to who was seated at her table, thought some
of John’s unorthodox plays were beginner’s errors. When she advised him as
to how to play correctly, he thanked her politely for her help and indicated a

willingness to improve. Twenty minutes later, the casino was a few thousand
dollars poorer and we had an employee take photos for us by the entrance.
Can an ordinary player still beat the game? My answer is a qualiﬁed yes.
Many blackjack games have rules that have been changed enough so they are
hard to beat. For instance, never play at a table where the payoﬀ for getting a
two-card 21, or blackjack, has been changed from the original 3:2 to lesser
amounts like 6:5 or 1:1. There are newsletters and services that currently rate
the games, and tell which ones are still good.
When I was the keynote speaker at the third World Game Protection
Conference in Las Vegas in 2008, I was asked whether, when I wrote Beat the
Dealer, I foresaw the magnitude and duration of its impact on the casino
industry. I said that I didn’t know in 1962 if it would last ﬁve years or ﬁfty,
but now we know it has continued to this day.
