Chapter 9
A COMPUTER THAT PREDICTS
ROULETTE
The modern form of roulette seems to have ﬁrst appeared in Paris in 1796. It
became the favored high-stakes game of the rich and the royal, enshrined in
Monte Carlo in the nineteenth century, and celebrated in story and song.
With its high stakes, splendid settings, and runs of extreme luck, which were
sometimes good but more often bad, it was a target for those with systems
attempting to overcome the casino’s advantage. These systems were too
complex for gamblers to analyze precisely, but they had plausible features that
inspired hope.
A favorite was the Labouchère, or cancellation, system. This was used in
roulette for bets that paid even money, where you win or lose an amount
equal to your bet. Among the even-money bets in roulette are wagers on red
or on black, each of which has eighteen chances in thirty-eight of winning. To
start the Labouchère, write down a string of numbers, such as 3, 5, and 7.
The total of these, 15, is what you try to win. Your ﬁrst bet is the total of the
ﬁrst and last numbers in the string, 3 + 7, or 10. If you win, cross oﬀ the ﬁrst
and last numbers, leaving only 5. Your next bet is 5, and if you win you have
reached your goal. If you lose, add 10 to the string so it becomes, 3, 5, 7, 10
and then bet 3 + 10 or 13. In any case, each time you lose you add one
number to the string, and each time you win you cross oﬀ two numbers.
Therefore, you need to win only a little over a third of the time to reach your
goal. What can go wrong? Gamblers, trying systems like the Labouchère,
were baﬄed when they never seemed to prevail.

However, using the mathematical theory of probability, it was proven that
if all roulette numbers were equally likely to come up, and they appeared in
random order, it was impossible for any betting system to succeed. Despite
this, hope ﬂared brieﬂy at the end of the nineteenth century when the great
statistician Karl Pearson (1857–1936) discovered that the roulette numbers
being reported daily in a French newspaper showed exploitable patterns. The
mystery was resolved when it was discovered that rather than spend hours
watching the wheels, the people recording the numbers simply made them up
at the end of each day. The statistical patterns Pearson detected simply
reﬂected the failure of the reporters to invent perfectly random numbers.
If betting systems don’t work, what about defective wheels where, in the
long run, some numbers will come up more than others? In 1947, two
graduate students at the University of Chicago, Albert Hibbs (1924–2003)
and Roy Walford (1924–2004), found a roulette wheel in Reno that seemed
to favor the number 9. They increased an initial stake of $200 to $12,000.
The next year they found a wheel at the Palace Club in Las Vegas on which
they made $30,000. They took a year oﬀ and sailed the Caribbean, then went
on to distinguished careers in science. Among many accomplishments, Hibbs
became director of space science for Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and
Walford became a UCLA medical researcher who showed that caloric
restriction in mice could more than double their maximum life span. Hibbs
later wrote, “I wanted to conquer space, and my roommate, Roy Walford,
decided that he would conquer death.”
Feynman must have known about biased wheels when he told me there was
no way to beat the game, because Hibbs got his PhD in physics under
Feynman at Caltech the previous year. In any case, biased wheels at big
casinos were likely a thing of the past, as gambling houses took better care of
their equipment.
So this was the setting when Claude Shannon and I, in September 1960, set
to work to build a computer to beat roulette. So far as we knew, everyone else
thought physical prediction was impossible.
As it was the last year of my two-year appointment at MIT, we had to
complete the task in nine months. We spent twenty hours a week at the
Shannons’ three-story wooden house. Dating from 1858, it was sited on one
of the Mystic Lakes, a few miles from Cambridge. The basement was a

gadgeteer’s paradise, with perhaps $100,000 worth of electronic, electrical,
and mechanical items. There were thousands of mechanical and electrical
components—motors, transistors, switches, pulleys, gears, condensers,
transformers, and on and on. As someone who had spent much of his
boyhood building and experimenting in electronics, physics, and chemistry, I
was now happily working with the ultimate gadgeteer.
We purchased a reconditioned regulation roulette wheel from a company in
Reno for $1,500. From the labs at MIT we borrowed a strobe light, and a
large clock with a second hand that made one revolution per second, the latter
recapitulating the role the stopwatch had in my earlier movie experiments.
The dial was divided into hundredths of a second and we could interpolate
still-ﬁner time divisions. We set up shop in the billiard room, where a massive
old slate table made a solid base on which to mount the wheel.
Our wheel was typical, carefully machined with an elegant design and
beauty that added to the appeal of the game. It consisted of a large stationary
piece, or stator, with a circular track around the top, where the croupier starts
each play of the game by launching a small white ball. As the ball orbits, it
gradually slows until ﬁnally it falls down the sloped conelike inside of the
stator and crosses onto a circular centerpiece, or rotor, with numbered
pockets that the croupier previously set spinning in a direction opposite to
that in which he spun the ball.
The motion of the ball is complicated by having several diﬀerent phases,
making it so daunting as to discourage analysis. We followed my original
plan, which was to divide the motion of ball and rotor into stages and analyze
each separately.
We began by predicting when and where the orbiting ball would leave the
outer track. We did this by measuring the time it took for the ball to make
one revolution. If the time was short, the ball was moving fast and would go
relatively far. If the time was longer, the ball was traveling slower and would
soon fall from the track.
To measure the speed of the ball, we hit a microswitch as the ball passed a
reference mark on the stator. This started the clock. When the ball passed the
same spot the second time we hit the switch again, stopping the clock, which
then showed how long it took for the ball to go around once.

Simultaneous with starting and stopping the clock, the switch triggered the
ﬂash of a strobe whose very short pulses of light were like those in a disco.
We dimmed the lights in the room so the strobe ﬂashes “stopped” the ball
each time the switch was hit, allowing us to see how much the ball was ahead
or behind the reference mark. This showed us how much we were oﬀ in
hitting the timing switch. From this we corrected the times recorded by the
clock for one revolution of the ball, making the data more accurate. We also
got from this a numerical measure of our errors in hitting the switch as well
as direct visual feedback. As a result we learned to become much better at
timing. With practice, our errors fell from values of about 0.03 second to
about 0.01 second. We were able to retain this level of accuracy later when
we concealed everything for casino play, having trained our big toes to
operate switches hidden in our shoes.
We found that we could predict, with a high degree of accuracy, when and
where the ball would slow enough to fall from the circular track. So far so
good. Our next step was to determine the time the ball would take and the
distance it would travel as it spiraled down the conical inside of the stator to
reach the spinning rotor. Most wheels had vanes or deﬂectors in this region—
typically eight—that the ball would frequently hit. The eﬀect was to
randomize the ball’s behavior. Its path could be shortened or lengthened,
depending on whether and how it hit one of these deﬂectors. We found that
the uncertainty this introduced into our prediction was too small to ruin our
advantage. The deﬂectors also gave us a handy choice of reference points for
timing the ball and rotor.
Finally, after the ball crossed onto the moving rotor, it would bounce
around among the individual numbered pockets, introducing yet another
uncertainty into our forecast.
The total prediction error was the sum of many eﬀects, including our
imperfect timing, the spattering of the ball on the rotor pocket dividers
(frets), the deﬂection of the ball by metal obstacles as it spiraled down the
stator, and the possible tilt of the wheel. Assuming the total error was
approximately normally distributed (the Gaussian or bell-shaped curve), we
needed the standard deviation (a measure of uncertainty) for the error of
prediction around the actual outcome to be sixteen pockets (0.42 revolution)
or less to get an edge. We achieved the tighter estimate of ten pockets, or

0.26 revolution. This gave us the enormous average proﬁt of 44 percent of the
amount we bet on the forecast number. If we spread our bet over the two
closest numbers on each side, for a total of ﬁve numbers in all, we cut risk
and still had a 43 percent advantage.
Using physics to win at roulette brings to mind the bizarre game of Russian
roulette. You cannot win, but physics may help you survive. The name
appears to have originated in a 1937 story by Georges Surdez:
“Did you ever hear of Russian Roulette?” […] With the Russian
army in Romania, around 1917, some oﬃcer would suddenly pull
out his revolver, put a single cartridge in the cylinder, spin the
cylinder, snap it back in place, put it to his head and pull the
trigger…
The spinning of the revolver’s cylinder is reminiscent of the roulette
wheel’s whirling rotor. With six chambers, only one of which is loaded, the
chance of ﬁring the cartridge would seem to be one in six. But for a properly
lubricated and maintained weapon held upright with the cylinder parallel to
the ground, gravity and the weight of the cartridge will cause the full chamber
to tend to end up near the bottom, provided the cylinder is allowed to stop on
its own. If the cylinder is then relatched, the player has shifted the odds in his
(women are too smart to play) favor. The eﬀect of gravity on the ﬁnal resting
position of an unevenly weighted cylinder varies, depending on the orientation
of the gun. My younger daughter, an assistant deputy district attorney for
more than two decades, tells me that modern forensic scientists are aware of
this.
—
Shannon, with his treasury of intriguing information and ingenious ideas, was
a joy to work with. Discussing our need for secrecy, he mentioned that social
network theorists studying the spread of rumors and secrets claimed that if
you pick two people at random in, say, the United States, then they are
usually connected by a chain of three or fewer acquaintances or “three
degrees of separation.” An obvious way to test this when you meet strangers

is to ask what famous people they know. It is likely that a famous person they
know shares an acquaintance with a famous person you know. Then the steps
are (1) you to your famous person, (2) your famous person to their famous
person, and (3) their famous person to them. The two famous people
connecting you give “two degrees of separation.”
As is my lifelong habit, I tested this claim, often with remarkable results.
Once on a train from Manhattan to Princeton, New Jersey, I noticed that the
pleasant, well-dressed, motherly-looking lady sitting beside me seemed
agitated. She didn’t understand English, French, or Spanish but she responded
to my elementary German, telling me her problem was knowing when to get
oﬀ in Philadelphia. After I had helped her, I learned she was a Hungarian
economic oﬃcial from Budapest on her way to a meeting. I decided to play
my “degrees of separation” game.
“Do you know anyone in Budapest named Sinetar?” I asked.
“Of course. They are a famous family,” she replied. “There’s Miklos, the
ﬁlm producer, as well as an engineer, and a psychologist.”
“Well,” I said, “they are relatives of my wife.”
Me, to Vivian, to a Budapest Sinetar, to my economist seatmate. Two
degrees of separation. So far, I’ve never needed more than three to connect
with a stranger.
The concept entered popular culture as “six degrees of separation” after
John Guare’s 1990 play of that name. The notion of degrees of separation
was well known as early as 1969 among mathematicians as the Erdös (ERR-
dosh) number, linking them via other mathematicians to the proliﬁc and
peripatetic Hungarian mathematician Paul Erdös, using the relation
“coauthored a paper with.” If you coauthored a paper with Erdös your Erdös
number is one. If your number isn’t one but you coauthored with someone
who had Erdös number one, then your number is two, and so forth.
The few steps that connect strangers explain how rumors spread rapidly
and widely. If you have a good investment idea, you might want to keep it
secret. In 1998 a New York Times Science Times article said that
mathematicians had discovered how networks might “make a big world small”
using the equivalent of the famous person idea, and attributed the concept of

six degrees of separation to a sociologist in 1967. Yet all this was known to
Claude Shannon in 1960.
He loved to build ingenious gadgets. One of these would ﬂip a coin end
over end a speciﬁed number of revolutions and have it land—at his choice—
either heads or tails. He also ran a cable from his workshop (the “toy room”)
to his kitchen. When Claude pulled on the cable, a ﬁnger, attached to it and
set up in the kitchen, would silently and jokingly summon his wife, Betty.
During our work breaks, Claude taught me to juggle three balls, which he
did while riding a unicycle. He also had a steel cable tied between two tree
stumps and walked along it, encouraging me to learn with the aid of a balance
bar. He could do any two of the three tricks together: juggle three balls, ride
the unicycle, and balance on the tightrope, and his goal was to be able to do
all three at once. One day I noticed two huge pieces of Styrofoam that looked
as if they could be worn like snowshoes. Claude said they were water shoes
that enabled him to “walketh upon the water,” in this case the Mystic Lake in
front of his house. The neighbors had been astounded to see Claude moving
upright above the surface of the lake. I tried the water shoes but found it
diﬃcult to keep from toppling over.
We got along so well because, from an early age, science was play for both
of us. Tinkering and building things was part of the fun, as was letting our
curiosity range freely.
In American roulette, the wheel has thirty-eight pockets for the ball to fall
into. Thirty-six of these, numbered from 1 to 36, are either red or black, with
eighteen of each. The green pockets, 0 and 00 (zero and double-zero), are
opposite each other on the rotor and thus split the other thirty-six into two
groups of eighteen. A winning bet on a single number pays 35:1, meaning you
get back your stake plus a proﬁt of thirty-ﬁve times the amount you bet. If
there were no 0 or 00, this payoﬀ would make the game even, because on
average, for each $1 bet, the player wins $35 one time in thirty-six spins and
loses $1 thirty-ﬁve times in thirty-six, for no net gain or loss. However, with
the addition of 0 and 00, on average the bettor who has no ability to predict
will win $35 one time in thirty-eight and lose $1 thirty-seven times in thirty-
eight, for a net loss of $2 per thirty-eight bets. The casino edge for him on
single-number bets then is $2 ÷ $38 or 5.26 percent. European roulette is
typically more generous, having just the single zero.

For bet sizing in favorable games, Shannon suggested I look at a 1956
paper by John Kelly. I adapted it as the guide for bets in blackjack and
roulette, and later in other favorable games, sports betting, and the stock
market. For roulette, the Kelly strategy showed that it was worth trading a
little expected gain for a large reduction in risk by betting on several
(neighboring) numbers, rather than a single number.
The croupier begins play by spinning the rotor. With our roulette
computer, we then time one revolution of the rotor, after which our device
knows where it is in the future, until the time comes when the croupier once
again gives it a push. Our computer then sends out a repeating sequence of
eight increasing pitched numerical tones, do, re, mi…Think of it as a piano
scale: (middle) C, D, E…C (next octave) and repeat. We chose to time the
ball when it had between three and four revolutions remaining. The closer to
the end we made our measurements, the more accurate our predictions, and
three revolutions to go still gave us enough time to place our bets. The
computer’s timing switch was hit when the orbiting ball ﬁrst passed a
reference mark on the wheel. When this happened, the tone sequence shifted
and played faster. When the timing switch clocked the ball as it passed the
reference mark again, after having made one revolution, the tones stopped.
The last tone heard named the group of numbers on which to bet. If the
person doing the timing misjudged the number of ball revolutions that were
left, the tones did not stop and we placed no bets, except for camouﬂage.
When the prediction was sent, it was simultaneous with the last input. The
compute time was zero!
Claude and I were doing this work while I went to Nevada with Manny and
Eddie to test my blackjack system, which gave me the opportunity to check
roulette wheels and conﬁrm that they behaved like our lab wheel. I saw that
many were tilted, which we had already discovered could further improve
prediction because it tended to limit the zones of the track from which the
ball could fall. I reported to Claude that half-chip and even one-chip tilts
were common. In our lab we had experimented by putting a coin half the
thickness of a casino chip (a “half-chip tilt”) under one of the three feet of
the wheel and found that this amount of tilt gave us a nice boost in advantage.
Months of experiments with a wide range of designs led us to a ﬁnal
version of the system. We split our equipment into parts, requiring a team of

two. One of us wore the computer, which had twelve transistors and was the
size of a pack of cigarettes. Data was input with switches hidden in the
wearer’s shoes and operated by his big toes. The computer’s forecast was
transmitted by radio, using a modiﬁcation of the inexpensive, widely available
equipment ordinarily used to remotely control model airplanes. The other
person, the bettor, would wear a radio receiver, which played the musical
tones telling him on which group of numbers to bet. We two confederates
would act like strangers.
The person placing the bets heard musical output through a tiny
loudspeaker pushed into one ear canal and connected by very thin wires to the
radio receiver, which was concealed under his clothing. So the wires wouldn’t
be noticed, we stuck them on with transparent spirit gum and painted them to
match the wearer’s skin and hair. The fragile copper wires, only the diameter
of a hair, broke constantly. Claude suggested that we ﬁnd ultrathin steel wires
to replace the copper. After an hour of telephoning we located a supplier in
Worcester, Massachusetts, that had what we needed.
We worked feverishly through April and May 1961 to complete the
computer because I would be leaving MIT the following month for Los
Angeles with Vivian and our not-quite-two-year-old daughter, Raun, and then
on to New Mexico State University in the fall. As we hadn’t quite ﬁnished
when Vivian, Raun, and I left, a couple of weeks later I took a red-eye back
from Los Angeles to Boston, showing up on the Shannons’ country doorstep
about 7 A.M. on a sunny summer morning. I lived there for three weeks while
Claude and I worked furiously to ﬁnish the project. Finally, after more tuning
and testing, we were ready. The wearable version of the computer was
operational at the end of June 1961.
Returning to Los Angeles, I told Vivian that the roulette computer was
ready, and Claude and I wanted to test it. Vivian and I met Betty and Claude
in Las Vegas in August. After we settled in adjoining hotel rooms with our
equipment, we headed out to locate suitable wheels. Our machine could beat
all the wheels we saw, so we chose one for the next day where we liked the
casino ambience. Then it was on to dinner and plans for the morrow.
The next morning we wired ourselves up. Claude wore the computer and
the radio transmitter and would use his big toes to operate switches hidden in
his shoes. I wore the radio receiver with the new steel wires going up my neck

to the speaker in my right ear canal. As I stood ready to leave for the casino,
Claude cocked his head and with an elﬁsh smile asked, “What makes you
tick?”
Claude was jokingly referring to the strange sounds (actually these were
musical tones) he would be sending from the computer he was wearing to my
ear canal, once we went into action at the roulette table. As I look back now
from the future, seeing myself wired up with our equipment, I stop that
moment in time and I think about a deeper meaning to the question of what
makes me tick.
I was at a point then in life when I could choose between two very diﬀerent
futures. I could roam the world as a professional gambler winning millions
per year. Switching between blackjack and roulette, I could spend some of
the winnings as perfect camouﬂage by also betting on other games oﬀering a
small casino edge, like craps or baccarat.
My other choice was to continue my academic life. The path I would take
was determined by my character, namely, What makes me tick? As the Greek
philosopher Heraclitus said, “Character is destiny.” I unfreeze time and watch
us head for the roulette tables.
The four of us arrive in the casino, with Vivian and Betty Shannon strolling
and chatting, while Claude and I are strangers to them and each other.
Lacking my casino experience, the others are nervous but fortunately don’t
show it. Claude stands by the wheel and times the ball and rotor; as
misdirection for what he is really doing, he writes down the winning number
after each roll of the ball, looking like just another doomed-to-fail system
player. Meanwhile, I take my seat at the far end of the layout, some distance
from both Claude and the wheel.
Claude waits for the croupier to give the rotor a push to keep it spinning.
As the green zero on the rotor goes by a reference point on the stator, which
Claude has chosen to be one of the ball-deﬂecting vanes, his big toe hits one
of the silent mercury switches hidden in his shoe. Contact. The soundless
equivalent of a click! When the green 0 comes around again, click. The
elapsed time is the duration of one rotation. After the second click, an eight-
tone musical scale—do, re, mi, and so on—begins to play in my ear,
repeating each time the rotor turns once. Now the computer knows not only
how fast the rotor is turning but also where it is in relation to the stator. The

rotor will gradually slow down even though it is suspended on a very low-
friction jeweled bearing. The computer also corrects for that. Claude will
have to retime the rotor every few minutes when the croupier gives it another
push to oﬀset its gradual loss of speed.
I get ready to bet. The croupier launches the ball. As it speeds around the
track inside the top of the stator, Claude watches each time it passes the
reference point. When he thinks it has more than three but less than four
revolutions left, he clicks with the other big toe. The pace of the repeating
musical scale speeds up. Finally, as the ball completes the next revolution,
Claude’s toe hits the switch again. Click! The musical tones stop. The last tone
I hear tells me the group of numbers on which to bet. As it is only a test, I bet
10-cent chips. Within a few spins, the computer works its magic, turning a
few dimes into a heap as yet another bet scores. I bet each time on a group of
ﬁve numbers that are adjacent on the rotor. This is common in Europe, where
the French call a group like this a voisinage, or “neighborhood.”
We have divided the numbers on the wheel into eight such groups of ﬁve,
with 0 and 00 appearing twice, as our groups included forty numbers and the
wheel has only thirty-eight. We’ve called these groups of ﬁve “octants.” The
average player who bets $1 on each of ﬁve numbers will win about ﬁve times
in thirty-eight or just over one-eighth of the time and lose all ﬁve bets
otherwise, with an overall rate of loss that turns out to be $2 for each $38
worth of bets, a 5.3 percent disadvantage. However, using our computer, our
bet on ﬁve numbers won a ﬁfth of the time, giving us a 44 percent edge.
But we had issues. Well into one winning session, a lady next to me looked
over in horror. Knowing I should leave, but not why, I raced to the restroom
and there in the mirror saw the speaker peeking out from my ear canal like an
alien insect. More seriously, though we frequently turned small piles of dime
chips into large ones, we had a problem that prevented us on this trip from
moving to large-scale betting. This had to do with the wires to the ear
speaker. Even though they were steel, they were so ﬁne that they broke
frequently, leading to long interruptions while we returned to our rooms and
went through the tedious process of doing the repairs and then rewiring me.
But when it was up and running, the computer was a success. We knew we
could solve the wire problem by using larger wires and growing hair to cover
both our ears and the wire running up our neck. We also considered

persuading our reluctant wives to “wire up,” concealing everything under
their fashionable longer hair.
While I was betting, no one watching had any idea that what Claude and I
were doing was in any way unusual, nor did they realize the connections
among the four of us. Even so, I realized that if the casinos ﬁgured out what
we were doing, they had an easy way to stop us. All they had to do was say
“No more bets” before the ball was spun, instead of waiting as they
customarily did until the ball had almost completed its rotations around its
track. To prevent them from catching on and doing this, we would need to put
on an act to divert attention from our winning. I already knew how much
eﬀort this would take, based on my experience with blackjack. Neither I nor
Vivian, Claude, and Betty would want to go through the rehearsed theatrics,
disguises, and misdirection needed, and with all the blackjack publicity I was
becoming too conspicuous to go unrecognized for long. It also wasn’t the way
any of the four of us wanted to spend what would inevitably involve a very
large amount of our time. So, with some ambivalence, we put the project
aside. I have always thought it was a good decision.
The MIT Media Lab lists our device as the ﬁrst of what would later be
called wearable computers, namely, computers that are worn on the body as
part of their function. In late 1961 I built the second wearable computer, a
knockoﬀ to predict the wheel of fortune or money wheel. As in the roulette
computer, my device used the toe-operated switch for input, the speaker for
output, and just a single unijunction transistor; it required only one person.
Matchbox-sized, it worked well in the casinos, but the game had too little
action to conceal the spectacular consequences of my late bets. Several times
when I placed bets on 40:1 as the wheel was spinning, the croupier would
give the wheel an extra push.
Finally in 1966, I publicly announced our roulette system because it was
clear by then that we weren’t going to exploit it. I published the details later.
When a mathematician from UC–Santa Cruz phoned me, I explained the
method to him. UCSC was where the Eudaemonic Pie group of physicists
would use the more advanced technology of the next decade to build their
own roulette computer. Like us they found a 44 percent advantage and, like
us, were frustrated by hardware problems. Later, groups using roulette
computers reportedly won large amounts.

Shannon and I had also discussed building a wearable blackjack computer.
Using the program I had used to analyze blackjack, such a computer could
count the cards and play a perfect game, winning at up to double the rate of
the best human card counters. This was an early instance, perhaps the ﬁrst, of
a computer that could outplay any human at a game. Later, computers went
on to play perfect checkers and to beat the world’s best at chess, Go, and
Jeopardy. Subsequently, others built and marketed wearable blackjack
computers. At the time, Nevada law, in particular the statutes on cheating, did
not forbid their use. However, as hidden computers in blackjack and roulette
increasingly cut into casino proﬁts, the Nevada devices law was passed as an
emergency measure on May 30, 1985. It banned use or possession of any
device to predict outcomes, analyze probabilities of occurrence, analyze
strategy for playing or betting, or keep track of cards played. The penalty:
ﬁnes and imprisonment. This broadly drawn legislation even seems to outlaw
the palm-sized strategy cards that are part of every copy of Beat the Dealer.
When, in 2009, an entrepreneur wrote a popular iPhone application to count
cards and recommend plays for blackjack, casinos reminded users that it was
a crime to do so at the tables.
Claude and I corresponded at intervals for a few years, initially about
roulette, until it became more and more clear that we didn’t want to take it
further. The last letter I remember writing was in late 1965 or early 1966,
where I recalled our discussions about the stock market triggered by my
seeing on his blackboard the ﬁgure 211, which equals 2048, representing the
amount $1 becomes if it is doubled eleven successive times, an investing goal
he was contemplating. I told him in my letter that I had found an
extraordinary method for investing in a small niche in the stock market,
which I thought could make 30 percent per year. Given time, I could surpass
the 211 ﬁgure. He never said what he thought of this hubris. And hubris it
was, as the actual rate of proﬁt would turn out to be closer to 20 percent.
We met for the last time in 1968, at a math meeting in San Francisco. His
poignant last words to me were, “Let’s get together again before we’re both
six feet under.”
After Claude’s death in 2001, Betty donated many of his papers and
devices to the MIT museum, including the roulette computer. It was lent by
the museum to the Heinz Nixdorf Computer Museum in Paderborn,

Germany, for an exhibit in the spring of 2008 where thirty-ﬁve thousand
people viewed it in the ﬁrst eight weeks.
When Claude walked up to the Las Vegas roulette wheel in August 1961,
he was using something no one but the four of us had ever seen before. This
was the world’s ﬁrst wearable computer. To me, a wearable computer is just
what the name indicates: a computer that is worn by a person in order to
fulﬁll its intended function. Though our device had little impact on later
developments, wearable computers, such as my Apple Watch, are everywhere
today.
After blackjack and roulette, I wondered: Could other casino games be
beaten?
