Chapter 10
AN EDGE AT OTHER GAMBLING
GAMES
In September 1961, a month after our test of the roulette computer in Las
Vegas, Vivian, Raun, and I moved to Las Cruces, New Mexico, where I
began my duties as a professor in the Mathematics Department at New
Mexico State University. Then a town of thirty-seven thousand people,
located in the high desert about four thousand feet above sea level, Las
Cruces was established near a principal source of the state’s water, the Rio
Grande. Towns were widely spaced in the desert expanse, and the nearest
population center was El Paso, Texas, about forty-ﬁve miles to the south.
After the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, some two hundred
miles to the north, NMSU was the next most important campus in the state
university system. When I arrived it was being transformed from an
agricultural college to a university. Just to the east of the campus was “A”
mountain, a large hill with an enormous white A for “Aggies.” Some claimed
that when the football team learned the ﬁrst letter of the alphabet, it would be
changed to B.
Our four years in New Mexico were memorable. Our younger daughter,
Karen, was born there and our son, Jeﬀ, was born in nearby El Paso. About
twenty miles away was White Sands Proving Ground and National
Monument, where we found some relief from summer heat, as the sun’s rays
were eﬃciently reﬂected away by the white gypsum “sand.”
I followed up on my childhood interest in astronomy, enjoying New
Mexico’s dark skies through a small telescope. The astronomical highlight

was a private lunch with Las Cruces resident and fellow NMSU professor
Clyde Tombaugh (1906–97), who became world famous in 1930 when, at the
Lowell Observatory in Flagstaﬀ, Arizona, he discovered the planet Pluto
(recently demoted to a “dwarf planet”). My student William E. “Bill”
Walden, who worked at Los Alamos, arranged for me to spend an afternoon
there with Stanislaw Ulam (1909–84), one of the twentieth century’s greatest
mathematicians. Ulam, part of the Manhattan Project that developed the
atomic bomb, later supplied crucial ideas for the hydrogen bomb—the Ulam-
Teller concept for thermonuclear weapons.
While teaching graduate courses and doing mathematical research at
NMSU, I wondered whether what I had learned so far would enable me to
beat other gambling games. One of the casino games I noticed on my Nevada
blackjack trips was baccarat, which James Bond plays both in Ian Fleming’s
book Casino Royale and in the dramatic beginning of the original version of
the movie of the same name. Long played in Europe for high and sometimes
unlimited stakes, this Continental favorite had been introduced in a slightly
modiﬁed form by a few Las Vegas casinos. With similarities to blackjack,
baccarat was a natural target for my methods. Fortunately, Bill Walden, a
computer scientist with an interest in applying mathematics, was happy to be
recruited. We began our analysis of baccarat in 1962, with the goal of ﬁnding
to what extent we might be successful using my card counting methods.
Nevada-style baccarat was dealt from eight decks, totaling 416 cards.
These have the same values as in blackjack, except only the last digit counts.
Thus Aces are 1, 2s through 9s are their numerical value, and 10s, Jacks,
Queens, and Kings count as 0, not 10. The game begins after the cards are
shuﬄed and a blank “cut card” is inserted into the pack of cards faceup near
the end. The 416 cards are then put into a wooden dealing box known as a
shoe. The ﬁrst card is exposed, its value noted, and this number of cards is
discarded, or “burned.” If the exposed card is a 10 or a face card, then ten
cards are burned.
A casino table had twelve seats, occupied by an assortment of customers
and shills (house employees who bet money and may pretend to be players in
order to attract customers). There are two main bets on the layout: Banker
and Player.

After the players place their wagers, the croupier deals two cards each
facedown to a betting spot on the table layout labeled BANKER and another
spot called PLAYER. Then the croupier turns the hands faceup. As with
individual cards, only the last digit of a total counts. For example, 9 + 9 = 18
counts as a total of 8. If the ﬁrst two cards of a hand total 8 or 9, termed a
natural 8 or a natural 9, as the case may be, all bets are settled without any
further cards being dealt. If neither the Player spot nor the Banker spot
receives a natural, each hand, starting with the Player’s, either receives one
more card from the croupier or stands according to a set of rules. The high
hand wins. If there is a tie the bettors get their money back.
Our analysis of baccarat followed the same approach I had used for
blackjack because of the similarities between the two games. To begin, we
calculated, for the ﬁrst time ever, the correct values for the house advantage
in the Nevada version of baccarat for the two bets, Banker and Player. For the
Banker, it was 1.058 percent of all bets placed; it was 1.169 percent if ties
were not included. For the Player bet it was 1.235 percent, or 1.365 percent
omitting ties. These ﬁgures assume that the player does not keep track of the
cards that have been used. The casino edge is diﬀerent for the two bets,
Banker and Player, because the rules for drawing a third card diﬀer and also
because winning bets on Banker have to pay the casino 5 percent.
What if a player does count cards?
To ﬁnd out, Bill Walden and I proved what we called the Fundamental
Theorem of Card Counting, which says, in a precise mathematical way, that
the advantage from card counting becomes better as more cards are seen.
This means the best situations come toward the end. We found that even
those were tiny and rare.
The reason baccarat does not have enough opportunities is because the
impact of removing one card from the pack in baccarat is about one-ninth
what it is in blackjack, so the eﬀect on the house edge is correspondingly
smaller. Also, the house edge to be overcome is greater, being more than 1
percent.
However, in addition to the main bets of Banker and Player, the baccarat
layout had four separate side bets: Banker natural 9, Player natural 9, Banker
natural 8, and Player natural 8. Banker natural 9 won if the ﬁrst two Banker

cards totaled 9, in which case the bet paid 9:1, meaning that a winning $1 bet
was paid a $9 proﬁt. The other three side bets had the same payoﬀ.
For the non-counter these bets were terrible, with a house edge of 5.10
percent for each of the two bets on natural 9 and 5.47 percent for natural 8.
But we discovered that although a card counter couldn’t beat the Banker and
Player bets, he could beat these side bets! As I predicted by reasoning and we
veriﬁed by computation, the edge on the side bets varied widely as cards were
used. About one-third of the way through the shoe, good opportunities
appeared, and things got better as more cards were played.
We devised a practical card counting system, which used the fact that when
the remaining cards had a big excess of 9s, the natural 9 bet favored the
Player. An 8-rich deck did the same for bets on Player natural 8.
For a casino test, I recruited the chairman of the Mathematics Department,
Ralph Crouch. We practiced counting down the eight-deck pack. This
required a running tally of the number of unseen cards, as well as the number
of 8s and 9s among them. Counting was harder than in blackjack because
eight decks have 416 cards, including thirty-two 9s and thirty-two 8s, and we
would track all three quantities.
Ralph was unlike any other math department chairman I have ever
encountered. Of middle height, ﬂorid-faced, bubbly, and chatty, he was an
extreme extrovert. This set him apart from the typical introverted
mathematician. A well-known joke is, “How do you tell whether a
mathematician is an introvert or an extrovert?” Answer: “If he looks at his
shoes when he talks to you, he’s an introvert. If he looks at your shoes, he’s an
extrovert.” The life of the party, Ralph promoted departmental get-togethers
fueled by “Las Cruces Punch,” a concoction made in a huge bowl with two or
more gallons of Bacardi rum along with frozen orange juice, pineapple juice,
and lemonade. Vivian and I evaded as many of these parties as we could and
made brief polite appearances when we did go. Years later, when my
daughters came across the recipe and the proportions—mostly rum—they
wondered how anyone remained vertical.
I am often asked what it takes to be a successful card counter. I’ve found
that an academic understanding is not enough. You need to think quickly, be
disciplined enough to follow the system, and have a suitable temperament,
including the ability to switch your mind into the here and now and stay

focused on the cards, the people, and your surroundings. Better still is to have
an “act” or persona that makes you seem like a type of player with which
casinos are familiar.
I thought Ralph would be perfect, along with his male golﬁng buddy Kay
Hafen, the controller of the university, for my proposed baccarat team. Kay
was low-key, levelheaded, and unﬂappable. In the practice sessions I held with
them, both learned to count well. Our wives came, too, and Vivian, who
hadn’t been on the various blackjack trips, was relieved to be able to monitor
my safety ﬁrsthand. When we weren’t playing, the six of us planned to enjoy
ourselves around town.
We drove to Las Vegas during the university’s 1963 spring break. We
arrived at the Dunes shortly before their baccarat game started at 9 P.M., and
acted as though we didn’t know one another. Velvet ropes separated the
baccarat alcove from the rest of the casino ﬂoor. The imposing raised table
had six chairs at each horseshoe-shaped end. Several female shills were
already seated when I sat down. Despite my publicity from blackjack, I went
unnoticed by the casino people. At least at ﬁrst.
As play began, a crowd gathered outside the velvet rope to watch what
could become a high-stakes game. Betting limits were $5 to $2,000 on the
main bets and $5 to $100 on the side bets, equivalent to about ten times as
much in 2016.
Then someone cried out, “There’s the guy who wrote the book.” The
baccarat supervisor’s eyes popped open and he ran to a nearby phone. One of
the wives, eavesdropping on the call upstairs, saw the man’s concern change
to reassurance and then amusement. Beating blackjack is one thing; baccarat
is another. Our spy heard, “Ha, ha. Let him play!” And so play we did.
Our ﬁrst night was pleasant. With the newly shuﬄed pack of 416 cards, all
bets favored the house, so I started with the smallest allowed bets on Banker,
$5, while I tracked the number of 8s, 9s, and total cards that remained, and
waited for favorable situations. I set the size of our big bets to give a win rate
of $100 per hour, hoping that would be low enough to keep us from being
barred.
It took about forty-ﬁve minutes to play through a shoe. After playing two
of them, I rested while Ralph and Kay played the next one. They split the
work, with Ralph monitoring the natural 8 bets, while Kay counted and bet

for the natural 9s. This was easier because they each had only two separate
card totals to keep track of, rather than three. After one shoe they rested and
I played two more sessions. We continued this pattern. When the game shut
down at the usual time of 3 A.M., we were ahead ﬁve or six hundred dollars,
about what we expected.
The next night, as I sat down for the start of the game, the atmosphere had
changed. The casino crew was distant and unfriendly—and the shills did
something strange. On the previous night the game began with me, another
player or two, and half a dozen female shills spread among the twelve seats.
Soon other players were attracted to this falsely busy scene and joined the
action. When all seats were ﬁlled, one shill popped up, leaving just a single
seat vacant for the maximum power to draw bettors: Just one seat left—grab it
while you can. As soon as a new player was drawn to that seat, yet another
shill popped out of hers. This dance of shill-in, shill-out, leaving exactly one
seat empty, had continued through the evening. But on this, our second night,
the shills on each side of me remained parked, watching closely. At the time I
had a bronchial tickle that triggered frequent strident coughs. Our undercover
wives were amused when the shills assigned to me became concerned for
their health, rebelled, and had to be ordered to stay at their posts.
As we continued to win, other players starred in their own human dramas.
Vivian noted a bleached-blond Asian lady with long magenta ﬁngernails.
Heavily made up and bejeweled, she was betting the $2,000 limit on each
hand and losing. She owned a chain of supermarkets and in a couple of hours
she lost one of them. Baccarat is a game favored by big bettors. By 1995
baccarat in Nevada accounted for half as much casino proﬁt as did blackjack,
yet with only one-ﬁftieth as many tables. A baccarat table was twenty-ﬁve
times as proﬁtable as a blackjack table.
The game shut down again about 3 A.M. on this second night. After we
counted our winnings, Ralph and Kay returned to the bar for a drink. The pit
boss and a couple of men from the casino were there with the baccarat shoe
and the eight decks of cards. They were muttering and examining the cards
one by one, looking for bends, crimps, markings, and any other clues as to
how we were winning.
The third night began with obvious hostility toward me by all the
employees in the pit. They conspicuously watched my every move. To mislead

them, I frequently touched my thumb behind my ear, as though I were a cheat
marking the cards with “daub,” a nearly invisible Vaseline-like substance
easily seen through special glasses. I hoped they would waste another night
examining every card, looking for what wasn’t there. On the ﬁrst two evenings
they had repeatedly oﬀered me drinks, but I had chosen coﬀee with cream
and sugar instead. Tonight it was war and they didn’t oﬀer me anything. We
won again.
When I sat down to play on the fourth night, the atmosphere had again
changed, drastically. The pit boss and his minions were smiling and relaxed.
They seemed pleased to see me. Then they volunteered “coﬀee with cream
and sugar, just the way you like it.” I was deep into the ﬁrst shoe happily
winning and drinking my coﬀee when suddenly I couldn’t think. I could no
longer keep the count. I was shocked because I had managed well enough
through noise, smoke, conversation, the pressure of high-speed play, the
excitement of losing or winning, and the impact of alcoholic beverages.
Something unexpected had taken place. I took my chips and left, replaced on
the next shoe by Ralph and Kay.
The wives saw that my pupils were hugely dilated. Bellamia Hafen, who
was a nurse, said that she had seen this often when people who had used
drugs were admitted to her hospital. I wanted to collapse into sleep but
Vivian, Isobel Crouch, and Bellamia plied me with black coﬀee and walked
me for several hours until the eﬀects began to wear oﬀ. Ralph and Kay played
through the evening until night four ended. We won again.
After considerable discussion among us, I took my seat for the start of the
game on night ﬁve. No longer smiling, the boys again oﬀered me coﬀee with
cream and sugar. I said, “No thanks. Just bring me a glass of water.” The rest
of my group groaned silently. It took a suspiciously long time and when the
water came I expected it to have something extra. To ﬁnd out, I carefully put
only a single drop on my tongue. Ugh! It tasted as if a box of baking soda had
been emptied into the glass. But that single drop was enough to ﬂatten me
again. I wondered what a swallow would have done.
With numb brain and dilated pupils I left and repeated the black-coﬀee-
and-walking routine. Meanwhile Ralph and Kay were asked to leave,
permanently, and the same went for all of their friends.

There was one more baccarat game with the side bets and it was at the
Sands casino. After a day of R&R, I went there with our bankroll and took a
seat at the table. I revised our target from $100 an hour to $1,000, ﬁguring
that the Dunes would have contacted the Sands so I would soon be barred.
After two and a half hours I was ahead $2,500. Then Carl Cohen, part owner
of the Sands and the person in charge, paid me a table-side visit. Carl had
previously disciplined Frank Sinatra for making a commotion in the casino.
When Sinatra persisted, Cohen saw to it that he didn’t return, even though
Sinatra was a minor part owner. It was Cohen who now told me not to play at
his casino anymore. I asked why and he said, “No reason. We just don’t want
you to play here.” He was accompanied by the largest security guard I had yet
seen. Discussion was pointless. I left.
During our six nights of play, we had proven the system at the tables. We
validated the theoretical mathematical calculations and demonstrated yet
another application of the Kelly system for betting and investing. But our trip
would have an unnerving postscript.
The six of us left Las Vegas the next morning to drive back to Las Cruces.
I was at the wheel as we went down a mountain road in northern Arizona. We
were going sixty-ﬁve miles an hour when the accelerator pedal suddenly
jammed. The steep downhill and the wide-open throttle were too much for
the brakes. The car sped up to eighty miles an hour and the turns in the road
became unmanageable.
With little time to think and my foot pressing as hard as I could on the
brakes, I also set the emergency brake, downshifted so the engine would help
slow the car, and cut oﬀ power by turning oﬀ the ignition. I ﬁnally managed
to stop in a turnout. A Good Samaritan who understood cars pulled over to
help us. Opening the hood to see why the accelerator jammed, he found a
part that had come unscrewed from a long, threaded rod, something he had
never before seen happen and found baﬄing. He ﬁxed it and we continued on
our way, alive, relieved, and sobered.
We had proven the system worked at the tables like it did in theory. As a
result, both the Dunes and the Sands removed the natural 8 and natural 9
bets.
While at New Mexico State, I invested money from book royalties and
gambling winnings in stocks. But I was ignorant of the market as well as

unlucky. The results were poor. I wanted to do better. Investments presented
a new type of uncertainty, but the theory of probability might help me make
good choices.
Things came together when I realized that there was a far greater casino
than all of Nevada. Could my methods for beating games of chance give me
an edge in the greatest gambling arena on earth, Wall Street? Ever curious, I
decided to ﬁnd out. I began to teach myself about the ﬁnancial markets,
lighting my way with an unusual lamp, the knowledge I had gained from
gambling games.
