Chapter 11
WALL STREET: THE GREATEST
CASINO ON EARTH
Gambling is investing simpliﬁed. The striking similarities between the two
suggested to me that, just as some gambling games could be beaten, it might
also be possible to do better than the market averages. Both can be analyzed
using mathematics, statistics, and computers. Each requires money
management, choosing the proper balance between risk and return. Betting
too much, even though each individual bet is in your favor, can be ruinous.
When the Nobel Prize winners running the giant hedge fund Long-Term
Capital Management made this mistake, its collapse in 1998 almost
destabilized the US ﬁnancial system. On the other hand, playing safe and
betting too little means you leave money on the table. The psychological
makeup to succeed at investing also has similarities to that for gambling.
Great investors are often good at both.
Relishing the intellectual challenge and the fun of exploring the markets, I
spent the summer of 1964 educating myself about them. I haunted the big
Martindale’s bookstore then in Beverly Hills. I read stock market classics like
Graham and Dodd’s Security Analysis, Edwards and Magee’s work on
technical analysis, and scores of other books and periodicals ranging from
fundamental to technical, theoretical to practical, and simple to abstruse.
Much of what I read was dross but, like a baleen whale ﬁltering the tiny
nutritious krill from huge volumes of seawater, I came away with a
foundation of knowledge. Once again, just as with casino games, I was

surprised and encouraged by how little was known by so many. And just as in
blackjack, my ﬁrst investment was a loss that contributed to my education.
A couple of years earlier, when I knew nothing at all about investing, I
heard about a company whose stock was allegedly selling at a bargain price. It
was Electric Autolite, and among their products were automobile batteries for
Ford Motor Company. The story on the business page of my newspaper said
we could expect a great future: technological innovations, big new contracts,
and a jump in sales. (The same forecasts for battery makers were being made
forty years later.)
As I ﬁnally had some capital from playing blackjack and from book sales, I
decided to let it grow through investing while I focused on family and my
academic career. I bought one hundred shares at $40 and watched the stock
decline over the next two years to $20 a share, losing half of my $4,000
investment. I had no idea when to sell. I decided to hang on until the stock
returned to my original purchase price, so as not to take a loss. This is exactly
what gamblers do when they are losing and insist on playing until they get
even. It took four years, but I ﬁnally got out with my original $4,000. Fifty
years later, legions of tech stock investors shared my experience, waiting
ﬁfteen years to get even after buying near the top on March 10, 2000.
Years later, discussing my Electric Autolite purchase with Vivian as we
drove home from lunch, I asked, “What were my mistakes?”
She almost read my mind as she said, “First, you bought something you
didn’t really understand, so it was no better or worse than throwing a dart into
the stock market list. Had you bought a low-load mutual fund [no-load funds
weren’t available yet] you would have had the same expected gain but less
expected risk.” I thought the story about Electric Autolite meant it was a
superior investment. That thinking was wrong. As I would learn, most stock-
picking stories, advice, and recommendations are completely worthless.
Then Vivian remarked on my second mistake in thinking, my plan for
getting out, which was to wait until I was even again. What I had done was
focus on a price that was of unique historical signiﬁcance to me, only me,
namely, my purchase price. Behavioral ﬁnance theorists, who have in recent
decades begun to analyze the psychological errors in thinking that persistently
bedevil most investors, call this anchoring (of yourself to a price that has
meaning to you but not to the market). Since I really had no predictive power,

any exit strategy was as good or bad as any other. Like my ﬁrst mistake, this
error was in the way I thought about the problem of when to sell, choosing an
irrelevant criterion—the price I paid—rather than focusing on economic
fundamentals like whether cash or alternative investments would serve better.
Anchoring is a subtle and pervasive aberration in investment thinking. For
instance, a former neighbor, Mr. Davis (as I shall call him), saw the market
value of his house rise from his purchase price of $2,000,000 or so in the
mid-1980s to $3,500,000 or so when luxury home prices peaked in 1988–89.
Soon afterward, he decided he wanted to sell and anchored himself to the
price of $3,500,000. During the next ten years, as the market price of his
house fell back to $2,200,000 or so, he kept trying to sell at his now
laughable anchor price. At last, in 2000, with a resurgent stock market and a
dot-com-driven price rise in expensive homes, he escaped at $3,250,000. In
his case, as often happens, the thinking error of anchoring, despite the
eventual sale price he achieved, left him with substantially less money than if
he had acted otherwise.
Mr. Davis and I used to jog together occasionally and chat about his
favorite topics, money and investments. Following my recommendation, he
joined a limited partnership that itself allocated money to limited
partnerships, so-called hedge funds, which it believed were likely to make
superior investments. His expected rate of return after paying his income
taxes on the gains was about 10 percent per year, with considerably more
stability in the value of the investment than was to be found in residential real
estate or the stock market. I advised him to sell his house at current market
just after the 1988–89 peak. He would have received perhaps $3,300,000 and
then, as was his plan, moved to a $1,000,000 house. After costs and taxes he
would have ended up with an additional $1,600,000 to invest. Putting this
into the hedge fund he had already joined at my recommendation, the money
would have grown at 10 percent per year for eleven years, becoming
$4,565,000. Add that to the $1,000,000 house, whose market price would
have declined, then recovered, and Mr. Davis would have had $5,565,000 in
2000 instead of the $3,250,000 he ended up with.
I’ve seen my own anchoring mistake repeatedly made by real estate buyers
and sellers, as well as in everyday situations. As I was driving home one day
in heavy traﬃc, an SUV forced its way in front of me, giving me a choice of

yielding or “maintaining my rights” and having a fender bender. Since I
receive these invitations daily, I saw no need to accept this one for fear I
would miss out. The SUV was in “my” space (anchoring: I’ve attached myself
to an abstract moving location that has a unique historical meaning to me, and
am allowing it to dictate my driving behavior). We were now lined up about
seventy cars deep in the most notoriously slow left-turn lane in Newport
Beach. Ordinarily the road is two lanes wide, but construction had narrowed
it to one, and the complex sequence of light changes allowed only about
twenty cars through on each two-minute cycle. What if, when we ﬁnally got
to the signal, the evil SUV was the last one through the yellow? Since it was
really “my” space, was I justiﬁed in risking an accident by rolling through on
the red? Otherwise, the time thief gains two minutes at my expense. The
temptation may sound as foolish to you as it does in cold print to me, but I
see this kind of behavior regularly.
Having learned the folly of anchoring from my investment experience, I
have seen that it can be equally foolish on the road. Being a more rational
investor has made me a more rational driver!
Two “expert” longtime insurance investors from Dallas drew me into my
next adventure in the market. They claimed to have become rich investing in
life insurance companies. According to their ﬁgures the A.  M. Best AAA
index of the average price of such companies had gone up in each of the last
twenty-four years, and they had plausible arguments that this would continue.
Sure enough, the amazing winning streak they had identiﬁed ended just after
my purchase, and we all lost money.
Lesson: Do not assume that what investors call momentum, a long streak
of either rising or falling prices, will continue unless you can make a sound
case that it will.
Thinking about momentum led me to wonder whether past prices could
somehow be used to predict future prices. To test this, I looked at charting,
the art of using patterns in the graphs of stock (or commodity) prices to
forecast their future changes. I was introduced to this by Norman, a Canadian
resident living in Las Cruces, while I was teaching at New Mexico State
University. After months of examining his data and predictions, I was unable
to ﬁnd anything of value. As Vivian said at the start, “This is going to be a
waste of time. Norman’s been doing this for years and you can tell he’s barely

getting by. Just look at his worn-out shoes and shabby clothes. And you can
tell from the quality of his wife’s old and dated outﬁts that they were once
better oﬀ.”
I still owed more tuition to Mr. Market for his introductory course in
investment mistakes. Mr. Market is an allegorical character famously
introduced by Benjamin Graham to illustrate the excessive market price
swings above and below the actual underlying business values of quoted
securities. Some days he’s manic and prices are high. Other days he’s gloomy
and shares can be bought well below what Graham called their “intrinsic
value.” In the early 1960s the demand for silver was exceeding supply and I
expected prices to spurt sharply. The value of the silver extracted from
melting everyday coins was eventually expected to exceed the face value by
enough to pay costs and give a proﬁt. Bill Rickenbacker, who backed my
blackjack trip with Mickey MacDougall and Russell Barnhart, had by then
purchased US silver dollars and stored them in a vault while he waited for this
to happen.
The further price rise of silver would slow somewhat as a new supply came
from melting coins. Also some ﬁve billion ounces of silver could potentially
be extracted from the vast pool of jewelry in India. Once demand absorbed
these new supplies, prices would jump even more. When the price of silver
actually did pass $1.29 per ounce, those US coins that contained 90 percent
silver were worth more as metal than as legal tender. Coins were skimmed
from circulation and melted to extract their silver. After the US government
banned this, the coins were hoarded and bought and sold in sixty-pound bags
via dealers.
Believing this economic supply and demand analysis was correct, I opened
a Swiss bank account to buy silver, with the help and encouragement of local
promoters who got a commission for making the arrangements. They
recommended doing this on 331⁄3 percent collateral. That means that for each
dollar’s worth of silver I bought, I had to deposit only 331⁄3 cents in my
account. The promoters arranged for my friendly Swiss bank to loan me the
rest. Of course, when I borrowed to buy three times as much silver as I could
have with cash alone, they got triple the commissions, and the bank was
happy to collect interest on the loan and charge me monthly storage fees.

Silver rose as predicted and the promoters recommended using the proﬁts
together with more bank loans to buy yet more silver. When the commodity
reached $2.40 an ounce my account had a lot more of the metal than when I
started, and I had a large proﬁt on all of my purchases. However, as I had
reinvested my proﬁts on the way up, $1.60 of that $2.40 an ounce was owed
on my loan from the bank. It was like buying a house with one-third down.
Then the price of silver dropped. When this happened some people sold to
capture their proﬁt. This drove down the price still further until others, who
had borrowed to an even greater extent than I had, were sold out by their
lenders as their accounts threatened to go underwater—meaning there
wouldn’t be enough left to pay oﬀ the loan. These sales pushed the price
down even more, forcing more sales by the remaining borrowers, causing
silver to drop rapidly to a little below $1.60, just enough to wipe me out, after
which it resumed its upward path. I learned from this that even though I was
right in my economic analysis I hadn’t properly evaluated the risk of too
much leverage. For a few thousand dollars I learned from this to make proper
risk management a major theme of my life for more than ﬁfty years
thereafter. In 2008 almost the entire world ﬁnancial establishment didn’t
understand this lesson and had overleveraged itself.
I also learned from my losing silver investment that when the interests of
the salesmen and promoters diﬀer from those of the client, the client had
better look out for himself. This is the well-known agency problem in
economics, where the interest of the agents or managers don’t coincide with
those of the principals, or owners. Shareholders of companies that have been
pillaged by self-serving CEOs and boards of directors are painfully familiar
with this.
After these lessons from Mr. Market, I was tempted to believe that the
academics were right in claiming that any edge in the markets is limited,
small, temporary, and quickly captured by the smartest or best-informed
investors. Once again, I was invited to accept the consensus opinion at face
value, and once again I decided to see for myself.
—
In June 1965, I began a second summer of self-education in economics,
ﬁnance, and the markets. The thin pamphlet on common stock purchase

warrants that I’d ordered had just come in the mail. I settled into a lawn chair,
curious to ﬁnd out how these securities worked. It was a revelation.
The pamphlet explained that a common stock purchase warrant is a
security issued by a company that gives the owner the right to buy stock at a
speciﬁed price, known as the exercise price, on or before a stated expiration
date. For instance, in 1964 a Sperry Rand warrant entitled the holder to
purchase one share of common stock for $28 until September 15, 1967. On
this ﬁnal day, if the stock trades above that price, you can use one warrant
plus $28 to buy one share of stock. This means the warrant is worth the
amount by which the stock price exceeds $28. However, if the stock price is
below $28, it is cheaper to buy the stock outright, in which case the warrant is
worthless.
A warrant, like a lottery ticket, was always worth something before it
expired even if the stock price was very low, if there was any chance the
stock price could move above the exercise price and put the warrant “into the
money.” The more time left, and the higher the stock price, the more the
warrant was likely to be worth. The prices of these two securities followed a
simple relationship regardless of the complexities of the balance sheet or
business aﬀairs of the underlying company. As I thought about this I formed a
rough idea of the rules relating the warrant price to the stock price. Since the
prices of the two securities tended to move together, the important idea of
“hedging” occurred to me, in which I could use this relationship to exploit any
mispricing of the warrant and simultaneously reduce the risk of doing so.
To form a hedge, take two securities whose prices tend to move together,
such as a warrant and the common stock it can be used to purchase, but
which are comparatively mispriced. Buy the relatively underpriced security
and sell short the relatively overpriced security. If the proportions in the
position are chosen well, then even though prices ﬂuctuate, the gains and
losses on the two sides will approximately oﬀset or hedge each other. If the
relative mispricing between the two securities disappears as expected, close
the position in both and collect a proﬁt.
A few days after I had the idea of hedging warrants versus common stock,
we packed up our possessions and moved from New Mexico State University
to Southern California, where I became a founding faculty member of the
Mathematics Department of the new Irvine campus of the University of

California (UCI). During our four years in Las Cruces, I had learned much
more mathematics, directed the PhD dissertations of talented students, and
published my research as a series of professional articles in mathematics
journals. But we wanted to live in Southern California where our children
would see their grandparents and our own siblings and their families, and we
would be near old friends. I also liked the fact that UCI purposely was starting
out emphasizing collaboration between faculty and students from diﬀerent
subject areas.
—
On my ﬁrst day in my new teaching position at UCI, in September 1965,
Julian Feldman, the head of the school of information and computer sciences,
asked me what I was working on. When I described my ideas about a theory
of warrant valuation and hedging, he said that another member of the new
faculty, an economist named Sheen Kassouf (1928–2005), had written his
PhD thesis on the subject. Feldman introduced us and I learned that Kassouf
had discovered the same concepts in 1962 and had already been shorting
overpriced warrants and hedging them, doubling his initial $100,000 in just
three years.
I realized that if we worked together we could develop both the theory and
the techniques for hedged investment more rapidly than by working alone. At
the weekly meetings I proposed, we roughly determined the fair price for a
warrant, ﬁnding quite a few that were substantially overpriced. The way to
proﬁt was to sell them short. To sell a security short you borrow the desired
quantity through your broker from someone who owns it, sell it in the
marketplace, and collect the proceeds. Later you have to repurchase it at
whatever price then prevails to meet your contractual obligation to return
what you borrowed. If your buy-back price is below your earlier sale price,
you win. If it is higher, you lose.
Short selling overpriced warrants was proﬁtable on average but risky. The
same was true for buying stocks. The two risks largely canceled each other
when we hedged the warrants by purchasing the associated common stock. In
a historical simulation our optimized method made 25 percent a year with
low risk, even during the great 1929 stock market crash and its aftermath. As

we worked on theory, Kassouf and I were investing for ourselves in warrant
hedges, which also made 25 percent per year.
We explained our methods for investing and presented the actual results
from our hedges in Beat the Market, ﬁnished in late 1966 and published by
Random House in 1967. There we extended our approach to include the
much larger area of convertible bonds. Just as in blackjack, I was willing to
share our discoveries with the public for several reasons. Among them was
the awareness that sooner or later, others would make the same discoveries,
that scientiﬁc research ought to be a public good, and that I would continue to
have more ideas.
Having somewhat diﬀerent ideas about how to set up our hedged
investments, Kassouf and I ended our collaboration after we ﬁnished Beat the
Market. As an economist, Sheen felt that he understood the companies well
enough to deviate from a neutral hedge. A neutral hedge gives balanced
protection against loss whether the market moves up or down. Sheen,
however, was willing to modify the long and short proportions in the hedge to
favor either a rise in the price of the underlying stock or a fall, depending on
his analysis. Given my bad experiences in picking stocks and my lack of
background in analyzing companies, I wanted to do hedges that were as
protected as possible against changes in the stock price, no matter in which
direction. I continued to work on the theory and to invest on my own.
A major theoretical breakthrough came to me in 1967. I used Occam’s
razor—the principle that given more than one explanation, you should begin
by choosing the simplest one—and plausible reasoning to arrive at a neat
formula for determining the “correct” price of a warrant. Armed with this I
could tell when they were mispriced and by roughly how much. That same
year I began using the formula to trade and hedge over-the-counter warrants
and options and, a little later, convertible bonds. An option to buy a stock is
similar to a warrant, the principal diﬀerence being that warrants are typically
issued by the company itself and options are not. Convertible bonds are like
ordinary bonds but with the additional feature that they can be exchanged for
a ﬁxed number of shares of the issuing company’s stock if the holder so
desires.
Having the formula further increased my conﬁdence and returns. This,
along with the fact that the available investment opportunities were much

larger than I could exploit with my modest capital, led to the next step. I
began to manage hedged portfolios for friends and acquaintances.
