Chapter 12
BRIDGE WITH BUFFETT
As my reputation as an investor quietly spread around UC, Irvine, friends and
members of the university community asked me to manage money for them.
Using the warrant hedging techniques in Beat the Market, I took on several
accounts with a minimum investment of $25,000. Among my new clients was
Ralph Waldo Gerard, dean of the graduate school at UCI, and his wife,
Frosty, so-called because of her crown of white hair. Ralph, a distinguished
medical researcher and biologist, was a member of the select National
Academy of Sciences. Courtly, curious, and widely informed, he enjoyed
discussing big ideas with me, as he had with one of his relatives, the great
stock market theorist and philosopher Benjamin Graham. Graham and
Dodd’s Security Analysis, ﬁrst published in 1934, was the landmark book for
the fundamental analysis of common stocks, revised and updated several
times. Through Graham, Gerard had met Warren Buﬀett and was an early
investor in one of his investment vehicles, Buﬀett Partnership, Ltd.
Warren, who would become Graham’s greatest student and arguably the
most successful investor of all time, started his ﬁrst investment partnership,
Buﬀett Associates, Ltd., in 1956 at the age of twenty-ﬁve with $100,100. He
told me with a laugh that the $100 was his contribution. After starting ten
more partnerships he merged them all into Buﬀett Partnership, Ltd., early in
1962. During the twelve years from 1956 to 1968, these funds Buﬀett
managed compounded at a rate of 29.5 percent, before he took his fee of
one-fourth of the gain in excess of 6 percent. He had no down years, whereas
large company stocks and small company stocks each fell in four of those
years. After Buﬀett’s fee, Gerard’s investment was growing at 24 percent a

year, surpassing the typical stock market investor’s experience, as measured
by small-company stocks, which compounded at 19 percent per year, and
large-company stocks, which returned 10 percent. Before taxes, $1 for
Buﬀett’s limited partners grew to $16.29. Each of Warren’s own dollars,
growing without the deduction of his fees, became $28.80.
So why were the Gerards interested in moving their money from the thirty-
eight-year-old Buﬀett, who had been investing since he was a child and with
whom they were netting 24 percent a year, to the thirty-six-year-old Thorp,
who had been investing for only a few years and from whom they could
expect, on the basis of past performance, to net just 20 percent a year? It was
because, after the upward spike in stock prices in 1967, when holders of
large-company stocks gained 38 percent on average over the two-year period
and small-company stocks were up a manic 150 percent, Warren Buﬀett said
it was too tough to ﬁnd undervalued companies. Over the next couple of years
he would be liquidating his partnership. His investors could cash out or, along
with Warren himself, take some or all of their equity as shares in two
companies owned by the partnership, one of which was a troubled little
textile company called Berkshire Hathaway. Buﬀett himself now owned $25
million of the $100 million partnership, as a result of his management fees
and their growth through reinvestment in the partnership.
The Gerards chose to take their distribution entirely in cash and were
looking for a new home for it. Ralph liked the analytic approach in Beat the
Market and my other writings, and he wanted not only to check me out
himself but, as I realized later, to get a reading from the great investor with
whom he had done so well. Thus it happened that in the summer of 1968 the
Gerards invited Vivian and me to their home for dinner with Susie and
Warren Buﬀett.
From their home in the Harbor View Hills section of Newport Beach, the
Gerards enjoyed looking at Newport Harbor, the Paciﬁc Ocean, and the
spectacular evanescent sunsets behind Catalina Island to the west. After we
sat down for dinner, Ralph’s wife, Frosty, asked each person at the table to
introduce themselves. Susie Buﬀett told us about her ambitions to be a
nightclub singer and how Warren was encouraging her. She also discussed her
activities in organizations that helped people, such as Fair Housing, and the
National Conference of Christians and Jews.

Warren was a high-speed talker with a Nebraska twang and a stream of
jokes, anecdotes, and clever sayings. He loved to play bridge and had a
natural liking for the logical, the quantitative, and the mathematical. As the
evening went on, I learned that he focused on ﬁnding and buying into
undervalued companies. Over a period of several years, he expected each of
these investments to substantially outperform the market, as represented by
an index such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or the Standard &
Poor’s 500 (S&P 500). As his mentor Ben Graham did before him, Warren
also invested in warrant and convertible hedging and merger arbitrage. It was
in this area that his and my interest overlapped, and where Buﬀett, unknown
to me, was vetting me as a possible successor to manage investments for the
Gerards.
As we chatted about compound interest, Warren gave one of his favorite
examples of its remarkable power, how if the Manhattan Indians could have
invested $24, the value then of the trinkets Peter Minuit paid them for
Manhattan in 1626, at a net return of 8 percent, they could buy the land back
now along with all the improvements. Warren said he was asked how he
found so many millionaires for his partnership. Laughing, he said to me, “I
told them I grew my own.”
Then Warren asked me if I knew about three oddly numbered dice. He had
recently heard about them and, in the years to come, would enjoy using them
to baﬄe one smart person after another. Like standard dice, each face has a
number between one and six, but unlike normal dice some numbers can be
the same. In fact, for the dice Warren asked me about, each die has no more
than two or three diﬀerent numbers. These dice are used to play a gambling
game: You pick the “best” of the three dice, then from the remaining two I
pick the “second best.” We both roll and the high number wins. I can beat
you, on average, even though you chose the better die. The surprise for nearly
everyone is that there is no “best” die. Call the dice A, B, and C. If A beats B,
and B beats C, it seems plausible that since A was better than B and B was
better than C, A ought to be much better than C. Instead C beats A.
This puzzles people, because they expect things to follow what
mathematicians call the transitive rule: If A is better than B and B is better
than C, then A is better than C. For example, if you replace the phrase better
than by any of the phrases longer than, heavier than, older than, more than, or

larger than, the rule is true. However, some relationships don’t follow this
rule. For instance, is an acquaintance of and is visible to do not. And, if we
replace better than by beats on average, these dice don’t follow the transitive
rule. So they’re called nontransitive dice. The childhood game of Rock,
Paper, Scissors is a simple example of a nontransitive rule. Rock beats
(breaks) Scissors, Scissors beats (cuts) Paper, and Paper beats (covers) Rock.
Another nontransitive example with great practical impact is voting
preferences. Often a majority of voters prefer candidate A over candidate B,
candidate B over candidate C, and candidate C over candidate A. In these
elections, where voting preference is nontransitive, who gets elected? It
depends on the structure of the election process. Mathematical economist
Kenneth Arrow received the Nobel Prize in Economics for showing that no
voting procedure exists that satisﬁes an entire list of intuitively natural
desirable properties. A Discover magazine article on this subject argued that,
with a more “reasonable” election procedure, based on voter comparisons of
all the major Democratic and Republican candidates, in 2000 John McCain
would have received the Republican nomination and then been elected
president instead of George W. Bush.
Back in Newport Beach, the die was being cast. I passed Warren’s test
when I told him if the dice are numbered as A = (3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3), B = (6, 5,
2, 2, 2, 2) and C = (4, 4, 4, 4, 1, 1) then calculations show that, on average, A
beats B two-thirds of the time, B beats C ﬁve-ninths of the time, and C beats
A two-thirds of the time. Other sets of nontransitive dice are possible as well.
I have entertained people by marking a set of three dice like this and letting
my opponent pick his die ﬁrst. After trying all three dice in turn and losing
each time, people are typically stumped.
Warren invited the Gerards and me to join him another time for an
afternoon of bridge at his house in Emerald Bay. This upscale gated
community of the very rich at the north end of Laguna Beach, California, had
its own magniﬁcent private beach and ocean views. As Warren and I talked,
the similarities and diﬀerences in our approaches to investing became clearer
to me. He evaluated businesses with the aim of buying shares in them, or
even the entire company, so cheaply that he had an ample “margin of safety”
to allow for the unknown and the unanticipated. In his view, such
opportunities arose from time to time when investors became excessively

pessimistic about an individual company or about stocks in general: “Be
fearful when others are greedy and greedy when others are fearful.” His
objective was to outperform the market in the long run and so he judged
himself largely on his performance relative to the market.
In contrast, I didn’t judge the worth of various businesses. Instead I
compared diﬀerent securities of the same company with the object of ﬁnding
relative mispricing, from which I could construct a hedged position, long the
relatively undervalued, short the relatively overvalued, from which I could
extract a positive return despite stock market ups and downs. Warren didn’t
mind substantial variations in market prices over months or even a few years
because he believed that in the long run the market would be up strongly and
by regularly beating it during its ﬂuctuations his wealth would grow over time
much faster than the overall market. His goal was to accumulate the most
money. I enjoyed using mathematics to solve certain interesting puzzles,
which I found ﬁrst in the world of gambling, then in the world of investing.
Making money conﬁrmed my theories by showing that they worked in the
real world. Warren began to invest while still a child and spent his life doing it
remarkably well. My discoveries ﬁt in with my life path as a mathematician
and seemed much easier, leaving me largely free to enjoy my family and
pursue my career in the academic world.
Warren’s house in Emerald Bay became newsworthy later on during
Arnold (“The Terminator”) Schwarzenegger’s successful 2003 campaign to
become governor of California. Initially, Buﬀett was a supporter and an
economic adviser to Arnold. One campaign issue was how to cut California’s
budget deﬁcit. The problem was caused largely by the anti-tax measure
Proposition 13, adopted by California voters in 1978. This limited the tax on
real estate to 1 percent of the assessed valuation with a cap of 2 percent per
year on any revaluation upward. With California’s soaring prices, the tax on
houses that weren’t traded fell over time to a small fraction of 1 percent of
their current value, thus sharply eroding the tax base and expanding the
budget deﬁcit. A house was reassessed at the current market price only when
it was resold. As a result, taxes on comparable houses varied greatly,
depending on when they last changed ownership. This led to major inequities
in the taxes paid by diﬀerent homeowners. In addition, by drastically lowering
the overall eﬀective tax rate on residences, Proposition 13 reduced the annual

expense of homeownership, which in turn fueled the excessive rise in
California home prices.
Businesses did even better than homeowners. They created companies to
hold properties. Instead of selling a particular property, they sold the
company that owned it. By keeping the same “owner,” this scheme could
preserve forever the original low valuation of the individual properties a
particular company owned rather than increasing the tax based on a new,
higher and more realistic sales price. The revenue the state lost would have
been enough to eliminate all the California budget deﬁcits from 1978 until
now, and to make unnecessary all the cuts in funding for education and law
enforcement, provided of course that politicians, seeing no deﬁcits as a result,
restrained themselves from adding foolish or wasteful new expenditures.
Buﬀett, aware of the economic harm to the state, publicly advised
Schwarzenegger to shift to a fair and equitable property tax. He pointed out
that by virtue of Proposition 13 the property tax on his Emerald Bay house,
which he purchased in the 1960s and was now worth several million dollars,
was substantially less than on his house in Omaha, currently valued at
$700,000. The governor-to-be, expecting to lose votes if he followed this
advice, said, “I told Warren that if he mentions Proposition 13 again he has to
do 
ﬁve 
hundred 
sit-ups.” 
Warren 
quietly 
discontinued 
advising
Schwarzenegger.
Afterward, when I was thinking about Buﬀett, his favorite game—bridge—
and the nontransitive dice, I wondered whether bidding systems at bridge
might be like those dice. Could it be that no matter which bidding system you
use, there will always be another system that beats it, so there’s no best
system? If so, the inventors of new “better” bidding systems could be chasing
their tails forever, only to have their systems beaten by still newer systems,
which in turn might then lose to old previously discarded systems.
Could one ﬁnd the answer to this question? Possibly when computers can
play bridge and bid at the expert level. How? By letting the computer play
large numbers of hands, pitting various bidding systems against one another,
and keeping track of how they do.
Suppose it turned out that no bidding system is best. Then your best
strategy would be to ask the opponents to disclose their bidding system, as
they are required to do, then choose the most lethal counter to it. When the

opponents catch on and demand that your team chooses its bidding system
ﬁrst, this leads to an impasse that might have to be resolved by a lottery to see
who chooses ﬁrst, or by some kind of random assignment of bidding systems.
Bridge is what mathematicians call a game of imperfect information. The
bidding, which precedes the play of the cards, gives some information about
the four concealed hands held by the two pairs of players who are opposing
each other. As the cards are played, players use the bidding and the cards they
have seen so far to make inferences about who has the remaining unplayed
cards. The stock market also is a game of imperfect information and even
resembles bridge in that both have their deceptions. As in bridge, you do
better in the market if you get more information sooner and put it to better
use. It’s no surprise that Buﬀett, arguably the greatest investor in history, is a
bridge addict.
—
Impressed by Warren’s mind and his methods, as well as his record as an
investor, I told Vivian that I believed he would eventually become the richest
man in America. Buﬀett was an extraordinarily smart evaluator of
underpriced companies, so he could compound money much faster than the
average investor. He also could continue to rely mainly on his own talent even
as his capital grew to an enormous amount. Warren furthermore understood
the power of compound interest and, clearly, planned to apply it over a long
time.
My prediction came true for a few months in 1993, at which time he was
the richest man in the world, until he was passed by Bill Gates and, later, a
few other dot-commers. Buﬀett regained the world’s top spot in 2007 only to
trade places with his bridge buddy Gates again in 2008. By then, time spent
with Warren had become a commodity of great value. In a vigorous auction
on eBay, an Asian investor bid $2 million, to be donated to charity, for the
privilege of having lunch with him.
Ralph Gerard gave me copies of Buﬀett’s letters to his partners and his
partnership document, a simple two-page aﬀair. It was clear from this that the
ideal plan would be to pool my investing for myself and others in a single
limited partnership just as Warren had eventually done.

—
At the time, I was managing a total of about $400,000. At 25 percent a year,
the accounts were grossing $100,000, and as my performance fee was 20
percent of the proﬁts, I was earning at the rate of $20,000 a year, roughly the
same as my salary as a professor. With the assets of the accounts pooled into
a single account, I could manage more with less eﬀort. A particular warrant
hedge only had to be set up and managed once, rather than replicated
individually for each managed account.
While I was deciding on my next steps, I got a phone call from a young
stockbroker in New York named Jay Regan, who had read Beat the Market
and told me he wanted to get into the investing business using a limited
partnership to implement my convertible hedging approach. Thinking he
might be able to handle the business aspects of running a hedge fund while I
focused on choosing the investments and on doing further research into the
markets, I arranged to meet him at my oﬃce in the UCI Math Department
one day in 1969.
Ten years younger than I and of medium height, the twenty-seven-year-old
Regan had thinning reddish hair, freckles, and the social skills of a promoter.
A Dartmouth graduate in philosophy, he quickly took in the principles on
which I based my investment methods.
We seemed to make a natural team. I would generate most of the ideas but
he would bring suggestions and trading possibilities from “the Street.” I would
do the analysis and compute orders for him to execute through various
brokers. He was to handle taxes, accounting, and most of the legal and
regulatory paperwork, things I wished to avoid so I could focus on research
and development.
We shook hands that day and agreed to create and manage together a new
investment partnership based on the ideas in Beat the Market. Newport Beach
was to be the think tank and trade generator, and New York the business
oﬃce and trading desk. Discussing how much capital we needed to start with,
we set $5 million as our target. If we made 20 percent net of expenses and
charged 20 percent of that as a performance-based fee each year, we’d share
4 percent of $5 million, or $200,000, more than my remuneration as a

professor of mathematics and what I was making from my smaller pool of
managed accounts.
Our operation was an example of what had come to be known as a hedge
fund. A hedge fund in the United States is simply a private limited
partnership managed by one or more general partners (each of whom risks
the loss of their entire net worth should things go badly wrong) and a group
of investors, or limited partners, whose loss is limited to the amount they
commit. The investors are primarily passive, with no role in the management
of the partnership or in its investments. At the time, such funds were only
lightly regulated, provided there were no more than ninety-nine partners and
they did not solicit the general public. Hedge funds based overseas, called
oﬀshore, may also be structured as corporations or trusts.
Although hedge funds were few in number at that time, they were not a
new concept. Jerome Newman and Buﬀett’s mentor, Benjamin Graham, had
started one as early as 1936. Under skilled managers whose interests were
more or less aligned with the investors through the incentive of proﬁt sharing,
investors hoped for substantially better returns. The name hedge fund
probably came about when the journalist Alfred Winslow Jones, inspired by
what he learned after researching an article he was writing about investments,
started a partnership in 1949. In addition to buying stocks he believed were
cheap, he attempted to limit, or “hedge,” risk by also selling short shares he
believed were overpriced. The short seller proﬁts if the price falls and loses if
the price rises. Short selling allows an investor to proﬁt in a down market; a
fund like Jones’s can, potentially, have more stable returns. Though Jones’s
idea didn’t receive wide attention at ﬁrst, a 1966 article in Fortune magazine
by Carol Loomis, “The Jones Nobody Keeps Up With,” announced that
Jones’s hedge fund had beaten all of the several hundred mutual funds over
the last ten years and the possibilities became widely apparent.
I knew that ﬁnding investors was not going to be easy. Just as 1967–68 had
been a manic two years for the markets and for the few existing hedge funds,
1969 was a major downer. Large-company stocks lost an average of 9
percent, and small-company stocks were crushed by an alarming 25 percent.
Most hedge funds suﬀered severe losses and were closing down. Though we
explained we were to be market-neutral and hedged, thus protecting
principal, our ideas were new and people were scared. We ﬁnally signed up

fourteen limited partners plus ourselves, each for $50,000 or more. My
individual investors were among our ﬁrst partners; Regan found more money
by going to the courthouse, getting lists of limited partners from documents
that had been ﬁled by other hedge funds, and cold calling. I ﬂew to New York
to meet prospects, explain our methods, and add cachet with my books and
academic position. By late October we had managed to get only $1.4 million
in commitments but we decided to move ahead anyhow. We’d simply grow
through proﬁts, and these would attract more capital later from both current
and new investors. Convertible Hedge Associates (later renamed Princeton
Newport Partners) opened its bicoastal doors on Monday, November 3, 1969.
An article in the Wall Street Letter announced our start, setting it in the
context of that year’s widespread market rout and the closing down of several
hedge funds.
MONEY ON THE MOVE. As some hedge funds break up in
the aftermath of sour performances this year, new investment
partnerships continue to be formed. One of the newest is
Convertible Hedge Associates, whose general partners are Ed
Thorp and Jay Regan. Thorp is the fellow who developed a
computerized system for beating the blackjack tables in Las
Vegas, before they changed the rules on him, and wrote the book
Beat the Dealer. He’s turned his computer talents to money
management and has a book out called Beat the Market. Regan
has been with Butcher & Sherrerd, Kidder, Peabody and White,
Weld. Among their limited partners are Dick Salomon, chairman
of Lanvin-Charles of the Ritz; Charlie Evans (formerly of Evan-
Picone) and Bob Evans (Paramount Pictures), and Don Kouri,
president of Reynolds Foods, Ltd.
We completed our ﬁrst two months of operation with a 4 percent proﬁt, or
$56,000. The S&P 500 Index was down 5 percent in the same two months.
My $5,600 share of the general partner’s fee exceeded my university income
for the same period.
It was clear that I was at a crossroad. I could use my mathematical skills to
develop strategies for hedging and possibly become rich; or I could compete

in the academic world for advancement and distinction. I loved university-
level teaching and research, and decided to stay with it as long as I could. My
best quantitative ﬁnancial ideas would be saved for our investors, not
published, and over time would be rediscovered by and credited to others.
Buﬀett’s report on me to the Gerards must have been favorable, since they
joined us and their trust fund retained an investment in the partnership until
after the deaths of Ralph and then Frosty. The time I spent with him had two
major eﬀects on my life: It helped move me along the path to my own hedge
fund, and it later led me to make a very proﬁtable investment in the company
he transformed, Berkshire Hathaway.
