Chapter 13
GOING INTO PARTNERSHIP
Princeton Newport Partners (PNP) was a revolutionary idea when we set it
up in 1969. We specialized in the hedging of convertible securities—
warrants, options, convertible bonds and preferreds, and other types of
derivative securities as they were introduced into the markets. Hedging risk
was not new but we took it to an extreme never before tried. To begin with,
we designed each of our hedges, which combined the stock and convertible
securities of a single company, to minimize the risk of loss whether the stock
fell or rose. We invented hedging techniques to further protect our portfolio
against changes in interest rates, changes in the level of the overall market,
and the catastrophic losses that can occasionally occur from enormous
unexpected changes in prices and volatility. We managed this with
mathematical formulas, economic models, and computers. This nearly total
reliance on quantitative methods was unique, making us the earliest of a new
breed of investors who would later be called quants, and who would radically
transform Wall Street.
I could see from the beginning how our wealth could grow. But when I told
friends and colleagues what I was up to, Vivian was almost the only one who
got it, despite what I had already done in gambling. Although she wasn’t a
scientist or mathematician, she shared two qualities with the best of them:
She asked the right questions, and she grasped the essentials. She had spent
hours helping me ﬁlm spinning roulette balls so I could make a machine to
predict which number would come up, just as she had dealt thousands of
blackjack hands so I could practice counting cards. And she helped me edit
my books about gambling and the stock market and negotiate the contracts.

My initial plan for Princeton Newport Partners, which for the ﬁrst ﬁve
years we called Convertible Hedge Associates, was to ﬁnd pairs of closely
related securities that were priced inconsistently with respect to each other,
and use them to construct investments that reduced risk. To form these
hedges, we simultaneously bought the relatively underpriced security while
oﬀsetting the risk from adverse changes in its price by selling short the
comparatively overpriced security. Since the prices of these two securities
tended to move in tandem, I expected the combination to reduce risk while
capturing extra returns. I identiﬁed these situations using the mathematical
methods I had worked out for judging the proper price of a warrant, option,
or convertible bond versus the common stock of the same company.
Betting on a hedge I had researched was like betting on a blackjack hand
where I had the advantage. As in blackjack, I could estimate my expected
return, estimate my risk, and choose how much of my bankroll to bet. Instead
of a $10,000 bankroll I now had $1.4 million, and instead of a $500
maximum bet, the Wall Street casino had no limit. We started betting
$50,000 to $100,000 per hedge.
To search for opportunities, early every afternoon after the market closed
in New York, UC, Irvine students whom I hired went to the oﬃces of two
brokerage ﬁrms with which I traded. They collected the closing prices for
hundreds of warrants, convertible bonds, convertible preferreds, and their
associated common stocks. A preferred stock typically pays a regular
dividend, whereas a common stock may or may not pay a dividend and, if it
does, will generally vary over time. A preferred stock’s dividend is paid ﬁrst
—in preference—before any payments due to the common stock. In the
typical case, where the dividend amount is ﬁxed, the preferred is like a bond
but more risky because the dividend payments and the claim on assets upon
liquidation are only paid after the corresponding bond payments. A so-called
convertible preferred is one that can be exchanged for a speciﬁed number of
shares of the common. So a convertible preferred is like a convertible bond
but less secure, as it is paid only if there is enough money to do so after the
bondholders receive their interest. At that time they gave us numerous
investment possibilities.
—

I started by running the business from our house in 1969, and the house itself
showed how much our circumstances had already changed. Eight years earlier
when we arrived at New Mexico State University we rented a single-story
nine-hundred-square-foot house with four tiny bedrooms, all of which were
soon needed. Our second daughter, Karen, was born a few months later,
followed by our son, Jeﬀ, the next year. Soon thereafter, gambling winnings
and book royalties not only allowed me to pay for my stock market education,
but also to buy our ﬁrst house. When we moved to UC, Irvine a couple of
years later, we found a larger and nicer two-story home in Newport Beach,
where the West Coast operations of Princeton Newport Partners began.
Vivian and I hired a contractor to add an outside staircase and a large
second-story room to accommodate the business. In the new room the data
was plotted on mathematical diagrams that I invented. These revealed
favorable situations and let me quickly specify the appropriate trades. Each
day’s closing prices for a convertible and its stock were plotted as a color-
coded dot on that particular convertible’s diagram. The diagrams were
prepared with curves that were drawn by a computer from my formula and
showed the “fair price” of the convertible. The beauty of this was that I could
immediately see from the picture whether we had a proﬁtable trading
opportunity. If the dot representing the data was above the curve it meant the
convertible was overpriced, leading to a possible hedge: Short the convertible,
buy the stock. A data point close to or on the curve indicated the price was
fair, which meant liquidate an existing position, do not enter a new one.
Below the curve meant buy the convertible, short the stock. The distance of
the dot from the curve showed me how much proﬁt was available. If we
thought it met our target, we tried to put on the trade the next day. The slope
of the curve near the data point on my diagram gave me the hedge ratio,
which is the number of shares of common stock to use versus each
convertible bond, share of preferred, warrant, or option.
After suﬀering for a few months with the distractions from the beehive of
activity at the house, Vivian made me lease an oﬃce. Moving to the second
ﬂoor of a small oﬃce building, I bought computers and hired more people. I
developed printed tables for trading each hedge. These tables listed the prices
of the stock versus the convertible needed to achieve our target return.
Besides the new hedges we wanted to add, the tables told us how to adjust

existing positions that needed the hedge ratio changed (so-called dynamic
hedging) because the stock price had moved or that should be closed because
we reached our objective.
Our computers used so much electricity that the oﬃce was always hot. We
left the windows open and blew out the heat with fans, even during the coolest
part of the California winter. Our landlord didn’t charge tenants for utilities,
instead paying it from his lease revenues. When the heat got my attention, I
calculated that the cost of the electricity we used was more than our rent. We
were getting paid to be there.
Each day after the market closed, I called Jay Regan in New York with
trading instructions for the next day. He had given me the results from our
trades earlier during the day, from which I had already updated my position
records. The next day he executed the trades I recommended, reported the
results, and the whole process was repeated.
To inform our limited partners as well as potential new partners, we
periodically issued updated versions of our Conﬁdential Private Placement
Memorandum, which explained such things as the operations and objectives
of the partnership, the fee structure, and the potential risks. We included
simpliﬁed schematic descriptions of a few of our actual investments, without
the mathematical formulas, diagrams, and calculations.
One of these trades could have been right out of the pages of Beat the
Market. In 1970 the American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T)
sold warrants to purchase thirty-one million shares of common stock at a
price of $12.50 per share. Proceeds to the company were some $387.5
million, at the time the most ever for a warrant. Though it was not suﬃciently
mispriced then, the history of how warrant prices behaved indicated this
could happen before it expired in 1975. When it did we bet a signiﬁcant part
of the partnership’s net worth.
—
We were guided in this trade and thousands of others by a formula that had
its beginnings in 1900 in the PhD thesis of French mathematician Louis
Bachelier. Bachelier used mathematics to develop a theory for pricing options
on the Paris stock exchange (the Bourse). His thesis adviser, the world-

famous mathematician Henri Poincaré, didn’t value Bachelier’s eﬀort, and
Bachelier spent the rest of his life as an obscure provincial professor.
Meanwhile a twenty-six-year-old Swiss patent clerk named Albert Einstein
would soon publish in his single “miraculous year” of 1905 a series of articles
that would transform physics. One of these initiated the Theory of Relativity,
which revolutionized the theory of gravitation and led to the nuclear age. The
second paper, on the particle nature of light, helped launch the Quantum
Theory. But it is yet another of Einstein’s articles that connects with my story.
In that paper Einstein explained a baﬄing discovery made in 1827 by the
botanist Robert Brown. Brown used his microscope to observe pollen
particles suspended in water. When illuminated, their tiny points of reﬂected
light displayed a ceaseless irregular random motion. Einstein realized that this
was caused by the bombardment of the pollen particles by molecules of the
surrounding liquid. He wrote down equations that correctly predicted the
statistical properties of the random motion of the particles. Until that time no
one had ever seen a molecule or an atom (molecules are groups of atoms of
various types bound together by electrical forces), and their existence had
been disputed. Here was the ﬁnal proof that atoms and molecules were real.
This article became one of the most widely cited in all of physics.
Unknown to Einstein, his equations describing the Brownian motion of
pollen particles were essentially the same as the equations that Bachelier had
used for his thesis ﬁve years earlier to describe a very diﬀerent phenomenon,
the ceaseless, irregular motion of stock prices. Bachelier employed the
equations to deduce the “fair” prices for options on the underlying stocks.
Unlike Einstein’s work, Bachelier’s remained generally unknown until future
Nobel laureate (1970) Paul Samuelson came across it in a Paris library in the
1950s and had it translated into English. Bachelier’s paper appeared in 1964
in The Random Character of Stock Market Prices, edited by Paul Cootner and
published by the MIT Press. Part of my early self-education in ﬁnance, this
collection of articles applying scientiﬁc analysis to ﬁnance strongly inﬂuenced
me and many others.
Bachelier had assumed that changes in stock prices followed a bell-shaped
curve, known as a normal or Gaussian distribution. This didn’t match real
prices well, especially for periods longer than a few days. By the 1960s,
academics had improved on Bachelier’s work by using a more accurate

description of stock price changes. Even so, these newer formulas for fair
option prices, which applied as well to warrants, were not useful for trading
because they included two quantities that could not be estimated satisfactorily
from data. One of these was a growth rate for the stock between “now” and
the warrant’s expiration date. The other was a discount factor that was applied
to the warrant’s uncertain payoﬀ at expiration in order to obtain its present
value.
This discount factor, or markdown, accounted for the fact that investors
tend to value an uncertain payoﬀ less than if it was a sure thing. For example,
if you toss a fair coin—which by deﬁnition has equal chances of coming up
heads or tails—an investor who is paid $2 for heads and nothing for tails has
an average but uncertain return of $1. This value is found by multiplying each
payoﬀ by the number of ways it occurs (one, in this example) and dividing by
two, the number of possible outcomes. Most investors would rather be paid
$1 for sure. For two investments with the same expected return, the less risky
one tends to be preferred. Inﬂuenced by having been born during the Great
Depression and by my early investment experiences, I made reducing risk a
central feature of my investing approach.
Back in 1967, I had taken a further step in ﬁguring out how much a
warrant was worth. Using plausible and intuitive reasoning, I supposed that
both the unknown growth rate and the discount factor in the existing warrant
valuation formula could be replaced by the so-called riskless interest rate,
namely that which was paid by a US Treasury bill maturing at the warrant
expiration date. This converted an unusable formula with unknown quantities
into a simple practical trading tool. I began using it for my own account and
for my investors in 1967. It performed spectacularly. In 1969, unknown to
me, Fischer Black and Myron Scholes, motivated in part by Beat the Market,
rigorously proved the identical formula, publishing it in 1972 and 1973. This
launched the development and widespread use of so-called derivative
securities throughout the ﬁnancial world. For their contributions, Myron
Scholes and Robert Merton received the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1997.
The 
Nobel 
committee 
acknowledged 
Fischer 
Black’s 
(1938–95)
contributions, and it is generally agreed that he would have shared in the prize
had he not died earlier from throat cancer.

Powered largely by the formula, Princeton Newport Partners prospered. In
our ﬁrst two months, November and December 1969, our investors gained
3.2 percent while the S&P 500 lost 4.8 percent, an 8 percent edge. In 1970
we were up 13.0 percent versus 3.7 percent for the S&P. In 1971 the score
was 26.7 percent to 13.9 percent, which was almost 13 percent better for our
limited partners. In 1972 the S&P ﬁnally did better, making 18.5 percent
compared with our 12 percent. Does this mean we did badly? No. It showed
we were doing exactly what we intended to do, produce steady high returns in
both good times and bad times. The hedges protected us against losses but at
the expense of giving up some of the gains in big up-markets. The variation
in our returns from year to year was mostly due to ﬂuctuation in the quantity
and quality of hedged investments, rather than the ups and downs of the
market. Our ﬁrst severe test came with the big bear market of 1973–74. The
downturn was driven in part by the Arab oil embargo. The resulting record oil
prices, adjusted for inﬂation, were never surpassed until the great run-up to
$140 a barrel, reached in 2008.
In 1973 the S&P fell 15.2 percent and we were up 6.5, with our partners
beating the market by over 20 percent. Stock market investors were hurt even
more in 1974. The S&P plummeted 27.1 percent and our partners made 9.0
percent, a gap of more than 36 percent in our favor. Over that two-year cycle,
limited partners in PNP saw each $1,000 increase to $1,160, whereas
investors in the S&P 500 saw their $1,000 shrink to $618. Moreover, PNP
made money every month in its ﬁrst six years except for one in early 1974,
when it declined less than 1 percent. From the peak on January 11, 1973, to
the bottom on October 3, 1974, the drop in the stock market was a savage
48.2 percent, the worst since the Great Depression. Even Warren Buﬀett said
then that it was a good thing for his partners he’d closed down when he had.
Existing partners were adding money and prospective new partners were
learning about us through word of mouth. Partnership capital had grown from
the initial $1.4 million to $7.4 million, and the general partners’
compensation increased proportionately. Since the Investment Company Act
limited us to ninety-nine partners, each investor’s stake would have to average
over $1 million in order for our pool to reach $100 million. Therefore we
wanted high-net-worth individuals and institutional investors who would make
an initial investment in PNP that would be substantial for us but a small part

of their overall funds. We also liked that high-net-worth investors tended to
be more knowledgeable, more experienced, and better able to judge the risks
of the partnership, as well as having their own advisers. To increase the
amount of new capital we could get from the dwindling number of spots
available for new partners, we raised the minimum to join from our initial
$50,000 to $100,000, then $250,000, $1,000,000, and eventually
$10,000,000. We admitted new partners only after a careful check of their
backgrounds. This was generally easy to do, as they often had careers about
which there was public information, or they were personally known to us.
We modiﬁed our performance fee of 20 percent of the proﬁts, billed
annually, by including a “new high water” provision. This meant that if we
had a losing year, we carried forward the losses and used them to oﬀset future
proﬁts before we were paid more fees. This helped align our economic
interests with those of the limited partners. As it happened, we never had a
losing year, or even a losing quarter, and this calculation was never invoked.
PNP’s oﬃces in Manhattan and Newport Beach expanded as we hired
more employees. I found talent at the nearby University of California, Irvine,
where I still was a professor of mathematics. Now I had to learn how to
choose and manage employees. Figuring this out for myself, I evolved into
the style later dubbed management by walking around. Instead of the endless
schedule of formal meetings I abhorred in academia, I talked directly to each
employee and asked them to do the same with their colleagues.
I explained our general plan and direction and indicated what I wanted
done by each person, revising roles and tasks based on their feedback. For
this to work, I needed people who could follow up without being led by the
hand, as management time was in short supply. Since much of what we were
doing was being invented as we went along, and our investment approach was
new, I had to teach a unique set of skills. I chose young smart people just out
of university because they were not set in their ways from previous jobs.
Better to teach a young athlete who comes fresh to his sport than to retrain
one who has learned bad form.
Especially in a small organization, it was important that everyone work well
together. As I was unable to tell from an interview how a new hire would
mesh with our corporate culture, I told everyone that they were temporary for

the ﬁrst six months, as were we for them. Sometime during that period, if we
mutually agreed, they would become regular employees.
I revised our policies as I gained experience. When my secretary signed out
sick every other Friday, and I discreetly asked one of her friends in the oﬃce
why, I was told she had a standing hair appointment and also caught up on
accumulated personal business. She drew from her annual allotment of paid
sick days because they would be lost if not used. With that system, people
who used their sick leave got more days oﬀ with pay and were rewarded over
those who didn’t use it. I removed this instance of what economists call a
perverse incentive by giving everyone a single pool of paid leave days that
accumulated based on the number of hours worked and covered paid
holidays, vacations, days oﬀ, and illness. Employees could use this time in
any of these ways, subject only to the limitation that time oﬀ not interfere
with essential job responsibilities.
In order to attract and keep superior staﬀ, I paid wages and bonuses well
above the market rate. This actually saved money because my employees
were far more productive than average. The higher compensation limited
turnover, which saved time and money otherwise used to teach my one-of-a-
kind investment methodology. At the higher levels, it kept people from
breaking oﬀ and going into business for themselves.
Investment opportunities were expanding, too, notably in April 1973 when
the new Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), created and managed by
the long-established Chicago Board of Trade, began trading options. Before
this, options were traded only over the counter (OTC), meaning that would-
be buyers or sellers had to use brokers to search on their behalf for someone
to take the other side of the trade. It was ineﬃcient, and the brokers charged
the customers high fees. The CBOE oﬀered a wide range of options, with
standardized terms, which were bought and sold on its trading ﬂoor, much
like stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange. Costs to buyers and
sellers dropped dramatically, and trading volume skyrocketed.
In preparation for this, I programmed our Hewlett-Packard 9830A
computer using my 1967 formula to calculate theoretical fair values for these
options. The computer, a beautifully crafted quality device the size of a large
dictionary, instructed a plotter of the type Hewlett-Packard was famous for,
using ink-ﬁlled pens to represent the results as multicolored diagrams. For

each option, correct pricing according to theory was represented by a curve.
Each point on one of these curves represented a possible stock price and the
corresponding fair price for the option. When we plotted the actual market
prices of the stock and the option as a color-coded dot, we compared its
location with the curve. If the point was above the theoretical curve, the
option was overpriced so it was a candidate to sell short while at the same
time buying stock to hedge the risk. The distance of the point from the curve
showed the amount of the mispricing. In the same way, a point below the
curve showed that the option was underpriced, and by how much. This meant
it was a candidate for the opposite type of hedge, long the option, short the
stock. The slope of our theoretical curve at any point automatically gave the
proper amounts of stock versus options for establishing a hedge that
minimized risk.
The theoretical fair-value curve of option prices versus all possible stock
prices was produced by the computer from the formula. This, in turn, used
data such as the volatility of the stock (a measure of the recent daily
percentage changes in the stock price), US Treasury interest rates, and any
dividends paid by the stock during the life of the option.
A couple of months before the CBOE opened, I was ready to trade with
the formula for pricing options that I thought no one else knew. Princeton
Newport was going to clean up. Then I received a letter and a prepublication
copy of an article from someone I hadn’t heard of named Fischer Black. He
said he was an admirer of my work and that he and Myron Scholes had taken
a key idea from Beat the Market, known as delta hedging, a step further and
derived an options formula. I scanned the article and saw it was the same
formula I was using. The good news was that their rigorous proof veriﬁed that
the formula I had discovered intuitively was correct. The bad news was that
the formula was now public knowledge. Everyone was going to be using it.
Fortunately, this took a while. When the CBOE opened for business we
appeared to be the only ones trading from the formula. Down on the ﬂoor of
the exchange it was like ﬁrearms versus bows and arrows.
To exploit price aberrations as quickly as possible, before others could and
before they faded, we asked the options exchange to let our traders use
programmed hand calculators on the ﬂoor. Our request was denied. The
newcomers were not to have an advantage over the established old-time

traders. We then asked for the next best thing, to be allowed to communicate
by walkie-talkies with our ﬂoor traders. Denied. It reminded me a bit of what
I had run into in Las Vegas with card counting. We then supplied our ﬂoor
traders with printed trading tables that covered the ever-growing number of
listed options. These were run oﬀ overnight on our high-speed printers and
express-mailed to our oﬃces in Princeton and Chicago. That served nearly as
well as hand calculators would have.
Since we needed the tables in both oﬃces as well as for traders spread over
the ﬂoor of the exchange, we ran ﬁve copies. Using z-fold paper interspersed
with layers of carbon paper, our Printronix Corporation machines ran all
night, every night. The hedging instructions and target prices, which covered
every situation likely to arise over the next few days, ran several hundred
pages. Each table was a handful, with pages about eleven inches by seventeen,
stacked a couple of inches deep. Much of this was described in a 1974 front-
page article in The Wall Street Journal. Later, when established traders felt
they could compete, hand calculators programmed to value options were
allowed and became a basic tool for the industry.
While I was totally engaged with the university and the business, Vivian
did most of the raising of our three preteen children. Yet she found time to
help reelect a decent local congressman. When she opened a campaign oﬃce
in Corona del Mar, party hacks tried and failed to stop her. She raised money
for the campaign, found her own volunteers, and launched a large telephone-
calling campaign. When the congressman was reelected, two party hacks took
credit for her entire operation and moved themselves up the party ladder.
Vivian was in it for results, though, not personal advancement or plaudits. In
ﬁfty-ﬁve and a half years of marriage I don’t ever remember her bragging.
The closest she came was when I would admire the way she matched the hues
of her outﬁts or furnished our household with a designer’s eye. She would
look at me and matter-of-factly explain, “I have a good eye for color.”
She also quietly organized and ran a large phone bank that helped elect the
ﬁrst black man to a California statewide oﬃce. She inﬂuenced people one-on-
one as well. A lady she met complained about “those Jews.” Vivian had lost
several relatives in Nazi World War II prison camps. When she told us about
meeting the woman, we expected to hear how she tore her to shreds.
Explaining why she did not, Vivian pointed out that the woman would have

learned nothing and simply would have become an enemy. Vivian patiently
educated this basically good person, and they became friends for the rest of
their lives.
Vivian’s insights helped me cope with the cast of characters I was meeting
in the investment world, many of whom seemed to be lacking a moral
compass. She was fascinated by people. It had become second nature to take
the bits and pieces someone told her about themselves and build a uniﬁed life
story, which she analyzed and checked for consistency. As a result my wife
was an almost unerring judge of character, motives, and expected future
behavior. I was repeatedly amazed when she applied this to business and
professional people I introduced her to for the ﬁrst time.
She did this easily, based on so little evidence I couldn’t believe it. But over
and over again, Cassandra-like if I didn’t listen, she was right.
After meeting one of the characters, she said, “He’s greedy, insincere, and
you can’t trust him.”
“How do you know this?” I asked.
She said, “You can see he’s greedy from the way he drives. The insincerity
comes out when he smiles. His eyes don’t really smile, too; they mock you.
And his wife has a sad look in her eyes that doesn’t add up. The face she sees
at home isn’t the one he shows the world.”
Years later, this “friend” Glen, as I’ll call him, was running a hedge fund in
which we were investors. The fund had lost $2 million in one of its
investments, partly through fraud. When lawyers eventually recovered $1
million of the losses, Glen allocated the money to his current partners, most
of whom were not among the former partners who had suﬀered the original
loss. As he would be deriving future economic beneﬁt from his current
partners but none from the former partners, he would gain by this injustice.
When I confronted him, he claimed not to be able to locate the twenty or so
former partners. I had a list and told him I had current information on all but
three and knew how to ﬁnd those through mutual friends. Then he said he
wouldn’t pay and that, under the terms of the partnership, each partner had to
go to arbitration separately. The amounts averaged $50,000 or so each, which
he knew were not worth pursuing after lawyers’ fees, personal time,
inconvenience, and stress. He refused my request that he agree to a single
arbitration to settle this for the entire group. He suggested slyly that maybe we

should try a few individual arbitrations and if he lost them all, he might
change his mind. When I asked his lawyer associate how he could ratify such
unethical behavior, he said, “They don’t teach ethics in law school.”
As Princeton Newport Partners prospered, I was meeting interesting
people. Curiously it wasn’t our investment performance but a wrinkle in the
tax code that led to a meeting with Paul Newman. The code lagged behind in
its treatment of listed options as there were, until a few years later when the
law was changed, transactions that made it possible to substantially reduce
federal and state taxes. To explore this I was invited to join Paul and his tax
lawyer for lunch on the set for the movie The Towering Inferno, at Twentieth
Century–Fox in Los Angeles.
The studios were adjacent to Beverly Hills High School, the only Southern
California high school with an oil well on campus. When I arrived, Paul was
in blue jeans with a shirt and jacket to match, long before this was chic. I am
reminded of the clean but faded Levi’s that I generally wore in the 1940s for
want of money and how I was astonished ﬁfty years later when stylish people
paid up for intentionally tattered and hole-ﬁlled jeans in far worse condition
than my high school pants.
I was struck by Newman’s remarkable blue eyes, even more intense in
person than on ﬁlm. Reserved, even shy when meeting someone for the ﬁrst
time, he looked me over, didn’t say anything at ﬁrst, then said, “You want a
beer?” I said, “Sure,” and he relaxed, deciding I was a regular guy. Over
lunch, as I ate a special sandwich he recommended, he asked about my
blackjack card counting system and how much I thought I could make at it
full-time. Mastering disguises and playing alone, instead of running a team, I
estimated $300,000 per year. “Why aren’t you doing it?” he asked. I said I
expected to do better running my hedge fund. As he was making six million
taxable dollars that year, which was the reason for our lunch, he appreciated
the answer. Nothing came of the meeting. Paul’s lawyer believed that the
ideas I presented for reducing his taxes were sound but new and thus likely to
be challenged. His lawyer advised Paul, a high-proﬁle progressive Democrat,
not to risk being embroiled with a Republican IRS.
We had other interactions with Hollywood. Two of our early limited
partners were Robert Evans and his brother, Charles. Bob was a relatively
unknown actor and producer until 1966 when the conglomerate Gulf and

Western took over Paramount and picked Evans as head of production.
During the next eight years Evans returned Paramount to success with hits
including The Odd Couple, Rosemary’s Baby, Love Story, Chinatown, and The
Godfather. In the 1997 movie Wag the Dog, Dustin Hoﬀman plays a character
based in detail on Evans’s appearance, habits, and mannerisms.
One day in 1971 or 1972 I went to Bob’s villa in Beverly Hills to attempt
to explain the types of trades that we were doing in the partnership. While he
and Charles bobbed around in the backyard pool, protected with sunglasses
and hats, I sat at the edge explaining the basic ideas behind convertible
hedging. At the time Robert was married to his third (of seven) wives, the
actress Ali MacGraw. Of course, I hoped she would make an appearance to
question me about the intricacies of the market, but she was traveling. Ali had
been nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress in 1970 for her role
in the movie Love Story and, even twenty years later when she was ﬁfty-two
years old, People magazine chose her as one of the ﬁfty most beautiful people
in the world.
Screenwriter Charles A. Kaufman (1904–91), whose screenplay for Freud
was nominated for an Oscar in 1963, became a limited partner and regularly
referred people to us, which may have indirectly caused certain other
prospective partners to call us. Kaufman had a Los Angeles–based accountant
who also did the books for some of the big casinos in Las Vegas. The
Kaufmans gave a dinner party for Vivian and me and the accountant and his
wife. The point was for me to answer questions both on partnership trading
strategies and our accounting practices. When the conversation turned to
blackjack and I mentioned what I knew about casino cheating, skimming, and
a double set of books, the accountant acted disbelieving and astonished. His
wife, a beautiful and outspoken former showgirl, would have none of it and
told us they knew otherwise. The accountant may have been more connected
than he let on, because shortly after this dinner, I received inquiries about
investing in the partnership from then famous and highly connected Las
Vegas ﬁgures like “Moe” Dalitz (1899–1989) and Beldon Katleman (1914–
88). Jay Regan quickly agreed with me that we didn’t have any available
openings.
One of my stories that particularly put the accountant in denial began in
the summer of 1962, when I was contacted by a special agent from the US

Treasury. The Treasury was investigating possible tax fraud in the Nevada
casino industry, believing that certain operators were removing large
quantities of cash, which they were not declaring on their tax returns. Part of
a secret undercover team, “John” resembled the actor Mike Connors, best
known for starring in two television series around that time, Mannix and
Tightrope, as well as several movies. We met for lunch regularly at the
Hamburger Hamlet in Westwood Village, adjacent to the UCLA campus.
John came as the character he played to fool the casinos, wearing a broad-
brimmed Stetson, cowboy clothes and identiﬁcation verifying that he was a
wealthy Texan named C. Cash Anderson (a little Treasury humor). He drove
a new red Cadillac convertible, its white top rolled down.
In Las Vegas, he bet big at the blackjack tables, an act that got him into the
rooms where the casinos counted the money from the collection boxes that
had been sealed and brought in from the blackjack tables. He reported seeing
two sets of books, along with corresponding adding machines, one showing
the real cash totals and the other the lesser amount that was reported to the
government. On behalf of the government team, John was consulting me on
how to improve their play at high-stakes blackjack and thereby keep down the
cost to the Treasury while they pretended to be unskilled high-rollers.
As the partnership prospered, so did Vivian and I. When we started back
in 1969 I forecast how quickly my wealth and Regan’s would grow. On a
yellow legal pad, with plausible assumptions about our company’s rate of
return, the rate of growth of our partnership’s net worth, and taxes, I
predicted that by 1975 we would be millionaires. I sent a copy to Regan.
Sure enough, in 1975, we were indeed both millionaires and the money
was changing our families’ lives. Vivian and I had extensive additions and
improvements made to our home. Back in 1964 I bought a used red
Volkswagen in Las Cruces from one of my students. A decade later, in 1975,
I drove a new red Porsche 911S. Vivian’s inexpensive utilitarian wardrobe
was evolving into coordinated designer outﬁts with fashionable handbags and
shoes. Our vacations, which used to be low-budget trips to professional
meetings, were being augmented and replaced by cruises and stays in high-
end overseas hotels.
We were now living beyond the means of most of our faculty friends. This
had the unintended consequence of distancing us somewhat from the smart,

funny, and educated people with whom we felt the most rapport. On the other
hand, we hadn’t yet made many new friends in the wealthy Orange County
business community, because most of our business partners were scattered
across the United States. As Vivian remarked, “We’re neither ﬁsh nor fowl.”
My shifting mathematical interests were also distancing me professionally
from my colleagues in the department at UCI. As is generally true in
universities, the research emphasis was on pure mathematics. Loosely
speaking, this is the development of abstract mathematics, or theory for its
own sake.
My PhD thesis was in pure mathematics and this continued to be my focus
for the next ﬁfteen years. But with the analysis of gambling games, I also
developed a strong interest in applied mathematics, which uses mathematical
theories to solve real-world problems. The ﬁnancial world was presenting me,
and Princeton Newport Partners, with an endless array of such puzzles to
solve for fun and proﬁt. I was becoming an applied mathematician again, and
in a department of pure mathematics I was professionally neither ﬁsh nor
fowl.
At the same time, the Math Department was headed for serious trouble.
Both the levels of grant money for research and funds from the state of
California to support the university had declined. This led to ﬁerce struggles
among various factions in the department for what was left. To mediate the
inﬁghting, an outsider was brought in as a chairman. He was forced out after
three turbulent years. For want of anyone else who might be acceptable to the
warring groups, and against my better judgment, I was persuaded by the
administration to act as temporary chairman.
The assignment was worse than I thought. I found that one assistant
professor had stopped showing up to teach, dividing his time between his
girlfriend four hundred miles to the north in the San Francisco Bay Area and
the casinos in Reno and Lake Tahoe. A card counter, he even called me with
blackjack questions! Another assistant professor was running up departmental
phone bills of $2,000 per month versus a total of $200 for the other twenty-
ﬁve professors combined. When I confronted him he claimed it was
mathematical research. A review of the bills showed almost all the charges
were for calls to two numbers in New York City. I dialed each, speaking in

turn to his mother and to a store that sold musical recordings. He was enraged
at me and not at all embarrassed when exposed.
Meanwhile, a full professor had stolen the conﬁdential employment records
of another full professor from the department ﬁles. When I discovered this
and confronted him, he refused to return it. It turned out that the ﬁle
contained a very nasty letter that he had written about his enemy. He feared
that if I, as chairman, learned what he had done, I would expose him. When I
asked the administration to initiate disciplinary action against these
incorrigibles, they declined to act. I was stunned and stymied.
One problem in large bureaucracies is that many of the members decide it
is better not to cross people, instead of standing on principle. I asked a good
friend, whom I had helped to get an appointment in our department, to
become my vice chairman and help me. Although he was now a full professor
with tenure, he declined, saying, “I have to live in the same cage with these
monkeys.” I did understand his point. On the other hand, I was not conﬁned
to the cage. I had PNP. I thought, Why try to ﬁx this if no one will even back
me up? I was in the Math Department by choice, not by necessity. It was time
to move on.
Initially, I transferred to UCI’s Graduate School of Management, where I
enjoyed teaching courses in mathematical ﬁnance. But I found factionalism
and backstabbing as bad there as it had been in the Math Department. Both
had endless committee meetings, petty squabbles over beneﬁts, people who
wouldn’t pull their weight and couldn’t be dislodged, and the dictum of
publish or perish. I decided it was time to leave academia. Even so, it was not
an entirely easy decision. I had heard more than one person say that what they
wanted most in life was to be a tenured professor at the University of
California. It had been my dream, too. Over the years I hired students and
former staﬀ from UC, Irvine but only one faculty member, one without
tenure, was willing to take a chance and join my operation. The others found
it a very scary notion. Of course, a few had regrets later.
Gradually reducing my teaching load from full-time, I ﬁnally resigned my
UCI full professorship in 1982. I loved teaching and research and felt a sense
of loss upon giving up a position I expected to enjoy for a lifetime, but it
turned out to be for the best. I took what I liked with me. I kept my friends
and continued my research collaborations. Free to do anything I wished, my

childhood dream come true, I continued to present my work at meetings, as
well as publish it in the mathematical, ﬁnancial, and gambling literature.
I intensiﬁed my focus on competing with the wave of mathematicians,
physicists, and ﬁnancial economists who were now ﬂocking to Wall Street
from academia.
