Chapter 14
FRONT-RUNNING THE
QUANTITATIVE REVOLUTION
When Black and Scholes published their formula, the same one I was already
using, I knew that to maintain PNP’s trading edge I would have to develop my
tools for valuing warrants, options, convertible bonds, and other derivative
securities rapidly enough to stay ahead of future marching legions of PhDs
hungry for academic advancement through publication. Though I had to keep
important results secret for the beneﬁt of our investors, I could publicize
lesser ideas that I thought would soon be found by others.
Before the work of Black and Scholes, I had moved beyond their basic
formula, having generalized it to include cases where short-sale proceeds
were withheld by the broker (to his beneﬁt, since he got the use of the money)
until the short sale was closed. Once they published, I presented these at a
meeting of the International Statistical Institute in Vienna, where I was
speaking. I also had extended the model to include dividend-paying stocks,
since I was trading call options and warrants on many such stocks. Then the
CBOE announced it would start trading put options sometime in the
following year, 1974. These options, like the call options we were already
trading, were called American options, as distinguished from European
options. European options can be exercised only during a short settlement
period just prior to expiration, whereas American options can be exercised
anytime during their life.
If the underlying stock pays no dividends, the Black-Scholes formula,
which is for the European call option, turns out to coincide with the formula

for the American call option, which is the type that trades on the CBOE. A
formula for the European put option can be obtained using the formula for
the European call option. But the math for American put options diﬀers from
that for European put options, and—even now—no general formula has ever
been found. I realized that I could use a computer and my undisclosed
“integral method” for valuing options to get numerical results to any desired
degree of accuracy for this as-yet-unsolved “American put problem.” In a
productive hour in the fall of 1973 I outlined the solution, from which my
staﬀ programmed a computer to produce precise calculated values. My
integral method also had another advantage over the Black-Scholes approach.
Whereas the latter was based on one speciﬁc model for stock prices, one with
limited accuracy, my technique could value options for a wide range of
assumed distributions of stock prices.
In May 1974 I had dinner with Fischer Black in Chicago, where he had
invited me to give a talk at the semiannual CRSP (Center for Research in
Security Prices) meeting at the University of Chicago. Then in his thirties,
Fischer was trim and tall, with combed-back black hair and “serious” glasses.
Focusing intently on whatever ﬁnance topic was being discussed, he spoke
articulately, logically, and concisely. His notes, compact and ultra-legible,
reﬂected this. He would go on to become one of the most innovative and
inﬂuential ﬁgures in academic and applied ﬁnance. Since a computational
method for pricing American puts had been easy for me, I brought it to show
Fischer and to learn from him how others had solved it. I laid the answer on
the table between us but before I could speak Fischer began telling me about
his approach to the problem and the diﬃculties that had so far stopped him.
Earlier, I had explored his approach and believed it would work but, as my
integral method was so easy, I used it. If Fischer Black didn’t know the
answer, no one else did. Owing it to my partners to preserve our competitive
advantage, I unobtrusively returned my work to my briefcase. Two other
computational methods for ﬁnding American put prices were eventually
published in scholarly journals in 1977.
As with my method for valuing American puts, my associates and I
continued to solve problems for valuing so-called derivatives before the
discovery and publication by academics. From 1967 until PNP closed at the

end of 1988, this gave us a signiﬁcant edge in trading the expanding array of
new ﬁnancial instruments.
Some of our trades were easy to explain to partners without using theory.
One of these involved warrants issued by the Mary Carter Paint Company.
Founded in 1958 as the successor to a 1908 company, it started as an
acquirer of other paint companies, then evolved into a resort and casino
developer in the Bahamas. Changing its name to Resorts International, it
divested itself of the paint business and name. In 1972 the company had
warrants that sold for 27 cents when the stock traded at $8 share. The
warrants were so cheap because they were worthless unless the stock traded
above $40 a share. Fat chance. Since our model said the warrants were worth
$4 a share, we bought all we could at the unbelievable bargain price of 27
cents each, which turned out to be 10,800 warrants at a total cost, after
commissions, of $3,200. We hedged our risk of loss by shorting eight
hundred shares of the common stock at $8. When the stock later fell to $1.50
a share, we bought back our short stock for a proﬁt of about $5,000. Our gain
now consisted of the warrants for “free” plus about $1,800 in cash. The
warrants were trading close to zero but below the tiny amount the model said
they were worth, so I decided we should put them away and forget them.
Six busy years passed. Then in 1978 we started getting calls from people
who wanted to buy our warrants. The company had purchased property in
Atlantic City, New Jersey, after which it successfully lobbied, along with
others, to bring casino gambling to the state, limited to Atlantic City. On May
26, 1978, Resorts opened the ﬁrst US casino outside Nevada. Having received
early approval, they had no competition and reaped windfall proﬁts until other
casinos opened late in 1979. With the stock now trading at $15 a share, ten
times its earlier lowest price, and the warrants trading between $3 and $4, the
model said they were worth about $7 or $8. So, instead of selling and reaping
a $30,000 to $40,000 proﬁt, I bought more warrants and sold stock short to
hedge the risk of loss. As the stock broke through the $100 mark, we were
still buying warrants and shorting stock. We ﬁnally sold the 27-cent warrants
and others for above $100 each. We ultimately made more than $1 million.
At the same time, blackjack teams using my methods were exploiting the
casino boom in Atlantic City with its temporary friendly environment and
reasonable blackjack rules. Ironically, as they were extracting millions of

dollars from the blackjack tables at Resorts and elsewhere, I was proﬁting
from Resorts’ securities.
In the three years and ten months from the start of 1973 through October
1976, limited partners in PNP gained 48.9 percent. During this time,
ordinary investors had a wild ride in the stock market. The S&P Index fell 38
percent in the ﬁrst two years and then surged 61 percent from 1975 through
October 1976, for a net gain of just 1 percent. Meanwhile, Princeton
Newport gained in every quarter.
That the market’s good years have to be better than its bad years just to
come out even is a general rule. As an extreme example to make the point,
using only month-end values throughout, the S&P 500 fell by 83.4 percent
from its peak at the end of August 1929 to the close in June 1932. A dollar
invested was reduced to 16.6 cents. For this 16.6 cents to become $1 again,
the index needed to become 6.02 times as large, an increase of 502 percent.
The wait was over eighteen years, until the end of November 1950. The rate
of growth per year during this long recovery period was 10.2 percent, near
the long-term historical average.
During the 1970s, the range and sophistication of our investments
expanded. Companies came with families of securities, which included
convertible bonds and preferreds, warrants, and put and call options. These
derived most of their value from that of the underlying stock and were called
derivatives. They proliferated in number, type, and quantity in the decades to
follow, as so-called ﬁnancial engineers invented new ones to possibly decrease
risk and certainly increase fees. I used my methodology to price these
derivatives and the others that followed. This enabled Princeton Newport
Partners to price convertible bonds more accurately than anyone else.
Hedging with derivatives was a key source of proﬁts for PNP during its entire
nineteen years. Such hedging also became a core strategy for many later
hedge funds like Citadel, Stark, and Elliott, which each went on to manage
billions.
—
Convertible bonds today may have complex terms and conditions. However,
the basic idea is simple. Consider the hypothetical XYZ 6s of 2020. Each

bond was originally sold for approximately $1,000 on July 1, 2005, to be
redeemed by the company for exactly $1,000, the “face amount,” on July 1,
2020. The bond promises to pay 6 percent of the face amount in interest for
each year of its life, in two semiannual installments of 3 percent, or $30,
payable to holders of record on January 1 and on July 1. So far these are like
the terms of a typical ordinary bond. However, the convertible has one more
feature. At the option of the owner, it can be converted into twenty shares of
XYZ common stock anytime until bond maturity on July 1, 2020. So this
bond combines the features of both an ordinary bond and an option. The
market price of the bond can be thought of as the sum of two parts. The ﬁrst
is the value of a comparable bond without the conversion feature, which will
ﬂuctuate with the level of interest rates and the ﬁnancial soundness of the
company. This sets a “ﬂoor” to the price.
The second part is the option value of the conversion feature. In our
example, if the stock is at $50, the bond can be exchanged for twenty shares
of stock, worth $1,000, which the bond is worth anyhow when it matures so
there is no beneﬁt from the conversion feature. However, if the stock were to
rise at any point to $75, twenty shares of stock would be worth $1,500. The
bond, which can be exchanged immediately for this amount of stock, should
trade in the market then for at least that amount.
Why do companies issue such bonds? Because the value of the extra option
or conversion feature, which gives the buyer a lottery ticket on the company’s
future, allows the company to reduce the interest rate they need to pay on the
bonds in order to sell them.
Just as PNP used option valuation methods to build models for pricing
convertible bonds, it did the same with other derivatives. Our hedges
individually had low risk. Of two hundred that I tracked in the early 1970s,
80 percent were winners, 10 percent ended approximately even, and 10
percent lost. The losses were considerably smaller on average than the gains.
—
To produce even steadier returns, we hedged the overall risk from our entire
collection of hedges by neutralizing the impact on our portfolio of shifts in
interest rates (across the spectrum of quality and maturity). We also oﬀset the

danger to the portfolio from sudden large shifts in overall stock market prices
and in the volatility level of the market. From the 1980s on, some of these
techniques came into usage by modern investment banks and hedge funds.
They also adopted a notion we rejected, called VaR or “value at risk,” where
they estimated the damage to their portfolio for, say, the worst events among
the most likely 95 percent of future outcomes, neglecting the extreme 5
percent “tails,” then acted to reduce any unacceptably large risks. The defect
of VaR alone is that it doesn’t fully account for the worst 5 percent of
expected cases. But these extreme events are where ruin is to be found. It’s
also true that extreme changes in securities prices may be much greater than
you would expect from the Gaussian or normal statistics commonly used.
When the S&P 500 Index fell 23 percent on October 19, 1987, a leading
academic ﬁnance professor said that if the market had traded every day for
the thirteen-billion-year life of the universe, the chance of this happening
even once was negligible.
Another tool used today is to “stress-test” a portfolio by simulating the
impact of major calamitous events of the past on the portfolio. In 2008, a
multibillion-dollar hedge fund managed by a leading quant used ten-day
windows from the crash of 1987, the First Gulf War, Hurricane Katrina, the
1998 Long-Term Capital Management crisis, the tech-induced market drop
in 2000–02, the Iraq War, and so forth. All this data was applied to the fund’s
2008 portfolio and showed that these events would have led to losses of at
most $500 million on a $13 billion portfolio, a risk of loss of no more than 4
percent. But they actually lost over 50 percent at their low in 2009, brought to
the brink of ruin before ﬁnally recovering their losses in 2012. The credit
collapse of 2008 was diﬀerent in kind from the past worst cases for which
they tested, and their near-extinction reﬂects the inadequacy of simply
replaying the past.
We took a more comprehensive view. We analyzed and incorporated tail
risk, and considered extreme questions such as, “What if the market fell 25
percent in one day?” More than a decade later it did exactly that and our
portfolio was barely aﬀected. When, with our expanding range and size of
trades, we moved our account to Goldman Sachs as our prime broker, one of
the questions I asked was: “What happens to our account if Goldman Sachs
New York is destroyed by a terrorist nuclear bomb smuggled into New York

Harbor?” Their reply was: “We have duplicate records stored underground in
Iron Mountain, Colorado.”
There is another kind of risk on Wall Street from which computers and
formulas can’t protect you. That’s the danger of being swindled or defrauded.
Being cheated at cards in the casinos of the 1960s was valuable preparation
for the far greater scale of dishonesty I would encounter in the investment
world. The ﬁnancial press reveals new skulduggery on a daily basis.
With inﬂation approaching double digits and a spike in commodity prices,
precious metals and options to buy or sell them were a booming business.
Back in my oﬃce, I compared the XYZ Corporation’s prices to the “correct”
model prices we used at PNP when we sold large amounts of such options to
a major dealer.
To my astonishment, I found that XYZ Corp was oﬀering to sell me
options at less than half my expected payoﬀ! After I collected ﬁnancial
statements from my friendly salesman and examined them, I discovered that
when XYZ Corp sold an option it counted the proceeds as income, but did
not set aside any reserve to pay oﬀ the options if and when they were cashed
in by the buyer. Since the correct reserves on each option they sold should
have been more than twice what they were being paid, proper accounting
would show their net worth becoming more negative every time they sold
another option.
It was clear that they had to sell more and more options, using the
increasing cash ﬂow to pay oﬀ any early “investors” who might cash in.
Classic Ponzi, and bound to end badly. What to do?
I decided on a little educational experiment. After reviewing the scanty
information available on sales, options outstanding, and early redemption
rates, I estimated the company would survive for at least eight more months.
It turned out to be ten. Buying $4,000 worth of six-month options, I doubled
my money in four months and cashed out. A few months later the oﬃces were
shuttered, the operators gone, and another fraud investigation was under way.
—
The next big test of PNP’s investment approach came soon afterward. From
1979 through 1982 there were extreme distortions in the markets. Short-term

US Treasury bill returns went into double-digit territory, yielding almost 15
percent in 1981. The interest on ﬁxed-rate home mortgages peaked at more
than 18 percent per year. Inﬂation was not far behind. These unprecedented
price moves gave us new ways to proﬁt. One of these was in the gold futures
markets.
At one point, gold, for delivery two months in the future, was trading at
$400 an ounce and gold futures fourteen months out were trading for $500 an
ounce. Our trade was to buy the gold at $400 and sell it at $500. If, in two
months, the gold we paid $400 for was delivered to us, we could store it for a
nominal cost for a year, then deliver it for $500, gaining 25 percent in twelve
months. There were a variety of risks, which we fully hedged, and several
“kickers”—scenarios where we would make a higher—(often much higher)
rate of return. We did similar trades in silver and copper and they worked as
expected, with one tiny exception. After we took delivery of our copper,
some of it was stolen from the warehouse our broker used and there was a
short delay while we were reimbursed from the warehouse company’s
insurance.
As the era of high interest rates unfolded, savings and loan companies
began to lose massive amounts of money. Here’s why. Savings and loans
borrowed money for a short term from depositors and lent much of it out
long-term for home mortgages at ﬁxed rates of interest. As short-term rates
shot up, the cost of money to the S&Ls went up rapidly, whereas their
revenue from the existing mortgage loans they had made earlier to
homeowners at much lower ﬁxed rates did not. This mismatch in interest
rates between their short-term borrowing and their long-term lending would
lead to the ruin of many S&Ls in the 1980s and a bailout cost to taxpayers of
several hundred billion dollars.
The possible collapse of the S&Ls could have been predicted and
prevented by suitable regulation, but wasn’t. The great ﬁnancial crises that
came later shared this characteristic.
Meanwhile, Princeton Newport Partners was expanding into new types of
investments.
