Chapter 15
RISE…
On November 1, 1979, ten years after we started Princeton Newport
Partners, the annualized return for the S&P 500, including dividends, was 4.6
percent and for small-company stocks 8.5 percent, both with far more
volatility than Princeton Newport. We were up 409 percent for the decade,
annualizing at 17.7 percent before fees and 14.1 percent after fees. Our initial
$1.4 million had grown to $28.6 million. We ended 1979 with a grand dream
for the 1980s: to expand our expertise into new investment areas. For me this
meant more interesting problems to solve in quantitative ﬁnance. For the
partnership it could lead to an increase in the amount of capital we could
invest at high rates of return.
I called our ﬁrst eﬀort the Indicators Project. The object was to study the
ﬁnancial characteristics of companies, or indicators, to see if they could be
used to forecast stock returns. The prototype was Value Line, an investment
service that launched a program in 1965 using information such as surprise
earnings announcements, price-to-earnings ratios, and momentum to rank
stocks into groups from I (best) to V (worst). A stock is said to have positive
momentum if its price has recently been trending strongly up, and negative
momentum if strongly down.
The head of our indicators project was Dr. Jerome Baesel, a talented and
articulate young economist whom I met when we were both teaching ﬁnance
in what is now the Paul Merage School of Business at UC, Irvine. Also
crucial to this project and virtually all the others, then and later, was Steven
Mizusawa. Steve and I met in 1972 when he and another UCI student asked
to do a special mathematics summer project under my direction exploring an

aspect of card counting in blackjack. They did an excellent job, and so, when
in 1973 I needed someone with computer skills, Steve was available. With
degrees in both computer science and physics, Steve has been in charge of
our computer operations and much of the associated research. He became a
general partner of Princeton Newport Partners and an invaluable friend.
The project relied on two vast securities databases and the computing
power to process them, both of which had recently become available. Daily
historical prices of stocks, the dates and amounts of any cash dividends paid,
and other data were marketed by CRSP, the University of Chicago’s Center
for Research in Security Prices. The Compustat database provided historical
balance sheet and income information. Of the scores of indicators we
systematically analyzed, several correlated strongly with past performance.
Among them were earnings yield (annual earnings divided by price), dividend
yield, book value divided by price, momentum, short interest (the number of
shares of a company currently sold short), earnings surprise (an earnings
announcement that is signiﬁcantly and unexpectedly diﬀerent from the
analysts’ consensus), purchases and sales by company oﬃcers, directors, and
large shareholders, and the ratio of total company sales to the market price of
the company. We studied each of these separately, then worked out how to
combine them. When the historical patterns persisted as prices unfolded into
the future, we created a trading system called MIDAS (multiple indicator
diversiﬁed asset system) and used it to run a separate long/short hedge fund
(long the “good” stocks, short the “bad” ones). The power of MIDAS was that
it applied to the entire multitrillion-dollar stock market, with the possibility of
investing very large sums.
Two professors of ﬁnance, Bruce Jacobs and Kenneth Levy, had
independently been thinking along the same lines as I learned when they
presented their work to the UC–Berkeley program in ﬁnance in the fall of
1986. Our system operated successfully until we closed it along with
Princeton Newport Partners at the end of 1988. Jacobs and Levy went on to
manage several billion dollars using this method.
By 1985 our oﬃces in Newport Beach, California, and Princeton, New
Jersey, had each grown to about forty employees. I managed the Newport
Beach oﬃce and Jay Regan the Princeton oﬃce. We were now trading in
markets all over the world. London was ﬁve time zones ahead of New York,

so our traders arrived early, updated our positions across the Atlantic, and
were ready for New York when it opened at 9:30 A.M. along with multiple US
options markets (Chicago Board Options Exchange, AMEX, Paciﬁc Coast,
Philadelphia). In Newport Beach, three hours behind Princeton, the action
began around 6 A.M. as we put the latest prices into our computers to generate
new trading advice for the East Coast oﬃce. In addition, the Asian markets
were open when most people in the United States were asleep. Trading
warrants and convertibles in Tokyo was especially important. Phone traﬃc
between Newport and Princeton began about 6 A.M., became very heavy for
most of the day, and ﬁnally tapered oﬀ in the late afternoon.
We expanded into new types of trades, several of which we pioneered. One
of these was a huge onetime-only transaction proposed to us by Goldman
Sachs in late 1983. It resulted from the government-mandated breakup of the
American Telephone and Telegraph Company monopoly. AT&T was being
divided into a new company also to be known as AT&T plus the so-called
seven sisters, which would be new regional telephone companies. Under the
terms of the deal, each ten-share lot of old AT&T would be exchanged for
ten shares of new AT&T plus one share in each of the seven sisters. The
aggregate price of the new securities, trading “when issued” (which means
you could contract “now” to buy or sell them but didn’t have to put up the
cash in the case of purchase, or get paid in case of sale, until they were
actually issued) was greater than the price of the old AT&T by enough to
make this trade attractive.
Princeton Newport bought ﬁve million shares of old AT&T at about $66 a
share for $330 million. We paid for most of this with term ﬁnancing, which
was a special loan from our broker just for this deal, to be paid oﬀ from the
proceeds when the position was closed out. Meanwhile, we oﬀset the risk of
owning old AT&T by simultaneously selling short the shares we were going to
receive in exchange for our shares of old AT&T. These so-called when-issued
shares consisted of ﬁve million shares of new AT&T and ﬁve hundred
thousand shares of each of the new seven sisters. We did the trade through
Goldman Sachs by taking half of each of two successive $5 million blocks of
about $330 million apiece. I have a gold-colored plaque, a so-called deal toy,
on my desk commemorating the December 1, 1983, block as then being the
largest dollar amount for a single trade in the history of the New York Stock

Exchange. In two and a half months, PNP netted $1.6 million from the
AT&T trade after all costs.
Meanwhile, an army of PhDs, following our path, greatly expanded the
theory of derivatives and implemented the revolution in quantitative ﬁnance
on Wall Street. They helped direct investing at hedge funds, investment
banks, and other institutions. Driven in part by the sell side—the sales force
that ﬁnds and sells new products—these quants invented new derivative
securities that the salespeople then pushed. These products undermined the
world ﬁnancial system in a series of increasingly grave crises. The ﬁrst of
these surprised almost everyone.
On Friday, October 16, 1987, the market, as measured by the Dow Jones
Industrial Average, fell about 4 percent. Since a daily move typically averages
about 1 percent, this was large, but not cause for panic. However, the market
had been declining somewhat and was becoming more volatile.
On the following Monday morning we watched the market continue to fall.
By the time I left for my usual lunch with Vivian it was oﬀ 7 percent, more
than half as large as the two record 13 percent and 12 percent down days of
October 28 and 29, 1929, which together signaled the start of the Great
Depression. As the market dropped further, my oﬃce called me at the
restaurant, telling me with alarm that the Dow Jones Index was down four
hundred points, or 18 percent, already the worst day ever, amid widespread
panic. Vivian wondered whether I needed to skip the rest of our lunch and
race back. PNP and we personally could be suﬀering massive losses. I told
her there was nothing I could do in the markets that day. Our investments
were either safe, thoroughly protected by hedging as I believed them to be, or
not. “What will you do?” she asked. I told her that ﬁrst we would relax and
ﬁnish lunch. Then, after a brief visit to the oﬃce, I was coming home to
think.
When I returned to my desk, the market had closed, having fallen 508
points, or 23 percent, by far the worst single day in history. One quarter of
the US stock market value was “gone.” The nation had lost 5 percent of its
net worth in one day, and the shock ripped through markets around the world.
Fear reigned. For most academic theorists, this was as close to impossible as
anything can be. It was as though the sun suddenly winked out or the earth
stopped spinning. They described stock prices using a distribution of

probabilities with the esoteric name lognormal. This did a good job of ﬁtting
historical price changes that ranged from small to rather large, but greatly
underestimated the likelihood of very large changes. Financial models like the
Black-Scholes formula for option prices were built using the lognormal.
Aware of this limitation in academia’s model of stock prices, as part of the
indicators project we had found a much better ﬁt to the historical stock price
data, especially for the relatively rare large changes in price. So even though I
was surprised by the giant drop, I wasn’t nearly as shocked as most.
Though there was no major outside event to explain this one-day collapse,
when I thought it through that evening I asked myself, Why did this happen?
Will the disaster continue tomorrow? Will there be proﬁt opportunities created
by the chaos? I believe the cause was a new ﬁnancial product called portfolio
insurance. Had I paid closer attention earlier to the vast expansion in its use, I
might have foreseen the disaster. This investment technique was largely
created and marketed by the quant ﬁrm of Leland, O’Brien and Rubinstein.
Suppose a company pension and proﬁt-sharing plan with a broad portfolio of
equities wants to protect itself against a sharp drop in the market. It sets up a
program, either in-house or by a portfolio insurance specialist, to switch from
equities into US Treasury bills as the market falls. This is done in stages: For
each drop of, say, a couple of percent, part of the stock portfolio is sold and
the proceeds used to buy T-bills. If the market later rises, the process is
reversed until, once again, the portfolio is fully invested in equities.
At the time of the crash $60 billion or so of equities were insured by this
technique and implemented largely by computers. When the market fell 4
percent on Friday the insurance programs placed orders, to be executed at
Monday’s opening, to sell stock and buy Treasury bills. When trading began
on Monday, these sales drove stock prices down further, triggering more
selling from portfolio insurance programs. As prices continued to plummet,
investors panicked and added their selling to the deluge. This “feedback loop”
continued throughout the day, building to a devastating climax. Portfolio
insurance was designed to protect investors from large market declines.
Ironically, the cure became the cause.
To understand what I did next, a little background is needed. It is relatively
expensive for portfolio insurance programs continually to sell equities as the
market drops, then buy them back when it rises due to commissions paid to

brokers to execute the trade and because of the impact on the market price
from the sale or purchase.
The institutions using portfolio insurance, even though they paid lower
rates on commissions than smaller investors, cut trading costs even more by
using, instead of the underlying stocks, contracts to buy (or sell) at a speciﬁed
future date the basket of stocks that made up the S&P 500 Index. These so-
called futures contracts traded on exchanges along with those for future
delivery of other assets, including bonds, currencies, metals, oil and gas, and
agricultural products such as corn, wheat, and pork bellies. These contracts
have standardized amounts and delivery dates, such as the one for one
hundred troy ounces of gold to be delivered during a speciﬁed period in
September 2017. The exchange stands as an intermediary between buyer and
seller, each of whom must post collateral with the exchange as a guarantee
they will honor their side of the contract. Known as margin, these funds are a
fraction of the total contract amount. Since the futures contract will be
exchangeable for the underlying asset, the two prices tend to track each other
closely. The stage was set for disaster.
By October 1987, futures contracts on the S&P 500 Index had been
trading for a few years and were a popular way either to gain exposure to the
market (buy, or “go long”) or to shed it (sell or “go short”) quickly and
cheaply. Normally, the prices of these futures contracts were very close to the
price of the S&P 500 Index itself. That was because large enough deviations
let arbitrageurs capture a proﬁt with a nearly riskless hedge through
simultaneously buying the cheaper of the index and the index futures, and
selling short the other. Ordinarily, this kept the price spread narrow. We had
been capturing proﬁts this way since the ﬁrst day in 1982 that these futures
traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
After thinking hard about it overnight I concluded that massive feedback
selling by the portfolio insurers was the likely cause of Monday’s price
collapse. The next morning S&P futures were trading at 185 to 190 and the
corresponding price to buy the S&P itself was 220. This price diﬀerence of
30 to 35 was previously unheard of, since arbitrageurs like us generally kept
the two prices within a point or two of each other. But the institutions had
sold massive amounts of futures, and the index itself didn’t fall nearly as far
because the terriﬁed arbitrageurs wouldn’t exploit the spread. Normally when

futures were trading far enough below the index itself, the arbitrageurs sold
short a basket of stocks that closely tracked the index and bought an oﬀsetting
position in the cheaper index futures. When the price of the futures and that
of the basket of underlying stocks converged, as they do later when the
futures contracts settle, the arbitrageur closes out the hedge and captures the
original spread as a proﬁt. But on Tuesday, October 20, 1987, many stocks
were diﬃcult or impossible to sell short. That was because of the uptick rule.
The rule was part of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (rule 10a-1). It
speciﬁed that, with certain exceptions, short-sale transactions are allowed only
at a price higher than the last previous diﬀerent price (an “uptick”). This rule
was supposed to prevent short sellers from deliberately driving down the price
of a stock. Seeing an enormous proﬁt potential from capturing the
unprecedented spread between the futures and the index, I wanted to sell
stocks short and buy index futures to capture the excess spread. The index
was selling at 15 percent, or 30 points, over the futures. The potential proﬁt in
an arbitrage was 15 percent in a few days. But with prices collapsing, upticks
were scarce. What to do?
I ﬁgured out a solution. I called our head trader, who as a minor general
partner was highly compensated from his share of our fees, and gave him this
order: Buy $5 million worth of index futures at whatever the current market
price happened to be (about 190), and place orders to sell short at the market,
with the index then trading at about 220, not $5 million worth of assorted
stocks—which was the optimal amount to best hedge the futures—but $10
million. I chose twice as much stock as I wanted, guessing only about half
would actually be shorted because of the scarcity of the required upticks, thus
giving me the proper hedge. If substantially more or less stock was sold short,
the hedge would not be as good but the 15 percent proﬁt cushion gave us a
wide band of protection against loss.
I went through a detailed explanation of my outside-the-box analysis of
why this trade was a windfall opportunity. But this day was beyond anything
our trader had ever seen or imagined. Gripped by fear, he seemed frozen. He
refused to execute the trades. I told him to do it for PNP and do it now, or
else I wanted him to do it for my account. If that was his choice, I told him I
would later tell all the other partners how the proﬁt I made would have, but
for him, belonged to the partnership rather than to me.

Here was my reasoning. If, because of the uptick rule, only about half the
shorts got oﬀ, then we would be properly hedged and make about $750,000.
If none got oﬀ (extremely improbable), we were buying the futures at an
enormous discount—the index itself would have to fall more than another 13
percent before we began to lose. At the other extreme, especially in a market
panic, there was virtually no chance all the shorts would go oﬀ. Even if all the
orders to sell short were completed, the market would have to rise more than
14 percent for us to lose money. To protect against this possibility, I told my
head trader that when we ﬁlled close to half the short-sale orders, he should
cancel the rest. After he ﬁnally complied with my request and completed the
ﬁrst round, I ordered a second round of the same size. In the end we did get
roughly half our shorts oﬀ for a near-optimal hedge. We had about $9 million
worth of futures long and $10 million worth of stock short, locking in
$1  million proﬁt. If my trader hadn’t wasted so much of the market day
refusing to act, we could have done several more rounds and reaped additional
millions.
We ended October “ﬂat” for the month (approximately zero net gain or
loss) whereas the S&P Index was down 22 percent. During the surrounding
ﬁve-month period, from August through December, the index also fell 22
percent whereas Princeton Newport Partners gained 9 percent.
In its ﬁrst decade of operation, 1969–79, PNP rose from a $1.4 million
partnership to being perhaps the most mathematical, analytic, and computer-
oriented ﬁrm on Wall Street. In the next eight years and two months, from
November 1, 1979, through January 1, 1988, our capital base expanded from
$28.6 million to $273 million, at which point we had investment positions
totaling $1 billion. Partnership capital earned an annual rate of 22.8 percent
before fees, and limited partners saw their wealth grow at 18.2 percent. The
S&P 500 compounded at 11.5 percent, and small-company stocks annualized
at 17.3 percent. We were much less risky than either of these, as industry
statistics conﬁrmed. We had no losing years or losing quarters.
We added extraordinary investment products that could expand our capital
base to billions.
They included:

1. State-of-the-art convertible, warrant, and option computerized analytic
models and trading systems. With this we had already become the
biggest player in the Japanese warrant market.
2. Statistical arbitrage, which was a computerized analytic model and
trading system for common stocks using a real-time feed of the ticker
into our $2 million computer center, where we generated automated
electronic orders and sent them to the ﬂoor. From one eight-by-eight
cubicle we traded between one and two million shares a day, which was
then 1 or 2 percent of NYSE daily volume.
3. A group of experts on interest rates joined us from Salomon Brothers.
While there, they made $50 million for that ﬁrm in just eighteen
months.
4. MIDAS: This indicator-driven stock prediction system was to be our
entry into the broader money management business.
5. OSM Partners: a “fund of hedge funds” that invested in other hedge
funds.
But all this was destined to come to an end.
