Chapter 16
…AND FALL
In the middle of the day on Thursday, December 17, 1987, about ﬁfty armed
men and women burst out of the third-ﬂoor elevators to raid our oﬃce in
Princeton, New Jersey. They were from the IRS, the FBI, and the postal
authorities. Our employees were searched before they were free to leave the
building. They were not allowed to return. The invaders impounded several
hundred boxes of books and records, including Rolodexes. They dug through
contents of wastebaskets and crawled through the ceiling spaces. It went on
into the early-morning hours of the next day.
This was part of a campaign by Rudolph Giuliani, US Attorney for the
Southern District of New York, to prosecute real and alleged Wall Street
criminals. As a prosecutor later told a defense attorney, Giuliani’s real
objective in attacking individuals in our Princeton oﬃce was to get
information to further his case against Michael Milken at Drexel Burnham
and Robert Freeman at Goldman Sachs. My partner Jay Regan knew them
both well and spoke to them often. Freeman had even been a roommate of
Regan’s at Dartmouth. Giuliani believed that Regan could help him bring
them down. Regan refused to cooperate.
The government used evidence from the raid and testimony from a
disgruntled former employee to develop their case. Ironically, when this man
was being considered for a job as a trader by the Princeton oﬃce, they ﬂew
him to Newport Beach to get our opinion. We said emphatically that he was
not suitable. However, it was our practice for each oﬃce to have the last word
in the areas of the business for which it was primarily responsible. The
Princeton oﬃce hired him. The ﬁve top people there were indicted and tried

on sixty-four charges of stock manipulation, stock parking, tax fraud, mail
fraud, and wire fraud. The defendants, in addition to Jay Regan, were our
head trader, head convertible trader, the CFO and his assistant, and a Drexel
Burnham convertible trader.
Neither I nor any of the forty or so other partners and employees in the
Newport Beach oﬃce had any knowledge of the alleged acts in the Princeton
oﬃce. We were never implicated in, or charged with, any wrongdoing in this
or any other matter. Our two oﬃces, more than two thousand miles apart, had
very diﬀerent activities, functions, and corporate cultures.
The key to the government’s case was a few conversations they discovered
on three old trading room audiotapes that had been saved years earlier, then
misplaced and forgotten. They were originally created because it was the
normal business practice in the Princeton oﬃce, as it was elsewhere on Wall
Street, to temporarily record all telephone conversations in the trading room.
A major purpose for this was to quickly resolve disputes with counterparties
over trading orders and executions. With our volume of eighteen billion
shares a year, mistakes were inevitable. One such trade, part of a gigantic
Japanese warrant hedge executed through a ﬁrm I’ll call Enco, was based on
what they told us about the terms of the warrant. Our traders said Enco
repeatedly assured us that the information they gave us was correct. In fact it
wasn’t. Our proof was on those tapes.
The resulting mistake in the quantities of securities used for our hedge
position cost us $2 million. Ordinarily the tapes ran continuously, keeping the
last four days of conversations, writing over the oldest as they recorded the
newest. But pending a resolution, our traders saved the tape covering the
disputed trade. Later, since Enco refused to admit the error was theirs, our
traders prepared for arbitration or litigation by initiating and recording two
more conversations in which Enco again told our traders the original
information they had given us was correct. This meant two more tapes,
including eight more days of conversations, were set aside for evidence. We
then showed management at Enco how the facts contradicted what their staﬀ
had told us, and asked for compensation. Normally, the erring broker
compensates the other party. Enco refused and said that if we litigated, they
would no longer do business with us. We knew that all of the big four
Japanese brokerage ﬁrms, which controlled the market in Japanese warrants

and convertible bonds, would follow suit. As this area was a major contributor
to our proﬁts, we accepted the $2 million loss. Though the three tapes should
then have been reused as was our usual practice, they sat forgotten in a desk
for a couple of years until the government seized them in the 1987 raid as
part of hundreds of boxes of ﬁles and materials.
The government invoked the Racketeer Inﬂuenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act (RICO), a tool designed to prosecute mobsters, for the ﬁrst
time ever against securities industry defendants. It was a landmark case. The
defendants posted cash bonds totaling $20 million.
To pressure them further, the US attorney began contacting our limited
partners and making arrangements to subpoena them to come to New York
and testify (to what?) before the grand jury. As they were passive participants
not involved in the operations of the partnership, these subpoenas had no
conceivable value for Giuliani’s case against Regan and the others, other than
to disturb and upset them, perhaps enough so they would withdraw from the
partnership.
One of our investors had just returned with a carload of groceries to her
country home in Northern California. As she described it, it was a sunny
August afternoon, with the fragrance of pines in the desert-dry air much like
the unforgettable atmosphere of Lake Tahoe in the high summer. As she
prepared to carry in the bags, she noticed a sedan parked across the street,
dented and with badly oxidized paint. The vehicle clearly did not belong in
the neighborhood and she became concerned when two scruﬀy men got out
and approached her. They brought a subpoena from the US Attorney ordering
her to come to New York and testify before the grand jury in the Princeton
Newport case.
Tall, poised, and elegant, with an artistic background, our partner was part
of the Bay Area social establishment. She began by asking the two men to
help her carry in the groceries. As they chatted, she said she really didn’t
know anything about the Princeton Newport case but she’d love to help. And
she always looked forward to a trip to New York. Of course they would put
her up at her favorite hotel and arrange theater tickets and restaurant
reservations, wouldn’t they? And she would need the information on the
current exhibits at the Metropolitan, the Guggenheim, and the Whitney, and
could they get her the schedule of programs at Carnegie Hall?

The bemused subpoena servers shuﬄed oﬀ and she heard no more from
Mr. Giuliani.
Not all our investors reacted with such aplomb, but every last one of our
more than ninety limited partners stood fast. No one asked to withdraw.
Giuliani’s ploy was exposed as a bluﬀ when no limited partner was actually
called to testify. Even so, we expected him to wreck our business if Regan
didn’t help him convict Milken and Freeman.
Limited partners were alarmed by the threat that RICO could be extended
to their partnership assets, and by the doubts the investigation raised about
some of our leadership in the Princeton oﬃce. I was disturbed by this and by
the fact that information about the case was not being freely supplied to me
by the Princeton oﬃce. For instance, when the government made a transcript
of the trading room tapes and supplied it to the defendants, I asked to see it. I
was put oﬀ with promises for weeks. Meanwhile, the lawyers for PNP, the
partnership, who were separate from the defense team, also obtained a copy.
At my request, they properly sent a set to me. An adviser for one of the
defendants, hearing of this, was enraged and asked that PNP’s lawyers be
ﬁred. I could understand why I was strung along when I read through the foot-
deep stack of documents. There, in black and white, were conversations that
had to be extremely embarrassing for those involved.
Legal fees for the defendants were estimated at between $10 million and
$20 million. There was no telling how long the case would go on or how it
would end. If the defendants were found guilty they would be liable for their
own legal bills whereas if they were declared innocent, the partnership would
pay. To get closure, I negotiated a ﬂat advance payout to the defendants of
$2.5 million, to cover any and all responsibility the partnership had for their
legal expenses. In addition to this payout, the partnership was burdened with
its own considerable legal expenses.
The return for PNP during this traumatic year was a mediocre 4 percent,
reduced not only by the millions in legal costs from the case but also because
the team in Princeton, consumed by defending themselves, couldn’t devote
their usual time to partnership business. As 1988 drew to a close, I saw no
good way forward for PNP. I said I was leaving. Limited partners followed
and the partnership then wound down.

Rudolph Giuliani resigned as a US Attorney early in 1989 to run
unsuccessfully later that year for mayor of New York, propelled by his fame
and notoriety from the several years he spent ﬁrst prosecuting the maﬁa and
then Wall Street ﬁgures. He ran again for mayor four years later, this time
successfully, and served two terms.
The defendants were convicted in August 1989 on multiple counts and
sentenced to jail terms of three months and ﬁnes. The convictions, using
RICO, were crucial in breaking the will to resist by Milken and Freeman.
Both plea-bargained. But they may have acted too soon. Two months after
the PNP convictions, which included racketeering counts under RICO, the
US Department of Justice for a second time took “steps to rein in the tactics
in racketeering prosecutions that sparked controversy during Wall Street
corruption cases brought by former Manhattan U.S. Attorney Rudolph
Giuliani.” The PNP defendants appealed and the Second Circuit Court of
Appeals threw out the convictions for racketeering and tax fraud. It upheld
the charges of conspiracy for all six defendants and securities fraud for two.
In January 1992, having achieved their real goal, which was to convict Milken
and Freeman, the prosecutors dropped the remaining charges against four of
the ﬁve PNP defendants and a related charge against the Drexel trader.
Princeton’s head trader and the Drexel defendant were still facing ﬁnes and
three-month prison terms for their remaining counts. In September 1992, a
federal judge vacated these sentences as well.
Superﬁcially, the PNP case appears simply to be a federal prosecution of
securities violators. To understand why it really happened, you need to go
back to the 1970s, when ﬁrst-tier companies could routinely meet their
ﬁnancing needs from Wall Street and the banking community, whereas less
established companies had to scramble. Seizing an opportunity to ﬁnance
them, a young ﬁnancial innovator named Michael Milken built a capital-
raising machine for these companies from within a stodgy old Wall Street
ﬁrm, Drexel Burnham Lambert. Milken’s group underwrote issues of low-
rated, high-yielding bonds—the so-called junk bonds—some of which were
convertible or came with warrants to purchase stock. The higher yield was the
extra compensation investors required to oﬀset the perceived risk that the
bonds would default. Filling a gaping need and hungry demand in the

business community, Milken’s group became the greatest ﬁnancing engine in
Wall Street history.
Such innovation outraged the old line establishment of corporate America,
who were initially transﬁxed like deer in the headlights as a horde of
entrepreneurs, funded with seemingly unlimited Drexel-generated cash, began
a wave of unfriendly takeovers. Many old ﬁrms were vulnerable because the
oﬃcers and directors had done a poor job of investing the shareholders’
equity. With subpar returns on capital, the stocks were cheap. A takeover
group could restructure, raise the rate of return, and make such a company
considerably more valuable. Since that company’s potential was so great, the
prospective new owners could pay more than the current market price.
The oﬃcers and directors of America’s big corporations were happy with
the way things had been. They enjoyed their hunting lodges and private jets,
made charitable donations for their personal aggrandizement and objectives,
and granted themselves generous salaries, retirement plans, bonuses of cash,
stock, and stock options, and golden parachutes. All these things were
designed by and for themselves and paid for with corporate dollars, the
expenses routinely ratiﬁed by a scattered and fragmented shareholder base.
Economists call this conﬂict of interest between management, or agents, and
the shareholders, who are the real owners, the agency problem. It continues
today, one example being the massive continuing grants of stock options by
management to itself, already estimated by the year 2000 to have risen to 14
percent of the total value of corporate America. By 2008 the greedy
incompetence of the chieftains of corporate America had helped bring on one
of the greatest ﬁnancial crises in history, leading to a massive taxpayer-
funded federal bailout to save the US economy from ruin.
The Drexel-funded newcomers were knocking the more vulnerable
managers oﬀ their horses into the mud. Something would have to be done.
Government ought to be sympathetic—the old corporate establishment had
most of the money and they were the most politically powerful and inﬂuential
group in the country. Their Wall Street subdivision might sustain some
damage, but one could expect the fall of Drexel to release, as it did, a huge
honeypot of business to be taken over by everyone else.
The old establishment ﬁnanciers were lucky in that prosecutors would ﬁnd
numerous violations of securities laws within the Milken group and among its

many allies, associates, and clients. However, it is diﬃcult to judge how
relatively bad these were, compared with the incessant violations that have
always been, and continue to be, endemic in business and ﬁnance, because
only a few of the many violators are caught, and when they are prosecuted it
may be for only a tiny fraction of their oﬀenses. This contrasts with the case
of Drexel, where the searchlight of government was focused to reveal as many
violations as possible. It’s like the case of the man who was cited three times
in a single year for driving while intoxicated. His neighbor would also drink
and drive, but was never pulled over. Who is the greater criminal? Now
suppose I tell you that the caught man did it only three times and was
apprehended every time, whereas his neighbor did it a hundred times and was
never caught. How could this happen? What if I tell you that the two men are
bitter business rivals and that the traﬃc cop’s boss, the police chief, gets large
campaign contributions from the man who got no traﬃc citations. Now who
is the greater criminal?
The situation was a dream come true for the government’s ax, Rudolph
Giuliani. Politically ambitious, Giuliani was aware of how an earlier US
Attorney, Thomas E. Dewey, prosecuted bootleggers in the 1930s and
parlayed this into the governorship of New York and almost, the US
presidency in 1948. The prosecution of securities violations and insider
trading was the perfect ladder.
What could PNP have been worth twenty-ﬁve years later, in the year
2015? How could I possibly have any idea? Amazingly enough, a market-
neutral hedge fund operation was built on the Princeton Newport model—the
Citadel Investment Group. It was started in 1990 in Chicago by former hedge
fund manager Frank Meyer when he discovered the young quantitative
investment prodigy Ken Griﬃn, who was then trading options and convertible
bonds from his Harvard dorm room. I met with Frank and Ken, outlining the
workings and proﬁt centers of PNP, as well as turning over cartons of
documents outlining in detail the terms and conditions of older outstanding
warrants and convertible bonds. These were valuable, because they were no
longer available.
Citadel grew from a humble start in 1990 (when I became its ﬁrst limited
partner) with a few million dollars and one employee, Griﬃn, to a collection
of businesses managing $20 billion in capital and having more than a

thousand employees twenty-ﬁve years later, annualizing at about 20 percent
net to limited partners. Ken’s net worth in 2015 was estimated at $5.6 billion.
As Princeton Newport Partners closed I reﬂected on the proposition that
what matters in life is how you spend your time. When J. Paul Getty was the
richest man in the world and manifestly not fulﬁlled, he said the happiest time
of his life was when he was sixteen, riding waves oﬀ the beach in Malibu,
California. In 2000, Los Angeles Times Magazine, speaking of new
multibillionaire Henry T. Nicholas III of Broadcom Corporation, said, “It’s
1:30 a.m. He’s just turned 40—at his desk, in a dimly lit oﬃce. He hasn’t
seen his wife and children, ‘my reason for living,’ for several days. ‘The last
time we talked, [Stacey] told me she missed the old days, when I was at TRW
and we lived in a condo. She told me she wants to go back to that life.’ But
they can’t go back because he can’t let up.” (They later divorced.)
I initially thought that I might continue on my own with a PNP-style
partnership. But if I did that, then, in addition to the fun parts, I would be
responsible for things I didn’t enjoy. I changed my mind and gradually wound
down our PNP oﬃce in Newport Beach, ﬁnding good jobs in the securities
industry for some of our key people at places like the giant hedge fund D. E.
Shaw, the ﬁnancial engineering ﬁrm Barra, and the investment group running
the multibillion-dollar pension and proﬁt sharing plan at Weyerhaeuser. Then
I called Fischer Black, who was now at Goldman Sachs, after hearing that he
wanted to build a computerized analytic system for trading warrants and,
especially, convertible bonds. Our proven state-of-the-art system was for sale,
so he ﬂew out and spent two days with Steve and me learning how it worked.
He took detailed notes but ﬁnally said that it would be too costly to convert
the code to run on their computers.
