Chapter 17
PERIOD OF ADJUSTMENT
Joseph Heller and Kurt Vonnegut were at a party given by a billionaire when
Vonnegut asked Heller how it felt to know that their host might have made
more money in one day than Heller’s Catch-22 since it was written. Heller
said he had something the rich man could never have. When a puzzled
Vonnegut asked what that could be, Heller answered, “The knowledge that
I’ve got enough.”
When Princeton Newport Partners closed, Vivian and I had money enough
for the rest of our lives. Though the ending of PNP was traumatic for us all,
and the future wealth destroyed was in the billions, it freed us to do more of
what we enjoyed most: spend time with each other and the family and friends
we loved, travel, and pursue our interests. Taking to heart the lyrics of the
song “Enjoy Yourself (It’s Later than You Think),” Vivian and I would make
the most of the one thing we could never have enough of—time together.
Success on Wall Street was getting the most money. Success for us was
having the best life.
It was by chance during this time that I discovered the greatest of all
ﬁnancial frauds. On the afternoon of Thursday, December 11, 2008, I got the
news I had been expecting for more than seventeen years. Calling from New
York, my son, Jeﬀ, told me Bernie Madoﬀ confessed to having defrauded
investors of $50 billion in the greatest Ponzi scheme in history. “It’s what you
predicted in…1991!” he said.
On a balmy Monday morning in the spring of ’91, I arrived at the New
York oﬃce of a well-known international consulting company. The
investment committee hired me as an independent adviser to review their

hedge fund investments. I spent a few days examining performance histories,
business structures, and backgrounds of managers, as well as making onsite
visits. One manager was so paranoid when I interviewed him at his oﬃce that
he wouldn’t tell me what kind of personal computers they used. When I went
to the restroom he escorted me for fear that I might acquire some valuable
crumb of information en route.
I approved the portfolio, with one exception. The story from Bernard
Madoﬀ Investment didn’t add up. My client had been getting regular monthly
proﬁts ranging from 1 percent to more than 2 percent for two years.
Moreover, they knew other Madoﬀ investors who had been winning every
month for more than a decade.
Madoﬀ claimed to use a split-strike price strategy: He would buy a stock,
sell a call option at a higher price, and use the proceeds to pay for a put
option at a lower price.
I explained that, according to ﬁnancial theory, the long-run impact on
portfolio returns from many properly priced options with zero net proceeds
should also be zero. So we expect, over time, that the client’s portfolio return
should be roughly the same as the return on equities. The returns Madoﬀ
reported were too large to be believed. Moreover, in months when stocks are
down, the strategy should produce a loss—but Madoﬀ wasn’t reporting any
losses. After checking the client’s account statements I found that losing
months for the strategy were magically converted to winners by short sales of
S&P Index futures. In the same way, months that should have produced very
large wins were “smoothed out.”
Suspecting fraud, I asked my client to arrange for me to visit the Madoﬀ
operation on the seventeenth ﬂoor of the famous Lipstick Building on Third
Avenue in Manhattan. Bernie was in Europe that week, and as we now know,
likely raising more money. His brother, Peter, head of compliance and of
computer operations, said that I would not be allowed through the front door.
I asked my client who it was that did the accounting and annual audits for
the Madoﬀ fund. I was told it was handled by a one-man shop run by
someone who had been a friend and neighbor of Bernie’s since the 1960s.
Now on high alert for fraud, I asked when the client received conﬁrmations of
trades. The answer was that they came by mail in batches every week or two,
well after the dates they supposedly occurred. At my suggestion, the client

then hired my ﬁrm to conduct a detailed analysis of their individual
transactions to prove or disprove my suspicion that they were fake. After
analyzing about 160 individual options trades, we found that for half of them
no trades occurred on the exchange where Madoﬀ said that they supposedly
took place. For many of the remaining half that did trade, the quantity
reported by Madoﬀ just for my client’s two accounts exceeded the entire
volume reported for everyone. To check the minority of remaining trades,
those that did not conﬂict with the prices and volumes reported by the
exchanges, I asked an oﬃcial at Bear Stearns to ﬁnd out in conﬁdence who all
the buyers and sellers of the options were. We could not connect any of them
to Madoﬀ’s ﬁrm.
I told my client that the trades were fake and Madoﬀ’s investment
operation was a fraud. My client had a dilemma. If I was right and he closed
his accounts with Madoﬀ he would protect his money, save his reputation,
and avoid a legal mess. He argued that if I were wrong, he would needlessly
sacriﬁce his best investment. I answered that I could not be wrong: I had
proven from public records that the trades never happened. He was being sent
make-believe trade slips. I made the point that to ignore this could put his job
at risk. That clinched it. He closed his accounts with Madoﬀ and got his
money back. Over the next eighteen years, he watched other Madoﬀ investors
seem to get rich. I wonder how often he regretted hiring me.
In my attempt, via “networking,” to ﬁnd out how much other money was
invested with Madoﬀ I repeatedly heard that all his investors were told not to
disclose their relationship, even to one another, on threat of being dropped.
Even so, I asked around, located half a billion dollars, and concluded that the
scheme had to be much larger. One investor’s track record showed gains
every month back to 1979, annualizing at 20 percent, and I was told the
record was similar stretching into the late 1960s. The scheme had already
been operating for more than twenty years!
Having shown that Madoﬀ was posting made-up trades to my client’s
accounts, and that he was apparently doing so to several other investors with
whom I spoke, I had the smoking gun that proved fraud. I warned people in
my network, forecasting an ever-expanding Ponzi scheme that one day would
end disastrously. Ponzi schemes take proﬁts to investors. They use the money
the investors put in but eventually need more, which they get by recruiting

new investors. These new investors also have to be paid, leading the Ponzi
operators to sign up still more. The longer it went undetected the bigger it
would grow and the worse it would be when it collapsed.
At this time Madoﬀ was a major ﬁgure in the securities industry, serving as
chairman of NASDAQ, running one of the largest “third market” (oﬀ the
exchanges) stock trading ﬁrms in the country, consulted by government, and
routinely checked out by the SEC.
Would the establishment have believed charges of wrongdoing? The story
of Harry Markopoulos gives the answer. Challenged by his boss in 1999 to
explain why Madoﬀ, with a supposedly similar strategy, could produce much
better and steadier returns, Markopoulos concluded that it was impossible on
the basis of quantitative ﬁnancial reasoning, just as I had done before I began
my investigation that proved fraud. Though he didn’t establish that the
individual trades were faked, even without that smoking gun his arguments
were overwhelmingly persuasive. For the next ten years Markopoulos
attempted to get the SEC to investigate, but it brushed him aside repeatedly,
cleared Madoﬀ after superﬁcial investigations, and quashed a request from
the Boston oﬃce, prompted by Markopoulos, to investigate Madoﬀ
Investment as a possible Ponzi scheme.
In a remarkable 477-page document, “Investigation of Failure of the SEC
to Uncover Bernard Madoﬀ’s Ponzi Scheme—Public Version,” August 31,
2009, Report No. OIG-509, the SEC investigates and documents its own
repeated failures, beginning in 1992 and continuing until Madoﬀ confessed in
2008, to follow up on obvious clues, pointed complaints, and clear violations
of securities laws. Yet the SEC continued to destroy documents through at
least July 2010, relating not only to Madoﬀ, but to major ﬁnancial institutions
like Goldman Sachs and Bank of America, as well as SAC Capital Advisors,
during a continuing investigation of the latter. Charged with insider trading,
SAC Capital agreed to a record $1.8 billion ﬁne in late 2013 and closed itself
to outside investors.
Ten years after I discovered the Madoﬀ fraud, at a hedge fund investing
conference sponsored by Barron’s, a weekly publication by The Wall Street
Journal presenting ﬁnancial data and in-depth stories, the headline article was
about the investment manager who wasn’t there, the manager with the best
record of all—Bernie Madoﬀ. Better yet for investors, he didn’t charge the

typical hedge fund fees of 1 percent of assets per year plus 20 percent of any
new net gains. Supposedly he made his money from charging small fees on
the huge trading volume that was ﬂowing through his brokerage ﬁrm from the
orders he placed on behalf of his investment clients.
Even with the well-publicized doubts expressed in the Barron’s story, and
the suspicions of fraud now being voiced by many, the regulators slept on. So
did Madoﬀ’s thousands of investors and the ﬁduciaries they paid to protect
them. How did the fraud end? When it became clear that there wouldn’t be
enough money to keep paying investors, which is how all Ponzi schemes end,
Bernie Madoﬀ (pronounced MADE-oﬀ, as in “with your money”) turned
himself in on December 11, 2008. Probably to protect his associates, he
came up with the improbable story that he was the sole conspirator in the
scheme. This man who was virtually ignorant about computer systems
claimed to have single-handedly directed the whole secure seventeenth-ﬂoor
computerized operation, along with some twenty or so employees generating
—supposedly unknowingly—a daily torrent of billions of dollars of fake
trades for thousands of accounts.
On August 11, 2009, exactly eight months later, Frank DiPascali, Jr., the
man who supervised Madoﬀ’s operations day-to-day, was charged by the SEC
in the US District Court, Southern District of New York. At this point the
SEC knew that Bernard Madoﬀ Investment Securities (BMIS) “managed
investor accounts as far back as the 1960s…” However, the SEC complaint
said the split-strike price strategy dated from 1992, whereas I had reviewed
client records showing that it was in place years earlier. Pleading guilty,
Madoﬀ told the judge that he began stealing money in the early 1990s. But
his criminal empire was already big then and had started at least twenty years
earlier. Madoﬀ claimed his brother, Peter, and sons, Mark and Andrew, all
principals in the ﬁrm, and the detail-oriented hands-on wife, Ruth, were
totally innocent and unaware of any complicity in the massive forty-year
fraud. In addition to supposedly running his swindle single-handedly, Madoﬀ
was vacationing at his various residences, traveling abroad to raise ever more
money, shuﬄing massive funds internationally among banks, and paying large
fees to “ﬁduciaries” who brought him investments, while the complex scheme
somehow ran like clockwork during his many absences.

Bernie Madoﬀ, in his allocution to the judge, said, contrary to fact, that he
thought his swindle began about 1991, whereas I discovered then that the
scheme had already been running for decades. The SEC’s complaint against
Frank DiPascali—presumably using information from DiPascali—that the
fraud was computerized and the split-strike price strategy had begun in 1992,
was also contradicted by the client reports I had reviewed from 1989 through
1991. Peter Madoﬀ, DiPascali, and several other employees later pled guilty
and were sentenced to ﬁnes and jail.
Madoﬀ gave the size of the scam at $50 billion, though based on the
amount of fake equity investors believed they had in their accounts at the end
it was later estimated at $65 billion. To equitably distribute any remaining
money, the bankruptcy trustee has to determine how much money each
victim put in, what was paid out, and to whom. Several “handlers,” who each
collected billions from the investors for whom they claimed to have
thoroughly veriﬁed the legitimacy of Madoﬀ’s strategy, skimmed oﬀ
hundreds of millions in fees. Powered by this cash ﬂood, they rose among the
politically and socially connected superrich. One individual reportedly
withdrew over $5 billion more than he put in! The fact that Madoﬀ was
letting others collect huge sums in management fees, all the while settling for
much less in trading commissions, should itself have been enough to alert
investors, advisers, and regulators.
The government released a list of more than thirteen thousand past and
present Madoﬀ account holders, ranging from hundreds of not very rich
Florida retirees to celebrities, billionaires, and nonproﬁts such as charities and
universities. If these legions of investors were easily gulled, often for decades,
what does this swindle (and others) say about the academic theory that
markets are “eﬃcient,” with its claims that investors quickly and rationally
incorporate all publicly available information into their selections?
Among the thousands of Madoﬀ investors on the list was a well-known
ﬁnancial adviser who had been present at the meetings in 1991 where I
exposed the Madoﬀ scam. At that time I had known Ned, as I’ll call him, for
many years so I made sure he understood every detail. Although we lost touch
in the mid-1990s, I was astonished in 2008 to ﬁnd that he and his family were
on the government’s list of Madoﬀ’s investors. Moreover, a mutual
acquaintance told me that Ned, who had made hundreds of millions advising

clients, was still directing investors to Madoﬀ the same week that the latter
confessed.
Having once known Ned well, I thought back to get more insight into why
he believed in Madoﬀ. In my opinion Ned was not a crook. Instead, I think
he suﬀered from so-called cognitive dissonance. That’s where you want to
believe something enough that you simply reject any information to the
contrary. Nicotine addicts will often deny that smoking endangers their
health. Members of political parties react mildly to lies, crimes, and other
immorality by their own but are out for blood when the same is done by
politicians in the other party.
I also learned early that when I gave Ned my opinion on anything, no
matter how careful or reasoned, it didn’t have much impact. Others had the
same experience. To make a decision, Ned would simply poll everyone he
knew for their opinion and then go with the majority view. Once I ﬁgured this
out, I stopped wasting my time sharing my thoughts with him.
The Ned polling method works remarkably well in certain situations, like
guessing the number of beans in a barrel, or the weight of a pumpkin. The
average of all the guesses by the crowd is typically much better than most of
the individual guesses. This phenomenon has been called the wisdom of
crowds. But like most simpliﬁcations, this has a ﬂip side, as in the Madoﬀ
case. Here there were just two answers, fraudster or investment genius. The
crowd voted for investment genius and got it wrong. I call the ﬂip side to the
wisdom of crowds the lunacy of lemmings.
By 1991, I had simpliﬁed to a staﬀ of four people. Steve Mizusawa was
hedging Japanese warrants, with some assistance from me. I was also
managing a portfolio of hedge funds for myself, with help from Judy McCoy.
She was in charge of tax and ﬁnancial reporting, helped Steve, and backed up
our oﬃce manager.
Enjoying life and ambivalent about returning to the investment hubbub, I
tried to ﬁnd a time-eﬃcient way to cash in on our statistical arbitrage
knowledge. After discussions with Steve, who would be crucial in
implementing any such venture, I went shopping for a partner to whom we
could license our software for royalties.
I contacted Bruce Kovner, a successful commodities trader whom I knew
from Princeton Newport days. Kovner started with the Commodities

Corporation in the 1970s, then went on to run his own commodities hedge
fund, eventually making billions for himself and his investors.
Along with Jerry Baesel, the ﬁnance professor from UCI who joined me at
PNP, I spent an afternoon with Bruce in the 1980s in his Manhattan
apartment discussing how he thought and how he got his edge in the markets.
Kovner was and is a generalist, who sees connections before others do.
About this time he realized large oil tankers were in such oversupply that
the older ones were selling for little more than scrap value. Kovner formed a
partnership to buy one. I was one of the limited partners. Here was an
interesting option. We were largely protected against loss because we could
always sell the tanker for scrap, recovering most of our investment; but we
had a substantial upside: Historically, the demand for tankers had ﬂuctuated
widely and so had their price. Within a few years, our refurbished 475,000-
ton monster, the Empress Des Mers, was proﬁtably plying the world’s sea-
lanes stuﬀed with oil. I liked to think of my part ownership as a twenty-foot
section just forward of the bridge. Later the partnership negotiated to
purchase what was then the largest ship ever built, the 650,000-ton Seawise
Giant. Unfortunately for the sellers, while we were in escrow their ship
unwisely ventured near Kharg Island in the Persian Gulf, where it was
bombed by Iraqi aircraft, caught ﬁre, and sank. The Empress Des Mers
operated proﬁtably into the twenty-ﬁrst century, when the saga ﬁnally ended.
Having generated a return on investment of 30 percent annualized, she was
sold for scrap in 2004, fetching almost $23 million, far more than her
purchase price of $6 million.
Kovner referred me to a hedge fund in which he was a major investor, and
I proposed to the manager of the fund that we would supply the software for a
complete statistical arbitrage operating system and license it for 15 percent of
his gross income from the use of the product. We would train their employees
and provide continuing counsel. Our license fee would decline over time to
adjust for improvements they might add, and for the obsolescence of the
original system. However, every time we agreed on a deal, the GP insisted on
making yet another change in his favor. After we had agreed to some of
these, it became apparent that they were endless. I terminated negotiations.
Most of us who have dealt with used-car dealers or rug merchants, or who
have bought and sold real estate, are familiar with a negotiation process

perhaps best described as haggling. To illustrate, suppose a house you want is
priced at $300,000. You oﬀer $250,000. The seller counters at $290,000.
You counter at $265,000, and so forth. Finally you agree to buy at $275,000.
This stylized dance may involve cajolery, trickery, and deceit. Wouldn’t it be
simpler and more satisfying for the seller to state his price and have the buyer
take it or leave it? After all, that’s how it’s done in most stores in the United
States. How could you shop if the prices you compare aren’t ﬁrm?
Yet in business deals haggling is common, just as it was with the fund
manager who haggled with me. What’s going on here? In our house example,
suppose the seller’s real lowest price is $260,000 and that the highest price
the buyer is really willing to pay is $290,000. (The seller might ﬁnd out, for
instance, that the buyer will really pay $290,000 by reporting that he has
another oﬀer at $289,000, at which point the ﬁrst buyer oﬀers $290,000.)
Thus any price between $260,000 and $290,000 is acceptable to both parties,
even though neither party knows this at the time. So $30,000 is “up for
grabs.” The objective of the haggle is to capture as much of this $30,000 as
possible for one side or the other.
On the other hand, if instead the buyer is willing only to go to $270,000
and the seller’s (secret) lowest price is $280,000, there is no overlap, no price
both will accept, and there will be no deal.
Where my family and I lived for over two decades was determined by just
such a haggler. We had decided to build a new house and had located a lot
with a spectacular view high on a hill in Newport Beach. In the depressed
1979 real estate market it was oﬀered at $435,000. We started at $365,000;
after a series of oﬀers and counteroﬀers, we eventually came back with
$400,000, which was countered at $410,000. We countered at $405,000, our
absolute limit. Rejected. We walked. A few days later the seller relented and
oﬀered to meet our $405,000 price. But we didn’t accept. Why not?
At our absolute limit, we were almost indiﬀerent as to whether we did the
deal or not. Meanwhile the seller had now alienated us, and we preferred not
to have any further dealings with him. Consequently his deal was less
attractive, and our top price now dropped below $405,000. Meanwhile we
considered alternatives. We soon bought a better lot, built a new house, and
spent twenty-two happy years there. The haggler’s lot remained unsold for
another decade.

Coincidentally, when we sold this house, we had another example of the
losing haggle. After it had been on the market a year, we suddenly got two
oﬀers the same weekend. We were asking $5,495,000 and expected to get
about $5,000,000. One oﬀer was at $4.6 million, and the prospective buyer
used his aggressive business partner to open negotiations. The partner’s in-
your-face style and nitpicking criticism of the house was designed to beat
down the price. He alienated us and our agent. The other oﬀer was for $5
million from an agreeable family who loved the house “as is.” We accepted,
upon which the other buyer begged us to reconsider, indicating he would
meet or exceed the other price, and wouldn’t use Mr. in-your-face to close the
deal. Too bad. Lesson: It doesn’t pay to push the other party to their absolute
limit. A small extra gain is generally not worth the substantial risk the deal
will break up.
—
Knowing when to haggle and when not to is valuable for traders. In the days
of Princeton Newport our head trader used to crow about how, by regularly
holding out for an extra eighth or quarter, he saved us large amounts of
money. Here’s the idea. Suppose we want to buy 10,000 shares of Microsoft
(MSFT), currently trading at, say, 71 bid for 50,000 shares, and 71¼ asked
for 10,000 shares. We can pay 71¼ now and buy our 10,000 shares. Or, as
our trader would do, we can oﬀer to buy our 10,000 shares at 711⁄8 and see if
we have any takers. If this works—and it does most of the time—we’ll save
$1⁄8 × 10,000 or $1,250.
This sounds good. Is there any risk? Yes. By trying to save $1⁄8 per share
we may miss a big winner if the stock always trades at 71¼ or higher for
however long we’re trying to buy. Those stocks we miss, which run away to
the upside, would have given us windfall proﬁts. Put simply, you might scalp
$1⁄8 twenty times but lose $10 once. Do you like that arithmetic? I don’t.
I asked our trader how he could tell whether his repeated scalping for an
eighth of a point oﬀset his losses from missed opportunities. He could not
make a case for what he was doing. I asked other traders around the street the
same question and didn’t ﬁnd anyone who could clearly show that they gained
more than they lost by doing this.

Markets are basic to modern economics, and trading is a fundamental
activity. Modern ﬁnancial theorists have, therefore, intensively analyzed how
markets work, both by examining data and by developing theories to explain
what they observe. They note that trades are initiated, sometimes by a buyer
and other times by a seller, for a variety of reasons. Some participants have
no edge—no special advantageous information—probably including most of
the people who do think they have an edge. Examples of these so-called noise
traders might include an index fund selling a company because it was dropped
from the index, or buying a stock that was added to its index, or an estate
liquidating to pay taxes, or a mutual fund buying or selling in response to cash
additions and withdrawals. Of course, to the extent worthwhile information is
used in these trades, such examples are imperfect.
The other type of trade is initiated by traders who do have an edge.
Examples might be the illegal insider trades made famous by the prosecutions
of Ivan Boesky and others in the 1980s—despite which such activities
continue to this day; or the legal trades made by those who are the ﬁrst to act
on public information like an earnings announcement, a takeover, or an
interest rate change.
Does all this really matter? What’s an eighth of a dollar a share? For our
statistical arbitrage program that was trading one and a half billion shares a
year, it would amount to almost $200 million annually. As Senator Everett
Dirksen was once quoted as saying about congressional spending, a billion
dollars here, a billion dollars there, and pretty soon you’re talking about some
real money.
—
What the hagglers and the traders do reminds me of the behavioral
psychology distinction between two extremes on a continuum of types:
satisﬁcers and maximizers. When a maximizer goes shopping, looks for a
handyman, buys gas, or plans a trip, he searches for the best (maximum)
possible deal. Time and eﬀort don’t matter much. Missing the very best deal
leads to regret and stress. On the other hand, the satisﬁcer, so-called because
he is satisﬁed with a result that is close to the best, factors in the costs of
searching and decision making, as well as the risk of losing a near-optimal
opportunity and perhaps never ﬁnding anything as good again.

This is reminiscent of the so-called secretary or marriage problem in
mathematics. Assume that you will interview a series of people, from which
you will choose one. Further, you must consider them one at a time, and
having once rejected someone, you cannot reconsider. The optimal strategy is
to wait until you have seen about 37 percent of the prospects, then choose the
next one you see who is better than anybody among this ﬁrst 37 percent that
you passed over. If no one is better you are stuck with the last person on the
list.
This idea rescued me back in my graduate student days at UCLA, shortly
after I had changed from the PhD program in physics to that in mathematics.
My thesis adviser, Angus Taylor, decided that I, like other doctoral
candidates, should deliver a mathematical talk for students. With my then
comparatively skimpy mathematical background, I was stumped for a topic
that would interest the mathematically knowledgeable people who would
attend and also attract new faces from outside the department. At the last
minute I came up with the title “What Every Young Girl Should Know” and
refused to tell anyone what I was going to say about it. The room was packed,
with attendance beyond anything previously seen. Most agreeably, in addition
to the usual mostly male audience, there were lots of pretty coeds. From their
questions and their expressions afterward, my listeners weren’t disappointed. I
had talked about the solution to the so-called marriage problem and had made
the math behind it understandable.
