Chapter 18
SWINDLES AND HAZARDS
When shifting my focus from beating gambling games to analyzing the stock
market, I naïvely thought that I was leaving a world where cheating at cards
was problematic and entering an arena where regulation and the rule of law
gave investors a fair playing ﬁeld. Instead, I learned that bigger stakes
attracted bigger thieves. Bernie Madoﬀ’s Ponzi scheme was only the largest
of the many exposed in 2008 and 2009, as a sharply falling market cut the
supply of new money ﬂowing into the swindles. These ranged in size from an
$8 billion bank scam to swindles involving hundreds of millions of dollars
each (including several hedge funds), and multimillion-dollar real estate,
mortgage, and annuity scams. Swindles likely follow a simple mathematical
law describing how their number increases as their economic size decreases.
The rise of the Internet and electronic connectivity created new
opportunities for fraud. On Friday, August 25, 2000, my niece Dana, who
was getting interested in stocks, called me after the market closed.
“Do you know anything about a stock called Emulex?” she asked.
“No, why?”
“Well, I own some, and shortly after it opened today it crashed from 113
[dollars per share] to 45 and then they suspended trading!”
“What’s the news about it?” I asked.
“I don’t know.”
“Well, my advice is to do nothing. I’d say there’s a good chance it’s another
Internet fraud and that the company is just as sound as it was yesterday.”

We soon learned what had happened. A twenty-three-year-old college
student had sent a report to the electronic news service Internet Wire for
which he formerly worked, purporting to be an oﬃcial news release from
Emulex (EMLX). The report claimed that the company’s president was
resigning, good positive earnings for the last two years were being corrected
to show large losses, and the SEC was to investigate. This fake information
spread quickly and the stock was down 56 percent by the time NASDAQ
halted trading. The hoaxer had earlier lost $100,000 selling Emulex short and
managed to regain this plus a $250,000 proﬁt before he was apprehended the
following week. In the process, at the worst point, he had knocked the market
capitalization of EMLX from $4.1 billion to $1.6 billion, a loss of $2.5
billion. Though the stock recovered most of its loss later in the day, it still
closed down 7.31 at 105.75, a fall of 6.6 percent or $270 million in market
value. The damage was much greater for those who sold during the drop.
Eleven days after the hoax was exposed, and after the hoaxer was caught, the
stock closed at 100.13, down 11.4 percent, never having fully recovered in
the interim.
According to the theory of eﬃcient markets (the EMH), the market sets
prices so that they accurately reﬂect all available information. How does the
collapse of 60 percent in ﬁfteen minutes in response to false information
represent the rational incorporation of information into the price? I also ask
believers in the EMH to explain why the stock failed to recover in the eleven
days after the hoax was exposed. The news for EMLX was good. So…?
Supporters of the eﬃcient market view have slowly accepted minor
deviations from the theory. They might acknowledge the market’s response to
the EMLX hoax as one of these; but as the press pointed out, the Internet is
rife with such attempts, notably in chat rooms, and EMLX was just one in a
series of large-scale spectacular attempts to fool the public in order to gain a
proﬁt.
Shortly afterward, on September 21, 2000, a front-page headline in The
New York Times read “SEC Says Teenager Had After-School Hobby: Online
Stock Fraud.” The ﬁfteen-year-old New Jersey high school student collected
$273,000 in eleven trades. He would ﬁrst buy a block of stock in a thinly
traded company, then ﬂood Internet chat rooms with messages that, say, a $2
stock would be trading at $20 “very soon.” The text here was about as

valuable as the message in a fortune cookie. Dr. EMH’s rational all-knowing
investors promptly bid up the price, at which point young Mr. Lebed sold. He
had opened his brokerage accounts in his father’s name. Lebed settled with
the SEC, repaying $273,000 in proﬁts plus $12,000 in interest. It’s not
apparent from the stories that any of this money was used to compensate the
defrauded investors, whose identity or degree of injury may in any case be
impossible to determine. The father’s comment? “So they pick on a kid.”
In the early 1980s, a decade before coming across Madoﬀ, I learned of a
remarkable investment manager. This foreign exchange trader was racking up
returns of 1 percent, 2 percent, 3 percent, and even 4 percent a month. He
seemed never to lose. I asked George Shows, an associate in my Newport
Beach oﬃce, to make an onsite visit to J. David Dominelli in nearby La Jolla.
George came back with the amazing track record and “advertising” literature
but could ﬁnd no evidence of any actual trading activity. Our requests for
audited ﬁnancial statements, proof of assets, and proof of trades were
smoothly deﬂected. I suspected a Ponzi scheme, and we didn’t invest. Two
years later Dominelli’s scam collapsed in 1984, wiping out $200 million and
defrauding one thousand investors, including many of the social, political, and
ﬁnancial elite of the San Diego area.
In 1984, I came across an innovative company with a new high-tech
computerized product for the ﬁnancial community. They were seeking more
capital to ﬁnish research and development and to market their product. The
story was persuasive, the business plan made sense, and my computer expert,
Steve Mizusawa, gave a thumbs-up to their plans. I and several friends
invested alongside the principals, paying them what was then the typical
hedge fund fee of 20 percent of proﬁts. The ﬁrst year’s ﬁnancial statements
showed no income, only substantial expenses for research and development.
Nonetheless, the principals declared a proﬁt and paid themselves 20 percent
of it! But there was no proﬁt, only expenses. How did the principals justify
pocketing our money? They claimed that the money spent for research and
development produced a value greater than the amount spent, and they treated
this alleged excess value as if it were cash in the bank! We eventually
managed to get them to give our money back.
Mismanaged, the company then dissipated their clear technological edge,
and competitor Michael Bloomberg passed them with a similar product that

became ubiquitous, making billions from it. A few years later, two of the
principals opened a hedge fund, and knowing their characters, I warned
against investing in it. In 2008 they were charged with misappropriating
several hundred million dollars of their investors’ capital in yet another Ponzi
scheme.
—
The frauds, swindles, and hoaxes, a ﬂood reported almost daily in the
ﬁnancial press, have continued unabated during the more than ﬁfty years of
my investment career.
But then, hoaxes, scams, manias, and large-scale ﬁnancial irrationalities
have been with us from the beginnings of the markets in the seventeenth
century, long before the Internet. Yet the repeated exposés are not processed
by the EMH true believer. Former UCI professor Robert Haugen, a vocal
academic critic of the EMH and the author of several books arguing against
the EMH, got an extreme response. During a UCLA conference, The Market
Debate: A Break from Tradition, after Haugen delivered a paper on market
ineﬃciency, he reported that Eugene Fama, father of the EMH and future co-
recipient of the 2013 Nobel Prize in Economics, “…pointed to me in the
audience and called me a criminal. He then said that he believed that GOD
knew that the stock market was eﬃcient. He added that the closer one came
to behavioral ﬁnance, the hotter one could feel the ﬁres of Hell on one’s feet.”
In the last few years, so-called high-frequency traders (HFTs) have used
computers to extract money from the market by inserting themselves between
buyers and sellers, gaining on average a small proﬁt on each transaction.
These predatory programs depend on extreme quickness to get ahead of
everyone else, with times measured in microseconds. Policed by the laws of
nature, electrical signals to the exchanges travel no faster than light, a speed
limit of about one thousand feet per microsecond. Location matters, and
ﬁrms have paid expensively to house their computers as physically close as
possible to the exchange. Recent reports say that a majority of trades involve
these programs, generating $21 billion a year in annual proﬁts. This was 0.1
percent of the market value of all US equities. A large investment house told
my son, Jeﬀ, that they have “guys with a few million of capital that clear
through them that trade hundreds of millions per day.” I’ve wondered whether

the frequent odd trading prices in Berkshire Hathaway, such as the one of
$89,375.37 reported for the A shares, come from one of these trading
programs.
Though many details of these schemes are either complex or not yet public
knowledge, one of the mechanisms is. Some exchanges, such as NASDAQ,
let HF traders peek at customer orders ahead of everyone else for thirty
milliseconds before the order goes to the exchange. Seeing an order to buy,
for instance, the HF traders can buy ﬁrst, pushing the stock price up, then
resell to the customer at a proﬁt. Seeing someone’s order to sell, the HF trader
sells ﬁrst, causing the stock to fall, and then buys it back at the lower price.
How is this diﬀerent from the crime of front-running, described in Wikipedia
as “the illegal practice of a stock broker executing orders on a security for its
own account while taking advantage of advance knowledge of pending orders
from its customers”?
Some securities industry spokesmen argue that harvesting this wealth from
investors somehow makes the markets more eﬃcient and that “markets need
liquidity.” Nobel Prize–winning economist Paul Krugman disagrees sharply,
arguing that high-frequency trading is simply a way of taking wealth from
ordinary investors, serves no useful purpose, and wastes national wealth
because the resources consumed create no social good.
Since the more the rest of us trade the more we as a group lose to the
computers, here’s one more reason to buy and hold rather than trade, unless
you have a big enough edge. Although it’s politically not likely, a small federal
tax, averaging a few cents a share on every purchase, could eliminate these
traders and their proﬁts, possibly saving more for investors than the extra tax,
and adding cash to the US Treasury. If this cut a trading rate of about $30
trillion a year for equities by half, a 0.1 percent tax (3 cents a share on a $30
stock) would still raise about $15 billion.
—
Routine ﬁnancial reporting also fools investors. “Stocks Slump on Earnings
Concern” cried a New York Times Business Day headline. The article
continued, “Stock prices fell as investors continued to be concerned about
third-quarter results.” A slump? Let’s see. “The Dow Jones Industrial Average

(DJIA) declined 2.96 points, to 10,628.36.” That’s 0.03 percent, compared
with a typical daily change of about 1 percent. Based on the historical
behavior of changes in the DJIA, a percentage change greater than this
happens more than 97 percent of the time. The Dow is likely to be this close
to even on fewer than eight days a year, hardly evidence of investor concern.
The DJIA is calculated by adding the prices of the thirty stocks that
currently make up the average, then multiplying by a number that continually
is readjusted to incorporate the eﬀects of dividends and stock splits. The
current multiplier was a little over ﬁve, meaning that if just one of the thirty
stocks had closed an additional point and a quarter higher, the closing DJIA
number would have been over six points larger, for a rise of over three points,
or 0.03 percent. DJIA stocks reportedly would have jumped, not slumped.
The S&P 500 Stock Index was down a mere 0.04 percent, a lack of change
almost as tiny as that of the Dow. The only real move was in the NASDAQ
composite, which fell 32.8 points, or 0.9 percent. Even this volatile index was
having larger daily changes two-thirds of the time.
What’s going on here? The story said stocks with earnings that didn’t meet
expectations had been penalized the previous day. But the impact on the
indexes was so small as to be meaningless. The reporter had made two errors.
First, he thought statistical noise meant something. Second, he missed the
other half of the story—the one about the stocks that must have gone up, and
why they did—as they must have done to oﬀset the eﬀect of the ones that
dropped.
Oﬀering explanations for insigniﬁcant price changes is a recurrent event in
ﬁnancial reporting. The reporters often don’t know whether a ﬂuctuation is
statistically common or rare. Then again, people tend to make the error of
seeing patterns or explanations when there aren’t any, as we’ve seen from the
history of gambling systems, the plethora of worthless pattern-based trading
methods, and much of story-based investing.
