Chapter 19
BUYING LOW, SELLING HIGH
It’s the spring of 2000 and another warm sunny day in Newport Beach. From
my home six hundred feet high on the hill I can see thirty miles across the
Paciﬁc Ocean to Wrigley’s twenty-six-mile-long Catalina Island, stretched
across the horizon like a huge ship. To the left, sixty miles away, the top of
the equally large San Clemente Island is just visible above the horizon. The
ocean starts two and a half miles from where I sit, separated by a ribbon of
white surf from wide sandy beaches. An early trickle of boats streams into
the sea from Newport Harbor, one of the world’s largest small-boat moorings,
with more than eight thousand sail and power vessels, and some of the most
expensive luxury homes in the world. Whenever I leave on vacation I wonder
if I have made a mistake.
As I ﬁnish breakfast the sun is rising above the hills behind me,
illuminating the ﬁnancial towers to the west in the enormous business and
retail complex of Fashion Island. By the time the skyscrapers are in full
sunlight I drive three miles to my oﬃce in one of them. The statistical
arbitrage operation that Steve and I restarted in 1992 has been running
successfully now for eight years.
Our computers traded more than a million shares in the ﬁrst hour and we
are ahead $400,000. Currently managing $340 million, we have purchased
$540 million worth of stocks long and sold an equal amount short. Our
computer simulations and experience show that this portfolio is close to
market-neutral, which means that the ﬂuctuations in the value of the portfolio
have little correlation to the overall average price changes in the market. Our
level of market neutrality, measured by what ﬁnancial theorists call beta, has

averaged 0.06. When beta is zero for a portfolio, its price movements have no
correlation with those of the market, and it is called market-neutral.
Portfolios with positive beta tend to move up and down with the market, more
so for larger beta. The beta of the market itself is chosen to be 1.0. Negative
beta portfolios tend to ﬂuctuate oppositely to the market. Our risk-adjusted
excess return, the amount by which our annualized return has exceeded that
from investments of comparable risk and called alpha by ﬁnance theorists,
has averaged about 20 percent per year. This means that our past annual rate
of return (before fees) of 26 percent can be thought of as the sum of three
parts: 5 percent from Treasury bills with no risk, about 1 percent due to our
slight correlation to the market, plus the remaining 20 percent, the amount by
which our return exceeds investments with comparable risk.
Using our model, our computers calculate daily a “fair” price for each of
about one thousand of the largest, most heavily traded companies on the New
York and American stock exchanges. Market professionals describe stocks
with large trading volume as “liquid”; they have the advantage of being easier
to trade without moving the price up or down as much in the process. The
latest prices from the exchanges ﬂow into our computers and are compared at
once with the current fair value according to our model. When the actual
price diﬀers enough from the fair price, we buy the underpriced and short the
overpriced.
To control risk, we limit the dollar value we hold in the stock of any one
company. Our caution and our risk-control measures seem to work. Our
daily, weekly, and monthly results are “positively skewed,” meaning that we
have substantially more large winning days, weeks, and months than losing
ones, and the gainers tend to be bigger than the losers.
Scanning the computer screen, I see the day’s interesting positions,
including the biggest gainers and the biggest losers. I can see quickly if any
winners or losers seem unusually large. Everything looks normal. I walk down
the hall to Steve Mizusawa’s oﬃce, where he is watching his Bloomberg
terminal, checking for news that might have a big impact on one of the stocks
we trade. When he ﬁnds events such as the unexpected announcement of a
merger, takeover, spin-oﬀ, or reorganization, he tells the computer to put the
stock on the restricted list: Don’t initiate a new position and close out what we
have.

Steve has just persuaded the broker where we do most of our business to
cut our commissions by 0.16 cents per share. The savings are big. Our entire
holding of stocks, long and short, turns over about once every two weeks, or
twenty-ﬁve times per year. At current levels this means we sell $540 million
of stocks held long and replace them with $540 million of new stocks, a total
value traded of $1.08 billion. We do the same with our shorts, for another
$1.08 billion worth of trades. Trading both sides twenty-ﬁve times a year
means we do $54 billion, or 1.5 billion shares annually. When famed hedge
fund manager Michael Steinhardt retired, he astonished many by announcing
he had traded a billion shares in one year.
The reduction Steve negotiated saves us $1.6 million a year. Even after
this, our brokers are collecting $14.3 million per year from us. Our broker
was smart to stay competitive.
Why is statistical arbitrage so-called? Arbitrage originally meant a pair of
oﬀsetting positions that lock in a sure proﬁt. An example might be selling
gold in London at $300 an ounce while at the same time buying it at $290 in
New York for a $10 gain. If the total cost to ﬁnance the deal and to insure
and deliver the New York gold to London were $5, it would leave a $5 sure
proﬁt. That’s an arbitrage in its original usage.
Later the term was expanded to describe investments where risks are
expected to be largely oﬀsetting, with a proﬁt that is likely, if not certain. For
instance, in what is called merger arbitrage, company A trading at $100 a
share may oﬀer to buy company B, trading at $70 a share, by exchanging one
share of company A for each share of company B. The market reacts
instantly and company A’s shares drop to, say, $88 while company B’s shares
jump to $83. Merger arbitrageurs now step in, buying a share of B at $83 and
selling short a share of A at $88. If the deal closes in three months, the
arbitrageur will make $5 on an $83 investment or 6 percent. But the deal is
not certain until it gets regulatory and shareholder approval, so there is a risk
of loss should the negotiations fail and the prices of A and B reverse. If the
stocks of A and B returned to their preannouncement prices, the arbitrageur
would lose $12 = $100 − $88 on his short sale of A and $13 = $83 − $70 on
his purchase of B, for a total loss of $25 per $83 invested, or 30 percent. The
arbitrageur won’t take this lopsided risk unless he believes the chance of
failure to be small.

Our portfolio has the risk-reducing characteristics of arbitrage but with a
large number of stocks in the long side and in the short side of the portfolio,
we expect the statistical behavior of a large number of favorable bets to
deliver our proﬁt. This is like card counting at blackjack again, but on a much
larger scale. Our average trade size is $54,000 and we are placing a million
such bets per year, or one bet every six seconds when the market is open.
As I walk back to my oﬃce, I think about how our statistical arbitrage
venture came to be. While teaching ﬁnance in the UCI Graduate School of
Management, I had many stimulating discussions with Dr. Jerome Baesel, the
professor in the next oﬃce. I invited him to work full-time at Princeton
Newport Partners. A major responsibility for him was to direct the indicators
project, a research program I conceived. Neither Jerry nor I believed the
eﬃcient market theory. I had overwhelming evidence of ineﬃciency from
blackjack, from the history of Warren Buﬀett and friends, and from our daily
success in Princeton Newport Partners. We didn’t ask, Is the market eﬃcient?
but rather, In what ways and to what extent is the market ineﬃcient? and How
can we exploit this?
The idea of the project was to study how the historical returns of securities
were related to various characteristics, or indicators. Among the scores of
fundamental and technical measures we considered were the ratio of earnings
per share to price per share, known as the earnings yield, the liquidation or
“book” value of the company compared with its market price, and the total
market value of the company (its “size”). Today our approach is well known
and widely explored but back in 1979 it was denounced by massed legions of
academics who believed market prices already had fully adjusted to such
information. Many practitioners disagreed. The time was right for our project
because the necessary high-quality databases and the powerful new
computers with which to explore them were just becoming aﬀordable.
By luck, one of our researchers almost immediately found the basic idea
behind statistical arbitrage. He ranked stocks by their gain or loss over the
previous two weeks. The stocks that had gone up the most did worse as a
group than the market in the next few weeks, and the stocks that were the
most down did better. Historically, the annualized return was 20 percent from
buying the one-tenth of stocks that had fallen most and selling short the tenth
that had risen most. We called the system MUD, as it was constructed from

the “most-up, most-down” stocks. As UCI mathematician William F.
Donoghue would joke, “Thorp, my advice is to buy low and sell high.” The
portfolio of long stocks tracked the market and the short portfolio did the
opposite, so the two sides together mostly canceled the movement of the
market. This gave us what we liked, a market-neutral portfolio. But that
portfolio still had larger ﬂuctuations in value than our usual investments, so
we put statistical arbitrage aside for the time being.
Unknown to us, a couple of years later an ingenious researcher at Morgan
Stanley invented a product similar to ours but with substantially less
variability. Trading probably began in 1983. With experience, his conﬁdence
increased and his investments expanded. Statistical arbitrage had become a
signiﬁcant proﬁt center at Morgan Stanley by 1985 but the credit for its
discovery, and the rewards from the ﬁrm, did not attach to the discoverer,
Gerry Bamberger. While his boss Nunzio Tartaglia continued to expand the
operation, a dissatisﬁed Bamberger handed in his notice.
As part of our plan to add diversiﬁed proﬁt centers, Princeton Newport
Partners was seeking to bankroll people who had successful quantitative
strategies. Bamberger, now out of a job, contacted us. He described his
strategy as high-turnover, market-neutral, and low-risk, with at any one time a
large number of stocks held long and a large number held short. It sounded
very much like our statistical arbitrage strategy, so even though we knew only
the general characteristics of the portfolio and none of the details of how
trades were chosen, we followed up. Once I gave my word that I would tell no
one else unless either he okayed it or the information entered the public
domain by some other route, I met with Gerry and he told me how his
strategy worked.
Gerry Bamberger was a tall, trim Orthodox Jew with an original way of
looking at problems and a wry sense of humor. We worked together for
several weeks in Newport Beach to test his system exhaustively. If I was
satisﬁed, we would bankroll a joint venture with Gerry. He brought a brown
bag for lunch, and it always contained a tuna salad sandwich. I ﬁnally had to
ask, “How often do you have a tuna salad sandwich for lunch?” Gerry said,
“Every day for the last six years.” He was a heavy smoker and I’m extremely
sensitive to tobacco smoke—to the extent that we did not hire smokers or
allow smoking in our oﬃce—so we negotiated how to handle this. We

compromised. Whenever Gerry needed a cigarette he would step outside our
ground-ﬂoor garden oﬃce. This is not the ordeal in Southern California that it
could have been during an East Coast winter.
The source of gain in the Bamberger version of statistical arbitrage was the
most-up, most-down eﬀect we had discovered in 1979–80. We hedged
market risk but Gerry reduced risk even more by trading industry groups
separately. To measure the historical performance of his system and to
simulate real-time trading, we used Princeton Newport’s 1,100-square-foot
computer room ﬁlled with $2 million worth of equipment. Inside were banks
of gigabyte disk drives as large as washing machines, plus tape drives and
central processing units, or CPUs, the size of refrigerators. All this sat on a
raised ﬂoor consisting of removable panels, under which snaked a jungle of
cables, wires, and other connectors.
The room also had its own safety system. In case of ﬁre, the air was
automatically replaced by noncombustible halogen gas within eighty seconds.
Once this happened the room had too little oxygen for ﬁre to burn or for
people to breathe. We practiced how to get out in time and to trigger the
halogen manually, if necessary.
Our facility was high-tech in the mid-1980s, but with the enormous
increase in computer miniaturization, speed, and cheapness, now even
cellphones store many gigabytes. The room was chilled to a constant sixty
degrees Fahrenheit by its own cooling system and had sealed doors and dust
ﬁlters to keep the air clean. Since smokers strongly emit tiny particles for an
hour or more after even a single cigarette, Gerry agreed, with a lot of good-
natured kidding, that the computer room was oﬀ limits.
When I was totally satisﬁed, we set up a joint venture, funded by PNP and
run in New York by Gerry as a turn-key operation. We called it BOSS
Partners, for “Bamberger (plus) Oakley Sutton Securities”—the latter an
entity created by us to assist PNP. On capital ranging from $30 million to
$60 million, BOSS earned between 25 and 30 percent in 1985. Returns
gradually declined to 15 percent or so by 1988. The waning proﬁtability and
the mounting Giuliani attack on our Princeton oﬃce discouraged Gerry from
continuing in the securities industry. He elected to retire a millionaire.
Meanwhile, I took the statistical arbitrage concept a step further. Trading
started with my improved approach in January 1988, thus by chance missing

the crash of 1987. How would we have done? Despite a 22 percent drop in
the S&P 500 Index, BOSS made 7 percent for October 1987. Computer
simulations showed our new statistical arbitrage product would also have had
a good day and a record month. This was a ship for riding out cataclysms.
To control risk further, I replaced Bamberger’s segregation into industry
groups by a statistical procedure called factor analysis. Factors are common
tendencies shared by several, many, or all companies. The most important is
called the market factor, which measures the tendency of each stock price to
move up and down with the market. The daily returns on any stock can be
expressed as a part that follows the market plus what’s left over, the so-called
residual. Financial theorists and practitioners have identiﬁed a large number
of such factors that help explain changes in securities prices. Some, like
participation in a speciﬁed industry group or sector (say, oil or ﬁnance)
mainly aﬀect subgroups of stocks. Other factors, such as the market itself, the
levels of short-term and long-term interest rates, and inﬂation, aﬀect nearly all
stocks.
The beauty of a statistical arbitrage product is that it can be designed to
oﬀset the eﬀects of as many of these factors as you desire. The portfolio is
already market-neutral by constraining the relation between the long and short
portfolios so that the tendency of the long side to follow the market is oﬀset
by an equal but opposite eﬀect on the short side. The portfolio becomes
inﬂation-neutral, oil-price-neutral, and so on, by doing the same thing
individually with each of those factors. Of course, there is a trade-oﬀ: The
reduction in risk is accompanied by limiting the choice of possible portfolios.
Only those that are market-neutral, inﬂation-neutral, oil-price-neutral, et
cetera, are now allowed, and so the attempt to reduce risk also tends to
reduce return.
We called the new method STAR, for “STatistical ARbitrage.” At the
request of one of our investors we sent a trading history to Barra, a world
leader in researching and developing ﬁnancial products. They tested STAR
with their model E2, which had ﬁfty-ﬁve industry factors and thirteen
macroeconomic factors. They found that our returns were essentially factor-
neutral, and did not appear to result from lucky bets.
It was good that we advanced beyond the Bamberger model because, in
simulation, its returns continued to fall. Moreover, after ﬁnishing with a good

1987, Morgan Stanley reportedly expanded their investment in it to $900
million long and $900 million short, which had to drive down returns for
everyone using the method. The rumor was that they lost between 6 percent
and 12 percent, leading to the winding down of the product.
People at Morgan Stanley began leaving the quantitative systems group that
was in charge of statistical arbitrage. Among those to depart was David E.
Shaw, a former professor of computer science at Columbia University. He
had been wooed to Wall Street to use computers to ﬁnd opportunities in the
market.
In the spring of 1988, Shaw spent the day in Newport Beach. We discussed
his plan to launch an improved statistical arbitrage product. PNP was able to
put up the $10 million he wanted for start-up, and we were impressed by his
ideas but decided not to go ahead because we already had a good statistical
arbitrage product. He found other backing, creating one of the most
successful analytic ﬁrms on Wall Street, and later would become a member of
the president’s science advisory committee. Using statistical arbitrage as a
core proﬁt center, he expanded into related hedging and arbitrage areas (the
PNP business plan again), and hired large numbers of smart quantitative
types from academia. In 2014, Forbes ranked him as the 134th richest
American, at $3.8 billion. One of his hires was Jeﬀ Bezos, who, while
researching business opportunities in 1994 for Shaw, got the idea for an
online bookstore and left to start a company called Amazon.com. At $30
billion in 2014, Bezos was the ﬁfteenth richest American.
As PNP began winding down in late 1988, despite the stress we developed
yet another approach to statistical arbitrage that was simpler and more
powerful. But as PNP phased out, I wanted simplicity. We focused on two
areas that could be managed by a small staﬀ, Japanese warrant hedging and
investing in other hedge funds. Both went well.
I had no immediate plans to use our new statistical arbitrage technique and
I expected that continuing innovations by investors using related systems
would, as is the way of things, gradually erode its value. Four years passed,
and then, my friend and former partner Jerry Baesel came to me with tales of
extraordinary returns from statistical arbitrage. Besides D. E. Shaw &
Company, the practitioners included former Morgan Stanley quants who were
starting their own hedge funds, and some of my past PNP associates. I asked

the former Morgan Stanley people if they knew how statistical arbitrage
started at their ﬁrm. No one did. A couple had heard rumors of a nameless
legendary “discoverer” of the system, who of course, was Gerry Bamberger—
so thoroughly had recognition for his contribution been erased.
If our statistical arbitrage system still worked, Jerry Baesel told me that one
of our former investors, a multibillion-dollar pension and proﬁt sharing plan
that was his current employer, wanted most or all of the capacity. Every stock
market system with an edge is necessarily limited in the amount of money it
can use and still produce extra returns. One reason is that buying undervalued
securities tends to raise the price, reducing or eliminating the mispricing, and
selling short overpriced securities tends to lower the price, once again
shrinking the mispricing. Thus, opportunities for beating the market are
limited in size by how trading them aﬀects market prices.
Since our statistical arbitrage method was mostly computerized, Steve and
I could run the managed account with help from our small oﬃce staﬀ. It
would let me have time to enjoy life. We decided to go ahead. The venture
began auspiciously. Our software ran smoothly, ﬁrst in simulation and then
with real money, starting in August 1992.
I also wanted to invest my own money. I could do this eﬃciently and
proﬁtably by creating a new investment partnership. This led to the launching
of Ridgeline Partners in August 1994 to trade alongside our institutional
account. Limited partners gained 18 percent per year over its eight and a
quarter years of operation.
Appendix E shows results for the large managed account, which for
conﬁdentiality I call XYZ. The annualized return of 7.77 percent and the
annualized standard deviation of 15.07 percent for the S&P 500 during this
period are somewhat below its long-term values. The unlevered annualized
return for XYZ before fees, at 18.21 percent, is more than double that of the
S&P; the riskiness, as measured by the standard deviation, is 6.68 percent.
The ratio of (annualized) return to risk for XYZ at 2.73 is more than ﬁve
times that of the S&P. Estimating 5 percent as the average three-month T-bill
rate over the period, the corresponding Sharpe ratios are 0.18 for the S&P
versus 1.98 for XYZ.
The graph in Appendix E, XYZ Performance Comparison, displays two
major “epochs.” The ﬁrst, from August 12, 1992, to early October 1998,

shows a steady increase. The second epoch, from then until September 13,
2002, has a higher rate of return, including a remarkable six-month spurt just
after the collapse (after four years) of the large hedge fund called, ironically,
Long-Term Capital Management. Following the spurt during the last quarter
of 1998 and the ﬁrst quarter of 1999, the growth rate reverts for the rest of
the time to about what it was in the ﬁrst epoch. However, the variability
around the trend is greater.
One cause for this greater variability might be the delayed and disputed
election of George W. Bush. We also had an economic sea change from
budget surpluses to massive deﬁcits as a result of increased spending and tax
rate reductions. More uncertainty came with the collapse of the dot-com
bubble and the horrors of 9/11.
We charged Ridgeline Partners 1 percent per year plus 20 percent of net
new proﬁts. We voluntarily reduced fees during a period when we felt
disappointed in our performance. We gave back more than $1 million to the
limited partners. Some of today’s greedy hedge fund managers might say our
return of fees was economically irrational, but our investors were happy and
we nearly always had a waiting list. Ridgeline was closed a large part of the
time to new investors, and current partners were often restricted from adding
capital. To maintain higher returns, we sometimes even reduced our size by
returning capital to partners.
Unlike some hedge fund managers who also had a waiting list, we could
have increased our fees by raising our share of the proﬁts or adding more
capital, thereby driving down the return to limited partners. Such tactics by
the general partner to capture nearly all the excess risk-adjusted return, or
“alpha,” rather than share it with the other investors are what economic
theory predicts. Instead, I preferred to treat limited partners as I would wish
to be treated in their place.
In August 1998, the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM),
a pool of $4 billion, lost nearly all its money. Highly leveraged, it threatened
to default on something like $100 billion in contracts. Some claimed that the
world ﬁnancial system itself was threatened. The Federal Reserve decided
LTCM was “too big to fail” and brokered a bailout by a consortium of
brokers and banks, each of whom had a ﬁnancial self-interest in saving

LTCM. At about the same time several Asian economies got sick, and Russia
defaulted on its debt.
The combination of events greatly increased volatility in the ﬁnancial
markets. Would these disruptions increase our potential rate of return or
would they thwart our statistical arbitrage system? Hedge funds were suﬀering
in multiple ways. Owners of Asian securities lost heavily. Financial
institutions suddenly were less willing to extend credit, and leveraged hedge
funds were forced to liquidate positions. We heard that large statistical
arbitrage positions were being closed out. This seems likely because they are
liquid and can be sold quickly to raise cash. This deleveraging and liquidity
crisis foreshadowed a similar and far greater global rerun in 2008.
If there was such a large movement out of statistical arbitrage positions, we
would expect our portfolios to lose while that was happening, because if
others sell the stocks we own this drives the price down and our long
positions show a loss. Similarly, if they have sold short the same stocks we
have and they buy them back, this bids up the price of the stocks we are still
short and we show a loss. Once the liquidation of portfolios winds down, we
would expect a rebound. What actually happened was that after a small dip in
the last four days of September, October began with six straight losing days
during which our portfolio lost 4.2 percent, the sharpest blow we had ever
experienced. Since this was just after the end of the quarter, I suspect it was
due to involuntary liquidation of statistical arbitrage positions to raise cash to
satisfy creditors. Fortunately we had just ﬁnished September with our best
month ever.
Though October began badly, we recovered all our losses and continued
the winning streak that started in September. It went on for six amazing
months, through February 1999. During this time we made 54.5 percent. The
result for the twelve months ending with August 1999 was that Ridgeline’s
limited partners made 72.4 percent. This was from a market-neutral product
using leverage of 2:1 or less. Several of our limited partners asked if we had
ever seen anything like this. I told them that in thirty-ﬁve years of market-
neutral investing I never had, but not to get used to it, as we were unlikely to
repeat this performance.
Between Ridgeline and XYZ we managed as much as $400 million in
statistical arbitrage and another $70 million in other strategies, whereas

PNP’s peak was $272 million. Compared with PNP’s maximum of eighty
employees, only six of us at Ridgeline faced our formidable competitors.
Several of those had hundreds of employees, including scores of PhDs in
mathematics, statistics, computer science, physics, ﬁnance, and economics.
We were a highly automated, lean, and proﬁtable operation.
We decided to close down in the fall of 2002. Returns, although
respectable, had declined in 2001 and 2002. I believed this was due to the
huge growth in hedge fund assets, with a corresponding expansion of
statistical arbitrage programs. I had seen this happen before in 1988 when
Morgan Stanley’s expansion of statistical arbitrage seemed to have a negative
eﬀect on our returns. The declining rate of return in statistical arbitrage
seemed to be conﬁrmed by the experience of most other hedge funds
operating in the “space.”
The most important reason to wind down the operation was that time was
worth more to me than the extra money. Vivian and I wanted to enjoy our
children and their families, and to travel, read, and learn. It was time once
again to change course in life.
And I had investments that remained interesting, such as the mutual
savings and loan conversions in which my son, Jeﬀ, and I began participating
way back in 1990.
