Chapter 21
ONE LAST PUFF
After twelve successful years, with the stock market vastly overpriced in his
opinion, Warren Buﬀett outlined the windup of Buﬀett Partnership, Ltd., in
October 1969. Partners would get a payout consisting of at least 56 percent
cash, possibly some scraps of stock in assorted companies, and an estimated
30 to 35 percent, for those who chose not to have them sold for cash, in two
companies—Diversiﬁed Retailing and a New England textile company called
Berkshire Hathaway. He added the discouraging, “For the ﬁrst time in my
investment lifetime, I now believe there is little choice for the average investor
between professionally managed money in stocks and passive investment in
bonds.”
As I reread Buﬀett’s letter today I see no clue now, nor did I then, that
Berkshire Hathaway would become the successor to Warren’s partnership.
Ralph Gerard, a longtime investor with Buﬀett and the man who introduced
us, never did, either. Of the $100 million distributed to partners, about $25
million was Buﬀett’s. He eventually ended up with nearly half of Berkshire’s
stock.
Berkshire was what Buﬀett and his mentor Benjamin Graham called a
cigar butt—you can pick it up cheaply and get one last puﬀ. As Forbes said in
1990, in its characteristic shorthand, “[Buﬀett] bought Berkshire Hathaway
textile mills 1965 ($12/share), dissolved partnership 1969 after thirty-fold
growth, decided to use Berkshire Hathaway as prime investment vehicle.
Textile business ﬂoundered (ceased operations in 1985) but investment
business boomed.”

Focused on Princeton Newport, I lost track of Warren after 1969. Then in
1983, I heard about the remarkable growth of a company called Berkshire
Hathaway. Not knowing it was to become Warren’s investment vehicle, I had
stopped paying attention to it back in 1969. The stock price then was $42 a
share, if you could ﬁnd anyone to trade with. It was now publicly trading at
over $900. I knew at once what this meant. The “cigar butt” had become a
humidor of Havanas. Despite its having increased by a multiple of more than
23 in fourteen years, I made my ﬁrst purchase at $982.50 a share and
continued to accumulate stock. By contrast, in 2004 I was talking to a bank
president in San Francisco when he mentioned that his mother had been a
limited partner in Buﬀett Partnership, Ltd., and received some Berkshire
stock as part of her distribution when the partnership closed. “That’s
wonderful,” I said. “At today’s prices [then $80,000 a share or so] she must
be very rich.” “Sadly,” he said, “she sold at $79 for a several hundred percent
proﬁt.”
If asked for advice, I recommended the stock to family, friends, and
associates with the understanding that it was a long-term holding with a
possibly volatile future. I didn’t suggest it to those who couldn’t understand
the reasoning behind the purchase and who would be scared by a big drop in
price. The response was sometimes frustrating.
In 1985 our divorced house cleaner, Carolyn, got $6,000 as a settlement
from an automobile accident. She wanted to invest it to send her children,
aged ﬁve and six, through college. Week after week she pleaded with me to
advise her, but as she knew absolutely nothing about securities or investing, I
declined. Urged on by her fortune-teller, who told her that I would double or
even triple her money, she persisted. In a weak moment I relented, provided
that if she bought the stock I recommended, she would never sell before
checking with me. I arranged low commissions for her, as a favor to me by a
broker friend, and she bought two shares of Berkshire Hathaway (BRK) for
$2,500 each. She later left housecleaning for oﬃce work and we lost touch
with her. Meanwhile BRK rose to about $5,000 a share just before the
October 1987 crash. I learned later from the broker that Carolyn had sold
near the post-crash bottom at $2,600 a share. Sixteen years later, in the ﬁrst
quarter of 2003 at the time her children might have been ﬁnishing college,
the stock ranged between about $60,000 and $74,000 a share.

My wife and I, our oldest daughter, Raun, and her husband, Brian, their
daughter Ava, and my son, Jeﬀ, decided, at Jeﬀ’s suggestion, to go to the May
2003 annual meeting held, as always, in Warren’s hometown of Omaha,
Nebraska. I wrote Warren ahead of time, mentioning that we were coming
and that seven-year-old Ava, also a shareholder, had questions for him.
Although we hadn’t been in contact since 1969, he remembered our meetings
fondly and said to tell Ava that he would “bone up” so he’d be ready for her
questions.
The shareholders’ meeting was on a Saturday morning and we ﬂew in the
previous Thursday, expecting to leave, variously, on Sunday and Monday.
The small annual shareholder meetings of thirty years earlier had grown into
a huge multiday celebration featuring “Berkshire millionaires” and informally
known as “Woodstock for capitalists.”
We began by sampling from the array of Berkshire companies including
Dairy Queen (a chain of ice cream confection stores), Borsheims jewelry (the
largest independent jewelry store) and its special “annual meeting weekend”
rates for shareholders, Nebraska Furniture Mart (the largest independent
furniture store), and of course See’s Candies, a California favorite. Every
Berkshire company employee whom we encountered—and they were many
and diverse—seemed competent, courteous, and well trained, a remarkable
fact, the learning of which in itself (considering the size of our stake) made
the trip worthwhile. Friday night we went to Gorat’s Steak House, Buﬀett’s
favorite, and had a large and delicious T-bone with trimmings for…$18.95.
Buﬀett and his business partner, Charlie Munger, were scheduled to eat there
Saturday night at a special shareholders’ dinner, so we booked that, too.
Saturday’s meeting began at 7:30 A.M. with a video for the early arrivals.
We slept in and ambled over to the Omaha Civic Auditorium just before
9:30, when Warren and Charlie would take the stage. On the way we passed
several incoherently screaming protesters—a ﬁrst?—wearing signs accusing
Warren and the company of supporting infanticide. They displayed bloody
photos of aborted fetuses and incorrectly accused the company of being pro-
abortion. The ironic consequences are reported below.
Finding the Omaha Civic Auditorium full with a crowd of fourteen
thousand, we joined two thousand more in an overﬂow room. Warren and
Charlie presented a concise account of Berkshire’s previous year, seen by us

on a big-screen TV, and then answered questions. There were ten microphone
stations with long sign-up lists at each. Ava was ninth on the shortest list we
could ﬁnd. After an hour, the slow pace of the questions and answers made it
evident that her turn would never come. On the way out we visited the
extensive product exhibits by various Berkshire companies. You could buy
See’s Candies, sets of encyclopedias, and for $8 have your picture taken with
a cardboard cutout of Warren. As Vivian said, “They’re not giving anything
away.”
Berkshire has evolved from the simple stock-picking days of the 1960s into
a conglomerate with three major parts. First there are common stockholdings
in companies like Coca-Cola, Gillette, and The Washington Post. Second,
there are wholly owned or controlled companies such as Wesco Financial,
World Book Encyclopedia, and Clayton Homes. The 2003 annual report lists
some sixty-six of these, with 172,000 employees, orchestrated by Warren and
Charlie from a corporate oﬃce that has “swollen” to sixteen employees. Third
and perhaps most important is the insurance segment consisting mostly of
GEICO and the reinsurance company General Re.
We headed for lunch and the NetJets exhibit at the local airport. Saturday
night we were back at Gorat’s. The price of the T-bone dinner we had Friday
was, as a “special for shareholders,” now $3 more. Charlie Munger reluctantly
worked the room we were in and I mentioned to him a tale I’d heard about his
youth. Charlie had gone to Harvard Law School and, when my friend Paul
Marx got his degree there a few years later, he found that Charlie was a
legend—with many saying he was the smartest person ever to have attended.
As a ﬁrst-year student Charlie was reported to have regularly intimidated
professors. In a famous interchange, the professor called upon Charlie, who
had not read the case at hand, to answer questions about it. Charlie’s
immediate response was, “Sir, you tell me the facts and I’ll tell you the law.”
While autographing my menu, Charlie said sadly, “That was a long time
ago…a long time ago.”
Omaha turned out to be a surprising treat. A Midwest town that had
peaked early in the last century, much of the city had migrated to the
suburbs, leaving a quiet and spacious downtown. Sunday we visited Omaha’s
ﬁne art museum, featuring a spectacular photographic exhibit by Warren’s son
Howard. Also interesting was the zoo, which had two large and distinct

domed walk-through habitats. Sunday afternoon, tornado warning sirens
sounded and everyone in the hotel was directed to the gym in the basement.
As we waited out the storm, I exercised on the machines while my son-in-law
Brian Tichenor went to the fourth ﬂoor and looked outside to see the
horizontal counterweighted arms of multistory construction cranes spinning
freely on their vertical supports. This protected them from being demolished
by the tornado. Alternating waves of lower and higher pressure caused the
soda in his hand to repeatedly ﬁzz excessively, then not at all. The tornado
wandered randomly through town, doing minor sporadic damage. The
tornado belt, a region of mid-America from Omaha to Dallas, terrorizes
residents with an average of eighty tornadoes a year, more than anywhere else
in the world.
Flights out of Omaha were canceled. With thirty thousand people who had
come for the Berkshire weekend missing ﬂights and wanting to leave as soon
as possible, it looked as if we would be delayed at least two days. We held a
family conference and within an hour Jeﬀ had chartered a private jet for us.
The next morning we took a ten-minute ride to the local airport and boarded
in minutes—no wait, no lines, no luggage hassle, no TSA body scans and
searches. We had two engines, two pilots, a ﬂight attendant, and a good lunch.
Seven-year-old Ava spoke for everyone when she declared she never wanted
to ﬂy any other way again. Whereas it took ten hours to reach Omaha from
Newport Beach, California, including hours of delay in Dallas due to
thunderstorms, we got home in two hours.
For many years Berkshire had a shareholder-directed charitable
contribution program. Each year the company allowed each A shareholder to
donate $X, where $X was $1 a share at the start and gradually increased to
something like $18 a share. Shareholders allocated their amounts to charities
chosen by them, not management, and Berkshire sent the money. As a result
of the antiabortion protests at this annual meeting and the related boycott of a
Berkshire company, the program was discontinued. The antiabortion
protesters succeeded in eliminating not only shareholder contributions
supporting family planning, but those to other charities as well, including
organizations the demonstrators themselves favored.
To decide whether to buy Berkshire one can do a little analysis. Berkshire,
as remarked earlier, has three major parts. First are the positions in publicly

traded companies like Coca-Cola, The Washington Post, and Gillette. The
securities markets price these every day. Is this Buﬀett portfolio worth more
than, less than, or the same as its market price? Should one add a premium
for Buﬀett’s market timing and stock-picking prowess?
Second are numerous wholly owned companies such as See’s Candies,
Clayton Homes, and NetJets. We can value these by applying the principles
of security analysis to the balance sheets, and by considering the growth rates
of the companies, their “franchise value,” and the quality of management.
The third component is the insurance group, with GEICO the most
important. To value these non-public companies we use, in addition to
security analysis as above, the value of the “ﬂoat.” This is money paid as
premiums that is currently being held to pay oﬀ future claims. Buﬀett invests
this and has made a proﬁt well in excess of the projected cost of claims. To
the extent Warren makes superior returns on the ﬂoat, as well as follows his
practice of selling insurance when prices are high and stepping aside when
competition drives prices down, the value of Berkshire is greater. For a few
years prior to 2008 Berkshire had an uninvested cash surplus of as much as
$40 billion, as Buﬀett found stocks generally overpriced. This “cash drag”
slowed the price increase of Berkshire during that period. When the market
collapsed in 2008, he put this money to work.
As Berkshire has grown, Buﬀett’s gain over the S&P 500 has diminished,
as he predicted. Table 2, which covers my experience, shows this. The edge
dropped in each new period. Beating the index in the future will be ever more
diﬃcult. There is also price risk arising from the uncertainty when Buﬀett
ceases to manage Berkshire. Despite the likelihood that his replacements will
be unusually talented, the stock price may fall sharply, perhaps for an
extended time.
Not long after buying Berkshire, I began putting some of my PNP proﬁts
into other hedge funds. Networking with some of the smartest and richest
people on Wall Street, sharing information and investment opportunities, I
also gained the beneﬁts of diversifying my personal portfolio.
Table 2: Total Return of Berkshire Hathaway A Stock Compared to the
S&P 500 for Three Successive Periods*

Date
Price $
BRKA
Elapsed
Time
Annualized
Return
Price $
S&P 500
Annualized
Return
BRKA
Edge Per
Year
08/10/83
980.50
———
———
161.54
———
———
01/31/90
7,455
6.48 years
36.8 %
329.08
11.6 %
+25.2 %
04/30/99
76,400
9.25 years
28.6 %
1335.18
16.3 %
+12.3 %
01/23/09
86,250
9.73 years
1.3 %
831.95
−4.7 %
+6.0 %
04/12/16
215,360
7.22 years
13.5 %
2061.72
13.4 %
+0.1%
* I chose the dates for the ﬁrst three periods because the price graphs suggested that they were natural
divisions. The fourth and last period covers the aftermath of the Great Recession.
