Chapter 24
COMPOUND GROWTH: THE
EIGHTH WONDER OF THE
WORLD
For those who want to climb the ladder of wealth, it is helpful to appreciate
the unusual arithmetic by which money grows. Compound interest, described
in a phrase of disputed origin, is “the eighth wonder of the world.” Wonder or
trick, it has built great fortunes, and you can use it to get richer.
In 1944, the ﬁfty-one-year-old IRS estate auditor Anne Scheiber left the
organization that rewarded her for twenty-three years of distinguished service
by never promoting her. Then she invested her savings of $5,000 in the stock
market. Living frugally and studying companies, she continually reinvested
her dividends. Her portfolio continued to grow until she died in 1995 at age
101. When her lawyer, Ben Clark, tried to meet with oﬃcials of Yeshiva
University to tell them about a bequest she had left to the school, they had
never heard of Anne Scheiber and wondered how to avoid wasting their time.
But when the meeting was ﬁnally held, they learned that Ms. Scheiber was
leaving them $22 million for the beneﬁt of women students.
Were Anne Scheiber’s choices unusually lucky? How would an average
investor have done? Taking the period from the start of 1944 until the end of
1997, allowing a couple of years for the settlement of the estate and the
delivery of securities to Yeshiva, $5,000 invested in a large stock index grew
to a mere $3.76 million; but the same amount invested in small stocks grew,
on average, to $12.31 million. Starting with a little more than Anne, investing

$8,936 instead of $5,000, the average small stock investor would have
achieved her $22 million result.
Compound interest, or more accurately compound growth, is the process
Anne Scheiber used, accumulating wealth by reinvesting her gains. An easy
way to think about compound growth, and also about the ladder of wealth, is
in terms of doubling and redoubling. Consider two investors, Sam Scared and
Charlie Compounder. Suppose Sam Scared starts with $1; each time it
doubles, he puts his $1 proﬁt in a sock instead of reinvesting it. After ten
doublings, Sam has a proﬁt in the sock of $1 × 10 plus his original $1 for a
total of $11. Charlie also starts with $1 and makes the same investments but
lets his proﬁt ride. His $1 becomes $2, $4, $8, et cetera, until after ten
doublings he has $1,024. Sam’s wealth grows as $1, $2, $3…$11. This is
called simple growth, arithmetic growth, or growth by addition. Charlie’s
increases as $1, $2, $4…$1,024. This is known variously as compound,
exponential, geometric, or multiplicative growth. Over a suﬃciently long
time, compound growth at a small rate will vastly exceed any rate of
arithmetic growth, no matter how large! For instance, if Sam Scared made
100 percent a year and put it in a sock and Charlie Compounder made only 1
percent a year but reinvested it, Charlie’s wealth would eventually exceed
Sam’s by as much as you please. This is true even if Sam started with far
more than Charlie, even $1 billion to Charlie’s $1. Realizing this truth,
Robert Malthus (1766–1834), believing that population grew geometrically
and resources grew arithmetically, forecast increasingly great misery.
Politicians, dimly aware of the awesome power of compound growth, have
in many jurisdictions passed laws against perpetuities to prevent the
enormous concentrations of wealth that might arise from investments
compounding without limit. On the other hand, some states and counties
welcome perpetual trusts, being more interested in deriving revenue from
them now.
The population of the world increased from 2.5 billion in 1930 to
7.3 billion in 2015, a growth rate of about 1 percent a year. It’s expected to
reach 9.7 billion by 2050. Everyone knows that this can’t keep up; the
carrying capacity of the earth—the amount of humanity the earth can support
as limited by the available solar energy for food, and by other scarce
resources—has been estimated as up to one hundred billion people. But what

if we could somehow keep growing at, say, a rate of 1 percent a century? A
calculation shows that in 1.2 million years we would be a solid sphere of ﬂesh
with a radius almost as large as that of our galaxy, expanding at the speed of
light!
How fast do ordinary investments grow? The best simple long-term choice
has been a broad common-stock index fund. At the average past growth rate
of about 10 percent a year, such an investment has doubled in about 7.3
years. Historically, inﬂation oﬀset about 3 percent of this, stretching to a little
over a decade the average time required to double real buying power. Taxable
investors in an index fund, which generates dividends and some realized
capital gains, pay government another percent or so annually, delaying the
doubling time to about twelve years.
To get quick approximate answers to compound interest problems like
these, accountants have a handy trick called “the rule of 72.” It says: If money
grows at a percentage R in each period then, with all gains reinvested, it will
double in 72/R periods.
Example: Your money grows at 8 percent per year. If you reinvest your
gains, how long does it take to double? By the rule of 72, it takes 72 ÷ 8 = 9
years, since a period in this example is one year.
Example: The net after-tax return from your market-neutral hedge fund
averages 12 percent a year. You start with $1 million and reinvest your net
proﬁts. How much will you have in twenty-four years?
By the rule of 72, your money doubles in about six years. Then it doubles
again in the next six years, and so forth, for 24 ÷ 6 = 4 doublings. So it
multiplies by 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 = 16 and becomes $16 million. For more on the
rule of 72, see appendix C.
The rule of 72 can expose outrageous claims. My personal trainer went to
a stock market seminar where the operators were pitching a method called
“rolling stocks.” Selecting common stocks that would supposedly oscillate
between two levels, they advised the investor to repeatedly buy low and sell
high. The operators claimed the suckers could make 22 percent a month.
Why would they bother to share their secret when, by putting $2,000 in a tax-
deferred IRA and reinvesting their gains, they would have more than $46
trillion in ten years?

Suppose you invest time and energy to add $1,000 to your wealth. Will you
sacriﬁce as much to make another $1,000? And another? Economic theorists
believe that most people won’t and that we typically put less value on each
successive $1,000 increase in our net worth. We feel this way about all scarce
useful items, or so-called economic goods. We value each additional unit less
than the last.
I apply this to the trade-oﬀs among health, wealth, and time. You can trade
time and health to accumulate more wealth. Why health? You may be
stressed, lose sleep, have a poor diet, or skip exercise. If you are like me and
want better health, you can invest time and money on medical care, diagnostic
and preventive measures, and exercise and ﬁtness. For decades I have spent
six to eight hours a week running, hiking, walking, playing tennis, and
working out in a gym. I think of each hour spent on ﬁtness as one day less
that I’ll spend in a hospital. Or you can trade money for time by working less
and buying goods and services that save time. Hire household help, a personal
assistant, and pay other people to do things you don’t want to do. Thousand-
dollar-an-hour New York professionals who pay $50 an hour for a car and
driver so they can work while they commute understand clearly the monetary
value of their time.
To get an idea of what your time is worth, take a moment now to think
about how much you work and the income you get from your eﬀort. Once
you know your hourly rate you can identify situations where buying back
some of your time is a bargain and other situations where you want to be
selling more of your time. As you get used to thinking this way, I predict that
you will often be surprised at how much you can gain.
Most people I’ve met haven’t thought through the comparative values to
them of time, money, and health. Think of the single worker who spends two
hours commuting forty miles from hot and smoggy Riverside, California, to a
$25-an-hour job in balmy Newport Beach. If the worker moves from his
$1,200-a-month apartment in Riverside to a comparable $2,500-a-month
apartment in Newport Beach, his rent increases by $1,300 a month but he
avoids forty hours of commuting. If his time is worth $25 per hour he would
save $1,000 ($25 × 40) each month. Add to that the cost of driving his car an
extra sixteen hundred miles. If his economical car costs him 50 cents a mile
or $800 a month to operate, living in Newport Beach and saving forty hours’

driving time each month makes him $500 better oﬀ ($1,000 + $800 −
$1,300). In eﬀect he earned just $12.50 per hour during his commute. Does
our worker ﬁgure this out? I suspect he does not, because the extra $1,300 a
month in rent he would pay in Newport Beach is a clearly visible cost that is
painfully and regularly inﬂicted, whereas the cost of his car is less evident and
can be put out of mind.
Americans supposedly spend an average of forty or more hours a week
watching television. Those who do have plenty of “junk time,” which they
can use instead for an exercise or ﬁtness program. Five hours a week for this
can add ﬁve years of healthy life.
Undervaluing such a deferred beneﬁt is a widespread investment error and
seems to be part of our basic psychological makeup. A psychologist
experimenting with four-year-olds oﬀered each child one marshmallow,
promising a second marshmallow if the ﬁrst was still there when the
experimenter returned to the room in twenty minutes. Left to their own
devices, two-thirds of the children promptly ate their marshmallow and one-
third waited to get two. Evaluating the children eight years later at age twelve,
the testers found that the two-marshmallow children were markedly higher
achievers than the one-marshmallow children. If you’re a one-marshmallow
child who grew up to buy on credit at crushing rates of 16 percent to 29
percent annualized, and you ask me where to invest some free cash, the ﬁrst
thing I recommend is paying oﬀ your credit card debt. The interest is
nondeductible and the saving is certain, so you’re earning a risk-free after-tax
rate of 16 to 29 percent. The second thing I recommend is that you start
investing some of your marshmallows, in order to enjoy more of them later,
instead of gobbling them all immediately.
