Chapter 25
BEAT MOST INVESTORS BY
INDEXING
The easiest way to outperform most investors and grow your wealth is based
on a simple concept that all investors should understand, both as a tool for
investing and as an example of logical thinking about the markets. Consider a
mutual fund that buys every stock trading on a major US stock exchange,
investing in each company a percentage equal to that company’s percentage
of the total value of all the US stocks. Thus the fund behaves like the entire
market, with the same daily percentage price changes and dividend payouts.
This means if the oil giant Exxon has a market value, computed as share price
times number of shares outstanding, of $400 billion and the total market
value of all stocks is $10 trillion, then the index fund puts 4 percent of its net
worth in Exxon, and so on for all the other stocks. A mutual fund like this
that replicates the composition and investment results of a speciﬁed pool of
securities is called an index fund, and investors who buy such funds are
known as indexers.
Call any investment that mimics the whole market of listed US securities
“passive” and notice that since each of these passive investments acts just like
the market, so does a pool of all of them. If these passive investors together
own, say, 15 percent of every stock, then “everybody else” owns 85 percent
and, taken as a group, their investments also are like one giant index fund.
But “everybody else” means all the active investors, each of whom has his
own recipe for how much to own of each stock and none of whom has
indexed. As Nobel Prize winner Bill Sharpe says, it follows from the laws of

arithmetic that the combined holdings of all the active investors also
replicates the index. Although this idea is well known, and I’m not sure where
it ﬁrst appeared, I ﬁrst heard it from him and he has given the clearest
exposition I’ve seen. I’ll call it Sharpe’s Principle.
I met Bill Sharpe in 1968 or 1969, when we were both young professors at
UCI. Highly regarded, he had already completed the work for which he was
awarded the Nobel Prize in 1990. Unfortunately he was in UCI’s School of
Social Sciences and I didn’t really get to know him before he was recruited by
Stanford just two years after his arrival. Had he still been at UCI after
Princeton Newport Partners was well under way, might we have collaborated?
He contributed a key simpliﬁcation for understanding options, the binary
model, and I might have been able to convince him that markets have
signiﬁcant ineﬃciencies—in other words, opportunities for abnormal risk-
adjusted returns. Discussing this in 1975 when I invited him to lecture at
UCI, Bill argued that my rewards from PNP didn’t demonstrate market
ineﬃciency, because you could argue that I and my associates were simply
getting paid according to our worth. Had we turned our talents to other areas
of economic endeavor we could expect the same.
Before costs, each passive investor gets the same return as the index. This
is also true for the active investors as a group but not for each one
individually. Holding a larger percentage than the index in some stocks and
less in others, they may do better or worse than the index in various periods.
Although the results (before costs) for the entire group of active investors
matches the return on the index, their individual returns are statistically
distributed around it with most fairly close and some quite diﬀerent.
They have more risk without the expectation of more return. Reducing risk
through diversiﬁcation is one reason to buy an index, but an even more
important one is reducing the costs that investors bear. Index funds trade
infrequently, with stocks turning over just a few percent a year as the
“keepers” of the index occasionally add and remove stocks, or because cash
ﬂows into or out of the fund. On the other hand, active investors as a group
have been trading more than 100 percent of their portfolio per year. This
imposes a substantial cost on them from commissions and by their impact on
market prices.

To illustrate the losses from market impact, suppose XYZ stock has a
“true” price of $50 a share. Assuming for simplicity that it trades in 10-cent
increments, between trades there will be buyers bidding for various amounts
at $49.90, $49.80, $49.70, and so forth. Similarly, sellers will be asking
$50.10, $50.20, et cetera. Someone who places an order to buy at whatever
price is available in the market, called a market order and one of the most
common types, will pay $50.10, a little above the true price. This 10-cent
diﬀerence between the price paid and the “true” price is called market
impact. Market impact increases with order size since, to continue our
example, a large market order may clean out not only the oﬀering at $50.10
but also stock oﬀered for sale at higher prices, resulting in an average
purchase price above $50.10 and a market impact greater than 10 cents per
share.
When Steve Mizusawa and I operated Ridgeline Partners, we reduced
these costs by dividing large orders into smaller ones of $20,000 to $100,000,
and waiting a few minutes between transactions to allow the market price to
recover. We know the “true” price is somewhere at or between the highest bid
price (the Bid) and the lowest asking price (the Asked), but not exactly
where. On average, it is about halfway between the two. To see that market
impact is a real cost, suppose in our example that just after buying stock at
$50.10 the buyer wants to sell it at market. He gets $49.90, for an immediate
loss of 20 cents or about 0.4 percent.
Investors who don’t index pay on average an extra 1 percent a year in
trading costs and another 1 percent to what Warren Buﬀett calls “helpers”—
the money managers, salespeople, advisers, and ﬁduciaries that permeate all
areas of investing. As a result of these costs, active investors as a group trail
the index by 2 percent or so, whereas the passive investor who selects a no-
load (no sales fees), low-expense-ratio (low overhead and low management
fee) index fund can pay less than 0.25 percent in fees and trading costs. From
the gambling perspective, the return to an active investor is that of a passive
investor plus the extra gain or loss from paying (on average) 2 percent a year
to toss a fair coin in some (imaginary) casino. Taxable active investors do
even worse, because a high portfolio turnover means short-term capital gains,
which currently are taxed at a higher rate than gains from securities, the sales
of which have been deferred for a year. For instance, if $1,000 is invested at

8 percent and gains are taxed when realized, table 1 compares the result of
paying the tax every year versus paying only at the end of a certain number of
years. I used 35 percent for short-term capital gain taxes and 20 percent for
long-term capital gains. Actual rates will vary with the investor’s tax bracket
and changes in the law.
Inﬂuential private equity and hedge fund managers have persuaded their
friends in Congress to grant them the beneﬁts of deferring taxes on their
overseas income for many years and, even better, then paying the tax not at
the rates for ordinary income that are paid by wage earners, but rather at
much lower long-term capital gains rates. The diﬀerence between the ﬁrst and
last columns of table 6 indicates the magnitude of the beneﬁts.
Table 6: With an Investment Making 8%, Paying Tax Every Year at
35%, at 20%, and Paying 20% at the End
Value of Investment
Investment Ends at
Year
Pay 35% Tax Every
Year
Pay 20% Tax Every
Year
Pay 20% Tax at End
0
1,000
1,000
1,000
1
1,052
1,064
1,064
10
1,660
1,860
1,927
20
2,756
3,458
3,929
30
4,576
6,431
8,250
If the index beats the pool of active investors by 2 percent each year, does
that mean it also beats most equity mutual funds? Widely publicized, year-
end annual reports show the S&P Index of 500 stocks beating a majority of
mutual funds most years but not always. Why? For one thing, we’re
comparing apples and oranges: The S&P 500 Index isn’t the whole market—
if our universe is the total stock market index then it’s an active investor,
although one with low costs—since it doesn’t include most small companies,
so the assets of a mutual fund that are not part of the S&P 500 are not subject
to Sharpe’s Principle as applied to that index. The S&P 500 stocks are
selected by the Standard & Poor’s Corporation, with occasional deletions and
additions. Although these ﬁve hundred large companies account for roughly

75 percent of the market value of all publicly traded stocks, it omits some
very large companies, notably, before 2010, Berkshire Hathaway, one of the
ten largest US companies by market value. In fact, the compound annual
return on small companies for the eighty-two years from 1926 through 2007
was 12.45 percent, compared with 10.36 percent for large companies. Yet the
extra boost for mutual funds from having had some of their assets in smaller
stocks still hasn’t oﬀset their extra costs.
Another aspect of the apples-and-oranges comparison is the impact of cash
balances. Since fund investors continually add or withdraw money, funds are
partly invested in ﬂuctuating cash balances. When the market rises strongly,
the interest on this cash doesn’t keep up and the fund return lags the return on
the equity portion of its holdings. Conversely, when the market is down
sharply, the losses on the fund’s equity position are reduced to the extent it is
in cash and by the interest it gets on that cash. The impact of this cash drag is
generally small.
Also, non-index mutual funds are only part of the total pool of active
investors. Conceivably, their managers could be relatively skilled, in which
case the mutual fund group would outperform the rest of the active investors.
In this case, though the active investors lagged overall, the mutual fund group
might excel compared with the others. However, academic studies of the
historical returns of mutual funds show little evidence of such managerial
skill on the part of mutual funds. Third, it is not the number of active
investors that must lag the index, according to Sharpe’s Principle. Instead, it
is the return on the total pool of actively managed assets invested in the index
that must underperform.
Morningstar, which tracks mutual fund performance, does periodic studies
comparing fund performance with indexes. The 2009 results are typical.
After adjusting for risk, size, and investment category, only 37 percent beat
their benchmark over the previous three years, with similar results for ﬁve
and ten years.
The beneﬁts from indexing are shown in table 7. Here I have used
historical returns on large stocks, like those in the S&P 500, with my
assumed costs. More details are given in appendix B. After costs and
inﬂation, tax-exempt passive investors gained 6.7 percent annually compared

with 4.7 percent for the actives, or one-third more. After taxes it is 2.0
percent for the actives and 4.8 percent for the indexers, more than double.
Table 7: Comparison of Passive Versus Active Investing
Index
Passives
Actives
Before costs
10.1%
10.1%
10.1%
After costs
—
9.7%
7.7%
After inflation
7.1%
6.7%
4.7%
Tax-exempt after
inflation
—
6.7%
4.7%
After taxes
—
4.8%
2.0%
If you index, select a fund with annual expenses less than 0.2 percent.
Reject funds that add management fees, sales loads, or other charges. The one
charge you can ignore is a penalty for selling before a short holding period,
such as thirty days, which funds introduced to prevent costly large-scale rapid
in-and-out trading by certain investors.
Each year, typically at the end of October, US equity mutual funds assign
the year-to-date taxable gains or losses to their current investors. If you were
to make an investment shortly before this in a year when the fund had a lot of
gain, you could experience the inequity of paying taxes on an amount far
larger than your real economic gain. On the other hand, in a year when the
fund allocated large losses, a purchase shortly before the time to receive the
losses could let investors reduce their tax bill without having had a
corresponding economic loss.
Tax-exempt investors such as IRAs, 401(k)s, employee beneﬁt plans, and
foundations ought to consider swapping their active investments in equities
into a broad no-load index fund, unless they have strong reasons to believe
their current investments give them a signiﬁcant edge. In my experience,
superior stock-picking ability is rare, which means almost everyone should
make the switch.
Taxable investors need to review their holdings on a case-by-case basis. For
instance, in 2015, with a cost basis of about $1,000 a share, a market price of

$225,000 a share, and a combined federal and state tax rate of, say, 30
percent, I would net about $157,800 per share after a sale of my Berkshire
Hathaway Class A stock. An index fund purchased with this smaller amount
would have to do about 43 percent better than Berkshire in the future for me
to catch up. This seems extremely unlikely.
Like me with Berkshire, investors who don’t trade, and use no advisers,
will avoid the usual expenses paid by active investors. In fact, their costs may
be even less than those of indexers. If such a buy-and-hold investor were, for
instance, to choose stocks at random, purchasing an amount of each
proportional to its market capitalization, we could show, by reasoning like
that used to prove Sharpe’s Principle, that the expected return is the same as
for the index from which the stocks were chosen minus the presumably small
costs of acquiring the stocks.
The main disadvantage to buy-and-hold versus indexing is the added risk.
In gambling terms, the return to buy-and-hold is like that from buying the
index then adding random gains or losses by repeatedly ﬂipping a coin.
However, with a holding of twenty or so stocks spread out over diﬀerent
industries, this extra risk tends to be small. The threat to a buy-and-hold
program is the investor himself. Following his stocks and listening to stories
and advice about them can lead to trading actively, producing on average the
inferior results about which I’ve warned. Buying an index avoids this trap.
For another way to look at index investing, suppose the same percentage of
each US stock were put into a low-cost index fund and all the rest went into a
giant pool actively managed by the world’s best managers. Then a clerk
managing the index fund with a computer to do the bookkeeping would beat
the team of the best managers on earth, by the amount of their extra
commissions and fees. In contests promoted by journalists, random portfolios
of stocks selected using chance devices such as darts, dice, or (ﬁgurative)
chimpanzees hold their own against the experts.
