Chapter 26
CAN YOU BEAT THE MARKET?
SHOULD YOU TRY?
When I ﬁrst became interested in blackjack, everyone said there was no way
to beat it. Winning systems, often involving complicated ways of varying the
amounts wagered, were proven mathematically to be impossible for many of
the classical gambling games. Besides, if someone could beat the casinos, the
rules would be changed to stop them. When I became interested in the stock
market, I heard the same claims about investing. Academics had developed a
series of arguments known as the eﬃcient market hypothesis (EMH). Using
ﬁnancial market data, they showed that tomorrow’s prices looked like random
ﬂuctuations around today’s prices, therefore they were not predictable.
Besides, if a price change were predictable, somebody would immediately
trade on this until it was no longer so. This notion gave rise to an apocryphal
story that all ﬁnance students have heard. Eugene Fama, father of EMH, was
strolling across the University of Chicago campus with a graduate student.
Looking down, the student exclaimed, “Look, there is a $100 bill on the
ground.” Without a glance down or a break in stride, Fama replied, “No,
there isn’t. If there were, someone would have picked it up already.”
The cards dealt at blackjack also seem to appear at random but not if you
“track the shuﬄe,” which is a way to beat the game by watching the order in
which the discarded cards are stacked, then mathematically analyzing the
particular shuﬄing technique being used, leading to a partial prediction of the
new ordering of the cards for the next deal. The likelihood of any card being
dealt next at blackjack also is not random if you count the cards. What

appears random for one state of knowledge may not be if we are given more
information. Future prices are not predictable and no one can beat the
market, but only when market prices “truly” ﬂuctuate randomly.
Supporters of the eﬃcient market hypothesis, really a collection of related
hypotheses, generally believe that securities markets in advanced developed
countries respond quickly and almost completely to new information. True
believers originally held that most investors were rational and well informed
over the decades. However, they have reluctantly yielded to the overwhelming
evidence to the contrary, but they still say the collective impact of investors
generally keeps current market prices close to the best possible estimate of
the value, averaged over all future scenarios. Since the 1960s, academics in
economics and ﬁnance have defended the various versions of the eﬃcient
market hypothesis as they churned out tens of thousands of articles,
thousands of PhDs, and hundreds of books.
The classic view of the correct price of a common stock is that it is derived
from the value of all the future earnings. These earnings are uncertain and
subject to unknowable factors. Could anyone have known beforehand how to
allow for the impact of 9/11 on the future earnings, hence on the then current
market price, of ﬁrms headquartered in the Twin Towers of the World Trade
Center? These future payoﬀs are discounted to a present value reﬂecting their
various probabilities and risks. If the market does a good job of using today’s
public information to set current prices, then the only investors who have an
edge are those with material private information. The high-proﬁle prosecution
of investors in the 1980s for illegal trading on inside information makes the
point.
The EMH is a theory that can never be logically proved. All you can argue
is that it is a good or not-so-good description of reality. However, it can be
disproven merely by providing examples where it fails, and the more
numerous and substantive the examples, the more poorly it describes reality.
So far I’ve shown how markets were beaten in the past with examples from
gambling, from the trading and results of Princeton Newport Partners,
Ridgeline, and other hedge funds, and from the story of Warren Buﬀett and
Berkshire Hathaway. Doing better than the market is not the same as beating
it. The ﬁrst is often simply luck; the second is ﬁnding a statistically signiﬁcant
edge that makes sense, then proﬁting from it. To illustrate, PNP did this in

the 1980s when it exploited the large discounts to liquidation value that
frequently appeared among closed-end funds.
Closed-end funds start out by selling shares to investors. They are called
closed because this sale of shares happens one time only, at the launch of the
fund. Management then invests the money in a stated category of securities,
such as high-tech, Korean, junk bonds, green energy, or biotech. To illustrate
how such a fund might work, suppose we’re in the midst of a precious metals
boom. The promoters sell shares of stock in the “Pot of Gold” (POG) closed-
end fund through brokerage ﬁrms, paying 8 percent of the proceeds to these
ﬁrms and their sales forces. Investors buy ten million shares at $10 a share,
for proceeds of $100 million less 8 percent, netting $92 million, which the
managers of POG invest in listed gold stocks. Each share, originally costing
$10, now represents $9.20 worth of stock, which is its net asset value (NAV)
per share. The “sell side,” the Wall Street promoters, have just captured
8 percent of the money. Notice that an investor could have bought gold stocks
directly and, for each $10, owned $10 worth of stock.
The shares of POG begin trading in the marketplace. Investors who are
optimistic about the skills of management could bid these shares up to $11,
$12, or even more, despite the NAV remaining at $9.20. Over time both the
market price of POG shares and their NAV (the value per share of the
underlying assets held by POG) will ﬂuctuate. Any price for POG above
NAV is called a premium to NAV and any price below NAV is a discount.
One more thing—NAV represents the liquidation value of POG shares but, as
long as management controls the fund, they are worth substantially less.
That’s because management collects fees and incurs expenses, thereby
reducing the beneﬁts of ownership for the shareholders, compared with an
investor who owns the underlying portfolio directly.
Because of management’s costs and fees, closed-end funds typically trade
at a discount to net asset value. If management’s fees and expenses tend to
run at, say, 15 percent of the wealth being created by the underlying
portfolio, then the shareholders might expect 85 percent of the future stream
of beneﬁts, so a fair price to pay ought to be 85 percent of NAV, or a
discount of 15 percent. In the case of POG, the ﬁrst investors pay $10 per
share. Wall Street’s selling charges cut this to $9.20. Then management takes
15 percent of future earnings, which reduces the value to the investor by

another 15 percent, leaving a value per share for him of 85 percent × $9.20
or $7.82. He’s immediately lost $2.18 of his $10 or 21.8 percent of his
investment to his helpers. It’s like having a brand-new car depreciate as soon
as you drive it oﬀ the lot. As time passes, the market price, as a percentage of
NAV, ﬂuctuates and the pattern varies from fund to fund and with overall
market conditions. I’ve seen discounts of 50 percent and premiums of 80
percent. To exploit this, an investor can seek to buy funds at deep discounts,
relative to their histories and to that of comparable funds.
You can also sell short shares of funds trading at a high premium.
Depending on their makeup, the long and short funds in your portfolio might
hedge each other to some extent, with futures and options providing
additional risk-oﬀsetting possibilities. The returns from such a strategy can be
fairly steady, but the long “workout” periods, during which premiums or
excessive discounts tend to disappear, can make them modest. I once invested
for a few years in an intelligently managed hedge fund that used this
approach. Because of the slowness with which the mispricings diminished,
our annualized return was 10 percent instead of the 15 percent we hoped for.
If POG was trading at a 40 percent discount with shares at $6 each and an
NAV of $10, we could attempt to buy enough shares to force and win a vote
to convert the fund to an open-end mutual fund, allowing shareholders to
redeem at net asset value. Then we pay $6 a share and cash out at $10 a
share, for a proﬁt of $4 or 67 percent on our $6. A closed-end fund trading at
a big discount was an opportunity for Princeton Newport. Despite ﬁerce
opposition from entrenched management, we succeeded in doing deals of this
type proﬁtably.
The diﬀerences between the market price and the net asset value of closed-
end funds leave nowhere to hide for those who believe the market does a
good job of setting prices correctly. Why do investors sometimes pay $1.80
for $1 of assets and other times oﬀer to sell $1 worth of securities for 50
cents? It can’t be lack of information, since NAVs and calculated percentage
price deviations are published regularly, along with actual portfolio holdings.
An unusual opportunity to buy assets at a discount arose during the
ﬁnancial crash of 2008–09, in the form of certain closed-end funds called
SPACs. These “special purpose acquisition corporations” were marketed
during the preceding boom in private equity investing. Escrowing the

proceeds from the initial public oﬀering (IPO) of the SPAC, the managers
promised to invest in a speciﬁed type of start-up company. SPACs had a
dismal record by the time of the crash, their investments in actual companies
losing, on average, 78 percent. When formed, a typical SPAC agreed to invest
the money within two years, with investors having the choice—prior to the
SPAC buying into companies—of getting back their money plus interest
instead of participating.
By December 2008, panic had driven even those SPACs that still owned
only US Treasuries to a discount to NAV. These SPACs had from two years
to just a few remaining months either to invest or to liquidate and, before
investing, oﬀer investors a chance to cash out at NAV. In some cases we
could even buy SPACs holding US Treasuries at annualized rates of return to
us of 10 to 12 percent, cashing out in a few months. This was at a time when
short-term rates on US Treasuries had fallen to approximately zero!
For those who still believe that the market always prices securities
properly, here’s a proﬁt opportunity that arose because investors couldn’t even
do arithmetic.
To see what happened, ﬁrst picture two car dealers with stores side by side.
The ﬁrst dealer oﬀers new Ford sedans for $9,000, plus a $2,000 rebate
payable in six months. The second dealer oﬀers the identical new Ford sedans
for $14,850. Everyone who drives up can see both prices on huge signs. The
higher-priced dealer has balloons ﬂying over his lot and a band playing. The
lower-priced dealer does a brisk business but the higher-priced dealer is
mobbed. Most of our “rational” investors prefer to pay too much. Nuts? Not
possible? It happens often. For instance, in the next example the $9,000 Ford
plus a $2,000 rebate is like 100 shares of 3Com and the identical Ford for
$14,850 is like 135 shares of PalmPilot. Now for the details.
Famous for its PalmPilot handheld personal organizer, the company 3Com,
with stock market ticker COMS, announced that it was spinning oﬀ its
PalmPilot division as a separate company. Some 6 percent of PalmPilot,
ticker PALM, was oﬀered to the public in an initial public oﬀering at a price
of $38 per share on Thursday, March 2, 2000. By the end of the day the 23
million shares that had been issued changed hands more than one and a half
times, for a one-day trading volume of 37.9 million shares. The price peaked
at $165 before closing at $95. The portion of PalmPilot sold in the IPO was

deliberately set well below demand and led to a buying frenzy and price spurt
typical at the time for tech stock IPOs. So far, this just repeated what we had
often seen during the previous eighteen months of the tech stock boom.
Now for the market ineﬃciency. At Thursday’s closing the market priced
PalmPilot at $53.4 billion, yet it valued 3Com, which still owned 94 percent
of PalmPilot, at “only” $28 billion. But that means the market valued 3Com’s
94 percent of PalmPilot at $50 billion, so it valued the rest of 3Com at
negative $22 billion! Analysts, however, estimated the value of the rest of
3Com at between $5 billion and $8.5 billion. And within six months or so,
3Com intended to distribute these PalmPilot shares to its shareholders.
Anticipating this, my son, Jeﬀ, had called me a few days earlier to mobilize
capital for this possible opportunity. You could buy PALM directly in the
IPO (to get IPO stock you had to be “connected”) or at wildly gyrating, much
higher prices in the “aftermarket,” when it began trading. Or you could buy
PALM indirectly by buying COMS and waiting a few months to get 1.35
shares of PALM for each share of COMS owned. Moreover, you would also
have a share in the post-spin-oﬀ business of 3Com, which was proﬁtable and
would have $8 cash per share. Jeﬀ estimated the stock would then have had a
value of $15 to $25.
Analyst’s note: Jeﬀ’s estimate of 135 shares of PALM to be distributed for
each 100 shares of COMS was deliberately conservative—a “worst-case”
choice—compared with the typical “street” estimate of 150 shares. Thus the
street’s estimate makes the disparity look even wider than what we assumed.
The uncertainty arose because the number of shares of PALM to be
distributed to COMS shareholders depended on how many shares of COMS
were outstanding at the time, and that would depend on how much dilution
occurred in the interim from—for instance—outstanding options.
When Jeﬀ and I were discussing strategy on the ﬁrst day, at one point the
prices were $90 per share for 3Com and $110 per share for PalmPilot.
Buying 135 shares of PalmPilot outright cost $14,850, but if we paid $9,000
for 100 shares of 3Com we got both 135 shares of PalmPilot and 100 shares
of the 3Com “stub” company. (Think of each 100 shares in 3Com as a ticket
having two parts, one labeled 135 SHARES OF PALMPILOT and the other piece or
stub labeled 100 SHARES OF 3COM POST-SPIN-OFF.) If you buy the hundred shares
of 3Com you pay $9,000 and get $14,850 worth of PalmPilot and a 3Com

stub with a current estimated value of between $1,500 and $2,500. Sell this
for, say, $2,000 and the 135 PalmPilot shares only have a net cost of $7,000.
I challenge eﬃcient market theorists to answer these questions: Why were
people willing to pay $14,850 for 135 shares of PALM when they could have
paid $7,000, and why were some investors buying PALM stock at a price that
set a value of $53 billion for the company instead of acquiring it at a price of
less than half as much by buying it via 3Com stock? It’s not a question of
information. The terms were simple, public, and known in advance.
How could Jeﬀ and I exploit this? One approach was to buy 3Com, wait six
months or so, then sell oﬀ both the PalmPilot shares we would get from
3Com and the remaining 3Com stub. But what if 3Com and PalmPilot were
both substantially overpriced now and their prices fell drastically by then?
There was reason to believe this might happen. First, COMS had run from
about $50 two months earlier to over $100 just before the IPO, in
anticipation of the spin-oﬀ. Second, we believed tech stocks were in a
speculative bubble driven by a large pool of irrational investors, many of them
in the new day-trading “casinos.” We were right about the speculative bubble.
The NASDAQ reached its all-time high at this time, then lost 75 percent in
less than three years. Sixteen years later it still hadn’t fully recovered.
We could borrow and then sell short 135 shares of PALM at $110 for
proceeds of $14,850, which would be held in escrow by our broker until we
returned the borrowed shares. We could also buy a hundred shares of COMS
at $90 for a cost of $9,000, setting up a nearly riskless hedge for an almost
sure proﬁt. In six months or so we would get 135 shares of PALM from our
100 shares of COMS and deliver it to clear our short position. Then the
$14,850 short-sale proceeds would be released to us from escrow, leaving us
with a net proﬁt of $5,850 in cash and a hundred shares of the 3Com stub. If
this were currently priced at $15 per share we could sell it for an additional
$1,500, making a total gain in six months of $7,350 on a $9,000 investment,
or 82 percent.
Such proﬁts for ourselves and other arbitrageurs were limited by the
amount of COMS our brokers would lend us to sell short. One of our friends,
who runs a $2.7 billion convertible hedge fund, was able to short two hundred
thousand shares of PALM and had previously bought COMS at a much lower
price, anticipating the pre-IPO run-up.

As The Wall Street Journal pointed out, in the few days when arbitrageurs
(hedgers) could borrow more shares of PALM, they might have been able to
reduce the disparity if they sold short PALM and bought 3Com, as in our
example. Here we see clearly a mechanism of market ineﬃciency, namely the
diﬀerent behavior of the “dumb” or irrational PALM buyers and the savvy
arbitrageurs. The Journal went on to point out that a similar pricing disparity
arose in mid-February when IXnet, Inc., was spun oﬀ from IPC
Communications Inc. Even though IPC still owned 73 percent of IXnet, it
was valued by the “eﬃcient” market at less than half of IXnet. Jeﬀ hedged
this one, too.
Like members of the Flat-Earth Society, eﬃcient market believers have no
problem with the 3Com-PALM example. A leading advocate of the EMH
explained that arbitrageurs couldn’t correct the price disparity because there
wasn’t enough PALM available to sell short, and if there had been, the
arbitrageurs (hedgers) would have brought the prices into a relationship
consistent with the relative values. This is true. I and others would have bet a
major part of our net worth if we could have borrowed the stock. However,
the buyers of PALM could and should have corrected the mispricing
themselves and by doing so substantially increased their holdings of PALM at
no cost, simply by selling their PALM and reinvesting the proceeds in 3Com.
Yet widespread public explanations of this, including a front-page story in
The New York Times the day following the oﬀering, had little immediate
impact. Investors not only couldn’t do arithmetic, they apparently didn’t know
anyone who could.
With the PALM/COMS example in mind, let’s take another look at the
eﬃcient market theory.
For a perfectly eﬃcient market, one you can’t beat, we expect:
1. All information to be instantly available to many participants.
2. Many participants to be ﬁnancially rational—for example, they will
always prefer more money to less money, other things being equal.
3. Many participants to be able instantly to evaluate all available relevant
information and determine the current fair price of every security.

4. New information to cause prices immediately to jump to the new fair
price, preventing anyone from gaining an excess market return by
trading at intermediate prices during the transition.
Note: Supporters of this theory realize, in varying degrees, that some or all
of these conditions are unrealistic, but claim that they hold well enough to
make it a good approximation.
Now let’s see how markets really operate, so we can understand how better
to invest.
In our odyssey through the real world of investing, we have seen an
ineﬃcient market that some of us can beat where:
1. Some information is instantly available to the minority that happen to
be listening at the right time and place. Much information starts out
known only to a limited number of people, then spreads to a wider
group in stages. This spreading could take from minutes to months,
depending on the situation. The ﬁrst people to act on the information
capture the gains. The others get nothing or lose. (Note: The use of
early information by insiders can be either legal or illegal, depending on
the type of information, how it is obtained, and how it’s used.)
2. Each of us is ﬁnancially rational only in a limited way. We vary from
those who are almost totally irrational to some who strive to be
ﬁnancially rational in nearly all their actions. In real markets the
rationality of the participants is limited.
3. Participants typically have only some of the relevant information for
determining the fair price of a security. For each situation, both the
time to process the information and the ability to analyze it generally
vary widely.
4. The buy and sell orders that come in response to an item of information
sometimes arrive in a ﬂood within a few seconds, causing the price to
gap or nearly gap to a new level. More often, however, the reaction to
news is spread out over minutes, hours, days, or months, as the
academic literature documents.

Our portrait of real markets tells us what it takes to beat the market. Any
of these can do it:
1. Get good information early. How do you know if your information is
good enough or early enough? If you are not sure, then it probably isn’t.
2. Be a disciplined rational investor. Follow logic and analysis rather than
sales pitches, whims, or emotion. Assume you may have an edge only
when you can make a rational aﬃrmative case that withstands your
attempts to tear it down. Don’t gamble unless you are highly conﬁdent
you have the edge. As Buﬀett says, “Only swing at the fat pitches.”
3. Find a superior method of analysis. Ones that you have seen pay oﬀ for
me include statistical arbitrage, convertible hedging, the Black-Scholes
formula, and card counting at blackjack. Other winning strategies
include superior security analysis by the gifted few and the methods of
the better hedge funds.
4. When securities are known to be mispriced and people take advantage
of this, their trading tends to eliminate the mispricing. This means the
earliest traders gain the most and their continued trading tends to
reduce or eliminate the mispricing. When you have identiﬁed an
opportunity, invest ahead of the crowd.
Note that market ineﬃciency depends on the observer’s knowledge. Most
market participants have no demonstrable advantage. For them, just as the
cards in blackjack or the numbers at roulette seem to appear at random, the
market appears to be completely eﬃcient.
To beat the market, focus on investments well within your knowledge and
ability to evaluate, your “circle of competence.” Be sure your information is
current, accurate, and essentially complete. Be aware that information ﬂows
down a “food chain,” with those who get it ﬁrst “eating” and those who get it
late being eaten. Finally, don’t bet on an investment unless you can
demonstrate by logic, and if appropriate by track record, that you have an
edge.
Whether or not you try to beat the market, you can do better by properly
managing your wealth, which I talk about next.
