Chapter 27
ASSET ALLOCATION AND
WEALTH MANAGEMENT
Private wealth in the industrially advanced countries is spread among major
asset classes such as equities (common stocks), bonds, real estate, collectibles,
commodities, and miscellaneous personal property. If investors choose index
funds for each asset class in which they wish to invest, their combined
portfolio risk and return will depend on how they allocate among asset
classes. This also is true for investors who don’t index. Table 8 gives a rough
overview of the asset categories. Investment assets held by mutual funds,
hedge funds, foundations, and employee beneﬁt funds are not included, since
their underlying assets have already been counted. Derivative securities,
which include warrants, options, convertible bonds, and many later complex
inventions, derive their value—as we have seen—from that of an
“underlying” security such as the common stock of a company. Instead of
listing them separately, they’re understood to be included as part of their
underlying asset class.
How are your assets divided among the categories in table 8? The big three
for most investors are equities, interest rate securities, and real estate. Each
accounts for about a quarter of the total net worth of US households, though
the proportions ﬂuctuate, particularly when an asset class experiences a boom
or a bust.
Table 8: Major Asset Classes and Subdivisions

EQUITIES
Common Stock
Preferred Stock
Warrants and Convertibles
Private Equity
INTEREST RATE SECURITIES
Bonds
US Government
Corporate
Municipal
Convertibles
Cash
US Treasury Bills
Savings Accounts
Certificates of Deposit
Mortgage-Backed Securities
REAL ESTATE
Residential
Commercial
COMMODITIES
Agricultural
Industrial
Currencies
Precious metals
COLLECTIBLES (Art, gems, coins, autos, etc.)
MISCELLANEOUS (MARKETABLE) PERSONAL PROPERTY
Motor vehicles, planes, boats, jewelry, etc.
Investors who chase returns, buying asset classes on the way up and selling
on the way down, have had poor historical results. The tech bubble that ended
in 2000, the inﬂation in real estate prices that peaked in 2006, and the sharp
drop in equity prices in 2008–09 were especially costly for them. On the
other hand, the buy-low/sell-high investors, whom you might think of as
“contrarian” or “value” investors, have tended to outperform by switching
some funds between asset classes.

The tables in appendix B show that stocks and commercial real estate have
provided the best long-run results for investors. Interest rate investments have
been roughly break-even after taxes and inﬂation, and only modestly positive
for nontaxable investors. However, though equities have performed best in the
long run, they have had extended periods when they have been in drawdown,
meaning that they were below their previous all-time high. Real estate fell
sharply in the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008–09.
Assuming that the risks and returns for asset classes in the twenty-ﬁrst
century will be similar to what they were in the twentieth, long-term passive
investors are likely to do best in common stocks and income-producing
commercial real estate, though the data is sketchier for the latter. Diversifying
between the two may reduce risk and increase overall return.
Many investors do not want the level of risk involved in common stocks or
real estate, where the high overall returns are interrupted by savage reductions
in wealth.
A retired couple I knew had investments worth $6 million, which they
planned to use as their means of support for the rest of their lives. Spending 4
percent of this per year, with the unspent part invested in “something safe
that keeps up with inﬂation,” this couple could enjoy the inﬂation-adjusted
equivalent of about $240,000 pretax per year for the twenty-ﬁve remaining
years at least one of them might live. They chose to put half in tax-free
municipal bonds and the rest in equities. They feared a replay of the Great
Depression.
I thought this plan suited them. As neither husband nor wife was interested
in learning about ﬁnance and investing, they should remain passive investors.
Even my suggestion, in the early 1990s, to put about $500,000 in Berkshire
Hathaway, then trading at $12,000 per share, was too much for them to think
about. It would have been worth $9 million in 2016 when the husband, who
had outlived his wife, ﬁnally passed away. Having half their money in
relatively safe and stable municipal bonds would likely preserve enough
wealth to ride through adversity.
The years passed. Although their market value varied inversely with
interest rates, the municipal bonds paid an average of 4 percent or so, tax-
free, or about $120,000 annually. Overall, US equity investments increased
four or ﬁve times on average (before taxes, investment adviser fees, and other

costs), and Berkshire Hathaway advanced from $12,000 to almost $150,000,
fell to $75,000 during the crisis, then rose above $200,000 per share in 2016.
When the crisis of 2008 struck, equities lost half their value before
rebounding. As tax receipts shriveled, the massive deﬁcits of the US
government were echoed at state and local levels. The safety of municipal
bonds no longer seemed so assured. However, although they would have done
better in equities, they still had enough money and, feeling safe, didn’t worry
as they would have done watching the ups and downs in the value of a stock
portfolio.
Another investor I know structured his portfolio of a few million dollars to
produce income at the level he wished to spend. Accordingly, his portfolio
consists mostly of short- and intermediate-term bonds, on which he pays a
signiﬁcant income tax. Curiously, he thinks he can only spend income, in the
form of dividends and interest, and he views capital appreciation as
something less real. I tried, and failed, to convince him that higher total
return (after tax) means more money to spend and more money to keep, no
matter how it divides between realized income and unrealized capital gains or
losses. To own a stock like Berkshire Hathaway, which has never paid a
dividend, and therefore produces no “income,” would be unthinkable for him.
This investor’s costly preference for realized income rather than total return
(economic income) is common.
The investor who is willing to do a little thinking, along with the investing
work that follows, has many ideas to check. For instance, there has been a
strong inverse relationship between the last few years’ average price/earnings
ratio of the stock indexes like the S&P 500 and the total return on the index
over the next few years. Put simply, a high P/E ratio suggests stocks are
overpriced and are likely to underperform, whereas a low P/E indicates the
opposite. An investor who is diversiﬁed among asset classes might exploit this
by decreasing his allocation to stocks when P/Es have been historically higher
and shifting more into stocks when the P/Es have been lower.
I prefer to think in terms of the inverse of P/E, or earnings divided by
price, sometimes known as E/P but perhaps better described as earnings
yield. When the P/E is 20, for example, the earnings yield is 1/20, or
5 percent. An investor who owns the S&P 500 Index could think of it as a
low-grade long-term bond, comparing the earnings yield of this “bond” to the

total return from some benchmark for actual bonds, such as long-term
Treasuries or corporates of a particular quality grade. When the earnings
yield on the stock index is historically high relative to the bond benchmark,
the investor sells some of his bonds and buys stocks. When bond yields are
high compared with stocks, he shifts money from stocks back to bonds.
Stories sell stocks: the wonderful new product that will revolutionize
everything, the monopoly that controls a product and sets prices, the
politically connected and protected ﬁrm that gorges at the public trough, the
fabulous mineral discovery, and so forth. The careful investor, when he hears
such tales, should ask a key question: At what price is this company a good
buy? What price is too high? Suppose, after doing your analysis of the
company’s ﬁnancial statements, management, business model, and prospects,
you conclude that it’s worth buying at $40 a share, at which price you expect
not only a satisfactory excess risk-adjusted return but have a margin of safety
in case your analysis is ﬂawed. Suppose you also conclude that the expected
return at $80 is substandard, so the stock is likely overpriced. Typically you’ll
avoid investing in stocks when they are trading above your buy price but, if
you follow many companies carefully, from time to time some will be
attractive purchases. The range between your “buy” price and the “likely
overpriced” level, in this case from $40 to $80, is likely to be narrower for
better, more experienced investors, enabling them to participate in more
situations and with greater conﬁdence.
The value of the US stock market at the end of 2014 was a little over a
third of the world total. The sales pitch for investing in stocks of more than
one country is to win the usual beneﬁt of diversiﬁcation—lower risk for a
given level of return. The results have been mixed: excellent for 1970–86 and
mediocre from 1987 through 2015. In recent years, especially in crises, world
markets, reﬂecting the increasing globalization of information through
technology, have tended to move much more in tandem with the US market,
limiting the amount by which diversiﬁcation overseas reduces risk.
A majority of American households own their own home. For many it is a
large part of their wealth. How good an investment has it been? In 1952, one
of my uncles and his wife paid $12,000 for a small one-story wood-and-
stucco home in the working-class community of Torrance, California. In
2006, he sold his house near the peak of the real estate bubble, which was

especially extreme in California. Despite the deterioration of his
neighborhood into a borderline gang area, and the advanced age of his house,
he netted about $480,000 after taxes and commissions. His investment
multiplied forty times in ﬁfty-four years, for a compound annual return of 7
percent. Also, his expenses of a few percent a year in property taxes and
maintenance were less than what he would have paid to rent a similar
property.
Although stories like this abound, my uncle was lucky. According to
economist Robert Shiller, average US home prices after inﬂation increased
from 1890 to 2004 by about 0.4 percent a year, with the rate being about 0.7
percent in the later 1940–2004 period. It follows from this that making a
proﬁt should not be a primary reason for owning your home. You can rent
instead and do about as well ﬁnancially. However, you may want, as I do, the
non-quantiﬁed beneﬁts of homeownership: You are your own boss, able to
make changes and improvements at will without prior approval from a
landlord. If you have a ﬁxed-rate loan or have paid for your house in full, you
have the security of knowing that your future monthly costs are controlled.
As I’ve noted, taxable investors share their proﬁts with government, which
on average sharply reduces their wealth compared to a nontaxable investor
with the same portfolio. They do have a chance to oﬀset this in whole or in
part using the well-known idea of tax-loss selling.
In its simplest form, investors sell losing stocks before the end of the
current year, realizing losses that reduce the year’s income taxes. This
behavior contributes to the so-called January eﬀect where selling pressure in
December further depresses the stock prices of the year’s losers, followed by
a rebound and excessive performance in January. The impact is greater for
smaller companies. Investors used to realize a tax loss by selling a loser and
buying it back immediately, with little risk of economic loss (or gain). To
inhibit this loss of tax revenue by making it risky, the US government
introduced the “wash sale rule,” which says that anyone who sells a stock at a
loss and buys it back within thirty-one days may not recognize the loss for tax
purposes. The rule is worded also to thwart savvy investors inclined to swap
into an “equivalent” stock to get around this.
The ﬂip side of tax-loss selling is tax-gain deferral, where an investor who
wishes to sell a security with a large gain waits until after the end of the year,

deferring the tax due on it by one year. The money can be used for an
additional year before being turned over to the government.
Though laws change, generally the tax rate on long-term capital gains,
which are those from positions held for more than a year before being sold,
has been substantially less than the rate paid on short-term capital gains.
Thus, an investor with a proﬁt may beneﬁt by waiting for more than a year to
sell. On the other hand, short-term losses are ﬁrst used to oﬀset short-term
gains in the tax calculation, so they are often more valuable than long-term
losses, which means that it is often better to sell losers before you have owned
them for over a year.
Princeton Newport Partners reduced or deferred much of the partners’
taxable gains at a time when tax laws were diﬀerent from what they are now.
Nonetheless, interesting possibilities still exist.
—
Tax-loss selling can be organized to yield greater beneﬁts. Suppose you are a
taxable investor who is happy buying and holding a stock index fund. If
instead you buy a “basket” of twenty or thirty stocks that are chosen to track
the index, you may be able to harvest increased tax beneﬁts. That such a small
number of stocks can, together, act like an index is shown by the Dow Jones
Industrial Index, a basket of just thirty stocks. It has historically moved in
concert with the S&P 500, even though the two indexes are chosen by entirely
diﬀerent methods and the very similar price behavior of the two was not
planned. To do index arbitrage, PNP developed techniques in the mid-1980s
for ﬁnding baskets of stocks that did a particularly good job of tracking an
index. We used this very proﬁtably the day after “Black Monday,” October
19, 1987, to capture a spread of over 10 percent between the S&P 500 Index
and the futures contracts on it. Quants have honed this to a ﬁne art and,
through their trading, generally keep the price discrepancy very small.
To cut taxes, start with a tracking basket and, each time a stock drops, say,
10 percent, sell the loser and reinvest the proceeds in another stock or stocks
chosen so the new basket continues to track well. If you want only short-term
losses, which is usually best, sell within a year of purchase. I advise anyone

considering doing this in a serious way to study it ﬁrst with simulations using
historical databases.
When making an investment, it is important to understand how easy it
might be to sell later, a feature known as liquidity. The lack of liquidity in
hedge funds and in real estate would prove costly for investors in the 2008–09
recession.
After closing Ridgeline Partners in 2002, I watched with growing concern
as deﬁcits expanded and the prices of houses and equities soared. Meanwhile,
hedge funds were changing their terms to lock up investors, making it
increasingly diﬃcult to withdraw capital. Allowed withdrawal dates went from
monthly to quarterly, annually, or worse. Notices had to be given further in
advance: thirty days became forty-ﬁve, sixty, or ninety days. Funds imposed
limits known as throttles on the amount that could be withdrawn on any one
date. The SEC played right into this with a new requirement that managers of
hedge funds with over $100 million become registered investment advisers,
unless they locked up initial investments for at least two years. Many funds
joyously tied up their investors’ money, avoiding registration in the process—
a win–win for the funds, to the disadvantage of the investors the SEC was
meant to be protecting.
In the spring of 2008 I realized that the collapse in housing prices was
going to have much wider repercussions, so I issued partial withdrawal
notices to several hedge funds in which I was invested. Unfortunately, these
once fairly liquid investments were no longer so. The ﬁnancial crisis of 2008
intensiﬁed sharply in September, before most of my withdrawals were
scheduled to be paid, by which time the fund values had declined
signiﬁcantly. Many funds faced a crisis with their imprudently leveraged
assets. The failure to anticipate the ﬁnancial collapse by repositioning
themselves led to sharp losses for their investors. Hedge funds, supposedly
proﬁtable in down markets, fell 18 percent for the year, while large stocks
were oﬀ 37 percent and equity real estate investment trusts dropped over 40
percent. The new generation of hedge fund managers, carried away by the
credit and asset bubble, either didn’t know how to hedge or didn’t think it was
worth the cost.
The largest university endowments, such as Harvard, Yale, Stanford, and
Princeton, also with substantial hedge fund investments, had even less

ﬂexibility, since they had long favored illiquid alternative investments, such as
private-equity funds, commodities, and real estate. After leading the pack for
years with returns in the high teens, they now gave back much of their
accumulated edge, with percentage losses in the mid-20s, compared with 18
percent for the median large endowment.
Because you can’t get out in time when trouble is coming, the excess
returns you expect from illiquid investments may be oﬀset by the economic
impact of unforeseen future events.
The boom and bust in residential and commercial real estate that occurred
in the ﬁrst decade of this century introduced millions of homeowners to the
dangers of leverage. Encouraged by the industry’s promotional myth that
prices only went up, homeowners borrowed 80 percent, 90 percent, and even
100 percent to buy their houses. As prices did rise, millions retained this high
leverage by reﬁnancing or taking on second mortgages and home equity loans.
When in 2006 prices peaked and then fell, selling by homeowners who were
now underwater (meaning that they owed more than the current market
price), along with those who bought more house than they could handle and
couldn’t keep up with their payments, depressed prices further, triggering new
selling. The lesson of leverage is this: Assume that the worst imaginable
outcome will occur and ask whether you can tolerate it. If the answer is no,
then reduce your borrowing.
My understanding of how to use leverage began with my experience in the
casinos. When I deployed my card counting system for blackjack, it made
intuitive sense to bet more when the expected gain, or edge, was greater. The
question was, how much? The answer was in a 1956 article by Bell Labs
physicist John L. Kelly, who some said was the smartest person there, after
Claude Shannon. In his fascinating history of the topic, Fortune’s Formula,
William Poundstone points out that for a favorable bet that pays odds of $A
for a bet of $1, the optimal Kelly bet is the percent of your capital equal to
your edge, divided by the odds, A. In blackjack, the typical favorable edge
was usually between 1 and 5 percent and the odds, or payoﬀ per dollar bet,
averaged a little more than 1. So, following the criterion when the card count
was good, I bet a percentage of my bankroll that was a little less than my
percent advantage. Kelly’s criterion is not limited to two-value payoﬀs but

applies generally to any gambling or investing situation in which the
probabilities are known or can be estimated.
What happens if you do this? Kelly showed mathematically that the wealth
of someone following his system would, with increasing likelihood, exceed
the fortune of a competitor using an essentially diﬀerent betting scheme.
From blackjack, I went on to use Kelly’s formula to manage bets in baccarat
and to allocate money among investments.
Some key features of the Kelly Criterion are: (1) The investor or bettor
generally avoids total loss; (2) the bigger the edge, the larger the bet; (3) the
smaller the risk, the larger the bet. The Kelly Criterion, not having been
invented by the old-line academic economists, has generated considerable
controversy.
Bill Gross, co-founder of PIMCO, who learned about the Kelly Criterion
in the summer of 1969 when he played blackjack in Nevada, is still
inﬂuenced by it in making investment decisions. As he told The Wall Street
Journal, “Here at PIMCO, it doesn’t matter how much you have, whether it’s
$200 or $1 trillion. You’ll see it throughout our portfolio. We don’t have more
than 2 percent in any one credit. Professional blackjack is being played in this
trading room from the standpoint of risk management, and that’s a big part of
our success.”
Three caveats: (1) The Kelly Criterion may lead to wide swings in the total
wealth, so most users choose to bet some lesser fraction, typically one-half
Kelly or less; (2) for investors with short time horizons or who are averse to
risk, other approaches may be better; (3) an exact application of Kelly
requires exact probabilities of payoﬀs such as those in most casino games; to
the extent these are uncertain, which is generally the case in the investment
world, the Kelly bet should be based on a conservative estimate of the
outcome.
As I pointed out in Wilmott magazine, Warren Buﬀett’s thinking is
consistent with the Kelly Criterion. In a question and answer session with
business students at Emory University, he was asked, in view of the
popularity of Fortune’s Formula and the Kelly Criterion, to describe his
process for choosing how much to invest in a situation. He and his associate
Charlie Munger, when managing $200 million, put most of it into just ﬁve or
so positions. Sometimes he was willing to bet 75 percent of his fortune on a

single investment. Investing heavily in extremely favorable situations is
characteristic of a Kelly bettor.
—
In a typical life cycle, prior to adulthood we consume more than we produce.
As we acquire education and training, we contribute more to society than it
takes to support us. During this period, a prudent or fortunate investor will
accumulate wealth from which to draw upon later as he ages and reduces his
income from work.
At this point, to support yourself entirely from your savings, how much can
you spend each year without running short? There is no one answer, of
course, because of the diﬀerences in our individual needs, desires, and
circumstances. One retiree I know has $10 million. He lives well and believes
that if his investments keep up with inﬂation, he can spend $400,000 a year
for the next twenty-ﬁve years before he runs out, and that’s plenty for his
purposes. This is the most “conservative” way to look at the problem: Invest
in something like short-term US Treasury bonds, which have little risk and
keep up with inﬂation, divide what you have by the greatest number of years
you may live, and that is what you can safely spend each year.
What if you want the payouts to continue “forever,” as you might for an
endowment? Computer simulations showed me that with the best long-term
investments, such as stocks and commercial real estate, annual future
spending should be limited to the inﬂation-adjusted level of 2 percent of the
original gift. This surprisingly conservative ﬁgure assumes that future
investment results will be similar in risk and return to US historical
experience. In that case, the chance that the endowment is never exhausted
turns out to be 96 percent.
The 2 percent spending limit is so low because, if the fund is sharply
reduced in its early years by a severe market decline, a higher spending
requirement might wipe it out.
