Chapter 28
GIVING BACK
In 2003, Vivian and I oﬀered to endow a chair in mathematics at the
University of California, Irvine. We were guided by what we had learned
from the charitable giving we had done over several decades. One principle
was to make the gift transformative, with an impact well beyond what you’d
expect from the monetary amount. We also wanted to fund projects that
wouldn’t happen without our support. These conditions were met.
A new chairman had transformed the Math Department in the 1990s,
quelling the strife, marginalizing the bad actors, and bringing in talented new
faculty. Though there were endowed chairs on the campus, math had none.
By creating one, we could attract a star and raise the department to a still-
higher level. We stated our objectives as (1) to support the research of an
individual mathematician of exceptional talent; and (2) using an unusual
investment and distribution policy, to cause the principal to increase through
compound growth so that the chair eventually becomes one of the most richly
endowed in the world, thereby attracting extraordinary mathematical talent to
UCI.
To meet our ﬁrst objective, the endowment is to be used only to
supplement the research activities of the chair holder. These funds are in
addition to, not instead of, the standard faculty salary and support from the
university. If the university is not willing to hire someone, neither are we.
This arrangement is to remain unchanged even if, as we expect, the
distribution from the endowment one day grows far beyond the salary paid by
the campus to the chair holder.

Funds used for general departmental, campus, or university budgets, or for
any purpose not directly in support of the research activities of the chair
holder, are limited to 5 percent of the annual money drawn. We speciﬁed a
distribution rate of 2 percent annually, which means 0.1 percent covers
administration and 1.9 percent goes to the chair. We knew that limiting the
annual draw from the endowment to 2 percent was crucial to our long-term
compounding objective.
We donated appreciated Class A shares of Berkshire Hathaway, which
eliminated a possible long-term capital gain for us if, instead, we kept the
shares and someday sold them. Stock is to be sold only as needed to fund the
chair. However, just one Berkshire A share would create far more cash (over
$200,000 in 2016) than the annual payment from the endowment. Therefore,
when money is needed, we asked that an A share ﬁrst be exchanged for
ﬁfteen hundred B shares, the speciﬁed conversion ratio. Worth about $140
each in mid-2016, the B shares could then be sold in precise amounts to
create funds when required. The point is to keep the endowment fully
invested in stock until cash is needed. When we are no longer alive,
remaining shares will be exchanged for a broad, no-load, US stock index fund
with a very low expense ratio, such as the Vanguard S&P 500 or the
Vanguard Total US Stock Index.
What kind of growth in the value of the endowment might we expect?
Over the last two hundred years, a broad US stock index has grown about 7
percent faster than inﬂation. No one knows whether the future will be equally
good, but even if the increase exceeded inﬂation by only 5 percent, the net
annual growth in purchasing power would be 3 percent. Doubling on average
every twenty-four years, after a century the endowment and its annual
payouts would have grown over nineteen times in today’s dollars. In two
hundred years this rate of growth would increase it to 370 times what is was
worth when the chair was funded in 2003. If the United States continues to
prosper, if the university continues to exist, and if our investment and
distribution policies continue to be implemented, the power of compounding
may well lead to an endowment fund for our chair in mathematics that, valued
in today’s dollars, exceeds that of the current endowment for any chair that
now exists in the world.

For those who wonder how likely this is to come to pass, we remind them
of a similar plan by Benjamin Franklin to, in the words of biographer H. W.
Brands, make a bequest that “would be immediately useful, yet it would gain
in philanthropic power with passing years.”
Upon his death in 1790, Franklin set aside two special revolving funds of
1,000 pounds each. One went to Boston, and the other to Philadelphia. They
were to be lent in small portions at 5 percent per annum to help “young
married artiﬁcers.” Franklin expected each fund compounding at 5 percent
per annum to increase in a century to over 130,000 pounds, at which point
100,000 pounds was to be used for public works. In the second hundred years
Franklin thought the remainder could, at 5 percent, increase to more than 4
million pounds, which then was to be divided between the cities and their
states. In actuality, the Boston fund had grown to $4.5 million by 1990 and
the Philadelphia fund to $2 million.
How have we done so far? In the ﬁrst thirteen years, the principal of the
endowment more than doubled after spending and despite the 2008–09
market collapse. Regarding the future existence of the university, former
University of California chancellor Clark Kerr observed that “since 1520,
only about 85 institutions have remained continuously in existence…about
70…[of these]…are universities…few things last longer or are more resilient
than universities.”
Political fads and fashions come and go. Special-interest groups attempt to
advance their agendas by seeking preferences or handicaps for particular
subgroups. The history of mathematics through the ages shows contributions
from an enormous diversity of cultures, beliefs, and social systems. We
specify that there is to be neither preference given nor discrimination against
any candidate on the basis of his or her race, religion, national origin, gender,
or beliefs, and that mathematical merit and future potential, as well as the will
and ability to implement them, be the criteria for selection.
We hope we have planned well and that our gift, like Ben Franklin’s, will
accrue to the beneﬁt of many generations.
Another charitable opportunity that ﬁt our criteria arose in 2004. The
George W. Bush administration had severely restricted the allowed federal
funding of stem cell research. Further, labs doing proscribed research had to
be absolutely separate from federally funded facilities. Theoretically, if a

pencil paid for by government funds was used for forbidden work, the entire
federal grant could and would be revoked.
The nation faced a delay in the development of lifesaving therapies, a
massive brain drain as our scientists moved overseas to continue their work,
and the loss of our lead in stem cell technology. California voters stepped in,
approving a $3 billion bond issue to create CIRM, the California Institute for
Regenerative Medicine. The purpose was to provide ten years of support for
stem cell research freed from the Bush restrictions.
CIRM intended to fund ﬁve or six centers at university campuses
throughout the state, each one of which would eventually get hundreds of
millions of dollars. The money would help construct research facilities
entirely separate from any federal funding, as well as fund grants for faculty
to develop new stem cell treatments for diseases. UCI already had an
important group of stem cell experts and was strategically placed in biotech-
rich Orange County. However, to qualify, the campus had to complete
building the research center in two years, and signiﬁcant portions of the
funding had to come from both the university and private donors. Who in
Orange County was rich enough and willing to be the lead private donor?
The next part of the story begins back in 1966 when a senior at Duke
University had a horrible automobile accident. He lost his scalp and most of
his blood. Fortunately a state trooper found the scalp and it was reattached. It
took a long time for his body to heal. While spending much of his senior year
in the hospital, he read Beat the Dealer. That summer, between graduation
and an upcoming three-year enlistment in the navy, he ignored his mother’s
advice to the contrary and went to Las Vegas as one of the early card
counters.
Using Beat the Dealer as a guide, he brought a bankroll of $200 and ran it
up to $10,000. It took four months. The grueling days at the green felt tables
often lasted sixteen hours. It was a hard way to earn money but the real value,
as with so many before and after him, was in what the young man learned. As
he later said, “I had no clue that my four months at the tables in Las Vegas
were to lay the foundation for a successful career in Wall Street. [It] taught
me several important principles that I’ve employed for the past twenty-ﬁve
years…”

Returning from Vietnam in 1969, the card counter went to UCLA to get a
master’s degree in business. He read about convertible bonds in Beat the
Market, which inﬂuenced him to write his master’s thesis on that topic.
Graduating two years later in 1971, he found that jobs for MBAs were
scarce. But when he answered an ad for a junior credit analyst at Paciﬁc
Mutual, they liked both the man and the thesis topic.
In the subsequent decades, he co-founded Paciﬁc Investment Management
Company, which would one day manage almost $2 trillion. The Duke senior
had become a billionaire known worldwide as William H. Gross, the Bond
King. Bill and his wife, Sue, had already donated tens of millions for medical
causes, so a group at UCI arranged a lunch meeting with Bill to see if he and
Sue would give $10 million and become the lead donors for a new CIRM-
subsidized stem cell research center.
In the course of the conversation, I mentioned that a $10 million gift would
lead to as much as $600 million in the years to come, leveraging their
donation sixty times. I saw an instant ﬂash in Bill’s eyes and thought: Bill and
Sue must value the chance to make an impact far greater than the value of the
amount donated, just as Vivian and I do. After careful consideration, they
said yes.
So far, so good. But CIRM also required, as evidence of community
support, that signiﬁcant gifts come from several private donors, not just one.
Along with others, Vivian and I added our own contribution. CIRM followed
through with $30 million in 2008 and the $70 million facility was completed
in less than two years, under budget and ahead of schedule.
The University of California also met another test Vivian and I used when
considering a contribution. We wanted at least 90 percent of the amount we
gave to be spent directly on our target purpose, rather than on fundraising and
administration. You can check this percentage for any nonproﬁt organization
from its annual ﬁnancial statements by looking at the ratio of money spent on
the target to the amount of money spent overall.
Vivian and I were indebted to the University of California system for
giving us a quality education that we could not have aﬀorded otherwise. It
was also where we met. We enjoyed saying thank you.
The timing for funding the Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Research Center
was fortunate. The economic climate was about to change drastically for the

worse.
