Chapter 29
FINANCIAL CRISES: LESSONS
NOT LEARNED
On October 9, 2007, the S&P 500 reached an all-time closing high of 1,565.
Led by home prices, which began to fall from their inﬂated 2006 peak, it
drifted downward, then accelerated to a low of 676 on March 9, 2009, a
decline of 57 percent. A million dollars’ worth of the index at the high fell to
$430,000 at the low. Single-family homes declined 30 percent. One bright
spot was bonds. Borrowing declined and interest rates fell, pushing US
government and higher-quality corporates up strongly. Despite an oﬀset from
this rise in bond prices, the net worth of US households, which peaked in
June 2007 at $65.9 trillion, fell to $48.5 trillion during the ﬁrst quarter of
2009, a loss of 26 percent. It was the worst blow to national wealth since the
Great Depression eighty years earlier.
The lessons learned then by our grandparents were forgotten after two
generations. The stock market collapse that triggered that calamity was the
climax to a speculative bubble. As stock prices rose in the 1920s, “investors”
(mostly gamblers) came to believe that they would continue ever upward. A
leading economist of the day encouragingly declared that stocks had
permanently reached a new high plateau. But the key to the disaster that
followed was easy money and leverage. Investors could buy stocks on as little
as 10 percent margin, meaning that they could put up only 10 percent of the
purchase price and borrow the other 90 percent. It sounds eerily familiar
because it is. The 2008 collapse in housing prices had the same cause:
unlimited unsound loans to create highly leveraged borrowers.

Here’s how it worked in the stock market in 1929. If shares trading for
$100 each were purchased for $10 down and a $90 loan per share and
subsequently went to, say, $110, the happy investor then had $20 per share of
equity, equal to $110 minus the $90 he originally borrowed from his broker.
He doubled his money on a mere 10 percent rise in the stock. He can now
borrow 90 percent against this $10-per-share proﬁt to buy an additional $90
worth of stock, bringing the total value of his stock to twice what he
originally bought. If the investor repeats this each time his stock goes up
another 10 percent, both his equity and his loan will double again at each
step. After ﬁve such increases of 10 percent over the previous price, the stock
will trade at $161 per share, a 61 percent gain. Meanwhile our pyramiding
investor will have doubled his equity ﬁve times, to thirty-two times the
starting amount. Ten thousand dollars becomes $320,000. After ten steps up
of 10 percent, during which the investor’s stake undergoes ten doublings, the
stock will be at $259 and from the original purchase of $10,000 worth of
stocks using only $1,000, the investor now has $10,240,000 of the same
security. His equity is 10 percent of this. He’s a millionaire. Such is the
hypnotically enticing power of leverage.
But what happens if the stock price then drops 10 percent? Our giddy
investor loses his entire equity and his broker issues a margin call: Pay oﬀ the
loan—which is now more than $9 million—or be sold out. As stock prices
rose in 1929, investors leveraged themselves in this way to buy more, driving
prices higher. The positive feedback loop led to an average total return on
large-company stocks of 193 percent from the end of 1925 to the end of
August 1929. A purchase of $100 on no borrowing grew to $293, and our 10
percent down investor who pyramided might have doubled his money more
than ten times, gaining more than a thousand times his original investment.
However, as prices eased in September and October 1929, the equity of the
most highly leveraged investors vanished. When they were unable to meet
margin calls, their brokers sold their stock. These sales drove prices down,
wiping out investors who hadn’t been quite as leveraged, triggering a new
round of margin calls and sales, driving prices down further. As the equity
bubble burst, the greatest stock market decline in history began. Large-
company stocks eventually dropped by 89 percent, to one-ninth of their
earlier peak prices.

As waves of leveraged investors were ruined, bank and brokerage ﬁrms,
saddled with bad debts, were wiped out, in turn ruining other institutions to
whom they owed money. As the contagion spread, economic activity declined
sharply, US unemployment reached 25 percent, and a worldwide depression
ensued. It was only in January 1945—after more than ﬁfteen years and most
of World War II—that, on a month-end basis, large-company stocks ﬁnished
above their August 1929 all-time high. Again, an investment in corporate
bonds more than doubled on average over this period and long-term US
government bonds almost did so, showing that diversiﬁcation into asset
classes other than equities, though possibly sacriﬁcing long-term return, can
preserve wealth in bad times.
To prevent a repeat of 1929, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
empowered the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System to
prescribe the part of the purchase price the investor has to put up to purchase
a listed security. He may borrow any or all of the remainder. Since 1934 this
has varied between 40 percent and 100 percent. A 100 percent margin means
all purchases must be fully paid for with cash. In 2009, initial margin was 50
percent. Stock exchanges specify the minimum amount of margin that must
be maintained as prices ﬂuctuate, the so-called maintenance margin. For
instance, at the maintenance margin rate of 30 percent, when the net worth of
an investor’s account is less than 30 percent of the value of the stocks he
owns, his broker calls for cash to pay oﬀ enough of the loan to bring the
investor’s equity back to the 30 percent level. Otherwise, the broker will sell
oﬀ stock until this is accomplished.
The collapse of the banking system was fueled in part by depositors, who,
seeing some banks fail, rushed to withdraw their money from the others while
there was still time. To dispel such panics in the future, the Banking Act of
1933 (the second Glass-Steagall Act), separated commercial and investment
banking in an eﬀort to limit the impact of speculation. It also established the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which covered losses up to a
certain limit. (In 2015 the amount insured was $250,000 per account.) This
safety net was severely tested in the 1980s, when the savings and loan
collapse cost the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation—that is, US
taxpayers—$250 billion, about $1,000 for every man, woman, and child in
the country.

Beginning in the 1980s, government, including presidents, Congress, and
the Federal Reserve, gave us three decades of reduced regulation of the
ﬁnancial industry. Leverage, easy money, and “ﬁnancial engineering” then
brought a series of asset bubbles and threats to the stability of the ﬁnancial
system itself.
The ﬁrst worldwide shock was the crash of October 1987, when the US
market fell 23 percent in a single day. The cause was a massive feedback
event driven by the recently invented quant product of portfolio insurance,
leveraged through the new ﬁnancial futures markets. Fortunately, equities and
the economy recovered quickly. Unfortunately, little was learned about the
perils of excess leverage.
A second warning came in 1998 with the collapse of the hedge fund Long-
Term Capital Management (LTCM). Run by a high-rolling trader and two
winners of the Nobel Prize in Economics, this so-called dream team of the
best traders and academic ﬁnancial theorists in the world was on the verge of
losing the fund’s entire $4 billion of net worth. In the deregulatory
environment of the time, they were leveraged between thirty and one hundred
times. Proﬁts of less than 1 percent annualized were magniﬁed with borrowed
money into yearly returns of 40 percent or so. As long as the world of asset
prices was normal, all was well, but just as in 1929 when investors on 10
percent margin were wiped out by a small reversal in prices, so LTCM, with
its margin ranging from 1 to 3 percent, was ruined by a sea change in
markets.
As Nassim Taleb points out eloquently in his book The Black Swan,
apparent excess returns like those for LTCM in normal times may be illusory
as they may be more than oﬀset by infrequent large losses from extreme
events. Such “black swans” can be bad for some and good for others.
Ironically, having passed in 1994 on the chance to invest in LTCM and
temporarily get rich, I made money in 1998 by exploiting the distorted
market prices left in the wake of their collapse. LTCM’s loss was our gain in
Ridgeline Partners.
LTCM’s collapse threatened to put $100 billion or so of bad assets on the
books of other institutions. This would bankrupt some banks, brokerage
houses, or hedge funds, in turn spreading around more bad assets and
bankrupting more institutions. If allowed to happen, this domino eﬀect might

have led to a worldwide ﬁnancial collapse, but a Federal Reserve–inspired
consortium intervened, took over LTCM, supplied more funding, and
conducted an orderly liquidation.
Nothing appears to have been learned from this. Spearheaded by Congress,
the banking industry got what it wanted. The ﬁrst Glass-Steagall Act, enacted
in the Great Depression to separate commercial and investment banking, was
repealed in 1999. This allowed big institutions to take on more risk with less
regulation through the trading of massive amounts of unregulated derivative
securities. When Commodity Futures Trading Commission chairperson
(1996–99) Brooksley Born wanted to regulate the derivatives that would later
be a major cause of disaster, the PBS program Frontline detailed how she was
blocked in 1998 by the triumvirate of Federal Reserve chairman Alan
Greenspan, US Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, and Deputy US Treasury
Secretary Lawrence Summers, all of whom would later advise government on
the 2008–09 bailout. Nassim Taleb asked why, after a driver crashes his
school bus, killing and injuring his passengers, he should be put in charge of
another bus and asked to set up new safety rules.
The brief era of government surpluses, where revenues exceeded expenses,
ended. More tax cuts reduced revenue in 2001. Expenses increased with
wars, the military budget, and the cost of entitlements. Deregulation
continued. Americans spent more than they earned, consumed more than they
produced, and borrowed abroad to pay for it. The administration and
Congress, pushed by a powerful real estate lobby, promoted an expansion of
homeownership to millions who couldn’t aﬀord it. When my niece, who
worked in the mortgage industry, declined to approve unsound loans,
management sent them to another underwriter for approval. Homes, which
allegedly always appreciate, were bought with little or no money down and
low introductory teaser interest rates to lower the initial payments. Liar loans,
where the buyer supplies false ﬁnancial information, were easy to get and
became common.
The mortgage industry sold the loans to Wall Street, where they were
securitized, which means that they were packaged into pools to back a variety
of bonds. These were then rated by agencies such as S&P, Moody’s, and
Fitch, which—in a blatant conﬂict of interest—were paid by their customers,
the same ones whose securities they were supposedly rating objectively. High

ratings made the securities easier to sell, but when home prices began to
decline from their inﬂated peak in 2006, many of these securities, including
those that these agencies gave the very highest rating of AAA, turned out to
have little value.
As prices for residential real estate in 2006 climbed to heights never before
seen, many owners turned their houses into piggy banks. Having borrowed
almost 100 percent of market value in many cases, they were underwater as
soon as prices declined slightly. They then owed more than their houses were
worth.
The vast expansion of credit that fueled the housing bubble was based
largely on securities invented by a newly arrived army of ﬁnancial engineers,
or quants. Combining their training in mathematics and the hard sciences
with notions like the eﬃcient market hypothesis and its relative, the belief
that investors are rational, they built new products using models that
supposedly mirrored reality, but didn’t.
These products cost the US economy several trillion dollars in forever-lost
gross national product and societal waste, and caused comparable damage
worldwide. It’s worth taking time to understand them.
I encountered the ﬁrst of these, called CMOs, or collateralized mortgage
obligations, when they were developed in the mid-1980s. It helps ﬁrst to
analyze the individual home mortgages that were pooled as collateral for the
CMOs.
Suppose that your best friend, wanting to buy a home for $400,000, asks
you to lend him 80 percent of the purchase price, or $320,000, with the other
$80,000 provided by his savings. In return he agrees to repay the loan over
thirty years and to pay you interest at the going rate of 6 percent annually.
This is called a ﬁxed-rate loan, because the interest will remain at 6 percent
no matter how the market ﬂuctuates. If this were an interest-only loan then
your friend would pay you 6 percent of $320,000, or $19,200 a year, and
would ﬁnally repay the entire principal in one balloon payment of $320,000
at the end of thirty years.
Instead you elect a level-payment scheme in which your friend pays a ﬁxed
amount at the end of each month. This payment is a little larger than the
monthly interest-only payment of $1,600 ($19,200 ÷ 12) and, as computed
from standard real estate formulas, turns out to be $1,918.59. The extra

amount reduces the principal slightly after each payment, which in turn cuts
the amount of interest charged on the next payment. Thus, as time passes, an
increasing part of each payment goes toward reducing the principal. The
principal declines slowly at ﬁrst, but near the end of the thirty years, the loan
has been mostly paid oﬀ and the interest due is small, so the payments then
mainly reduce principal. Your security for the loan is your friend’s house.
Your contract speciﬁes that in the event your friend defaults on the loan, you
can sell the house and use the proceeds to pay yourself part of, or hopefully
all of, what he owes. But you have no further recourse.
If housing prices have never gone down by much, at least not for a long
time, what’s your risk? Well, this question is about average prices, not those
of individual houses. Your friend’s neighborhood could turn into a slum. Or
he might have bought the house in New Orleans shortly before Hurricane
Katrina. In any case there are risks that threaten you with the loss of some or
all of the money you have lent.
Life and casualty insurance companies deal with risks like this all the time.
What they do is sell many insurance policies, any one of which may cost the
insurance company more than it is paid in premiums—but their degree of
risk, spread over the entire pool, is expected (on the basis of past experience)
to leave the insurance company with a proﬁt after it pays casualty losses and
expenses.
The same idea is behind collateralized mortgage obligations. Assemble
hundreds or thousands of mortgages. Four thousand mortgages at $250,000
each creates a $1 billion pool! Collect the interest and principal payments
from each of these mortgages and use them to pay people to whom you have
sold shares of the pool. This stream of monthly payments is much like those
from a bond, and shares of the CMO pools were priced like bonds.
However, to price them accurately we need to know how much we are
going to lose on defaults. When I studied this for Princeton Newport, I
learned that the practice in the ﬁnancial industry was to assume that default
rates would follow normal historical experience. There was no attempt to
quantify and adjust for infrequent large-scale bad events like the Great
Depression, and the massive increase in defaults that could occur. The models
failed to incorporate Black Swan risk into the pricing.

Another problem was forecasting the rate at which homeowners might pay
oﬀ their mortgages early, perhaps to reﬁnance their existing home. A thirty-
year mortgage held for the full period is much like a long-term bond. Paid oﬀ
in ﬁve to ten years, it is more like an intermediate bond, and if it is retired in
two or three years, the payments resemble those from a very short-term bond.
Since interest rates vary, depending on the length of time until a bond is
redeemed (this variation in rates is known as the term structure of interest
rates), the correct price to pay for the CMO depends on how rapidly the
mortgages in the pool are paid oﬀ as well as on their default rate. As I noticed
back in the 1980s, the prepayment rate on ﬁxed-rate mortgages is highly
unpredictable. When the Federal Reserve’s actions cause long-term rates to
drop, new mortgages are cheaper than existing ones. Homeowners then pay
oﬀ their mortgages early and reﬁnance to lower their monthly payments. On
the other hand, if rates rise, homeowners hang on to their ﬁxed-rate existing
loans, causing prepayment rates to plunge.
With pricing based on bad models, Wall Street used CMOs to pour credit
into the housing market. Mortgage-lending companies reﬁnanced new home
mortgages, then sold them to banks and Wall Street ﬁrms, getting new cash to
fund additional mortgages. The banks and Wall Street ﬁrms pooled these
mortgages to back CMOs, which they sold to “investors,” getting their cash
back to recycle into the purchase of yet more mortgages to back new CMOs.
Everybody got rich. The mortgage origination companies collected fees
from the homeowner borrowers. The banks and brokers bought the
mortgages, issued CMOs, and sold them at a proﬁt. They also had a steady
income from servicing the CMOs, collecting the payments from the mortgage
pools, deducting a fee, and distributing the rest to the CMO holders. How
could so many fees be collected and yet leave anything that could be sold for
a proﬁt to the buyers of the CMO shares? This was done via ﬁnancial magic.
The CMOs were divided into tranches (French for “slices”), creating a
hierarchy of CMO classes, with the most preferred being paid ﬁrst and the
least preferred getting what was left, if anything. The rating agencies, paid by
the CMO issuers to estimate the quality of the tranches, erred substantially in
the direction of optimism. Since higher-rated securities sell for more than
those of lower ratings, the CMOs sold for more than they would have
otherwise. The magic was that the sum of the parts (tranches) were sold for

more than the cost of the whole. Politicians prospered, too, as the real estate
and securities industries contributed enthusiastically to their reelection
campaigns. Everyone was winning and the party was on.
The academic community made its contributions. As Nobel Prize winner
Paul Krugman pointed out, macroeconomists assured us that, due to their
greater understanding, catastrophic failures could no longer occur. Scott
Patterson details in his book The Quants how all of this was facilitated by
quants who, with calculations based on academic ﬁnancial theory, assured
everyone that their model prices were accurate and the risks small.
Hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth of CMOs were sold to investors
worldwide. The idea was so good that it was expanded to CDOs—
collateralized debt obligations—where other kinds of debt like loans on autos
or credit cards were used instead of home mortgages. Risky as these proved
to be, an even more dangerous security, the credit default swap, or CDS,
appeared on the scene, to the unconcern of sleeping regulators. A CDS is
essentially an insurance policy that a lender can purchase to protect himself
against a default by the borrower. Typically the insurance is bought for a
certain number of years for a ﬁxed annual payment. For instance, on the
$320,000 loan to your home-buying friend, you might be worried about a
default in the next ﬁve years so, if it were available, you might purchase
insurance for the period at, say, $1,600 per year, or 0.5 percent of the initial
loan amount.
Trillions of dollars’ worth of these credit default swaps were issued, and
began trading like any other security. To buy or sell these contracts, you
didn’t have to own the debt the CDS insured. That in itself wasn’t the
problem, since the ﬁnancial markets are simply one big casino, though one
with economic beneﬁts, and all investment positions are equivalent to bets.
The problem was that the issuers of CDSs could issue them with no collateral
other than their “full faith and credit,” meaning that if their bets lost they
might not have the money to pay.
The margin (collateral set aside to assure payment) was generally small to
zero. These unregulated items often were held by subsidiaries, so they
wouldn’t appear explicitly in the ﬁnancial statement of the parent company. A
case in point was American International Group (AIG), a huge worldwide
insurance company, which—when the crisis hit in 2008—was threatened

with collapse. During the US government handout of hundreds of billions to
save the ﬁnancial system, AIG was the largest single recipient—a whopping
$165 billion. They had issued trillions of dollars in CDSs through a
subsidiary, backed mainly by their name. As the bonds they insured dropped
in price, they had to post collateral to back the (now losing) CDSs they had
sold. Eventually, they couldn’t pay, threatening to create hundreds of billions
in losses for banks and investment houses worldwide. Not only did the US
bailout of AIG help domestic companies such as Goldman Sachs, which held
$10 billion of bad paper assets from AIG that was absorbed by the taxpayers,
but the largesse was distributed worldwide to cover AIG’s defaults.
To see how crazy this was, imagine that Joe Sixpack oﬀered to sell you a
CDS on your $320,000 loan to your friend for $1,600 a year for ﬁve years.
Joe is doing well, has a million-dollar house with no debt, and is therefore
“good for the money.” Happy with $1,600 a year in extra income, Joe
continues to sell CDSs on residential mortgages. Unregulated, he sells a
thousand just like the one he sold you, and his income grows to $1.6 million a
year. If these loans average $320,000 each, he is insuring a total of $320
million, all backed by his million-dollar house. You object, arguing that Joe
couldn’t sell this many CDSs because once he’s sold a few of them people
would realize there was a good chance he couldn’t pay oﬀ in a crisis. Ah, but
what if Joe did this in a subsidiary and didn’t disclose the vast scale of his
operations? Welcome to AIG.
Each CDS Joe Sixpack sells is a potential future liability. It should be
carried as such on his books and will prove to be a good sale only if the
premiums he receives, plus reinvestment income, are more than enough to
cover the future claims against the credit default insurance he has sold. Just
like the similar situation that arises for life insurance companies, Joe needs to
set aside a reserve on his books to cover these future payouts, and he needs to
increase those reserves as the likelihood of payouts increases. If instead Joe
collects the income and doesn’t put aside a reserve, then he is running a Ponzi
scheme like the one I described at XYZ Corporation in the 1970s, where they
sold call options on precious metals far too cheaply, called the proceeds
income, and did not set aside an appropriate amount for payouts they might
have to make later to the option holders. How did AIG’s CDS operation diﬀer
from either Joe’s scheme or XYZ’s?

In 2004, ﬁve major investment banks persuaded the US Securities and
Exchange Commission to increase their allowable leverage. Previously, they
could borrow $11 for every $1 of net worth. This meant they only had $1 out
of every $12, or 8.33 percent, as a cushion against disaster. Under its
chairman Christopher Cox, the SEC allowed Goldman Sachs, Morgan
Stanley, Merrill Lynch, Bear Stearns, and Lehman Brothers to expand their
leverage to something like 33:1, rivaling the levels that doomed the ill-fated
hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management just six years earlier. With, say,
$33 in assets and $32 of liabilities for each $1 of net worth, a decline of a
little over 3 percent in assets would wipe out their equity. Once this happened
and a bank was known to be technically insolvent, creditors would demand
payment while they could still get it, triggering a classic run on the bank, just
as in the 1930s.
When the crisis hit four years later in 2008, the same length of time it took
excess leverage to destroy LTCM, the run on the bank threatened to destroy
all ﬁve of these geared-up Goliaths. Three of these ﬁve investment banks
ceased to exist as independent entities; the other two, Morgan Stanley and
Goldman Sachs, were saved by government intervention plus, for Goldman, a
multibillion-dollar purchase of 10 percent preferred stock and warrants by
Warren Buﬀett’s Berkshire Hathaway. Both returned to prosperity in 2009,
with Goldman triumphant. Partners were on track to share near-record
bonuses of between $20 billion and $30 billion. The elimination or
marginalization of some rivals was not a bad thing. Appearing pixyish in his
public appearances, when CEO Lloyd Blankfein was asked about the gigantic
bonuses, he explained that the ﬁrm was “doing God’s work.” The argument is
the standard academic one that more trading creates eﬃcient capital markets,
with better prices for buyers and sellers, for the beneﬁt of all humankind. It
came out later that part of God’s work was bankers knowingly selling
mortgage-based junk securities while at the same time making massive bets
that would pay oﬀ if their clients were ruined. When you compare the pay
scale for God’s bankers with that for his clerics, you must conclude that the
work of bankers is indeed divine.
Though there were individual personal and institutional casualties among
the ﬁnancial establishment, the politically connected wealthy raided the public
purse for a trillion dollars to save entities that were “too big to fail.”

Expensive sops were disbursed to mollify and reward special-interest groups.
Those who turned in a vehicle to be scrapped, and then bought another car,
were paid up to $4,500 in a program known as Cash for Clunkers. Spun as
good for the environment, the only requirement was that the new purchase get
gas mileage of one to four miles a gallon more, depending on the category of
vehicle. The environmental beneﬁts of this small gain in mileage were more
than oﬀset by the extra pollution produced in the manufacture of a whole new
automobile. Car dealers, however, cheered as the boost from replacement-car
sales cleared inventory from their packed lots.
As full-time and part-time unemployment rates continued to climb,
unemployment insurance was repeatedly extended. This is good to the extent
it is needed, but it would seem to be in the public interest to employ as many
of those idle beneﬁciaries as possible in doing useful work. Programs like the
Works Progress Administration (WPA) and the Civilian Conservation Corps
(CCC), which I remember from my childhood, built roads, bridges, and
public works during the 1930s, and the improvement in our infrastructure
beneﬁted us all for decades.
The real estate industry got its political handout. First-time homebuyers got
an $8,000 fully refundable tax credit—“fully refundable” means you can
apply for and get the $8,000 check even if you never paid a penny of tax in
your life. The deceptive language is typical of politicians. Under this poorly
monitored program a four-year-old bought a house. At least it was his ﬁrst
time.
In some cases, unrepentant mortgage lenders accepted the tax “refund” as
the down payment, requiring no additional equity from the buyer. Congress
further rewarded the real estate lobby by extending the program to those who
hadn’t bought a house in the last three years. Inspired by Cash for Clunkers,
why not pass a new program called Dollars for Demolition in which people
who own run-down residences get paid a “fully refundable” tax credit of, say,
$100,000 to tear down their house and build a new one? This would
reenergize the construction industry—a key part of the American economy.
There is no end to the possibilities.
—

Asset bubbles, where investor mania drives prices to extreme heights, are a
recurring puzzle for investors. Can you proﬁt? Can you avoid major losses? In
my experience, it has been easy to spot a bubble after it is well under way, as
prices and valuations far exceed historical norms and seem to have no
economic sense. Examples include the savings and loan boom in the 1980s,
the tech stock overvaluation in 1999–2000, and the great inﬂation in housing
prices that peaked in 2006. Making a proﬁt is trickier. Like a Ponzi scheme,
it’s not easy to tell when it will end. If you bet against it too early you can be
ruined in the short run even though you are right in the long run. As Keynes
said, the market can remain irrational longer than you can remain solvent.
What about avoiding losses? Once you spot the bubble, you simply don’t
invest in it. However, there is the problem of spillover damage or contagion.
The collapse of housing prices from 2006 to 2010 didn’t just hurt speculators
and those who bought too late. Derivatives spread the damage throughout the
world. In March 2009, when the S&P 500 had fallen 57 percent from its
peak, I could not tell whether to buy stocks or to sell what I had. Either
decision might have been a disaster. If we continued into a major worldwide
depression, buying more would be costly. In the other scenario, the one that
occurred, this was the bottom, and stocks rebounded over 70 percent in less
than a year. Warren Buﬀett, who had better information and insight than
almost anyone, later told The Wall Street Journal’s Scott Patterson that at one
point he was looking into the abyss and considering the possibility that
everything could go down, even Berkshire Hathaway. It was only when the
US government indicated it would do whatever was necessary to bail out the
ﬁnancial system that he realized we were saved.
How can we prevent future ﬁnancial crises driven by the systemic and
scarcely regulated use of extreme leverage? One obvious step is to limit
leverage by requiring suﬃcient collateral to be posted by both counterparties
when they trade. That’s what is done on regulated futures exchanges, where
contracts are also standardized. This model has worked well for decades, is
easy to regulate, mostly by the exchanges themselves, and has had few
problems.
Institutions that are “too big to fail,” and have a signiﬁcant risk of doing so,
should be broken into pieces that are small enough to fail without
jeopardizing the ﬁnancial system. As Alan Greenspan ﬁnally admitted, “Too

big to fail is too big.” This is a catchy sound bite but it misstates the real
problem. It’s not the mere size of an institution that creates the danger. It is
the size of the risk to the ﬁnancial system from a failure. As Paul Krugman
points out, Canada’s ﬁnancial system was as concentrated in big institutions as
was that of the United States yet Canada didn’t have massive mortgage
defaults, collapsing ﬁnancial institutions, and giant bailouts. The diﬀerence
was that Canada had strict standards for mortgages and tighter limits on bank
leverage and risk.
Our corporate executives speculate with their shareholders’ assets because
they get big personal rewards when they win—and even if they lose, they are
often bailed out with public funds by obedient politicians. We privatize proﬁt
and socialize risk.
The ability of corporate executives to capture an increasing share of public
wealth is reﬂected in what CEOs earn. Compared with one of their average
workers, CEOs in 1965 took home 24 times as much but “four decades later
the ratio was 411 to 1.” Another indication of increasing economic inequality
is the share of national income captured by the top one-hundredth of 1
percent of all earners. In 1929 they captured 10 percent of national income.
This fell to about 5 percent during the Great Depression, gradually rising
again beginning in the 1980s. In the last few years the share of national
income claimed by these 12,500 households broke its 1929 record of 10
percent and continues to increase. These executives claim that their
compensation inspires them to be the creative engines of capitalist society,
beneﬁting all of us. The crisis of 2008 is one of our rewards.
Studies done both before and after the 2008–09 recession showed that the
larger the percentage of corporate proﬁt paid to the top ﬁve executives, the
poorer the earnings and the stock performance of the company. These
superstars tended to drain their companies rather than beneﬁt them. The
executives claim that “market forces” determine their salary. However, as
Moshe Adler, in his article “Overthrowing the Overpaid,” points out,
economists David Ricardo and Adam Smith, writing more than two hundred
years ago, “concluded that what a person earns is determined not by what that
person has produced but by that person’s bargaining power. Why? Because
production is typically carried out by teams…and the contribution of each
member cannot be separated from that of the rest.”

A wave of populist outrage has led to demands for laws to limit executive
pay. A simpler and more eﬀective solution is to empower the shareholders.
They are the owners of the company and the ones looted by their oﬃcers and
directors.
At present, most corporate boards run their ﬁrms like third-world ﬁefdoms.
When shareholders vote to elect directors, generally nominated by the self-
perpetuating board, they typically can vote yes or no. One yes vote can elect a
director in the face of a million no votes. The company rules are deliberately
designed to make it diﬃcult or impossible for independent shareholders to
nominate directors or place issues on the ballot. Instead, corporations—their
legal existence already being permitted and regulated by the state—should be
required to conduct democratic elections following the usual voting rules in
our American democracy. Moreover, any block of shareholders that together
holds some speciﬁed percentage of the shares should have the unrestricted
right to nominate directors and to put issues on the ballot, including the
replacement of board members and top executives.
Some companies disenfranchise shareholders by having two or more
classes of shares with diﬀerent degrees of voting power. Management may,
for instance, own A shares with ten votes each and the public may own B
shares with one vote each. How would you like to live in a country where any
“insider” could cast ten votes and any “outsider” got only one? Abolish this
and make it one share, one vote. Another problem arises because, currently,
institutions that hold shares in custody for their owners can cast proxy votes
for those shareholders who decline to vote. These proxies usually perpetuate
current management and ratify its decisions. Change this so that the only
votes that count are those cast directly by the shareholder; so-called proxy
votes would not count.
These two measures—democratic elections and shareholder rights to put
issues to a vote—would allow the owners of the company, namely, the
shareholders, to exert control over the compensation of top executives, their
so-called agents, and would, in my opinion, be far more eﬀective and accurate
than direct government regulation.
Our economy slowly recovered in the years following the 2008–09 crisis.
However, little has been done to add safeguards to prevent a recurrence. As
the philosopher George Santayana famously warned, “Those who cannot

remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” Though the institutions of
society have diﬃculty learning from history, individuals can do so. Next, I
share some of what I’ve learned.
