Chapter 30
THOUGHTS
To end this story of my odyssey through science, mathematics, gambling,
hedge funds, ﬁnance, and investing, I would like to share some of what I
learned along the way.
Education has made all the diﬀerence for me. Mathematics taught me to
reason logically and to understand numbers, tables, charts, and calculations as
second nature. Physics, chemistry, astronomy, and biology revealed wonders
of the world, and showed me how to build models and theories to describe
and to predict. This paid oﬀ for me in both gambling and investing.
Education builds software for your brain. When you’re born, think of
yourself as a computer with a basic operating system and not much else.
Learning is like adding programs, big and small, to this computer, from
drawing a face to riding a bicycle to reading to mastering calculus. You will
use these programs to make your way in the world. Much of what I’ve learned
came from schools and teachers. Even more valuable, I learned at an early age
to teach myself. This paid oﬀ later on because there weren’t any courses in
how to beat blackjack, build a computer for roulette, or launch a market-
neutral hedge fund.
I found that most people don’t understand the probability calculations
needed to ﬁgure out gambling games or to solve problems in everyday life.
We didn’t need that skill to survive as a species in the forests and jungles.
When a lion roared, you instinctively climbed the nearest tree and thought
later about what to do next. Today we often have the time to think, calculate,
and plan ahead, and here’s where math can help us make decisions. For
instance, are seatbelts and air bags “worth it”? Suppose we upgrade a hundred

million vehicles at a cost of $300 each, a total of $30 billion, and have ﬁve
thousand fewer traﬃc deaths per year. If these vehicles with their added
safety features are around for ten years, that’s ﬁfty thousand lives saved at a
cost of $30 billion, or $600,000 per life. Though many in the auto industry
disagreed, we spent the money and saved the lives.
What about the pack-a-day smoker? Forty years of this will make his life
on average seven years shorter. Each cigarette not only brings death twelve
minutes closer, but adds health problems to spoil one’s remaining years. Then
there are the costs to the rest of us, namely, higher medical costs in the ﬁnal
years, more sick days during the working years, and secondhand smoke
damage. But these are averages. Some smokers do not die of smoking-related
diseases, whereas others die at an early age. It’s like gambling at roulette. On
average you lose 5 cents when you bet $1. But this is an average. Some
gamblers are wiped out quickly and others may hold their own for quite a
while.
One of the major public policy issues today is the trade-oﬀ between the
costs and the beneﬁts of certain procedures. Some choices are stark. Is it
better to spend $500,000 to save the life of someone with super-drug-
resistant tuberculosis or to use the same amount to save ﬁfty lives by
delivering ﬁfty thousand doses of ﬂu vaccine at $10 each to schoolchildren?
Statistical thinking can help us with choices like these.
I believe that simple probability and statistics should be taught in grades
kindergarten through twelve and that analyzing games of chance such as coin
matching, dice, and roulette is one way we can learn enough to think through
such issues. Understanding why casinos usually win might help us avoid
gambling and teach us to limit our losses to their entertainment value.
Gambling now is largely a socially corrosive tax on ignorance, draining
money from those who cannot aﬀord the losses.
Most of what I’ve learned from gambling also is true for investing. People
mostly don’t understand risk, reward, and uncertainty. Their investment
results could be much better if they did. For instance, years ago my
homeowners’ association kept their cash reserves in thirty-day US Treasury
bills for absolute safety. However, they spent only about a ﬁfth of these
reserves each year. I suggested that they put a ﬁfth of their reserves into US
Treasuries maturing in the coming year, another ﬁfth to mature the year after,

and so forth. This well-known strategy, called laddering, generally pays oﬀ
because longer-term US bonds, with more price ﬂuctuation before they
mature, generally yield more. Five-year bonds have beaten thirty-day T-bills
by about 1.8 percent annually over the last eighty-three years. The treasurer
of the association, a professional accountant, opposed the idea at ﬁrst but later
agreed and used it proﬁtably.
I would like to see basic ﬁnance taught in elementary and secondary
schools. If more of our citizens knew how to balance their checkbooks and to
create and understand income statements and balance sheets for themselves,
they might do better at choosing homes they can aﬀord. Properly managing
investments would better prepare people for retirement and make them less
dependent on society during their lifetimes.
One of my great pleasures from the study of investing, ﬁnance, and
economics is the discovery of insights about people and society. The physical
sciences have rules such as the law of gravitation that generally hold true in
the world as we know it. But human beings and the way they interact aren’t
covered by broad, unchanging theories and may never be. Instead I’ve come
across more limited concepts that tie things together and serve as shortcuts to
understanding.
One of these is a favorite of libertarians and free-market fans, introduced
by Adam Smith back in 1776. Smith suggested that in an economy of many
small buyers and sellers, each trying to increase his own proﬁt, our collective
beneﬁt would be maximized as though guided by an “invisible hand.” The
notion is of limited use, because most markets are not as Smith assumed.
Take computer chips: 99.8 percent of them, worldwide, are made by just two
US companies, and the smaller one is ﬁghting to survive.
An opposite concept to the magic of the invisible hand is “the tragedy of
the commons,” as explained in 1968 by Garrett Hardin. Imagine a natural
resource that anyone can freely use, such as—once upon a time—catching
ﬁsh in the ocean. In the eighteenth century, schools of cod were so vast that
Benjamin Franklin was amazed when his ship plowed through them for days
at a time. Now, after two centuries of overﬁshing, this population has
collapsed. How has individual self-interest maximized social good? On a
global scale we have the example of pollution. Individual humans have freely
burned fossil fuels and greatly increased the amount of greenhouse gases such

as CO2, leading to a continuing rise in the earth’s temperature over the last
century. The tiny particles also emitted have caused lung diseases and deaths.
But each polluter gains more individually from his own actions than he loses,
so he has no direct pressure to change.
The solution for society illustrates another neat unifying concept, that of
“externalities.” In the arcane jargon so beloved by the economic priesthood,
an externality is a cost or beneﬁt for society that results from private
economic activity. The externality is negative in the case of air pollution. The
“fair” solution then becomes obvious: Estimate the damage and tax it by that
amount. Externalities also can be positive. If I ﬁreproof my house it protects
my neighbors, and tends to both reduce the costs of local ﬁre services and
increase proﬁts for my insurer. Instead of being taxed, I may be rewarded by
a drop in my insurance rates.
Berkshire Hathaway’s Charlie Munger presents his list of such thinking
tools in the engaging Poor Charlie’s Almanack: The Wit and Wisdom of
Charles T. Munger. This multidisciplinary collection of insights includes a
favorite of mine for understanding deals and relationships, namely, “Look for
the incentives,” which is closely related to ﬁnding “Cui bono?” or “Who
gains?” Cui bono instantly explains why seven thousand US gun dealers,
lining the border with Mexico from Tijuana to Corpus Christi, are allowed
freely to provide nearly all the military-level arms used by the Mexican drug
cartels. It explains why Congress mandated the wasteful folly of corn-based
ethanol, the production of which causes almost as much pollution as it oﬀsets
and drives up food prices for everyone. If ethanol use were the goal, why was
there, until the end of 2011, a 54-cent-per-gallon tariﬀ to keep Brazilian
ethanol out?
More insights come from a much bigger idea of fundamental importance
for all investors, the recognition that the group I call the politically connected
rich are the dominant economic and political power in the United States. This
is a key concept for understanding what happens in our society and why it
happens. They are the ones who buy politicians, using campaign
contributions, career opportunities, investment proﬁts, and more. As owners
of wealth who also control power, they run the country and will continue to
do so. We saw how they used the government to bail them out of the ﬁnancial
crisis of 2008–09.

Let me be clear. I don’t object to some people being richer, even much
richer, than others. I object to gain of wealth through political connections
rather than earning it by merit. If a basketball franchise pays my neighbor
Kobe Bryant $20 million a year because it takes that much to get him, ﬁne.
But if hedge fund managers bribe politicians to put a clause in the laws
cutting the tax rate on much of their income to a fraction of the percentage
the average worker pays, I object.
Simplistically, there are two types of rich, those who use government to tilt
the playing ﬁeld in their favor and those who don’t. The former pay taxes at a
rate well below the middle class and the latter pay at substantially higher
rates. The blended rate of the two groups is similar to that paid by the upper
middle class. But the politically connected rich typically point to the higher
rates paid by their nonconnected rich fellows as a cover to demand still more
tax breaks for themselves. The power in this group resides mostly in those
who are in the upper 0.01 percent of wealth holders, currently worth $125
million or more.
Another theme for dealing with public policy issues is to simplify rules,
regulations, and laws. Get government out of the business of micromanaging.
For example, California and many other states have their own income tax
code, which resembles the federal tax code but is diﬀerent enough so that a
resident must complete and ﬁle a state return that is as detailed and complex
as his federal return. Here’s my solution. Let the state tax for individuals
simply be a fraction of the federal tax, to be set by the legislature, and chosen
to raise the same total revenue as the current tax. The return would ﬁt on a
postcard, saving hours for each taxpayer and freeing several thousand
unproductive state employees for useful work in the private sector.
Eliminating three thousand state of California employees at a cost of
$100,000 each, including salaries, beneﬁts, and overhead, would save the
hard-pressed state $300 million a year, not to mention all the time and money
saved by citizens. So we have a revenue-neutral proposal that is a net gain for
the state.
Even greater beneﬁts come when we apply this approach to the federal tax
code. Tax rates are high because the loophole-riddled regulations allow many
to pay less or even nothing. A revenue-neutral ﬂat tax could make the tax
code simple and fair, and would catch those who currently are getting a free

ride from the rest of us. All income would be taxed equally, with an
exemption set at, say, one and a half times the poverty level. Those below this
cutoﬀ would pay no tax. As this entire group has only a small part of national
income, the impact of these exemptions would be minor. Because much
currently untaxed income would be taxed, the estimated revenue-neutral rate
would be 20 percent or so. Again, we could have an enormous beneﬁt to
society. Hundreds of thousands of government employees, tax lawyers,
accountants, and tax preparers would be freed to make (hopefully) a
productive contribution to society. The value-added tax is another proposal
that recaptures those who have escaped taxation and cuts the top tax rate in
half.
Having an idea that beneﬁts society is the ﬁrst step. The hardest part, more
often than not, is passing laws to implement it. This has become harder, as
the political clash between the parties in the United States has become
extreme. Politics, once called the art of the possible, is becoming the art of
the impossible. Gridlock between uncompromising factions was one cause of
the fall of the Roman Empire.
History, arguably, has had just two great superpowers, the Roman Empire
after the defeat of Carthage, and the United States after the fall of the Soviet
Union. Of great importance for long-term investors is whether the US will be
the dominant world power in the twenty-ﬁrst century, or whether we have
peaked, dissipating our strength in costly foreign wars, ﬁnancial
mismanagement, and domestic strife. The ﬁrst scenario could lead to another
century of equities returning 7 percent a year after inﬂation. The other
outcome could be far less pleasant. I reassure the pessimists by noting that
we’re still rich, still innovating, and besides, Rome wasn’t destroyed in a day.
Nations that were once among the most powerful, such as Britain, France,
Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, and Portugal, are still among the most
developed and civilized of countries. To the optimists I mention the obvious:
endless deﬁcits, massive wastage of lives and wealth in wars, political
subsidies (pork, bailouts, corporate welfare, paying the able-bodied not to
work), and destructive partisanship in all three branches of government.
Meanwhile, the rise of China is transforming the geopolitical and economic
landscape.

One of the most ominous and underappreciated threats to our future is in
education and technology. My own state of California is a leader in the race
to the bottom. The anti-tax movement has starved the state of revenue,
especially the educational system. The ten campuses of the University of
California, once among the ﬁnest public systems of higher education in the
world, raised tuition to $12,000 a year by 2015. When I was a student in
1949 it was $70, which is like $700 today, adjusting for inﬂation. A good
education was available to any qualiﬁed student. The university’s graduates
went on to lead the technological revolution; but by 2014 the state contributed
only about 10 percent of the total cost of all campus operations.
If the UC system doubled tuition and fees it could drop state support
altogether and go private! Since out-of-state and foreign students are charged
three times the tuition paid by California residents, individual deans and
administrators are raising more money by replacing the latter by the former.
Meanwhile gifted foreign students, many of them Chinese, receive advanced
degrees in the United States and return home, rather than struggle for
postdoctoral funding and permission to become residents. Talented
American-born scientists and engineers are joining them in a reverse brain
drain. Economists have found that one factor has explained a nation’s future
economic growth and prosperity more than any other: its output of scientists
and engineers. To starve education is to eat our seed corn. No tax today, no
technology tomorrow.
