Epilogue
Freud said that once we have the basic necessities of food, clothing, shelter,
and health, then what we seek is wealth, power, honor, and the love of men
and women. For ﬁnancial titans who aggressively continue to seek tens of
millions, hundreds of millions, and sometimes billions, you can ask, “Is the
winner really the one who dies with the most toys?” How much is enough?
When will you be done? Often the answer is “Never.”
To preserve the quality of my life and to spend more of it in the company
of people I value and in the exploration of ideas I enjoy, I chose not to follow
up on a number of business ventures, although I believed that they were
nearly certain to become extremely proﬁtable. Once I worked out the major
concepts in a subject and proved them in action, I liked new mental
challenges, moving on from gambling games to the investment world, with
warrants, options, convertible bonds and other derivatives, then statistical
arbitrage. Starting as a university professor, I expected to spend my life
teaching, doing research, and talking to smart like-minded people; but from
childhood I was intrigued by the power of abstract thinking to understand and
direct the natural world. When I later saw how physics could predict roulette
outcomes through the fog of chance, and mathematics could tip the odds in
blackjack, I was drawn into a lifetime of adventure.
It was my good fortune to share most of this journey with a remarkable
companion. From childhood, my wife, Vivian, loved books and was a
voracious reader. One year we kept a journal about the books we read. In
twelve months she cruised through more than 150 books at seven hundred
words or more per minute. I know that because one day when we were both
reading, I couldn’t believe how fast she was turning the pages, so, without her
knowing, I timed her for an hour. She passed on her love of books and her
extraordinary facility with the English language to our children and
grandchildren.

She mastered bridge, studied art and art history, learned to prepare quality
healthy meals, completed a master’s degree in library science, inspired her
family to focus on personal ﬁtness and health, and supported causes and
charities. She was also one of the rare people known as super-recognizers.
She could casually recognize people she’d met decades before, even though
they had been transformed—in my opinion often beyond recognition—by
age, style, carriage, shape, and size. When most of us remember the past, the
memories fade over time and the “facts” may shift closer to the heart’s desire.
When it had to do with people, Vivian’s memory was both extraordinarily
accurate and unchanging over time.
After she died from cancer in 2011, we celebrated her life with a memorial
service. When I think of our lives together, I remember what her brother said
then: “Nobody can take away the dance you have danced.”
Life is like reading a novel or running a marathon. It’s not so much about
reaching a goal but rather about the journey itself and the experiences along
the way. As Benjamin Franklin famously said, “Time is the stuﬀ life is made
of,” and how you spend it makes all the diﬀerence.
Best of all is the time I have spent with the people in my life that I care
about—my wife, my family, my friends, and my associates. Whatever you do,
enjoy your life and the people who share it with you, and leave something
good of yourself for the generations to follow.
