NOTES

CHAPTER 1
a single word Curiously, my son had the same experience. He didn’t say anything until he was about
the same age. His sister, about a year and a half older, was his interpreter. They would go around
as a little pair and when he indicated with body language and facial expressions what he wanted,
she would get it done.
complete sentences Henriette Anne Klauser, in Writing on Both Sides of the Brain, Harper, San
Francisco, 1997, pp. 36–38, tells a similar story of a ﬁrst grader who wouldn’t write no matter
how she prompted him until, suddenly after seven months, he released a torrent of ﬂuency.
Great Flu Pandemic More people died from the Great Flu Pandemic of 1918–19 than from any other
plague in history, and more than from World War I itself.
the US version In the US and the UK, a million is one followed by six zeros. US usage adds three zeros
for each step up, so a billion has nine zeros, a trillion twelve zeros, and so on. Practice in the UK
adds six zeros at each stage so a billion has twelve zeros, etc.
one standard deviation Standard deviation indicates the size of a typical ﬂuctuation around an average
value.
to the news See Nassim Taleb’s readable and insightful book Fooled by Randomness.
quick mental estimate By the rule of 72, discussed later, a 24 percent annual growth rate doubles
money in about 72/24=3 years. After nine years we have three doublings, to two, then four, and
ﬁnally eight times the starting value. But it actually takes about 3.22 years because the rule of 72
underestimates the doubling time more and more as rates increase beyond 8 percent.
of the Alamo The story of this epic battle and the subsequent ordeals of those held captive by the
Japanese is told by Eric Morris in Corregidor: The American Alamo of World War II, Stein and
Day, New York, 1981, reprinted paperback, Cooper Square Press, New York, 2000.

CHAPTER 2
surgical facilities The horrors of life in such camps is eloquently rendered in Three Came Home: A
Woman’s Ordeal in a Japanese Prison Camp, by Agnes Keith, 1949, paperback 1985, Eland
Books, London and Hippocrene Books, New York.
was still running Edmund Scientiﬁc’s Scientiﬁcs 2000 Catalog for Science and Engineering Enthusiasts,
page 31.
several thousand feet See The Darwin Awards, Evolution in Action, “Lawnchair Larry,” pp. 280–81,
by Wendy Northcutt, Plume (Penguin), New York, 2002.
of these ﬂares String soaked in potassium nitrate solution and dried.
recipe and procedure About ﬁfty years later, while listening to Ken Follett’s novel The Man From St.
Petersburg, I noted that the terrorist antihero’s recipe and procedure for making nitroglycerine
were consistent with how I made it as a boy in my mother’s refrigerator.
depth of 5 feet digitalcollections.lmu.edu/ cdm/ ref/ collection/ chgface/ id/ 294.
a man’s hand As in 1 Kings 18:44.
dimensional analysis I was familiar with the book Dimensional Analysis by Percy W. Bridgeman, Yale
University Press, New Haven, CT, 1922.
joined the rest In 2015, my granddaughter Claire Goul was one of three hundred semiﬁnalists in the
same contest. It was now the Intel Science Talent Search and had become more competitive, with
three top prizes of $150,000 each, compared to one top prize of $10,000 back in 1949.

CHAPTER 3
standard American wheel European wheels had only one green number and further improvements in
the odds, such as the player betting on red or black only losing half his stake if that number came
up.
systems must fail One of the most well-known examples is the Pythagorean theorem from plane
geometry. It says that for a right triangle, the sum of the squares of the sides equals the square of
the hypotenuse. For instance, the triangle with sides 3, 4, and 5 is a right triangle and 32+42=52.
Also 122+52=132 for another right triangle. There are inﬁnitely many and we could check them
one at a time, but never ﬁnish. The theorem does it all at once.
a rubber ring Feynman put the rubber ring, which was made from the same material as that used on
the Challenger, in the ice water and showed that, when it became cold like it did during the launch
of the Challenger, it became so brittle it was likely to fail. Feynman tells the story in Classic
Feynman, edited by Ralph Leighton, Norton, New York, 2006.
wealthy older student T. T. Thornton
for every frame You can see the ﬁlm at www.edwardothorp.com.

CHAPTER 4
a new strategy Baldwin, et al (1956).
and even awe For the rules of blackjack and my original report of this experience, see Thorp, Beat The
Dealer, 1962, rev. ed. 1966.

CHAPTER 5
mathematics course The course was measure theory, basic to probability and statistics.
partially played decks For one ﬁfty-two-card deck we can choose a subset by selecting 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4
Aces in ﬁve ways, similarly selecting the number of cards for values Two through Nine in each of
ﬁve ways, and selecting between 0 and 16 Ten-value cards in seventeen ways for a grand total of
5×5×…5×17−1 (there are nine 5s, one each for Ace, Two,…Nine) or a little over 33 million
diﬀerent total partial decks. (We subtract one to delete the case where zero cards of each value
are chosen, leading to a subset with no cards in it.) For the eight-deck game the corresponding
ﬁgures is 33×…×33×129−1, or about 6 quadrillion (6 followed by 15 zeros) partial decks.
to a gigantic For people who like to compute, suppose that each of these strategy tables was written on
a separate piece of paper the size of a dollar bill. I estimate the volume of a dollar bill at 1.08
cubic centimeters so the strategy tables would occupy 37 cubic meters or 1300 cubic feet. For
eight decks they would ﬁll a space of 6.5 cubic kilometers or 1.6 cubic miles.
0.21 percent The Baldwin group said later that their ﬁgure of 0.62 percent for the casino’s edge should
have been 0.32 percent. An arithmetic error caused the incorrect ﬁgure.
the blackjack rules Casino blackjack rules have varied over time and among casinos. The rules I used
for the calculations were then typical.
(half the deck) The chance that the last twenty-six cards contain all four Aces is about 5.5 percent.
type from the deck Later exact calculations give numbers which are a bit more favorable to the player.
These results also are aﬀected by the many variations in casino rules. For details see Thorp (1962,
1966), Griﬃn (1999), Wong (1994).
$200 bankroll This book spans more than eighty years, during which the value of money has changed
dramatically. For an accurate perspective the reader can convert money to current dollars using
Appendix A.
my mathematical work The discovery was an example in functional analysis, in which both Taylor and
the mathematician were specialists.
Shannon at noon Our meeting was on September 29, 1960, and I memorialized the details in a letter I
wrote that same evening to a friend, mathematician Berthold Schweizer.
to the academy Thorp, Edward O., “A Favorable Strategy for Twenty-One,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 47, No. 1, 1961, pp. 110–12.
the program booklet Thorp (1960). Fortune’s Formula also was the title of William Poundstone’s
2005 book covering some of this story about blackjack, roulette, the stock market, and the Kelly
Criterion.
The Boston Globe “Can Beat Blackjack, Says Prof.,” by Richard H. Stewart, Boston Globe, January 24,
1961, page 1.
across the country For example, Columbus Dispatch (1961), Las Vegas Sun (1961), Miami News
(1961), New York Herald Tribune (1961), New York World Telegram and Sun (1961), Washington
Post and Times Herald (1961).

CHAPTER 6
ran his story Thomas Wolfe, Washington Post, January 25, 1961, page A3.
oﬀered a strand Paul O’Neil (Life magazine, 1964), in a generally accurate story, erroneously quotes
me as saying of the string of pearls, “We had it appraised ﬁrst thing in the morning. It was worth
$16.” Neither statement is correct. This was repeated by Bruck (1994) even though I told her this
part of the Life story was wrong. A good misquote is hard to kill.
the everyday gambler Schwartz, David G., Roll the Bones, Gotham Books, New York, 2006.
was a characteristic Feller (1957), (1968).
the investment worlds The greatest bond investor ever, William H. Gross, also learned this lesson in
the casinos of Las Vegas. Motivated by Beat the Dealer, he went there in the summer of 1966,
turning a $200 bankroll into $10,000. See Bill Gross on Investing, William H. Gross, Wiley, New
York, 1997, 1998. He would later use the ideas in co-managing two trillion dollars for PIMCO.
with the house I realized later that I would have had an advantage if I had started each deal with big
bets, maintaining them if the count was good and causing the dealer to shuﬄe when it wasn’t.
a serious loss Why might a bigger bankroll lead to more risk of losing it all? The reasons are partly
technical, partly psychological. First the technical: To exploit the larger bankroll we would be
likely to make maximum bets ($500 in those days) even in situations that were just slightly
favorable. This would increase the size of the ﬂuctuations in our stake and require a longer playing
time than I had available to be fairly sure of coming out ahead.
Now the psychological: X and Y didn’t have my level of understanding of, and conﬁdence in,
the system. If, with a $100,000 bankroll they would in fact quit when we were down say $60,000,
then I would be playing and sizing bets and taking risks as though I had a $100,000 bankroll
when, unknown to anyone, I really only had a $60,000 bankroll. This subtle distinction between
the ostensible bankroll and the real bankroll has contributed to the downfall of many gamblers
and investors, as we shall see.
An additional psychological problem which I didn’t expect was Kimmel insisting playing his
“pidgeon” version of my system, betting big, losing back much of the fruits of my labor, and then
excitedly refusing to stop.
afternoon in Boston Ivi, her mother, and two sisters came to the US after World War II as refugees
from Estonia.

CHAPTER 7
great mathematics centers Segel, Joel, Recountings, A.K. Peters, Ltd. Wellesley, MA, 2009, tells the
story of mathematics at MIT.
to stay on My family’s relationship with MIT continued two generations later. Three of my
grandchildren, fraternal triplets, entered together as freshmen. See, e.g., “Triplets Celebrate After
ALL are Accepted to Prestigious MIT…,” London Daily Mail, Saturday, July 25, 2015.
building the ﬁrst one The MIT Media Lab timeline erroneously gives the year 1966 for our computer,
probably because I ﬁrst revealed its existence in the 1966 revised edition of Beat the Dealer.
However, the correct year is 1961, when we completed and successfully tested it in Las Vegas, as
explained in numerous subsequent publications, and veriﬁed in correspondence dated August
1961, between Shannon and me, now in the archives of the MIT Museum. The device itself also
remains at the museum.
few early players Among them were Emmanuel Kimmel (Mr. X of Beat the Dealer), Jesse Marcum
(the “little dark haired guy from Southern California” in Beat the Dealer), Russell Gutting
(“Junior”), Benjamin F. (“System Smitty”) Smith, and Mr. F. (who I was told was Joe Bernstein,
the “silver fox” in columnist Herb Caen’s book Don’t Call It Frisco). Marcum seems to have been
the only one who consistently adhered to the method.
fairly thorough shuﬄes Of course, seven is not a magic number. The actual number of shuﬄes needed
varies, depending how close to “random” is speciﬁed, the type of shuﬄe, and how “random” is
measured.
in private games Danger in the Cards has been out of print for many years.
William F. Rickenbacker For more on this trip see the letters from Thorp and Barnhart in Blackjack
Forum, Vol. XVII #1, Spring 1997, pp. 102–104, XX #1, Spring 2000, pp. 9–30, and XX #2,
Summer 2000, pp. 105–107.
working for the board He wrote about our experience in a syndicated column titled “Even ‘Honest’
Vegas House Cheats.”
bits of publicity E.g., Time, “Games: ‘Beating the Dealer,’ ” January 25, 1963, p. 70.
“It's Bye! Bye! Blackjack” appeared Scherman, 1964.
a nine-page story O’Neil, Paul. “The Professor Who Breaks the Bank,” Life, March 27, 1964, pp. 80–
91.
a heart attack In April of 1966.
thwart these card counters Vic Vickery, “Counting on Blackjack,” Las Vegas Style magazine, May
1993, pp. 61, 67.
Players Too Smart Carson City (UPI): New York Journal-American, April 3, 1964.

CHAPTER 8
High–Low System I called this the Complete Point Count in Beat the Dealer.
pooling their bankrolls For the optimal trade-oﬀ between risk and return, the bet size in a given
situation is proportional to bankroll. To the extent the players on a team are unsure about the
current size of the group’s bankroll, they will tend to reduce their bets slightly.
Paciﬁc Stock Exchange Google the Blackjack Hall of Fame write-ups for more on Francesco, Hyland,
Uston, and others in this chapter.
the blackjack community As the popularity of the game surged, a blackjack community evolved.
Special newsletters for counters were circulated and, later, websites appeared. Stanford Wong’s
newsletters and websites provided cutting edge information on how and where to play for best
advantage. Arnold Snyder’s quarterly Blackjack Forum had articles from leading players and
theorists over its twenty years or so of publication and gave a good informal history of the war
with the casinos. Anthony Curtis’s Las Vegas Advisor was a monthly guide to events, and to best
deals on food, accommodations, and playing conditions. The Gambler’s Book Store, managed by
Howard Schwartz, continued to oﬀer the latest books and systems. Richard Reid’s website
www.bjmath.com was a treasury of articles, workshops and discussions. The network that arose
accelerated the development of new methods for advantageous play.
The second line Later more exact calculations changed these numbers somewhat. They also vary
slightly with the number of decks.
nearest whole number Thirteen was chosen because it gave a good ﬁt.
count was to use The strengths of various card counting systems are thoroughly discussed in The
Theory of Blackjack by Peter Griﬃn, 6th Edition, Huntington Press, 1999.
in the discard tray An easy way to do this is by estimating how many half decks are left, as described
in Professional Blackjack by Stanford Wong (pseud.), Pi Yee Press, 1994.
the point count If you divide the ultimate strategy values in table 1 by eight and round oﬀ to the
nearest whole number, you get the values of 0 or 1 that make up the complete point count.
However the values for sevens and nines are about as close to 1 and −1, respectively, as they are to
zero. Choosing them thusly gives the alternative point count I was using in Puerto Rico.
“what I’ve got.” The quote is from Thorp (1966), pp. 84–85.
1970s, several people Notably, Keith Taft.
a powerful advantage I explained the idea in Thorp, Edward O., “Non-random Shuﬄing With
Applications to the Game of Faro,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, pp. 842–47,
December 1973. A much expanded version appears in Gambling and Society, edited by W.
Eadington, Charles C. Thomas, Springﬁeld, IL, 1975, as: “Probabilities and Strategies for the
Game of Faro,” pp. 531–60.
cheating, the statutes N.R.S. 465.015.
success much more diﬃcult Legends of Blackjack by Kevin Blackwood and Larry Barker, Kindle
eBook, April 5, 2009, tells the stories of some of the leading professionals.
the Blackjack Ball “The Smartest Guy in the Room,” by R.M. Schneiderman, Newsweek, February 20,
2012, pp. 56–57.

in the movie 21 Inspired by the Ben Mezrich book Bringing Down the House.
rate the games Stanford Wong’s monthly newsletter is thorough.

CHAPTER 9
exploitable patterns Pearson, Karl, The chances of death and other studies in evolution, London, New
York, E. Arnold, 1897.
sailed the Caribbean Los Angeles Times, February 27, 2003, page B12, obituary of Albert Hibbs. See
also Wilson (1965, 1970).
Hibbs later wrote Caltech obituary for Hibbs at http://pr.caltech.edu/ periodicals.
a thing of the past Decades later, professional gambler Billy Walters found and exploited eﬀective
roulette wheels, as reported in Beating the Wheel, by Russell T. Barnhart, Carol Publishing, New
York, 1992. Walters is interviewed in Gambling Wizards, by Richard W. Munchkin, Huntington
Press, Las Vegas, Nevada, 2002, pp. 16–18. With a plastic playing card and a few minutes at a
roulette wheel, I can tell you whether any of the dividers, or frets, separating the pockets on the
rotor, are high or low, loose or tight, and which numbers will be aﬀected. For good measure I
would also check to see if the wheel was level and that the rotor hung true on its spindle.
odds in his…favor Thanks to Richard Cohen for supplying this.
a 1956 paper Kelly, J. L., “A New Interpretation of Information Rate,” Bell System Technical Journal,
Vol. 35, 1956, pp. 917–26.
and the stock market Thorp, Edward O., “Optimal Gambling Systems for Favorable Games,” Review
of the International Statistical Institute, Vol. 37, 1969, pp. 273–93; Thorp, Edward O., “The Kelly
Criterion in Blackjack, Sports Betting, and the Stock Market,” Handbook of Asset and Liability
Management, Vol. 1, S.A. Zenios and W.T. Ziemba, editors. Elsevier, New York, 2006.
called wearable computers “A Brief History of Wearable Computing” timeline—MIT Media Lab,
www.media.mit.edu/ wearables/ lizzy/ timeline.html.
only one person O’Neil, Paul, “The Professor Who Breaks the Bank,” Life, March 27, 1964, pp. 80–
91.
our roulette system Thorp, Edward O., Beat The Dealer, 2nd Edition, Vintage, New York, 1966.
the details later Thorp, Edward O., “Systems for Roulette I,” Gambling Times, January/February
1979; Thorp, Edward O., “Physical Prediction of Roulette I, II, III, IV,” Gambling Times, May,
July, August, October 1979; Thorp, Edward O., The Mathematics of Gambling, Lyle Stuart,
Secaucus, New Jersey, 1984.
by hardware problems Bass, Thomas A., The Endaemonic Pie, Houghton Miﬄin, New York, 1985.
May 30, 1985 One of the uninformed people writing for Wikipedia claimed our computer was used to
“cheat” at roulette. This is false. We and the many others who subsequently used roulette and
blackjack computers could not be prosecuted under the strong anti-(player) cheating statutes
already in place in Nevada. That’s why the Nevada state legislature had to pass a law speciﬁcally
outlawing “devices.”

CHAPTER 10
thermonuclear weapons Ulam, S. M., Adventures of a Mathematician, Scribner’s, New York, 1976.
to a set of rules These rules are designed to make the casino’s edge roughly the same on the two bets.
for the two bets Thorp and Walden (1966).
Walden and I proved Thorp and Walden (1973).
is in blackjack Griﬃn (1995), Thorp (1984), Vancura (1996).
so the eﬀect Griﬃn (1995), Thorp (1984), Vancura (1996).
as many tables Vancura (1996).

CHAPTER 11
can be ruinous The Kelly Criterion highlights the perils of overbetting even when you have the edge.
waiting ﬁfteen years The NASDAQ Composite ﬁnally exceeded its March 2000 peak in April of
2015. However, investors were still behind more than 20 percent after adjusting for inﬂation.
weren’t available yet Bogle on Mutual Funds, pp. 169–70 says “The indexing concept was…
introduced…to the mutual fund industry in 1976.” and in fact by the author himself, John C.
Bogle.
or the stock market According to a Fidelity Research Institute Report dated February 2007 stocks
averaged about 10 percent a year, beating residential real estate by more than 4 percent a year for
1963–2005 and by more than 5.5 percent annualized over 1835–2005. Bonds also did better than
residential real estate.
to Mr. Market See The Warren Buﬀett Way, by Robert G. Hagstrom, Jr., Wiley, New York, 1994, pp.
50–51, and The Warren Buﬀett Portfolio, by Roberg G. Hagstrom, Jr., Wiley, New York, 1999,
pp. 143–44.
thesis on the subject Kassouf, Sheen T., Evaluation of Convertible Securities, Analytical Publishers
Co., 602 Vanderbilt Street, Brooklyn, New York 11218, 1962. A brief summary of hedging with
warrants and convertible bonds.
Beat the Market You can read more about our theories and investments in Beat the Market at
www.edwardothorp.com.

CHAPTER 12
researcher and biologist You can read about his remarkable scientiﬁc aptitude and career on The
National Academics Press website, www.nap.edu/books, in Biographical Memoirs v.53 (1982),
National Academy of Sciences. In 1974 Gerard, who became one of my ﬁrst investors using
money paid out to him by Buﬀett, passed away. His wife, Frosty, survived him for several years.
When she died, part of their Princeton Newport investment went to support the University of
California, Irvine.
analysis of common stocks The classic 1940 second edition was reissued by McGraw-Hill in 2002.
was his contribution Some biographies of Buﬀett say $105,000. My ﬁgure, which I recall from
conversations with Warren, is conﬁrmed in the deﬁnitive biography of Buﬀett, The Snowball, by
Alice Schroeder, Random House, New York, 2008.
a manic 150 percent Returns on equities are from Ibbotson Associates (2007).
Peter Minuit Minuit, Peter (1580–1638), Dutch colonial governor in America, helped establish New
Amsterdam, the settlement that became New York City. He joined the Dutch West India
Company and set out for the company’s settlement in America. He reached Manhattan Island in
1626 and became the ﬁrst director general of the colony. Minuit purchased the island from one of
the Algonquian-speaking tribes with trinkets valued at 60 Dutch guilders, a sum later calculated at
$24.
with all the improvements From 1626 to 1968 is 342 years. Twenty-four dollars compounding at 8
percent would become $6.47 trillion, 1⁄8 or more of the net worth of the USA at that time. By
2013 this grows at 8 percent to $206 trillion, enough to buy half the world: estimating US 2013
net worth as $100 trillion ($77 billion for households plus $23 billion for government) and
assuming the US has about 25 percent of the globe’s total net worth gives an estimate of $400
trillion for the market value of the world.
Discover magazine article “May the Best Man Lose,” Discover, Nov. 2000, pp. 85–91. For more on
voting paradoxes, see Poundstone, William, Gaming the Vote: Why Elections Aren’t Fair (and
What We Can Do About It), Hill and Wang, New York, 2008, and Saari, Donald G, “A Chaotic
Exploration of Aggregation Paradoxes,” SIAM Review, Vol. 37, pp. 37–52, March 1995, and A
Mathematician Looks at Voting, American Mathematical Society, 2001.
are typically stumped For more on nontransitive dice see Gardner, Martin, The Colossal Book of
Mathematics, Norton, New York, 2001, and Finkelstein, Mark and Thorp, Edward, “Nontransitive
Dice with Equal Means, in Optimal Play: Mathematical Studies of Games and Gambling, Stewart
N. Ethier and William R. Eadington, editors, University of Nevada, Reno, 2007.
early as 1936 See Schroeder, loc. cit.
the last ten years Loomis, Carol, “The Jones Nobody Keeps Up With,” Personal Investing, Fortune,
April 1966.
few existing hedge funds The hedge fund world at the start of 1968 was tiny, almost insigniﬁcant. The
combined capital in dollars was less than one one-thousandth of what it was in 2016. Back in
1968, the top twenty funds ranged in size from $80 million down to $12 million.
Altogether, there were about 150 funds, with aggregate capital of a billion or two. This grew to
more than two trillion dollars a half a century later. Since the dollar value of GNP was about a

tenth of what it was forty-eight years later, hedge funds compared to GNP grew more than a
hundred times from 1968 to 2016.
and were closing down The decline is catalogued in Robertson, Wyndham and Haines, Angela, “The
Hedge Funds’ Dubious Prospects, A Report on Twenty-Eight Funds,” Personal Investing, Fortune,
October 1970. The group consisted of the largest hedge funds as of December 31, 1968. The big
winner was Buﬀett Partnership, Ltd., which was closing after a spectacular twelve years because
stock prices were too high compared with the underlying value of the companies. The only other
fund whose assets had increased was Steinhardt, Fine, Berkowitz & Co.
Wall Street Letter The Wall Street Letter, Myron Kandel, Editor, Nov. 17, 1969.

CHAPTER 13
never before tried The year before, Arbitrage Management Company was set up to exploit the hedging
ideas in Beat the Market. Among others it involved Harry Markowitz, who later won a Nobel Prize
in Economics, and John Shelton, a leading ﬁnance professor and warrant theorist. Though
proﬁtable, the gains were not enough to keep it from disappearing from the scene after three
years.
would transform physics For a full account see the inspiring Annus Mirabilis: 1905, Albert Einstein
and the Theory of Relativity, by John and Mary Gribbin, Penguin, New York, 2005.
of stock price changes See the article by Case M. Sprenkle in The Random Character of Stock Market
Prices, Paul H. Cootner, editor, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1964.
riskless interest rate Academic economists and ﬁnancial theorists have long assumed, as in the Black-
Scholes formula, that US Treasury bonds and their short-term version, bills, are riskless. The
argument goes that the government can always print the money it needs in order to pay the
interest and to redeem them at maturity. Congressional battles over whether to raise the debt
ceiling, such as the clash in 2013, exposed the fallacy. The US can pay its debts but it may choose
not to. Default is possible. Since investors generally demand to be paid a higher rate of interest to
purchase risky debt, this dispute over the debt ceiling has led to higher borrowing costs for the
US. Thus, those opposing an increase in the debt ceiling have made the debt itself larger.
warrant expiration date For an account of what I did, see my articles in Wilmott magazine, Sept.
2002, Dec. 2002, and Jan. 2003. They are also available on my website at
www.edwardothorp.com. For an introduction to the methods of plausible reasoning see
Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning, Vols. I and II, by George Polya, Princeton University Press,
1954, and his more elementary How to Solve It, 2nd Edition, Doubleday, 1957.
I began using it For a background discussion, see Derivatives: Models on Models, by Haug, Espen
Gaarder, Wiley, New York, 2007, pp. 27–44.
Beat the Market They acknowledge this in their famous paper, Black, F. and Scholes, M., “The Pricing
of Options and Corporate Liabilities,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, May–June 1973, pp.
637–54.
the identical formula The fact that their formula was identical to the one I was using veriﬁed that my
plausible reasoning led to the correct result.
down when he had Buﬀet: The Making of an American Capitalist, by Roger Lowenstein, Random
House, New York, 1995, page 156.
customers high fees In a massive replay, hundreds of trillions of dollars’ worth of derivatives contracts
now trade Over-the-Counter (OTC). Again, the banks and brokers love the high fees and are
resistant to standardizing the contracts. The OTC contracts are under-collateralized and could
easily precipitate a ﬁnancial collapse similar to what we saw in 2008–09. Exchange-traded
standardized contracts could eliminate this threat.
from the formula Years later I heard that one trader had consulted Black and also was using formula
prices when trading began at the CBOE.
The Wall Street Journal “Computer Formulas Are One Man’s Secret to Success in Market,” by
Jonathan R. Laing, Wall Street Journal, September 23, 1974, page 1.

running my hedge fund Fortune’s Formula, page 172, incorrectly reports that I was making as much
then as Paul Newman was.
One of my stories Beat the Dealer, 1966 edition, pp. 167ﬀ.

CHAPTER 14
where I was speaking “Extensions of the Black-Scholes Option Model,” Thorp, Edward O.,
Contributed Papers 39th Session of the International Statistical Institute, Vienna, Austria, August
1973, pp. 1029–36.
model for stock prices This is the so-called lognormal model for stock price changes. A diﬀerent but
important situation which it fails to cover for option valuation is the bimodal, or two-peaked,
payoﬀ distribution which arises when one company makes a tender oﬀer for another.
and applied ﬁnance Fischer Black and the Revolutionary Idea of Finance by Mehrling, Perry, Wiley,
New York, 2005.
were eventually published See “Option Pricing: The American Put,” by Parkinson, Michael, Journal
of Business 1977, v50(1), pp. 21–36, and “The Valuation of American Put Options,” by Brennan,
Michael J. and Schwartz, Eduardo, Journal of Finance 1977, v32(2), pp. 449–62.
than $1 million Andrew Tobias used my account of this trade and several others we did in his book
Money Angles, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1984, pp. 68–72.
is a general rule If you make 20 percent in year one and 30 percent in year two the wealth and
relatives are 1.20 and 1.30. Multiplying gives 1.56, which is the wealth relative for the two
successive years, the amount a dollar grows to if reinvested. Thus the two-year gain is 56 percent,
not 20 percent+30 percent or 50 percent. If you simply add the numbers in the table you get
+11.7 percent for the market, which isn’t nearly as bad. But to ﬁnd out what a dollar invested at
the start of 1973 grows to, or diminishes to, you need to multiply together the results for
successive periods, which produces the –0.5 percent ﬁgure. The result from investing $1 for one
period is called the “wealth relative” (wealth at the end of the period). For instance, if you make
12 percent during the year, the wealth relative for that twelve months is 1.12. When we add the
numbers for the returns for PNP limited partners the result is 42.1 percent, signiﬁcantly less, in
this case, than the actual 48.9 percent ﬁgure obtained by multiplying successive wealth relatives.
only month-end values Month-end ﬁgures for the S&P 500 are from Ibbotson. Because the Great
Depression was, on average, deﬂationary, the results based on inﬂation adjusted or “real” returns
are less extreme.
quality and maturity More precisely, “duration,” which is the discounted weighted average time for
the payment stream.
hundred billion dollars During the early stages of the run-up in interest rates, S&Ls were raising
money by selling puts at bargain prices on Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA)
bonds. Bonds usually trade in thousand-dollar denominations or “par” amount and are quoted as a
percent of par, so these bonds—quoted at 98—were currently selling at $980 each. The puts we
bought from the S&L which issued them gave us the right to sell the bonds to that S&L at this
price for the life of the put, which in our case ranged from twelve to eighteen months. If the
bonds fell, we could buy the bonds below 98 and “put them” to the bank, which was required to
pay us 98 under the terms of the contract. If the bonds rose instead, the puts would expire
worthless. As the price of a put tends to move in a direction opposite to that of the underlying
security, we hedged the risk of loss on the put by buying GNMA (“Ginnie Mae”) futures, i.e.,
contracts to buy GNMA bonds at a certain price and time in the future. In futures markets,
contracts require daily settlement of gains and losses. If the bonds fell in price we would have
temporarily to lay out cash for our losses in the futures markets, even though we would ultimately

get the money back when we cashed in our puts. Since our cash and borrowing power was ﬁnite,
this limited how big a hedge we could safely carry to completion. To estimate the maximum safe
size for our hedge we needed to consider the lowest price anyone imagined GNMA bonds could
drop to during the next eighteen months. The number was 85, a fall of 13 points. I said, let’s be
super-cautious and double our margin of safety to cover a collapse of 26 points, or a price of 72.
This prudence was rewarded when the unexpected happened and the bonds fell as low as 68
during the duration of our trade.

CHAPTER 15
at UC, Irvine It was then the Graduate School of Management.
were earnings yield Earnings yield is E/P, Where E is annual earnings (either trailing twelve months or
predicted next twelve months—you choose). This is the inverse of P/E, the famous price/earnings
ratio, but E/P is better because of problems in the interpretation of P/E when E is zero or
negative.
several billion dollars Market Neutral Strategies, Bruce I. Jacobs and Kenneth N. Levy editors, Wiley,
New Jersey, 2005.
when it opened Hours for the N.Y.S.E. were from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Monday through Friday, from
October 1, 1974, until September 30, 1985, when the opening time changed to 9:30 A.M.
of which we pioneered Among them were the interest rate swap (the object here was to hedge away
interest rate risk in our positions), the bond cash and carry, the commodity cash and carry,
capturing a proﬁt when closed-end funds could be purchased below their liquidation value, and
special deals.
historical stock price data I learned only recently, while reading the interview of Harry Markowitz in
Masters of Finance, IMCA, Greenwood Village, CO, 2014, page 109, that Markowitz and Usmen
got the same answer for daily S&P 500 Index price changes as we did for a much larger data set
of two hundred individual stocks. Their work, done sometime before 1987, and submitted before
he won the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1990, was initially rejected for publication (!),
appearing elsewhere only in 1996.
of the impact Market impact refers to the fact that “market orders” to buy are, on average, ﬁlled at or
above the last previous price and “market orders” to sell tend to be ﬁlled at or below the last
previous price.
gained 9 percent The accounting period with an odd length of ﬁve months arose here for PNP because
the ﬁscal year end for PNP changed in 1987 from October 31 to December 31.
statistics conﬁrmed Common metrics include the Sharpe ratio, the Sortino ratio, the distribution of
drawdowns, and the MAR ratio (annual return divided by maximum drawdown). See, for
instance, the three-part series by William Ziemba in Wilmott magazine: “The Great Investors,”
March, May and July 2006.
or losing quarters For comparison, the S&P 500 was down in eleven of the thirty-two full quarters
and small company stocks lost in thirteen.

CHAPTER 16
associates, and clients Den of Thieves by James B. Stewart, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1991.
Ken Griﬃn The Quants by Scott Patterson, Crown, New York, 2010.
ﬁrst limited partner Conversation with Citadel’s Scott Raﬀerty.
$5.6 billion The Forbes 400 list likely misses people that should be on it, the numbers are estimates,
and wealth ﬂuctuates, so the rankings are not exact. For example, Warren Buﬀett qualiﬁed when
the list was started in 1982 but they didn’t discover him until 1985! Also missing from the Forbes
list are “The $13 Billion Mystery Angels,” of the article by Zachary Mider, Bloomberg
Businessweek, May 8, 2014. Mider reveals that a group of former PNP employees made at least
$13 billion in the twenty-ﬁve years after starting their own ﬁrm in 1989, with the aid of our
quantitative methods and computer algorithms.
Malibu, California For some of his thoughts, see J. Paul Getty, How to Be Rich: The Success of a
Billionaire Businessman, Playboy Press, New York, 1965.
Corporation, said Los Angeles Times Magazine, January 23, 2000, pp. 10ﬀ and page 35.
D. E. Shaw When D. E. Shaw hired one of our key employees the ﬁrst thing they reportedly did was
debrief him for six hours to ﬁnd out everything he could tell them about PNP.
convertible bonds The program had methods for incorporating quality deterioration and credit default
risk which were, I believe, unique at the time.

CHAPTER 17
I’ve got enough The New Yorker, May 16, 2005.
buyers and sellers We chose a sample of ten option trades from the forty which we had not already
proven to be fakes.
a legal mess For the classic story of a legal mess, see Jarndyce versus Jarndyce in Bleak House by
Charles Dickens.
his best investment If Madoﬀ is really gaining 20 percent a year and their best alternatives give, say,
16 percent a year, then they’re only out 4 percent a year.
to destroy documents Rothfeld, Michael and Strasburg, Jenny, “SEC Accused of Destroying Files,”
Wall Street Journal, August 18, 2011, page C2.
the headline article Arvedlund, Erin E., “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,” Barron’s, May 7, 2001.
in the early 1990s “Bernard Madoﬀ Gets 150 Years in Jail for Epic Fraud (Update 7),
Bloomberg.com, June 29, 2009.
$65 billion News Release, “Bernard L. Madoﬀ Charged in Eleven-Count Criminal Information,” U.S.
Attorney for the Southern District of New York, March 10, 2009.
One individual reportedly One Jeﬀry M. Picower, according to The New York Times, Sunday, July 5,
2009, page B2. According to a later report in The New York Times by Diana B. Henriques,
October 2, 2009, page B5, the trustee liquidating the Madoﬀ assets, Irving H. Picard, “reported
that one Picower account had been overdrawn by $6 billion when Mr. Madoﬀ was arrested.”
the individual guesses If half of the crowd’s guesses are on each side of the average it is a
mathematical fact that the average will be closer to the correct value than at least half of the
individual estimates. What is interesting is that the crowd consensus is often much better yet.
hedging Japanese warrants “The Money Man: A Three-time Winner,” Forbes, November 25, 1991,
pp. 96–97.
so-called secretary or marriage problem Today one might retitle it as “The Signiﬁcant Other
Problem.”

CHAPTER 18
to gain a proﬁt A couple of weeks after the EMLX hoax, the Los Angeles Times reported that the
SEC, in a “web fraud sweep,” accused thirty-three companies and individuals of illegally using the
Internet to make more than $10 million in proﬁts by driving up the prices of more than seventy
small thinly traded stocks, hyping them on chat rooms, websites, and in email messages.
before the Internet Two readable and entertaining accounts are the famous Extraordinary Popular
Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, by Charles MacKay, and its more current sequel, Ponzi
Schemes, Invaders from Mars and Other Extraordinary Popular Delusions, by Joseph Bulgatz.
Hell on one’s feet See page 71 of Haugen, The New Finance: The Case Against Eﬃcient Markets,
Second Edition (1999).
Recent reports “Toxic Equity Trading Order Flow on Wall Street,” by Arnuk, Sal and Saluzzi, Joseph,
A Themis Trading LLC White Paper, www.themistrading.com, and “Algo Traders Take $21bn in
Annual Proﬁts,” by Tom Fairless of Financial News, quoting the research ﬁrm Tabb group.
for the A shares Reported as of 1:22 P.M. New York time on July 24, 2009.
one of the mechanisms “Traders Proﬁt With Computers Set at High Speed,” by Charles Duhigg, New
York Times, Friday, July 24, 2009, Page A1, and “SEC Starts Crackdown on ‘Flash’ Trading
Techniques,” by Charles Duhigg, New York Times, Wednesday, August 5, 2009, Page B1. See
also: (1) Patterson, Scott, and Geoﬀrey Rogow, “What’s Behind High-Frequency Trading,” Wall
Street Journal, Saturday/Sunday, August 1–2, 2009, page B1. (2) Wilmott, Paul, “Hurrying Into
the Next Panic?”, New York Times, Wednesday, July 29, 2009, page A19.
Krugman disagrees sharply Krugman, Paul, “Rewarding Bad Actors,” New York Times, Monday,
August 3, 2009, page A19. See also O’Brien, Matthew, “High Speed Trading Isn’t About
Eﬃciency—It’s About Cheating.” The Atlantic, February 2014.
cut a trading rate The dollar value of all trades in U.S. equities varies from year to year, as does the
portion created by the high-frequency traders.
Business Day headline New York Times, September 28, 2000.

CHAPTER 19
billion shares annually The Medallion Fund, a hedge fund closed to new investors, run by
mathematician James Simons, includes a similar and far larger trading operation than ours with a
higher rate of turnover and a vast annual trading volume. Now an investment vehicle for Simons
and his associates in his ﬁrm Renaissance Technologies Corporation, it is probably the most
successful hedge fund in history.
of our researchers David Gelbaum.
Gerry Bamberger For this and much more, see A Demon of Our Design, by Richard Bookstaber,
Wiley, New York, 2008.
in the securities industry See the book The Quants: How a New Breed of Math Whizzes Conquered
Wall Street and Nearly Destroyed It, by Scott Patterson, Crown, New York, 2010.
and more powerful It was based on the statistical notion of “principal components”; We called it ETS,
for “Equity Trading System.”
Japanese warrant hedging See Forbes, November 25, 1991, pp. 96–99, “A Three Time Winner,” and
the article by Shaw, Thorp and Ziemba, “Risk Arbitrage in the Nikkei Put Warrant Market of
1989–1990,” App. Math. Fin. 2, 243–71 (1995).
trend is greater The graph makes returns in the second epoch appear even more variable relative to the
ﬁrst than they really were. The proper display for comparing variability and growth rates is a so-
called lognormal graph. For that graph of XYZ’s performance, see Thorp, Edward O., “Statistical
Arbitrage, Part VI,” Wilmott, July 2005, pp. 34–36.
had ever experienced Reportedly, Simons’s secretive Renaissance Partners had a similar experience in
August of 2008, losing 8 percent or so in a few days, then rebounding to make more than 100
percent for the year.
employees, only six Since the six people in my oﬃce also had other responsibilities, we had only 3.5
“full-time equivalents” on the project.
in statistical arbitrage Firms doing statistical arbitrage, such as the hedge fund group Citadel, already
had in place most of the technology, talent, and expertise needed later to create and implement
high frequency trading (HFT). For an account of HFT, see the book Flash Boys by Michael
Lewis; In 2005, three years after we went out of the statistical arbitrage business, Steve and I
worked with Jerry Baesel, who was then at Morgan Stanley Asset Management, to see if it was
worth restarting. We concluded it was marginal because simulation showed a recent unlevered
return of 10 percent or so, not attractive enough when compared to other investment opportunities
then available to us. Meanwhile, we put the “shrink-wrapped” software on our shelf with a tag
saying “add people and data to reactivate.” Had we been running the program during the 2008–09
economic crisis, I suspect that we would have had a rerun of our “miraculous” 1998–99 results.

CHAPTER 20
or ten thousand shares The number of shares for which a depositor can apply varies from one oﬀering
to another, but between ¼ percent and 1 percent of the issue is common.
deals aren’t as good If, for example, the business value in the MW deal were $5 instead of $10,
management helped themselves to $3 of the ﬁnal enterprise value, and selling costs were $1,
buyers of the IPO would get a value of $5+$10−$3−$1=$11 for their $10. The market won’t
recognize this value right away, so the stock will start trading below $11 a share. Meanwhile,
market prices for the group of S&Ls as a whole could drop, taking the new stock’s price down,
too. Or, if the market sees management as greedy—$3 is a lot to take out for themselves—or not
competent to put the new capital to work, the stock will decline.
so-called opportunity cost Opportunity cost refers to the cost of the opportunity that was given up. In
addition to the cost of redirecting our capital from other investments, it includes the value of
whatever didn’t get done because we redirected our personal time to the S&L project.

CHAPTER 21
never did, either After BPL closed, Buﬀett accumulated Berkshire stock whenever he could, often
from his friends, associates, and former partners. According to Schroeder, The Snowball, pp.
341–42, the stock was unregistered then so it had to be traded privately.
As Forbes Forbes 400, October 22, 1990, page 122.
growth, decided Quietly.
made my ﬁrst purchase Buﬀett was so uninformative about his plans that his own children sold their
stock fairly early. I started buying about the time his daughter Susie sold oﬀ the last of hers.
$74,000 a share “Ordinary” investors tend to switch their money from securities that drop in price to
those that have gone up, a strategy sometimes described as chasing returns. An academic study of
all domestic US equity mutual funds covering 1991 through 2004 showed that this behavior by the
fund investors reduced their annual returns by an average of 1.6 percent; Friesen, Geoﬀrey C. and
Sapp, Travis R.A., “Mutual Fund Flows and Investor Returns: An Empirical Examination of Fund
Investor Timing Ability,” Journal of Banking and Finance, September 2007. Summarized in
“Buying High and Selling Low,” Mark Hulbert, New York Times, July 12, 2009, Mutual Fund
Report, page 18.
a famous interchange Paul Marx told me this story.
principles of security analysis As practiced by Graham, Dodd, Buﬀett, Munger, Fisher and others.
Three Successive Periods I chose the dates for the ﬁrst three periods because the price graphs
suggested that they were natural divisions. The fourth and last period covers the aftermath of the
Great Recession.

CHAPTER 22
fund in the country The woes of Harvard’s endowment fund are chronicled in “Rich Harvard, Poor
Harvard,” by Nina Munk, Vanity Fair, August 2009, pp. 106ﬀ.
average 18 percent This loss ﬁgure of 18 percent is commonly cited by the industry and I use it
throughout the book. However, it substantially understates the drop because some funds did not
fully discount their toxic assets, others with illiquid assets reported too late to be counted, reports
are voluntary so losers are less likely to respond, and the impact of funds which disappeared
during the year may not have been included.
billion in 2007 New York Times, March 25, 2009, page B1.
Management fees Incentive fees in 2015 averaged 17.7 percent of any proﬁt, compared to 19.3
percent in 2008, according to The Wall Street Journal, September 10, 2015. Management fees had
declined to an average of 1.54 percent.
hedge fund returns The studies encountered diﬃculties obtaining clean long-term data and in
correcting for survivorship bias: funds that died early and may not be in the database are expected
to have performed more poorly. Omitting them and studying only the survivors overstates the
results.
Later analyses Dichev, Ilia D. and Yu, Gwen, “Higher risk, lower returns: What hedge fund investors
really earn,” Journal of Financial Economics, 100 (2011) 248–63; Lack, Simon, The Hedge Fund
Mirage, Wiley, New York, 2012.
One study Bloomberg Businessweek, “Buzzkill Profs: Hedge Funds Do Half as Well as You Think,”
August 17, 2015, reports on a study by Getmansky, Lo, and Lee. Using data from 1996 through
2014, they conclude that a reported average return of 12.6 percent was really 6.3 percent when
the losers, who tend not to report, are included.
As Shakespeare Julius Caesar, Act I, Scene II, lines 140–41.
in an article International Fund Investment, April 2000, page 64.
managers that year New York Times, March 25, 2009, page B1.
playing this game New York Times, September 9, 1999, National Edition, page C10.
tend to fade Consider the statistical phenomenon of regression toward the mean.
of their stake Numerous books and articles give accounts of what happened, including Roger
Lowenstein, When Genius Failed, Random House, New York (2001), “Failed Wizards of Wall
Street,” Business Week, September 21, 1998, pp. 114–20, and “Hedge Fund’s Star Power Lulled
Big Financiers Into Complacency,” by Timothy L. O’Brien and Laura M. Holson, New York
Times, October 23, 1998. For some of my comments, see Tim O’Brien’s story “When Economic
Bombs Drop, Risk Models Fail” in the New York Times, October 4, 1998. A sensational Nova
program on LTCM that aired in February 2000, asserted that the total LTCM contracts
outstanding amounted to a trillion dollars.

CHAPTER 23
good to him Perhaps too good. He later stole millions from his ﬁrm and ﬂed to Brazil.
following classiﬁcation Forbes, October 11, 1999, page 60.
$83 trillion Orange County Register, March 7, 2014, Business, page 3.
is not available How big is the underground economy? What’s the value of privately held non-traded
businesses? How much of the national wealth consisting of patents, copyrights, and innovation is
being counted? Most household labor is not monetized, hence is not customarily counted in
national income.
$1.36 million Source: Money magazine report on a University of Michigan study, the lead author being
Fabian T. Pfeﬀer. Much of the increase in inequality comes from the fact that housing prices were
about the same in 2014 as they were in 2003, whereas US stocks, as represented by the S&P 500,
doubled. The rich have a higher proportion of their wealth in stocks and less in housing than
poorer people.
for large stocks Ibbotson Associates yearbook.
saves $6 each day He saves more each day in later years assuming the price of cigarettes increases
along with inﬂation.
An article http://quickenloans.quicken.com/ Articles/ fthbc_aﬀord_budget.asp.
$10,000 diﬀerence grows Mentally calculated by the rule of 240 in Appendix C.
The formula Assume the power law N = AW–B, where W is a high enough wealth level to exclude
most people, and N is the number having wealth at least W, and A and B are unknowns. The two
facts I used to ﬁnd A and B were (1) when N = 400, W = $1.3 billion, and (2) the total wealth of
the 400 was $1.2 trillion, giving an average value of three times the cutoﬀ. The result is N = 400
[(1.3 billion)/W]4/3. The value 4/3 for B seems to be roughly the same from year to year, as the
average wealth seems to be about three times the cutoﬀ. So you can recalibrate the formula each
year that this is true by simply replacing 1.3 billion by the current cutoﬀ. Using 1999 data, in
“How Rich Is Rich?—Part 1,” Wilmott magazine, July 2003, pp. 44–45, I found the slightly
diﬀerent value 1.43 instead of 4/3. Perhaps coincidentally, the 2009 Forbes 400 edition oﬀers a
calculator using this formula on page 20 at forbes.com/baldwin. Forbes, page 20, says the formula
uses the exponent 0.7, which equals 1/B and, therefore, a value for B of 1.43. Their formula
inverts mine and expresses W as a function of N. For an extended discussion of formulas for
estimating wealth and income, including evidence for the Pareto equation, see Inhaber and Carroll
(1992) and the many further references therein as well as Scafetta, Picozzi and West, “An out-of-
equilibrium model of the distribution of wealth,” Quantitative Finance, Vol. 4 (2004) pp. 353–64.
billion dollars or more The Orange County Business Journal listed 36, with Lakers basketball star
Kobe Bryant in 36th place at $250 million. Since I know of people they missed, the ﬁgure of 49
may be closer to the truth.
$81 billion The Gates household had as much wealth as 150 thousand average US households. In other
words, one one-thousandth of all the private wealth in the United States.
large increases in wealth Carrying this a step further, you could guess someone’s future wealth, in
current dollars, by estimating the present value of their future savings, plus their current net
worth. This is similar to some methods used by analysts to calculate the value of a company in

current dollars, and hence the fair price for its stock. Using an estimated future inﬂation rate you
could then arrive at a value for their wealth on any future date.
$37 million each Bloomberg, August 17, 2009, citing UC–Berkeley economics professor Emmanuel
Saez, noted for his continuing studies of, and statistics on, the distribution of income and wealth
in America. Note that the average of $37 million, divided by the cutoﬀ of $11.5 million, is 3.2,
very close to the result of the same calculation for the wealth distribution of the Forbes 400,
suggesting that 2007 superrich taxable income followed the same, or nearly the same, power law
as that for wealth.

CHAPTER 24
disputed origin The claimed sources include Benjamin Franklin, various Rothschilds, Albert Einstein,
Bernard Baruch, and “unknown.”
$22 million result These ﬁgures do not include trading costs or income taxes. A buy-and-hold investor
loses little to trading costs and is taxed only on dividends. Taxes, if any, vary with the investor.
less than the last So-called decreasing marginal utility.
as one day less Adults with the same chronological age vary widely in their ﬁtness age. Qualiﬁers for
the Senior Olympic Games have a functional and ﬁtness age averaging twenty-ﬁve years less than
their calendar age, as reported in “Older Athletes Have a Strikingly Young Fitness Age,” by
Gretchen Reynolds, in the New York Times, July 1, 2015. Studies of identical twins give
persuasive evidence of the longevity beneﬁts of exercise. See, for instance, “One Twin Exercises,
the Other Doesn’t,” Gretchen Reynolds, New York Times, March 4, 2015.
forty hours of commuting Assuming he works on average about twenty days a month.
a month to operate Costs include fuel, maintenance, insurance, license fees, and depreciation, plus the
owner’s time spent taking care of these.

CHAPTER 25
the US stocks The Vanguard Total Stock Market Index Admiral Shares, ticker symbol VTSAX, does
this. Actually, it invests in each stock proportionally to the market value of the so-called ﬂoat,
which is the estimated fraction of freely trading shares, as opposed to shares being held which are
not available for trading. The diﬀerence in performance between the two methods has been
negligible.
it ﬁrst appeared Justin Fox, The Myth of the Rational Market, page 119, reports that Ben Graham, in
1962, pointed out that investment funds as a whole shouldn’t expect to beat the market “because
in a signiﬁcant sense they…are the market.”
the clearest exposition Sharpe, William, “The Arithmetic of Active Management,” Financial Analyst’s
Journal, Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 7–9, January/February, 1991.
all areas of investing According to Lipper, Inc., Wall Street Journal, July 6, 2009, section R, the
average equity mutual fund expense ratio alone was 1.22 percent in 2007, compared to 0.20
percent for Vanguard’s no-load equity index funds. As the expense ratio is only a part of the fees
investors pay, the “helpers” collect substantially more than 1 percent per year and, with trading
costs, active investors lag passives by well over 2 percent annually.
ﬁve and ten years Fund Track, by Sam Mamudi, Wall Street Journal, October 8, 2009, page C9.
corresponding economic loss These extra taxable gains or losses will be oﬀset later if you liquidate
your investment.
to catch up Taxes leave me with 70 percent of my sales price. To get back to $100, $70 has to increase
by $30 or 42.6 percent.

CHAPTER 26
beat the market This sounds nonsensical at ﬁrst. What it means is that no one has any information
whatsoever that has predictive value.
to the contrary They display the well-known characteristic known as cognitive dissonance.
and hundreds of books An excellent history of these meanderings is Justin Fox’s book The Myth of
the Rational Market.
all the future earnings Interpreted as net value paid out or accumulated for the beneﬁt of a sole
owner.
on inside information As chronicled by James Stewart in Den of Thieves, Connie Bruck in The
Predators’ Ball, and others.
this type proﬁtably Tobias, Andrew, Money Angles, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1984, pp. 71–72.
Often, management would oﬀer to redeem shares at an intermediate price, thus cashing out the
dissidents and retaining an asset base of unredeemed shares which they could continue to be paid
to manage.
in a few months Buying SPACs was not without risk because the assets were not protected from
creditors in bankruptcy. Jeﬀ, who discovered the strategy, researched the risks in each case before
investing.
or 82 percent I have omitted details such as how the actual cash required for the investment might vary
from the $9,000 of the example because of the interaction of margin regulations with the
investor’s preexisting portfolio, and also because of time-varying marks to the market on the short
position.
The Wall Street Journal Wall Street Journal, March 3, 2000, page C19, “Palm Soars As 3Com Unit
Makes Its Trading Debut.”
the EMH explained Malkiel, Burton G., A Random Walk Down Wall Street, Norton & Co., New
York, 2007.
The New York Times New York Times, March 3, 2000, page A1, “Oﬀspring Upstages Parent In Palm
Inc.’s Initial Trading.”
academic literature documents It often takes weeks or months for the stock price to fully adjust after
announcements of unexpected earnings, stock buybacks, and spin-oﬀs.

CHAPTER 27
already been counted Mutual fund management companies and hedge fund general partnership
interests have a separate and often considerable market value but they have already been counted
as part of the private equity subcategory.
between asset classes For a highly mathematical discussion of this eﬀect, sometimes called “volatility
pumping,” see The Kelly Capital Growth Investment Criterion: Theory and Practice, editors
Leonard C. MacLean, Edward O. Thorp, and William T. Ziemba, World Scientiﬁc, 2010.
The results For a comprehensive history of returns for world stock markets, see Triumph of the
Optimists, by Dimson [et al].
1940–2004 period “Causes of the United States Housing Bubble,” from Wikipedia, 09/16/09 version;
Ziemba, William, “What Signals Worked and What Did Not 1980–2009, Parts I, II, III, Wilmott
magazine, May, July and Sept. 2009.
owning your home On average, signiﬁcant money in excess of inﬂation is made in commercial real
estate but not in residential real estate. Homeowners and would-be buyers often don’t understand
the distinction. They also are misled by the stories of big winners at various times and in diﬀerent
localities. They share this error with stock market investors, which is no surprise as many are the
same people. Behavioral ﬁnance theorists have analyzed this human tendency.
median large endowment “Princeton’s Endowment Declines 23 percent,” by John Hechinger, Wall
Street Journal, September 30, 2009, page C3.
Fortune’s Formula The title, Fortune’s Formula, should sound familiar, as it was the title of the talk I
gave on blackjack to the American Mathematical Society in 1961. Bill Poundstone considerately
asked if he might use it as his title. In Beat the Dealer I called this, naturally enough, the Kelly
Gambling System. Since 1966 I’ve called it the Kelly Criterion and the name has stuck.
larger the bet You can read about the details in articles I have written, most of which are available on
my website at www.edwardothorp.com.
considerable controversy In addition to Poundstone’s history, mathematically trained readers can study
some of the burgeoning modern developments in The Kelly Capital Growth Investment Criterion:
Theory and Practice, editors Leonard C. MacLean, Edward O. Thorp, and William T. Ziemba,
World Scientiﬁc, 2010.
As he told The Wall Street Journal “Old Pros Size Up the Game,” by Scott Patterson, Wall Street
Journal, March 22, 2008, page A9. Gross left PIMCO in 2014 and went to Janus to manage
money.
out in Wilmott magazine See “Understanding the Kelly Criterion,” by Edward O. Thorp, Wilmott,
May 2008, pp. 57–59, and http://undergroundvalue.blogspot.com/ 2008/ 02/ notes-from-buﬀett-
meeting-2152008_23.html.
Computer simulations The simulations were done by mathematician Art Quaife.

CHAPTER 28
stock index fund Why not continue to hold Berkshire? One reason is that I can’t foresee who will be
managing the endowment in the distant future and believe it best to lock them into the well-
understood mechanical approach of indexing. This avoids the waste that occurs from active
investing.
H. W. Brands Fortune, August 11, 2003.
resilient than universities As quoted in Sample, Steven B. and Bermis, Warren, Los Angeles Times
Book Review, July 13, 2003, page R9.
criteria for selection I thank Professor Ronald Stern for encouraging and facilitating the creation of
the chair, Paul Marx of the University Foundation for legal help and for many insightful
conversations, and my wife, Vivian, for her part in creating the conditions that made our
contribution possible.
early card counters See The Bond King, by Timothy Middleton, Wiley, New Jersey, 2004, and
Everything You’ve Heard About Investing is Wrong, by William H. Gross, Random House, New
York, 1997, as well as the revised version Bill Gross on Investing, by William H. Gross, Wiley,
New York, 1997, 1998.
past twenty-ﬁve years Gross, 1997, op. cit. page 90.
causes, so a group The idea of meeting with Bill Gross started with Professor Stern, then Dean of the
School of Physical Sciences, and Greg Gissendanner, who was UCI’s University Advancement
Oﬃcer at the School. My friend and attorney, Paul Marx, knew Bill and set up a lunch.
ahead of schedule Sue and Bill Gross later gave an additional $4 million to complete the fourth ﬂoor
conference center and laboratories.

CHAPTER 29
all-time closing high Source: www.ﬁnance.yahoo.com, daily closing prices, adjusted for splits and
dividends. Figures are truncated from 1565.15 and 676.53.
$48.5 trillion The Federal Reserve, as reported in the Los Angeles Times, March 12, 2010.
$161 per share The successive 10 percent increases over the previous stock price compound, moving
the stock from $100 to $110, then to $121, $133.10, etc., reaching $161.05 after the ﬁfth
increase.
more than ten times Month-end returns from the end of 1925 to the end of August 1929 show no
decline in the index from a previous peak of 10 percent, suggesting that conditions were
encouraging for borrowing as stock prices increased.
maintenance margin For a discussion of maintenance margin, see, for instance, Beat the Market, by
Thorp, Edward O. and Kassouf, Sheen T., Random House, New York, 1967, Chapter 11.
impact of speculation Wikipedia.
Frontline Frontline: The Warning, October 20, 2009, pbs.org, available on DVD.
gross national product What would have been produced by workers who are unemployed never gets
“made up.” Social waste included deteriorating empty untended houses and the impact on society
of shattered lives.
Krugman pointed out Krugman, Paul, “How Did Economists Get It So Wrong?” New York Times
Magazine, September 6, 2009, pp. 36–43.
in his book The Quants: How a Small Band of Math Wizards Took Over Wall Street and Nearly
Destroyed It, by Scott Patterson, Crown, New York, 2010.
remain solvent He also said, on the same point, “In the long run we are all dead.”
anyone, later told Patterson, Scott, Wall Street Journal.
Krugman points out Krugman, Paul, “Good and Boring,” New York Times Op-Ed, February 1, 2010.
411 to 1 Hiltzik, Michael, “Echoes of Bell in CEO Salaries,” Los Angeles Times, page 31, October 3,
2010. Wall Street Journal (as reprinted in The Orange County Register, May 11, 2014, Business,
page 3) says a study by the Economic Policy Institute found that for the 350 companies with the
largest sales, CEOs received 18 times the pay of their workers in 1965 but were compensated 201
times as much, on average, in 2012.
as Moshe Adler Adler, Moshe, “Overthrowing the Overpaid,” Los Angeles Times Opinion, page A15,
January 4, 2010.

CHAPTER 30
Garrett Hardin Hardin, Garrett, “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science, Vol. 162, No. 3859
December 13, 1968, pp. 1243–48.
protects my neighbors Vaccination is a positive externality as it protects others from contracting a
disease from the recipient.
collection of insights Poor Charlie’s Almanack: The Wit and Wisdom of Charles T. Munger, Foreward
by Warren Buﬀett, edited by Peter Kaufman. Expanded third edition, 2008.
much of their income Read the evolving discussion of the taxation of so-called carried interest in
Wikipedia and elsewhere on the Internet. The 2012 Republican presidential candidate, Mitt
Romney, was a substantial beneﬁciary.
of national income The top 1 percent have about a third of taxable income, the next 9 percent have
another third, and the bottom 90 percent have the remaining third.
20 percent or so To get a simplistic feel for the numbers, government received $3.25 trillion in income
in 2015 and GNP was $18 trillion. If we exempt $2 trillion for the very poorest citizens and tax
the remaining $16 trillion of GNP at a single rate, the result is 3.25/16 or 20 percent.
a year by 2015 According to the UC Admissions Oﬃce, this is mitigated by the fact that more than
half of undergraduates pay no tuition and more than two-thirds receive grants and scholarships
averaging $16,300.
of them Chinese My grandson Edward, while a high school senior, was taking an advanced
mathematics class (partial diﬀerential equations) at UCI. Thirty-one of the thirty-six students
were Chinese. As they were unaware that Edward speaks Mandarin ﬂuently, he overheard many
candid conversations.
APPENDIX A
dollar has changed For an insightful discussion of why the inﬂation index from the 1970s may be
much too low as a result of a series of government revisions in the method of calculation, and the
consequences to investors and consumers, see “Fooling With Inﬂation” by Bill Gross (June 2008)
at www.pimco.com.
For updated Consumer Price Index numbers and for month-by-month values, go to
www.bls.gov/cpi or do the usual Google search.
APPENDIX C
$2 billion in cash Los Angeles Times, Thursday, September 7, 2000, page C5.
