 
 
 
Credit Suisse Economics  
Lombard Street and Commodities 
 
Late last Friday afternoon, the following Bloomberg headline caught my eye: 
*ECB TURNS DOWN ENERGY TRADERS’ PLEA FOR FUNDING SUPPORT 
The recent bottlenecks in commodity funding markets are stemming from 
commodity traders exhausting and then asking for bigger credit lines from banks – 
surging commodity prices mean credit lines must be fully utilized to move cargo 
but when credit lines are fully utilized, you don’t have anything left to draw on 
to pay margin on more price-volatile cargo. Then you start to prioritize uses – 
you’ll use your credit lines exclusively to lease ships and to fill it up with cargo 
and you won’t hedge (because you exhausted your credit line and so cannot 
afford to hedge), which then means more uncertain price terms in the future… 
…price terms in terms of the price level, that is, inflation! 
In a bizarre twist of logic… 
…commodities are core to price stability (a central bank mandate), but the 
liquidity needs of commodity traders that procure commodities were deemed 
peripheral by the ECB from a financial stability perspective. It must follow that  
if commodity traders ever get emergency liquidity assistance (ELA), they’ll get it 
for price stability, not financial stability considerations. Regardless of the reason, 
today we’ll try to imagine the price commodity traders might have to pay for ELA.  
There is no free lunch. Unlike the military and diplomatic protection to 
commodity assets and the global sea routes through which they are shipped, 
central bank liquidity is never a free externality. There is always a price you pay: 
implementing the Washington Consensus in Southeast Asia in 1997, where 
the IMF played the role of the global central bank (no swap lines back then); 
implementing Basel III after the Great Financial Crisis of 2008; and, perhaps, 
rules limiting leverage in the RV hedge fund community for the bailout received 
during March 2020 (no rules have been proposed yet, but they may be coming). 
To start our emergency liquidity discussion, consider four facts. 
First, as Perry Mehrling taught us, always and everywhere, finance is hierarchical, 
and as Katarina Pistor taught us, the laws that underpin the hierarchy of finance 
are flexible at the core and rigid at the periphery. Emergency liquidity assistance 
is hard to get when you are a non-bank: it was impossible to get it in 2008 if 
you were a conduit, a SIV, a primary dealer, a finance company, or a money fund, 
and once again it is impossible to get it today if you are a commodity trader. 
Commodity traders are at the periphery of the financial system, and the laws 
are rigid once again. But every crisis starts at the periphery and the bushfire  
4 April 2022 
Investment Solutions & Products 
Global 
 
Important Information  
THIS IS NOT RESEARCH. PLEASE REFER TO THE IMPORTANT DISCLOSURES AND CONTACT YOUR CREDIT SUISSE 
REPRESENTATIVE FOR MORE DETAILS. This report represents the views of the Investment Strategy Department of Credit Suisse and 
has not been prepared in accordance with the legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research. It is not a 
product of the Credit Suisse Research Department and the view of the Investment Strategy Department may differ materially from the views 
of the Credit Suisse Research Department and other divisions at Credit Suisse, even if it references published research recommendations. 
Credit Suisse has a number of policies in place to promote the independence of Credit Suisse’s Research Departments from Credit Suisse’s 
Investment Strategy-and other departments and to manage conflicts of interest, including policies relating to dealing ahead of the 
dissemination of investment research. These policies do not apply to the views of Investment Strategists contained in this report.  
 
 
CONTRIBUTOR 
Zoltan Pozsar 
212 538 3779 
zoltan.pozsar@credit-suisse.com 
 
  

 
 
4 April 2022 
 
Lombard Street and Commodities 
2 
ultimately encircles the core. The moat around fortress balance sheets at the core 
will help this time around – hundreds of billions of dollars of reserves at the Fed 
(the moat) will contain the fire and help the survival of the periphery for a while, 
but if the fire rages for too long or intensifies, the core can also sustain damage. 
Second, according to Bloomberg, the ECB did leave the door open to 
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) provided by national central banks, but the 
possibility of that depends on the laws defining national central bank mandates – 
that is, while hope is not lost completely, hope depends on legal interpretation.  
Third, crises are about normally good collateral turning bad and impossible to 
finance and/or hedge. KRW in 1997, mortgages in 2008, Treasuries in 2020, 
commodities today. Mortgages and Treasuries are central bank eligible assets. 
Commodities aren’t, and central banks only lend against collateral, but 
commodity traders don’t have high-quality, liquid assets (HQLA) to pledge. 
Central banks also like to be “secured to their satisfaction” and central banks’ 
legal departments, not markets departments, determine what is satisfactory. 
Fourth, location matters. The ECB was the first, but perhaps not the last 
central bank that commodity traders have approached for liquidity. The largest 
commodity trading houses are based in Geneva, Zug, and Singapore, and so 
the Swiss National Bank and the Monetary Authority of Singapore are exposed. 
No, the dollar swap lines won’t suffice, because the dollars that come from the 
swap lines with the Fed are just the inter-central bank bit. Central banks then 
broadcast those dollars via cross-currency repos to their local banks, where the 
collateral comes from the HQLA portfolio of local banks. Once again, 
commodity traders do not have HQLA. They are net borrowers in the system, 
not net lenders. They are long physical commodities and structurally short liquidity, 
and unless central banks decide to accept physical commodities as collateral, 
there is no easy way to for national central banks to provide emergency liquidity. 
Irrespective of these four hurdles… 
…all sorts of commodities are becoming more expensive and more volatile, and 
the commodity world’s equivalents of G-SIB score-related price spikes due to 
physical disruptions are coming (see below) – and the price spikes won’t follow 
calendar patterns, but rather the patterns of war and sanctions. Liquidity shocks 
never announce themselves, they just happen. That’s why they are called shocks. 
According to an ancient Andaman folklore…  
…when you see the water levels recede, run to the highest ground you can find. 
In 1997, clearing banks in New York saw the water levels recede for 
Southeast Asian banks and finance companies (they ran out of dollar balances). 
It was time to short the FX pegs, i.e. the concept of fixed exchange rates. 
In 2008, clearing banks in New York saw the water levels rapidly recede for 
primary dealers and other shadow banks (they could not fund subprime MBS). 
It was time to short the ABX and then primary dealers, and the concept of par. 
In 2019, clearing banks in New York saw the water levels rapidly recede and 
they got to their LCLoR – o/n repo popped in September 2019, and the Fed’s 
bill purchases that followed were not fast enough to get the system ready for 
the liquidity storm that the onset of Covid-19 would unleash in March 2020.  
It was time to short Treasuries and the concept of a tight cash-futures basis. 

 
 
4 April 2022 
 
Lombard Street and Commodities 
3 
In 2022, clearing banks in New York and banks in other financial centers are 
seeing water levels rapidly receding once again. This time for commodity players. 
Commodity traders asking for central bank liquidity assistance is a symptom  
– the symptom – of liquidity stress. You don’t ask for liquidity assistance 
without long-term consequences like regulatory oversight and liquidity rules,  
and so if you ask for liquidity assistance, you must really-really need it. Why? 
Because as Perry Mehrling taught us, “liquidity kills you quick”, and here we’ll 
add that in the commodities world, where the nominal world of money trading 
(the four prices of money) and real world of physical commodity trading meet, 
liquidity means not one but two things: the flow of money and the flow of atoms. 
Liquidity can kill you quick from two directions… 
…if the financial flow of margin payments stops (can’t pay margin), and also 
…if the physical flow of commodities stops (why pay margin).  
The ancient Andaman folklore will soon have its commodity trading version… 
…when you see commodity flows recede, run to a central bank you can find. 
In previous dispatches, we warned about potential disruption to the flow of gas 
(the buyer turns away because it does not want to pay in rubles; the seller 
turns away and turns off the faucet; or more covertly, pipelines get damaged in 
Ukraine through sabotage so no one knows why Europe ended up without gas). 
In previous dispatches, we also warned about potential disruptions to oil flows 
due to VLCC shortages, not to mention risks to Saudi-U.S. relations due to the 
U.S.’s “rapprochement” with Iran or the increased risk of piracy due to a  
wheat crisis (see here). The release of oil from the U.S. SPR is welcome, but… 
…it reminds us of J.P. Morgan lending its last penny in the o/n repo market in 
September 2019 and then nothing. The Fed had to top up the banking system 
with reserves, but that was easy. As we said in our last dispatch, it’s easy to 
print money, but impossible to print gas and oil to fuel industry, transport goods, 
or heat homes, or to print wheat to eat. There are major risks to pipelines; 
there are risks in the developing world’s willingness to provide commodities to 
the developed world (not just from Russia, but also from OPEC, which refused 
to increase the production of oil despite a pre-SPR release plea from the U.S.); 
there are risks in terms of shipping capacity; and there are risks to sea lanes – 
straits getting closed, tolls at the Suez Canal spiking, and piracy increasing. 
Black gold meets the black swan… 
We need to understand commodity traders’ plea for ELA both in the context of 
a world where commodities flow freely, and the only worry is how to finance 
more expensive and more price-volatile cargo, but also in a world where 
commodities do not flow freely, and where ELA is needed by those who were 
owed margin but did not get paid because the other side called force majeure. 
The nickel market is small, but… 
…the oil and gas markets are big. The private sector could afford to deal with 
liquidity issues at the LME but won’t be able to deal with liquidity issues at the 
much larger oil and gas markets. The banks that were owed margin payments 
during the recent nickel debacle reportedly preferred not to be paid margin by 
the troubled counterpart to protect the integrity of the LME. But remember:  

 
 
4 April 2022 
 
Lombard Street and Commodities 
4 
if you owe a bank $1 billion, it’s your problem. If $10, it’s the bank’s problem, 
and unlike the nickel market, the oil and gas market won’t be a $1 billion problem. 
Commodities are full of tail risks that are impossible to price, and the next leg 
of the liquidity crisis in commodities is just a headline away. This is a war, not  
a business cycle. In period of regime change, the normal rules don’t apply… 
…and as we learned from Andy Grove, “only the paranoid survive”. 
I want to continue to emphasize my concern about tail risks in the system, and 
also that I was wrong about how to express these systemic tail risks to date. 
This is clearly not a STIR trade, or at least not yet… 
I was wrong about the expression of these concerns (not funding spreads, 
since commodity traders do not fund in dollar funding markets directly, but 
indirectly through banks and banks are swimming in liquidity), but I was right 
about the early days of a liquidity crisis. Like Tolstoy’s unhappy families  
(unlike happy families, they are all unhappy in their own way), every crisis is a 
crisis in its own way: 1997 was a crisis of the periphery in Southeast Asia, not 
the New York core; 2008 was a crisis of the periphery (subprime borrowers 
and the shadow banking system) that due to mismanagement engulfed the core – 
the New York core; 2020 was a crisis of the risk-free U.S. Treasury curve – 
the New York core was a source of strength but still needed help from the Fed.  
Every major crisis is a crisis of money and collateral. Every major crisis is also a 
liquidity crisis. Not every crisis engulfs the core, but that doesn’t mean you 
shouldn’t care: 1982, 1994, 1997, and 1998 did not engulf the core like 2008, 
but you still had to care. And you have to care about commodity traders today. 
If not through funding spreads, how else can we express these concerns? 
First, liquidity kills you quick and sudden deaths leave everyone exposed, and so 
large losses at the core of the financial system are not zero probability risks. 
The size of the commodity derivatives complex is big, about $1.5 trillion  
(non-precious metals only, $1 trillion of which are OTC swaps, see here). 
While not necessarily lethal, bank equities can be hit by unexpected losses. 
Second, liquidity can save you but at what price? What if the liquidity help from 
central banks comes at the expense of nationalization (“secured to satisfaction”) 
– or the forced sale or pledging of real assets, like mines? We are not talking 
about Russia nationalizing the assets of BP. We are thinking about parallels to 
AIG, where liquidity assistance came in exchange for a steep equity interest, 
and AIG having to sell its stake in AIA. Maybe it’s a good omen that the SNB 
is an experienced investor in equities – a good omen for the New York core, 
but not for the equity investors of commodity trading houses. To summarize… 
…bank equities can suffer if ELA to commodity traders isn’t coming, and  
equity investors in commodity traders can suffer in the extreme both  
if liquidity assistance isn’t coming (you fold), but also if assistance is coming 
(you can get nationalized, either in whole or partly, or are forced to sell assets). 
Third, maybe the ECB and other central banks will decide to launch CEPP – a 
Commodity Emergency Purchase Program – where they buy unsecured debt 
from commodity traders to fund their needs. If the EBC buys corporate debt, 
and if the SNB buys corporate debt, maybe they will end up doing that for 
commodity traders, and will not request equity in return for emergency liquidity. 
We do not know which of these three scenarios will happen. 

 
 
4 April 2022 
 
Lombard Street and Commodities 
5 
What the steady inflow of U.S. dollars was to South Korea in 1997, and what 
the steady flow principal and interest payments were to the performance of 
subprime mortgages and CDOs in 2008 (and the entities exposed to them), 
the steady flow of gas, oil, and other commodities is to financial stability today.  
Sudden stops are about to get a new meaning… 
…for they can happen not only in the nominal, but also the real domain. 
Shadow banking is “money market funding of capital market lending”. 
Shadow banking is also “money market funding of commodity trading”… 
…for as discussed here, the legacy of Marc Rich and Pincus “Pinky” Green 
(Rich’s right-hand in shipping matters) was to turn commodity trading into a 
highly levered trading operation, funded by unsecured credit lines from banks. 
Bagehot was a commodity trader, and if you read Bagehot Was a Shadow Banker 
– first page, “What Would Bagehot Say” – you’ll read about “a world where 
government debt is not yet the focal point of trading and prices, as it came to 
be in the 20th century. Instead, the focal point was the private bill market, 
which domestic manufacturers tapped as a source of working capital, and 
which traders worldwide tapped to finance the movement of tradable goods.  
It was a market in short-term private debt, collateralized by tradable goods,  
quite different from the 20th century market in long-term government debt. 
What has come down to us as the Bagehot Rule for stemming financial crises  
– lend freely at a high rate of interest—was originally about the Bank of England 
buying bills freely but at a low price. The Bank also made loans of its own 
(“advances”) against collateral, and the Bank’s generous collateral valuations 
provided further support for market prices. Bagehot himself famously urged the 
Bank to accept as collateral “what in ordinary times is reckoned a good security” 
rather than at current market valuations. The point was to prevent troubled banks 
from being forced to liquidate fundamentally sound assets at fire sale prices.” 
The key concepts in the above passage – authored by Perry Mehrling et. al. – 
are private (real) bills and working capital. What would Bagehot do today? 
He’d be quite surprised at Friday’s ECB decision. 
He’d launch CEPP (see above) right away. 
The ECB’s decision on Friday… 
…shows not only an interesting twist of logic where the guarantors of price stability 
(which are not central banks, but commodity traders) are deemed peripheral 
from a financial stability perspective, without regard for what their liquidity problems 
mean for price stability. It also may show a disregard for financial history. 
As the above passage reminds, emergency liquidity assistance was originally 
administered to backstop working capital needs for international trade in goods 
(which also include commodities). Today, we are in love with working capital 
needs of a different domain: the working capital needs of asset managers that 
come from the repo market and the FX swap market. What real bills are to the 
trading of real goods, repo and FX swaps are to trading financial goods (bonds). 
It’s great that we now embrace the concept of DoLR… 
…but it took us a decade and a half to get used to that idea, and that idea was 
about adopting old ways of thinking in a new context. In that process, we seem 
to have forgotten about the origin of the old ways – the real world of commerce, 

 
 
4 April 2022 
 
Lombard Street and Commodities 
6 
the trading of commodities and goods more broadly. Central banks have to 
backstop the liquidity needs of commodity traders, for if they do not do so, they 
will soon have to be funding a series of price control measures through more QE. 
In a way, central banks are on the hook either way, they just don’t realize it yet. 
Once again, of the three ELA options (no ELA; ELA for equity; ELA unsecured 
– for each, see above), we don’t know which one central banks will choose. 
A lot will depend on the ECB’s and other central banks’ reading habits – is it 
the Old Testament (Old Testament justice for non-banks and no ELA); or is it 
the Merchant of Venice (ELA for a pound of flesh); or another English classic – 
Bagehot’s Lombard Street as the polar opposite to Shakespeare’s classic?   
 
 

 
 
4 April 2022 
 
Lombard Street and Commodities 
7 
  
Additional Important Information  
This material has been prepared by the Investment Strategy Department personnel of Credit Suisse identified in this material as "Contributors" and not by Credit 
Suisse's Research Department. The information contained in this document has been provided as general market commentary only and does not constitute any 
form of personal advice, legal, tax or other regulated financial advice or service. It is intended only to provide observations and views of the Investment Strategy 
Department, which may be different from, or inconsistent with, the observations and views of Credit Suisse Research Department analysts, other Credit Suisse 
departments, or the proprietary positions of Credit Suisse. Observations and views expressed herein may be changed by the Investment Strategy Department at 
any time without notice. Credit Suisse accepts no liability for losses arising from the use or reliance on of this material. This material is not for distribution to retail 
clients and is directed exclusively at Credit Suisse’s institutional clients.  
FOR IMPORTANT DISCLOSURES on companies covered in Credit Suisse Global Markets Division research reports, please see http://www.credit-
suisse.com/researchdisclosures. To obtain a copy of the most recent Credit Suisse research on any company mentioned please contact your sales 
representative or go to http://www.credit-suisse.com/researchandanalytics.  
This material does not purport to contain all of the information that an interested party may desire and, in fact, provides only a limited view of a particular market. 
It is not investment research, or a research recommendation for regulatory purposes, as it does not constitute substantive research or analysis. This material is 
provided for informational purposes only and does not constitute an invitation or offer to subscribe for or purchase any of the products or services mentioned.  
The information provided is not intended to provide a sufficient basis on which to make an investment decision and is not a personal recommendation or 
investment advice. While it has been obtained from or based upon sources believed by the trader or sales personnel to be reliable, each of the trader or sales 
personnel and Credit Suisse does not represent or warrant its accuracy or completeness and is not responsible for losses or damages arising from the use or 
reliance on of this material.  
Where distribution of this material is subject to the rules of the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”), it is a “solicitation” of derivatives 
business only as that term is used within CFTC Rule 1.71 and 23.605 promulgated under the U.S. Commodity Exchange Act (the “CFTC Rules”) where 
applicable, but is not a binding offer to buy/sell any financial instrument. The views of the author may differ from others at Credit Suisse Group (including Credit 
Suisse Research).  
Credit Suisse is acting solely as an arm’s length contractual counterparty and not as a financial adviser (or in any other advisory capacity including tax, legal, 
accounting or otherwise) or in a fiduciary capacity. Any information provided does not constitute advice or a recommendation to enter into or conclude any 
transaction. Before entering into any transaction, you should ensure that you fully understand the potential risks and rewards and independently determine that it 
is appropriate for you given your objectives, experience, financial and operational resources, and other relevant circumstances. You should consult with such 
advisers (including, without limitation, tax advisers, legal advisers and accountants) as you deem necessary.  
Credit Suisse Securities (Europe) Limited ("CSSEL") and Credit Suisse International ("CSI") are authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated 
by the Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA") and the Prudential Regulation Authority under UK laws, which differ from Australian Laws. CSSEL and CSI do not 
hold an Australian Financial Services Licence ("AFSL") and are exempt from the requirement to hold an AFSL under the Corporations Act (Cth) 2001 
("Corporations Act") in respect of the financial services provided to Australian wholesale clients (within the meaning of section 761G of the Corporations Act) 
(hereinafter referred to as “Financial Services”). This material is not for distribution to retail clients and is directed exclusively at Credit Suisse's professional 
clients and eligible counterparties as defined by the FCA, and wholesale clients as defined under section 761G of the Corporations Act. Credit Suisse (Hong 
Kong) Limited ("CSHK") is licensed and regulated by the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong under the laws of Hong Kong, which differ from 
Australian laws. CSHKL does not hold an AFSL and is exempt from the requirement to hold an AFSL under the Corporations Act in respect of providing 
Financial Services. Credit Suisse Equities (Australia) Limited (ABN 35 068 232 708) ("CSEAL") is an AFSL holder in Australia (AFSL 237237). In Australia, 
this material may only be distributed to Wholesale investors as defined in the Corporations Act. CSEAL is not an authorised deposit taking institution and 
products described herein do not represent deposits or other liabilities of Credit Suisse AG, Sydney Branch. Credit Suisse AG, Sydney Branch does not 
guarantee any particular rate of return on, or the performance of any products described.  
This material is distributed in the European Union by Credit Suisse Bank (Europe), S.A. regulated by the Comision Nacional del Mercado de Valores.  
If this material is issued and distributed in the U.S., it is by Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC (“CSSU”), a member of NYSE, FINRA, SIPC and the NFA, and 
CSSU accepts responsibility for its contents. Clients should contact sales coverage and execute transactions through a Credit Suisse subsidiary or affiliate in 
their home jurisdiction unless governing law permits otherwise. Investment banking services in the United States are provided by Credit Suisse Securities (USA) 
LLC, an affiliate of Credit Suisse Group. CSSU is regulated by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission under United States laws, which differ 
from Australian laws. CSSU does not hold an AFSL and is exempt from the requirement to hold an AFSL under the Corporations Act in respect of providing 
Financial Services. Credit Suisse Asset Management LLC (CSAM) is authorised by the Securities and Exchange Commission under US laws, which differ from 
Australian laws. CSAM does not hold an AFSL and is exempt from the requirement to hold an AFSL under the Corporations Act in respect of providing Financial 
Services.  
If this material is issued and distributed in Japan, it is issued and distributed in Japan by Credit Suisse Securities (Japan) Limited, Financial Instruments Firm, 
Director-General of Kanto Local Finance Bureau (Kinsho) No. 66, a member of Japan Securities Dealers Association, The Financial Futures Association of 
Japan, Japan Investment Advisers Association, Type II Financial Instruments Firms Association. This report has been prepared and issued for distribution in 
Japan to Credit Suisse’s clients, including institutional investors;  
This report may not be reproduced either in whole or in part, without the written permission of Credit Suisse. All trademarks, service marks and logos used in 
this document are trademarks or service marks or registered trademarks or service marks of Credit Suisse or its information providers. All material presented in 
this document, unless specifically indicated otherwise, is under copyright to Credit Suisse or its information providers. Copyright © 2022 Credit Suisse Group 
AG and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.  
 
