
HERE IS WHAT SOME FINANCE HEAVYWEIGHTS HAVE TO SAY
ABOUT ALPHA TRADER.
I couldn’t put this book down! Brent has done an amazing job at capturing the challenges
that traders face on a daily basis and how best to navigate today’s markets. It is an
essential read for anyone who is interested in managing money and the behavioral
psychology behind those who “make the market!” Brent shows himself to be as skillful an
author as he has been one of the leading players in global foreign exchange. Well done!
—Ben Melkman,
founder and CIO of Light Sky Macro
Brent has been on my must-read list for years. This book is no exception.
ALPHA TRADER is an instant trading classic.
— John Mauldin,
president of Mauldin Economics
Brent is a smart, balanced and hyper-pragmatic trader. I have known and worked with him
for years, and his constant search for new paradigms is what sets him apart. ALPHA
TRADER is a very, very valuable book which may save young (and old) traders from
significant emotional (and monetary) pain.
— Jens Nordvig,
world-renowned currency strategist,
economist and founder of Exante Data
Alpha Trader is one of the most intuitive books about applied trading psychology and
rational behavior. It is a masterpiece that puts you in control of your trading.
—Saed Abukarsh,
partner at Ark Capital Management (Dubai)
Brent’s book is an honest assessment of what is required to be successful in the markets.
Successful traders have a process that is not canned or rigid... Because markets are not. If
you are serious about making it as a full-time trader, ALPHA TRADER is the book you
need to read. It’s an honest take on what you will need to do and expect to make it like a
pro.
—Dave Floyd,
founder of the Aspen Trading Group
Brent has been trading for 20 years and you should listen to anyone who has been trading
that long. Over the course of a 20-year career, a trader will experience at least 50 major
panics, crashes, and dislocations. Having the wrong exposure to one of these means the
end of your career. Trading isn’t about getting rich; it’s about staying alive.
— Jared Dillian,
publisher of the Daily Dirtnap
and regular Bloomberg contributor
Copyright © 2021 by Brent Donnelly
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or used in any
manner without written permission of the copyright holder. It is fine to use
excerpts if you are reviewing the book.
First edition 2021
Editing: Stephen K. Donnelly
Cover design: Emir Orucevic
Interior layout: KUHN Design Group
Author photo: Christine Donnelly
ISBN 978-1-7367398-0-8 (hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-7367398-1-5 (softcover)
ISBN 978-17367398-3-9 (ebook)
For more information go to: www.brentdonnelly.com
This book is dedicated to
the small bird who carries us all on her back.
CONTENTS
Foreword by Dr. Ben Hunt
A quick story
Introduction
PART ONE : WHY DO SOME TRADERS SUCCEED, BUT MOST
FAIL?
Chapter 1: Know yourself
Good traders are introspective and self-aware
Chapter 2: If it was easy, it wouldn’t pay so well
Research shows success in trading is difficult to achieve and sustain
Chapter 3: Understanding success
Success and high performance in the world outside of trading
Chapter 4: So you’re saying there’s a chance?
Why some traders succeed but most fail
PART TWO : THE ALPHA TRADER MINDSET
Chapter 5: Level up
The traits and habits you need to succeed
Chapter 6: Kryptonite
Bad behavior, poor discipline, sloppy thinking, and leaks
Chapter 7: Smart people do stupid things
Rational, unbiased trading
PART THREE : METHODOLOGY AND MATHEMATICS
Chapter 8: Understand microstructure
Step one towards becoming an expert in your market
Chapter 9: Understand narrative
Step two towards becoming an expert in your market
Chapter 10: Understand technicals, sentiment and positioning
Step three towards becoming an expert in your market
Chapter 11: You feeling lucky, punk?
Data collection, risk management and variance
Chapter 12: Bringing it all together
The lifecycle of a trade, from idea to execution to exit
PART FOUR : ADAPTATION AND ATTITUDE
Chapter 14: Adapt or die
Stay flexible and achieve long-term trading success
Chapter 15: Thank God it’s Monday!
It is impossible to succeed without the right attitude
Conclusion
One last story
Coda
Acknowledgements
Appendix A: Further Reading
Appendix B: 21 ways to succeed at trading and 13 ways to fail
Index
I
FOREWORD
f you’re reading this foreword, you’re probably considering whether or
not to buy this book. You also probably have a professional or semi-
professional connection to financial markets. Maybe you already work on a
trading desk. Maybe you work in sales at one of those too-big-to-fail outfits
and trade in your personal account. Maybe you don’t currently work in the
financial industry at all, but you’ve been spending a lot of hours on
Robinhood and you’re thinking about taking your involvement “to the next
level”, whatever that means to you. In any event, you’re reading this
foreword for clues as to whether this book will make you a better trader.
Whether it will help you make more money.
It will.
Why will Alpha Trader help you become a better trader? Not because it
tells you WHAT to think as a successful trader. Not because it gives you
instructions on trading this or trading that. No, no, no. It’s because Alpha
Trader teaches you HOW to think as a successful trader. And that’s what
makes all the difference. It’s the only thing that makes a difference, in every
game that we humans play.
Here, I’ll give you an example of what I mean.
If you’re not a serious chess player, you’ve never heard of Aron
Nimzowitsch. If you are a serious chess player, you undoubtedly have a
dog-eared copy of his groundbreaking book – My System – first published
in 1925. What was so revolutionary about Nimzowitsch’s book? It wasn’t a
collection of openings. It wasn’t a list of moves and countermoves that you
should memorize. It wasn’t a manual full of instructions. No, no, no.
Nimzowitsch’s book doesn’t tell you what to think about chess. It teaches
you how to think about chess. How to think about position. How to think
about the flow of the game. How to think about risk-taking and aggression.
How to think about edge and strategic dynamics. Sounds pretty dry, right?
Not in the least. My System is written with wit, with a point of view. My
System 
is 
chock-full 
of 
examples 
and 
illustrations, 
but 
presented 
as
annotated stories of personal experience, not constructed applications of
pure theory.
These are the same topics covered in Alpha Trader – position, flow,
risk-taking, edge, strategic dynamics – all amplified by Brent Donnelly’s
keen understanding of the pervasive role of variance and chance, the crucial
difference that makes the game of markets so much more difficult than the
game of chess.
This is the same format and style of Alpha Trader – wit, a point of view,
annotated personal experiences – all in service to illuminating a frame of
thought rather than rote instruction.
I think that Alpha Trader and Brent Donnelly are to the game of markets
what My System and Aron Nimzowitsch are to the game of chess. Truly
revolutionary. Truly useful. Books and authors that will change forever
HOW you think about playing their games with mastery.
But wait, there’s more.
Yes, Alpha Trader will help all you professional and semi-professional
and professional-wannabe traders become better traders. This book will
help you make more money. You should buy this book and you should read
it cover to cover.
And then you should give this book to your partner or your father or
your daughter or your close friend … someone who has never traded a day
in 
their 
life, 
someone 
who 
has 
no 
professional 
or 
semi-professional
connection to financial markets whatsoever … and ask them to read this
book. Please.
Because Alpha Trader won’t only make you a better trader. It won’t
only help you make more money from trading. It will make you a better
player of games.
Back in 1988, Iain M. Banks wrote a book titled The Player of Games,
part of a wonderful series of science fiction novels that describe The
Culture, a super-advanced galactic civilization. In this book, The Culture
sends a representative to negotiate with a less advanced civilization where
everyone’s social and political status is determined by how well they play a
very complicated game. The Culture’s representative enters the global
tournament himself, and despite only a few years to study a game that all of
the inhabitants of this civilization spend their lives playing, he manages
(spoiler alert!) to win the game. How? Because anyone can master the rules,
even the intricacies of the rules, of any game. There’s nothing special in
that. There’s no edge. What IS special, however, and where there IS edge
comes in the very personal and very human understanding of position,
informational flow, variance, risk-taking and strategic dynamics that shape
ALL games.
And … not to burst anyone’s bubble, but that less advanced civilization
where everyone’s social and political status is determined by how well they
play a very complicated game? That’s us. That’s Earth. That’s the modern
human civilization. That’s the very complicated game of markets and
politics and social interactions that we all play, all the time, in ways both
large and small.
It’s 
the 
single-most 
important 
determinant 
for 
success 
in 
our
financialized and casino-fied and gamified world, regardless of where you
sit or what you do in that world: are you an effective player of games?
I think that Alpha Trader can help anyone – trader or not – become a
more effective player of games.
It sure did for me.
Dr. Ben Hunt
Co-founder and CIO
Epsilon Theory
T
A QUICK STORY
BEFORE WE START
FAIRFIELD COUNTY, CONNECTICUT
MAY 6, 2010 | 4:55AM
he Connecticut air is cold and damp. The trader moves in silence. He
steps 
quietly 
through 
the 
pitch-black 
darkness 
of 
his 
Colonial
McMansion and toward the door. As he disarms the home security system,
the BEEP BEEP BEEP of the keypad code he enters is impossibly loud in
the quiet of the predawn morning. He steps out of the house, closes and
locks the door, and hops into his car.
As he rolls down the driveway and into the foggy morning, he inserts a
Deadmau5 CD and blasts it at high volume in an effort to wake up and get
pumped for another day of trading. But this will not just be another day of
trading. This will be one of the most insane trading days of his career.
It has been a frustrating year so far. The Eurozone Crisis has been
smoldering for months but the trader’s attempts to sell the euro have been
met with massive countertrend rallies as the Fed embarks on another round
of USD-negative quantitative easing (QE). They call EURUSD a collision
of two garbage trucks. The trader struggles to steer clear of the wreckage.
His strongest view recently has been lower USDJPY. There is risk
aversion popping up all over the place as markets worry about a domino
effect where Greece crashes out of the Eurozone, followed by Spain,
Portugal, Ireland and then finally Italy. Everyone is bearish stocks as the
S&P 500 rally from 666 in March 2009 to 1050 now is seen as a mirage; the
side effect of a money printing magic trick performed by central bankers.
Totally unsustainable.
EURUSD opened the year at 1.4500 and now trades sub-1.25 so the
short trade is hard to stomach. Even when you know it’s the right thing to
do, it takes a lot of courage to sell something down >15%. So the trader has
shifted his attention to USDJPY and he expects it to go substantially lower
as global risk aversion remains elevated and safe haven currencies like the
yen should find demand.
USDJPY has been inexplicably well-bid given recent risk aversion and
the Fed “money printing”. It just rallied from 90 to 94 on air over the last
two weeks. Meanwhile, the best leading indicator for USDJPY is always
US bond yields and they have been plummeting for a month. USDJPY
looks completely wrong.
The trader stares at Figure 0.1, which shows US 10-year bond yields
and
The chart covers the period up to May 5. This story takes place May 6. Chart courtesy of
Refinitiv
USDJPY. The black bars are USDJPY and the dotted line shows US bond
yields. Note they usually follow in lockstep. The divergence is a strong
signal to the trader that he should be short USDJPY.
If you look in the top right corner, you can see that USDJPY is a bit off
the highs, but not much. Two days in a row, the high has been 94.99 and
USDJPY is now bouncing aimlessly around 93.80 as he rolls into the hedge
fund parking lot. It is still early so there are only three Porsche 911s in the
lot right now. More will arrive later.
This USDJPY trade has been tiring and painful as the trader got short at
94.00 with a stop loss at 95.05 and those two daily highs mean he has come
within a hair (6 pips, or 0.064%) of getting stopped out, two days in a row.
Holding on to a trade like this is exhausting as his fight-or-flight stress
system remains activated for long stretches. Cortisol overload.
Now, he can relax a bit and let things play out. His target is 91.00.
Average daily range has been about 1 yen (100 pips) lately so he figures we
might get there in the next week or so.
10 :45 AM
It has been a boring morning with USDJPY in a tight range. The sun
comes out and it’s almost shorts weather outside so the trader decides to go
for a run before lunch. Less than a mile into his run, he gets his first
indication that this is not a random, ordinary day. His Blackberry rings.
Bank sales on the line to tell him that USDJPY has just dumped 100 points
in 15 minutes. Trading 92.80 now… Odd. He turns around and sprints back
to the office, Spidey-sense tingling.
By the time he grabs a quick shower and returns to the desk, USDJPY is
91.50. He is short $100 million USDJPY so that puts his profit (aka P&L or
profit and loss) around +$2.8 million on the day. That’s more P&L than this
trader typically makes in an excellent month. A huge haul. He scans the
headlines and Bloomberg chats and finds no good explanation for what is
going on. The stock market is down, but not enough to explain the move in
USDJPY. This makes no sense. When a trade shows a big profit that makes
no sense, he likes to cover it and move on.
The trader buys 100 million USDJPY at 91.50. He is back to flat with
no position and nearly 3 bucks of P&L in the bank.
He sits there calmly and processes what has happened. He allows
himself to feel happy, just for a second. He stuck to his plan and had the
patience to sit with a decent-sized position for three days. He relaxes and
basks in the satisfaction of a job well done.
Then… Some dumb voice in his brain says:
2.8 million dollars is an amazing day. But… Maybe I can make 5 million
today?
And his hands, as if possessed by some mischievous or evil force, move
slowly toward the BUY and SELL buttons. For no reason. And like a
moron… He goes long USDJPY.
First, he buys $50 million at 91.50 and then another $50 million at
91.25. These are impulsive trades with no rationale. His planned stop loss is
90.85 but before he has time to input a stop loss order, he notices S&Ps
lurch lower on a huge volume surge. He puts on his headset and fires up the
S&P squawk to see what’s going on.
If you want to hear the soundtrack to what happens next, Google “Flash crash stock
market 2010 squawk” and select one of the YouTube replay videos
The announcer’s voice is strained as he narrates an unexplained fall in
stocks from 1150 to 1120. USDJPY skips through 91.00 and the trader’s
P&L shrinks to $2.0 million. He tries to sell at 90.80 and whiffs. USDJPY is
suddenly in freefall. 90.10 trades. 90.00 breaks. USDJPY has just dropped
more than four percent in a few hours. A monster move. The trader’s eyes
flick over to his P&L which has now shrunk back to six digits. Two-thirds
of three days’ work, gone in 60 seconds.
And then… Stocks sell off hard out of nowhere. Like… REALLY
HARD. The S&P squawk guy is losing it. Screaming. 1100 breaks in the
S&P. 1080, 1070, 1060. USDJPY is a waterfall. The squawk loses his mind
as he yells:
“We have some BIG paper sellers here… 7 evens are trading. 6 evens
are trading! 5 EVENS ARE TRADING!!! New lows here…”
USDJPY breaks 89.00 and the trader has still sold only 23 million USD,
leaving him stuck with a position of 77 million USD. It is a fast market,
nearly impossible to transact. He picks up a phone to two different banks
and neither one answers. He tries to hit the 88.60 and gets a reject notice
from the aggregator. The price feed is stale and crossed now; it shows 89.00
/ 88.10, which is not possible. The trader is now down on the day. In the
red. His face is hot and feels red like his P&L. Urge to slam fist on desk is
rising. The trader feels like he is falling, falling::::::::::::::::::::in cinematic
slow-mo.
USDJPY stabilizes a bit even as the S&P squawk continues to go nuts.
“65 even offered! 60 trades… 60 even bid, this is the widest we have
seen in years,” his voice cracks, he’s yelling like the announcer at Churchill
Downs as the horses turn for the stretch.
“60s trading! 50s trading! 50 at 70 now! We are twenty wide!”
1060 trades in S&Ps now, down just about 10% today, on zero news.
Nobody knows what the hell is going on and there is panic in the air. The
squawk dude continues to scream. He is pouring gasoline on the trader’s
agitation.
The trader’s P&L is now six figures in the red. Sadness. Anger. He is
furious with himself because he had the right trade, waited patiently for
almost three days for it to work, caught the move perfectly according to
plan … And then flipped the other way on a whim, for no reason and gave
everything and more back in half an hour. $2.8 million is a good month for
this trader. He just made and lost that much in less than two hours.
I am an idiot. How did I get into this mess?
He needs to make a decision here and quick but he realizes that he is
flooded. It is impossible to make a good trading decision when you’re
flooded. He needs a second to clear his mind. He tears off the headphones,
drops them on his desk, and stands up.
He walks over to the window and tries to find a moment of lucid calm.
He has been through these emotional storms before and knows how to get
back 
to 
shore. 
He 
stares 
over 
the 
waters 
of 
the 
Long 
Island 
Sound.
Gradually, his heart rate lowers. Clarity slowly, slowwwwly returns. His
lizard brain retreats and his rational mind takes over. He talks to himself:
It doesn’t matter how you got here. What are you going to do about it?
88.00 was the low in March. It’s a massive level. The panic is fading.
USDJPY is down 700 points in two days and now bonds are reversing
lower. This is the place to buy USDJPY, not sell.
He returns to his keyboard, puts his headphones back on. The squawk
guy has stopped screaming. He is noticeably more composed. S&P futures
have bottomed within a whisker of limit down. They are stable but have not
rebounded significantly. The bid/offer is super wide so it’s hard to tell
whether they are moving higher or just bouncing along the bottom.
The trader looks around the room and sees the panic and electricity
levels have dropped. Not as many phones are ringing. Voices in the room
are no longer frantic. He buys 50 million USDJPY at 88.85. And another 73
million at 88.95. Max long now, long $200 million USDJPY. But this time
it’s thought out, not random, and he feels good about what he is doing. He
feels confident but fully in control. He calmly thinks forward: USDJPY
could easily rally to 92.50 from here. When you catch a turn like this, you
can be greedy.
He leaves a stop loss for half his position (sell 100 million USDJPY at
87.94) and then sits back to let things play out. He has his plan and now he
knows all he can do is watch and see if it works. There is one more frenetic
whipsaw and USDJPY briefly prints to a low of 87.95. One pip from his
100 million USD stop loss. Amazing luck. Seconds later, stocks stabilize,
and then it’s like everyone realizes all at once that whatever the heck just
happened… It’s over.
USDJPY is paid at 88.70, then up through 89.50. It breaks 90.00 and as
it hits 90.40, the trader flicks his eyes to the P&L. It is almost exactly back
to the level where it peaked earlier: $2.8 million. He praises the trading
gods and squares up. NICE!
Too bad he didn’t stick with his plan on the way back up, either. A few
hours later, USDJPY hit the trader’s original target of 92.50.
Check out Figure 0.2 for the price action in USDJPY that day.
The trader made a multitude of both good and bad decisions in the three
hours around the 2010 Flash Crash. The trading described in this story is a
microcosm of everything that can go right and wrong in trading. Traders
make good, careful decisions and get rewarded, they make bad decisions
and get punished … but then sometimes a good decision leads to a bad
outcome … or a bad decision is rescued by good luck. Every trader is a
steaming hot bowl of bias stew and must maintain self-awareness and
lucidity behind the screens as the trading day oscillates between boredom
and terror.
That story of the 2010 Flash Crash, just like this book, is all about the
razor thin line that separates success and failure in trading. Alpha Trader is
written to help you understand markets but also, more importantly, to help
you better understand yourself as a trader. It is about great decisions and
dumb mistakes. It is about how to be rational and why smart people do
stupid things. All the time.
The book is written for traders at every skill level. I wrote it to be
understood by noobs, but I also aimed to write something that will resonate
with experienced trading professionals.
Alpha Traders are smart, rational, disciplined, flexible, patient, and
aggressive… They have the endurance to handle unending ups, downs,
hills, and valleys. They come in fired up each day to solve the ultimate
puzzle and they get paid incredibly well if they succeed. Alpha Traders
work hard (even when they don’t feel like it), seek to continuously improve,
and love markets more than they love money.
Thank you for taking the time to read my book. I hope you find it
entertaining and useful. I hope it helps you unlock your maximum trading
potential.
By the way, I plan to publish future updates, fresh trading stories and
new lessons, tactics and strategies, exclusively for readers of Alpha Trader.
If you are interested, please sign up at brentdonnelly.com.
Enjoy.
Brent
alpha ADJECTIVE
the strongest, smartest, highest ranking members of a group.
alpha NOUN
abnormal returns in investing or trading; the edge of a strategy in
excess of the broad market or benchmark return.
T
INTRODUCTION
rading is a complex, chaotic, loosely-structured game played by the
smartest minds and most expensive computers in the world. It is the
ultimate puzzle. Few can trade at an elite level for an extended period. The
game is constantly changing and the rules, mechanics and probabilities are
difficult to observe and forever in flux. Just when you think you’ve got a
plan: BAM.
You get punched in the mouth.
Trading is hard. Many people do not have the skills or knowledge to
consistently make money. Those who do have the skills often cannot
monetize them because they are irrational and poorly disciplined. Markets
are like a giant battlefield crawling with heavily-armed humans and cyborgs
all searching for and fighting over scattered chunks of gold. High-speed and
ultra-competitive.
Trading 
attracts 
intelligent, 
driven 
individuals 
who 
see 
enormous
financial rewards and few barriers to entry. But no amount of intelligence or
skill is enough if you are irrational, undisciplined, or overconfident. The
best analysis is useless if you can’t resist the urge to self-destruct.
From 
the 
20-something 
professional 
poker 
player 
who 
trades
momentum stocks in the back of a casino between tournaments, to the
grizzled 60-year-old industry veteran launching a new systematic strategy
out of a sleek glass building in bucolic Connecticut, everyone is battling for
a slice of the same finite pie. How does a tiny group of traders stay on top
and profit, year after year, while most fail? How do you excel in this high-
stakes competition? How do you unleash the alpha?
The answer is mindset, methodology, and math.
This book is for traders of every skill and experience level. The kid who
just opened a Robinhood account with $100 of birthday money faces many
of the same challenges and psychological hurdles as the veteran portfolio
manager running billions of dollars of currency risk for a London asset
management 
firm. 
I 
have 
been 
trading, 
managing 
other 
traders, 
and
mentoring for 25 years. But I still make mistakes. All the time.
Plugging leaks, building on strengths, and neutralizing weaknesses is a
lifelong battle.
To write this book, I sifted through thousands of pages of academic
research, talked to dozens of veteran traders, and dug through 25 years of
my own memories and experience, all in an effort to define the ideal trader.
No one can achieve trading perfection; that is not the goal. To achieve
excellence, though, we must first identify what perfection looks like, then
head in that direction.
This is not a behavioral economics textbook and it is not a boring,
theoretical deep dive into trading psychology. It’s a practical guide full of
actionable information, concisely distilled research, exciting and relevant
trading floor stories, and real-life examples that explain and reinforce
critical concepts.
Trading involves a deeply personal journey of struggle, continuous
adaptation, 
and 
self-improvement. 
The 
journey 
never 
ends 
because
whenever you think you’ve almost mastered the game, the game changes.
No book can fully describe the individual path that each trader will
follow, so take what resonates for you and reject what does not. I am not
all-knowing. This book documents the thinking of one person. What works
for me is not guaranteed to work for you. As Bruce Lee said:
Research your own experience.
Absorb what is useful, reject what is useless…
… and add what is essentially your own.
Alpha Trader will help you take an honest look at yourself and help you
identify your strengths, weaknesses, and edge. The book will explain how
irrational behavior and bias are trader kryptonite. It will teach you specific
rules, realistic techniques and practical habits that will help you evolve into
a more successful and profitable trader.
Be rational and self-aware. Learn, improve, and grow. Unleash the
Alpha.
My goal is to keep this book as punchy and practical as possible. Here is
how it is structured:
Part One digs into the equation that determines success or failure in
trading. I review the research and my own experience and try to find the
general equation for trading success. When you read Part One, think about
where you match up or diverge from the Alpha Trader profile. This section
is a short look at the general recipe for success before we dig into the
specific ingredients.
Part Two goes into more depth as I unpack the specific qualities of
winning and losing traders. I hope you will identify some of these winning
traits and kryptonite in your own character and learn from the strategies I
present to build on strengths and iron out weaknesses. Part Two ends with a
look at how smart people do stupid things and provides a ton of examples
and perspective on trader bias.
Part Three is the most fun. There, we will talk about how to become an
expert 
in 
your 
product 
and 
how 
to 
achieve 
sustainable, 
long-term
professional trading success. We dig deep into topics like microstructure,
market 
narrative, 
technical 
analysis, 
sentiment 
and 
positioning, 
self-
discipline, and risk management. Then, we spend a chapter bringing it all
together with a detailed walkthrough of a real trade, giving you a direct
look into my thought process from start to finish. By the end of Part Three,
you will have detailed knowledge of how I structure trades and you can use
that knowledge to develop or improve your own methodology.
Finally, Part Four is all about healthy mindset. There, I write about how
you can adapt and continuously improve with a focus on self-awareness,
perspective, and metacognition.
Now that you have an overview of how the book is structured, let’s go!
P
PART ONE
WHY DO SOME TRADERS SUCCEED,
BUT MOST FAIL?
art One is a quick look at success in general and at success in trading
more specifically. We start with a look inward as I ask you to evaluate
yourself and establish a baseline of your current strengths and weaknesses
as a trader. In Chapter 2, we look at how incredibly difficult it is to achieve
lasting trading success. Chapter 3 is a scan of the research on success in the
world outside of trading. Then, in Chapter 4, we take this information and
study the research on trading to solve for the more specific equation of
trading success.
As you read Part One, think about where you match up or diverge from
the Alpha Trader profile, and take notes. The point of Part One is to study,
understand and define the factors that lead to trading success and then start
an iterative process where you repeatedly learn, plan, execute, analyze, and
improve to get there.
I
CHAPTER 1
KNOW YOURSELF
Good traders are introspective and self-aware
n trading, the enemy is not bad luck. It’s not other traders, or the market.
The enemy is not the algos or the central banks or the goldbugs or sales or
your manager or the HODLers or Dave Portnoy or QE. When it comes to
trading, enemy number one is you.
Know the enemy and know yourself.
SUN TZU
I like that Sun Tzu quote for Chapter One of a book about trading
because it has a cool circularity. In trading, the enemy and the self are one.
You will not succeed in trading without self-awareness and discipline.
The biggest challenge in trading is not choosing what asset class to
trade, or when to buy and sell, or what percentage of your capital to risk on
each trade. The biggest challenge in trading is to manage your self. You are
a bundle of emotions, memories, history, knowledge, and bias. You can be
smart and do stupid things. You can make a hard job impossible by making
irrational and compulsive decisions.
The first step toward becoming a better trader is to get a firm handle on
who you are right now. Therefore, before we delve into what makes a
successful trader, I want you to complete a quick quiz. It will help you set a
personal baseline and take an inventory of your attributes. It will give you a
snapshot of how you see yourself as a trader before we jump in.
DO THE QUIZ NOW! Don’t be lazy. It will take you five minutes or
less.
Instructions
Rate yourself in each category of the trader assessment below by putting
an X in the appropriate box in each row. Be honest. Don’t think about your
best or worst moments. Your answers should reflect how you see yourself
as a trader on an average day. Do the test privately without any chance of
your boss or coworkers seeing. Otherwise, you may be tempted to stretch
the truth or exaggerate your positive traits.
If you have never traded before, that’s fine. Most people have a pretty
good idea of their likely strengths and weaknesses even before they start
trading, so just fill out how you see yourself, or how you think you will act
as a trader. Don’t think about your ideal self; just record the current reality.
Sure, there will be some bias and uncertainty and subjectivity and probably
overconfidence as you complete the grid. That’s fine. Just do your best.
You may have noticed something when filling out the quiz: The traits
are arranged in a specific way. Each of the four sections has its own logic.
Here is how the groups are arranged:
Group 1 (A to D): These traits are on a continuum where both
extremes are bad. You need a lot—but not too much—of many traits
to succeed in trading. For example, an Alpha Trader must be risk
seeking 
but 
not 
reckless. 
She 
must 
be 
confident 
but 
not
overconfident. She must be nimble but not constantly changing her
mind. An independent thinker but not a reflexive contrarian.
Finding the fine balance is part of what makes trading so hard. Too careful
and you’ll never make any money. Not careful enough, you’ll blow up. It is
hard for many to find the middle ground on the continuum of particular
attributes.
Group 2 (E to L): Successful traders tend to score on the high end
(right hand side) of this scale.
Group 3 (M to V): Successful traders tend to score on the low end
(left hand side) of this scale.
Group 4 (W to Z): These traits influence you as a trader but there is
no strictly better place to land on the scale.
Now let’s look at the ideal trader. Keep in mind, this ideal trader does
not exist. This is an abstraction to help you see where you are vs. the ideal.
Also keep in mind that I am not the holder of absolute truth on this topic. I
have decades of experience and I have done extensive research on this topic
but it is possible for reasonable people to disagree about the importance of
many of these personality traits as they pertain to trading success. The
research is not conclusive; in fact, it’s often contradictory.
For example, the research on the importance of gut feel in trading is all
over the place. Much of it uses experiments with small sample sizes to
make general but unconvincing conclusions. Some of it uses methodology
that I find uninspired. The fact that the research on gut feel in trading is
mixed probably tells you something about the relative importance of gut
feel. Unlike rational thinking, which all research deems to be critically
important, gut feel is less clearly an important part of trading success.
In fact, relying on your gut can often be detrimental. Intuition can be the
aggregation of data and patterns processed at a subconscious level to reach
useful conclusions, or it can be a bunch of sloppy heuristics and emotion
that produces biased, irrational decisions.
After working on various trading floors for many years and studying the
research on trader success and failure, here are my best estimates for the
ideal characteristics of the Alpha Trader:
How do your scores match up to the Alpha Trader? Where do your
scores diverge? Does this divergence concern you or does it make perfect
sense? Some divergences might be worrisome, and some might just identify
how you are unique. Remember, this is a thought experiment not a math
problem.
Each trait will be discussed more fully later on, so I will not take a lot of
time explaining them here. I’ll give you just enough to satisfy your curiosity
since I’m sure you’re wondering about a few of my answers.
A: Risk seeking is a natural fit for trading, but too much leads to
recklessness and ruin.
B: Confidence is good, but overconfidence is kryptonite.
C: “Strong opinions, weakly held.” If you don’t know this concept,
don’t worry. We’ll cover it in Chapter 5.
D: You need to think for yourself but not reflexively go against the
crowd. The crowd is correct more often, and for longer, than many
contrarians expect.
E: Rational, high-quality thinking is the #1 characteristic of an Alpha
Trader.
F: Trading is stressful. Can you handle it?
G: Self-control and willpower are critical. Making rules is easy.
Sticking to them is hard.
H: Trading is a quantitative game full of estimated probability, hidden
mathematics, 
and 
incomplete 
information. 
Math 
and 
statistics
knowledge are a huge edge.
I: Trading is hard. Simply doing the work is a big advantage in a
world where even professional traders can sometimes be lazy.
J: A passion for trading is the motivation that will lead you to success:
not a passion for money. Trading is too hard and too grueling to do
just for the money.
K: Logic trumps gut feel most of the time.
L: Losing streaks and big losses hurt. A positive attitude helps you
bounce back when you inevitably hit a rough patch. A negative
outlook 
can 
pull 
you 
into 
a 
downward 
spiral 
when 
markets
inevitably fail to cooperate.
M: Good traders seem to be luckier than bad traders. Hmmm.
N: Trading is a marathon. You need endurance to keep running.
O: One edge in markets is to look at the world differently than others.
But if you are extremely creative, you may find that trading is not a
good enough outlet for that creativity.
P: The Trading Gods are not pushing the market against you. The
more you believe that you are in control of your life, the better
your odds of trading success.
Q: Traders need to be decisive, but extreme decisiveness may border
on 
impulsiveness 
and 
that 
can 
lead 
to 
overconfidence 
and
overtrading.
R: Adapt or die. Markets are always changing. Can you keep up? S:
Trading in the zone requires focus. But you need to be able to
multi-task a bit as well. Singular focus is not usually possible in
trading 
as 
you 
must 
toggle 
between 
various 
markets, 
reading
research, monitoring Twitter, and actual trading activity.
T: 
Curiosity 
leads 
to 
learning. 
Learning 
makes 
you 
more
knowledgeable. Superior knowledge is an edge.
U: An organized trader has a clear process. She collects data and
approaches the task of trading methodically. That’s a good thing!
V: Nothing beats experience. If you never make the same mistake
twice, you won’t make many mistakes after 20 years.
W: Emotion is not a good or bad thing in trading. All kinds of
emotional types can succeed in finance. That said, emotion and
irrational behavior tend to go together so if you’re emotional you
need to be unusually self-aware, too.
X: There are some advantages to having a network of contacts but a
trader can easily succeed completely on his own.
Y: A wide body of research shows women perform better at trading
than men. This is mostly because men trade more than women due
to overconfidence.
Z: Extroverts and introverts might have different styles but neither
one is better or worse at trading.
Your scores on the quiz should take you one small or perhaps medium-
sized step closer to self-awareness. Self-knowledge comes from experience
and from data, but it can also come from focused introspection.
Keep 
in 
mind 
that 
you 
are 
probably 
overconfident 
in 
your 
self-
assessment. Whatever grades you gave yourself are probably somewhat
inflated 
relative 
to 
reality 
because 
human 
beings 
pretty 
much 
always
overrate themselves. In a survey I conducted in 2016, for example (see
figure 1.1), 70% of traders said they were better than average while just 5%
rated themselves worse than average. Not possible! You are almost certainly
not quite as good as you think you are.
Men are especially prone to overconfidence. But even if you overrated
yourself on every positive variable in this quiz, the relative distinctions you
make between traits (not the absolute numbers you assign) are the most
important thing. This will reveal your strengths, expose some weaknesses,
and help you find avenues for continuous improvement.
The harsh reality of trading is that it is insanely difficult (but not
impossible!) to succeed. If you have been trading for a while, you have a
good sense of the enormous challenge presented by trading. If you are new
here, I want to give you a realistic view of the success rate.
Success in trading is only possible for a small group of individuals, but
those 
individuals 
are 
rewarded 
with 
an 
incredible 
adventure 
and
extraordinary financial upside. The more worthwhile and lucrative a goal is
in this world, the harder the achievement of the goal is likely to be. Trading
certainly fits that relationship. It is a business with an extremely high level
of difficulty but massive reward potential.
Now that you have taken a few minutes to think about your trader
personality, let’s head to Chapter 2 and look at just how difficult it is to
achieve persistent trading success.
T
CHAPTER 2
IF IT WAS EASY, IT WOULDN’T PAY
SO WELL
Research shows success in trading is hard to achieve and harder to
sustain
rading for a living is like becoming a pro athlete or a famous author or
a professional poker player. There are few barriers to entry and no
specific credentials are required. And the financial rewards are potentially
astronomical. Anyone can dream of making it big in these fields. But only a
tiny fraction of those who go after the dream will succeed at any point. An
even smaller fraction will achieve sustained success over many decades.
The goal of this book is to help you become one of the very few who
thrives—and survives.
Intelligence and drive are the keys to success in most business pursuits,
but this is not strictly true in trading. Intelligence and drive are necessary,
but not sufficient conditions for trading success.
Many people think of trading as a zero-sum game and that makes them
feel optimistic. Since almost everyone believes themselves to be better than
average in almost all pursuits, the thought is that if something is a zero-sum
game, all you have to do is be better than the next guy to win. Wrong.
Trading is a negative sum game.
When I was day trading equities, most traders were gross positive and
net negative in most periods. They could take money out of the market, but
not enough to cover their brokerage, bid/offer spread and other slippage.
Transaction costs and slippage are a significant drag for traders at every
level.
Therefore, you need a significant edge to not only make money, but also
to make enough money to exceed execution, technology, and operational
costs. Further, grinding out tiny profits still isn’t enough. There is so much
risk and uncertainty involved in trading that for it to make any sense, you
need to significantly exceed the income you could make in a lower risk
profession. The bar for success in trading is high.
WHAT PERCENTAGE OF TRADERS SUCCEED?
The word “succeed” can mean many things, but based on various
metrics, my conclusion from the research and my own observation over the
years is that the success rate for independent day traders is probably
between 3% and 5%. For institutional traders, the success rate is much,
much higher because:
• there are many barriers to entry that one must overcome before
earning a role on an institutional trading desk so the pool of entrants
is 
much 
more 
highly 
qualified 
and 
well-vetted 
than 
a 
random
selection of independent traders;
• traders at a bank receive significant training and are surrounded by
experienced mentors; and
• market making has a built-in edge which gives new traders at a bank
more runway.
In my experience, of all the individuals who manage to get one of the
few trading seats available at a bank, about 50% succeed as traders. I define
“succeed” as: still employed and profitable three years after starting.
For traders at a hedge fund, the success rate is higher than retail but
lower than bank traders. Most hedge funds don’t have elaborate training
programs or the edge from market making that banks do, but most traders
hired by hedge funds already have substantial experience, so the sample is
biased. You are usually already successful by the time you get a job at a
hedge fund.
Cory Mitchell of day trading firm Vantage Point Trading wrote a nice
blog post on this topic
1
. He defined success as “producing consistent profits
for 
multiple 
years” 
and 
after 
studying 
a 
meaningful 
sample 
size 
he
estimated the observed success rate at Vantage Point was between 3.5% and
4.5%.
When I worked as a day trader in Toronto in the late 1990s, the success
rate was about the same. I sat on a trading floor that held 50 people and
almost the entire floor turned over three times in the three years I was there.
Anyone that lasted, I got to know well because we spent so much time
together in the office.
Of the ~150 traders that came and went, 8 made money consistently for
two years or more. Most bombed out in three to six months and the
remainder struggled for one or two years but could never grind out enough
money to call it a job. 8 out of 150 is 5.3%, and that low success rate came
despite a mandatory (and excellent) 2-week training course.
The low success rate makes sense and is roughly consistent with success
rates in other sought-after skill-based professions with low barriers to entry
such as fiction writing and pro sports. About 2.6% of published books sell
more than 5,000 copies
2
. 3% to 7% of high school athletes make the NCAA
in most sports while about 2% of NCAA athletes go pro
3
.
If you’re new to trading, you need to understand going in that the
success rate is low. You will need a ton of innate skill, the energy to work
hard every single day and rare levels of perseverance to have any chance
whatsoever. It’s not a matter of flicking through a few charts, drawing a
couple of trendlines or using some automated Charty McChart Chart
POWERIndicator™.
Brad Barber, Yi-Sung Lee, Terrence Odean, Ke Zhang and Yu-Jane Liu
studied this topic in a 2017 research paper: “Do individual day traders make
money? Evidence from Taiwan.” Day trading was extremely popular in
Taiwan in the late 1990s (as it was in many other countries). 20% of all
trading 
volume 
in 
Taiwanese 
stocks 
at 
that 
time 
was 
attributable 
to
individual day traders.
Here are the takeaways from their study:
One percent of individual investors accounted for half of day trading
volume in Taiwan.
Heavy day traders made gross profits but not enough to cover
transaction costs and thus they were net negative P&L.
Over any particular 6-month period, 8 out of 10 day traders lost
money.
A small group of day traders had persistent ability to generate net
profit, in excess of transaction costs.
Many traders sustained losses for long periods before quitting.
About 1% of traders generated consistent profits through skill.
This quote from an article about the study captures the long odds of
success they uncovered
4
:
The vast, vast majority of day traders were losing money. Unless you
really had a strong reason to think that your ability to day trade was much
greater than that of most people, it made no sense to start day trading in
the first place. It’d be like, to some extent, going into a casino and saying
I’m really good at roulette; even though I know everyone else loses
money at roulette, I’m going to win.
For the record, professional investors have a very low success rate too.
Here’s a typical stat, from a January 2020 Financial Times article
5
: “Just 28
per cent of US equity fund managers investing in large companies managed
to beat the US stock market last year, and over the past decade a mere 11
per cent managed to do so, according to Bank of America.” This result
emerges in study after study.
A random group of unskilled investors should beat the market 50% of
the time. Yet a significant majority of investors consistently underperform a
simple index or benchmark. Solving for how to generate alpha in highly-
efficient markets is one of the toughest puzzles on earth.
Markets are extremely (but not perfectly) efficient.
Knowing that success in trading is rare, let’s look at how to achieve it.
The next chapter is twenty pages or so. It’s a short discussion of the
research on success in general. Then, in Chapter 4, we will apply these
lessons about achievement in general to the more specific subject of trading
success.
1. 
https://vantagepointtrading.com/whats-the-day-trading-success-rate-the-thorough-
answer/
2. 
https://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/columns-and-blogs/soapbox/article/6153-
a-bookselling-tail.html
3. 
http://www.ncaa.org/about/resources/research/estimated-probability-competing-college-
athletics
4. https://www.aaii.com/journal/article/trading-more-frequently-leads-to-worse-returns
5. https://www.ft.com/content/a7e20d96-318c-11ea-9703-eea0cae3f0de
T
CHAPTER 3
UNDERSTANDING SUCCESS
Success and high performance in the world outside of trading
his 
short 
chapter 
will 
give 
you 
some 
background 
on 
the 
main
determinants of success in the world in general, outside of trading.
Since trading is both a business and a skilled pursuit, it is worth doing a
quick review of what leads to success in similar fields, before we zoom in
on trading more specifically in Chapter 4.
Success is a squishy noun that can mean different things to different
people. Most research frames success in terms of one or more of the
following:
Income
Educational achievement
Ranking or achievement in sport
Happiness, health, and longevity
Avoidance of negative outcomes like criminality, addiction, and
divorce
We’ll focus on the first three since those are the outcomes that relate
most closely to trading. Let’s look at some measures and characteristics of
personality and how they relate to success.
This and next two images courtesy of Jonatan Pallesen https://jsmp.dk/posts/2019-06-16-
talebiq/
IQ (Intelligence Quotient)
IQ is a controversial topic in the world of psychology and there is
heated debate over what exactly it measures. This quote captures a few of
the shortcomings of IQ, in simple language:
Just to clear the air, let’s note first that whatever an intelligence test
measures 
it 
is 
not 
quite 
the 
same 
thing 
as 
we 
usually 
mean 
by
intelligence. It neglects such important things as leadership and creative
imagination. It takes no account of social judgement or musical or artistic
or other aptitudes, to say nothing of such personality matters as diligence
and emotional balance.
DARRELL HUFF, How to Lie with Statistics
There is plenty of controversy when researchers try to correlate IQ with
various measures of success. It is hard to control for all the other factors
that go into whatever form of success one is trying to measure. That said,
most research finds some link between IQ and success. For example, an
excellent paper by Jay Zagorsky of Boston University
6
comes to this
conclusion:
… results confirm other researchers’ findings that IQ test scores and
income are related. Depending on the method of analysis used and
specific factors held constant, each point increase in IQ test scores is
associated with $202 to $616 more income per year. This means the
average income difference between a person with an IQ score in the
normal range (100) and someone in the top 2% of society (130) is
currently between $6,000 and $18,500 per year.
Figure 3.1 from data blogger Jonatan Pallesen shows the relationship
between IQ and income using 10 years of data.
You can see the relationship slopes up and to the right and the very high
incomes are much more common in the top right quadrant than in the top
left quadrant. If we are defining success as income, IQ is an important
predictor.
Figure 3.2 offers a nice clear visual. Pallesen breaks IQ into three
groups (low, middle, high) to show how the median and right tails of the
income distribution relate to IQ:
Source: https://jsmp.dk/posts/2019-06-16-talebiq/
IQ also correlates with most other measures of success like mortality,
longevity, crime and (somewhat obviously) academic grades:
I included a chart of academic grades vs. IQ (Figure 3.3) so you can see
that even a measure of success directly connected to IQ (doing well in
school) still
Source: https://jsmp.dk/posts/2019-06-16-talebiq/
has significant volatility around the trend line. There are plenty of high
IQ students with poor grades and low IQ students with good grades.
Academic success depends on far more than intelligence.
After IQ, the next big driver of success is personality. There is so much
research on the connections between personality and life outcomes that no
individual could process it all in one lifetime. In the next few pages, I will
do my best to succinctly summarize some of the key relationships between
personality and success.
The Big Five
Most studies of personality and its impact on life outcomes use the Big
Five Personality Traits
7
. These are the five personality traits that dominate
the 
literature 
on 
personality. 
The 
five 
traits 
use 
common 
language
descriptors to classify people on five key domains. These five domains
incorporate nearly all aspects of human personality, and extensive research
shows that these five factors explain the majority of human character. The
model is sometimes known as OCEAN because the five traits are:
Openness to experience (inventive/curious vs. consistent/cautious)
Conscientiousness (efficient/organized vs. easy-going/careless)
Extraversion (outgoing/energetic vs. solitary/reserved)
Agreeableness (friendly/compassionate vs. challenging/detached)
Neuroticism (sensitive/nervous vs. secure/confident)
The Big Five is better than Myers-Briggs (MBTI) according to nearly
all researchers and psychologists because it is scientific and repeatable. In
contrast, Myers-Briggs was created in the 1920s by non-experts without any
scientific process or empirical inputs. MBTI often yields two different
results for the same person, even if the person takes the test twice in a short
span of time.
MBTI is fun and may have some practical applications, but it has no
empirical or scientific basis. As Wharton psychology professor Adam Grant
says in his Psychology Today article, Goodbye to MBTI, the fad that won’t
die
8
:
If we’re going to divide people into categories, those categories ought to
be 
meaningful. 
In 
social 
science, 
we 
use 
four 
standards: 
Are 
the
categories 
reliable, 
valid, 
independent, 
and 
comprehensive? 
For 
the
MBTI, the evidence says: Not very, no, no, and not really.
Scientists and experts strongly prefer the Big Five to MBTI so that is
what we’ll use here.
Each Big Five trait runs on a continuum. The five traits capture most or
all aspects of human personality, and there are many facets or more specific
traits that fall under each heading. Some of these traits are more relevant to
us than others. For example, I want to highlight grit and self-control as
critical facets under the heading of conscientiousness, because those are
important in trading.
Grit captures characteristics like perseverance, resilience, ambition, and
the pursuit of long-term goals. Multiple studies show that grit is highly
correlated with conscientiousness
9 
so it falls under that heading, but I think
it is specifically important to trading and thus worth mentioning separately.
Same 
story 
with 
self-control, 
which 
has 
a 
lower 
correlation 
with
conscientiousness than grit, but still falls in the same bucket
10
. We will
discuss these more later.
Most research shows that the Big Five traits are fairly stable over a
person’s lifetime. There is just one trait that changes significantly over the
lifetime of an average person: conscientiousness. There is a steady and
meaningful rise in conscientiousness as we age. Figure 3.4, made with data
provided by Christopher Soto, paints the picture
11
.
Remember 
though, 
this 
is 
an 
average. 
Averages 
camouflage 
the
substantial variance within a sample. Conscientiousness evolves differently
in specific individuals over time. Some people will massively increase their
conscientiousness as they grow. Some will flatline their entire life or even
become less conscientious.
Image: Donnelly, data provided by Christopher Soto
Untangling the connections between the Big Five traits and future
success is incredibly complex because of the need to control for so many
other factors (parental income, birthplace, sex, education, cross-correlation
between the traits themselves, etc.) but the multitude of studies on the Big
Five converge on some consistent conclusions
12
.
THE BIG FIVE AND FINANCIAL SUCCESS
Income has a strong positive correlation with conscientiousness and
extraversion. It has a weak negative relationship with agreeableness and
neuroticism. Openness results look inconclusive to me as they have a
negative coefficient in some studies and a positive coefficient in others.
Figure 3.5, an excellent diagram from Miriam Gensowski’s 2014 paper,
shows how she found the Big Five influenced men’s incomes, by age.
As 
one 
might 
expect, 
neuroticism 
correlates 
with 
many 
negative
outcomes including lower income and higher incidence of mental disorder
and general health problems. Note that the negative impact of neuroticism
on income is not large.
Agreeableness, perhaps surprisingly, shows up in more than a half-
dozen research papers as a negative influence on income. It consistently
reduces average earnings by 2%-6%
13
. Being nice doesn’t pay!
Besides the simple linear relationship between personality and income,
the fit between a job and the personality of the employee also matters.
Linear regression gives a brute force look at how personality influences
income, but a more nuanced approach is to match a worker’s personality to
an expert’s views on what personality traits are necessary in that person’s
job. Research shows that a good fit between a person and their job leads to
higher income for the worker
14
.
This 
last 
observation 
is 
important 
when 
we 
think 
about 
trading.
Knowing that job / personality fit is an important driver of income, we will
spend some time in Chapter 4 looking at how the Big Five relate to trading
success. This will help you understand if your personality is a good fit with
trading 
and 
where 
you 
might 
need 
to 
monitor 
a 
potential 
personality
mismatch.
To summarize, here is how the Big Five personality traits relate to income:
Trait
Correlation with income
Openness
None
Conscientiousness
Strong positive
Extraversion
Small positive
Agreeableness
Moderate negative
Neuroticism
Small negative
Obviously, income is just one way to measure success. Let’s look at two
others.
Success in sports
Athletic competition is similar to trading in many ways. Sports and
trading both present fast-moving, high-pressure environments with quick
decision-making 
and 
(usually) 
incomplete 
information. They 
present 
a
competitive 
atmosphere 
with 
well-defined 
rules, 
objective 
numerical
feedback, and clear winners and losers.
In sport, the trait that consistently correlates with high performance is,
once 
again, 
conscientiousness. 
This 
finding 
is 
consistent 
across 
many
papers
15
and pushes conscientiousness to the top of the charts in terms of
our 
best 
guess 
of 
what 
might 
matter 
for 
trading 
at 
this 
point. 
If
conscientiousness leads to higher income and better performance in sports,
it is logical to think it matters for trading too.
Academic success
Academic environments also have some similarity to trading. School
and 
trading 
both 
generally 
present 
intellectually 
challenging, 
problem-
solving 
environments 
where 
feedback 
is 
immediate 
and 
objective
(academic grades = P&L
16
). Once again, the number one trait that correlates
with 
academic 
performance 
is 
conscientiousness. 
And 
once 
again,
neuroticism correlates negatively.
It is worth mentioning here that academic grades and test scores are a
better predictor of career and social success than IQ
17
. This is because
outcomes 
like 
grades 
and 
test 
scores 
are 
a 
combination 
of 
not 
just
intelligence, but also hard work, conscientiousness, grit, self-control, and
perseverance. Intelligence is a necessary but not sufficient condition for
good grades, high test scores and future success. IQ by itself is not enough.
While the Big Five also have some predictive power when it comes to
happiness, health, mortality, divorce, criminality and other facets of life,
those realms are not measures of success that are as relevant to trading. We
know how the Big Five predict income, sports performance, and academic
success, three outcomes that I believe are correlated to trading success. The
overall results are clear:
Conscientiousness is the most important positive predictor of success.
IQ is also an important positive predictor.
Neuroticism is a less important, negative predictor of success.
Of course, we have only looked at innate traits so far. Another way of
looking at success is to isolate effort or hard work. Most research on
performance breaks down success into some combination of talent, skill,
and effort. You can’t just be smart and talented, you need to do the work.
We will go into that concept later but for now we can file “effort” under
“conscientiousness”.
Another important variable when it comes to success is environment.
Kids that grow up in supportive environments, like athletes with world-
class coaches, perform better. This is relevant to trading too, and we will
discuss the importance of a healthy trading environment later on. I have
been 
in 
both 
the 
right 
trading 
environment 
and 
the 
wrong 
trading
environment at various points in my career, and my belief is that trading is
so difficult that it becomes almost impossible if you are not in a supportive
setting.
Finally, luck is an extremely important contributor to success in any
specific activity and in life overall. Many successful people do not fully
appreciate or acknowledge the significant role luck played in their success.
As E. B. White put it: “Luck is not something you can mention in the
presence of self-made men.”
Some examples of how luck influences success:
More than 50% of the difference in income between any human being
on earth is determined by where they were born
18
. As Warren Buffett
put it:
“Through dumb luck, Charlie and I were born in the United States, and we
are forever grateful for the staggering advantages this accident of birth
has given us.”
WARREN BUFFETT’S 2014 Shareholder Letter
People born in June and July are significantly less likely to become
CEOs due to the relative age effect
19
. Schools group children together
by age, regardless of their birth month, and the cutoff for most schools
is July 31. Therefore, children born in June and July are disadvantaged
through life because they are younger than their classmates born in
other months and are perceived to be less mature, less intelligent, and
lower potential than their peers.
How about this completely insane true story from the early days of
FedEx
20
:
By mid-July our funds were so meager that on Friday we were down to
about $5,000 in the checking account, while we needed $24,000 for the
jet fuel payment… When I arrived back in Memphis on Monday morning,
much to my surprise, the bank balance stood at nearly $32,000. I asked
Fred where the funds had come from, and he responded, “The meeting
with the General Dynamics board was a bust and I knew we needed
money for Monday, so I took a plane to Las Vegas and won $27,000
(playing blackjack).” I said, “You mean you took our last $5,000 —how
could you do that?” He shrugged his shoulders and said, “What difference
does it make? Without the funds for the fuel companies, we couldn’t have
flown anyway.”
People born earlier in the year outperform those born later in the year
in almost every sport where this has been studied. The foreground bars
in Figure 3.6 show month of birth distribution for elite youth soccer
players in Europe, with overall month of birth data for the entire
population as the background bars.
Many simulations and studies show that luck plays an enormous role in
success, especially in cases of extreme success. While moderate success can
often be explained mostly by skill, effort and talent, extreme success
usually also requires significant good luck.
While you cannot control luck, remember that effort and skill determine
the slope of your life’s path, even if luck determines the starting point and
variance around that path. As Abraham Lincoln said: “The harder I work,
the luckier I get.” We will discuss this more in Chapter 15 and you will see
that some of what we tend to call luck is more just a matter of being
observant and seizing on opportunities that present themselves.
Image by Chemical287 via Creative Commons
Fortunately, most varieties of luck are short-term and mean-reverting.
The larger the sample, the more luck disappears and the true nature of a
phenomenon is revealed. A coin might come up heads 10 times in a row but
it’s not going to come up heads 500,000 times in a row. A bad trader might
make money 3 days in a row but she is unlikely to be profitable in any
given year. A weak poker player might beat a professional in a one-hour
session but he will go bust in a marathon cash game.
This discussion is important because luck plays a major role in trading.
It operates through multiple channels like short-term variance and path
dependence. In the Flash Crash story at the start of this book, there were
multiple instances where the trader got lucky and if you re-ran that Flash
Crash 
USD- 
JPY 
scenario 
a 
million 
times, 
there 
would 
be 
plenty 
of
instances where the trader came out deep in the red.
What seems like luck in life is often just careful observation and the
ability to capitalize on opportunity. Richard Wiseman, who has spent years
researching luck, set up a variety of interesting experiments to show that
luck is not really luck. In one experiment, he placed a $20-dollar bill on the
ground in the path of students and found that those that self-identified as
lucky were much more likely to notice and pick up the $20 bill than the
others.
In another study, Wiseman gave volunteers a newspaper and told them
to count the number of photos inside. On the second page, in large font,
there was a box that said: “Stop counting—there are 43 photographs in this
newspaper.” Another box halfway through the paper read: “Stop counting,
tell 
the 
experimenter 
you 
have 
seen 
this 
and 
win 
$250.” Those 
who
identified as lucky took just seconds to return their answer while those who
viewed themselves as unlucky spent more than two minutes counting all the
photos. Other studies reveal the same thing: What we perceive as luck is
often just a combination of good observation skill and the ability to seize
unexpected opportunities.
It is crucial that you understand the way luck influences trading, and
how you can manage and reduce the negative impact of various forms of
luck. This is discussed in Chapter 11.
Conscientiousness and neuroticism
Before we move on to Chapter 4, I want to talk a bit more about
conscientiousness and neuroticism because they are most correlated to
success, in arenas related to trading.
Neuroticism leads to many negative outcomes. It can be broken down
into these facets:
Irritability
Insecurity
Anxiety
Hostility
Depression
Self-consciousness
Impulsiveness
Vulnerability
If you score high in any of those traits (they are all sub-traits of
neuroticism), think about how you can reduce their presence or impact.
Work on these negative traits using meditation, mindfulness, reframing,
yoga, 
professional 
therapy, 
self-reflection, 
and 
other 
techniques.
Neuroticism will make it harder for you to achieve your goals.
If neuroticism is kryptonite, conscientiousness is a superpower. Here is
a breakdown of the facets or sub-traits that psychologists consider part of
conscientiousness
21
:
Orderliness / order / tidiness
Industriousness / hard work / energy
Reliability / responsibility
Impulse control / self-control
Decisiveness (opposite of procrastination)
Persistence / perseverance
With the knowledge that these facets of conscientiousness are major
predictors of life success, think about how you can improve in one or more
of these areas. This will help you not just as a trader, but as a human being.
This is especially true if you are young, because conscientiousness is the
trait that can most easily be boosted over time.
My conscientiousness score is OK but not great. I am in the 60
th
percentile. That said, I have put a lot of work into trying to be more
organized, reliable, and persistent. Over the years, I slowly learned that
personality 
traits 
are 
not 
fixed, 
they 
can 
be 
molded 
and 
improved. 
I
probably scored closer to 35 on conscientiousness when I was in my 20s.
My self-control has never been great, and it is still not amazing. I accept
this and try to work around it. Here are a few ways you can boost your
conscientiousness:
1. Don’t say things like: “I’m just like that” or “I’m really disorganized”
or “That’s just who I am” when it comes to conscientiousness. Being
organized or on time or proactive is a choice. Think of your mind as
plastic, not fixed.
2. Read the book: “Willpower: Rediscovering the Greatest Human
Strength”, by Roy Baumeister and John Tierney. It is packed with
research 
and 
anecdotes 
about 
how 
to 
improve 
not 
just 
your
willpower, but your organizational skills and your metacognition. I
learned a ton of immediately applicable information from that book,
including how to keep my inbox empty. It also taught me how we
have a finite supply of willpower each day and thus willpower often
runs low, especially at night. And the book taught me the importance
of Zeigarnik Loops
22
.
3. Acknowledge your willpower is not perfect and create systems to
protect yourself from this weakness. Create friction in places where
you engage in activities you should not. An example of friction is
when people turn off their phone while at dinner to avoid checking it.
By making it a hassle, you are less likely to perform the habitual or
addictive behavior. On the other hand, reduce friction to reinforce
desirable habits. For example, if you want to get in shape, don’t
make yourself decide whether to work out or not each day. Work out
every day. And go to bed in your workout gear so you have one less
step to take in the morning before working out. When the decision is
already made, there is less friction. In trading this means you need to
build systems and install processes that protect you from unwanted
behaviors 
like 
overtrading 
while 
working 
to 
automate 
desirable
behaviors like stop loss discipline.
4. Set specific and realistic short-term action goals. Instead of saying:
“Man, I need to get in shape.” Say: “This month, I’m going to eat
zero potato chips and work out 15 times.”
5. Break long-term or difficult tasks into smaller chunks and focus on
doing one chunk at a time. Writing a book is daunting. Writing a few
pages is not. If you focus on writing a few pages each day, a few
months later you magically have the rough draft of a book. Same
thing in trading. Try not to focus on your YTD P&L too much. Come
in each day and do your best. Each year is only around 250 trading
days. Take them one at a time and do your very best each day. Let the
YTD P&L take care of itself.
6. Make lists. Do not expect yourself to remember everything, even if
you have an excellent memory. Outsource your memory to a notes
app or a piece of paper.
7. Be on time. Even if you don’t care about punctuality, many people
do. It is rude to show up late for meetings, events, or dinner. It is
sloppy and unprofessional to submit work after a deadline. Even if it
doesn’t bother you when others are late, forget about your own
preferences. Your values around this topic are not the most important
thing. 
Understand 
that 
punctuality 
is 
part 
of 
becoming 
a 
more
considerate, thoughtful, and conscientious person. It is not OK to say
“that’s just who I am.”
8. Adopt a continuous improvement mindset. You don’t need to make
huge changes all the time. Instead, be on the constant lookout for tiny
improvements you can make that don’t require Herculean effort. I try
to do this with my daily newsletter, AM/FX. I will look at my charts
and see if there is a way to display them a bit more clearly. I will
think of new features that might appeal to different readers. I will ask
my readers what they like and don’t like and try to keep evolving the
product through subtle improvements.
9. Learn about inbox zero. It sounds impossible at first, but it’s not.
Don’t be one of those people with 1,431 unread messages who I have
to contact three times before I get a reply. That is not good!
10. Turn off notifications for desktop e-mail and turn off nearly all
notifications on your phone. You should check your e-mail once per
hour or less. It is not that urgent. Each pop-up every time you get an
e-mail is a pointless distraction and will take you out of the zone
when you are trading. Access your technology when it makes sense
to do so; don’t be a puppet controlled by your apps.
Remember that most of your traits are not fixed. You can improve and
evolve. You can increase your conscientiousness over time.
Conclusion
This 
chapter 
looked 
at 
research 
where 
success 
is 
defined 
as 
high
income, exceptional sports performance, or high academic achievement. On
these three measures, all of which have parallels to trading, the formula is:
Success = conscientiousness + IQ +
talent/skill + luck - neuroticism
Everybody’s story is different but that’s the general formula for the
overall population. The weighting of each factor varies by individual and
over time. Now let’s move on to Chapter 4 and see how closely success in
the broader world parallels success in trading.
6. Jay Zagorsky, “Do you have to be smart to be rich?” (Elsevier, 2007)
7. You can take a free Big Five test here: https://openpsychometrics.org/tests/IPIP-BFFM/. It
is not an adware or promotional site, it’s just the test. There is another slightly different
one here: https://projects.fivethir-tyeight.com/personality-quiz/.
8. 
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/give-and-take/201309/goodbye-mbti-the-fad-
won-t-die
9. For example, Rimfeld et. al 2016 shows the proportion of variance that grit and
conscientiousness 
share 
due 
to 
genetic 
causes 
is 
0.86
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4981570/
10. See: Deborah Cobb-Clark et al., “Self-Control: Determinants, Life Outcomes and
Intergenerational Implications”, IZA Discussion Paper Series 2019 and Kaitlin Werner et
al., “Grit, Self-Control and Conscientiousness”, (2020)
11. Christopher Soto et al., “Age Differences in Personality Traits from 10 to 65”, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology (2011). Thank you, Chris, for generously sharing your
data.
12. Miriam Gensowski, “Personality, IQ and lifetime earnings” (2014).
13. Braakmann 2009; Denissen, Bleidorn and Hennecke 2018; Heineck 2007; Nandi and
Nikoletti 2014; Mueller and Plug 2006; Judge, Livingston, and Hurst 2012; Nyhus and
Pons 2005.
14. Jaap Denissen et al., “Uncovering the power of personality to shape income” (2017).
15. Examples: Tran 2012, which looked at American football rankings vs. the Big Five; Allen,
et al 2011, which looked at athlete coping and performance vs. the Big Five; and Fasold
et 
al. 
2019 
which 
showed 
a 
relationship 
between 
conscientiousness 
and 
handball
goalkeeper performance.
16. P&L stands for profit and loss, the ultimate measure of trading success.
17. 
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/personality-iq-success-wealth-factors-
determining-prospects-intelligence-careers-james-heckman-a7880376.html
18. Branco Milanovic, “Global Inequality of Opportunity: How much of our income is
determined by where we live?”, (2015).
19. Du, Gao and Levi, “The Relative Age Effect and Career Success: Evidence from
Corporate CEOs” (2012).
20. Robert Frock, “Changing how the world does business” (2006).
21. MacCann, Duckworth and Roberts. “Empirical identification of the major facets of
Conscientiousness,” (2009).
22. Google it when you have time. Zeigarnik loops are interesting.
A
CHAPTER 4
SO YOU’RE SAYING THERE’S A
CHANCE?
Why some traders succeed but most fail
You don’t need to be a rocket scientist. Investing is
not a game where the guy with the 160 IQ beats the
guy with a 130 IQ. Rationality is essential.
23
WARREN BUFFETT
s you will see in this chapter, that Buffett quote applies to trading too.
There is a surprisingly large body of academic literature on trading.
It is a profession that is of interest not just to those in finance, but also to
psychologists, economists, statisticians, and sociologists. I spent weeks
going through all this literature in an effort to find why some traders
succeed but most fail.
This is not a formal review of the academic literature on trading
success; it is my best effort to boil a ton of research down to a few key
conclusions.
I don’t want to bore you with superfluous information so I am going to
jump straight to the conclusion and then explain it. After poring through all
the research on trading success, two critical traits jump out:
1. Rationality is the human trait that best predicts trading success.
People who are rational and do not jump to quick conclusions using
mental shortcuts (heuristics) are more successful in trading. This
characteristic can be measured as Rationality Quotient.
2. Overconfidence is the human trait that best predicts trading failure.
People who overestimate their ability to outsmart the market perform
worst.
Are you rational?
It makes a ton of sense that rational traders outperform those who are
not. Good traders study behavioral finance because humans, as a group, act
in predictably irrational ways and this predictable irrationality can be
exploited for profit. So, by extension it seems reasonable to say that those
who do not exhibit this irrationality will outperform.
Rationality can be measured with a simple three-question test called the
Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT). More sophisticated tests of rationality are
in 
development 
as 
well, 
such 
as 
Keith 
Stanovich’s 
Comprehensive
Assessment of Rational Thinking (CART)
24
. While IQ is meant to measure
intelligence and EQ (Emotional Quotient) is meant to measure emotional
intelligence, RQ (Rationality Quotient) measures how rational a person is.
RQ and IQ are correlated, but they are not the same thing. A nuanced
understanding of probability along with the ability to avoid jumping to the
first, 
most 
obvious 
conclusion 
are 
critical 
mental 
skills 
possessed 
by
someone with high RQ but not necessarily by someone with high IQ.
Keith Stanovich is at the forefront of rationality research and he puts it
this way:
It is a profound historical irony of the behavioral sciences that the Nobel
Prize 
was 
awarded 
for 
studies 
of 
cognitive 
characteristics 
(rational
thinking skills) that are entirely missing from the most wellknown mental
assessment device in the behavioral sciences – the intelligence test.
Intelligence tests measure important things, but not these – they do not
assess the extent of rational thought. This might not be such an omission
if it were the case that intelligence was an exceptionally strong predictor
of rational thinking. However, research has found that it is a moderate
predictor at best and that some rational thinking skills can be quite
dissociated from intelligence
25
.
Stanovich and others have conducted a great deal of research on how
rationality and intelligence relate and while the two are correlated, there are
areas 
where 
particular 
types 
of 
rationality 
are 
totally 
uncorrelated 
to
intelligence. 
For 
example, 
highly 
intelligent 
people 
suffer 
more 
from
confirmation bias than less intelligent people. This is why experts often
underperform 
laymen 
in 
tasks 
where 
one 
would 
expect 
the 
expert 
to
outperform. Confident experts have trouble taking in new information if it
contradicts their existing view of the world.
Here is more from an excerpt of an interview with Stanovich
26
:
… the correlations between measures of intelligence and various tasks
from 
the 
cognitive 
psychology 
literature 
that 
measure 
aspects 
of
rationality are surprisingly low. We use the term “surprisingly” here,
because for many years it has been known that virtually all cognitive
ability tasks correlate with each other. Indeed, many show quite high
correlations. So, being psychologists, the surprise is in the context of this
wide and vast cognitive ability literature, which has the technical name
“Spearman’s positive manifold.” This positive manifold—that performance
on cognitive tasks tends to correlate, and often quite highly—is more than
100 years old.
…Indeed, in restricted samples of educated adults this correlation can be
virtually zero on certain tasks in the literature. Most often the correlation is
positive, but, again, in light of 100 years of correlations between cognitive
ability tasks, the correlations are often surprisingly low.
Of course, one of the implications of this is that it will not be uncommon to
find people whose intelligence and rationality are dissociated. That is, it
will not be uncommon to find people with high levels of intelligence and
low levels of rationality, and, to some extent, the converse.
There are entire books written about rationality and I will cover many
specific forms of bias in Chapter 7, but for now we will review a few
important ways that rational thinking differs from irrational thought.
System 1 vs. System 2 thinking
The two systems concept was developed by Daniel Kahneman and is a
major topic in his book “Thinking Fast and Slow”.
System 1 (thinking fast) executes quickly without much thought. It is
your lizard brain. It tends to be biased because it relies on speed, shortcuts,
and heuristics. Speed sacrifices accuracy.
System 2 (thinking slow) requires conscious effort and thought and is
less biased. System 2 is more rational than System 1.
Rational thinkers use System 2 more than System 1; they substitute
methodical assessment for gut feel. If they use System 1, they follow up and
double-check with System 2 afterwards before acting. System 1 is the crazy
kid inside you. System 2 is the adult in the room.
Numeracy
Rational thinkers understand numbers.
Rational thinkers understand probability. Irrational thinkers
overestimate the chance of low probability events and underestimate
the likelihood of high probability events.
Irrational thinkers are often fooled by randomness and do not
understand the human bias toward seeing patterns where none exist
(apophenia).
Rational thinkers are not influenced by how a problem is framed. If
someone tells you there is a 1% chance you will die if you go
skydiving, or they tell you there is a 99% chance you will live, you
should feel the same about skydiving. In reality, the framing of the
information matters and people are more likely to avoid the 1% chance
of death and give the thumbs up to the 99% chance of living.
Logic
Rational thinkers act logically and consistently.
Rational thinking shows consistent preferences. If you like A better
than B and B better than C, you should like A better than C. There are
many real-world examples where people don’t follow this logic.
Experiments show that many people do not have consistent
preferences and will say they like (for example) bacon more than
Skittles and Skittles more than Doritos but will then say they like
Doritos more than bacon. This is not rational.
Biased, irrational thinkers overweight short-term gains and overreact
to recent or intense stimuli. When trading news, be aware of recency
bias and don’t overweight some random news item just because it’s
yelling at you in RED ALL CAPS on Bloomberg.
Rational thinkers seek to understand alternative hypotheses, not just
their own hypothesis. They accept evidence that contradicts their view.
Irrational thinkers overweight confirming evidence and ignore
contradictory evidence.
Rational thinkers are not overconfident. They understand why it is
funny that 80% of drivers think they are above average.
This is a short list of some of the differences between rational and
irrational thought. There are hundreds of examples, enough to fill many
books. We will go in depth on many of these forms of bias later. Now that
you have a sense of rational vs. irrational thought patterns and methods,
let’s look at how to measure rationality.
Testing for rationality
The Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT) measures rationality using just
three questions. It is a fairly new test, invented in 2005 by Shane Frederick.
Here is one of the three questions
27
(the other two questions appear later in
this book):
QUESTION: If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how long
would it take 100 machines to make 100 widgets?
_____ minutes
Did you answer 100 minutes?
The correct answer is five minutes. Each machine makes one widget
every five minutes. Therefore 100 machines can make 100 widgets in five
minutes. Those who answer quickly use a shortcut to jump to the answer of
100 minutes. Those that use System 2 (slow down!) calculate the correct
answer: Five minutes.
There are other, more in-depth rational thinking questionnaires. The
CRT is valid and reliable but the three questions in the CRT have become
somewhat well-known and if you already know about what is essentially a
trick question, you are unlikely to answer it incorrectly the second time.
The best explanation for many of the deviations between efficient
markets and reality come from the irrational behavior of the human beings
interacting 
in 
markets. 
Therefore, 
one 
might 
reasonably 
assume 
a
connection between rationality and trading.
Now, let’s look at highlights from some of the most interesting research
on success in trading.
Research Paper 1
“What Makes a Good Trader? On the Role of Quant Skills, Behavioral Biases and Intuition
on Trader Performance” (2015)
BRICE CORGNET, MARK DESANTIS, AND DAVID PORTER
This paper studied individual trader performance in an experimental
setting. It then compared performance to participants’ measures of financial
literacy, cognitive skill, behavioral bias, and theory of mind. They conclude
that 
behavioral 
bias 
(particularly 
overconfidence 
and 
the 
failure 
to
understand 
random 
sampling) 
explains 
trader 
earnings 
while 
standard
cognitive and theory of mind skills are of marginal importance.
Those that scored high on the CRT and exhibited less behavioral bias
earned significantly more than those who did not. Standard intelligence and
theory of mind ability were not important.
Rationality Quotient (RQ) is more important than IQ.
Here are a few quotes of interest from the paper, along with my
thoughts:
A common thread running through each of these [behavioral] biases is the
individual’s inability to refrain from using automatic responses and simple
heuristics.
Bad traders think fast. Good traders think (a bit) slower. The paradox
here is that sometimes you need to think fast when you are trading because
speed can be an edge. If an important announcement hits the wires, you
can’t always sit around waiting for System 2 to deliver a verdict. If you
don’t hit the buttons right away, someone else will. In other words, some
short-term trading requires a “Ready, Shoot, Aim” thinking style. That’s
OK.
If you are trading headlines, events, and quick reaction time trades, you
can overcome the heuristic / fast thinking problem by trading in two steps.
Step 1: When you see a headline or something that makes you want to
act… Go ahead and act. Go to market and get set on your position.
Step 2: Once you have the position on, take a step back and analyze
your actions using System 2. Is this logical? Or is this a dumb idea? You
need to have the force of mind to take a trade off right away, usually at a
small loss, if your System 2 analysis says that your System 1 idea was
wrong. This is hard because we tend to have trouble selling at a small loss
and we tend to overvalue assets (or positions) we already own.
Note that if you enter trades using System 1 (reacting quickly to
headlines, for example) then subsequently evaluate them more fully using
System 2, you need to overcome both the endowment effect and anchoring
bias in order to get out of bad trades quickly. If your System 2 analysis says
“this is a bad trade”, don’t wait for the price to get back to break even. Cut
the position and move on. Good short-term trading involves taking many
small losses.
The endowment effect (a.k.a., divestiture aversion) says that when we
own something, we value it more highly than if we did not already own it.
Anchoring bias says we will attach importance to the price at which we
entered a trade, even though that price is irrelevant once we have the trade
on. We will talk about both these forms of trader bias (and many others) in
Chapter 7.
Side note: Here’s a funny-because-it’s-true anecdote on the endowment
effect from a 2019 blog post by Michael Batnick:
Years ago when I was trading, probably 2010 or 2011, I had some fun
trading weekly options around earnings releases. I was gambling, which
is not something I only recently came to terms with. I knew it at the time
which is why I never put a lot of money at risk. During one of these
wagers I meant to buy calls, but by accident I bought puts. In that moment
a funny thing happened. It wouldn’t have been much trouble to unwind
this trade, but instead I rationalized why puts were the right decision. “I
guess I’m bearish now,” I thought. My actions influenced my mindset. I
was owned by my possessions.
The next quote of interest from the paper is:
Individuals 
tend 
to 
mistakenly 
believe 
that 
they 
observe 
predictable
patterns in randomly generated data.
This is the failure to understand random sampling. Randomly generated
data creates all sorts of patterns. Human beings are hard-wired to see
patterns. 
We 
see 
faces 
in 
sockets, 
animals 
in 
the 
clouds, 
patterns 
in
randomly-generated stock charts, and Jesus Christ on toast
28
. Humans see
patterns even where there is often only randomness. This is why I tend to
view technical analysis
29
with great skepticism—technical analysis pushes
us toward pattern-seeking behavior when we should instead be fighting our
bias to see patterns everywhere.
Our studies show that people who are immune to commonly-known
behavioral biases perform the best in experimental asset markets.
This is the conclusion of many studies. RQ is more important than IQ
30
.
You are either part of the unbiased, efficient markets or you are creating
exploitable inefficiency with your biased, irrational actions.
Research Paper 2
“Mental Capabilities, Trading Styles, and Asset
Market Bubbles: Theory and Experiment” (2016)
ANDREAS HEFTI, STEVE HEINKE AND FRÉDÉRIC SCHNEIDER
These 
researchers 
first 
did 
a 
series 
of 
experiments 
to 
evaluate
participants on two dimensions, analyzing and mentalizing
31
. Then, they ran
a typical asset market / trading experiment to see how different individuals
would behave and perform. The core idea is that different actors behave
differently in the market and if we split individuals into groups we might
see a pattern emerge in terms of trading success.
Analytical 
skill 
was 
measured 
as 
successful 
performance 
in
mathematics, logic, and probability while mentalizing was defined as the
ability to understand the mental states of others and predict their behavior.
The traders were broken into four quadrants:
And here are the trading results:
Mathematics, logic and understanding of probability win. The ability to
analyze the behavior of others has some power, but only if you have the
rational and probabilistic thinking first. Analytical, rational thinking is
necessary 
and 
sufficient 
to 
earn 
a 
profit, 
but 
the 
more 
well-rounded
individual earns much more in this experiment.
Research Paper 3
“Good Thinking or Gut Feeling? Cognitive Reflection and Intuition in Traders, Bankers and
Financial Non-Experts” (2015)
VOLKER THOMA, ELLIOTT WHITE, ASHA PANIGRAHI, VANESSA STROWGER, AND
IRINA ANDERSON
This 
paper 
looks 
directly 
at 
CRT 
vs. 
intuition 
and 
comes 
to 
an
unambiguous conclusion. Traders score higher on the CRT and favor the
avoidance of mental shortcuts compared to non-traders. They rely more on
System 2 than non-traders. Furthermore, the study found that traders do not
rely 
on 
intuition 
any 
more 
than 
non-traders. 
To 
quote 
the 
study’s
conclusion:
While traders are apparently no different in their use of ‘intuition’ or ‘gut
feeling’ to other people, the majority of them are markedly improved in
their propensity to engage in reflective thinking and less susceptible to
‘cognitive impulsivity’.
The study also says that some would argue that high CRT scores could
be equivalent to elevated numeracy. While there is overlap between high
CRT scores, rationality and strong numeracy, other studies have shown that
numeracy and CRT performance are not the same thing
32
.
Research Paper 4
“Trader Personality and Trader Performance:
A Framework and Financial Market Experiment” (2008)
ARJEN VAN WITTELOOSTUIJN AND KATRIN MUEHLFELD
This paper involves an asset market trading experiment where results
are 
compared 
to 
six 
personality 
traits: 
Locus 
of 
control, 
maximizing
tendency, regret disposition, self-monitoring, sensation seeking and type
A/type B behavior.
The primary conclusion of the paper is that those who trade less and
those who work limit orders (i.e., act like market makers, not price takers)
outperform those who trade more frequently and cross more spreads using
market orders. The findings are consistent with many other papers and
investigations which show that overtrading leads to worse performance
33
.
The main driver of the underperformance from trading too much is
transaction costs, but even in experiments where there are no transaction
costs, the subjects that trade most perform worst. Good traders wait for
outsized opportunities, they don’t trade frenetically, reacting to every bit of
flickering price action.
I say this as someone who must fight not to react to every bit of
flickering price action.
While high CRT was a consistent variable in predicting the earnings of
traders in many studies
34
, the results of experiments and research on softer
skills like Theory of Mind are mixed. For every research paper that found a
positive connection between mentalizing or Theory of Mind and trader
earnings, there was one that suggested the opposite
35
.
My conclusion is that it is absolutely clear from the research that
rational thinking is the number one trait of a successful trader. High
intelligence, numeracy and financial literacy are also important. Trading
with 
gut 
feel, 
intuition 
and 
similar 
soft 
skills 
is 
less 
important, 
and
sometimes counterproductive.
Yes, gut and intuition can be the subconscious processing of reams of
information, 
an 
amalgamation 
of 
disparate 
data 
and 
knowledge. 
It 
is
common for people to know something without knowing how they know it.
Then again, gut and intuition are often just the way fear, bias and other bad
influences make their way into our thinking and behavior.
You may have seen breathless media reports in the mid-2010s with
headlines like “Gut Instinct: Do Traders Have a Sixth Sense?
36
” trumpeting
a few small studies that seemed to suggest trader intuition is of great
importance. I read those studies. They generally had tiny sample sizes (10
to 20 traders) and were unconvincing, in my opinion.
Distilling all the research down to one formula, I get this new equation:
Trading success = rational thinking + IQ +
self-control - overconfidence
Recall 
from 
Chapter 
3, 
the 
formula 
for 
general 
success 
(money,
academic grades, and sports) was:
Success = conscientiousness + IQ +
talent/skill + luck - neuroticism
Combining it all together, we get this final equation:
Alpha Trader = rational + intelligent + skilled +
conscientious + calibrated confidence
Note my equation for trading success excludes some traits that are
important but not critical to trading success. I did not include risk appetite,
for example. People at each end of the risk-taking continuum (extremely
risk averse or highly risk seeking) might underperform those in the middle,
but risk appetite is not an important character trait in the literature on
trading performance.
Furthermore, risk tolerance can be dialed up or down fairly easily with a
simple set of rules. I have seen traders at every point on the risk-taking
spectrum succeed.
Note that before the year 2000 or so, IQ was less important in trading
because trading was more skill-based and less quantitative. Now, a higher
level of intelligence is required although I would argue that Wall Street
currently overvalues IQ and academics, and does not focus enough on grit,
street smarts and fire in the belly.
My equation leaves out many positive attributes that most certainly
make for better traders. It does not include positive attitude or ability to
handle stress, for example. These are useful but not critical attributes when
it comes to trading success. There are plenty of grumpy, stressed out traders
that still make money. Sure, that’s not ideal (and certainly does not meet my
personal definition of success), but only the indispensable traits are in the
equation. Many other attributes will help you succeed in trading but the
formula I laid out is the mashed potatoes—everything else is gravy.
That concludes this chapter and our look into the research on trading
success. I highlighted some specific papers because they capture the gist of
the broader literature, but please note that I went through piles of research
before I reached my conclusions. This chapter just shared a few highlights.
This is the end of Part One and our look at why some traders succeed
but most fail.
In Part Two, we go deeper. We look at rationality, conscientiousness,
and overconfidence in more detail, plus dig into many other important
trader attributes to help you learn, evolve, adapt, and improve.
23. Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks, (Wiley 2007).
24. Keith Stanovich, “The Comprehensive Assessment of Rational Thinking,” (2013)
25. https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-27/edition-2/what-intelligence-tests-miss
26. https://jamiehalesblog.blogspot.com/2010/10/dysrationalia-intelligent-people.html
27. Shane Frederick. “Cognitive Reflection and Decision Making”. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. (2005).
28. See, for example: Liu, et al. “Seeing Jesus in toast: Neural and behavioral correlates of
face pareidolia,” (2014).
29. Technical analysis is the study of financial markets using charts and patterns. This is a
massive subject area that fills hundreds of books. There is even a designation one can
earn as a certified technical analyst: Chartered Market Technician (CMT).
30. IQ is still important, though. There is plenty of research showing high-IQ investors
outperform low-IQ investors. See, for example Grinblatt, Keloharju and Linnainmaa, “IQ
and Stock Market Participation,” (2011)
31. Mentalizing is a psychology term that relates to an individual’s ability to think about and
understand their own thoughts and the thoughts of others. It is conceptually similar
(though not identical to) empathy or Theory of Mind. It essentially measures whether you
can put yourself in someone else’s shoes or see the world through their eyes.
32. Jordana Liberali et al., “Individual Differences in Numeracy and Cognitive Reflection,
with Implications for Biases and Fallacies in Probability Judgment,” (2011)
33. See, for example: Brad Barber and Terrance Odean, “Trading is Hazardous to Your
Wealth,” (2000) and “Boys Will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence and Common Stock
Investment,” (2001).
34. See also: Brice Corgnet et al., “The Effect of Earned vs. House Money on Price Bubble
Formation in Experimental Asset Markets”, (2013), and Noussair, Tucker and Xu: “A
Futures Market Reduces Bubbles but Allows Greater Profit for More Sophisticated
Traders”, (2014)
35. De Martino et al. “In the mind of the market: Theory of Mind biases value computation
during financial bubbles” (2013)
36. https://www.cnbc.com/2016/09/20/gut-instinct-do-traders-have-a-sixth-sense.html
P
PART TWO
THE ALPHA TRADER MINDSET
art Two is a deeper look at the winning traits and negative attributes
that combine to lead to trading riches or ruin. It is also an exploration
of what it means to be rational and unbiased, a state of mind that can never
be perfectly attained but which is always the goal.
Remember, nobody embodies every positive trait or is free from every
negative aspect. The goal is to be brutally honest about your strengths and
weaknesses and then work hard to boost positives, tame weaknesses, and
plug leaks.
As you read the next three chapters, think about your own assets and
limitations. Take notes. And never focus exclusively on fixing weaknesses.
Awareness of your strengths, and the ability to build on those strengths, is
just as important as the ability to identify and address weakness.
Part Two is divided into three chapters:
Chapter 5: Strengths and positive traits
Chapter 6: Weaknesses and leaks
Chapter 7: Rational, unbiased trading
Let’s start with specific positive character traits that increase a trader’s
probability of success.
T
CHAPTER 5
LEVEL UP
The traits and habits you need to succeed
here is no single x-factor in trading. Successful trading combines a
variety of disparate skills and characteristics. Remember the formula
from Chapter 4:
Alpha Trader = rational + intelligent + skilled +
conscientious + calibrated confidence
As we unpack the essential traits, a broader list emerges. Let’s go
beyond the equation and dig into more detail to identify particular traits that
I believe lead to success in trading. Here is my complete list of positive
trader attributes:
That’s a huge list!
Cognitive 
traits 
rely 
on 
intellectual 
effort, 
conscious 
thought, 
and
reasoning. Most cognitive skills can be built up over time. Non-cognitive
traits 
can 
be 
static 
or 
changeable
37
. 
As 
I 
showed 
in 
Chapter 
3,
conscientiousness generally increases with age, so take advantage of this
and work especially hard on skills that come under that umbrella like
organization, self-control, focus and preparedness.
Even if you cannot change some parts of who you are, understanding
your fixed, innate characteristics can help you manage yourself better and
avoid putting yourself in a position to fail. Whether you are a new trader or
a wily veteran, the point of this section is to get you thinking about your
own profile and areas where you can improve.
Nobody has every skill and characteristic in abundance. Many of the
skills can be built, and weaknesses can be managed. Your goal is to know
yourself well enough that you can take the actions needed to excel. Work on
your weaknesses and level up your strengths using the methods and ideas in
the chapters that follow.
I will discuss these traits individually but I won’t waste time defining
them, as I know that you know what all those words mean! This chapter
will tell you what each trait means for trading and most importantly, give
you specific ideas and tips on how you can level up in each area.
COGNITIVE TRAITS
Let’s start with the cognitive traits (the first two columns of the table).
Rational
We talked a bit about rationality in the last chapter. Chapter 7 is a deep
dive into all the ways humans act irrationally so I will leave the topic alone
for now. Suffice it to say: Alpha traders think and act rationally. After
analyzing heaps of research, thinking about all the traders I have worked
with over many years, and studying my own best and worst trading periods,
I feel strongly that the best way to describe the Alpha Trader in one word is:
Rational.
Intelligent, knowledgeable, informed
Medium to high intelligence, especially as it relates to numbers, is
important in trading. You need to do calculations on the fly, understand
expected value and probability, know basic economics (micro and macro),
solve puzzles, interpret stories, and understand or filter often conflicting
and incomplete information. It’s not rocket science… But it’s also not shape
sorting.
IQ 
is 
somewhat 
fixed, 
but 
knowledge 
and 
information 
can 
be
accumulated over time to increase your edge.
Here are some ways to level up your knowledge:
Think about areas you are weak and take courses online. For example,
take a course or read a book about macroeconomics, options trading,
technical analysis, financial history, or trading psychology. Branch out.
Play the long game. Whether you are 25 or 50, keep learning. Don’t
just focus on your weaknesses. If you are strong in derivatives, keep
getting better. Go deep into the topics you love but also explore areas
where you lack familiarity. Become expert or near expert in as many
domains as possible.
Read more. The Economist, FT, WSJ, books & blogs (see
recommendations in Appendix A). This is such a simple piece of
advice but many people in finance say they are distracted at the desk
all the time or it’s too hard to find the time to read. If you read more
than everyone else, you will be better informed than everyone else.
And it’s cumulative. You can up your efficiency by scanning a wider
range of relevant blogs and news feeds. Even if you don’t read every
single word of every article, you capture the zeitgeist by scanning
more sources.
Think of a market adjacent to what you trade and learn about it. If you
trade the Canadian dollar, study the oil market. If you trade S&P
futures, read a book about SPX options. If you trade gold, read a book
about platinum.
E-mail or message someone who knows more than you do about a
topic. If you read a blog and find it interesting, email the writer with a
followup question. If you just read a book about markets, reach out to
the author on LinkedIn and ask a specific question. If you trade
USDJPY at a bank, walk over and talk to the person who trades 10-
year bonds.
Read financial history.
Be thoughtful about your information sources and reduce redundancy.
There is a major surplus of finance information and analysis out there.
When I went to work at a hedge fund after my employer (Lehman
Brothers) went under, I had 20 banks covering me at first. There was
so much redundancy and useless information, I quickly narrowed my
list down to five banks and found that was much more manageable.
How many overnight summaries does one person need? There is
plenty of good research on Wall Street, but there is also plenty of fluff.
Get to know the strategists and researchers out there, read the best, and
filter the rest.
Thirty to fifty good Twitter follows are better than 350. You will find
as you expand your media consumption, you get more and more
redundant information, nonsense, and cut and paste headlines that just
waste your time. If you work at a fund or institution, my estimate is
you hit diminishing returns at about 3 to 5 coverage banks. After that,
the duplication is probably not worth the odd bit of unique analysis
that squeaks through.
The philosophy: Be curious, keep learning and build knowledge for the
long run.
Quantitative
Many trading roles require in-depth knowledge of statistics and the
ability to code or program (usually in Python). Even a trader in the most
vanilla discretionary or short-term trading seat benefits from quantitative
sophistication.
I will lump numeracy under this heading as well, because the ability to
intuitively understand numbers helps traders enormously. For example,
many market making roles require quick calculations (converting yen to
dollars when a salesperson asks for a price in a fast market, for example).
Traders that can do quick mental math have a small advantage over those
that cannot.
How to level up your quantitative skills:
Learn about expected value (EV) and decision trees. These are
especially useful when trading economic or market events with
discrete outcomes. For example:
You think the Fed will cut rates today and the market has it priced as
80%/20%, in favor of a rate cut. A professional rates trader would say
that 20 out of 25 basis points are priced in. You decide to risk $200,000
on the trade; you will make $50,000 if you are correct and the Fed
cuts. If they don’t cut, you lose your $200,000.
Many people will see this negative leverage as bad (risking 200 to
make just 50) but it is not inherently good or bad
38
. It depends on the
probabilities you assign to each outcome.
The tricky thing with market probabilities is that unlike probabilities in
gambling, they are not known or measurable. You have to estimate
them. Accurately estimating probabilities is a skill that gives you an
edge in trading. Incomplete information is one of the challenging
hallmarks of markets as an exercise in probability.
Back to our example. Let’s say you think there is a 95% chance the
Fed will cut rates. Here is the expected value of a $200,000 wager on
this event:
So even though you are risking $200k to make $50k, this is an
excellent trade idea. Clearly, though, your confidence in that 95%
figure is key to making this bet. If you think it’s more like 70% or
80%… Then stay away. Your view is about the same as the market.
I assume that most people reading this book have a pretty clear
understanding of EV, but if you are new to the game or you were
sick the day this was taught in university statistics… Brush up! Go
online and take a short course or do some reading about expected
value. Good traders work comfortably with EV both explicitly and
subconsciously.
Learn Python. This is rapidly becoming the standard for data analysis
in finance. Excel is fine but not as good as Python. Not even close.
Take a course in statistics, probability, or data visualization.
Read academic research papers about the assets you trade. Freely
available academic research is a hugely underutilized resource. Most
research can be found and read online. Go to Google Scholar and type
in a topic you find interesting (e.g., stock market inefficiencies, trading
psychology, currency valuation or high-frequency trading). If you find
a good paper, go to the bibliography and read some of the papers cited.
Learn about Bayes Theorem and Bayesian updating. There are many,
many good websites on the topic (e.g., towardsdatascience.com). The
basic idea of Bayesian updating is that good forecasters start with a
prior probability and then update it as new information comes in. This
is in contrast to people that form an opinion and then ignore new
information. Good thinking and good forecasting are not possible
without Bayesian updating.
A simple example:
Your name is Bob. You are in high school and you
estimate there is a 60% chance that Phoebe will go out
on a date with you (once you finally get the guts to ask
her). The next day, you say “Hi” to Phoebe as you both
enter chem class. She says: “Hey, Tim!” and floats
toward her desk, leaving a sweet cloud of vanilla scent
in her wake. Using Bayesian updating, you take the new
information (she doesn’t know your name) and update
your prior 60% estimate to 25%.
In contrast, someone who does not use Bayesian methods might
ignore the new information because it does not fit his prior belief.
This is known as confirmation bias, which we will discuss later in
Chapter 7. He might lie to himself and say “Oh it’s fine… There was
probably someone named Tim behind me and she was talking to
him” even though there is nobody named Tim in chemistry class.
This is how confirmation bias works. We trick ourselves and ignore
information that doesn’t fit our priors.
UPDATE: Oh no! Phoebe just blew a kiss to Bad Boy
Eric Cooper at the back of the class! You revise your
probability that she will go on a date with you down to
0.84%.
One side benefit of using Bayes Theory, Bayesian updating and
terms like “prior probability” and “updating your priors”… It makes
you sound super smart. :]
Read Superforecasting by Phil Tetlock and Dan Gardner. This is one of
the best books on statistics and forecasting, and it has tons of
applications both to the real world and to trading. The book also does
an excellent job of explaining Bayes so you kill two bullet points with
one stone if you read it. I would say Superforecasting is one of the
books that has most influenced my quantitative thinking style (along
with Fooled by Randomness by Nassim Taleb, Risk by Dan Gardner,
and Thinking in Bets by Annie Duke). A full list of book
recommendations appears in Appendix A.
Backtest your ideas. If you notice that stocks tend to fall every
Monday and rally every Tuesday, backtest it. If it feels like oil rallies
every day from 2PM to 3PM, check it out. Is it true or false? Whenever
a hypothesis appears in your head, dig in and figure out if it’s true.
Playing with ideas and data like this can inspire new ideas and a better
understanding of the inner workings of the markets you trade. If you
don’t know how to backtest, just open Excel and start messing around.
This is the kind of thing you can teach yourself with a bit of effort.
Calibrated confidence
Given 
the 
critical 
importance 
of 
confidence 
and 
(especially)
overconfidence in trading, we will dig more deeply into this topic in
Chapter 7. For now, I will just say that high confidence is required for
trading but overconfidence is the worst leak.
Independent thinker
Important: An independent thinker is not someone who is contrarian all
the time, disagrees with everyone, or loves playing devil’s advocate. That is
not independent thinking; that is reflexive opposition. That is not good!
Independent thinking means that you analyze information using your
own framework and come to logical conclusions. You develop your own
beliefs, incorporating as much information as possible. “Information” can
include the curated beliefs of others.
Sometimes your conclusions agree with the crowd and you hop on the
trend. Sometimes you are on the other side of consensus, so you take a
contrarian view.
Many human beings are hardwired to conform. In a famous 1951
experiment by Solomon Asch, eight “subjects” were placed in a room.
Seven were actors and the eighth was the true subject of the experiment.
They were all shown the two cards in Figure 5.1 and asked to answer out
loud which line (A, B, or C) was the same length as the line on the card on
the left. The true subject was seated so that he or she would answer last.
by Fred the Oyster, Creative Commons 4.0 (CC BY-SA 4.0)
In the test where the first seven in the group answer correctly, the
subject answered correctly 99% of the time. On the other hand, when the
group of actors all responded with the same wrong answer, the test subject
gave the correct response only 63.2% of the time.
This result is surprising and unintuitive. You might say “Meh, that’s
dumb, I would never do that.” Don’t be so sure! This experiment has been
replicated many times, and you have the benefit of being an outsider with
complete 
information. 
Other 
experiments 
show 
that 
almost 
everyone
conforms to social influence to a high degree.
When humans have incomplete knowledge, their instinct is to follow the
group. Many people in the Asch experiment did not follow the group, but
the 
experiment 
involved 
an 
easy 
question 
with 
an 
obvious 
answer.
Everyone should have answered correctly yet almost 37% of people did not.
Google 
“Stanford 
Prison 
Experiments” 
for 
another 
example 
of 
the
astonishing levels of conformity observed in experimental settings.
In markets, where incomplete information and group behavior are an
intrinsic part of the game, you need to make sure you are always thinking
for yourself. Don’t get caught up in the CNBC (bullish) or Twitter (bearish)
hype or get sucked in by what the “smart guy at the big hedge fund” wrote
in his opinion piece in the FT.
Think for yourself.
Also note that if your reaction when reading about the Asch experiment
was: “I would never pick the wrong line in that experiment,” you are just
like almost everyone else who believes that bias is something that happens
to everyone else, but not to them. Groupthink and conformity bias are real
and impact smart people and dumb people alike! 
39
When it comes to independent thinking, Peter Thiel nails it with this
quote:
The most contrarian thing of all is not to oppose the crowd but to think for
yourself.
Flexible and open-minded
The cure for many forms of bias in trading (and in life) is to be flexible
and open-minded. This is captured by the concept of “strong opinions,
weakly held”, a framework for thinking developed by technology forecaster
and Stanford Scholar Paul Saffo. Here is his description of how to think
40
:
Allow your intuition to guide you to a conclusion, no matter how imperfect
— this is the “strong opinion” part. Then – and this is the “weakly held”
part – prove yourself wrong. Engage in creative doubt.
Look for information that doesn’t fit, or indicators that point in an entirely
different 
direction. 
Eventually 
your 
intuition 
will 
kick 
in 
and 
a 
new
hypothesis will emerge out of the rubble, ready to be ruthlessly torn apart
once again. You will be surprised by how quickly the sequence of faulty
forecasts will deliver you to a useful result.
This sounds a lot like Bayesian updating, right? Start with a prior and
update it as you get more information. It also sounds a lot like my
discussion earlier of how to trade headlines with a “Ready, Shoot, Aim”
approach. You react, using your System 1 or gut instinct, then you quickly
analyze 
your 
action 
and 
look 
for 
confirming 
or 
(most 
critically)
contradictory evidence. You look not just at your chosen hypothesis, but
other competing ones.
I write a daily macro newsletter called AM/FX that goes out to a
sizeable 
list 
of 
hedge 
fund 
and 
real 
money 
portfolio 
managers 
and
strategists. One of the great benefits of sending out AM/FX is that when I
publish my hypothesis, I have a few thousand people out there vetting it and
consciously or unconsciously looking for alternatives. The e-mail responses
I get make me aware of alternative ways of looking at the world that I might
not have considered.
You can replicate this process by getting your hypothesis out there. If
you have a strong view, share it with your coworkers and see what comes
back. Drop it on Twitter (if you are thick-skinned enough to withstand the
corrosive 
“SOMEBODY 
IS 
WRONG 
ON 
THE 
INTERNET!” 
culture
there). Send an e-mail to a few traders you respect with your thesis laid out
in one or two paragraphs.
If you are an introvert, don’t feel like you have to remain an introvert
forever. Push yourself to make new connections. I was a shy kid and pretty
insecure in high school. I never liked meeting new people and I would
consider myself an introvert by nature. I changed over time, though, as I
saw the benefits of reaching out to people and making new connections and
moving out of my comfort zone.
When you send your thesis out into the wild, the responses will inform
you, not just by their content, but also by their tone. If you get a series of
agitated replies with a bunch of rebuttals you can easily bat away, you are
probably onto a good trade idea. Strong pushback indicates that people are
positioned the other way. If you can easily refute their arguments, then
happy days. On the other hand, sometimes you might get a bunch of well-
reasoned replies that highlight facts you omitted from your analysis. Then
it’s time to reassess.
Exploring alternative hypotheses is
the bedrock of good thinking.
Start with a strong view and then try to step outside yourself as much as
possible to look at alternative scenarios. This is part of why expected value
and decision tree calculations (among many other forms of good thinking)
add value. They force you to look at all the possible paths. You take
multiple possible outcomes and attempt to weight them according to their
probabilities. You don’t just take a view and stick with it regardless of
incoming or alternative information.
The book Psychology of Intelligence Analysis by Richards J. Heuer, Jr.
is the best elucidation of good thinking I have read. The author worked for
the 
CIA 
for 
45 
years 
in 
various 
roles 
including 
operations,
counterintelligence, 
and 
intelligence 
analysis. 
The 
book 
explains 
how
human bias impedes clear thinking. Much of it applies directly to trading.
The book is out of print but fortunately it is freely available on the
CIA’s website. Of particular relevance is “Part Two: Tools for Thinking”,
especially “Chapter 8: Analysis of Competing Hypotheses”. If you want
access to the full buffet of information, I suggest you read the whole book:
it’s less than 200 pages and it is not boring! If you want the quick meal, at
least read Chapter 8. For now, here’s an appetizer… My synopsis of
Heuer’s summary of Chapter 8
41
.
STEP-BY-STEP OUTLINE OF ANALYSIS OF COMPETING HYPOTHESES
1. Identify the possible hypotheses to be considered. Use a group of
analysts with different perspectives to brainstorm the possibilities.
2. Make a list of significant evidence and arguments for and against
each hypothesis.
3. Prepare a matrix with hypotheses across the top and evidence down
the side. Analyze the “diagnosticity” of the evidence and arguments
— that is, identify which items are most helpful in judging the
relative likelihood of the hypotheses.
4. Refine the matrix. Reconsider the hypotheses and delete evidence and
arguments that have no diagnostic value.
5. Draw tentative conclusions about the relative likelihood of each
hypothesis. Proceed by trying to disprove the hypotheses rather than
prove them.
6. Analyze how sensitive your conclusion is to a few critical items of
evidence. 
Consider 
the 
consequences 
for 
your 
analysis 
if 
that
evidence 
were 
wrong, 
misleading, 
or 
subject 
to 
a 
different
interpretation.
7. 
Report 
conclusions. 
Discuss 
the 
relative 
likelihood 
of 
all 
the
hypotheses, not just the most likely one.
8. Identify milestones for future observation that may indicate events
are taking a different course than expected.
Be thoughtful and look at alternative hypotheses with an open mind.
Lay out the arguments against your view and see how you feel about them.
Do they make sense? Are they easily refuted?
Be aware that when you are in a position, you are not objective. You are
under the influence of bias when you are in a trade. You own something
(the trade and the view that led to it) and people don’t like giving up what
they own. Therefore, if you are feeling uncomfortable about a position, the
best bet is to take it off. Then, once you’re flat, you can analyze with an
open, unbiased mind.
As I state in my first book
42
:
Rule #7 of FX Trading: Flat is the strongest position. When in doubt: Get
out.
It is easier to honestly evaluate competing hypotheses when you are flat,
open-minded, and flexible.
Creative
People 
outside 
Wall 
Street 
don’t 
generally 
associate 
the 
world 
of
finance 
with 
creativity, 
but 
they 
should. 
Orthodox, 
follow-the-crowd
thinking does not work in trading. Most of the legends of finance had some
creative insight that took them to another level. Examples include Milken’s
idea for high yield “junk” bonds, Paul Tudor Jones and Peter Borish’s idea
to overlay past and present chart patterns to predict the crash of 1987,
George Soros’ idea of reflexivity, and Ray Dalio’s idea for the All-Weather
portfolio which came to be known as Risk Parity.
Creative thinking does not have to mean you come up with ideas that
completely revolutionize finance. Can you slice and dice data in a new and
interesting way and thus create more accurate short-term market forecasts?
Can you think outside the box to discover new variables that will help guide
you through the noise?
For example, in 2006, it was fairly well-known that copper and gold
prices could be used as predictors for the Australian dollar because those
two commodities are significant Australian exports. Similarly, it was known
that crude oil was a driver of the Canadian dollar because Canada exports
huge amounts of crude. But there was no such variable for the New Zealand
dollar for some reason, and my job at Lehman Brothers in those days was
trading the AUD, CAD, and NZD.
So I Googled: “What are the major exports of New Zealand?” and the
answer is: Milk products. Milk, butter, and cheese account for 25% of NZ
exports and milk prices are an important marginal driver of NZ GDP
43
. So I
overlaid a chart of dairy futures with the New Zealand dollar and DING!
There was a pretty good fit. Correlation / causation yadda, yadda but when
two things overlay and there is a logical connection between them in the
real economy, you are probably onto something.
When I first published the overlay in 2006, I got a few hahaha emails in
response. But eventually, the idea caught on and now it’s a common
variable for people to look at when assessing the fair value of the NZD.
Recently, someone sent me a chart overlaying “Norwegian Spot Salmon
Price” with the Norwegian Krona (NOK) and I was suitably impressed.
There is still room for innovation in trading!
Try your best to think creatively about problems in finance. It is not
always a brute force quantitative solution that is needed. To be creative does
not mean you have to paint or write poems. It means you come at problems
with imagination, and develop original ideas.
Circling back to Heuer
44
:
…[Think] of information in memory as somehow interconnected like a
massive, multidimensional spider web. It is possible to connect any point
within this web to any other point. When analysts connect the same
points frequently, they form a path that makes it easier to take that route
in the future. Once they start thinking along certain channels, they tend to
continue thinking the same way and the path may become a rut. The path
seems like the obvious and natural way to go.
Information and concepts located near that path are readily available, so
the same images keep coming up. Information not located near that path
is less likely to come to mind. Talking about breaking mind-sets, or
creativity, or even just openness to new information is really talking about
spinning new links and new paths through the web of memory.
These are links among facts and concepts, or between schemata for
organizing facts or concepts, that were not directly connected or only
weakly connected before. New ideas result from the association of old
elements in new combinations. Previously remote elements of thought
suddenly become associated in a new and useful combination. When the
linkage is made, the light dawns. This ability to bring previously unrelated
information and ideas together in meaningful ways is what marks the
open-minded, imaginative, creative analyst.
How to be more creative in trading
1. Study other asset markets or businesses with linkages to your market.
The more you understand the iron ore market, the better you can
trade 
the Australian 
dollar. The 
more 
you 
understand American
Airlines, the better you can trade the airlines ETF: JETS. Drill into
the principal factors that drive your market and learn about them in
detail.
2. Read about random and varied topics. It seems so obvious but I never
really understood this until recently. If you read voraciously, you
load new information into your mind and that information can then
cross-pollenate with old information and spark new ideas.
Most ideas come from combining two forms of disparate knowledge.
If you read about art, or outer space or fractals or whatever… Cool
finance-related ideas may pop into your head from time to time
thanks to the stimulation.
3. Go for a walk. Sitting at your desk staring at numbers going up and
down will drop you into a rut at some point. Get up and go outside
for a few minutes. I have had many moments of clarity on the way to
the bathroom or on my way to pick up Panera for lunch.
4. Talk to people in your network. New ideas come from contact with
new streams of thought. Don’t be a taker, though. Offer ideas to your
network. Don’t be the guy that just emails ten people saying, “What
you thinking?” To form a strong network, you need to both offer and
receive information and ideas.
5. Be curious and develop interests outside finance. Learn some history.
Listen to British rap music. Exercise your brain like it’s a muscle.
Curious
Curious people are more interesting. Curiosity makes you smarter. It
helps you learn. Some people are naturally more curious than others, but
anyone can become more intentionally curious. It’s not hard.
As one might expect, there is a direct link between curiosity and
academic performance
45
. Curious kids learn more and perform better
46
. But
research 
shows 
that 
information-seeking
47

and 
curiosity
48

also 
exert 
a
positive influence on adult learning and job performance.
The simplest way to be curious is to simply ask “Why?” as much as
possible. Back in the day, when everyone knew that apples fell from trees,
Newton was the one to ask: “Why don’t apples fall sideways? Why don’t
they fall upwards?”
When 
you 
see 
a 
phenomenon 
in 
the 
markets, 
ask 
why. 
This 
is
particularly 
true 
when 
backtesting. 
When 
you 
discover 
a 
pattern 
that
backtests successfully, can you explain why it works? If you can, there is a
much greater probability that what you discovered will work out of sample.
Much of what you find sifting through data is just data snooping or data
mining. But when you find patterns and can explain them logically, you
have something much more powerful.
Part of being curious is also just not being lazy. When you see a term
that you don’t fully understand in a news article… Investigate. A few years
ago, there was a headline saying the ECB might open up its OMT program,
and a trader on another desk said out loud: “Huh… I wonder what OMT is,”
then went back to eating his sandwich. That’s not good!
A curious trader would hear the announcement and then go off and do
some research on OMT. That might lead them to the history of monetary
financing and something epic like Fiat Money in France
49
. If you read that
footnote, you are on the right track. You are showing intentional curiosity.
To be curious and conscientious is to be the kind of person that reads the
footnotes. If you didn’t read that last footnote, go and read it now. And then
go download Fiat Money in France for free from the Mises Institute (the
book is public domain). It is scary and entertaining stuff. France circa 1780
parallels the current era of infinite money printing, big time.
The Growth Mindset
If you have kids, you may be familiar with the idea of the growth
mindset because it is a trendy topic in education right now. The idea was
popularized by American psychologist Carol Dweck. Here is how she
defines it in a 2012 interview:
In a fixed mindset, students believe their basic abilities, their intelligence,
their talents, are just fixed traits. They have a certain amount and that’s
that, and then their goal becomes to look smart all the time and never
look dumb. In a growth mindset, students understand that their talents
and 
abilities 
can 
be 
developed 
through 
effort, 
good 
teaching 
and
persistence. They don’t necessarily think everyone’s the same or anyone
can be Einstein, but they believe everyone can get smarter if they work at
it.
When you reflect on particular negative traits you possess and think
“that’s just who I am” or “that’s just me”, you cannot grow. Instead,
embrace the surprising plasticity of the human brain and keep learning,
evolving, and improving.
This concept is similar to the Japanese concept of Kaizen or “good
change” which was a key ingredient in the superior quality and productivity
of the Japanese automakers as they eclipsed North American car makers in
the 1980s. With Kaizen or Growth Mindset (aka, continuous improvement),
you always look to make incremental positive changes and continue to
grow.
Without a growth mindset, this book is not going to help you much
because you will wrongly believe that many of the traits, strengths, and
weaknesses you possess are fixed or too difficult to change. That’s not the
right 
attitude. 
Pick 
a 
weakness, 
and 
work 
on 
it. 
You 
will 
notice
improvement over time.
When someone says, “I’m not a people person” or “I’m not very good
at math”, that’s a fixed mindset. Clearly people are predisposed a certain
way by genetics, personality, and environment. That is your starting hand. A
growth mindset says that you can overcome your starting hand by playing
well, and thereby outperform your baseline or starting point.
Here’s a quick summary of how the two mindsets contrast:
Even if you were the most disorganized kid in high school, all over the
place in university and live like a pig now, you can still become an
organized person. You have to drop the idea that you are a certain way and
embrace positive change. You don’t need to take radical action; make
continuous small changes. Start small and keep improving every day.
Another hot topic in the world of education is grit.
Grit, perseverance, mental endurance
If you have kids, you have probably been bombarded with articles and
parent coffees and TED Talks about building grit in your children. Fail early
and fail fast and fail often and the marshmallow test and all that.
Here is how Angela Duckworth, who popularized the term “grit”,
defines it
50
:
Grit is passion and perseverance for long-term goals. One way to think
about grit is to consider what grit isn’t. Grit isn’t talent. Grit isn’t luck. Grit
isn’t how intensely, for the moment, you want something.
Instead, grit is about having what some researchers call an “ultimate
concern”—a goal you care about so much that it organizes and gives
meaning to almost everything you do. And grit is holding steadfast to that
goal. Even when you fall down. Even when you screw up. Even when
progress toward that goal is halting or slow.
Alpha traders have grit.
Duckworth’s book: Grit: The Power of Passion and Perseverance is on
every high-performing parent’s bookshelf. Building grit in our kids is a
strategy to combat the worry that helicopter parents have sheltered kids too
much in recent years. The idea is that showering kids with praise and
participation trophies instead of preparing them for the harsh realities of the
cruel, cruel world makes them weaker, not stronger.
While my feeling is that grit has been overplayed and somewhat beaten
to death as a trendy simple fix in educational circles, that does not mean it
is not a valid and important topic. Grit is important in life and critically
important in trading. One thing that many people fail to appreciate is just
how grueling and demoralizing trading can be, even if you’re good at it.
For example, I have been collecting data on my trading since 2006 and I
make money almost exactly 50% of all days. Some years it’s 52%, some
years it’s 49% but my win percentage is surprisingly stable. The variable
that determines my yearly P&L is the magnitude of my up days relative to
the magnitude of my down days.
Let’s say you are a day trader that works 200 days per year. You are net
profitable 50% of those days. If your average up day is $6,000 and your
average down day is $2,800 (these stats are not unrealistic) … Here is how
much you make that year:
OK, that’s a pretty good income (depending on your location and
lifestyle) but think about the emotional trajectory of that year. You lost
money on 100 separate days, and losing days usually feel pretty bad. Forget
about losing days, how about losing streaks? I just created a simulator in
Excel that generates a series of 200 coin tosses which would be the same
win/loss profile as a trader with a 50% win rate.
Almost every string of 200 coin tosses has a streak of at least 7 tails.
Some of them have strings of 10 or even 15 tails in a row! That’s a great
deal of psychic pain to withstand, even if you are supremely confident that
your win rate is truly 50%. If you have only been trading for three years and
you think your win rate is 50%, then you hit 10 losing days in a row… Will
you still be sure your win rate is 50%? Or will you start to worry you might
have lost your edge… Or the market has changed… Or???
This is where grit and mental endurance come in. Sure, winning at
trading is fun, but losing at trading is even more unfun. It is widely-
accepted that humans will pay about twice as much to avoid a loss as they
will pay for a gain. We will discuss this more in the section on bias.
Check out how the s-curve in Figure 5.2 deviates from the x-axis and
you can see the pain of losses is twice as negative as the positive effect of
same-sized gains. Knowing that this is the case, you need grit and mental
endurance to withstand all the pain of all those losing days. I have come to
terms with the distribution of probabilities at this stage of my career so now
after a losing day, it is easier for me to move on than it used to be.
When I was in my 30’s, there were a few bad days when I walked out of
Lehman Brothers totally numb. One day was so bad I got on the subway
going the wrong way and ended up in Kew Gardens before I realized what
was going on. Now, I find it easier to say to myself something like: “Hills
and valleys, buddy. Hills and valleys. Flush your mind and start fresh
tomorrow.”
That said, when I lose money nine days in a row (which still happens!) I
can’t help but get a little itchy and red-faced. In the middle of the ninth
consecutive day I still might fantasize about turning my keyboard sideways
and smashing it over the front edge of my desk.
“Loss Aversion” by Laurenrosenberger, Creative Commons 4.0 (CC BY-SA 4.0)
But I don’t do that, because I know it wouldn’t help.
If you have ever played poker in a casino, you understand the concept
of mental endurance. Sometimes (just like in trading) you have to sit there
for hours and fold every hand because there is nothing to play. Then you
finally get a good hand (AA) and play it perfectly only to lose to the drunk
guy who hit trip 7’s on the river. Can you internalize the fact that the other
player got lucky and find strength in your own belief in process, not
outcome? If you’re good, you can.
Grit is about playing the long game.
Obviously there is overlap between grit and some of the other qualities
and traits we have talked about. I wanted to single out grit because it’s easy
to understand and it captures so much in one 4-letter word
51
.
Organized
Conscientious people are organized. This does not mean they were born
organized. I struggled with organization and executive functioning right
into my 30’s and when I would miss a meeting or screw something up due
to disorganization or bad planning I would just say “Well, that’s how I am.
Sorry.” Then, at some point, I found that wasn’t good enough. When you
have a family, it becomes more difficult to just shrug and say “whoops”.
Once you abandon the concept of “that’s just the way I am” on any
particular 
trait, 
you 
have 
taken 
a 
huge 
step 
towards 
evolution 
and
improvement. Adopt the growth mindset: the belief that talent and character
are not fixed. Science supports this idea. The human brain exhibits much
more plasticity than we once thought. A growth mindset, instead of a fixed
mindset opens up all sorts of upside for you as a person. Including…
Becoming more organized.
The Baumeister and Gardner book on willpower that I referenced earlier
is a good start if you want to become more organized. Also useful:
The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen Covey.
Written in 1989 but still popular for a reason.
The Checklist Manifesto by Atul Gawande. Pretty much exactly what it
sounds like. Many interesting examples.
The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg. Almost everything about
staying organized comes down to habit.
Note that these books can be boiled down into bullet points that will
give you 80% of the benefit in 20% of the time. You can get summaries of
most major books by googling “Summary, BOOK NAME”, or by going to
Goodreads, Blinkist and other websites. I find the distilled version of many
nonfiction books is enough to get the point.
Another 
efficiency 
trick 
for 
non-fiction 
books: 
when 
you 
start 
an
audiobook, set it to 2X normal speed and listen for two minutes. Then, set it
to 1.5X normal speed, and it will sound normal. Efficiency!
Here is what being organized means in trading:
1. Have a plan each day
An excellent way to lose money consistently is to sit down at your
computer and start hitting the BUY and SELL buttons with no plan. My
plan comes together as I write AM/FX each day. For most of my career I
have worked at a bank, so writing each day is a natural part of my job.
When I went to a hedge fund for a few years in the early 2010s, there
was no reason to write (I had no one to write for) and I found my trading
was sloppier and more random at first. Writing a quick plan in the morning
anchors you and forces you to stop and think, before you start trading.
You don’t have to write anything elaborate. It can be two sentences you
send to your co-worker or it can be a detailed trade plan before each and
every trade. The format is not the thing, the doing it is the thing.
A nice way to approach your plan for the day is to have a simple list that
you check off each morning before you start trading. It can have 5 or 6
quick entries, for example:
1. Data and events today
2. Strong views
3. Big levels (sift through whatever charts and technical analysis you
like and narrow it down to the big levels that might hit today)
4. My plan for the day. This does not have to be super-detailed. For an
equity day trader, it might look something like:
a. Buy 500 MSFT at 9:28 a.m. with a stop at $149.80 and re-evaluate
at 3PM.
b. Trade headlines with max risk of $4,000.
c. Buy AAPL on break of $247.00, stop loss $244.80 and take profit at
$249.99.
d. Call Mom at 1:15 p.m.
e. Workout 2 p.m. to 3 p.m. (biceps and back)
5. $ at risk (if you use a daily stop loss, how much are you risking
today?)
6. Side projects (stuff you can do when the market is dead—reading,
research, spreadsheet building, Python, etc.). Having a few of these
at the ready will help you stay productive instead of sitting there
when it’s quiet going, “Hmm, what should I do?” or flicking through
The Daily Mail. If you do your daily plan in Excel, you can carry
over whatever side projects you did not complete yesterday into
today’s Daily Plan.
Try not to trade until all items on your Daily Plan have been filled in.
Be ready for the day before you start trading. Don’t be the guy who doesn’t
realize 
an 
economic 
number 
is 
coming 
out 
and 
yells, 
“Whoa! 
What
happened!” when markets freak out at 10:00:00 a.m. Be prepared.
And 
don’t 
watch 
any 
sports 
highlights 
until 
after 
11 
a.m. 
That’s
unprofessional. :]
2. Collect data
The best way to learn about and improve your trading is to collect data.
What are your trading statistics? There will be a more complete discussion
of what data to collect and how to analyze it in Chapter 11. For now, just
know that good traders collect data and analyze it creatively.
3. Build and optimize your information network
Be thoughtful about what information you consume and how you
connect with peers and mentors. Narrow down what you read regularly and
cut out the garbage. There are a few analysts that I read religiously. On the
other hand, when I find myself reading the super-smart analysis of someone
who has been consistently bearish stocks since 2005, I know I am wasting
my time.
Try to understand the motivations and bias behind anything you read.
This is particularly important in the era of clickbait and markets-are-gonna-
crash bear porn. I have spoken to good journalists who admit that they feel
forced to sensationalize headlines and even entire stories in order to satisfy
the institutionalized prioritization of clicks over quality.
If you read a story on Bloomberg or the WSJ that includes the phrase
“unnamed sources”, that is your first clue that the article could well be
trash. A journalist can publish any sort of nonsense on the internet and there
is very little consequence if it turns out to be inaccurate. The news cycle
moves on and nobody goes back and rates reporters on their past accuracy.
The #1 thing they get rated on is: number of clicks.
When 
you 
read 
stories 
and 
analysis 
about 
financial 
markets, 
it 
is
important to know who wrote what you are reading. Finance stories are
sometimes 
written 
by 
junior 
journalists 
with 
very 
little 
knowledge 
of
financial 
markets. 
Many 
bank 
analysts 
and 
economists 
have 
strong
worldviews and are committed to a directional bias. If an analyst is bullish,
first ask: Is this analyst always bullish? Question the details and sources
when reading news articles.
The unsourced and rumor-filled stories run by the major outlets during
the China/US Trade War in 2018 and 2019 were particularly notable for
their inaccuracy. After a while, the market caught on and stopped reacting to
the nonstop, poorly-sourced stories with headlines like “Sources Say Trade
Talks Hit Snag”. Every news outlet publishes unsourced or poorly-sourced
articles with headlines full of exaggeration at times. Be skeptical and weed
them out as much as possible. If you react to a headline, read the actual
story as quickly as possible afterwards because there might be less there
than you think.
Just to be clear, there are plenty of excellent journalists in finance. My
point is simply that you need to pay attention to who wrote whatever you
are reading, and the more you know about their track record and biases, the
clearer the lens you are reading through.
Next, think about your personal information network. Be thoughtful and
efficient about who you talk to, what websites you read, who you follow on
Twitter, and who you interact with. Can you prune the network a bit and get
rid of some of the time-sucking or negative-value-add channels?
For example, I find reading tweets from a list of about 25 to 50 handles
is a productive and useful way to acquire timely information. On the other
hand, I know to refrain from reading replies and reactions to tweets; that is
an incredible waste of time. And I try my best never to read or reply to
political or trolling tweets.
Don’t get sucked into the time-wasting negativity vortex of comments
sections on social media or the web. They are time-sucking garbage dumps
often representing the lowest form of humanity—the worst possible place to
spend your limited and precious time. Twitter and Zerohedge, for example
can be useful sources of information; just be sure to filter properly and
avoid pointless time spent in the comments section rabbit hole.
4. Write it down, or type it out
Thoughts are abstract and fuzzy. Writing (with a pen or on a computer)
is solid and concrete. If you think, “I’m going to cut my AAPL short at
$285”, that is completely different from writing CUT AAPL 285 on a piece
of paper and having those words stare up at you as the stock rallies from
$282.50 to $284.75.
The same goes for any plans or ideas you have. There is so much noise
in your head, so many competing voices vying for airtime. Don’t assume
you can formulate a plan in there and then execute it successfully without
writing anything down. Again, this doesn’t have to mean anything more
than scratching a few notes down on a piece of paper or recording some
thoughts in a spreadsheet.
Research shows that when you write down
a goal, you are more likely to achieve it.
When you write something down, it solidifies. It transforms from
abstract into concrete. All the sludge falls away and only the important
information is left. When you write something down, you have made a
choice 
to 
select 
that 
particular 
information, 
goal, 
or 
action 
as 
more
important than all the others. This highlights it for your brain. When you
write something down, you signal to your brain “THIS IS IMPORTANT”.
Your brain records it as such.
The pathways and connections developed in your brain are different
when you write something down because the encoding process is different.
The encoding is stronger, more robust, and information is recalled more
easily. If you want something to happen, write it down.
Another benefit of writing down stop losses, take profits, ideas and
goals is that it is harder to wiggle out of them when they are staring right at
you. You can’t convince yourself that you never really were going to stop
out at $285 absolutely for sure if you have a huge note on your desk that
says CUT AAPL @ 285!!! It is your past self sending a message to your
future self. Unambiguously. In black Sharpie.
5. Keep a trading journal.
A trading journal is the best way to keep track of your progress,
especially early in your career. It can be a detailed record of every single
trade you do, or it can be a few paragraphs you write at the end of the day.
A trading journal can take whatever form you like. Record a few thoughts
each day, or record the specifics of each trade you do. Either way, a journal
will 
enhance 
your 
ability 
to 
analyze 
performance, 
and 
improve 
your
process. You will start to notice repeated mistakes. You will identify bias in
your views. “Hmmm, I’m always short bonds and never long. That’s
probably not good. I need to be more flexible.”
Your journal entries should focus on your decision-making and process.
What triggered the idea? How strongly did you feel about it? Was it all
logic, or partly gut? Describe the specifics of the process and the route you
took to develop, execute, and exit the trade.
To enforce the habit of journaling, I send an email to one of my peers on
the desk at the end of each day. I call it 12-12, meaning 12 hours back and
12 hours forward. The 12 back part is a quick summary of how my day
went, whether I stuck to the plan, whether I overtraded and so on. The 12
forward part is my overnight and next day trading plan including stop
losses, dollars at risk and maximum position size.
Those are the five parts of what it means to be organized in trading.
Now let’s move to the next positive trait that leads to trading success.
Process oriented
There is a wide body of literature covering process vs. outcome. As a
rule, you should view your trading P&L as a semi-random output of your
process. You control the process, but you do not control the short-term
outcome in trading. The sooner you understand this, the better. There is a
tremendous amount of variance in trading and one of the best ways to
handle this is to focus on your process. If the process is good, the results
will eventually follow.
Think deeply about your process. Where do your trade ideas come
from? Are 
you 
just 
flicking 
through 
a 
few 
charts 
and 
drawing 
some
trendlines and expecting that to give you an edge? Or are you doing the
heavy 
lifting 
by 
digging 
deep 
into 
the 
drivers, 
participants, 
and
idiosyncrasies of your market, and uncovering unique insights that are
likely not already in the price?
The best book that I have read on the topic of Process vs. Outcome is
Thinking in Bets by Annie Duke. Duke used to be a professional poker
player and while the book talks poker a fair bit, most of her insights also
apply 
directly 
to 
trading. 
The 
book 
is 
about 
decision 
making 
with
incomplete information, and that is the essence of trading.
Trading 
is 
like 
poker 
in 
that 
each 
decision 
relies 
on 
incomplete
information and each outcome or trial is strongly influenced by luck. But
like poker, in the long run, the luck evens out
52
. We will talk more about
luck and variance in Chapter 11, but for now I just want you to understand
that if you have a strong process, you will not be as worried about bad luck.
Your goals should mostly focus on process, not outcome. If you need to
get to a particular outcome (say a $7,000,000 trading revenue budget), work
backwards from there to set goals that are primarily related to process. Here
are some examples of rules that might be part of a solid trading process:
Complete 6-point Daily Plan every day before executing any trades.
Maximum 10 trades per day.
If I stop out of a trade, don’t do the same trade again for 24 hours (and
don’t move stops to avoid triggering this rule!)
Backtest and build a new trading system for the NASDAQ open.
Contact three traders or other peers each day to share ideas or
dialogue.
When you are confident in your process, you can ride out the inevitable
losing streaks because you understand that outcomes are partially dictated
by randomness in the short term. Obviously, in the end, it’s the outcome
that matters but when you focus on process, the outcome “magically”
takes care of itself.
When evaluating trades, traders, and trading strategies, always refer to
this matrix:
Let’s look at an example of bad decision / good outcome and see how
traders with good thinking and bad thinking might respond.
Oil just dropped from $42 to $40 in ten minutes. Jimmy is caught long
oil futures and the price is more than $1 through his original stop loss of
$41. The market is in freefall but he has convinced himself to give it just a
little bit more room because there is a big chart point right here that he
hadn’t noticed earlier when he first chose his stop loss.
Jimmy was originally long at $42 with a stop at $41 and a take profit at
$43.80, risking $1.00 to make $1.80. This was a decent set up because he
thought the odds of either side of the trade hitting were about 50/50. Fifty
percent probability with a 1.8 : 1 payout = high expected value.
Now, he’s down $2.00 on the trade and can’t bring himself to cut it. The
logical part of his brain says: “Dude, you’re way through your stop. Follow
your own rules and get out.” But there is another voice in his head saying:
“Jimmy-Boi… You know it’s going higher; You just need to hold on just a
little bit longer. This is the low, baby. Just hold on. You know you can do
it…” Then, before Jimmy has a chance to decide which voice to listen to, a
headline hits:
*SAUDI ARABIA TO CUT OIL PRODUCTION 1M BBL/DAY AS ASIAN
DEMAND FALLS
Boom! Oil spikes back up to $42 and Jimmy cuts the position at flat. He
logs out of his trading software and starts scrolling through Facebook
memes. Needless to say, crude rallies to $44 in a straight line afterwards as
the Saudi news triggers a reassessment of the supply/demand equation.
Jimmy thinks: “I am so glad I held on and ignored my stop loss. That
saved me a lot of money.”
He does not understand bad process / bad decision / good outcome.
A good trader thinks: “Not only did I not follow my process, I failed to
update my view when the headline came out. Instead of following a good
process, I did everything wrong. Sure, I broke even but in the long run I am
going to blow up or bleed out if I keep doing this.
“First, I need to automate my stop losses. My broker has a stop loss
function that works perfectly fine. Second, when news comes out I need to
analyze how it impacts my prior hypothesis, not just get out of the trade
because it’s back to flat. That’s just dumb old reference dependence or
anchoring bias. All I cared about was the level I got into the trade and my
intraday P&L.
I should be making trading decisions based on market factors, not based
on how I feel about my P&L or random, meaningless chart points. I don’t
deserve to be flat on this trade; I deserve to be down a cartload. I will count
my blessings, reduce my risk for a day or two and spend some time working
on my process.” On the flipside, if you do a bunch of analysis on a trade,
execute according to your plan, then get blown out of the water by a
random headline… Don’t feel bad. That’s just trading. Every trade has a
probability of success and failure and unless you are Bobby Axelrod, the
probability of success on a trade is never going to be 100%. As long as you
stick to the plan and manage your risk appropriately, don’t worry about
losing trades. Losing trades are part of the game.
Think forward. Think forward. Think forward.
Spend most of your time thinking about the future path of markets and
how you can predict and capitalize on that path. Spend as little time as
possible thinking about trades that happened earlier today or yesterday or
six weeks ago. The time to look back is when you are consciously in
process-analysis 
mode, 
looking 
thoughtfully 
back 
on 
your 
trades 
and
trading patterns in recent weeks or months. Otherwise, think forward.
Alpha Traders are future-oriented and don’t spend much time on regret.
There is nothing more tedious than a trader that constantly talks about what
he was going to do, or should have done or was DEFINITELY going to do
but then didn’t because his phone rang or he got faked out by the price
action or blah blah blah…
Hindsight Harry is annoying. Nobody likes Hindsight Harry. He bothers
the heck out of the people he talks to because he has a negative mindset that
emphasizes past outcomes when he should be focused on process and the
future. Clear your mind of past trades and focus on the next opportunity.
Good traders thoughtfully review their decisions in quiet moments, long
after the fact. Bad traders say “woulda”, “coulda”, and “shoulda”.
As Don Meredith, the American football announcer and player for the
Dallas Cowboys once said:
If ifs and buts were candy and nuts, we’d all have a Merry Christmas.
53
Healthy skeptic
Healthy skepticism is the ability to question the wisdom of the crowd,
common knowledge, and experts while still maintaining the ability to
incorporate information from respected sources. People sometimes confuse
cynic with skeptic and it is important to know the difference.
The modern definition of cynicism is someone who is bitter, motivated
by 
self-interest 
and/or 
distrustful 
of 
humanity 
in 
general. 
This 
is 
an
unhealthy approach for markets as it leads to a persistently negative,
inflexible, and bearish worldview.
Skeptic comes from the ancient Greek skeptikós, meaning thoughtful,
inquiring or “I consider”. It means someone who requires strong evidence
before accepting a belief or claim. Skepticism is good.
If someone tweets “Stocks are up 11 Mondays in a row!”, the healthy
skeptic reads that tweet, wonders if it’s true, gathers the data and verifies
the claim. Through this investigation, the trader might also discover other
patterns 
in 
the 
data. 
Tuesdays 
are 
up 
even 
more, 
Fridays 
are 
quiet,
Thursdays are busy, etc. A less independent and skeptical thinker retweets
the original (possibly wrong) information and plans to buy stocks at 8 a.m.
on Monday.
When you receive information, greet it with healthy skepticism. Is the
information 
accurate? 
Is 
the 
person 
or 
organization 
disseminating 
the
information biased? Are they always bearish, or frequently too optimistic?
Are they trying to inform their readers, or generate clicks? Alpha traders are
healthy skeptics. They require strong evidence before accepting a claim.
Don’t 
believe 
the 
hype 
on 
CNBC. 
Ignore 
professional 
forecasters.
Doublecheck 
any 
claim 
someone 
makes 
on 
FinTwit. 
Much 
of 
the
“information” out there is biased or wrong.
This concludes our review of the cognitive traits from the first two
columns of the table at the beginning of the chapter. Now we’ll move on to
the third column: Non-cognitive traits.
NON-COGNITIVE TRAITS
While cognitive traits like intelligence, rationality, quantitative skill, and
properly-calibrated confidence are crucial for trading success, there are
many non-cognitive traits that are equally important. Before we dig in, here
is the complete list of traits we will cover:
1. Discipline and self-control
2. Adaptation
3. Courage
4. Self-awareness
5. Ability to handle stress
6. Focus
7. Patience
8. Locus of control
9. Decisiveness
Discipline and self-control
Discipline 
and 
self-control 
are 
facets 
of 
conscientiousness 
and 
are
crucial to trading success. It is easy to learn the rules of trading but if you
don’t 
follow 
them, 
you 
will 
fail. 
Many 
sophisticated, 
intelligent, 
and
knowledgeable traders fail because of poor discipline and bad self-control.
The fight to remain disciplined and fully in control of our actions is one
of the great challenges faced by every human being. We all know that
exercise and a healthy diet will keep us slim and healthy. Most people want
to be slim and healthy. Yet 71.6% of US adults are overweight or obese
54
.
Understanding what needs to be done and doing what needs to be done are
two completely different things.
Self-discipline is the greatest edge in every aspect of life. Health,
fitness, education, career success, productivity, marital longevity, and of
course trading… They all require discipline. Improve your current level of
discipline and you will increase your future levels of happiness and success.
It’s true in life, and in trading.
To start, understand where you are on the continuum of self-control.
What score did you give yourself in the quiz from Chapter 1 (Row G)? If
you are low in this category (as I am), this is the place to focus. The
smartest trader in the world will not succeed if she has terrible self-control.
There are many traits and characteristics and ideas in this book but if
you have a problem with self-discipline, I would make fixing that your first
priority. Take action and learn to become more disciplined. Here are some
suggestions on how to do that.
How to level up your self-discipline:
If you have poor self-discipline, admit it. Then create systems to deal
with it. Too many people just hope they will be stronger and more
disciplined next time instead of creating friction to prevent unwanted
actions, and automating desirable habits.
Outsource discipline as much as possible. For example, every time you
put on a trade, load up an automated stop loss right away. If you have a
team that works for you, keep your hands off the buttons and let them
get you in and out of trades according to parameters you set in
advance. Remember that once you put a trade on, the bias kicks in.
You often start to overthink, overreact, and overanalyze. Stick with the
parameters you selected when you entered, automate or outsource the
stop loss, and take profit so that you do not overtrade.
Create a clear set of risk management rules and keep them as simple as
possible. If you have a daily stop loss of $100,000, it’s easy to know
when you are done for the day. On the other hand, if you use a very
complex set of rules governing your risk management and have no
clear eject button, you are more likely to crash. Always have either a
daily, weekly, or monthly stop loss (or all three) to manage risk of ruin.
Meditate or do yoga. A mind in a state of agitation has less self-control
and less willpower. Learn about mindfulness. Check out
dailystoic.com.
Read books about willpower and self-control. It is a trait that is innate
to some extent but can also be built. Willpower: Rediscovering the
Greatest Human Strength by Roy Baumeister and John Tierney is
excellent, as are The Science of Self-Discipline by Peter Hollins and
The Disciplined Trader by Mark Douglas.
When you are done reading these books, create a short list of
takeaways: two or three actions you plan to take to improve your
process and become more disciplined. Keep things as simple as
possible.
Get a coach. There are many levels of coaching available for traders.
When I worked at a hedge fund, we had a coach that came in once a
month and I found the process useful. I found I did most of the talking
and the coach prompted me and helped me find my way. There are
online trading coaches available too, but do your homework before
hiring someone.
A majority of the trading advice, coaching, lessons, seminars, and
products available online are worse than worthless. They are often scams or
borderline scams, frauds offered up by individuals with marketing, not
trading skills. Good trading coaches have some combination of experience
in psychology, performance science and trading. Do some due diligence
before you hire a trading coach.
Adaptation
Many traders are good in a specific type of market. Some are good
breakout traders, or range traders or flow traders. Maybe they do well when
stocks are falling but not when stocks rally. Some traders were great before
the algos but have no idea how to trade algo-driven markets. The challenge
is that markets are always changing. If you’re really good at one type of
market, it is almost guaranteed you will be a dinosaur at some point.
Adaptation is such an important part of long-term trading success that I
devoted an entire chapter to it. See Chapter 14 for a full discussion of why
and how excellent traders adapt.
Courage (but not recklessness)
Good trading requires courage. You need to be able to put on positions
that go against what common knowledge, media hype and the smart guy on
TV are saying. You need to take positions big enough that they make you
feel legitimately at risk if things go wrong. You need to be able to drive the
car fast enough to win the Grand Prix… But not so fast you slam into the
wall.
Optimal risk appetite is the narrow balancing point between tight,
riskaverse white-knuckling and sloppy overtrading. There is no such thing
as a perfect trade. When you see a setup that looks amazing, commit the
maximum capital possible under your risk management framework.
I use a three-level system for conviction and risk allocation. We will go
in depth on sizing and conviction in Chapter 11 but for now just know that
when it comes to your highest conviction trades, you should have enough
risk on to make you feel uncomfortable, but not out of control. The biggest
size you think is still rational, whether or not that makes your knees weak.
If it makes your knees wobble a bit but the math is rational, that’s perfect.
Varying bet size when huge opportunities come along
is an important determinant of trading success.
Changing bet size is the way card counters beat the dealer in blackjack.
They look for opportunities with abnormally good odds and then make
large bets on those events. Obviously the big difference with trading is that
you don’t know the odds of any trade, you can only estimate them. But if
you see a trade that you believe has a 90% chance of success and a payout
of 2 : 1… You need the courage to bet big.
Good traders understand the importance of varying bet size based on
opportunity, market volatility and their current performance. Bad traders
always trade the same position size regardless of the opportunity set,
volatility or P&L.
Remember, there is a continuum from chicken to crazy. You need to be
courageous, but not reckless. Risk of ruin is the number one risk to manage
— not risk of missing out. Not risk of falling behind budget or benchmark.
Not risk of underperforming the guy next to you.
Take meaningful, courageous risk but never look into the abyss.
Note that risk appetite for an individual is not constant. Many traders
behave differently under different conditions. Here are three effects that
influence trader risk appetite:
1. Zero-bound effect. Traders that are down on the year tend to trade
more nervously than traders who are up. If you are up $4 million on
the year and drop to $2.5 million (a loss of $1.5 million), that will
feel different than going from plus $1 million to minus $500,000.
You need to have the courage to take smart risk, even when you are
down.
2. End-of-period effect. Traders tend to take less risk at the end of the
year. If a trader has had a good year, they want to bank it. If they
have had a bad year, they don’t want to make it worse. This effect is
why most hedge funds will not pay out more than once per year.
Hedge funds that institute twice-yearly payouts find that trader risk
appetite 
drops 
in 
both 
June 
and 
December, 
instead 
of 
just 
in
December.
3. House money effect. Traders that are massively profitable in a given
period will tend to take on extra risk. This is known as the house
money effect, a bias that shows up in both experimental and real-
world 
settings. 
The 
house 
money 
effect 
is 
especially 
strong
immediately after large gains, and then it dissipates over time.
HOW IS YOUR RISK APPETITE?
How did you score yourself on the continuum from “Risk Averse” to
“Sometimes Reckless” in the Chapter 1 quiz (row A)? If you scored 7 or 8
you are probably in the sweet spot. Below seven, you are probably not
taking enough risk and could be trading below potential. 9 or 10? You may
well be overtrading or pushing too hard.
Here is a quick discussion of different risk appetite scores, what they
mean, and how to address problems related to specific ranges. I suggest you
read all the sections, regardless of your risk appetite score, because there
are tips and anecdotes in each section that apply to everyone.
Risk appetite score: 1-4
Risk averse trader
More traders than you would expect fall into the 1-4 range. That’s OK!
You can still succeed in trading if you are risk averse. But don’t be in
denial. Be self-aware and be honest about your score. A score between 1
and 4 signals you are a risk averse trader. Even if your risk appetite score is
higher than four, please read this section.
The risk averse trader:
Is afraid to lose money. It is impossible to trade successfully if you are
afraid of losing money. You will always be weak. If your fear comes
from within, you need to work on it. If your fear comes from
inadequate capitalization, the irony is this: your fear of losing money
means you are going to lose all your money. Wait until you are
adequately capitalized and find another source of income until then.
Traders with too little capital end up gambling. The biggest real risk in
trading is that you will lose money. You need to understand and accept
this risk before you can have any chance of success as a professional.
Has trouble pulling the trigger.
Always looks for the perfect trade.
Needs many things to align before trading.
Often feels much more comfortable having the same position as
manager or peers. Rarely takes the opposite position.
Looks for an excuse to take off a trade as soon as she puts it on. She
will say things like “It should have gone up by now”, “It’s not trading
well”, “I don’t like the price action” or “This idea isn’t working” even
when the security has barely moved. She will take a tiny loss or tiny
profit using any possible excuse because fundamentally she is risk
averse and her subconscious would prefer not to have the position (or
any position)! There is a difference between taking risk and putting on
positions. If you are always on edge the second you put on a position,
you need to think about how to develop staying power. See the tips
below.
Tips for risk averse traders
First of all, plenty of good traders are risk averse. They have many of
the skills necessary to succeed in trading, and this is their main weakness. It
is not the hardest weakness to overcome, but it requires a short list of rules
that must be followed religiously:
1. Set a minimum risk size for every trade. With aggressive traders,
you are more worried about maximum dollars at risk. With risk
averse traders, you need to set minimums. Much as there is a speed
limit on every highway, there is also a lesser-known minimum speed
on 
many 
roads. 
If 
you 
are 
trading 
from 
home 
with 
a 
$50,000
account, risking $100 to make $200 is not going to move the needle.
In that example, a trader could set a minimum of at least $500 of risk
per trade, $1,000 if it’s a high-quality idea. Minimum risk amounts
ensure that you extract maximum value from your good ideas.
Be thoughtful about what is a reasonable minimum. If you are a bank
trader trying to make $10,000,000 of alpha in a year, risking $30,000
to make $50,000 is a waste of time unless you can find many of these
trades each day. Reverse-engineer your minimum $ at risk per trade
using your monthly or yearly P&L objective.
Here is an example. You are trading from home and want to make
$250,000 next year. You make money 50% of days and lose money
50% of days. Your average winning day is 1.6X your average losing
day. Toss this into a spreadsheet and keep changing the “average
winning day” amount until the year total is $250,000. That gives you
a starting point for how much risk you will need to take.
This concept can also be relevant to traders with high risk
appetite scores. When I first worked at a hedge fund, I felt like a kid
in a candy store because instead of just FX, I was able to trade every
financial market under the sun. I could trade oil, wheat, bonds and
whatever else I wanted.
At first, this led me to dabble in many markets. It was a great
learning 
experience, 
but 
I 
found 
that 
I 
did 
a 
poor 
job 
of 
risk
managing trades in secondary markets because they were much
smaller than my core trades. I would risk $300,000 on an FX trade,
but I might only risk $50,000 on an oil trade at first, because I felt I
didn’t know the market as well.
Thus, when an oil trade went against me, I would tend to show poor
discipline because the P&L impact was minimal. I would drag my
stop lower or even just cancel it because the losses didn’t really hurt.
In contrast, when a trade went my way, I had trouble taking profit at
my target because the gain didn’t feel big enough.
I might say to myself: “Man, that was a great idea, but I only made
$65,000. Not even worth the mental capital. Maybe I can stretch it to
$100,000 and at least make it worth the effort.” Needless to say, after
hitting the target, oil would reverse and I would cut at a small loss.
My trading in these products improved substantially when I set risk
minimums for non-core markets. Instead of dabbling in oil or silver
or other futures, I would only enter if I had a strong view and was
willing to take meaningful risk (say $200,000 or more if my normal
risk size in FX was $300,000). This ensured:
a. 
High 
conviction 
before 
entering 
a 
secondary 
market 
because
meaningful capital was at stake; and
b. proper attention to the position and rigorous risk management since
the position was big enough to matter, meaning
c. no too-small positions in non-core markets to distract or waste
mental capital.
2. Do not take off a trade until the stop loss, take profit, or some
other predetermined reassessment trigger is hit. I will explain the
meaning of “reassessment trigger” throughout this book. The risk
averse trader sees danger at every corner and is consciously or
subconsciously looking for excuses to end the discomfort of being in
a trade and get back to the relaxed state of flat. Remember: to be an
Alpha 
Trader, 
you 
need 
to 
be 
OK 
with 
feeling 
uncomfortable
sometimes.
If you are a risk averse trader (or you are managing a risk averse
trader) simply institute a rule. When you put on a trade, list the
reasons you will take it off: stop loss or take profit hit (of course).
Time triggers are fine, as long as they are determined ahead of time.
For example: I will reassess at 4 p.m. today (if it’s a day trade) or at 3
p.m. Friday (if it’s a multi-day trade). These are called reassessment
triggers
55
.
All reassessment triggers should be determined ahead of time. Any
other reason to take off a trade is not acceptable. It looks bid! It’s not
going 
down! 
Some 
other 
market 
just 
blipped 
higher 
so 
I 
got
nervous… etc. These are not good reasons to reduce risk.
Once you take a position, you are a gigantic drooling bias monster.
Your weaknesses are multiplied by ten when you are in a trade. Set
specific rules that will restrict your actions when the inevitable
discomfort kicks in. Learn to live with the discomfort. That’s what
real risk feels like. Have courage. Stop white-knuckling every trade.
Put the trade on and let it cook. Do not take it off until one of your
ex-ante triggers hits.
3. Use trade quotas. Set a number of trades that you plan to do in a
given period and stick to it. Your first instinct might be: “What if
there 
are 
not 
that 
many 
opportunities?” 
There 
are 
always
opportunities. If they are only lower conviction opportunities, then
just size them appropriately.
The quota you set for yourself is highly contingent on your trading
style, but if you are a short-term trader (but not a day trader or high-
frequency trader), you might set a minimum of three trades per week.
This forces you to get engaged and take risk, even when you are
uncomfortable doing so. Sure, it might put you in a few lower EV
trades, but the tradeoff is necessary to ensure you don’t spend too
much time underinvested on the sidelines.
A basketball player who always waits for the perfect shot might
shoot 100% from the field and score 4 points per game. That is not
good! As a coach, you want that player to take 15 shots and miss 5
(and thus score ~20 points). Traders who are risk averse do not take
enough shots, so implementing a quota forces them to find a better
place on the continuum
56
.
Risk appetite score: 5-7
Moderate risk trader
If you gave yourself a 5, 6 or 7 on the continuum of risk averse to risk
seeking, you can probably up your game. Your risk aversion is not a
weakness, but you might be able to stretch yourself a bit and avoid an early
career plateau.
In the early 2000s, I worked for a bank that was generally risk averse.
They ran a risk business model that is surprisingly common in banks: “take
risk, but don’t lose money”. This is the optimal business model for a
manager that wants to protect the bank but also allow for a bit of upside if
trading conditions are optimal. This same business model is employed by
many pod-based hedge funds. If you have 100 traders all working with very
tight stops but some of those traders are still able to generate 20% returns in
a year, the overall returns and Sharpe ratio of the hedge fund will be
outstanding.
Some traders detest this business model because it makes them nervous.
Taking risk without losing money sounds like an oxymoron. It really isn’t.
It just means that you need to behave like a call option. Take as much risk
as you want when you are profitable, but play extremely tight when you are
not. This is the logical approach for any conservative senior manager who
views the traders working for him as a portfolio. It is a good business model
even if it’s not the most fun one to work in for traders with very strong risk
appetite.
The moderate risk taker thrives in that sort of model because they
deliver 
exactly 
what 
management 
wants: 
decent 
upside 
with 
limited
downside. I have generally been fairly flexible in my approach but I
definitely have concluded that this is the optimal strategy for most traders.
Increase your risk when you have a strong P&L base and decrease your risk
when you are near or below zero. This substantially reduces risk of ruin,
allows for the right tail, and offers you the best chance at long-term success.
The trader with risk appetite in the 5-7 range struggles to produce the
right tail of the distribution though, because they will more likely be
satisfied once they hit their budget or goal. This is the kind of trader I was,
when I worked at the generally risk-averse bank I mentioned. If my budget
was $5 million and I got there eight months into the year, I was encouraged
to “bank it” or “ring the register” or “take it easy into year end.”
This makes sense on some level but greatly reduces your ability to see
what kind of trader you can be, because despite the risks of the house
money effect, most traders are at their best when they have a big base of
P&L to work with but can remain patient and on the lookout for great
opportunities worthy of a big bet.
Given the incentives and guidance from management, at that bank I
acted like a trader with risk appetite of 5-7 even though my true risk
appetite is much higher. High enough that it tends to be a weakness when
I’m not at my best.
When I went to Lehman Brothers in 2006, I had a great start to the year.
My budget was $6 million and I was up more than that by March. I went to
my boss at the time and asked him how he felt I should proceed. I gave him
the explanation of how things went at my last job and how they would tell
me to “take it easy” once I hit my budget. Steam came out of his ears.
“No way, dude! This your chance to see what kind of trader you are!
You have six million dollars in the bank! Set a stop loss at three million and
go turn that six into ten.”
I sat there thinking for a bit and he waved me out of his office.
“Go! Go make money!”
That year I made $50 million dollars and I am forever thankful to that
manager for teaching me that lesson. The lesson was not: “You have money
in the bank so go gamble it.” The lesson was: “When you are in a strong
capital position with chunky P&L, increase your risk in a methodical way
and try to blow through the ceiling. The time to go for it is not January 1;
the time to go for it is when you have money in the bank and markets are
full of opportunity.”
When you take this approach, it is crucial that you remain aware of
downside and drawdown. Set a point at which you will go back to a more
defensive approach. In the case outlined above, I was up $6 million and set
my “go back to defensive” level at +$3m. This gives you ammo to push
hard when you’re doing well but also defines your downside so you don’t
just blow through all the money you’ve made.
This idea of pushing hard when you are in a strong position is 100%
contingent on the opportunity set. You don’t push just because you’re doing
well. You push because you’re doing well and there are great opportunities.
Wait, wait, wait… Then pounce. Traders with risk appetite scores in the
5 to 7 range need permission and opportunity to push hard when they are
doing well. If you are managing a trader like this… Push them to push
themselves. Ask them: “Do you want to see what kind of trader you can be?
This is your chance.”
If you scored between 5 and 7 on risk appetite, here are some things to
try:
As described above: When you reach a P&L threshold where you
would have been satisfied in the past (e.g., at budget, above budget,
best YTD ever and it’s only August…) don’t look at it as an
opportunity to chill. Think about an amount you could lose that would
still leave you in a strong position. If your budget was $4 million and
you are up $3 million in April, for example. Say to yourself: I’m going
to wait for a really good opportunity or series of opportunities, and
trade extra aggressively until I draw back down to $2 million. In other
words, I’m going to be very aggressive with $1 million of my P&L if I
see trades I believe in.
If you draw back down to $2 million, reset and slow down. But if you
are able to risk that $1 million to make $3 million, suddenly you find
yourself up $6 million and it’s still only June!you draw back down to
$2 million, reset and slow
To be 100% clear: this is not mindlessly doubling down at a casino
because you have seventeen black chips in your pocket. This is
increasing your bet size on high odds opportunities because you have
the capital to do so. This is how you generate outsized returns without
risk of ruin.
No matter what type of trader you are, there will not be an infinite
number of years where you start the year very strong and the trading
environment is favorable. When the stars align like this, be
courageous. Go for it. If you draw down to your predetermined point,
that’s OK. Trading is about risk. Sometimes you’ll be wrong and you
will lose. That’s trading. Then you hunker down and start building up
the P&L again.
Another thing to try if you are in the 5 to 7 range and have been doing
OK: Increase all your risk parameters by a fairly small increment, say
20%. If you are normally trading 200 e-minis, go to 240. If you are a
home trader risking 1% of capital as your daily stop loss, increase it to
1.2% of capital. If you are a bank trader who usually trades 20 million
EURUSD, try 24 million. This is something you should do when you
are confident and trading well. Incremental risk increases break you
out of the habit of sizing your positions the same all the time.
Many traders establish a comfort level and standard position size and
never move away from it. If you work at a hedge fund, you are often
forced to change position size as your capital increases. But if you
work at a bank or at home, you can feasibly trade the exact same
position size for years at a time. To grow, you need to keep gradually
increasing risk until you either hit capacity constraints (a significant
problem when it happens, but not a concern for 95% of traders) or
until you reach the maximum allowable position for your capital base.
Position sizing is discussed in Chapter 11.
Depending on your capital base, you may already be running the
largest possible positions given your risk framework. If you are a
home-based trader with a $1m account and you’ve determined that 3%
of capital is the right daily stop loss for you, and you’re hitting your
stop loss once a week, that’s too much. If you hit it once per year, you
are probably too risk averse. Your variance is probably too low and
you can up your risk.
Trading is always a tension between taking the most possible risk to
make the most possible money when you are right, and taking small
enough risk that you don’t blow yourself up when you hit a string of
bad ideas. Think about where you are on this continuum. Most traders
that I have seen could take more risk. Some (including myself ) would
do better if they took less. And that brings us to the other end of the
risk appetite spectrum.
Risk appetite score: 8-9
Strong risk appetite
A trader with a risk appetite score of 8 or 9 has the most upside but also
requires more supervision and has more downside risk than a trader with a
lower score. I would say the sweet spot for risk appetite is somewhere in the
7.5 to 8.0 area, though traders with very high scores, when harnessed, can
deliver 
blockbuster 
returns. 
Then 
again, 
they 
can 
be 
scary 
to 
watch
sometimes.
A trader with strong risk appetite needs rules. If you are in this category,
develop specific but simple rules to regulate your desire to take risk.
All of the following limits should be clearly defined and deemed to be
unbreakable:
1. Maximum daily, monthly, and yearly loss. This can be a formula
based on total capital and current P&L. Depending on trading style,
the liquidity of products traded, and time horizon, daily stops are not
appropriate 
for 
all 
traders. 
There 
is 
a 
full 
discussion 
of 
risk
management in Chapter 11.
2. Permitted products and strategies. Can a hedge fund PM sell volatility
with unlimited downside, for example? Can a home day trader short
low-priced stocks? Can an FX trader take a position in a pegged or
managed Asian currency?
Depending on where you trade, this question may not be relevant. It
is an esoteric question that does not come up all that often, but can be
the difference between blowing up and not blowing up.
Many of the blowups that I have witnessed first-hand have been the
result of trades where the trader never should have been trading that
product in the first place. Hedge fund managers risking 24 basis
points to make 1 on Bank of Canada day. Retail day traders going
short a thinly-traded biopharma stock. Option traders selling topside
USDCNH volatility. Retail FX punters going long EURCHF at
1.2010. These are all blowups caused by traders dealing in products
that they never should have touched.
If you are day trading from home, what stocks are fair game? The
way you answer this question might be the difference between long-
term success and instant, nuclear devastation of your trading account.
See GameStop shorts, for example.
3. Maximum position size by product.
4. Value 
at 
risk 
(VAR) 
or 
stress-test 
P&L. These 
are 
higher-level
frameworks used at banks and hedge funds, but both methods have
many issues when applied in real life. If you trade from home, don’t
worry about VAR, it’s a tool used by institutions. Some problems
with VAR and stress testing:
» VAR often depends on historical volatility which is not always a
good predictor of future volatility.
» Stress tests can overweight rare events and ignore the fact that stop
losses are effective loss control mechanisms in liquid markets. For
example, stress-testing the P&L of 50 million USDJPY against five
years of data might show a maximum possible loss of 500 pips or
$2.5 million (approx.) but a stop loss will protect a disciplined
trader from anywhere near that large of a loss.
» VAR and stress testing often rely on historical correlation which is
backward-looking and unstable.
This book is for active, short-term traders attempting to generate
alpha. It is not meant to address carry, short volatility, rolldown,
basis, and other trading strategies that involve convex and non-linear
payout structures.
5. Cooling off levels. If a trader draws down X from high water or over-
earns by Y, she should enter a two or three day cooling off period.
During cooling off periods, all risk is cut in half. This helps stabilize
P&L after weak periods and avoids winner’s tilt after strong periods.
If a trader has enough experience, P&L history, and self-awareness to
know she does not suffer from winner’s tilt or overconfidence after
very strong periods, the topside cooling off levels can be excluded.
Cooling off levels are different from stop losses on the downside as
they 
relate 
more 
to 
bad 
streaks 
and 
drawdown 
from 
peak, 
not
absolute levels of P&L.
Risk appetite score: 10
Too much risk appetite
If you gave yourself a score of 10 on risk appetite, you need to be
careful. You are probably in the sensation-seeking, trading-for-excitement,
or gambling category. Trading can be a lot like gambling (if you want it to
be) 
and 
it 
has 
similar 
dopamine 
payoffs 
if 
you 
have 
an 
addictive
personality. Along with the rules I listed above, traders with a risk appetite
score of 10 need to honestly analyze their motivation for trading and be
self-aware enough to know whether they are acting more like finance
professionals or gambling addicts.
Traders on the extreme end of the risk-taking spectrum use trading as
another method of sensation seeking. This is not good. We will talk much
more about trading for fun (instead of profit) in Chapter 7. That ends this
discussion on risk appetite. Now let’s go back to the non-cognitive traits
that define the Alpha Trader.
Decisiveness
Good traders are decisive. I want to acknowledge here I know there is
overlap between many of the traits I describe in this section. In fact, as I
stated much earlier, most of them fall under the Big Five psychological trait
of conscientiousness. Risk appetite, courage and decisiveness are all similar
personality facets. I could have lumped them all under risk appetite but I
want to dig deeper and unpack some subtle distinctions.
So yes, decisiveness is like courage and risk appetite, but here I mean it
more as the specific ability to press buttons once you have an idea. Trigger
happy vs. gun shy. Do you find it easy to put on a trade once you have a
good idea? Or do you hesitate? Does this hesitation lead to worse entry
points 
and 
tactical 
weakness, 
or 
is 
it 
healthy 
calibration 
and 
impulse
control? If you gave yourself a 10 out of 10 score on decisiveness, there is a
good chance you are too impulsive, overconfident, or both.
Here is how I would describe the continuum from decisive (10) to hesitant
(1):
9-10 Probably trigger happy. Risk of overconfident and impulsive
trading. If it is too easy to decide and pull the trigger every time,
perhaps you need to hesitate a bit more? Most likely you should filter
out some trades and focus on your best ideas. Decisiveness is great
but think about whether it is possible you are too decisive. Maybe
you need to filter your ideas a bit more and either reduce your
number of trades or at least be sure to size your best trades much
larger than the others.
Traders with a score of 9 or 10 in decisiveness probably have a hard
time ignoring random headlines and feel the urge to trade on every
bit of news. “News” sounds a lot like “noise”.
7-8 The sweet spot. Decisive but still cautious enough to understand
that not every shiny object has value. Able to hit the buttons when a
headline comes out but also able to not hit the buttons.
5-7 Probably a bit too hesitant but still nothing to worry about. Think
about whether you are waffling on good ideas. What exactly do you
need to get over the line and put on a trade? Are you waiting for
confirmation from others? When you come up with a trade idea, do
you feel better if you run it past a few other traders before executing?
Try not to look for validation from others. Own your ideas and
remember that if other people agree with your idea, that does not
necessarily make it better. It may mean it’s a popular idea with less
upside than a unique or contrary idea that nobody likes.
1-4 Too hesitant. You are probably leaving good trades and good
money on the table as you fail to pull the trigger. Force yourself to do
a certain number of trades per day or per week as described in my
quota system earlier. This takes away the should I / shouldn’t I
hesitation because knowing you have to do X trades this week, the
decision has already been made. The question then just becomes
which trades to do, not whether to trade.
Another exercise to help short-term traders get more comfortable
hitting 
the 
buttons 
and 
trading 
more 
frequently 
(and 
with 
less
hesitation) is to make markets. If you are a day trader at home, put a
small bid and a small offer in the same stock, 3 cents apart. When
both sides trade, do it again. Set a stop loss in case it blows through
one side of your price and keep putting in two-way prices for an hour
or so. This is also a good way to get quicker on the keys if that is
relevant to your trading style (if you trade headlines, for example).
Finally, get a trading coach. This does not have to be a huge financial
or time commitment. You can meet a trading coach once per month
and communicate with him by email once a week. Talking out loud
about trading-related issues can be valuable. Thoughts buzz around
in your head and sometimes make sense and sometimes do not. A
conversation can help you identify and unpack the issues that cause
your hesitation.
While trading coaches often have a psychology background, the most
important part of talking to a trading coach is the talking, not the
psychology 
expertise. 
Putting 
your 
thoughts, 
concerns 
and
weaknesses out in the open often clarifies them and will help you
deal with them. A co-worker or experienced trader you know can
most likely offer nearly as much help as a trained psychologist. That
has been my experience anyway.
Self-awareness
Part of the intent of this book is to make you more self-aware and more
honest about your strengths and weaknesses as a trader. There is no shame
in having low scores on some dimensions. Nobody possesses all positive
characteristics in abundance. Better to admit that you are risk averse and
trade accordingly than pretend your name is Gordon Gekko or Dollar Bill.
The number one way to build and cultivate self-awareness is to
maintain a trading journal.
This is such a cliché of trading advice. That’s because it’s true. You can
journal individual trades or individual days or just sporadic thoughts. Keep
a document or spreadsheet open in the background and note what you are
doing.
I will tell you this up front: keeping a journal is a tough habit to
maintain. It’s a huge pain in the butt and two things tend to happen. Either:
A) You start trading really well and you get in the zone and you can’t be
bothered updating your journal because you feel like a trading God or
B) You keep losing money and you get worn down and the last thing
you want to do is spend 20 minutes journaling what happened because all
you really want to do is bolt out of the office and go meet some friends for a
G&T.
It is extremely difficult to maintain a trading journal habit but it is worth
it. And just because it is difficult, that is no excuse not to do it. Very few
highly-productive habits are easy to maintain. Remember that if trading was
easy, it would not pay so well.
One trick that works for any difficult-to-maintain habit like lifting
weights or not smoking or keeping a trading journal is to find a partner who
wants to do the same thing. If you promise to exchange one paragraph a day
with a friend, you are not just letting yourself down if you get lazy, you are
letting down your friend as well.
If you think “I’m going to go lift weights today at 10 a.m.”, that is much
less powerful than setting an appointment to meet your friend and lift
weights at 10 a.m. Most people find it easier to let themselves down and
will work harder to do the right thing for a friend (or acquaintance for that
matter).
This can also be handled with a professional trading coach. On the most
basic level, a trading coach can simply be there to help enforce your daily
regimen. Like a personal trainer, a coach can keep you on track and help
you enforce the good habits that you don’t quite have the willpower to
enforce yourself. This section is about self-awareness: if you know you are
not good at forming strong habits, find a way to get one paragraph of
journaling out every day. Somehow. Some way.
A trading journal helps you keep track of emotions, bias, themes, and
thoughts. There are many ways that a journal can help you. It can take two
basic forms. One is a trade-by-trade journal. If you are new to trading, I
recommend 
this 
approach. 
A 
free 
form 
approach 
is 
fine 
for 
more
experienced traders but a more granular system will help new traders collect
more data.
The more data you collect, the more likely you will learn something
from your journal. Think about areas where you know you are weak and see
if you can come up with data that might reveal your progress in that area.
Here’s a sample trading journal in a spreadsheet:
I have formatted the information to fit it on the page here but in real life
I record each trade across a huge row in Excel. This makes it is easier to
process the data later. For example, you can calculate the average length of
time you are in a trade, or see whether you stick to your stop losses or not
by creating simple formulas below the final row.
In this example, you see a frequent problem that many traders have:
This trader put the trade on looking for USDCAD to go to 1.3950. But
when it ripped higher from 1.3460 to 1.3650 in just one day, he took profit
because it felt like “too much, too fast”. He didn’t stick to his plan. Instead
he should have done one of the following:
a) Trailed his stop loss up. We will talk more about this in the chapter
on risk management. It can be a good strategy, but it also has
downside.
b) Stayed with his original plan. This is usually the best course of
action. Before you put the trade on, you were a sober tactician.
Once you have the risk and the market is flying higher, you are an
emotional human being who does not want to give back a huge
profit. If you always cut your winners prematurely, the risk/reward
ratio you think you are using is inaccurate. If you risk 1 to make 2
at inception, but then cut half way to your take profit all the time,
your real risk/ reward is 1 : 1. That is why there are boxes for
reward vs. risk at both inception and exit. You need to keep track
of whether you are sticking with your ideas or jumping out of good
trades too early.
c) Sold one third or half of the position and let the rest ride. This can
be a good way of dealing with your desire to cut. Can you reduce
just 33% of the risk and at least make yourself feel better?
A trading journal is the most direct route to trading self-awareness.
Ideas become concrete when you write them down. By recording each trade
along with a rationale and thought process, you can pick up on recurring
errors, problems, or leaks in your trading.
Thoughts are abstract and fuzzy. Writing is concrete and solid.
Often, the process of writing things down will bring out new ideas and
thoughts, and will lead to different results. As Daniel Boorstin once said: “I
write to discover what I think.” 
57
Sit down and do a deep dive into your trading journal every month or
so. See if you can find meaningful takeaways. For example:
Do you stick to your plan? Does your risk/reward at inception come
close to your actual risk/reward. If not, why?
Are there any consistent features of your good or bad trades?
» Time horizon
» Asset class
» Conviction level
Did you hit your stop loss more often than usual? This might be a sign
that your positions are too big or the volatility regime has changed and
you have not adapted.
Once you have your takeaways, set one goal (or two at most) to address
a leak or issue you have discovered. I am a big believer in working on just
one or two measurable and achievable goals at a time. Let me explain.
When I was a senior manager at a bank, we used a formal corporate
goal-setting system and usually it allowed for somewhere between five and
fifteen goals to be entered. I found that was just way too many goals for me
to supervise or coach as a leader and way too many goals for an employee
to manage as an individual.
I eventually instituted my own “One Goal” system. I told the people that
worked for me that all those goals in the corporate system were great, but
all I cared about was their one most important goal. I asked them to e-mail
me that goal and explain why it was important and how they planned to
achieve it. This was effective. I saw much more impact from this One Goal
system than I ever saw from more formalized, multi-goal systems.
So… After 
reviewing 
your 
trading 
journal, 
come 
up 
with 
a 
goal.
Something fairly short-term (a few months at most). Another feature of
good goals is that they are specific, and not too long-term. If you can set a
goal that covers the next month or two, that is much easier to achieve.
You are more likely to succeed with a goal like “I will not drink any
soda for the next month” than with “I’m never going to drink soda again.”
Chunking into smaller, achievable, and short-term goals develops habits
and process that will lead to achievement of bigger-picture, longer-term
goals.
Here are a few hypothetical examples of useful takeaways or goals that
might emerge after you analyze your trading journal:
No S&P futures trades for 30 days. All the money I make in other
assets, I give back with my irresistible urge to go short S&Ps!
My trading journal entries are much more emotional than usual.
Tighten daily stop loss to $15,000. My normal stop is $30,000 but I
have been trading badly and I know I’m in a weird state of mind
because my Dad is really sick.
No trades between noon and 3 p.m. Those trades hit 35% of the time
vs. 57% of all trades initiated outside that time frame.
One of the easiest ways to lose money in trading is by hitting buttons
somewhat randomly in response to stimulation from noisy price movement.
This sort of thing:
{TSLA RALLIES FROM $444 TO $449}
“Tesla’s rallying! Something must be going on. Whoa, it’s breaking
$450! There must be news out.”
{TRADER BUYS 300 SHARES AT $450.70. THE HIGH IS $450.85. THE
STOCK FADES DOWN TO $450.10.}
“Hmmm. It’s losing momentum.”
{TRADER FRANTICALLY SCROLLS THROUGH TWITTER LOOKING
FOR POSITIVE TESLA HEADLINES. TSLA DRIFTS BACK DOWN TO
$449.00}
“Crap. That was dumb.”
{TRADER SELLS AT $448.60 FOR A LOSS OF $2.10 PER SHARE}
If you update your trading journal with every trade in real-time, it is less
likely you will put on pointless trades like the one above. First of all, as you
fill in your trade journal in real-time you will realize you have nothing to
put in the “Rationale” box. Ummm… Because it was going up?? Because I
thought there might be a headline? Because: FOMO? Second, once you are
in the habit of completing your trading journal, you will become rooted in a
process 
where 
you 
already 
know 
you 
need 
a 
decent 
rationale 
before
entering a trade.
When you know you need a decent rationale to enter in your trade
journal, that tightens up your filter. You avoid dumb noise trades because
you know as you move your hands toward the buttons that there is no good
rationale. You don’t hit BUY or SELL, because you have developed good
discipline.
Knowing that you are going to record every trade in a trading journal
makes you more selective and logical when trading. You are less likely to
hit buttons for no good reason and get sucked in by the deafening noise. It
also boosts your confidence once you are in the trade because you have
clearly laid out your reasoning, and it is solid.
Everything in your head is abstract. There is a ton of noise in there.
Multiple competing voices with logic, ego, mental shortcuts, bias, memory,
and emotion, all competing for airtime. When you record a plan, you filter
out the noise and distill the logical output.
The Alpha Trader always has a plan.
A trading journal is not the only way to build self-awareness. Here are
some other methods:
1. Step outside yourself. This sounds a bit weird and self-helpy, but it can
be a powerful way to up your self-awareness. Sit there, quiet your mind and
imagine your rational self, standing right next you. What do they think of
your trading right now? This is a way of shutting down System 1 (gut) and
activating System 2 (logic). When you ask, “What would my rational self
think?”, you break through the storm and noise of swirling thoughts and
focus on the logical. This is especially important for active traders, because
rapid 
trading 
activity 
is 
more 
likely 
to 
be 
driven 
by 
quick 
decisions
influenced by emotion and bias.
The key here is to slow things down and observe yourself and your
actions rationally. If you identify a mistake, correct it as quickly as possible
without much further thought. Seeing yourself making a mistake is step
one, but then you need to take action and correct it. I have literally said out
loud: “I know this is a mistake, but I’m doing it anyway,” as I press buttons
to enter a trade. I showed good self-awareness there, I guess, but it is clearly
not good enough to simply identify a mistaken action. One needs to stop it
before it happens.
You need to have the self-control and willpower to take over when you
see your dumb brain doing something suboptimal. Your dumb brain is the
one that wants to yell “squirrel!” when it sees a squirrel. Your smart brain is
the one that resists impulses and takes control. Try to be aware of the
different layers of thought that go on in your mind and notice repeating
patterns such as the urge to:
Buy something just because it’s going up.
Do a trade because you are bored.
Exit a good position because it’s not moving.
Cut a position because you don’t like the price action.
When you are self-aware, you understand the many pieces that make up
the 
mental 
puzzle. 
You 
are 
part 
intelligent, 
rational 
thinker 
and 
part
impulsive, jumpy, fight-or-flight lizard. Know when your smart brain is in
control, and notice yourself acting irrational and dumb. Comment on it.
Then grab the steering wheel. Sorry dumb brain, you’re not taking me
where I want to go. Move over, I’m driving.
2. Think about your motivations. This is another way of building self-
awareness. Human beings are driven by incentives. What motivates you to
succeed? The most reliable motivation is a strong internal desire to achieve.
External motivations like money, proving yourself or outperforming the guy
that sits next to you will not lead you to the promised land. This is well-
known 
in 
education 
circles. 
Intrinsic 
motivation 
crushes 
extrinsic
motivation.
In other words: are you trading because you enjoy it, you want to win,
and/ or it satisfies you intellectually? Or are you trading to get rich? This is
a complex question given the instant feedback and direct monetary rewards
of successful trading. Research shows that if you dream of being rich… No
matter how rich you get, you will always wish you were richer. So,
pursuing money for the sake of money is a pointless goal.
There is a concept known as the hedonic treadmill which states that as a
human being earns more money, his desires and expectations rise in tandem
so that no amount of wealth will lead to greater happiness. Research shows
this 
to 
be 
generally 
true. 
Once 
someone 
makes 
enough 
money 
to
comfortably acquire shelter, clothing, food, and health care (annual income
somewhere around $75,000 to $125,000 per year in most parts of the
United States), additional increases in income do not increase happiness
much.
Harvard’s Study of Adult Development followed the lives of hundreds
of people over eight decades and found the happiest people were the ones
that had the strongest and most durable relationships with community,
family, and friends. Relationships predict longevity and happiness better
than money, intelligence, or fame.
Making ten million dollars is not going to make you happy on its own.
But if you truly love trading… It might! You should (generally) enjoy the
process and act of trading. You should find it intellectually stimulating,
exciting and (sometimes) fun. You should look forward to going to work
most days. If you don’t, you are doing it wrong. Here is a quote from one of
the great books on self-awareness: Eckhart Tolle’s The Power of Now.
See if you can catch yourself complaining, in either speech or thought,
about a situation you find yourself in, what other people do or say, your
surroundings, your life situation, even the weather. To complain is always
nonacceptance of what is. It invariably carries an unconscious negative
charge. When you complain, you make yourself into a victim. When you
speak out, you are in your power. So change the situation by taking action
or by speaking out if necessary or possible; leave the situation or accept
it. All else is madness.
I highly recommend The Power of Now. The book is not directly related
to trading, but it does offer insight on mental skills that help with good
trading and good thinking. Specifically, the book (as you might guess from
the title) is about a focus on the present, the now. Good traders don’t get
mired in what ifs. They trade the market one day at a time and do not waste
finite mental energy on thoughts of past outcomes or fears of an uncertain
future.
Trading is not life or death. If you fail, you will learn and the sun will
rise 
tomorrow. 
This 
is 
not 
emergency 
heart 
surgery 
where 
failure 
is
catastrophic. Maintain perspective. If you spend a stretch of more than 18
months of trading where you are mostly miserable, I would think about
finding another role or another career. Trading is not just about P&L. It is
also about learning, personal growth, self-discovery, and self-improvement.
Focus as much as possible on self-improvement and process development—
let the money take care of itself.
For the record, I have found myself miserable on several occasions and
for me it has always been about the role, not the career. If you work in an
unpleasant setting; if you work for a manager that does not respect you or
does not know how to run a risk business; if you work for a firm that is
extremely risk averse; or if you trade at home with insufficient capital or
insufficient support from your family, the problem is probably the role, not
the trading.
If you are in a good firm and you like your manager, or you are trading
independently with plenty of capital, and you still dread sitting down in
front of your computer in the morning: that is bad. Make a change.
If trading isn’t fun most of the time, you need to figure out why.
3. Morning prep. Another way to build self-awareness is to do a quick
morning prep and self-check-in. You can simply fill out a quick one pager
when you first sit down at the desk. For a NASDAQ day trader, it might
look something like this:
It takes about two minutes to complete; this is not a major task. It sets a
professional and organized tone for the day and allows you to ask the key
questions. This Daily Sheet as I call it, forces you to lock in on what is most
important for the day; your mood, the market, and your plan. To steal a term
from mindfulness and yoga, the Daily Sheet forces you to center yourself
before you start trading.
Complete your daily sheet, then take a few breaths, clear your mind, and
center yourself.
Then go.
A few comments on this trader’s DAILY SHEET:
The trader has a max daily risk of $5,000 and then reduces risk
depending on mood and opportunity set. The formula is the average of
the mood and opportunity scores divided by 10 times $5,000. In this
case: ((8.5 / 10) * 5000). It makes sense to adjust your risk based on
your perception of your own mood / confidence and your assessment
of what the market might give you today. There’s no point in allocating
max risk to a quiet Monday. We will talk about risk allocation later, but
note that daily loss limits should be set as a percentage of free capital,
not a raw $ number. In this case, I am using $5,000 to keep things
simple.
This trader’s target P&L is always 2X stop loss. That is reasonable but
can vary by trader. The target can be important for traders who like to
press and add risk when they are trading well. Hitting the day’s P&L
target alerts the trader that maybe it’s time to reduce risk, not increase
it.
The plan does not have to be anything super-complicated. A general
strategy and any specifics you know in advance will suffice. One or
two sentences.
Personal reminders can go at the bottom. Schedule all your personal
and business meetings for the afternoon. Never schedule meetings
(business or personal) before noon. That is your time to trade.
Keep it sacred and free of distractions. Whether you are a home day
trader or a Senior MD at an investment bank—if you want to trade
successfully, do not schedule meetings that interfere with prime
trading time. Your performance will suffer.
To reduce your morning workload, the technical levels section can be
filled in the night before. The rest must be completed, in full, before you
allow yourself to start trading. This is not difficult. Do it every day.
Write a brief plan for the day before you start pressing buttons.
Trading is a journey that can bring you wisdom that will benefit your
nontrading life. By the same token, self-improvement efforts outside of
trading can make you a better trader. We have scratched the surface of self-
awareness here, mostly as it pertains to trading. Pursue self-awareness as a
trader, but also as a curious and growth-oriented human being.
Embrace meditation, yoga, exercise, and other paths to self-awareness
and you will become a better trader. A healthy body and a healthy, self-
aware mind will give you the endurance for long-run survival in the market.
Ability to handle stress
Whenever people ask me “Don’t you find trading stressful?” I reply:
“Yeah, but it’s good stress.” Like playing professional baseball is stressful.
Or flying a fighter jet is stressful. And sure, the stakes are high but it’s not
life or death. It’s important. But it’s not life or death.
Good traders have the right perspective. They take the job seriously but
do not allow it to consume them.
Trading is not who you are. It is what you do.
A fair bit of research has been done on the physiological impacts of
trading. The book The Hour Between Dog and Wolf by John Coates covers
the topic well. When a human senses danger, the brain releases adrenaline
and cortisol. This boosts the person’s blood pressure and heart rate and
prepares them to fight the lion or run from it. In our case, the threat is
market risk, so the problem is that the stress reaction is not temporary, it
goes on and on.
The original purpose of our response to danger was to allow for fight or
flight, either of which is meant to be a temporary burst of activity followed
by recovery. In trading, we can stay stressed all day and eventually this puts
strain on our digestive, immune and other systems because we are flooded
with cortisol. Excessive cortisol can lead to poor memory, paranoia, anxiety,
and all sorts of bad stuff. That is why traders burn out.
Nobody who is 24 years old believes they can ever burn out. People
who have experienced almost exclusively success in their early life can’t
imagine ever being tired or burnt out or failing. But trading is exhausting. If
you don’t manage your stress level properly and stay somewhat healthy in
your 20s and 30s, you probably won’t be trading in your 40s or 50s.
One trader I work with had her Apple Watch monitoring her heart rate
as the Fed announced its interest rate decision in August, 2019. She had a
ton of orders to watch and was at significant risk through the meeting.
Check out Figure 5.3 for a chart of her heart rate that day.
How good traders deal with stress:
Perspective. Like I said earlier, we are not storming the beaches of
Normandy here, we are buying and selling assets in an attempt to
generate short-term profits. If you can take the job seriously and treat it
as a profession, but still understand the sun will come up tomorrow no
matter how well or how badly you trade… You can win.
Relax. Learn to relax and breathe when you have big risk on. Don’t
white knuckle every trade and grind your teeth over every basis point
jiggle. You need to get comfortable with being uncomfortable. This
took me a long time, but it is a nice state of mind to have a ton of risk
on and know that you can see the world clearly and breathe. This does
not mean you don’t care. It just means you have put on risk before, you
will put on risk again and this is just a single trial in a process with
thousands of trials. Each trade is a spoonful of water in an ocean.
Don’t get riled up.
Source: Christina Fusilli’s phone
Go off the desk. Many traders hate to go off the desk because they are
worried about missing something. In the long run, the benefits you
gain from going off the desk exceed the risk you take of missing
something. When you go off the desk, your heart rate goes down and
you will often experience stunning moments of clarity. Every
experienced trader knows the feeling of that super-clear market insight
that pops into your head when you’re off the desk.
The human brain produces new ideas by creating connections between
disparate thoughts and stimuli and it does this best when it is at rest. To
achieve clarity and produce a-ha moments of trading insight,
sometimes you need to go off the desk and let your brain work. Much
in the way sleep allows your brain to process everything you have
experienced during the day, pulling yourself away from the screens
allows your brain to cool off and run some different, less urgent
subroutines.
Frequently heard on the trading floor: “Man, I just realized something
really interesting on my way back from the bathroom…”
Turn off your phone at night. Checking your phone four times a
night makes you feel important and allows you to impress your friends
with your aggressive commitment to capital markets. Checking your
phone at night is more addiction than useful habit. Markets are always
awake, but you need time to rest. They will be fine without you for a
few hours.
Leave a stop loss and a take profit on every position you hold at night.
Then turn off your phone and get some proper sleep.
I used to leave call levels in various currencies and I would get the
call from Hong Kong or Tokyo or London at 2:30 a.m. This would
result in:
a. Wife, annoyed.
b. Young kids, awake.
c. No good trades since I had no idea what was going on in the market
and was groggy and not in a strong position to make split-second
decisions.
d. Much more tired the next day because of elevated heart rate in the
middle of the night and 60 minutes of tossing and turning and half-
awake dreams about USDJPY before finally falling asleep twenty
minutes before my alarm went off in the morning.
Eventually, I left instructions with all the other centers. Do not call
me at night. Still, even once I kicked the call level habit, if I woke up
to the go to the bathroom in the middle of the night, I was always
tempted to check the market
58
. Again, this is pointless. Do not do it.
Turn your phone off when you go to bed and turn it back on when
you wake up. It took me many years to learn this and implement it
and my health and sleep quality improved dramatically when I did.
Well-rested outperforms sleep-deprived.
It 
is 
common 
sense 
but 
research 
also 
shows 
conclusively 
that
humans perform tasks at a substantially higher level when properly
rested and we make persistent and frequent errors when sleep-
deprived. And if you use your phone as your alarm: don’t. Get a
normal alarm clock or a Shake and Wake
59
.
Breathe. Learn how to focus on your breath through meditation, yoga,
or other mindfulness practices. Also, read the book Breath by James
Nestor.
The ability to deal with stress is somewhat innate, but you can learn
stress management and be thoughtful about your own reaction to
pressure. Again, try to step outside yourself at times and make
observations. Hmm, I just smashed my fist on my keyboard, maybe I
should take a little walk. Observe your own behavior and understand
what it might mean. I have a huge lump in my throat and I want to
yell. This trade is getting under my skin in a bad way. I need to square
up and start fresh tomorrow.
The struggle for self-awareness is a timeless piece of the human
condition. Greater self-awareness will help you in trading and will help
you in real life. Now let’s move on to the next non-cognitive trait on
our list.
Focus
Alpha Traders maintain focus even when flaming arrows are raining
down on the battlefield and everyone else is losing their mind. Trading
floors are quieter than they used to be but there is still plenty of chaos when
markets are on the move. There are moments when market makers need to
watch multiple markets, yell out accurate and tight prices to multiple
salespeople and execute trades in more than one asset at the same time. This
requires military-style concentration and focus.
The sample size is small, but two of the best traders that ever worked
for me came from the military. There is some overlap in terms of level of
focus between trading and military operations and anyone who has engaged
in live gunfire is certainly not going to be scared off by a flash crash in
GBPUSD or a 7 standard deviation move in US 10-year yields! Another
bonus when hiring ex-military into trading is that they are usually older and
more mature than standard graduates. Thus, they are better-prepared and
more able to jump straight into a trading seat.
One obvious tell, when new analysts join us on the trading floor, is
whether they can process various streams of information simultaneously.
Some young recruits have this skill and some do not. There have been times
when two sales-people were yelling at me for a price at the exact same time
and a junior analyst came right up to me and said “I’m getting coffees. Do
you 
want 
one?” 
without 
even 
realizing 
I 
was 
engaged 
in 
multiple
transactions. This sort of market awareness is hard to teach. New kids on a
trading floor either have it or they don’t.
I would therefore say that focus is one of the skills that is most innate
and toughest to teach or upgrade. That said, here are a few things you can
do to improve your trading focus:
Schedule. Schedule all non-trading tasks either outside of work hours
or in narrow, uneventful windows like 1:30 to 3:30 p.m. for equities or
after 2:30 p.m. if you trade commodities. I mentioned this earlier but it
is a dumb mistake that even senior traders make. I often made this
mistake myself when I was running a large FX business and had
around 50 people working for me. Outlook meeting notifications
popped up on my screen like fireflies all day when I first started in
management, but I realized that the good trading hours need to be
protected from outside distractions.
Your boss wants you to succeed so don’t be afraid to ask to reschedule
a request you receive for an 8:00 a.m. meeting. Most meeting times are
set somewhat arbitrarily. Explain to your manager or employees or
wife or whoever needs to set up a meeting: these hours are sacred and
I need to be on the desk from X to Y. Any other time is fine.
Focus. Close your email during peak trading periods. If your main
trading time is the equity open, close your email from 9 a.m. to 11:00
a.m. Answering emails one at a time as they come in distracts you.
Over and over and over. And 99% of them are completely useless.
Open emails and deal with them in batches every few hours. Your
efficiency and focus will improve. Also: you should learn about Inbox
Zero.
Exercise. In some years I have exercised like an athlete and stayed in
outstanding shape. On the other hand, I have had a few multi-year
periods where I could not fit proper exercise into my schedule for
whatever reason. The difference is glaring. After a year or so of no
exercise, my brain gets dull and hazy. I have trouble waking up in the
morning and I am dying for a nap around 3 p.m. every day. Optimal
mental performance does not require you to be a ripped V with six-
pack abs. But it does require a minimal amount of physical
maintenance—a few workouts per week, ideally combining weights
and cardio.
If you think you don’t have time to work out. Make time. I moved my
wake-up time from 5 a.m. to 4 a.m. to allow time to work out and the
extra energy I get from the exercise, and the psychological benefits of
exercise more than outweigh the hour of sleep I give up. Get up one
hour earlier three days a week. It’s worth it. Unless you have a
newborn baby or a sick relative or some truly extenuating situation…
You need to make time to exercise. It’s a big part of playing the long
game successfully.
Stretch. Stand up and walk around a bit. Take short breaks away from
the desk. This gets the blood flowing, resets your mind, and forces you
out of mental ruts. Change your perspective and breathe a bit. This can
be a 3-minute stroll. It sounds so simple but many traders stay welded
to their chair for hours when they should be standing to stretch every
few minutes. You need to move around a bit to maintain physical
energy and you need to get off the desk every now and then for a
change of mental scenery.
Put your phone away. Many trading floors prohibit mobile phones for
compliance reasons, and one side benefit of this policy is that it
removes the distraction. You can answer the text from your mom later.
Peak trading requires flow.
Flow happens when you are in the zone and you process all the
incoming information in the most efficient way possible. Remove as many
distractions as possible from your point of contact with the market and be
particularly brutal about protecting the most sacred hours of your trading
day. For many styles of trading, that can be just two to four hours per day.
Don’t clutter up those crucial hours. Close Facebook, put your phone in a
drawer, shut Outlook, and focus.
Patience
Winning traders very often use a style that also performs well in poker.
The style is called “tight/aggressive”. The idea is you play as tight as
possible (waiting for clear opportunities where you have a substantial edge)
and then act aggressively when those opportunities arise.
In poker this means instead of limping into many pots, often with
marginal hands, you wait for strong cards in strong position or large pots
that will justify the risk of entering with medium cards or weaker position.
In trading this means instead of trading every chart pattern and support
and resistance and up and down jiggle and random news headline, you wait
for strong set ups where you have an edge and then you commit significant
capital to the idea.
The path to success is to take massive, determined action.
TONY ROBBINS
This is easy to type out in a document but much harder to execute in
real life. What happens in real life is either a) the trader is not disciplined
enough to wait for high quality opportunities, she gets bored and puts too
much money behind too many low-quality ideas or b) the trader is not
courageous enough to commit to even the best ideas and so she puts on
small bets even when there is a once-per-year type opportunity. Then, when
the trade works exactly as expected, she whinges about how she is “way too
small!” and “she knew this was going to happen!”
While I stated earlier that good trading requires courage; it all also
requires patience. Most traders have a bias to action and this can lead to
poor trade selection and bad capital allocation. If you put money behind
every idea that pops into your head, the high-quality ideas will be diluted by
the random dumb ideas.
When I am trading well, I am patient, I pick my spots and I do fewer
trades. When I am trading poorly, I react to every headline and chart pattern
and flicker of the numbers on the screen. The key for me is to wait and wait
and wait as long as possible. Reject as many trade ideas as possible until
finally there is a trade idea that is so juicy I cannot resist. Then attack it.
Wait until all the planets are aligned.
You 
want 
to 
participate 
in 
trades 
where 
the 
macro 
story, 
charts,
positioning, 
sentiment, 
and 
cross-market 
indicators 
all 
point 
the 
same
direction. If you use 10 criteria for trade selection, you don’t want a trade
that ticks two boxes. You want the one that ticks eight! But those trades
don’t come along every few hours. the way you wish they would. You need
to 
wait. 
This 
is 
especially 
difficult 
in 
low 
volatility 
markets 
where
frequency of opportunity is lower.
Patience, of course, should not be confused with a bias to inaction. This
is where self-awareness is important. If you are biased to inaction, you need
to be less patient! Since I am always biased to action and overtrading, I
need to be more patient. Think about where you lie on that spectrum. An
interesting (though not very surprising) pattern that emerges from my innate
lack of patience is that my Sharpe ratio is higher when I am in the red vs.
when I am deep in the black.
If I’m in the red for the year, or even for the month, my main goal is to
avoid going deeper into the red. This is the zero bound effect I describe
earlier, in the section on Courage. Everyone has a point of discomfort as
they near their stop loss, and your goal is to stay away from that point of
discomfort so that you are not weak when a huge opportunity or great trade
idea emerges.
Therefore, I know that when I am below zero on the year, I need to be
selective. I wait and wait and wait and then the “I’ll know it when I see it”
moment arrives and I pounce. Often when I’m doing very well, my patience
slips and I feel like I can afford to swing at some bad pitches. I get a bit
sloppy 
and 
drawdown 
before 
going 
back 
to 
basics 
and 
renewing 
my
commitment to tight/aggressive. Even though I know my bias to action is a
weakness, I still struggle with it. Some rough parts of your personality are
easier to smooth out than others.
A good trader is like a leopard hiding in the tall grass. The cat will wait
for long periods, sometimes hours, for the right opportunity to pounce. If he
lunges too early or too late, he will miss the kill. He waits and waits, until
the perfect moment—and then attacks with 100% commitment and force.
Locus of control
Locus of control is our next non-cognitive attribute. Broadly speaking,
locus of control is a concept in psychology that explains how people see
their own influence on the situations, outcomes, and experiences in their
lives. In school, students with internal locus of control believe success or
failure come from effort and hard work. Students with external locus of
control believe success or failure come from luck, fate, unfair or bad
teachers, bias, and so on. Students with internal locus of control might
blame a C grade on their own poor preparation, while students with external
locus of control would blame the teacher or the test.
How do you view the outcomes and experiences in your life? Do you
take responsibility or blame external forces? In life outside of trading,
internal locus of control tends to lead to better outcomes, because when
people believe they can control their own life, they take ownership and do
the necessary work to improve their situation. Those who believe they don’t
control their own life, don’t bother to try.
In games and pursuits involving probability, successful participants
understand what they control and what they do not. This is the entire
message of a book like Thinking in Bets by Annie Duke: if you focus on
results instead of process, you fail to understand which part of the system
you control and which part you do not.
While strong internal locus of control generally correlates with positive
life outcomes (because those who believe they influence outcomes in their
life tend to have stronger motivation and make more effort), it can also lead
to the illusion of control. Many think (either consciously or unconsciously)
that they have control in areas where they cannot possibly influence the
outcomes.
A remarkable experiment by Langer and Roth showed that students who
had success predicting a coin toss early on tended to believe they had
superior coin toss prediction skills to those that did not. If people can
convince themselves they are superior forecasters of a coin toss, imagine
how they might convince themselves of their ability to predict markets!
Langer and Roth reported their findings in “Heads I win, tails it’s
chance”
60
. I love the title because it captures the faulty thinking of many an
overconfident trader. If I make money on the trade, I’m smart. If I don’t, it
was just bad luck. That’s not rational thinking!
Example 1: You are playing poker. You have two aces and your
opponent has a junk hand like 9-5. The player with 9-5 is drunk and
goes all in and you obviously call. The flop is 9-9-5 and you lose to
the full house.
Example 2: A tennis player hits a perfect shot down the line and the
umpire calls it out, even though it was clearly on the line.
Example 3: A baseball player hits a line drive that looks like a clear
home run but the opposing center fielder climbs the wall and grabs
it for a very loud out.
A professional poker, tennis or baseball player in these situations will
tend to understand that they did everything they were supposed to do and
ran into a very unfortunate bit of bad short-term luck. They understand that
if you reran the same event 1,000,000 times, the result would be a success
more than 99% of the time. They can shrug it off and understand that their
process was good and while the outcome clearly stunk, they have nothing to
feel bad about.
On the other hand, a weak player or someone who does not understand
process vs. outcome or what they control vs. what they do not control will
be enraged. “I can’t believe that guy flopped a full house! I am the
unluckiest 
person 
in 
the 
world!” 
etc. That 
is 
what Annie 
Duke 
calls
“resulting”. When you focus on results, you fail to understand what you
control and what you do not control—this is a major fault. In life, trading,
sports, and everywhere, you need to understand what you control and what
you do not.
In trading, internal or external locus of control is not most important.
What is most important is making the distinction between those things that
we do and do not control. This is captured nicely in the Serenity Prayer, a
mantra popularized by Alcoholics Anonymous but relevant to everyone:
God, grant me the serenity to accept the things
I cannot change, courage to change the things
I can, and the wisdom to know the difference.
The last line is key. Think about what parts of the system you control.
You control the inputs, not the outputs. In trading, this means focus on good
thinking and rational decision-making, and don’t get upset when you hit a
bad run.
Understand that variance is part of the game and you cannot and will
not ever control it. What you can control (and change if necessary) is your
process and your attitude. Nick Jonas (the Aussie trader I work with, not the
singer) has this on a Post-It stuck to his monitor at work: “The only things I
control are my effort and my attitude.”
People waste way too much time worrying about random stuff they
can’t control. This is often true in trading but it is true out there in the
world, too. A big part of my personal philosophy is to not waste time on
things I cannot control. For example, when I was younger, I would spend
months obsessing about what my bonus was going to be in January. As
discussions started in September and expectations management took hold
into October and November, I listened to all the speculation about the bonus
pool and tried to keep my ear to the ground to get a sense of what my bonus
might be.
As years passed, I realized something. If I come into work and try my
best and perform well and do a good job… The bonuses take care of
themselves. There is no correlation between how much you worry about
what your bonus is going to be and how much you get paid. There is,
though, a strong correlation between your bonus and: how hard you work,
how well you prepare, how disciplined you are and what kind of attitude
you have.
Come in to work each day with a positive attitude.
Do the work. Focus.
Behave rationally. Go home.
Do it again tomorrow.
That is the 22-word recipe for trading success.
Don’t obsess over your MTD or YTD P&L or the bonus pool or what
kind of car you might buy if you finish strong. Don’t waste time on what
might happen if you flame out as a trader and spill your entire account.
Don’t wonder why that guy got paid more than you or that woman got
promoted or that dummy gets invited to all the client dinners and you don’t.
There is always someone doing better than you and someone doing
worse than you. Focus on yourself. Run your own race and ignore the
runners in front of and behind you. Be better today than you were yesterday.
A bad poker player constantly complains about bad cards or bad beats.
A good poker player knows that in the long run her superior skill will
deliver outsized returns and short-term variance means nothing. A good
trader doesn’t spend too much time upset when they get stopped out at the
high or low. That is just something that happens sometimes.
The good trader knows there will be just as many times they survive by
a hair. Good and bad luck even out and the result at the end of many years
is not luck. Also note: good traders rarely use words like “should have” or
“would have” or “could have”. They focus on what is and what will be. The
present and the future. Not the past.
Other traits
Like I mentioned in a footnote earlier, it is a tricky exercise to place
traits into cognitive and non-cognitive buckets. In the end, I did my best but
still I was left with a bunch of traits and factors that don’t fall neatly into
either category. These “other” traits and factors I will call Category 3
Factors. I will discuss them in this section. They are:
1. Raw trading instinct
2. Passion for trading
3. Experience
4. Luck
5. Appropriate capital
6. Healthy risk-taking environment
Raw trading instinct
Trading instinct is what I call the x-factor. The thing that separates good
from great. When you watch American Idol, you can detect this x-factor
right away. The singer’s voice might not be the best you’ve ever heard, and
they might not be the best-looking or best dancer, but there is some hard-to-
define aspect that moves you. Most people will agree on who has this x-
factor and who does not.
There is a similar x-factor in trading. It is not just about risk appetite or
quant skill or patience or discipline or any of the traits I have mentioned.
It’s about instinct. When new traders come to the desk out of an analyst
program, it’s easy to see when they have this x-factor.
They intuitively get what is going on much more quickly than others.
They don’t ask questions 15 seconds after a huge market move because they
understand when is the right time to converse and when is the right time to
keep quiet. They input tickets the right way and can mentally calculate P&L
on a trade quickly without making a series of tortured faces first. They
understand the metagame and know that if ten separate banks recommend
short oil on the same day, that is not bearish oil.
Innate trading skill varies dramatically from person to person and can be
a huge head start for some and a hurdle that is too high to get over for
many. I believe that some people are innately good or bad at trading and it
is fairly easy to see this early on. If you are a manager, invest in the people
that have the x-factor and help those that do not have it to pivot as quickly
as possible.
One trader that worked for me who did not have the x-factor told me, 10
years after he pivoted to a job that fit him much better, that he wished
someone had told him earlier that he wasn’t suited to be a trader. He could
have moved on to a new career that fit his personality and skills more
quickly instead of wasting five years in a job that he and I probably both
knew was not the best fit.
This is a useful insight. Not everyone was born to be a trader… Even if
they successfully complete a sales and trading analyst program at a major
bank.
Some of this x-factor is the difference between street smarts and book
smarts. Investment banks emphasize book smarts because they are easy to
quantify and there is much less risk in hiring someone with mega quant
skills from an Ivy League school. Pre-2005 or so, many traders emerged out
of the back office or even the mail rooms of Wall Street firms because
managers weighed x-factor and personality higher than they do now. While
those managers probably over-weighted personality and “fit”, the system
now overweights academic credentials while failing to appreciate the street
smarts needed to succeed in most trading roles.
You cannot hone x-factor but it is important to be aware of it. Were you
born to be a trader? Or did you just kind of fall into it by accident or
because you saw how much money traders make? This matters. Traders that
feel they were born to trade have a better chance of surviving through the
inevitable existential storms that blow into every trader’s mind from time to
time. If you believe you are doing what you are meant to do, you won’t quit
when it feels impossible.
This brings us to the next Category 3 trait: passion.
Passion for trading
The number one thing I care about when hiring traders is their passion
for trading. This is usually easy to see because fake passion is easy to
discern. I care that traders are passionate because I believe:
1. their chance of success is exponentially higher than that of a less
passionate trader;
2. they are much more enjoyable to work with because they are not
complaining about how the market sucks or the job sucks or the
world sucks; and
3. they are more likely to find personal happiness as a trader.
People that enter trading by accident, or because they are not sure what
they want to do and just kind of land there after a training program, are less
likely to succeed than the myriad of kids who have had their eye on trading
since sophomore year of college. Trading is tiring, frustrating, and often
unrewarding. You have to love it to stick with it.
When I worked as a day trader there was a huge banner that read:
THANK GOD IT’S MONDAY! That is exactly how I feel about trading,
even after 25 years. When the FX market opens on Sunday afternoon and
when S&Ps open at 6 p.m. on Sunday night… I am logged in and often
trading right away. I am excited for the week to get started and to try to
outtrade 
everyone 
else 
after 
analyzing 
all 
the 
weekend 
news. This 
is
borderline obsessive behavior but for me it is a passion, not an obsession.
I know that the line between passion and obsession is crazy thin. That is
why I take specific steps to ensure I do not lose perspective. I turn off my
phone at night; I square up when I am on holiday; I go for walks without
my phone so that I am not constantly checking the market, etc.
I am a big believer in doing something you love. It’s the biggest cliché
in the world but most clichés exist because they are true. Something that is
universally true often becomes cliché but that does not make it any less
true.
My desire to always be in a growth environment, where I can come in
every day and do my best while feeling passionate about what I do, is part
of the reason I have changed jobs many times over the course of my
lifetime. Why settle for a decent job? Why work for someone you don’t get
along with or in a job that doesn’t really fit? Do something you are
passionate about. If you lose the passion or find the role or environment
does not fit—make a change if you can.
If you don’t love trading, find another job!
Since not everyone is cut out for trading, part of the decision-making
process for many traders is figuring out when to quit. When you have
invested significant time and money into your trading career, how do you
know when enough is enough? This is a hard question to answer because
success in trading only comes with extreme perseverance and experience.
Therefore, by its very nature, trading rewards those who refuse to quit.
You have to recognize that for most people there will never be a clear
sign from above that tells you exactly when enough is enough. If you have
been trading for more than two years and you are not making significant
progress, that is a bad sign. I would say that anyone who has been trading
for more than three years and does not feel confident that they are on the
right path, is probably on the wrong path.
Not everyone can succeed at trading. If things are not working out after
two or three years of effort, think about what comes next. Can you parlay
your trading experience into another job or pursuit? Investing, financial
planning, research, etc.?
Experience
One Catch-22 of trading is that experience is one of the most important
drivers of trading success but if you don’t succeed fairly early on, you never
have the chance to get the experience. Young traders should put themselves
in a position to gain experience at as low a cost as possible. If you want to
learn to trade and have $25,000 to your name… Don’t open a trading
account with $25,000 in it! Most traders lose money when they start out.
A good substitute for experience is a strong mentor. Traders that go
from college into junior trading roles at banks or hedge funds have an
enormous advantage over those who do not. They get experienced mentors,
solid training, and the ability to learn using someone else’s money. Traders
of any age trying to learn to trade from home need to be aware of the huge
disadvantage they are saddled with, and find a way to develop a network of
peers and some sort of mentorship.
Luck
There is an ironic fact about most good traders. They simultaneously:
Understand the difference between variance and luck;
Know that luck is not a long-run factor in successful trading;
Don’t really believe in luck; and yet
Consider themselves lucky.
We will get into the topic of luck much more in Chapter 11 but for now
let me just tell you that most good traders I know think of themselves as
lucky. I think deep down most of them believe in the saying “luck is when
preparation meets opportunity” but at the same time they also believe
themselves to be abnormally lucky. You don’t hear successful traders saying
stuff like:
“The market is out to get me!”
“I am cursed!”
“I am the unluckiest person in the world.”
If you say stuff like that: STOP.
Those are things you hear bad traders blurt out on a trading floor. Is the
world out to get you, or are you going to take over the world? Good traders
understand that luck is purely a short-term phenomenon and it is evenly
distributed 
over 
longer 
time 
frames. 
Luck 
should 
have 
no 
impact
whatsoever on a trader’s emotions. Good traders say things like:
“Wow, another disappointing day today. I have now lost money five
days in a row. I need to stick to my process more than ever. I will stay
unemotional and work as hard as possible tomorrow.”
Or…
“My methodology is not working in this regime. I will cut my risk in
half and think about why there seems to be a mismatch between my style
and the market.”
There are only three reasons you are losing money:
1. Your methodology is not producing edge.
2. Mental or behavioral issues are causing you to deviate from your
methodology (i.e., you are not sticking to the plan).
3. Variance.
That’s it. Again, we will talk about this later but variance is part of
trading. There is no good and bad luck. Just variance which can be
explained with statistics and probability. That is why there is no reason to
pray for a market outcome or beg the trading gods for a rally. Please, just
this one time. The only god of trading is probability. Even a forecaster who
can predict the market accurately 90% of the time will still be wrong five
times in a row every now and then.
Locus of control, grit, growth mindset and an individual’s perception of
her own luckiness all come down to the same core belief: I control my own
fate. The harder I work, the better things will get for me in the long run,
even if bad stuff will inevitably happen in the short term. All that matters is
the long game. Daily returns mean nothing, monthly and yearly returns are
what matter.
You control your own fate. Never blame external factors when you lose
money.
Healthy trading environment
While I just spent several paragraphs talking about the importance of
internal locus of control and embracing the belief that you determine your
trading 
outcomes, 
there 
is 
one 
extremely 
important 
external 
factor 
to
consider. You cannot succeed in an unhealthy trading environment. You
must have a risk-taking environment that is not hostile to risk, or thinly
capitalized.
This point could have been at the top of this chapter because in the
wrong environment, even the most rational, disciplined, skilled and self-
aware trader will fail. There are many features of a trading environment that
can be desirable but there are two that are absolutely necessary for survival
and success:
1. Appropriate capital.
2. Healthy and supportive risk-taking environment. Let’s look at each
feature separately.
Appropriate capital
In terms of external factors, sufficient capital is an absolute prerequisite
for successful trading. Let’s look at what this means for the three main
types of trader.
Retail traders
No retail trader can succeed with a $1,000 trading account because the
income generated from the most successful strategy will be too small to
move the needle. Even a 300% return will not be enough to make a
difference and so the trader is very likely to employ too much leverage and
blow up the account via gambling.
A tiny trading account is OK for learning the markets and much better
than 
paper 
trading. 
It 
might 
give 
you 
a 
sense 
of 
the 
emotional 
and
psychological hurdles that come with live trading, but it will never give you
a chance to really know what kind of trader you are.
In 
general, 
position 
sizing 
can 
account 
for 
most 
issues 
around
insufficient capital. If your capital is small, you need to take smaller
positions. We will discuss position sizing in Chapter 11. But there are
thresholds below which you cannot hope to succeed. For a young retail
trader with no family to support and low expenses, this amount could be as
low as $25,000. For a dentist with three kids in private school looking to
quit his job and trade full time, this number would be significantly higher.
Bank traders
If you work in a bank, you don’t have a fixed amount of capital. Instead,
you have risk limits. As such, your risk limits need to be properly aligned
with your performance expectations or budget. If you have a $30,000 daily
stop loss and a budget of $10,000,000, you will fail. It’s impossible to make
ten million dollars in a year with such a tight daily stop.
The easiest way to determine whether your risk limits are appropriate in
a bank is to run simulations. You can set up simple simulations in a
spreadsheet to look at a 252-day period
61
and spit out ranges of outcomes
based on various inputs. Retail traders can do this as well to determine risk
of ruin. The greater idea you have of your prior performance statistics, the
more accurate the simulation will be. I will go into a deeper discussion of
how to use simulations to understand performance and risk of ruin in
Chapter 11.
Portfolio managers
Capital or assets under management is a critical variable for every
hedge fund and real money portfolio manager (PM). Good PMs can scale
their strategy substantially and tend to think of performance in terms of
basis points, not dollars. Good PMs comfortably scale their risk up or down
as necessary based on the capital they are managing. On the other hand,
PMs that think about P&L in terms of dollars tend to have trouble sizing up
(or sizing down) because they are anchored on various P&L thresholds. If
you think of a good day as $1 million of P&L, you won’t adjust very
smoothly as your capital increases from $100 million to $1 billion. On the
other hand, if you think of a good day as 100 basis points, you will.
Note that it is possible to have too much capital. In fact, a common
issue with hedge fund portfolio managers is that they have too much capital,
not too little. Many traders at hedge funds are pressured to take on more and
more capital, regardless of the capacity of their trading strategy. And it takes
a trader with courageous integrity to say “no” to more capital. It is a bit like
refusing a promotion—quite often it could be the right decision, but it can
feel strange and potentially risky to do so.
Every trader and every trading strategy has an optimal level of capital.
The more capital you take on, the worse your returns will be after a certain
point, because your best strategies will reach capacity and additional capital
will need to be allocated to inferior strategies. If you are a PM at a hedge
fund, you should target your optimal level of capital, not just look to
increase your capital year after year.
Capacity depends to a great extent on the products you trade. A boutique
institutional trader specializing in microcap stocks will have much lower
capacity than a hedge fund PM trading G10 currencies. Capacity is mostly
determined by liquidity.
Research shows there is a sweet spot for hedge fund size in the $250
million to $1 billion assets-under-management range. Below $250m, costs
are hard to cover and above $1 billion, returns and Sharpe ratios fall
62
. This
is logically true for individual managers as well. This does not mean all
increases in capital are bad. You need to think about what your optimal
capitalization level looks like and aim for that, not higher. As your capital
rises to higher than optimal levels, the opportunity set is diluted and
transaction costs increase disproportionately. The high-alpha opportunities
are slowly drowned out by inferior trades.
A healthy risk-taking environment
A healthy environment breeds successful risk takers. Even the best
trader is unlikely to succeed in a toxic environment. A healthy risk-taking
environment means different things for different types of trader.
Retail traders
For people trading their own money, a healthy environment means
enough 
runway 
to 
learn, 
make 
mistakes, 
bounce 
back 
and 
eventually
prosper. Capital is crucial, as mentioned in the last section, but so is support
from family, financial flexibility, and the ability to focus and get in the zone
all day.
If you want to be a trader, but your wife wants you to get a “real” job
and you have twins screaming from the other room and no money to pay
rent next month… Put down this book and come back when you have a
more conducive environment. Trading is hard enough; anything that makes
it harder usually makes it impossible.
You own your life, so if you want to be a trader, do it. But pick the right
time and circumstances to do it so that you give yourself a proper shot at
success. There is nothing worse than wondering what could have been.
Quite often, you can work full time and find ways to trade on the side (and
more 
importantly, 
study 
trading) 
so 
that 
as 
you 
gain 
experience 
and
confidence in trading you are still earning a steady income. Then, once you
have a decent amount of money in the bank, you have a bit of runway to
trade full time and see if you have what it takes.
Bank traders
You would think that most or all bank traders would operate in a healthy
risk-taking environment but this is absolutely not the case. Banks have
different levels of risk appetite and managers within those banks can have
dramatically different incentives.
Let’s say you trade 10-year bonds at a large commercial bank. Imagine
two environments:
A) The manager that hired you and mentored you got a job offer at an
investment 
bank 
and 
just 
left 
under 
somewhat 
acrimonious
circumstances. Instead of replacing the head of trading, the bank
has given the current head of sales responsibility for your group.
He never liked your old boss, he has never traded before, and he
plans to retire in a few years. He just wants to survive the last few
years of his career and pay for his kid’s last few years of college.
He is extremely risk averse. He views the business model as an
agency where clients do trades, the bank goes to market and
offloads the risk, and the bank earns a small, nearly risk-free
commission.
Or…
B) Your manager is fired up and entrepreneurial and previously ran
global macro at a big hedge fund. He wants that kind of ambitious
risk culture at your bank because he believes a strong, healthy risk
culture 
best 
serves 
the 
clients 
of 
the 
bank. 
By 
employing
meaningful risk appetite, the bank can provide best-in-class pricing
to clients, world class trade ideas and expert market intelligence.
Customers get superior service from the bank and the bank makes
more money than the competition in the process. Win/win.
It is obvious which trader is going to have a greater chance of success
and most enjoy coming to work each day. If you work at a bank, you should
regularly evaluate your environment and study where your incentives are
aligned with the bank’s and where they are not. To succeed, you need clear
risk limits and rules of engagement so that no one is ever second-guessing
your actions, and you don’t have to second guess them yourself.
Portfolio managers
Portfolio managers are most likely to work in a healthy risk-taking
environment. Since hedge funds and asset managers are often exclusively in
the business of taking risk, they best understand the nature of risk and they
are usually good at creating a clear set of rules and then letting traders trade.
Still, it’s important to understand where your incentives align with those
of the firm and where they do not, so that you don’t misfire. The most
important example of this is that many hedge fund risk managers focus as
much or more on volatility of returns than on absolute returns. This is
because the risk manager at a pod-based hedge fund sees each trader as part
of a portfolio.
If the returns of each PM look approximately like those of a call option
(small downside with unlimited upside), then the aggregate performance of
all those traders at the end of the year is likely to look pretty good. If, on the
other hand, most traders are targeting 6% volatility while two or three are
realizing 25% volatility, the business model does not work as well.
While you are paid a percentage of your absolute returns, quite often
your manager is almost as concerned about your volatility as she is about
the headline returns number. This makes perfect sense, especially as risk
managers are constantly trying to separate luck from skill. A trader that
makes money consistently with low volatility is much more likely to be
displaying skill than a PM that puts up three years like: +70%, -24%, +
35%. Furthermore, the risk of ruin of a Steady Eddie is significantly lower
than the PM I just mentioned, and nobody wants to be the one managing a
trader when he blows up.
This is not an argument for you to target a specific level of volatility and
forget about returns. All I am saying is that you should be acutely aware of
your manager’s (and your investors’) incentives, not just your own.
A related phenomenon you will see at many hedge funds is that while
your contract may have a stop loss, your real stop loss might be much
tighter. Contractual risk limits are often wider than reality, depending on the
personality of the business and risk managers involved. If you are new at a
hedge fund, make sure you fully understand all the written and unwritten
rules the fund follows. Your official stop loss might be -15%, but if every
other trader that ever went down 9% at the fund got a shoulder tap, you
should probably calibrate to a 9% stop loss (or tighter!)
Think about your manager’s (and investors’)
incentives. Does your strategy and behavior align?
This advice applies to traders at every type of institution. When you
understand the incentives of management, you can make sure you are
playing by the correct rules and that you will not put yourself or your
manager in an unwanted or awkward position.
Other features of a healthy risk-taking environment:
Peers. There are other good risk takers to talk with and bounce ideas
off. Hopefully there is at least one trader that is more experienced
and/or more skilled than you. Otherwise you are always the mentor
and never the mentee. For retail traders, I believe there is a huge
benefit to working in a trading office, not at home. You learn from
others, have people to share ideas with and share the pain with when
things go wrong. A robust network of peers gives you a chance to talk
about specific trades, general risk management and other trading-
related topics.
Make a concerted effort to build a strong network of trading
peers. This can be online or IRL. Learning takes longer if you have to
figure everything out yourself.
Rule-based limits and risk-taking framework. The clearer the rules
of engagement, the easier it is to develop a clear process and proper
risk management. You don’t want an environment where a loss is fine
one day, but the same loss two weeks later results in a bunch of emails
flying around asking what happened. Ask for clear, numerical limits
and goals.
Management risk appetite. Management understands that if you take
real risk, you will lose money sometimes. It is common to hear bank
traders joke about the “Take risk, but don’t lose money” business
model. This is a model that works well for management as it
essentially means they can sleep well at night knowing that traders are
monetizing client flow but not taking any meaningful risk. It is less
attractive for individual traders because their leeway to express views
is severely limited. The only time traders can take “risk” in this model
is when they are already profitable (usually from a client trade). This
model allows traders to risk money earned but not take real financial
risk that may result in losses.
A mentor to teach you, support your risk taking and help you maintain
confidence during the inevitable down times.
A clear connection between performance and pay. Risk appetite
fizzles when traders don’t expect to get paid for alpha they generate.
Taking real risk requires significant mental effort and endurance and
traders will not give their all to a business they do not believe will
compensate them for doing so.
There are so many characteristics that make a good trader. That just
about 
concludes 
this 
chapter 
on 
winning 
traits. When 
you 
finish 
this
chapter, put the book down and take a moment to think about one or two
characteristics you want to work on. Go through my tips and write down a
couple of specific actions you will take to improve in particular areas. Then
come back to Chapter 6.
I strongly believe that improvement comes in small increments and by
focusing on one or two specific goals. Achieve those goals, then set new
goals. Don’t try to do everything at once or monitor seventeen areas where
you hope to improve. Drill down and pick one or two. Then do the work.
That is the end of Chapter 5. Those are the positive traits that will bring
you success in trading. Now let’s look at all the faulty thinking and ugly
habits that lead you astray.
37. Note: It is more difficult than you might expect to bucket skills as cognitive or non-
cognitive; don’t get mad at me if you think I put something under cognitive that you believe
should 
fall 
under 
non-cognitive. 
For 
example, 
reasonable 
people 
might 
categorize
“confidence” as either cognitive or non-cognitive.
38. See the section on favorite/longshot bias in Chapter 7. People tend to prefer longshots
because optically they offer better payouts. But payouts depend not just on the odds the
bet offers, but the probability of it paying out.
39. Conformity bias is the human tendency to take cues for proper behavior in most
contexts from the actions of others instead of exercising independent judgment.
40. https://www.saffo.com/02008/07/26/strong-opinions-weakly-held/
41. Abridged from: Richards J. Heuer, Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, Center for the
Study of Intelligence, 1999
42. Brent Donnelly, The Art of Currency Trading, John Wiley & Sons (2019). It is a tad meta
for me to footnote my own book here. I acknowledge it feels a bit like I’m referring to
myself in third person. Anyway, there is some overlap between my FX trading book and
this book, so I will refer to that one in here a few times. I hope you don’t mind. :)
43. 
This 
website 
is 
great 
if 
you 
are 
interested 
in 
global 
import 
and 
exports 
data:
https://oec.world/en/profile/country/nzl/
44. Heuer (1999), abridged from p. 65.
45. 
https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2017/07/the-underrated-gift-of-
curiosity/534573/
46. Hassinger-Das, B., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Appetite for knowledge: curiosity and children’s
academic achievement (2018)
47. Mussel, P., Introducing the construct curiosity for predicting job performance Journal of
Organizational Behavior (2013)
48. Reio, T.G., Jr. and Wiswell, A., Field investigation of the relationship among adult
curiosity, 
workplace 
learning, 
and 
job 
performance, 
Human 
Resource 
Development
Quarterly (2000)
49. Fiat Money in France by Andrew Dickson White is a classic 1876 book about how paper
money can become worthless when governments print and spend irresponsibly. It is
highly relevant in this era of unlimited money printing to finance unlimited government
spending.
50. 
Check 
out 
the 
full 
Q&A 
(which 
is 
where 
this 
excerpt 
comes 
from) 
here:
https://angeladuckworth.com/qa/
51. Why is it that some four-letter words have so much more oomph than any 3 or 5 letter
words? :]
52. In finance, people prefer to say “variance” not “luck”. It is more polite and sounds
smarter. And seriously, there is a difference. Luck is what happens in a short sample.
Variance is the fluctuation of a random variable around its mean. The better we can
measure this variance, the less we worry about luck because in the long-run, luck
disappears and variance can be predicted and managed.
53. You might also enjoy this Australian poem from 1937 which makes the same point:
“Were ‘ifs’ and ‘buts’ just tents and huts / how gaily could we hide! / if ‘buts’ and ‘ifs’ were
yachts and skiffs / how merrily we would ride! / but ‘ifs’ and ‘buts’ they interfere and spoil
the whole affair / If it were not for ‘ifs’ and ‘buts’ / I’d be a millionaire! Source:
https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/58819878?searchTerm=%22ifs+and+buts%22
54. That’s a CDC stat from 2016.
55. I first heard the term “reassessment trigger” while reading Bija Advisors notes online. So
I give credit to Stephen Duneier for coining the term, though I’m not positive he invented
it. It’s a good term.
56. If you don’t like the word quota, you can use “goal” but to me quota implies you must
reach the number and goal implies you hope to reach it. So I like “quota” better.
57. He was Librarian of the United States Congress from 1975 to 1987. Don’t feel bad that
you’ve never heard of him.
58. Pro tip: Don’t drink any liquids after 7 p.m. and you will sleep through the night.
59. That’s what I use—it’s a wristband alarm that vibrates—it quietly buzzes you awake
without bothering your spouse at 4 a.m. or whatever time you get up.
60. Langer, E. J., & Roth, J. Heads I win, tails it’s chance: The illusion of control as a
function of the sequence of outcomes in a purely chance task. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology (1975).
61. There is an average of 252 trading days in each year.
62. See for example: https://www.aurum.com/insight/elephant-in-the-room-size-and-hedge-
fund-perfor-mance/ 
and
https://docs.preqin.com/newsletters/hf/Preqin_HFSL_Mar_14_Fund_Size_Performance.p
df
T
CHAPTER 6
KRYPTONITE
Bad habits, mistakes, sloppy thinking, and leaks
here 
are 
specific 
bad 
habits, 
mistakes, 
unhealthy 
mindsets 
and
persistent errors that lead traders to fail. Most bad trading follows a few
specific patterns. In this chapter, I will go into some of the most common
sources of trader kryptonite, and outline strategies to reduce the impact of
negative traits. Building strength is important but you must also minimize
destructive and unprofitable behaviors.
The most damaging of all forms of trader kryptonite is biased or bad
thinking and we will discuss bias in depth in Chapter 7. This chapter will
focus on everything else that holds traders back, other than irrational and
biased thinking.
When thinking about why traders lose money, the starting point is
simple. Trading is not a zero-sum game; it is a negative sum game. There
are external costs (technology, hardware, research, data, personnel, etc.) and
transaction costs (commissions, bid/offer, slippage) that eat away at your
performance, day after day. If you generate small gains, your alpha will leak
away in a steady stream of payments to vendors and market makers.
When I traded the NASDAQ bubble from 1999 to 2002, my gross daily
P&L was rarely negative, and I was gross positive every single month. But I
went from wildly profitable in 1999 and 2000 to flat in 2001 and net
negative in 2002, as I had to trade more and more shares to generate the
same P&L after the absolute value of NASDAQ stocks collapsed following
the bubble burst.
Instead of trying to make $3 on 1000 shares as Qualcomm jumped from
$600 to $603, I had to make 30 cents on 10,000 shares as Qualcomm
moved from $60.00 to $60.30. The simultaneous collapse of stock prices
and 
the 
decimalization 
of 
equity 
trading 
meant 
the 
highly-profitable
strategies I employed in 1999/2000 were no longer profitable in 2002.
Transaction costs are a constant drag on performance so you need a big
edge to succeed in trading.
Today, stock market trading is “free” in theory for many individuals.
But you know the saying: if the product is free, then you are the product. In
the past, you paid a transparent commission and the bid/offer spread. Now,
you still pay the bid/offer spread and you pay a hidden transaction fee
which is the profit earned by a high-frequency market maker which receives
an ultra-short-term “free” option as it chooses how to execute your trade.
Trading costs continue to trend lower but are more and more difficult to
observe or measure. And they still matter.
Another 
reason 
that 
trading 
is 
negative-sum 
for 
individuals 
is
information and technology asymmetry. Large institutions (banks, asset
managers and central banks) have better access to information, and superior
(faster) technology. A trader at home watching news headlines cannot
compete with algorithmic headline reading software. When market moving
news comes out, individual human traders are at a meaningful speed
disadvantage.
A portfolio manager at a hedge fund or a trader at a bank has a team of
analysts and quants working with them to extract signals from the noise.
They have in-depth analysis of upcoming events and instant breakdowns of
important news. The Twitter era has democratized this a fair bit and
substantially decreased the advantage of the institutions over individuals.
There is a ton of high-quality information and analysis on Twitter if you
know where to look. Still, institutional information is generally higher
quality and easier to access than the information available to those outside
the industry.
Let’s look at some of the most common reasons traders lose money.
1. Bad discipline
2. Not enough edge
3. Overreliance on simple indicators
4. Too 
much 
focus 
on 
trade 
ideas 
and 
not 
enough 
focus 
on 
risk
management
5. Emotion
BAD DISCIPLINE
The number one reason that traders lose money is bad discipline. No
amount of edge or skill matters if you cannot stick to the plan. The most
amazing alpha-generating strategy is useless if you deviate from it. The
most sophisticated, optimized and adaptive risk management system will
fail if you selectively ignore some of its rules and procedures, depending on
your mood or emotional state. Every time you deviate from your process or
your plan because of bad discipline or emotion, you leak money.
Learning the rules is easy. Following them is hard.
I am highly qualified to talk about the importance of discipline in
trading because my best and worst trading always depends on my level of
discipline. The market is like a siren from Homer’s Odyssey, always trying
to get you to crash your boat into the rocks, constantly trying to make you
break your own rules.
Overtrading is my kryptonite and I could write an entire book about my
own battles with bad discipline. One of the great contradictions of trading is
that conservative, disciplined people tend to be risk-averse while risk-
loving people tend to be compulsive and undisciplined. This is not a truism,
just a general relationship between overlapping character traits.
The great paradox of trading is that it demands you be both risk-loving
and highly disciplined.
Most people are one or the other. You need to be both. This is the
essence of the tight/aggressive philosophy described earlier. You follow the
rules, you wait, you analyze, you stay patient, you ignore low-quality ideas
and then (finally!) a juicy trade presents itself and you attack aggressively.
Bad discipline often reveals itself as overtrading, gambling, or trading
for fun and stimulation. Another symptom of bad discipline is the inability
to stick to the plan—moving your stop loss and take profit when they get
close, for example. Often this is a simple emotional reaction to movements
in price. When people own an asset that is going up, they have trouble
selling it, even if their initial plan was to take profit at a particular level that
has just been reached.
If discipline is an issue for you, spend most of your time trying to level
up this characteristic. Automate your process as much as possible.
Bad discipline is the #1 source of trader kryptonite.
There is a demon voice in many people’s heads. The voice that tells
skinny women they are fat or convinces alcoholics to have “just one drink”.
That voice is there to sabotage you and your trading. It can make you do
things that make no sense and often you will barely understand your own
actions when you follow it.
Have you ever heard a voice in your head saying:
“Just hold on a bit longer, it’ll bounce back. Get back to flat, then square
up. No point taking the loss here. It’ll definitely bounce.”
Or:
“The stock is rallying, you can’t miss this move! I know you stopped
out at the low already… But you have to buy the high now; you’re gonna
miss a huge rally! The guy next to you is long at good levels and he’s
making so much more money than you!”
Do you control that voice? Or does it control you? This sort of stuff gets
existential pretty fast and “the voice in your head” is the subject of many
books and articles on psychology, mental health, self-help and philosophy.
The 
duality 
or 
multiplicity 
of 
the 
human 
mind 
is 
an 
incredible 
and
fascinating topic, and you should be aware of how and when these voices in
your head sabotage you.
Understanding how your ego and the non-productive voices in your
head manipulate your behavior and self-worth is a critical step towards self-
awareness. You must recognize when the wrong voices tell you to press the
BUY and SELL buttons.
Meditation and mindfulness training along with books like The Power
of Now by Eckhart Tolle can help you quiet and control the non-productive,
negative or disruptive voices in your head. A well-designed process and an
automated risk management system also help, as they create fewer decision
points where you have to intervene or actively make decisions under stress.
The less you have to decide on the fly while in a position and the more your
parameters are laid out beforehand and not subject to revision, the better.
We will get more into risk management in Chapter 11.
While bad discipline often kills off otherwise good traders, bad traders
usually lose money because they suffer from one or more of the following
problems.
NOT ENOUGH EDGE
Whether you trade at the biggest asset management firm in Midtown
Manhattan or out of a spare room in your parent’s house in Wichita,
Kansas… Trading is an impossibly complex game of imperfect information
played by many thousands of technologically-sophisticated and highly-
motivated opponents. What is your edge?
Successful traders can clearly and confidently explain their edge.
Do 
you 
have 
enough 
edge 
to 
outperform 
the 
market 
and 
exceed
transaction costs? This is the most important question in trading, especially
if you do not work at a bank. Banks have some built-in edge (better
information, market making revenue, best access to liquidity) but if you
work at home or at a hedge fund or at an asset management firm… What is
your edge? Don’t lie to yourself. Think about it and be honest.
Detour: Sources of edge
Let’s take a detour for a minute and look at some sources of edge over
the years. There are many other sources of edge, especially at the micro
level. This list is meant to get you thinking about your own edge. The point
is not to go through the list and pick one. It’s a starting point for thinking
about and understanding your personal trading edge.
There is a cliché that if you are at a poker table and you don’t know who
the sucker is… You are the sucker. Similarly, if you are a trader and you do
not know what your edge is, you probably don’t have an edge. I will focus
on sources of edge for human traders and the date ranges I provide are my
best estimate of when that source of edge was most prevalent.
Most of these sources of edge still exist, but are greatly diminished from
peak.
Trend Following
1984 to 2003
Trend 
following 
systems 
were 
the 
go-to 
source 
for 
human 
(and
computer) 
alpha 
in 
the 
1980s 
and 
1990s. 
Many 
large 
trend-following
commodity trading advisors (CTAs) extracted meaningful abnormal returns
for more than two decades. Returns from trend following systems have
steadily declined over the past 40 years. Many studies cover the slow
decline of trend following performance. This table from the Winton study
63
shows the decline in trend following Sharpe ratios over time:
10-year gross Sharpe ratio. Fast: Weekly, Medium: 6-week, Slow: 13-week
This does not show there are now zero profitable trend following
strategies, but clearly the edge has dropped over time. This is not a surprise
given the proliferation of academic literature on the topic in the 1990s and
2000s. As a strategy becomes well known, its Sharpe ratio grinds towards
zero.
Asymmetrical information and lack of transparency
1980 to 1996
Before the internet, markets were opaque and it was hard for those
outside financial institutions to get an accurate view of prices. Traders at
banks and large investment firms had a meaningful advantage given their
knowledge of accurate price levels and because of wide bid/offer spreads.
Meanwhile, relatively few macro traders had big research budgets and
access to policy makers. Those who did had a massive edge over less
informed and less sophisticated corporations and speculators.
Instantaneous 
communication 
speeds, 
near-unlimited 
availability 
of
information 
and 
rigorous 
compliance 
and 
monitoring 
of 
non-public
information have dramatically flattened the landscape for both macro and
bank traders.
Technical Analysis
1980 to 2006
The most common trading strategy on most trading desks I worked on
before 2006 was technical analysis. Most techniques were fairly basic,
while some of the smarter-sounding people might throw in some Elliott
Wave or more esoteric systems built in Lotus 1-2-3. Most of these strategies
produced 
what 
amounted 
to 
trend 
following 
or 
breakout 
signals.
Continuation patterns, breakouts, head and shoulders etc. were the favored
setups and these piggybacked on the underlying high Sharpe of trend
following strategies in that era.
As algorithmic strategies became more common in the mid-2000s and
trend following Sharpes fizzled, traders using simple technical analysis lost
their edge because technical strategies are easy to replicate with a computer
and computers are better than humans when it comes to risk management
and unbiased trade selection. Now, I believe technical analysis has been
reduced to a risk management tool and does not work effectively for trade
selection or forecasting.
Analyzing Price action
1970s to 2015 (?)
It feels to me that price action in recent years has become increasingly
meaningless. The idea that something “trades well” or “looks bid” pretty
much just means it’s at the highs these days, not that it’s going higher. Price
action has lost most of its forecasting value. I think very short-term, there is
still meaning in Good News/Bad Price setups (i.e., when something can’t
rally on good news, that is temporarily bearish) but this effect has a short
half-life.
Here is Stan Druckenmiller commenting on the decline of price action
as a signal in 2018
64
:
These algos have taken all the rhythm out of the market and have
become extremely confusing to me. And when you take away price action
versus news from someone who’s used price action as their major
disciplinary tool for 35 years, it’s tough, and it’s become very tough. I don’t
know where this is all going. If it continues, I’m not going to return to 30%
a year any time soon, not that I think I might anyway, but one can always
dream when the free money ends, we’ll go back to a normal macro
trading environment.
I think perhaps algorithms which are less emotional and react less
predictably to news, are partly to blame for the decline in the importance of
price action, but there could also be the simple fact that everyone knows
about this style of analysis, so it has lost its edge. The current generation of
30-to 45-year-old traders were all brought up on Reminiscences of a Stock
Operator and Market Wizards and thus we are always scouring the price
action for a signal.
Throw in the massive price distortions from non-price sensitive central
bank buying of various assets and it’s not hard to see how whatever signal
price action might have carried in the past has been destroyed by central
banks, and arbitraged away by speculators who all learned from the same
books and interviews.
Global Macro
1970s to ???
Global macro is very crowded as the proliferation of pod-based hedge
funds 
and 
internet 
macro 
strategists 
pushed 
global 
macro 
into 
the
mainstream around 2005 and left too much capital chasing too little alpha.
If you assume that any market strategy or inefficiency has X amount of
alpha available, then the more actors trying to gobble up that alpha, the
lower average returns and average Sharpes must fall over time. Too much
competition and low interest rates are the top two challenges to global
macro hedge fund returns since 2008.
Massive moves in asset prices driven by Fed QE, Abenomics and ECB
QE delivered monster alpha to hedge funds at various points in the 2010s,
but these epic events have been rare in recent years.
Correlation and intermarket analysis
2004 to 2014
This was my bread and butter back in the Lehman Brothers days but
after the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, everyone became acutely aware of
the 
importance 
of 
correlation 
and 
intermarket 
analysis 
for 
short-term
trading.
Just about every global macro trader (and blogger) in the world is
highly proficient in this style of analysis now. And there are many, many
computerized systems using dynamic correlation to trade every asset class.
Again: Too much money chasing too little alpha.
I still use correlation as an important input for my trade ideas but I think
its usefulness has declined significantly over the past 20 years.
Data Trading
1990 to 2005
It’s 
1997. 
I 
expect 
a 
strong 
nonfarm 
payrolls 
(NFP) 
number 
and
USDJPY is 118.80/85. As 8:30:00 a.m. approaches, I key up a bid for 100
million USDJPY at 119.01. I stare intensely at the US economic release
page on Bloomberg.
5, 4, 3, 2, 1…
If the number is significantly better than expectations, I hit send. If not,
I do nothing. Often, pre-2005 or so, you could scoop all the lazy offers left
by risk averse traders and make an instant $100k or $200k profit in the
seconds after any major economic release. Now, there are hundreds of algos
set up with a series of commands like: (If NFP beats by 1 standard deviation
+ Unemployment rate drops, buy 100 USDJPY, limit X). All available
liquidity is sucked up in microseconds as an army of algos wipes the
battlefield clean.
There are some second derivative ways to make money trading the
economic data now, but 95% of the alpha is now owned by algorithms. This
creates a form of singularity where price finds its new equilibrium point
almost instantly after economic data hits the market. Instead of flailing all
over the place as it tries to find the right price, USDJPY just ratchets to the
new “correct” price in a few minutes as similarly-tuned programs react at
faster than human speed.
Pattern Recognition
1980 to ???
There is a famous story of Paul Tudor Jones and Peter Borish using
price and volume patterns to uncover an analogy between the price and
volume pattern in the stock market in 1987 and price and volume in the
stock market in 1929. Using this analogy, macro analysis, and his concerns
about derivatives, portfolio insurance, and equity futures without price
limits, Tudor predicted the Crash of ‘87 and returned 62% in October
1987!
65
In 2019, this type of analogy would be tweeted twenty-two times by day
traders and online bloggers and would be revealed in the output of every
machine learning, AI and pattern recognition machine at every hedge fund
and bank in the world. Computers are significantly better than humans
when it comes to unbiased pattern recognition.
I do believe, though, there is still an edge in pattern recognition.
Experienced human traders can still combine complex pieces of information
to form conclusions that would elude the best computers.
Leverage, carry and selling risk premium
Forever
Borrow at 2% and buy an asset that yields 7%. Carry and roll down.
Sell insurance to hedgers. Sell SPX puts. These are the tried, tested and true
ways to generate consistent returns. These strategies produce non-normal
returns and lead to occasional blowups and meltdowns and are often more
beta than alpha. Tactics like timing on entries and exits and superior risk
management, though, can make simple levered carry and option selling
strategies more like alpha than beta.
Quant / discretionary combo
2012 -
While quantitative analysis was once mostly the domain of systematic
and 
algorithmic 
trading 
programs, 
human 
traders 
now 
use 
more
sophisticated 
quantitative 
methods. 
Combining 
the 
best 
quantitative
analysts, 
the 
best 
datasets 
and 
the 
best 
discretionary 
traders 
into 
one
business pod looks to me like the ideal model for discretionary alpha
capture in the current era. Quantitative analysis is greatly enhanced by
experienced humans who can ask the right questions. Models are great for
many types of trading, but are not as good at other tasks such as predicting
or reacting to regime change or handling one-off events.
All these styles of trading still work, off and on. The challenge is to find
a trading style that gives you an edge in the current market, and then stay
clear-eyed, open-minded, and adaptable so you can transition or pivot as the
market changes. Your edge this month might not be your edge next month,
or next year.
Detour complete! I hope this brief roundup of historical sources of edge
helps you think about and identify your current edge. Before we get back to
our main discussion about why traders lose money, let’s play a quick little
game.
Take a look at Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2. I pulled these from Bloomberg
and took the name of the security off so that you won’t be biased. See if you
can predict the next move in the asset (or at least get a feeling for where it
might go next). Think about what you see in terms of trend, support,
resistance and any other tradeable patterns. What is your view on the future
direction of these two assets? How strong is your view? If you were forced
to trade these, would you go long or short?
Did you take a view? Long or short?
I lied. These are not from Bloomberg. The two charts were generated
using the =RAND() function in Excel. They are randomly-generated and
have no connection to any security. If you had any view or guess as to
where 
these 
charts 
are 
heading… That 
view 
has 
no 
basis. These 
are
randomly-generated squiggles that might go up, down, or sideways.
This brings us to the next reason that traders lose money: They rely too
much on simple indicators.
OVERRELIANCE ON SIMPLE INDICATORS
Many traders put way too much faith in simple indicators. While there
is something to be said for simplicity, you also need to be realistic enough
to grasp that drawing a trendline on a daily chart and buying the break of
that line is probably not a strategy that will offer much edge in the long run.
Anything a computer can easily do is unlikely to be a huge winner.
Many retail traders get sucked into seminars and trading courses that
advertise simple breakout or similar technical strategies. Often the sellers of
these strategies offer up impressive data showing that a particular strategy
has generated outsized returns. Remember that this is all backward looking.
Using any simple trading software, I can backtest a few thousand strategies
and then cherry pick the ones that were incredibly profitable in hindsight.
Then advertise those. The problem with this sort of analysis is that it does
not work out of sample
66
.
Do not believe the hype of online trading seminars that claim consistent
profits from simple technical indicators. There is an entire industry built
around the idea of easy profits and simple strategies and the sad fact is that
these programs do not work. Instead of dumping $15,000 into a bogus
training program, put $10,000 into a trading account and buy a huge pile of
trading books and a bunch of meditation classes. Think of that $10,000 in a
trading account as tuition and start trading. Very cautiously.
Reliance on simple indicators is not just a problem in retail trading.
Very often, a bank trader will send out a trade rec featuring something like a
trendline going back five years that just broke. They will advocate a trade
based on the breakout. Personally, my philosophy is that simple is good in
general but there is a point where analysis is too simple. Buying an asset
because a line on a chart broke belongs in the “too simple” category for me.
Does it really pass the sniff test that you can draw a line on a chart and
then wait for it to break and that will be a sustainable source of alpha or
edge in a complex game played by the most expensive computers and some
of the smartest human beings in the world? I doubt it. These sorts of basic
trend following strategies were money in the 1980s and into the 1990s but
not now. A computer has better discipline than you and can execute a
simple technical breakout strategy with less slippage and zero emotion.
Simple 
technical 
strategies, 
especially 
breakout 
strategies, 
are 
like
dashboard 
indicators 
in 
your 
car. 
Yes, 
they 
are 
helpful, 
almost
indispensable, really… But you would never drive a car just by staring at
the speedometer, tachometer and GPS.
If you want to succeed in trading, you will need to find a more
sophisticated source of edge than technical analysis. It is a part of the
toolkit but it doesn’t work by itself.
We’ll talk more about the behavioral pitfalls of technical analysis when
we discuss apophenia in Chapter 10, and I touch on the good, the bad and
the ugly of technical analysis throughout this book. Now, let’s move on to
the next reason traders lose money:
TOO MUCH FOCUS ON TRADE IDEAS AND NOT ENOUGH FOCUS ON RISK
MANAGEMENT
For every 100 trading books available on Amazon, I would estimate that
one is about risk management, 29 are about trading psychology and the
remaining 70 are mostly focused on trading systems or how to come up
with trade ideas. And half of those “How to come up with trade ideas”
books describe simple strategies that have no edge.
Finding good trade ideas is the start of the trading process, but risk
management is the ultimate determinant of success or failure in trading.
Even if you can properly forecast the direction of the market 65% of the
time (a very high success rate), if you don’t manage your risk properly, you
will either slowly bleed out or quickly blow up. Risk management is so
important that I have devoted all of Chapter 11 to the topic. For now, just
know that bad risk management leads to failure mainly via three channels:
1. Risk of ruin. This is the big one. It doesn’t matter how smart you are
or how much edge you have, if you look into the abyss enough times,
eventually you will fall in. Some trading styles and strategies are
more prone to ruin than others.
2. Slow bleed. If you cut your winners too fast or regularly ignore or
move your stop losses, trades where you were risking 1 to make 2
turn into trades where you are risking, say, 1.3 to make 0.8. Your
capital slowly leaks out, like air from a tire.
3. Static position sizing. Failure to understand how position sizing
relates to volatility, capital levels and profit objectives can lead you
to trade the wrong position size, especially when macro or volatility
regimes change. This will lead to both suboptimal performance and
increased risk of ruin.
I will save the rest of the risk management discussion for Chapter 11.
Let’s look at another reason traders lose money: emotion.
EMOTION
Emotions are not necessarily bad but they are detrimental when you do
not recognize them and when you allow them to influence your thinking.
Emotions can make you less rational.
When an attractive trade idea comes along and you have a solid process,
it doesn’t matter whether you have lost money five days in a row or just
finished a record six week run. It does not matter if you woke up in a great
mood or can barely get out of bed. Your process will determine when to
take risk, what position size to set, and what reassessment triggers make
sense. But emotions can trigger bad thinking and bad trading, if you let
them.
Several 
studies 
confirm 
this 
including 
one 
by 
Lo, 
Repin 
and
Steenbarger which says:
Specifically, 
the 
survey 
data 
indicate 
that 
subjects 
whose 
emotional
reactions to monetary gains and losses were more intense on both the
positive 
and 
negative 
side 
exhibited 
significantly 
worse 
trading
performance, implying a negative correlation between successful trading
behavior and emotional reactivity
67
.
Some emotions that cause trouble for traders:
Frustration
When you smash your fist repeatedly on a pinball machine, it eventually
tilts and stops working. The human mind can be similar. When faced with a
series of stressful losses, especially particularly hard to believe or unlucky
losses, many traders will tilt. When on tilt, they will either shut down or
take extra risk in order to get revenge on the market. Traders who attempt to
get revenge on the market are more likely to face ruin, not find redemption.
The 
point 
is 
not 
to 
turn 
yourself 
into 
a 
robot 
and 
operate 
in 
an
emotionless void, but to recognize your emotions via self-awareness, and
develop strategies to deal with strong and harmful emotions before they
jeopardize performance. Often, all it takes is a quick walk outside or across
the trading floor to clear your flooded mind and return to emotional
equilibrium. For more severe or prolonged negative emotional states, a few
days off might be required.
Since I work at a bank and have client-facing responsibilities, it’s not
practical for me to take a day off when my frustration level is high. Instead,
I still come in to work, but I don’t trade. I write and research, or work on
quantitative projects. The benefit of this approach is that I still stay in touch
with the market but the drawback is that if you are in front of the screens,
there is always going to be the temptation to trade.
If you are worried that you are not disciplined enough to keep your
hands off the keys; find something else to do. Take a day with the kids or go
watch a movie or spend a day reading at the library. Some traders prefer the
mental 
clarity 
and 
cleansing 
that 
comes 
with 
getting 
away 
from 
the
computer and truly disconnecting from the market. I can see that logic.
Whatever you need to do, do not sit there with an angry lump in your
throat, pounding the BUY and SELL buttons out of frustration. This is like
the poker player who loses eight hands in a row, turns red-faced and shoves
all his chips into the pot without even looking at his cards. This is not good.
Euphoria
On trading’s emotional spectrum, the opposite of frustration is euphoria.
In my trading, I tend to have more of a performance issue around euphoria
than frustration. When I am frustrated, I tighten up and wait for outstanding
opportunities and that makes me better, not worse. On the other hand, when
I am doing very well, I sometimes increase my risk more than is justified by
the 
set 
of 
market 
opportunities. 
This 
is 
the 
“house 
money” 
effect 
I
mentioned earlier.
Rarely will I see my P&L crash after a moderate or bad trading period.
My biggest drawdowns almost always come after a sustained period of
overearning. I get overconfident. Cartoon dollar signs flash in my eyes. I
double a position that is deep in the money when I should be taking profit.
There is a particular level of P&L where I know I tend to get sloppy so I
use conditional formatting in my P&L spreadsheet to create an alert. The
month-to-date cell turns orange as the “I’m doing too well” level gets close
and then the cell turns red once the overearning threshold is crossed. For
me, trading well seems to lead to more good trading up until a point and
then 
eventually 
I 
hit 
a 
point 
of 
overconfidence/sloppy 
trading 
which
sometimes leads to a big drawdown.
This 
phenomenon 
is 
also 
called 
“Winner’s Tilt”. Tilt 
is 
usually 
a
condition associated with traders or poker players that are losing or on a run
of bad luck. They go on “tilt” which means they start chasing with bad
cards in bad situations because their minds are flooded or they are seeing
red.
In contrast, Winner’s Tilt is another way of describing the house money
effect: temporary madness brought on by a series of winning trades or
winning days. I can feel this coming on now as usually I feel a bit giddy
when it’s happening and might even find myself singing or joking around
more than usual on the desk.
Thaler and Johnson find strong evidence of the House Money Effect in
their 1990 paper: “Gambling with the house money and trying to break
even: The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice”. The gist of the paper
is that when wagering with uncertainty, we should logically make decisions
based on the probabilities associated with various outcomes and those
decisions should be rational and independent of what happened beforehand.
Instead, we gamble more recklessly when our pockets are full of black
chips. Meanwhile, when we are in a negative position, sitting on a loss, we
find bets that offer the chance of break-even inordinately attractive. Anyone
who has ever traded recognizes these two related forms of bias.
Rational bettors evaluate current odds and do not factor in prior
outcomes.
Be aware of your own emotions at all times and watch for the house
money effect in your trading. Do you trade strong when you are up money?
Or do you trade overaggressive and sloppy? If you are singing on the desk
or yelling with excitement or pumping your fist… Achtung! You are about
to get punched in the mouth.
Here’s a short post I wrote on this topic in 2020.
Joyful yelling signals imminent P&L crash
One of the underappreciated features of working on a trading floor is that
you are allowed to yell; pretty much whenever you want. In contrast, at
other jobs I have held in the past (pizza maker guy at Little Caesar’s, data
entry clerk at Statistics Canada, gas pumper at Texaco)… It would be
super weird to randomly yell out (for example) the number 32 at max
volume. It would generally be frowned upon if I suddenly screamed:
YOU’RE DONE!!! from a government office cubicle.
But on a trading floor, random yelling is perfectly fine!
As much as it is fun to yell on a trading floor, though, it can sometimes be
a 
sign 
of 
euphoria 
and 
overconfidence. 
Overconfidence 
leads 
to
overtrading, poor sizing, confirmation bias and a failure to see alternative
hypotheses (because you know you’re right, why bother thinking about
how you could be wrong, right?) Overconfidence is also one of the main
reasons men underperform women in trading.
Anyway, I am generally a fairly humble guy and I like to think about
alternative hypotheses and all that… But one of my leaks is a particular
type of momentary overconfidence. When I am doing abnormally well, I
get excited; I want to add risk even though I should be reducing. I am
momentarily swept up by a wave of irrational exuberance and should be
thinking about reversion to the mean, not further upside momentum.
Many traders commit this error.
Example: Last Thursday I could sense the market putting on a bit of a
deflation trade (or, more accurately, taking off the popular reflation trade)
and so I bought a USDMXN call to hedge a predicted flurry of coming risk
aversion. Almost instantly, USDMXN ripped higher from 18.76 to 18.85
and our franchise lit up. All at once, a flood of client trades came through
from sales.
Excited about my good timing and all the flow coming in, I yelled “FX IS
BACK!” across the trading floor… A hopeful nod to the idea that the
recent long and painful months of low FX volatility might be over. Then, I
looked over to my chat log and saw one of my brokers had just typed
“Hey 
Brent: 
NICE 
CALL 
MXN!”. 
A 
trader 
on 
the 
options 
desk
congratulated me a few seconds later. I glanced at my P&L and saw one
of my best days in the past two months. And then…
You can probably guess what happened next. Sad trombone. It all went
terribly wrong. Here is the chart:
This is a phenomenon I call the Cheer Hedge. When you cheer for a
position or yell or sing or fist bump on the trading floor—watch out. Your
P&L is about to crash. The reason I call it the Cheer Hedge is that when I
was a manager, whenever one of my traders started singing or cheering
for a position, I always hedged the position in the management book right
away. And the hedge always made money!
I wrote about this in THE ART OF CURRENCY TRADING and I now
make this mistake less than I used to. But knowing the rules and following
the rules is not always the same thing. That’s one reason trading is so
hard.
The takeaway here is that you need to be aware not just of your own
general level of risk appetite but also of how your risk appetite changes
under different conditions. I described the house money or “Winner’s Tilt”
effect in that story and you probably have similar personal experiences.
What makes your risk appetite go up and down? Catalog the factors and
be aware when they kick in. Note that I have just described how euphoria
can lead to overconfidence. I will dig much more deeply into the topic of
overconfidence in the next chapter. Let’s wrap things up with one more
reason traders lose money and then we will move on to Chapter 7.
FAILURE TO ADAPT
Chapter 14 is all about adaptation so I don’t want to front-run myself
here. I just wanted to include “Failure to adapt” here because it is critical,
but also different from the other reasons for failure I describe in this
chapter. While the reasons I listed above are generally reasons traders fail in
the first place, failure to adapt is the reason many good traders end up
failing over time.
Some traders are really good at one type of trading. Maybe it’s breakout
trading, or trend following or mean reversion or cross-market or whatever.
But a single style of trading does not work forever. Markets are by their
nature highly adaptive and efficient. Almost by definition, whatever works
best today is unlikely to work very well in the future. The whole process of
price discovery is built to sniff out abnormal returns. The more people or
algorithms discover a popular trading method, the less likely it is to work
going forward.
Do not form a strong bias toward a particular trading style. Adapt to
what the market is rewarding.
Markets 
are 
forever 
evolving 
and 
traders 
that 
cannot 
adapt 
are
eventually pushed over the cliff by an invisible hand. Flexible, open-
minded, creative and humble traders understand the fact that just because
they are making money today, that does not entitle them to make money
tomorrow.
They must earn tomorrow’s money by thinking harder, working smarter
and discovering new and untapped sources of inefficiency or low-hanging
alpha in the market. Before we end this chapter on kryptonite and how to
fail at trading, I am going to take a quick detour and talk about three
moments in my career where I failed. Then, I extract the lessons.
THREE BIG MISTAKES AND WHAT I LEARNED FROM THEM
While I have read most of the top trading books, the great lessons I have
learned about trading have come from real life experience. In this section I
go over a few specific trading experiences that went wrong for me. I hope
that reading about my mistakes will help you avoid making similar errors in
the future.
1. Thinking it would go on forever (2000)
When I was trading the NASDAQ bubble in the late 1990s, I was in my
late 20’s and appropriately immature. I took my trading account from
$25,000 (the only money I had at the time) to more than $350,000 while
simultaneously using the account to pay expenses including rent, travel, fun
and a black M3. To give you a sense of my overconfidence at the time,
another trader and I called the office we worked at “The Faucet”. Because
all you had to do was walk in and turn it on and… Out came the money. We
were kind of joking, but not really.
Trading is never easy, but the market in 1999 was about as close to easy
as trading could ever get. A simple, disciplined approach that followed
momentum and headlines was fairly easy to monetize if you had confidence
and some courage. The mistake I made was thinking it would go on forever.
I did not have the experience or maturity to realize that any period where
trading delivers outsized or easy returns is, by definition, unsustainable.
Markets can be inefficient for short periods but not forever.
By the end of 2002, my edge was gone, my account was shrinking fast
and I was out looking for a “real job”.
Make hay when the sun is shining. If the market is paying a particular
style of trading, lever up as much as you reasonably can and work as many
hours as you possibly can. It will not last forever. Instead of working my
butt off and squirreling away my gains, I worked when I felt like it because
I thought I could come in and make money whenever I wanted. I had no
sense of urgency.
The positive takeaway from my dumb approach in the late 1990s was
that when a similar moment of outstanding trading opportunity appeared in
2008, I recognized it. I knew it was time to work as hard as humanly
possible because the period of insane volatility and fat pitches was only
temporary. The tuition I paid in 1999 paid off with my best year ever in
2008.
2. Failing to ride the Abenomics trend (2012)
In late 2012, USDJPY was trading near 80.00 while the Japanese stock
market (Nikkei 225 Index) was languishing in the 8,500 area. Japan was in
a deep economic funk. The country was on the wrong end of a multi-decade
deflationary sucking machine that had sapped all confidence and left an
overvalued currency and undervalued financial assets.
That 
all 
changed 
with 
the 
announcement 
of 
Abenomics, 
a 
major
economic program spearheaded by prime minister Shinzo Abe. Abenomics
was a series of initiatives that called for major structural reforms and
massive monetary easing in Japan. Over the next three years, the Nikkei
Index rallied 250% and USDJPY had an eye-popping rally from 80.00 to
125.00. I know three traders that pretty much made their careers on that
move.
For whatever reason, I struggled to close my eyes and go with the move.
Positioning became extreme very quickly (as one might imagine when a
country’s leader decides to devalue the currency and ramp the equity market
higher). I knew very well by that point in my career (I started in 1995) that
when there is a major economic or policy shift, positioning doesn’t matter,
but for some reason I had a mental block and struggled to go with the trend.
I had seen enough times where positioning didn’t matter for extended
periods, so I should have known better. For example, in 2008 (the global
financial crisis, most people were short stocks most of the way down), 2010
(US quantitative easing, the market went short USD and cleaned up) and
2011 (the Eurozone crisis, the market was short EUR all the way down
though punters did get badly rinsed when EURUSD finally bottomed).
Eventually, positioning always matters but in the early and middle
stages of watershed economic and policy changes, the macro is much
bigger than any concern about positions. Thing is, as USDJPY climbed
from 80 to 90 to 100, I struggled massively to trade from the long side.
Instead, I was playing retracements and “big levels” and trying to top tick
one of the biggest economic stories of my lifetime.
I still don’t have a good sense of why I could not get myself to trade the
Abenomics 
trend 
successfully. 
I 
have 
various 
excuses 
but 
no 
good
understanding of where the mental block came from. But when a similar
trade showed up in 2015 (ECB quantitative easing, which drove EURUSD
from 
1.40 
to 
1.05 
in 
pretty 
much 
a 
straight 
line) 
… 
I 
was 
ready. 
I
recognized the similarity of the setup and was strict about trading EUR only
from the short side until after the pair had already dropped massively lower.
A hedge fund PM told me about how the founder of his fund (and the
firm’s biggest risk taker) put a Post-It note on his monitor in 2009 that said:
LONG OR FLAT. At that time, the authorities had just changed all the rules
(suspended mark-to-market, banned short selling, bailed out the banks,
bailed out the car companies, announced quantitative easing, etc.) and he
realized that it was going to be impossible for stocks to go down from that
moment on.
I usually preach “nimble” as a key defining characteristic of successful
short-term traders. There is, however, a time to have one core view and
stick to it. Identifying these rare moments where the markets will be one-
way for an extended period can be the difference between an uninspired
trading career and a great one.
3. Sprinting out of the gates
One recent December, after a decent trading year, I decided I was going
to try something different in the new year. I had been pretty consistent over
the previous 5 or 6 years, putting up excellent but not amazing yearly P&L
and I thought: “I have hit a plateau. I want to do something bigger. Trade
bigger. Double last year’s P&L.” So instead of starting slowly and building
a base of P&L before adding meaningful risk, I took a different approach.
It just so happened that I had a very strong view that the USD would
sell off in the new year and so I decided to go all in right off the bat and
take a ton of risk on January 1. Take a guess what happened. I got
absolutely crushed, losing ½ of my prior year’s P&L in the first four weeks.
This put me in a devastating hole where I could barely trade for a while as I
scraped back and precariously avoided getting to the point where I would
need to worry about my YTD stop loss.
Sprinting out of the gates is a bad strategy!
No matter how strong your view at the start of the year, there is too
much path dependence involved if you go hard on Day 1. Even if you are
placing what you think is an 80/20 bet, if that 20% comes up, you are so
hobbled that you threaten your entire year. It’s not worth the risk. You are
essentially betting your entire year on a small sample. This is not good!
I spent the next six months scratching back to flat and managed to finish
up a tiny bit on the year. But those 11 months were a grueling and painful
marathon. The following year, needless to say, I started with smaller risk
and successfully built a base before taking on larger risk.
Sometimes you have to do the wrong thing to be reminded why you
need to do the right thing. You cannot make your year in January, but you
can lose it. Learn from my mistake. Start slow, build the base and be like a
call option with limited downside and unlimited upside. We will dig into the
concepts of path dependence and risk management in Chapter 11.
That’s it for Chapter 6 and that ends our initial discussion of trader
kryptonite. Now let’s dig even deeper and talk about bias and irrational
behavior, and how traders can recognize and avoid bad thinking and bad
habits.
63. Check out this, for example: https://www.winton.com/research/historical-performance-of-
trend-following
64. https://macro-ops.com/notes-druckenmiller-real-vision-interview/
65. http://www.chartpattern.com/articles/40greatest-trades-article.pdf
66. In-sample is data you analyze to come up with a strategy. Out-of-sample data is a
separate set of data you use to test the strategy. This helps avoid datamining and
snooping problems because almost any set of data will eventually yield what looks like a
decent strategy if you torture it long enough. If you want to learn more about backtesting
and the pitfalls of datamining, there is a lesser-known book called Fooled by Technical
Analysis: The perils of charting, back-testing and data mining by Michael Harris. It is
available online.
67. Lo, Repin and Steenbarger: Fear and Greed in Financial Markets: A Clinical Study of
Day-Traders (2005)
O
CHAPTER 7
SMART PEOPLE DO STUPID THINGS
Rational, unbiased trading
ne of the great a-ha moments of my life was the realization, not so
many years ago, that smart people still do stupid things. All the time.
Once you recognize this, the world starts to make a lot more sense as you
observe both your own actions (assuming you are smart), and the actions of
others. In this chapter we will delve into some of the ways that even the
smartest traders act irrationally, and then we will try to find remedies for
these biased behaviors.
In Chapter 3 you learned that superior performance on the Cognitive
Reflection Test (CRT) predicts trading success. In other words, traders that
rely on System 1 and heuristics (thinking fast) will underperform traders
that favor System 2 and logic (thinking slow). There is a conundrum here
though: trading requires fast decision making!
The 
Alpha 
Trader 
needs 
to 
make 
quick 
decisions 
that 
are 
not
contaminated 
by 
behavioral 
bias. 
There 
is 
an 
inherent 
conflict 
here,
obviously, because fast thinking generally relies more on shortcuts while
slower thinking relies more on rational logic. In this section, we will discuss
a host of behavioral biases, and then think about how to counter them.
High-performing traders understand behavioral bias and are self-aware
about how their own bias negatively impacts their decision-making. They
know that even the best, most knowledgeable trader is subject to many
types of behavioral bias.
The amazing thing about most behavioral bias is that it works on you,
even if you know about it. This is similar to the way optical illusions work.
Even 
if 
you 
have 
been 
told 
about 
the 
exact 
way 
your 
thoughts 
are
malfunctioning, it doesn’t matter. I can tell you there are no gray dots in the
intersections in Figure 7.1, but you will see them anyway! You are a silly
human just like the rest of us.
Image: Donnelly
It’s important for you to internalize the fact that mere awareness of a
bias does not make you immune to it. So first we will examine the different
types of trader bias, then discuss techniques to deal with each. This chapter
will outline the types of bias that vex traders, and present specific methods
you can use to avoid, or at least reduce, their potential damage.
Trader Bias #1: Overconfidence
The only thing I am 100% sure of is that anyone who is 100% sure of
anything is not worth listening to.
MATTHEW GITTINS (a well-known FX spirit guide), 2019
As mentioned in Part 1, overconfidence is the most important and most
devastating 
bias 
in 
trading. 
The 
line 
between 
confidence 
and
overconfidence is wafer thin.
Confidence is critical but overconfidence is deadly.
If you think all your trades are 5-star home run/amazeballs ideas, your
ability to determine the expected value of those trades is likely to be
hampered 
by 
this 
overly 
rose-colored 
view 
of 
the 
trade’s 
prospects.
Overconfidence leads to overtrading, poor assessments of probability, and
rigid, closed-minded assessments. Overconfident traders are also less likely
to 
explore 
alternative 
hypotheses 
and 
will 
embrace 
confirmatory
information much more openly than contradictory info.
Overconfident traders:
take too much risk
trade too frequently
behave recklessly
make poor assessments of probability
do not keep an open mind
overweight evidence that confirms their idea and ignore evidence that
does not
fail to consider alternative hypotheses
refuse to admit when they are wrong
In the 2020 Super Bowl, the San Francisco 49ers were up 13-10 early in
the fourth quarter. They intercepted a pass to take a commanding 20-10 lead
and the entire 49ers defense ran into the end zone for a show-offy group
celebration and team photograph.
Even if you are not an NFL football fan, you can probably guess what
happened next. The opposing quarterback, Patrick Mahomes put up 21
straight points. The Kansas City Chiefs won 31-20 and Mahomes is now
my favorite quarterback of all time. The San Francisco 49ers were reckless
and loose. They failed to consider the alternative hypothesis (that they
might lose).
A less cocky team in that spot would be thinking about finishing and
winning the Super Bowl, not assembling like a group of clowns in the end
zone while the opposing team game-plans the next possession.
There is nothing more dangerous than a team that celebrates as if they
won the championship before the game’s over. By the same token, there is
no trader more likely to dump a huge wad of cash than the one who pumps
his fist, celebrating a trade he hasn’t squared up yet.
Don’t do this in the middle of a football game! Photo by Doug Benc (AP Images)
Perhaps surprisingly, research shows that the more difficult a task, the
more overconfident people tend to be. This is obviously a problem when it
comes to finance, given its extraordinary challenges. Research shows that
training and experience can reduce miscalibration (of confidence), but only
to a minor degree. You must appreciate and understand that we all tend
toward overconfidence. Remain humble and do your best to consider what
you don’t know or might be missing in a given situation.
For a fascinating read on overconfidence and miscalibration, Google:
“Calibration of Probabilities: The State of the Art to 1980” by Lichtenstein,
Fischoff and Philips. Not only is the paper full of interesting insights, it was
scanned from a typewritten document presented to the US Navy in 1981, so
it has a cool retro vibe. And it’s not boring.
There are three types of overconfidence:
1. Overestimation, where people tend to overestimate how well they
will perform a task.
2. Overplacement, where people grossly overestimate their rank or
placement among others. This is also known as the “better-than-
average effect”. Most individuals think of themselves as better than
average at most tasks, even though it is not mathematically possible
for more than 50% of individuals to be better than average. There has
been considerable research on this topic. One of the earliest studies
showed that 93% people surveyed in the US and 69% of Swedes
thought they were better than average drivers!
68
3. Miscalibration. This occurs when an individual believes his ability
to estimate something (say, the price of a stock) is better than the
reality. His confidence interval should be wide but it is narrow.
Research shows that overconfidence can have positive consequences in
many 
aspects 
of 
life. 
Overconfidence 
helps 
with 
ambition, 
morale,
persistence, and helps individuals signal a better-than-reality level of skill
or knowledge to peers. Overconfident people are viewed by peers as more
competent than properly calibrated people.
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
when 
it 
comes 
to 
trading 
(and 
investing):
overconfidence is unambiguously negative.
There 
is 
so 
much 
research 
showing 
that 
overconfidence 
leads 
to
negative outcomes in both trading and investing that it’s hard to know
where to begin. The first study I want to discuss
69 
uses miscalibration to
assess subjects’ potential overconfidence and then compares that to their
trading performance. A standard psychological questionnaire to measure
calibration asks subjects to give a low and high estimate for difficult
questions such as:
Martin Luther King’s age at death.
Length of the Nile River (in miles).
Number of countries that are members of OPEC.
Number of books in the Old Testament.
Weight of an empty Boeing 747 (in kilograms).
And so on. Properly calibrated individuals will write down low to high
ranges that include the correct answer most of the time. Overconfident or
miscalibrated individuals will answer with ranges that are too tight and
often do not include the correct answer.
In the Biais et al. study, subject miscalibration was measured and then
subjects were grouped into quartiles from most to least miscalibrated. The
subjects were then placed in an experimental asset trading market. At the
end, trading profits were checked against miscalibration to check for a
relationship. 
As 
you 
might 
guess, 
there 
was 
a 
strong 
relationship.
Miscalibrated individuals performed worst and well-calibrated individuals
killed it (see Figure 7.2).
Image: Donnelly, with data from the paper cited above
This gets at the idea of knowing what you know and knowing what you
don’t know. If you have no idea about an answer, you should answer with
an extremely wide range. People that don’t have a good understanding of
their own lack of knowledge perform poorly in this trading experiment and
I believe these experimental results match real life outcomes. It is important
to know what you know and also to be humble about what you don’t know.
As Mark Twain or Josh Billings once said:
“It ain’t what you don’t know that gets you into trouble. It’s what you know
for sure that just ain’t so.”
Alpha traders have intellectual humility.
Prolonged time in the market inevitably beats the overconfidence out of
you. Traders who have survived for many years understand that no matter
how smooth the sailing is right now, there is always another storm just over
the horizon; no matter how much you know, you barely know anything.
The 
study 
just 
referenced 
shows 
a 
direct 
connection 
between
miscalibration and trading performance. There is often a more indirect
connection 
too, 
as 
overconfidence 
leads 
to 
overtrading 
which 
reduces
performance 
through 
higher 
commission 
or 
bid/offer 
spread 
paid 
plus
reduced trade selectivity.
Patient, well-calibrated and aggressive traders will trade less often than
impatient traders who always think the market is wrong and they are right.
Properly-calibrated traders understand the public signal (the market price) is
probably correct most of the time and they need a very strong reason before
believing in the superiority of their own private signal (their alternative
view of where the price should be or where it’s going).
If the market was always right, you could never make money. On the
other hand, markets are generally very efficient; they are usually right, or
correct themselves quickly. You should always give the market the benefit
of the doubt and think about what you might be missing before you decide
to challenge the wisdom of the crowd (i.e., the current market price) by
entering a trade.
Another excellent study conducted in 2001 looked at six years’ worth of
retail discount brokerage trading records for more than 35,000 households
70
.
The study concluded that men executed 45% more trades than women and
this overtrading was the primary reason women outperformed men by about
1% (net returns).
In another study
71
, researchers measured subjects’ confidence and then
set up ten experimental asset markets. They constructed some markets of
overconfident traders and some of people with a more rational view of their
own abilities. Prices in the rational market tracked the fundamental asset
value fairly accurately while the market of overconfident traders saw higher
prices, greater volatility, higher trading volumes and more bubbles.
Anyone watching the NASDAQ in 1999 or bitcoin in 2017 (and 2021)
can 
see 
how 
this 
experiment 
is 
an 
accurate 
reflection 
of 
reality.
Overconfident traders think they are right and the market is wrong. They
overvalue their own opinion (private signal) and underweight the market
price (public signal).
The majority of the research shows that women are less overconfident
than men and that they outperform men in trading and investing.
…girls are not necessarily less confident than boys, but rather they are
less overconfident.
72
…although both men and women were overconfident, undergraduate
men were especially overconfident when incorrect.
73
That last quote is from a paper called: “Highly confident but wrong.”
What a great title. It makes me smile. And here is the conclusion of an even
more topical study:
This 
paper 
studies 
performance 
predictions 
in 
the 
7-item 
Cognitive
Reflection Test (CRT) and whether they differ by gender. After participants
completed the CRT, they predicted their own (i), the other participants’ (ii),
men’s (iii), and women’s (iv) number of correct answers. In keeping with
existing literature, men scored higher on the CRT than women and both
men and women were too optimistic about their own performance. When
we compare gender-specific predictions, we observe that men think they
perform significantly better than other men and do so significantly more
than women.
74
That quote is particularly relevant because it comes from a study of
gender differences related to the Cognitive Reflection Test. Recall the CRT
is the test we covered in Chapter 4. Performance on the CRT is evidence of
rationality and predicts trading success. A well-calibrated estimate of CRT
performance is also likely to predict trading success.
There is a strange irony that aggressive Type A males are often attracted
to 
trading 
and 
this 
sub-category 
is 
(in 
general) 
most 
likely 
to 
be
overconfident. Then again, it also makes sense. Risk-seeking behaviors and
overconfidence tend to go together (if you think you’re invincible, you take
more risk) while less overconfident but risk-averse individuals are not
interested in, or likely to be good at, trading.
There is much more research I could present but I think you get the two
main points:
1. Women outperform men in trading, mostly because they are less
overconfident.
2. Overconfident traders trade too much and underperform those with
well-calibrated confidence.
How to combat overconfidence
1. Respect the market. The market is not always right, but it is not
often wrong.
2. Do a pre-mortem on your trades. Picture the trade going wrong and
see if you can imagine what might have caused the failure. This puts
you in the mindset opposite to overconfidence. Instead of assuming
it’s the best trade ever and you are smarter than the market, you
assume it’s a failure and ask yourself why.
3. Be aggressively open-minded and stay humble. No matter how
confident 
you 
are, 
there’s 
still 
a 
good 
chance 
you 
are 
wrong.
Embrace the fact that part of being a good trader is accepting that
you will frequently be wrong. Daniel Negreanu (one of the best
poker players in the world) still loses countless hands.
4. Bounce trade ideas off people you respect. I send out my trade ideas
every day and the feedback I get is tremendously useful on many
levels. First, people that disagree with me will present reasons they
disagree and I can assess these reasons and recalibrate my confidence
level. If the reasons are strong enough, I might even change my mind
or exit the trade. Second, I get a good sense of sentiment. If everyone
agrees 
with 
me, 
the 
market 
is 
most 
likely 
positioned 
that 
way
already. If everyone disagrees, I am probably in the minority position
and if I can comfortably rebut the counterarguments, my idea is more
powerful.
Trader bias # 2 : Overtrading
Trading can be incredibly fun. That’s good. But that is also a problem!
Enjoyment should always be a side benefit of trading and not the primary
objective. The first objective must always be profit. Very often, traders will
get involved in the market out of boredom or out of a need for stimulation.
This gets them into trades that have weak (or no) logic and low or negative
expected value. Remember: tight / aggressive. Look for juicy, low hanging
fruit and pluck it. Don’t climb up into the treetops and risk a big fall. Be
patient.
How powerful is trading as a stimulant? Very. This is from a 2001
study
75
:
The psychological processes underlying the anticipation and experience
of monetary prospects and outcomes would appear to play an important
role in gambling and in other behaviors that entail decision making under
uncertainty. In this regard, it is striking that the activations seen in the
NAc, 
SLEA, 
VT, 
and 
GOb 
in 
response 
to 
monetary 
prospects 
and
outcomes overlap those observed in response to cocaine infusions in
subjects addicted to cocaine.
In case you are wondering: NAc (nucleus accumbens), SLEA, VT, and
GOb are four reward-related brain regions. And the following is from
Andrew Lo’s testimony to Congress on Hedge Funds, Systemic Risk, and
the Crisis of 2007-2008:
… the same neural circuitry that responds to cocaine, food, and sex—the
mesolimbic dopamine reward system that releases dopamine in the
nucleus accumbens—has been shown to be activated by monetary gain
as well.
Both the anticipation and receipt of monetary gains trigger the reward
circuitry of the brain. Human nature is to seek activation of this circuitry
both consciously and unconsciously. You must come to grips with the fact
that trading often involves sitting there doing nothing, just waiting for a
great opportunity. Unfortunately, the numbers moving up and down on that
screen are like squirrels, and you are a dog.
Various commentators, including Jean-Paul Sartre, have commented
that war is “…hours of boredom interspersed with moments of terror”.
Trading can often be the same. There is a strange temporal rhythm to
trading where time speeds up and slows down depending on what is going
on.
I remember instances after a major economic announcement or market
event where I did 5 or 6 big trades, got into a position and out of a position
and made hundreds of thousands of dollars. The time elapsed felt like 15
minutes. Then, later in the day when things were quiet, I would go look at
the 1-minute chart and could not see enough detail to capture what had
happened. I would have to go to a 1-second chart to see the levels at which I
did those 5 or 6 trades and I would realize that the entire sequence, which
felt like 15 minutes, actually took more like 90 seconds.
This 
time 
dilation 
is 
a 
common 
feature 
in 
sports, 
military 
action,
trading, and other fast-moving pursuits that require rapid-fire, high-stakes
decision making. Of course, the stakes are much higher in the military but
the mental effect where time slows down is similar.
Once you get that feeling of excitement, the in the zone moments where
the P&L piles up so fast you can’t believe your eyes—you want that feeling
again. Problem is, you can’t get that feeling by trading low probability set
ups. Instead, those low EV trades give you that “why did I do that” feeling.
You can’t trade to chase a rush. Your only goal each day should be to
maximize P&L.
In 2018, Stephen Brown of NYU et al. conducted a cool study where
they dug through vehicle ownership records and found the make and model
of car driven by more than 1,000 hedge fund managers
76
. Then, they
compared fund performance to car type and found this intuitive result:
Using a novel data set of automobile purchases by hedge fund managers,
this 
paper 
exploits 
cross-sectional 
variation 
in 
vehicle 
attributes 
to
investigate the effects of sensation seeking on investment behavior. We
argue that the purchase of a powerful sports car signals the intent to drive
in a spirited fashion and therefore conveys a propensity for sensation
seeking. Our results empirically validate the advice given by some hedge
fund allocators to avoid managers who drive fancy sports cars. We find
that managers who own performance cars take on more investment risk
than do other managers, without being compensated with higher returns.
Therefore, performance car owners deliver lower Sharpe and information
ratios than do non-performance car owners.
The incremental risk-taking by sports car enthusiasts extends beyond
financial markets to the fund operations arena. Sensation seekers are
more likely to terminate their funds, disclose violations on their Form
ADVs, 
and 
exhibit 
greater 
operational 
risk. 
Sensation 
seeking 
also
shapes trading behavior. Managers who embrace powerful sports cars
trade more frequently, actively, and unconventionally than do managers
who eschew such cars. They also gravitate toward lottery-like stocks.
Trading hurts the performance of sensation seekers more than it hurts the
performance of sensation avoiders.
Here is another excerpt:
… sports car drivers underperform non-sports car drivers by 2.92% per
year while minivan drivers outperform non-minivan drivers by 3.22% per
year.
Jesse Livermore did not drive a mini-van! :] This is more evidence that
you can be risk-averse and still succeed as a trader. The researchers also
found that hedge fund managers who received more speeding tickets also
underperformed, which is consistent with the idea of sensation-seeking
leading to more risk but not better returns. Other studies also confirm:
sensation-seeking traders overtrade, pay more commission, and perform
worse than non-sensation-seeking traders
77
.
You need to be honest with yourself. Just like it’s OK to be risk averse,
it is OK to be sensation-seeking or boredom-averse. You just need to be
aware of it and institute a set of rules to control your behavior and manage
your weaknesses. You also need to accept that this sensation-seeking or
disinhibition is a weakness you will need to deal with throughout your
career. Attitudes toward risk are highly innate and very difficult to modify
even with the healthiest, most growth-oriented mindset.
Sensation-seeking and gambling often go hand in hand. To get a sense
of whether you are trading to feed your desire for excitement (i.e., as a form
of gambling) take a look at the following excerpt from the DSM-V. The
DSM-V or DSM5 is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders. 
It 
contains 
descriptions, 
symptoms, 
and 
other 
criteria 
for
identifying mental disorders and it is the authoritative guide to mental
illness throughout most of the world.
Here, 
I 
have 
taken 
the 
section 
on 
identifying 
gambling 
disorder
(previously 
known 
as 
pathological 
gambling) 
and 
replaced 
the 
word
“gambling” with “trading”. Do any of these line items sound familiar to
you?
78
A diagnosis of gambling trading disorder requires at least four of the
following during the past year:
1. Need to trade with increasing amount of money to achieve the desired excitement
2. Restless or irritable when trying to cut down or stop trading
3. Repeated unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back on or stop trading
4. Frequent thoughts about trading (such as reliving past trading experiences, planning
the next trade, thinking of ways to get money to trade)
5. Often trading when feeling distressed
6. After losing money trading, often returning to get even (referred to as “chasing” one’s
losses)
7. Lying to conceal trading activity
8. Jeopardizing or losing a significant relationship, job, or educational/career opportunity
because of trading
9. Relying on others to help with money problems caused by trading
Many traders would recognize their own thought patterns in that list. A
trader who scores himself as 10 out of 10 for risk appetite might see himself
in five or six of those behaviors. Think about these criteria for gambling
disorder and be honest with yourself about how trading impacts your life. It
should be an enjoyable, intellectually stimulating profession, not a way to
achieve a gambler’s high.
Jesse 
Livermore 
is 
celebrated 
as 
a 
trading 
hero 
but 
it 
is 
worth
remembering that he took his own life after going bankrupt for a third time,
after his second divorce. He is a trading hero and a cautionary tale wrapped
into one.
The process and mechanics of trading and gambling overlap. Both
involve risk management, probability, randomness, risk of ruin, emotion,
bias, and irrational human beings. Bad trading can often be very much like
casino gambling. It is impulsive, emotional and has a negative expected
value.
Excellent trading deals with incomplete information and variance of a
game like blackjack, but has a positive expected value, like a professional
poker player at a table of weaker opponents.
One final note here: The term “gambling” usually describes a form of
entertainment where the gambler’s odds or expectation are negative. Some
forms of gambling, like poker, can have a positive expectation if the player
is highly skilled. I would say that when a highly-skilled and highly-
disciplined poker player sits down at a table full of tourists or recreational
poker players, that is not gambling.
The skilled player has a significant mathematical edge. Poker is much
closer to trading than most forms of gambling because it offers a small
group of highly-skilled players the ability to generate abnormal returns
consistently. In other words, poker is skill, not luck. Research confirms this
unequivocally.
I 
think 
it 
is 
interesting 
that 
research 
also 
shows 
that 
hedge 
fund
managers who are skilled in Texas Hold ‘em outperform those who are not.
Here’s the conclusion reached by Yan Lu, Sandra Mortal and Sugata Ray in
a 2019 research paper
79
:
We find that hedge fund managers who do well in poker tournaments
have significantly better fund performance. This effect is stronger for
tournaments with more entrants, larger buy-ins, larger cash prizes and for
managers who win multiple tournaments, suggesting poker skills are
correlated with fund management skills.
Like Taylor in Billions. This further solidifies the skill link between
poker and trading and separates them from luck-based gambling such as
roulette, 
craps 
and 
(mostly) 
blackjack
80
. 
Trading, 
like 
poker, 
involves
significant 
variance 
and 
path 
dependence 
but 
long-run 
outcomes 
are
primarily driven by skill. We will talk much more about skill, luck, and
variance in Chapter 11. For now, remember:
If you want to gamble, go to a casino.
A substantial portion of investor underperformance can be explained
simply by the fact that investors are active when they should be doing
nothing. This is proven again and again by the consistent and sizeable
outperformance of index funds vs. active managers and by the poor returns
in retail accounts. Most of the time you should be doing nothing!
This is a simple concept but one that is extremely difficult to put into
practice in real life.
Your default mode should always be to do nothing.
Flat is the most powerful position in trading. When you have no
position, you are unbiased, ready to pounce, and unconstrained by any prior
view or notions. You are not anchored on any price or level. You are most
open-minded and nimble when you have no position.
Yet people often feel bad when they are flat, especially if they remain
flat for many days. “I’m not putting my capital to work”, they might think.
Or “My boss is gonna think I’m lazy.” Human nature equates doing nothing
with laziness, and in most jobs that’s a pretty accurate assessment! An
employee who sits there and does nothing over multiple days is probably
not doing a great job in most roles. In trading, though, the opposite can be
true. Quite often, the trader doing nothing is the wolf waiting silently in the
long grass. Ready to pounce. An Alpha Trader.
Take pride and comfort in your ability to remain flat. The very nature of
the tight/aggressive framework in trading is that you should be flat as often
as possible and only engage when the expected value of a trade is high.
Flat is good. A trader with no position has no bias.
How to combat overtrading
1. Think about your motivations for trading. Do you overtrade?
Why? Self-awareness is key before any action can be taken to fix the
problem.
2. Create speedbumps that must be cleared before you can trade.
Maybe that means filling in a quick pre-trade checklist. Maybe it
means going through an execution desk instead of pressing the
buttons yourself. If all you have to do is press a button to trade, you
can easily become the lab rat pushing the little button for more
cocaine. If your process includes a speedbump or two, it is harder to
overtrade.
The 
idea 
is 
to 
create 
friction 
around 
unwanted 
behaviors. 
For
example, I find when I leave my orders with a broker, I am much less
likely to cancel them than if I watch them myself. It can be rude or
annoying to cancel a close order with a broker and so the bar to
cancel is higher. This is good. You should not be cancelling your take
profit sell order just because “it looks bid”. It always looks bid at the
high.
At one particular bank I worked at, we had the ability to trade at any
time through an app on our phones. Most other banks did not have
that functionality. As you might expect, the ability to trade on your
phone was incredibly convenient but it also led to overtrading. It
takes particularly high conviction for me to contact a trader in Hong
Kong or London and put a trade on, but if all I need to do is open my
phone and press a couple of buttons, I am much more likely to put on
any trade idea that pops into my head at whatever time of night.
A good trading process usually involves some sort of written trade
plan. It is not always practical to completely write up a trade before
you put it on, given that short-term trading often requires quick
thinking and rapid execution. That said, once you have the trade on,
you usually have plenty of time to write it up afterwards. By doing
so, you justify the trade, you game plan it and you may find out that
the trade was a dumb idea before you get stopped out. Have the
flexibility to get right back out of a trade if you realize as you write it
up that the idea is weak.
3. Create hurdles and barriers between you and the market. If you
can trade with a single click, you are going to trade more. If you can
trade on your phone at 3 a.m. (and your phone is on), you will trade
more. If you need to convene a 10-person investment committee to
vote on a new investment, you are going to trade less. If you need to
log into Bloomberg or call someone at 3 a.m. in order to execute, you
will trade less.
Obviously this is a continuum and there can be huge negatives to
slowing down your process, too. But knowing that overtrading and
too much activity is the biggest leak for many traders, what can you
do to slow down your execution process? What is the right balance
of speed/accessibility and restraint/selective trading? I would say it’s
too 
easy 
for 
most 
people 
to 
trade. 
Can 
you 
create 
a 
trading
framework that allows you to express your views but that also
constrains any impulsive urge to jump into new trades or out of
existing ones?
4. Stop staring at the screen. Take a break from the screens once in a
while. Staring at price action will lead to suboptimal decisions
triggered by price action and random noise. Once you have a position
on, let it breathe. Price action is mostly meaningless. Staring at the
screen ups the amount of stimulus you receive each day and may
lead to excess action.
5. Set a maximum number of trades per period. This needs to be
logical and based on your trading history. Answer this question:
When I am trading well, how many trades do I execute per day or per
week? Then set a maximum that you feel is close to optimal. A lower
number forces you to be more selective (and tight/aggressive). On
the other hand, your returns will suffer if you set the limit too low.
Market conditions should be the primary determinant of when and
how much you trade, but a maximum trades figure anchors you
around the appropriate level of activity.
My time horizon is short and my trades usually last one hour to three
days. If I take more than two or three positions in a day, I am usually
overtrading. As a market maker, I tend to trade much more than an
average hedge fund PM and this has become a bad habit for me at
times. Client trades provide a convenient excuse for a market maker
to take on risk that makes no sense. Instead of covering a client trade
for a small profit or loss, the temptation can be to justify the position
and ride it. It’s the endowment effect again… We overvalue trades
we have on. It’s dumb, but we all do it.
A similar rule you can set for yourself (which is easier to follow if
you are mostly a day trader) is to set a maximum number of line
items. When I was day trading stocks, I never had more than three
positions. There is a good reason for this. When things go wrong, it’s
hard to manage 14 line items in your book and anyway, most traders
will find there is high correlation between their positions. Instead of
spreading yourself thin, focus on one or two core positions and put
all 
your 
risk 
where 
it 
belongs. 
Diversification 
has 
benefits 
in
investing but good trading is all about concentrated risk.
6. When you put on a trade, establish firm stop loss, take profit and
reassessment triggers. Then, do your very best not to take the trade
off before one of them hits. Overtrading doesn’t just mean putting on
too many trades. Often it means taking off trades prematurely for no
reason. It is hard to stick with a trade when nothing is going on but
remember that most of the movement in a security comes in short
bursts of activity that take very little time. Most of the time is boring,
random drift.
Let’s say you spend an hour analyzing spreadsheets, thinking about
positioning, planning out your trade, etc. Your idea is solid, all the
planets are aligned and you decide it is time to go short Venn
Corporation (VENN). Let’s go.
You sell 1,000 shares of VENN, risking 1% to make 3%. Two hours
later, the market is quiet. VENN has been stuck in a tiny range and
you’re bored. A random headline comes out that is vaguely bullish
one of VENN’s competitors and a flash of a thought crosses your
mind that VENN might rally in sympathy. You press a few buttons
and cut the trade.
The stock rallies 30 cents then drops a buck as the market decides the
story is good for the competitor, but bad for VENN. Now your trade
idea should have been 70 cents in the money and instead you cut for
reasons you don’t even really understand. You are now in a tricky
position. Do you get back in at worse levels? Or just forget about it?
Man, if this thing drops 3% this afternoon …
(EVIL VOICE IN YOUR HEAD: And you know it’s gonna drop…
‘Cuz you cut like a chicken!)
If you had input your stop loss and your take profit in an automated
system 
and 
controlled 
your 
impulsive 
desire 
to 
press 
buttons…
Things would be so much better. Remember, once you have a
position on, you are steaming hot bias stew. Your first assumption
should always be: the original plan was the best.
Stick to the original plan unless material new information emerges.
Or, better yet, just stick to your original parameters every time. Sure,
new 
information 
might 
matter, 
but 
your 
interpretation 
of 
new
information once you have a position on is often biased. Always err
on the side of inaction. When you have a position on, you should
almost always ride it out until the stop loss or take profit hits. Not
always. But almost always.
7. If you have a constant need for activity, find productive outlets.
Every time you have an idea for a backtest, trading strategy or
analysis, write it down so that you have a list of projects to pursue
when you are bored. I am constantly jotting down stuff like “What
hour of the day has the highest volume in USDJPY?” “Does bitcoin
outperform on weekends?” etc. Then, when I’m bored, I can work on
these questions instead of sitting there twitching as I try to keep my
fingers off the BUY and SELL buttons.
When in doubt: Do nothing.
There is a fascinating 1975 essay by Charles Ellis called: “The Loser’s
Game”. It is mostly fascinating because even back in 1975 it was obvious
(and 
easily 
proven 
with 
data) 
that 
active 
management 
of 
investment
portfolios consistently underperformed passive management. This is still
true today but for some reason it took the world about 40 years to catch on
and now money is finally flooding out of active funds and into passive
indexes.
The essay is worth a read; there are some great analogies in it and it
goes into some detail on why active will underperform passive by definition
due to transaction costs. Later in this book, I show just how dramatic
transaction costs are as a drag on your performance. The more you trade,
the more money you leak. Remember this: All other things being equal it is
a fundamental truth of trading and investing… The more you trade, the
more you pay.
Make fewer, higher quality decisions.
This is the essence of the tight/aggressive way. This is a core behavior
of the Alpha Trader.
Trader bias # 3 : Confirmation bias
Faced with the choice of changing one’s mind or proving that there is no
need to do so, almost everyone gets busy on the proof.
JOHN KENNETH GALBRAITH
There is a good chance you already know about confirmation bias. It is
one of the best-known and most-discussed forms of bias out there. It is
most-discussed because it is critically important and hard to fight, even
when you understand it.
Confirmation bias is the tendency for humans to seek and incorporate
information that supports their existing view, and ignore or reject new
information that does not.
Instead 
of 
impartially 
evaluating 
new 
evidence 
in 
the 
search 
for
unbiased conclusions about the market, people tend to stick to their current
view and then look for evidence to support it, while ignoring evidence that
does not.
While Kahneman and Tversky tend to be the names we most associate
with 
behavioral 
bias, 
confirmation 
bias 
was 
discovered 
by 
British
psychologist Peter Wason. His experiment was simple. He gave subjects the
series: 2-4-6, then told them it satisfied his Pattern Rule. He then told
subjects they could construct other sets of three numbers to test their
assumptions about the Pattern Rule. Each time the subject showed the
experimenter 
their 
three 
numbers, 
the 
experimenter 
would 
tell 
them
whether or not it satisfied the Pattern Rule until the subject was confident
they figured out the rule.
Subjects would test either a series like 8-10-12 (satisfies rule) and 22-
24-26 (satisfies rule) or 3-6-9 (satisfies rule) and 5-10-15 (satisfies rule) or
4-8-12 (satisfies rule) and 10-20-30 (satisfies rule) until eventually most
would answer that the Pattern Rule is either:
Count up by 2’s
Count up by a multiple
Some formula like add the first two numbers to get the third number.
But whatever answer people came to, they tended to get an idea and
then test it over and over until they were certain it was right. What they did
not do, generally, was try deliberately-wrong sequences to see if those
might work.
The actual Pattern Rule was “any three numbers that increase in value”.
Anyone that tested 1-2-3, for example, would have instantly ruled out all
three patterns listed above. But subjects were always busy testing patterns
that fit their rule without ever thinking to test those that did not. Instead of
looking for more and more evidence that their hypothesis was correct, they
should have tried sequences that did not fit their hypothesis, in an attempt to
invalidate it.
Look harder for evidence and arguments against your hypothesis.
Confirmation bias is one of the most harmful bugs in human reasoning.
You see it everywhere in media and on Twitter as consumers of information
ignore competing views and augment their existing opinions with more and
more confirmatory evidence.
The concept is especially disruptive in trading and investing because it
inhibits good thinking, locks us into a view, and blocks out useful non-
confirmatory information. Also, other types of bias (such as the endowment
effect) work together with confirmation bias and make it very difficult for
investors to change their mind once they take a position in the market. You
see confirmation bias in action almost every day on a trading floor.
Example: You have been following Zzap Corp. for months and you
bought the stock at good levels. Everyone has been excitedly waiting for the
hot new Zzap Flidget Fone to come out. A headline hits:
*ZZAP REPORTS 90-DAY FLIDGET FONE LAUNCH DELAY DUE TO
SUPPLIER ISSUES.
An unbiased market watcher might think that is bearish. The stock drops
4%. But you are a fan of Zzap, you are long the stock and so you might
think something more like: “Meh, this isn’t big news, the phone’s still
coming out. It’s not even Zzap’s fault. This is an overreaction. The stock’s
gonna bounce.”
Meanwhile, two analysts downgrade the stock. They say this is further
evidence that Zzap’s supply chain is overly reliant on a single chip supplier
in Vietnam and that the supplier is severely mismanaged. The stock drops
another 4%. You might think: “Man, I can’t believe how much the market is
overreacting here!”
On the other hand, bears are probably yelling: “I knew this was gonna
happen!”
How to combat confirmation bias
1) 
Read 
about 
confirmation 
bias. 
It 
is 
one 
of 
the 
most 
catalogued
psychological 
phenomena 
out 
there 
and 
the 
research 
is 
surprisingly
interesting. Confirmation bias is powerful and kind of frightening because it
severely compromises the human capacity for reason. For example, if you
take two people who have opposite views on a divisive issue like capital
punishment, 
and 
give 
them 
new 
information, 
here’s 
what 
happens.
Excerpted from an excellent article on confirmation bias from the New
Yorker
81
.
One of the most famous of these [confirmation bias experiments] was
conducted, again, at Stanford. For this experiment, researchers rounded
up 
a 
group 
of 
students 
who 
had 
opposing 
opinions 
about 
capital
punishment. Half the students were in favor of it and thought that it
deterred crime; the other half were against it and thought that it had no
effect on crime.
The students were asked to respond to two studies. One provided data in
support of the deterrence argument, and the other provided data that
called it into question. Both studies—you guessed it—were made up, and
had been designed to present what were, objectively speaking, equally
compelling statistics. The students who had originally supported capital
punishment rated the pro-deterrence data highly credible and the anti-
deterrence data unconvincing; the students who’d originally opposed
capital punishment did the reverse. At the end of the experiment, the
students were asked once again about their views. Those who’d started
out pro-capital punishment were now even more in favor of it; those who’d
opposed it were even more hostile.
I 
have 
found 
over 
the 
years 
that 
the 
more 
deeply 
I 
read 
about
confirmation bias, the more easily I can see it happening to me in real time.
I have realized mid-sentence sometimes that I am shooting down the
importance of a headline simply because I am positioned the wrong way.
The longer you trade, the more you will notice that when news comes
out and you are flat, you react quickly and without bias. When news comes
out that goes against your view and position, you will often hesitate or
freeze or explain away the news. Watching yourself make a decision
influenced by confirmation bias in real time is the first step toward beating
the problem. Until you see yourself doing it, you have not really recognized
how confirmation bias negatively impacts your decision making.
2) Actively consider other hypotheses. We talked about this in Chapter 5.
If you can spend two hours reading reports and studying charts and coming
up with a thesis on why you want to buy PommeTech stock…. Can’t you at
least take 15 minutes to think about why NOT to buy it? Or, even better,
think about the reasons you might want to go short PommeTech.
This intellectual exercise greatly strengthens your trade ideas because if
you can come up with five good reasons to short PommeTech at this point,
your bull case weakens. If you can only think of two, and have good
rebuttals to both, that’s more like it. And finally, if you can think of exactly
zero reasons anyone would want to short PommeTech, your thinking is
probably biased and you better ask around.
Step outside yourself and pretend you are an analyst forced to write a
bearish piece about PommeTech. What might it say? While many smart
individuals are happy to play Devil’s advocate whenever they hear someone
else’s ideas, they are often unable to poke holes in their own logic.
Not only does actively considering other sides of the story help deal
with confirmation bias, it can also help you later on. If the facts of the story
start to change, you may recognize the competing hypothesis coming true
and your hypothesis losing steam. Having explored the bearish case, you
are more likely to recognize it when it comes along as opposed to remaining
blind to it or shrugging it off.
Once you have a great trade idea:
poke some holes in it for a few minutes.
3) Be a Bayesian. Think about the world now as your prior and commit to
updating as new information comes in. If today you think the probability
that Italy leaves the Eurozone in the next 12 months is only 10%, and that is
a big reason you are bullish euro, adjust your probability honestly as new
information comes in. Don’t just scan the news for bullish stories about
Italy and skip over the bad news. That sounds silly but it is exactly what
people do!
Read both sides of the story and continuously adjust your worldview.
When you have a solid grip on Bayesian thinking, you will suffer less from
confirmation bias (“Bayesian thinking” is explained in Chapter 5).
4) Create a quick pros and cons sheet for any trade that involves
meaningful risk. This is such a simple exercise and your mom probably
told you about it when you were 11. Still, it’s effective. When I am making
a major decision (new job, new home, kids’ school, etc.) I always create a
list of pros and cons. Quite often, the decision becomes much easier
afterward because the result of the pros/cons list is so clear. Research shows
this 
simple 
procedure 
produces 
a 
marked 
improvement 
in 
the
appropriateness of confidence judgments
82
.
I do the same thing when I’m writing about trade ideas. Once I’m done
writing my thesis or trade idea in AM/FX (pros), I spend a few minutes
trying to take the other side (cons). This is important because I’m sending
my ideas out to thousands of people and I don’t want to look stupid, but it’s
also part of a strong intellectual process and sound trade idea development.
Questions I ask:
Why might this trade not work?
What are the key assumptions I have made?
What are the key risks to the idea? What might go wrong?
Imagine the trade as it crashes and burns. What happened? Sometimes
by imagining the adverse scenario, we can tease out risks we might
have missed. This is the pre-mortem concept discussed in the section
on overconfidence.
In the climactic rap battle in the movie 8 Mile, Papa Doc wins the coin
toss 
and 
elects 
to 
let 
B-Rabbit 
(Eminem) 
go 
first. 
Eminem 
uses 
the
“Stealing Thunder” technique to bring up and tear down and run through
every insult that his opponent might possibly use on him. By the time Papa
Doc hits the stage, there is nothing left to say. Eminem refuted every
possible argument Papa Doc could have made.
Your trade ideas should be like that. You know the contrary view so
well, you can dissect and refute it better than anyone else.
5) If you have a particularly strong economic worldview, don’t get
sucked into the echo chambers that support specific narratives. Too
often, the bears read only bearish material while the bulls are plugged only
into cheerleading analysts. Gold and bitcoin bulls can spend the whole day
reading bullish forecasts and stories on the internet but they will laugh off
anything bearish with “Those guys don’t get it.” Don’t be like that.
Give 
weight 
to, 
and 
spend 
time 
evaluating, 
credible 
opposing
viewpoints. Don’t lock into one view. It’s intellectually lazy and can be
hazardous to both your wealth and your credibility. Discount the views and
analysis of anyone who always has the same view.
There is a reason I sign off AM/FX each day with: Good luck, be
nimble. Intellectually nimble is the best mindset for successful trading.
It is important to know that confirmation bias is not strongly related to
intelligence. This is consistent with the idea that rational thinking and
intelligence are not the same thing
83
. That should be one of your main
takeaways from this book.
Smart people do stupid things. All the time.
To succeed in trading, you can’t just be smart. You also have to be
rational. You have probably spent most of your life getting smarter. Now it’s
time to train yourself to be more rational. To quote from an article titled
“Why Intelligent People do Foolish Things”
84
:
The absence of knowledge in areas important to rational thought creates
a mindware gap. These important areas are not adequately assessed by
typical intelligence tests. Mindware necessary for rational thinking is often
missing 
from 
the 
formal 
education 
curriculum. 
It 
is 
not 
unusual 
for
individuals to graduate from college with minimal knowledge in areas that
are crucial for the development of rational thinking.
Everyone, including you, suffers from confirmation bias.
Trader bias #4 : Extrapolation
One thing you learn after five years or so of working on Wall Street is
that most “forecasts” you read are simply extrapolations of the current
trend. I will show you a few good examples, but I could literally make 100
of these charts and then 100 more if I had time.
Figure 7.3 shows EURUSD in black and the average FX strategist’s
EURUSD forecast in dotted gray. If you look closely, you can see that the
forecast simply follows the trend and turns when the price of EURUSD
turns. The forecast is useless. This is a concept you should get used to. If
you piled up all the research showing humans cannot forecast accurately, it
would 
stretch 
to 
the 
moon. 
I 
strongly 
recommend 
you 
read
Superforecasting by Tetlock and Gardner to get a full grasp of the perils of
forecasting.
The chart is comical (to me at least!) but it’s even funnier when you see
it in real time. In 2017, Emmanuel Macron won the presidency in France
and this was seen as a bullish development for the euro. EURUSD started
trending higher and every analyst set a topside target of 1.15 or 1.20. When
EURUSD rallied to 1.20 fairly quickly, forecasters did not say “mission
accomplished” … They simply raised their forecast to 1.25. When it got to
1.25, they raised their forecast to 1.30.
Take a look near the middle of the chart where EURUSD peaked. You
see the black line crash lower, then the “forecasts” follow a few months
later. As EURUSD sold off hard from 1.25 to 1.18 in April 2018, analysts
climbed over each other to lower their forecasts for months and months.
This is not forecasting—it’s extrapolation.
The default and easy view to take in the market is to assume that
whatever is going on right now will continue. But that is often not how the
world 
works. 
Periods 
of 
outperformance 
are 
very 
often 
followed 
by
reversion to the mean.
This is the logical explanation for the “sophomore jinx”, the Cheer
Hedge, the Sports Illustrated jinx and the Magazine Cover Indicator. A
theme or market move that has become such an important story that it
landed on a magazine cover has probably outperformed in a major way and
thus is more likely to revert to the mean than to further outperform its
already stellar outperformance.
In markets, there is another reason why price reverts to the mean.
Extremely low or high prices change the supply and demand profile for the
asset. If oil goes to $100, new rigs come on board and increase supply and
this pushes the price lower. If oil goes to $20, people buy more fuel-
guzzling 
trucks 
because 
gas 
is 
cheaper. 
This 
increase 
in 
demand 
for
gasoline pushes oil prices back up. If the price of corn triples, companies
will substitute other commodities that are cheaper. And so on.
Watch for changes in supply and demand in your market after large
price changes. Are medium or long-term sellers or buyers entering the
market to take advantage of high or low prices? This change in participant
behavior can mark the beginning of the end of a trend.
The number one input into almost every forecast is the current level and
trend of the asset. There are notable exceptions, such as the fact that
everyone has been (mostly) calling for higher US yields despite a 40-year
trend lower, but generally you will see that when something is going up, it
is forecast to go up more and when something is going down, forecasters
expect it to keep going down.
Extrapolation bias is a form of recency bias. Humans tend to overweight
more recent information in most analysis simply because that information is
more available (i.e., top of mind). Events from years ago are harder to
remember and incorporate. This is why you see analysts put out bullish
predictions for oil when it’s trading at $100 and bearish predictions for oil
when it’s trading at $25.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Check out Figure 7.4. When Greek debt was the most attractive and
yielded 35%, the ratings agencies downgraded it. As of December 2020, it
is the least attractive it has ever been, with yields close to zero. And they
upgraded it. Note that yield moves opposite to the price of the bond so the
ratings agency downgraded the bond at the lows and upgraded it at the
highs.
My point is not to troll the ratings agencies, and I know technically they
are not forecasting, they are just nowcasting. The point is just that when an
asset is in trouble, everyone hates it. When an asset is ripping, everybody
loves it.
Now let’s do oil (see Figure 7.5).
Again, note how the price moves first and the forecast follows and has
no predictive value.
Extrapolation bias does not just impact economists and forecasters, it
impacts traders (big time). Most traders are much more comfortable buying
things that are going up and selling things that are going down. Sometimes
this is an appropriate strategy, often it is not.
The bias manifests in another way besides the tendency to chase the
market higher and lower. Many traders put on a trade, and when it hits their
target, instead of taking profit, they raise their target. “It looks bid! I can’t
take profits here!” they will say.
Be aware of this bias. Notice it in your thought patterns. Be rational. As
my friend The Gold Crow says:
It always looks great on the highs and terrible on the lows.
When there is a strong trend and you have faith in it for multiple
reasons, that’s not extrapolation bias. That’s a rational expectation that the
thing will go up. When a stock rallies three bucks out of nowhere and your
instinct is to buy it because “someone must know something” you are
making an irrational extrapolation.
There are traders out there that have the opposite bias and tend to trade
mean reversion all the time, even when things are trending. That’s me. I am
more biased towards mean reversion and this bias can be just as costly as
extrapolation. Trading mean reversion all the time can be like trying to
catch falling pianos.
Strong trend = falling piano
85
.
Do you like to catch falling pianos?
This is really important: good traders go with the trend, or fade it,
depending on the regime, the setup, the fundamentals, the technicals and so
on. They don’t identify themselves as trend or mean reversion experts.
Don’t say “I’m a mean reversion guy” or “I’m a trend follower”. Different
styles work at different times.
You should identify and trade what works in the current market. Don’t
commit to one trading style and hope the market cooperates. It won’t.
Negative extrapolation
While 
what 
we 
typically 
witness 
in 
financial 
markets 
is 
positive
extrapolation 
(everyone 
assumes 
whatever 
is 
happening 
will 
keep
happening), there can also be the problem of negative extrapolation. That is:
it has never happened before so it can’t happen now. This is a failure of
imagination. The best outlook is to always consider almost any possibility,
no matter how unlikely. This does not mean you need to position for
extremely low probability outcomes; you just need to consider them.
A 
famous 
example 
of 
negative 
extrapolation 
is 
Ben 
Bernanke’s
infamous failure of imagination just before the 2008 Global Financial
Crisis:
INTERVIEWER: Tell me, what is the worst-case scenario? Sir, we have
so many economists coming on our air and saying, “Oh, this is a bubble,
and it’s going to burst, and this is going to be a real issue for the
economy.” Some say it could even cause a recession at some point.
What is the worst-case scenario, if in fact we were to see [housing] prices
come down substantially across the country?
BERNANKE: Well, I guess I don’t buy your premise. It’s a pretty unlikely
possibility. We’ve never had a decline in house prices on a nationwide
basis. So what I think is more likely is that house prices will slow, maybe
stabilize: might slow consumption spending a bit. I don’t think it’s going to
drive the economy too far from its full employment path, though.
In case you were born very recently: housing went down nationwide in
2008. It went down a lot. People used similar logic when assessing the
SNB’s EURCHF floor at 1.20 before it broke in 2015. The idea was: “They
held it this long; there’s no way they’ll let it break!”
Annndddddd…. It’s gone.
Another concept that long seemed ridiculous and unimaginable but then
quickly became mainstream is the idea of negative interest rates. Most
market pricing before 2012 or so always treated zero as the absolute lower
bound for interest rates.
Therefore, punters made many bets in Swiss rates (for example) that
went horribly wrong when the SNB cut rates below zero.
Always remember:
anything can happen.
This does not mean you need to be wracked with fear, on high alert for
extremely low probability events all the time. It means you need to be open
minded to outliers and their possible impact. Consider low probability
events and think about how they could influence your risk of ruin. No
matter how unlikely an event might be, it’s not worth taking the other side if
it can blow you up. Many learned this the hard way after the SNB debacle
in 2015.
Trader bias # 5 : Favorite vs. longshots
Human beings generally prefer to bet on longshots and avoid favorites,
even though favorites almost always offer higher expected returns. Before
we delve into why that might be and how it is relevant to trading, let’s look
at a bit of evidence from the world of horse racing. Here is the money quote
and an accompanying chart from a 2010 paper by Erik Snowberg and Justin
Wolfers
86
:
The racetrack provides a natural laboratory for economists interested in
understanding decision making under uncertainty. The most discussed
empirical regularity in racetrack gambling markets is the favorite-longshot
bias: equilibrium market prices (betting odds) provide biased estimates of
the probability of a horse winning. Specifically, bettors value longshots
more than expected given how rarely they win, and they value favorites
too little given how often they win. Figure 1 illustrates, showing that the
rate of return to betting on horses with odds of 100/1 or greater is about
-61%, betting randomly yields average returns of -23%, while betting the
favorite in every race yields losses of only 5.5%.
The chart clearly shows that betting on favorites is a better (err… less
bad…) strategy than betting on longshots. Yet even though the effect is
wellknown, it has persisted over many decades. Favorite/longshot bias was
initially discussed in 1949 and yet the effect still shows up in many (but not
all) gambling and financial markets
87
. The more asymmetric (lotto-like) the
payout, the more likely traders, investors, gamblers (and regular folk) will
overbet the longshot.
There are three main reasons for the existence of favorite / longshot
bias:
1. The marginal utility of a large win is often higher than the marginal
utility of a small win, even if the odds of the small win are near
100%. With a fixed amount of capital at risk, small payoffs don’t
really “move the needle” financially or psychologically.
Say you are a hedge fund manager who wants to generate a 10%
return this year. You are offered two trades, both risking 5 bps if
wrong: 
Trade 
1 
has 
an 
80% 
chance 
of 
making 
5 
basis 
points
(expected value = +3 bps) and Trade 2 has a 5% chance of making
80 basis points (expected value = -0.75 bps).
Even though Trade 1 is clearly more attractive mathematically, many
traders (whether they will admit it or not) are more attracted to Trade
2 because it moves the needle for their YTD P&L while the first one
does not, unless they place a huge bet.
2. Betting on favorites is not as fun as betting on longshots. Bettors and
investors looking for excitement or stimulation prefer longshots.
3. 
Human 
beings 
tend 
to 
overestimate 
the 
likelihood 
of 
lower-
probability events and underestimate those with higher probability
(see Figure 7.7). Keep this in mind when assessing odds. If you think
something is a 5% shot, you are probably too high. If you think
something is an 85% shot, you are probably too low. In contrast,
humans are good at evaluating probabilities in the middle of the
spectrum (the 25% to 60% zone).
Figure 7.7 shows a stylized curve of how research shows humans
typically estimate probability (solid black line), versus how probability
looks in real life (dotted line).
Since estimating probability is a critical skill in trading, you must
understand: It is more difficult to estimate high and low probabilities
than those near the middle.
In trading, the longshot bias effect shows up in language like “levered
bets”, “outstanding risk/reward”, and the ever-popular “asymmetric payout
profile”. Looking for asymmetric payouts makes sense in aggregate: if you
are always betting $1.00 to win $0.50 in a game where the odds are not
known beforehand (only estimated), it is hard to achieve persistent success.
On the other hand, this preference for longshots can sometimes lead to bad
trades with good optics (like those 5% one-touches that are always so hard
to resist).
The longshot mentality is bolstered by financial media features that
shower adulation on tail risk managers in the rare moments their highly-
levered insurance bets pay off. There are no stories written about the tail
risk fund that bleeds for four straight years while the VIX is pinned at 12!
The takeaway here is: be aware of favorite/longshot bias. Don’t get sucked
in by bad trades with good optics.
Various estimates put the cross-over point around 35%/40%
An example of favorite longshot bias in action
You often see favorite-longshot bias over economic and central bank
events. For example, when a central bank meeting is coming up, and there
is a tiny (but not zero) chance of that central bank cutting rates, the market
loves to go into the meeting short the currency. This often creates an
imbalance where there are so many people betting on the longshot (a rate
cut) that you get an outsized move when no cut is delivered.
Here is an example: in early February 2020, COVID-19 was popping up
all over the world and had triggered the first wave of fear about the global
economy. Given Australia’s dependence on commodities and global growth,
some observers thought the Reserve Bank of Australia might cut rates in
response to the virus contagion.
Interest rate markets priced the probability of an interest rate cut as less
than 10%, but if the cut was delivered, AUDUSD might drop 100 points.
The simple longshot trade was to go short AUD and cover quickly if the
RBA did not announce a rate cut. Traders in this set up thought they were
risking a few pips for a chance to make 100 pips of profit. But Figure 7.8
shows what happened:
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
There were so many traders caught short on the lotto ticket trade, the
pair gapped 30 pips higher (from 0.6690 to 0.6720). Traders thought they
were risking 5 pips to make 100, but were actually risking 30 to make 100.
If you assigned a 10% chance to the RBA cut (which was probably
generous), the expected value of the trade with 5 pips of downside risk was
+5.5 as you can see in Table 1. But in real life, because the “no cut” cost
you 30 pips, the expected value of the trade was actually -17 pips! See
Table 2.
Note that while we don’t know for sure (because it didn’t happen), a cut
from the RBA might have yielded a drop of less than 100 points, because
the position was so crowded. In other words, the expected value of the trade
might have been even worse than -17bps.
Any time you hear people talking about a lotto ticket trade or a trade
where there is very little risk, or where you win in almost every scenario: be
cautious. This is probably a sign that traders are flocking to a trade that has
great optics on paper but possibly bad mathematics in real life. Those trades
get crowded. As a trade gets crowded, the risk/reward gets worse and your
ability to get out quickly becomes impaired.
Favorite/longshot bias also shows up in option pricing. Speculators love
to buy low-delta options (cheap options that pay out a huge windfall if
something very unlikely happens) and market makers generally do not like
selling them. Therefore, research shows that the lower the probability of an
option paying off (and thus the more leverage is embedded in that option),
the more overpriced it will tend to be.
Watch for favorite/longshot bias in your own trading and in setups that
unfold in front of you.
Trader bias # 6 : Round numbers
When you fill your car with gas, do you sometimes have the urge to
round it off to the nearest dollar, even though you are paying with a credit
card? Do you get a tiny thrill watching a car’s odometer roll over from
99,999 to 100,000? For many amateur marathon runners, a finishing time of
3:59:58 is a great success while 4:00:02 is a disappointment. These are
examples of round number bias.
Human beings tend to pay attention to round numbers and treat them as
special or more important than other numbers. OK, sure Brent… Who
cares?
You should.
Round 
number 
bias 
appears 
in 
financial 
markets, 
and 
while 
this
knowledge will not be life-or career-changing for you, it will save you from
the occasional big disappointment. Due to round number bias, many market
participants leave their orders on the round numbers. Many more than you
would see if orders were randomly or evenly distributed. I will show you
two examples from the world of equities, but these anomalies are present in
every market I have studied.
Figures 7.9 and 7.10 show the distribution of the last two digits (the
cents) of each daily high and low in TSLA and NFLX from 2015 to 2020.
For example, $520.40 would be 40. $765.00 would be 00. $509.33 would
be 33, etc. Note the huge overrepresentation of highs and lows at 00 and 50,
exactly as round number bias would predict (00 is far, far left).
Therefore, if you leave an order to buy at, say $473.01, you are
statistically more likely to get filled than the person with an order at
$473.00 or $472.99 because the majority of buy orders will be on the round
number at $473.00. Most days, you’ll probably get filled at any one of those
three levels, but the occasional time you get filled at 01 when you would
not 
have 
got 
filled 
one 
cent 
lower 
can 
have 
a 
big 
impact 
on 
your
performance.
On the flip side, if you are leaving stop loss orders, always leave them
on the correct side of the round number. Sell stops should be below 00 and
buy stops should be above. The day you leave a stop loss at $474.99 and the
low is $475.00, you will feel like you got lucky, but these tiny alterations in
behavior can sometimes be skill masquerading as good luck.
P.S. When that happens, you owe me a beer.
Trader bias #7: Apophenia
Chaos is not dangerous until it begins to look orderly.
MAX GUNTHER, The Zurich Axioms
Great traders are masters of pattern recognition. They will see a setup
and recognize it either consciously or unconsciously. I remember many
times after great runs of trading that I felt like I knew what was going to
happen before it happened. This ability comes from the incredible powers
of human pattern recognition. The problem is:
Humans are built to see patterns, even when none exist.
Apophenia or patternicity are terms psychologists use to describe the
human predisposition to see patterns or connections, even where none exist.
Apophenia leads to many flaws in human thinking and explains why people
see Jesus on toast, UFOs in the sky, bigfoot in the woods and so on. This
human bias toward pattern recognition also leads gamblers who are on a
winning streak to believe they will keep winning. Even smart, logical
people often feel like they are “heating up” after a lucky series of hands at a
poker table.
This is also known as clustering illusion. People have a hard time
believing that streaks are the result of randomness, even though random
data contains many streaks!
We 
are 
wired 
to 
find 
meaning 
and 
significance 
in 
random 
and
meaningless data. Apophenia goes a long way toward explaining why
humans believe conspiracy theories, suffer from paranoia, and embrace
pseudoscience. When you see patterns everywhere, you see meaning and
connections too. Understand that you are not immune! You are predisposed
to see patterns, even where none exist.
The human ability to see patterns is a critical part of our evolution and
allows us to understand the world without having to analyze every single
new piece of information. If we have never seen a large black cat with large
teeth on the savannah, a useful evolutionary trait was to assume that its
behavior and risk profile is similar to other large animals with huge teeth
we have encountered in the past.
We can correctly infer that the presence of dark clouds in the sky above
us represents an increased probability of rain in the next few hours. We
know a hissing sound nearby means snake bite risk is higher than normal
and we dramatically increase our alert level.
Evolution favored false positives over false negatives because the cost
of a false positive in the wild was much lower than a false negative. For
example, there is a loud grumbly noise in the bush that Caveman Kror
cannot clearly identify:
False positive (Type 1 error): That sounded like a lion, I think?! I’m
out of here!
Cost: Kror may have used some unnecessary energy avoiding what
could have been just a random sound.
False negative (Type 2 error): Hmm, I wonder what that grumbly noise
was. It didn’t sound exactly like a lion. I guess I’m good. (42 seconds
later) Oh, dang, it was a lion.
Cost: Kror is dead.
Seeing patterns where there are none may be superior evolutionary
behavior, but it’s not helpful in trading. Given the very strong human
instinct to see patterns, how useful do you think simple eyeballing of charts,
basic trendlines and breakout patterns is likely to be? What are the odds that
chart break is just a standard false positive—like the loud noise in the bush?
Now add on human confirmation bias… Are you just seeing what you want
to see? Probably.
This does not mean that there are no patterns in the world. If you run
into heavy traffic four days in a row at a particular interchange, it makes
sense 
to 
consider 
whether 
there 
is 
causation. 
Investigating 
further, 
or
temporarily changing your route is likely to be optimal. But you need to be
aware that the way humans see patterns is biased to Type 1 errors. You need
to be discriminating and use a tight filter when looking for patterns. You
need to consider that what you are looking at could be random.
How to combat apophenia
There 
are 
three 
ways 
to 
beat 
apophenia 
in 
trading. 
Awareness,
skepticism, and analysis.
1. Awareness. Hopefully this section has you thinking about, and more
aware of, apophenia and patternicity. It’s a deeply engrained and
basic part of human cognitive function. Once you appreciate that the
human brain is biased toward pattern recognition, new patterns you
detect are placed in the proper context.
2. Skepticism. Start from a place of skepticism. When you see a pattern
or a correlation, assume it is bogus and try to work out why it might
not be. Most people assume patterns are valid and then spend time
further 
validating 
them 
with 
other 
analysis 
or 
information. You
should start by assuming patterns are meaningless and work your
way towards meaning via analysis.
3. Analysis. Let’s say you see a headline on Bloomberg: “Death Cross
in silver futures triggers bearish signal”. You pull up the story and
see a fugly chart where the 50-day moving average has just crossed
below 
the 
200-day. 
Is 
your 
first 
instinct 
to 
sell 
silver? 
Or 
to
investigate more deeply? Patterns like this should not be taken at
face value. Most of them are meaningless and have no empirical
basis. Take half an hour to pull some data into Excel and backtest the
pattern. Does it have any predictive value?
When I say “patterns” that does not just mean technical analysis. It is
any cause-and-effect relationship that appears to exist in markets. Again,
humans tend to ascribe causality to many things that are the result of pure
chance.
On the other hand, patterns like the following examples could be
meaningful, persistent, and predictive:
gold tends to go lower from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m. (maybe gold producers
sell at this time?)
whenever US rates go lower, USDJPY goes lower (Japanese investors
prefer higher rates?)
AAPL tends to lead the QQQs (large caps lead indexes?)
And so on. Sophisticated pattern recognition can be a significant source
of edge when it is free from bias.
I spend a good part of my time analyzing data in an attempt to
determine whether patterns have predictive value or not. Most often, the
answer is “not”. Taking the time to analyze patterns and to determine
whether or not they are useful for forecasting is a good way to overcome
apophenia and discover useful tools for beating the market.
This is my simple four-step method for accepting or rejecting patterns:
1. Identify a pattern or relationship.
2. Generate a hypothesis.
The best patterns have some sort of underlying logic. If gold goes
down every day from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m., maybe that is the window
when gold producers sell? If you can logically explain why a pattern
works, it is much more likely to be non-random and persistent.
3. Analyze the data.
4. Accept or dismiss the pattern.
Anyone who took a science class as a kid should recognize this as a
shortform version of the scientific method. Most patterns you analyze will
be worthless. You will dismiss them and move on. On the other hand, the
few patterns you find that are non-random can be incredibly valuable to
your future trading.
Every time you notice a pattern, reduce it to something you can test and
then get to work. You don’t need sophisticated quantitative skills to do basic
backtesting of simple theories. Once you backtest a pattern, you have a
much deeper understanding of whether or not it is random, and you know
whether to factor it into your trading decisions.
For example, I like to use moves in one market to predict moves in
another market. Here is an example of how I will look at a pattern and try to
determine whether or not it has meaning. This excerpt from AM/FX also
gives you an idea of how I pull together multiple reasons for a particular
trade idea. We will discuss how to build a trade idea in much more depth
later on.
From July 1, 2020:
We had a rare setup at the close yesterday as US rates have dropped 8
bps in the last five days while USDJPY was up 1.3%. There have been
2610 trading days in the last 10 years and just 49 of them have satisfied
the condition: (USDJPY up >1% and US 10-year yields down more than
7bps). Here is how USDJPY performed after:
Two conditions: Up >1% in past 5 days and US 10-year yield down >7bps in past 5 days.
And note that USDJPY rallied from 88 to 107 in the last 10 years, so if
you took any random sample it would show USDJPY going up, not down.
That makes this result even more interesting. The medians are similar to
the averages, so there is not a small group of instances skewing the
average.
Overall, I think USDJPY is a sell based on yields, the move in gold, and
USDJPY’s consistent inability to take out 108.00. Also, there was a three-
day run of buying madness in NY time from 7 a.m. to 11 a.m. and there is
no evidence of that today. It was probably a major rebalance into month
end. So that is over, which also helps.
Note in Figure 7.11 how USDJPY bashed against 108.00 four times (four
arrows) before a huge false break and then it retested the 108.00 level
again afterwards (fifth arrow).
I am therefore adding a short USDJPY recommendation. You could either
sell here or leave an offer at 107.75 with a stop at 108.26.
With ISM and payrolls tomorrow, there is a decent chance you get done.
And 
with Yield 
Curve 
Control 
on 
the 
horizon 
and 
the 
explosion 
of
coronavirus cases in the US South, I doubt strong US data will impact
yields much.
Note by leaving an order to sell above market at 107.75 through
nonfarm payrolls, I attempt to take advantage of the noisy volatility created
by an event I think is meaningless to get set at a good level on a trade I like
for a bunch of reasons. See Figure 7.11.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
I got set on the trade the day after payrolls (at 107.75) and USDJPY
went pretty much straight down.
Backtesting is an entire field of quantitative research and there is
considerable complexity involved. I am not a computational finance or
applied math expert, so I like to keep things as simple as possible. I come
up with a theory, and then I test it. I don’t tweak the parameters or snoop
around until I find something useful. I just go in, test, and get out. While a
full course in backtesting is beyond the scope of this book, you don’t need a
degree in financial engineering to conduct basic backtests of patterns you
identify and ideas you come up with.
When testing your hypothesis, be aware of a few things:
1. The law of small numbers. You need a decent sample of observations
for your analysis to mean anything. If you see that TSLA stock went
down the last four Aprils in a row, that’s meaningless. If it went
down 33 of the last 41 Fridays, that might mean something. While
there is no hard rule for legit sample size, any study using less than
30 observations is risky and likely to be unreliable.
2. The harder you have to look, the more likely whatever you find is
bogus or biased. Let’s say you want to see how the stock market
performs the Monday after a 3% drop on Friday. You find nothing
interesting. So then you test how it performs after a 4% drop on
Friday. Still nothing. Then, you up the threshold to 5% and find the
subsequent Monday averages a 2% further fall. Then you test, “What
if stocks fall 2% or more Thursday AND 5% or more Friday” … The
more you mess around with your parameters, the more likely you are
to 
find 
“interesting” 
results. 
This 
is 
called 
“p-hacking” 
in 
the
research business. You keep tweaking the inputs until you get an
interesting result. That is not good research.
Don’t torture your data in an effort to make it confess. Keep your
analysis simple. For the best ever and super simple explanation of
how p-hacking, snooping and data-mining work, Google “xkcd green
jelly beans”.
3. Be aware of the trend in your data. If you do any study of S&P 500
data 
since 
1930, 
you 
will 
generally 
find 
that 
bullish 
strategies
perform well and bearish strategies perform poorly! This makes
sense since stocks have gone up a zillion percent in that time period.
Similarly, you will find it easy to “discover” bullish NASDAQ or
bearish oil company strategies. The secular trend in the data is an
important driver of the output of any strategy you analyze.
4. 
No 
matter 
how 
well 
something 
worked 
in 
the 
past, 
there’s 
no
guarantee it will work in the future. In a world of infinite data, many
relationships, and a huge number of sophisticated analysts, people
are going to find strategies that worked in the past. If you have a
strong opinion on why the strategy is likely to work in the future, the
value of your analysis is higher.
For example: Turnaround Tuesday (discussed in more detail below)
is well known and has existed for many years. It is founded on a
reliable and repeatable pattern of human behavior and a persistent
fear 
and 
greed 
cycle 
that 
repeats 
around 
weekends, 
even 
if
statistically savvy investors know about it. Also, as a short-term
strategy, it is fairly expensive to execute (in terms of transaction
costs) so large institutions are unlikely to quickly arbitrage it away.
5. Don’t build regression models unless you know what you are doing.
Regression models can be useful but often require sophisticated
knowledge to avoid datamining, overfitting, and other errors.
Most patterns in finance are random. You need to find evidence and use
logic before accepting a pattern as meaningful.
As a quick detour, here is a bit more info on Turnaround Tuesday, in
case you are not familiar with its amazing power.
Turnaround Tuesday
During periods of market fear, there is a common intraweek pattern that
stock markets often follow. This sequence is shown in Figure 7.12. Markets
don’t always follow this pattern but they do follow it a surprising proportion
of the time.
The most reliable part of this pattern is “Turnaround Tuesday”. This is
the tendency for stocks to rip higher on Tuesday if they sold off the Friday
and Monday before. It is a simple human pattern that occurs because when
the news appears bad, traders get nervous into the weekend and sell some of
their holdings on Friday. Then, they read all kinds of negative media reports
about the big scary thing and that scares them into selling more on Monday.
Investor selling pulls in momentum traders who go short on Monday.
This adds to the selling pressure. Then, Tuesday comes and there is nobody
left to sell. Then the shorts get squeezed and that triggers Turnaround
Tuesday.
In case you think this sounds silly, have a look at this evidence. First,
here is how the S&P performs in the most extreme Turnaround Tuesday
setup which is when it falls Thursday and Friday and then is down more
than 5% on Monday. This is rare but check out the returns in Figure 7.13.
In contrast, if you study all days after a 5% one-day drop, the average
return the next day is just +0.9%. Not terrible, but nothing amazing.
Second, to give you more evidence supporting Turnaround Tuesday,
Figure 7.14 shows SPX performance for Tuesday vs. all other days in 2008.
Note that 2008 was one of the worst bear markets in history so Turnaround
Tuesday was a thing almost all year. If you traded in 2008, you probably
find this chart pretty mind-blowing.
Trader bias # 8 : Anchoring
I have always found anchoring bias to be one of the most interesting
forms of trader bias. The basic idea of anchoring bias is that when we are
asked 
to 
guess 
or 
predict 
something, 
we 
are 
biased 
toward 
the 
first
reference point offered.
Outside of finance, this is most commonly seen in negotiations. If we
are told the price of a car is $12,000, anything below that feels cheap and
anything above that feels expensive. Even if we find out later that the car is
only worth $10,000, we will still find ourselves anchored on the initial
price. Heaps of research proves this. Weirdly, anchoring works even if the
initial number is unrelated to the question at hand.
A simple anchoring experiment (which my son did for Science Fair
once, and it worked) goes as follows: subjects first draw a random number
from 1 to 100 out of a bag. Then, they are asked to guess (for example) how
many African countries are in the United Nations. Those that drew low
numbers from the bag answer consistently lower than those who drew
higher numbers out of the bag.
Another famous example of anchoring is when you ask people to
quickly estimate 1 X 2 X 3 X 4 X 5 X 6 X 7 X 8 you get a much lower
answer than if you ask them to quickly estimate 8 X 7 X 6 X 5 X 4 X 3 X 2
X 1.
In negotiation, you often hear “never make the first offer” because you
are giving up too much information and optionality. In contrast, an effective
negotiation strategy can be for one side to make an outrageous first offer,
thereby anchoring the negotiation on a figure that is hard to get away from.
Say 
you 
are 
negotiating 
with 
an 
employer: 
you 
want 
to 
get 
paid
$500,000 and you believe you have decent power in the negotiation. You
open by suggesting a salary of $650,000. Now, both sides are anchored so
high that when you both finally settle on $550,000, everyone feels like a
winner.
Once you know about anchoring, you see it all over the place, especially
in how companies price their goods. Treadmill: Was $1299, now $999. That
sounds like a good deal, but it could well be the company has never sold a
single unit for $1299 and they are just trying to anchor you on that inflated
price to make you feel good about paying $999.
In markets, anchoring bias manifests in four main ways.
1) We anchor on our entry point. This is the most common and powerful
way you see anchoring bias in markets. If you buy a stock at $99.40, that
specific level becomes very powerful in your mind. You will find it much
easier, for example, to sell at $99.41 (a small profit) than $99.39 (a small
loss) even though the economics of selling at these two different levels is
practically identical.
Losing is painful and negative. Winning is pleasurable and positive. So
even though two cents is meaningless to your P&L, the difference between
selling below or above your cost is the difference between winning and
losing. Human beings are hard-wired to avoid losses. As discussed earlier,
research shows the pain we feel from losses is about double the pleasure we
get from gains of equal size. This bias is called loss aversion.
A related bias is the disposition effect. This is the strong and consistent
tendency for investors to prefer to sell assets that have increased in value
while holding onto assets that show a loss. If it goes up, you sell it. If it
goes down, you hold on to it and pray for a bounce. These related forms of
bias all come down to the same thing: humans don’t like to lose
88
. The
remedy is simple:
You must learn to love small losses.
When you take a small loss, try to feel good about it. Say: “Taking small
losses is the way to achieve trading success.” Say it over and over.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Trading losses are an expense incurred by your trading business. Your
goal is to minimize trading loss expense while maximizing trading revenue.
You minimize trading loss expense by cutting bad trades quickly and by
sticking to your plan. You increase trading loss expense with shoddy risk
management, poor discipline, and sloppy trading.
As a beginning trader, you will no doubt hear yourself thinking “This
trade feels wrong. As soon as I get to break even, I’m out.” Two problems
here:
Problem One: “This trade feels wrong” is not rational analysis. Unpack
why it feels wrong. Is there something inherently wrong with the price
action, or is the stock just not moving and you’re bored? Those are two
completely different things. Often your instincts are just your impatience
and emotions trying to sabotage a perfectly good trade.
Problem Two: “As soon as I get to break even, I’m out” is not logical.
Do you think the market cares where you got in? As if there is something
magical about your entry point? If you have determined, via logic, that the
trade is not worth holding onto, get out. If you have not determined you
should get out of the trade, maintain your existing parameters.
Every trade you put on should have a stop loss and a take profit. After
that, you need a solid reason to cut the trade. Otherwise, stick to your
original plan. Don’t keep recalibrating based on every emotion you feel.
Emotions are fine but overreacting to them is not.
Just remember: Your entry point is meaningless.
2) We tend to anchor on price level highs and lows. The feeling you get
from the market is often more about recent changes, not absolute moves.
This is why if you buy gold at $1570 and it goes to $1670 you feel good but
then when it drops to $1600, you feel more bad than good even though you
are still $30 in the money. How we feel about a trade is often more
influenced by recent changes in price than by aggregate moves.
Say you are long gold with a stop at $1540 and a take profit at $1680. It
rallies to $1670, then pulls back to $1620. Quite often a trader will say: “If
it just gets back to $1670, I’ll get out.” They are anchoring on the high
because that was their moment of maximum pleasure. Sure, if $1670 is a
major tech level now and you realize that $1680 was the wrong level to take
profit… Be my guest and move your take profit lower. But don’t just move
it because you are anchored on that level now.
3) We also anchor on P&L highs. Have you ever been up $15,000 at
midday then you give back half and you say: “OK, if I get back to
+$15,000, I’ll square up.” That’s not rational. When you hear your internal
monologue saying something like this, recognize that you are not being
rational. Trade the current setup, not the arbitrary P&L threshold you hit
two hours ago.
One of the key overall lessons I hope you get from this book is this:
Recognize when you are thinking or behaving irrationally and stop it.
Even after 25 years of trading, I still think and say irrational things on
the trading floor. The biggest difference now is that I hear myself saying
these things and quietly laugh at myself. The ability to get outside yourself
and see when you are not being rational is a necessary step towards
becoming an Alpha Trader.
4) Economists anchor on prior economic data. If the nonfarm payrolls
(NFP) number was +325,000 last month and all signs point to a much lower
number this month, research shows that economists will tend to anchor on
the prior number and their forecasts (on average) will be too high.
Say you are an economist and your extremely detailed and complex
econometric model says that this month NFP should be +38,000. If last
month’s number was +325,000, that +38,000 number feels kinda low. You
will be inclined to submit a number that sounds a bit less extreme or “more
rational” 
like 
+100,000. 
In 
fact, 
that 
number 
is 
less 
rational 
and 
is
influenced by anchoring bias.
If you trade the economic data, look for moments when this month’s
data is expected to be significantly different from last month’s. Then,
assume the actual outcome will show an EVEN LARGER discrepancy than
economists’ forecasts suggest.
If you are interested in the specific topic of how economists anchor,
check out the research footnotes on this page
89
. Here is a quick excerpt from
the Campbell and Sharpe paper
90
:
We examine whether expert consensus forecasts of monthly economic
releases from 1990-2006 have a tendency to be systematically biased
toward the value of previous months’ data releases. We find broad-based
and 
significant 
evidence 
for 
the 
anchoring 
hypothesis; 
consensus
forecasts 
are 
biased 
towards 
the 
values 
of 
previous 
months’ 
data
releases, which in some cases results in sizable predictable forecast
errors.
Trader bias # 9 : Herding
One great paradox of markets is that they are mostly driven by the
wisdom of the crowd but occasionally by its madness. Separating the two is
a key source of alpha. Before we talk about herding and temporary madness
in markets, let’s first discuss the wisdom of crowds.
Most of the time, the errors made by buyers and sellers cancel out and
the average of all the transactions is some approximation of a reasonable
equilibrium price. This outcome is similar to the jelly bean experiment. In
that experiment, a crowd of people are asked to guess how many jelly beans
are in a jar. The interesting result is that the crowd (the average of all
guesses) 
is 
always 
very 
accurate 
and 
often 
more 
accurate 
than ANY
individual in the entire crowd. This is astounding and suggests you should
be humble when trying to beat the market.
Instead of a bunch of undergrads guessing how many jelly beans are in
the jar, imagine 1,000 highly-trained quants who have millions of dollars to
invest in jelly bean estimation technology. Do you think you can beat them?
That’s a more apt analogy for the markets.
The wisdom of crowds, though, relies on diverse and unbiased opinion.
And it relies on incentives. If there is no prize, estimates will be lazy and
less accurate. Or (for example) if the jar is extremely far away from the
people trying to estimate the number of jelly beans (say at the very front of
a huge lecture hall), the crowdsourced conclusion might be too low because
the jar looks smaller from afar. If everyone is drunk or distracted, the
estimate also might not be as good.
In trading, if you can explain exactly why you think the crowd is wrong,
you are on the right track. Usually this will be either because the crowd is
biased or the crowd’s incentives are not aligned with the goal of finding the
equilibrium price. I will explain both in the section that follows. The main
takeaway for this section is:
Assume the crowd is wise most of the time and look for moments when
you can explain exactly why it is wrong or identify that it has gone
mad.
As the amount of quality data available to all investors approaches
infinity, it is more and more difficult to find an informational edge. Before
2000 
or 
so, 
economic 
and 
financial 
market 
data 
were 
expensive 
and
difficult to acquire for non-institutional investors. As recently as 2006 or
2007, a trader with live price feeds and a solid understanding of correlation
had an informational edge over other short-term traders. Live news feeds
were expensive and out of reach for individual investors until recently.
Now, literally anyone can access reams of financial data, read dozens of
well-informed blogs doing sophisticated cross-market analysis, and get free
real-time news from Twitter. Informational edge is incredibly difficult to
find. This puts a premium on other types of market analysis and (I believe)
potentially increases the value of sentiment and positioning analysis.
By their nature, markets are prone to periods of herding. Narrative-
driven markets with many traders chasing the same themes and responding
to the exact same information and incentives can drive everyone toward the
same cliff. If you can identify the times when the entire market is running in
the same direction, you can pivot and profit by going the other way.
There are a multiple reasons market participants herd to the same
themes and trends:
1. Herding is human nature. In Chapter 5, we talked about the Asch
conformity experiments, where even when it was obvious that a line
was the same size as other lines, many subjects would go with the
crowd if the majority said one line was longer. Asch did another
famous experiment to show how human beings prefer to conform
with their peers.
The experiment involved multiple actors who enter an elevator and
face the back of the elevator, away from the door. Asch found that
most random strangers who entered the elevator afterwards joined
the crowd and faced away from the door. Conformity and herding are
basic human instincts that help society function. If you see a group of
people acting a certain way, it sends you a strong subconscious signal
that the group behavior is appropriate and so it requires strong,
conscious pushback for you to act independently.
2. It is much easier to believe in and respond to a narrative than it is
to value securities. “The internet is going to be huge! You gotta buy
Cisco!” is an easier story to understand than “Cisco is overvalued at
100X sales.” Since human traders are more stimulated by stories than
they are by data, the price level of an asset is often less important
than the story being told. This is why good companies can be terrible
investments.
While there is usually great uncertainty surrounding the appropriate
value of a company’s stock, there is frequently little disagreement
over good stories. “Amazon is a revolutionary company that offers
an unprecedented customer experience” is hard to debate and easy to
invest in. Since most people are trading narratives (whether they
want to admit it or not), and narratives are often pretty clear and one-
sided, investors herd into the great stories. This is not just true with
stocks, it is true with macroeconomic stories too.
3. FOMO. The fear of missing out pulls in those who have not yet
bought into a narrative. As they see their peers making money on an
investment (and hear the amazing stories of ginormous profits over
IPAs at the bar), they do not want to miss out. This is especially
powerful 
in 
the 
professional 
investment 
business 
where 
most
managers 
are 
benchmarked 
to 
their 
peers 
and 
where 
portfolio
managers fear looking stupid if they miss a big story.
When a powerful macro narrative appears, you see hedge fund
money pouring into the story. Not just because it’s a good story they
believe in but also because managers are afraid their peers will make
money on it and they won’t. FOMO is a terrible yet common reason
traders put on trades. You see this at a micro level on trading floors,
too. When two or three traders on a desk have a profitable trade on,
other traders get jealous and put the trade on to avoid looking bad in
case the trade continues to perform.
I remember multiple FOMO periods during the 2012 to 2015 period,
when Abenomics and Bank of Japan (BOJ) easing were driving
USDJPY higher. Portfolio managers knew their peers were killing it
on the trade so even later on, when USDJPY had already gone from
80 to 120, traders “had to have it” because they felt stupid if they did
not. Before the BOJ meetings in 2015 and 2016, I often heard hedge
fund PMs say something like “Well, I don’t think the BOJ is going to
do anything tonight but I’m going in long USDJPY anyway just in
case.” This is FOMO and favorite/longshot bias all wrapped into one
negative EV trade idea. PMs were thinking more about the lotto
ticket style payoff profile and how they might look bad for missing it
instead of rationally sizing up the risk/reward of playing for a low
probability event that was already heavily subscribed.
4. As a rule, human beings are not very original and this is true both
inside and outside the investment industry. This is why independent
thinkers are so highly valued in investment firms: there are not very
many of them. Many traders on Wall Street are extremely book
smart, gifted test-takers that made their way into trading by playing
the Ivy League game to perfection. Get straight A’s, crush the SATs,
play a sport, network like crazy and voila. None of this requires
much independent thinking.
This 
is 
not 
to 
say 
Wall 
Street 
is 
a 
particularly 
unoriginal
environment, it is just to say that on average, most people follow the
crowd and Wall Street is no exception. Original, creative thinking
can be a huge source of edge in trading. If all you see is the same
stuff everyone else sees, how can you find inefficiencies? How can
you profit? You probably can’t. You follow the crowd, stick to
benchmark and hope nobody finds you out.
5. Incentives. Many traders and investors are incentivized to stick with
the crowd. As an investment manager, if you hug your benchmark
and own mostly technology stocks during a tech bull market, you are
unlikely 
to 
get 
fired. 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
if 
you 
think 
tech 
is
overvalued and you stay underweight throughout the bull market,
you are very likely to get fired! If tech crashes, and you were long
with everyone else, your investors are likely to give you a pass.
“Everyone else got killed in the crash, too… Nobody could have seen
it coming!”
Traders and investors who have mortgages and kids in private school
often 
think 
more 
about 
keeping 
their 
job 
than 
they 
do 
about
maximizing profits.
Let’s go back to the jelly bean game again for a moment. Imagine a
game where 400 students are asked to guess how many jelly beans
are in a jar. But the five highest and five lowest guesses are expelled
from school and the rest compete for a prize of $50. How would that
change the distribution of the guesses? My bet is that particular set of
incentives would herd everyone towards the average, and greatly
reduce the number of extreme guesses.
Herding does not just happen in investing, it is a feature of trading
too. Let’s say you are a trader at a macro hedge fund and there is a
huge macro theme (e.g., the ECB is doing QE). Most people in the
business are doing the trade; in fact, you went to a macro round table
dinner at Milo’s last week and 12 out of 15 traders said long Italian
bonds was their TOP TRADE.
Thing is, you don’t like Italian bonds. You think they are priced for
perfection. Then again, you know if Italian bonds rip and all your
peers deliver returns of 10%+ while you drop 3%, it’s going to look
bad. Your wife just delivered your second child and you just upsized
to a 5,700 square foot McMansion in Westchester. Maybe it would be
better to just plug your nose and buy the stinking Italian bonds. If the
bonds crash… You and all your peers end the year down and
investors be like: “What are you gonna do! Bad year for macro!”
Quite often, herding is caused by career risk. It often feels riskier for
a trader to go against the herd than it is for him to just follow along.
Doing the opposite of what everyone else is doing is hard! It goes
directly 
against 
human 
nature. 
Most 
people 
react 
strongly 
to
incentives and so instead of solving for: “How can I make my
investors the most money?” they solve for: “What will give me the
best chance of keeping my job?” Even if they are not doing this
consciously, there is a good chance their subconscious is busy doing
it for them.
To recap: wisdom of the crowds works when the crowd is diverse,
unbiased and motivated by aligned incentives. When you see a market
where these conditions are not met, start to think about going the other way.
Herding is a tricky concept because being part of the herd is often
profitable. In fact, the reflexive contrarian will lose more money than the
sheep because major trends get very crowded for a long time before they
blow up. Don’t be the trader that is always trying to be smarter than
everyone else and who is always going the other way. There is a time and a
place to be contrarian. Alpha traders identify the time and place to be
contrarian but are also perfectly comfortable riding with the herd (going
with the trend) much of the time.
How to detect and combat herding:
1. Embrace independent thinking. Humans are built to conform: fight
this 
instinct 
and 
make 
confident, 
independent 
judgments 
while
staying humble at the same time. This is not easy!
2. Get comfortable with feeling uncomfortable. Humans are social
animals that find comfort from doing what others do, and success in
trading requires you to go against that instinct somewhat regularly,
so successful traders are going to feel uncomfortable a fair amount of
the time. Get used to feeling uncomfortable.
3. Study and quantify sentiment. Sentiment data is widely available
and comes in all shapes and sizes. We’ll talk sentiment in Chapter
10. Whatever asset you trade, investigate the best ways to collect and
analyze sentiment data. While it’s great to listen to the market noise
and try to come up with your own view on sentiment, data usually
beats anecdote. This is especially true in our current world where
people on Twitter are constantly calling for the end of the world and
bitcoin to one million. Data is much more useful than randomly-
collected snippets.
4. Use overbought and oversold indicators. My experience with over-
bought and oversold indicators is that your threshold for putting on
trades should be as extreme as possible. I like signals that come up a
few times per year, such as Jake Bernstein’s Daily Sentiment Index
below 10 or above 90. The reason is that sentiment is not extreme
most of the time. Sentiment that is rather bullish or kinda bearish
means nothing. The market will spend most of its time in the space
where sentiment has no predictive value. In fact, sentiment is a “go
with” most of the time. The only time it’s contrarian is at the mega-
extremes. But if you can identify these mega-extremes, you can hit
some huge winners.
5. Always be on high alert for turns in sentiment. If you ever notice
bullish sentiment at the low or bearish sentiment at the high: pay
attention. 
Generally, 
sentiment 
almost 
always 
follows 
price. 
If
something is going up, people will be bullish. If the price is falling,
most people will be bearish. There are exceptions (many are always
bearish the stock market, even when it’s at the highs) but in general,
that’s how sentiment works. Very rarely, though, you will see the
opposite and those moments are meaningful.
A prime example is the US dollar in March 2020. The COVID-19
pandemic triggered a liquidity crisis and there was a mad scramble
for dollars. The Great Dollar Shortage drove EURUSD from 1.1300
to 1.0800 in very short order (stronger dollar, weaker euro). Then,
the Fed went all-in, announcing a massive QE and dollar liquidity
program. 
Due 
to 
ongoing 
pressures 
in 
emerging 
markets 
and
equities, though, the USD remained in demand.
At 
that 
time, 
you 
could 
see 
a 
subtle 
but 
important 
change 
in
sentiment happening. The market, which had been raging bullish
USD, started to think about the future impact of all this new USD
liquidity and sentiment slowly turned from bullish USD to modestly
bearish USD. But the USD was still at the ding dong highs! This is a
rare but extremely high EV setup. If you notice a subtle shift away
from a popular narrative, but the price hasn’t moved yet, get ready to
go the other way. Often price will lag sentiment. A market that is
bullish on the lows or bearish on the highs is getting ready to turn.
6. Stay objective. Understand the bias of the media you consume and
look for unbiased sources of data. Twitter leans bearish stocks and
bullish bitcoin and gold. CNBC is almost always bullish stocks.
Zerohedge tends to be bearish Wall Street and bullish gold. Whatever
you read, always consider which way it leans. I prefer to read
analysts who are flexible because those who constantly stick to the
same view tend to be locked in and plagued by confirmation bias.
One of the best financial-market-guru business models is to pick a
view (hopefully a popular one) and pound the table on it year after
year. You attract a following of like-minded people and you deliver
the echo chamber that they need to reinforce their views. And they
will pay you for it. This is not analysis or forecasting, it’s marketing.
Be aware when you receive information from people like this; they
will never change their view and as such their view is probably not
worth much. Good analysts will change their view (at least once
every few years!) Good marketers will stick to one view and beat it
until they have paid off the summer house in East Hampton.
Don’t go on Twitter and see 400 bearish stock market posts and
conclude that the market is short. It might be; it might not be.
Collecting anecdotal information can be extremely useful but you
need to know the bias of the source. Data is always better than
anecdotes so look for objective sources of sentiment and positioning
data and focus more on those than what you consume via traditional
or new media.
A special comment on bubbles
Bubbles are the most spectacular of all financial herding events. Here is
a commentary I wrote in June 2020 about the Davey Day Trader technology
and retail stock trader bubble. It explains how I think about bubbles and
how to trade them.
HERE’S THE THING ABOUT BUBBLES
I don’t go around calling every bull market a bubble. In fact, when
people do that, it bothers me. But this equity rally contains a bunch of micro
bubbles. These sector and stock-specific retail bubbles are fueled by:
People have extra savings and nothing to spend money on;
People can’t wager on or watch sports or go to bars;
A new culture of day trading has emerged with Dave Portnoy as the
supreme leader;
People over consume free goods and retail stock trading is now “free”
There is no widely-accepted definition of a bubble but to me the
evidence 
of 
a 
bubble 
is 
clear 
from 
people’s 
behavior. 
They 
have 
an
unwavering belief in the topside, completely ignore risk, use leverage to
amplify gains and brag about how easy it is to make “free money”.
The recent series of mini-bubbles has featured a rolling series of non-
sensical moves.
Nonsensical moves
There are two kinds of nonsensical stock moves. One is where a bunch
of people think a move is wrong because of valuations or whatever. Also
known as sour grapes. Those “nonsensical” moves happen every day and
are purely subjective and meaningless. The other kind of nonsensical move
is 
when 
there 
is 
a 
move 
that 
represents 
a 
huge 
divergence 
from 
a
mathematically 
known 
outcome 
that 
is 
on 
the 
foreseeable 
/ 
tradable
horizon. These are quantifiable or observable violations of efficient markets
or the law of one price and are much less subjective.
There were multiple examples of this in 1999/2000. The most famous is
when 3COM spun off 5% of PALM
91
. The hot thing at the time was
handheld gadgets so everyone wanted to own PALM and their awesome
Palm Pilots. Nobody cared about poor old 3COM and their dial-up modems
and PCMCIA cards.
The day of the PALM IPO, PALM closed at $95, giving it a market
value of $54B. 3COM’s closing price of $81 gave it a market value of
$28B. So even though 3COM owned $50B worth of PALM stock, it was
trading at a market value of $28B. The company had no debt and $1B in
cash.
This (kind of ) breaks the rule of one price and violates assumptions of
market efficiency and arbitrage. One analyst asked: “Can the markets add
and subtract?” You only get this stuff when the market is losing (or has lost)
its mind
92
. Something similar happened in June 1999 when TD spun off its
TD Waterhouse online brokerage division as discount brokerages were hot
stocks at the time because the environment was just like it is today: retail
gamblers galore.
Today, we have the curious cases of Chesapeake Energy and Hertz
Rent-A-Car (aka Hertz Global Holdings). Chesapeake is on the verge of a
potential bankruptcy filing and its bonds trade for less than 10 cents on the
dollar. Hertz Global Holdings has already declared bankruptcy.
4:44PM yesterday: *CHESAPEAKE SAID TO PREPARE CH. 11 FILING,
GIVE LENDERS CONTROL
It probably goes without saying, but shares of bankrupt companies
should not be worth very much! They are almost always cancelled and end
up being worth zero. They keep trading though, sometimes for years.
Usually they bounce along around $1 and eventually bleed to zero. At a
low enough price point, even though the stock is worth $0, it’s not worth it
to go short and longs can’t be bothered selling (or they already sold) so it
never goes straight to zero right away. Figure 7.15 is the chart of a company
that went bankrupt in 2014 but still trades. That is approximately what the
stock of a bankrupt company should look like.
So what about Hertz and Chesapeake, then? Figure 7.16 and Figure 7.17
show their movement from from January 1 to mid-June 2020:
I’m not a corporate finance guy and I have no opinion on the breakup
value or recovery values of either of these companies. All I am saying is
that in a normal market these two assets would be bouncing along between
$0 and $1, not producing 1000% returns. Sure, there are squeezes in the
stocks of bankrupt companies, but not like this. These moves are another
sign of excess (especially relative to the HTZ and CHK bonds, which are
priced around 35 cents and 6 cents, respectively).
Here’s the thing about bubbles
Ok, sure, it’s a bubble. Even if you agree with me, what do you do?
First of all, let me clarify that I believe this is a retail bubble in a specific
group of stories, not a broad market bubble. If you are a professional asset
manager, you should know what stocks are being bid up by retail right now
and think about your dream exit levels.
Here’s the thing about bubbles. Just because you have identified one,
that does not mean you should be short. Often the real money is made by
identifying a bubble and jumping on for the bullish Wave 5 insanity.
For example, while it was obvious that bitcoin was a classic bubble by
May/ June 2017, it did not crash until seven months later after rallying
another 500%. Correctly identifying bitcoin as a bubble in June 2017 would
have cost you a ton of money.
Identifying something as a bubble just frames the volatility to expect
(high) and lets you know you should use your imagination when setting
upside and eventual downside targets. It also tells you that the endgame is a
high-speed collapse of 75% to 90% off the ultimate high. It does not mean
you just go short and collect the free money. In fact, it’s often easier to
make money long a bubble, not short. So what do we do?
Identify bubble assets that you own and find a moving average or other
technical signal that will tell you when to get out. Bitcoin had already
rallied from $300 to $3,000 when people called it a bubble. Then it went
from $3,000 to $20,000. Missing the last leg of a bubble can be costly.
Shorting the last leg of a bubble can be deadly. In the 2017 bitcoin rally, the
100-day moving average defined the trend the whole way up. Fit a moving
average to the current price trend of whatever bubble assets you own and
liquidate on a daily close below.
Remember that it’s OK to be long during a bubble. It’s also OK to be
short! I worked at a day trading firm 1999/2001 and the people that went
bust in that period mostly fell into two categories:
1. People that believed religiously in the future of the internet and the
unlimited upside of the internet stocks and lost all their money
trading from the long side.
2. People that believed it was a bubble and lost all their money trading
from the short side.
3. I know I said two categories, but there was a very small third
category: The gold bugs. There were two guys off in the corner that
were like: “These sheep are stupid, we’re long gold and PAAS
(silver). This will all end in tears.” They were right! But they
couldn’t hang on long enough and both had to liquidate and find
“real” jobs in mid-2001.
The people that did well in 1999/2001 were the most flexible and open-
minded. We never got married to a side. We didn’t think the bull market
was dumb and we didn’t think the internet was a world changing miracle.
We were not overly philosophical about anything; we just wanted to make
money. Getting philosophical about markets (i.e., “The Fed is manipulating
markets, this is dumb!”) makes it way harder to win. Try not to do that.
Look for signs of blow off tops. One clue that it’s over is when bubble
stocks don’t respond to good news. In 2000, many internet stocks topped
out after failing to rally on blowout earnings reports.
When someone hears that a market is a bubble, they generally want to
go short. Watch for the inevitable burst but don’t get married to either side.
Detour complete! To sum up: When you see what looks to be a bubble,
there are just two things to remember.
Be rational… And be flexible.
Before we wrap up this section on trader bias, let me first give you a
few blurbs on other important forms of bias to watch out for.
Outcome bias
This is our tendency to evaluate a decision based on the outcome,
instead of the process that was followed to reach that decision. I discuss
process vs. out-come in Chapter 5 and it is extremely important to separate
the two. If you do a ton of research, come up with a great trade idea and
then a totally random news event stops you out 10 minutes after you put on
the trade… That’s good decision / bad outcome. Don’t worry about it.
Annie Duke’s book Thinking in Bets spends a ton of time on outcome bias
(she calls it “resulting”). It’s a great book if you want to learn more about
thinking about thinking.
Squirrel-chasing bias
Human attention is drawn to shiny objects. Homer Simpson is often
distracted by squirrels. Prices on the screen are stimulating and interesting
and human beings tend to confer much more meaning to price movement
than it generally deserves.
Chasing bias is the tendency to enter trades in a security simply because
it is moving. Something rallies, and you want to buy it. Something sells off
and you want to sell it. Rid yourself of this bias. It is a weakness that
plagues many traders, even hedge fund professionals. It is essentially a
combination of activity bias (the need to be active even when doing nothing
would be a better choice) and extrapolation bias (“It went down so it’s
gonna keep going down!”)
Bad traders see price moving on the screen and think somebody knows
something. Good traders know 97% of all price action is noise.
“Apple’s gapping lower! Somebody must know something!”
Nope. No. No. They probably don’t. There is an endless series of buys
and sells going through the market and the overwhelming majority of those
buys and sells have no particular edge or informational advantage. It could
be a guy selling to pay for his divorce. It could be an asset manager
reducing risk before she goes on vacation. It could be tax loss selling that
has 
nothing 
to 
do 
with 
the 
company 
in 
question. 
Don’t 
assume 
that
someone knows something when you see price moving.
If you are bearish Apple for six different reasons, and you have been
watching a key level all week, and Apple finally breaks down through that
level, then by all means, sell! But don’t be the trader that just jumps on
whatever is moving just because it’s moving. If you find yourself doing
that… Stop. That is what bad traders do. That is what traders with no plan
do. It is the trading equivalent of Homer Simpson chasing the squirrel.
Be aware of this leak and catch yourself chasing price. Step away from
your computer and give yourself a firm talking to. Chasing price without a
plan is a recipe for persistent losses and frustrating performance.
Hindsight bias
Humans tend to think they know more than they know and they tend to
think that they knew things were going to happen even when they truly had
no idea. My first boss was famous inside the bank for walking by, seeing
what had moved up or down the most and then saying (for example): “I
wanted to be long USDJPY! I knew it was going up!” Well, if you knew,
why didn’t you buy some?
After something has moved, you might remember some weak gut
feeling you had or some random thought that flitted through your mind
about buying that thing. It’s meaningless! It is also annoying. Don’t be one
of those people that says woulda, coulda or shoulda on a trading floor. The
only thing that matters are the decisions and actions you take in real-time.
Hindsight bias is also a constant feature of financial media. When you
see a headline like “Stocks rally on higher oil price” remember that the
journalist is writing with the benefit of hindsight. If you went back to the
start of the day and asked people what stocks would do if oil prices went
up, you might get 50% saying stocks would go down and 50% saying
stocks 
would 
go 
up. 
Journalists 
are 
often 
storytellers, 
not 
traders 
or
financial professionals. They are always trying to make up stories to explain
moves that are often driven by non-macro factors like flow and positioning.
There 
are 
many 
excellent 
finance 
journalists 
but 
there 
is 
also 
the
obligation for the financial media to tell a story based on fundamentals and
macro when often that is not the driver of a market move.
You will never see a headline like “USDCAD rallies as macro portfolio
manager stops out of huge short because he’s going on vacation.” If this is
the reason USDCAD rallies, journalists will fabricate some sort of narrative
that seems to fit in hindsight. That’s their job! Overall, you should be
extremely skeptical of most articles in the financial press. They are not
intentionally false, but they are biased almost exclusively to trying to fit a
macroeconomic explanation even when short-term moves in markets are
often explained by other factors.
Don’t talk about bad beats or ideas you never put on or the times you
get stopped out at the high or low. That’s all just part of trading and nobody
will find you interesting if you tell them about these types of incidents.
Always look forward.
Grizzly bias
Compulsive 
bearishness 
is 
a 
bias 
that 
has 
not 
received 
as 
much
coverage as other forms of trader bias. The bearish bias in the market since
2008 is probably the costliest human bias in finance. Think of all the money
lost on short ES futures in the past 10 years. All the “crash is imminent”
blog posts. All the apocalyptic hedge fund bets. Crazy.
One way permabears justify imminently lower equity prices is by
referencing the bond market. If yields are going up, that’s bad for earnings,
bad for margins, bad for borrowers, bad for severely indebted sovereigns,
etc. If yields go down, it’s “What do bonds know!?” or “The rates market
don’t lie!”
The relationship between stocks and bonds is fluid and for most of my
lifetime, stocks have been going up and bonds have been going up. This is
not to say it will go on forever, only to say that stock market bears need
better reasons than “yields are going up” or “yields are going down”. In
times of plentiful liquidity, it is perfectly logical for both stocks and bonds
to go up, up and away.
Bears sound smarter than bulls
Research shows conclusively that humans perceive people who present
negative or pessimistic opinions as more intelligent than those who express
positive or optimistic opinions. Bearish analysts are viewed as “cutting
through the noise” while bulls are often viewed as naïve fanboys banging
pompoms together on CNBC.
Strangely though, the path of human progress is an undeniable upward
trend. As Deirdre McCloskey put it:
… pessimism sells. For reasons I have never understood, people like to
hear that the world is going to hell, and become huffy and scornful when
some 
idiotic 
optimist 
intrudes 
on 
their 
pleasure. Yet 
pessimism 
has
consistently been a poor guide to the modern economic world
93
.
Similarly, stocks mostly go up, most of the time. Morgan Housel put it
like this
94
:
In investing, a bull sounds like a reckless cheerleader, while a bear
sounds like a sharp mind who has dug past the headlines – despite the
record of the S&P 500 rising 18,000-fold over the last century.
Yet 
many 
of 
the 
best-known 
Wall 
Street 
pundits 
are 
persistently
pessimistic and many of them have been around for decades. Think of all
the famous bears in finance. I could make a list 20 names long without even
Googling. Plenty of them have cool nicknames and there are even two
different celebrity economists nicknamed Dr. Doom. I find that funny.
These are all incredibly smart guys who do amazing analysis that
mostly points to an imminent large-scale bear market. And yet the evidence
shows these forecasts are almost always wrong. Why do we keep reading
their stuff? Because it sounds really smart! The forecasting business has
very little accountability and is mostly about marketing and sounding smart,
not accuracy.
These permabears are famous and they are highly paid. How is this
possible when stocks have spent most of their time in a bull market since
1980? If you always call for a bear market, and then one happens, were you
right? Answer: it doesn’t matter. Pessimism sells, even if it’s the wrong
view most of the time. When you read a “crash is imminent!” piece ask
yourself: is the author preying on my inherent negativity or is she actually
providing useful and actionable analysis supported by a verifiable track
record?
There is an entire industry of permabears because there is steady
demand for them. Don’t stoke that demand. Permabears sound smart, they
are entertaining and they reassure us that our intelligent skepticism is not
misguided despite mountains of evidence to the contrary. The funny thing
is, if these permabears ever change their view, they lose followers and
subscribers.
There is a tried and true strategy in the financial media: adopt one
dramatic world view, stick to it no matter what happens, and sell sell SELL
SELL it no matter what new information comes in to contradict your
viewpoint. As the saying goes: never let the facts get in the way of a good
story.
To be clear, I’m not advocating a permabull stance either. That would be
equally bad. As a trader, you need to be flexible and open-minded, not
perma- anything. This discussion is meant to make you think about how
pessimism is like intellectual candy. It tastes delicious, but it’s generally bad
for your financial health.
Negativity outsells positivity everywhere you look. Cynics and critics
sound smart. People love to read negative stories. Here’s a short excerpt
from a study of how people perceive writers of book reviews
95
:
Negative reviewers were perceived as more intelligent, competent, and
expert than positive reviewers, even when the content of the positive
review was independently judged as being of higher quality and greater
forcefulness.
The same bias exists in non-financial news. Multiple experiments show
that people claim to prefer positive news but actually prefer to consume
negative news. This negativity bias is part of human nature. Even infants
react to negative stimuli with more intensity than they do to positive
stimuli. When people of any age are subjected to two stimuli of equal
intensity, one positive and one negative, the negative stimulus has a greater
psychological impact than the positive one. Negative impressions are more
salient and more memorable.
Negativity is an attention magnet. Like McCloskey said: “Pessimism
sells.” Be a rational consumer of information and do not allow smart-
sounding permabears to bias your process.
Ignore the permabears.
Stories of funds that set money on fire trying to short stocks are
plentiful. One fund I know opened in 2012 and the first trade they did was
go short S&P futures. The last trade they did before shutting down in 2016
(due to poor performance) was cover a short S&P futures position. Another
fund made 22% on Abenomics in 2013 but lost 18% on bearish S&P bets
that year and ended around flat overall. It is a costly bias. When you trade,
you should always be equally able to go long or short risky assets. If you
can’t, it’s a major leak you need to work on.
Warren Buffett said it best:
For 240 years it’s been a terrible mistake to bet against America, and now
is no time to start. America’s golden goose of commerce and innovation will
continue to lay more and larger eggs.
The Gambler’s Fallacy and the Hot Hand
The Gambler’s Fallacy and the Hot Hand are two opposite but related
forms of bias. Some people see a roulette wheel that comes up red eight
times in a row and they think black is due. Some win a few rolls at the craps
table and want to increase their bet size because they have the “hot hand”.
Thing is, in randomly generated data, there are many streaks. They don’t
mean anything; they’re just how random sequences go. Seven heads in a
row does not impact the eighth flip. The coin has no memory.
Probability has no memory.
There is no supernatural element to probability; it is a mathematical
construct. The intuition people get at casino tables is nonsense. If you had a
hunch you were going to win and then you won… It’s a coincidence. Every
spin of a roulette wheel is mutually exclusive and each roll of the dice in
craps is independent of the last.
In finance, things are trickier. If TSLA is up 10 days in a row, is it
wildly over-bought and more likely to fall on day 11? Or is day 11 an
independent event with no relationship to the prior 10? It can be hard to say.
The best starting point is to assume each financial minute, hour and day
is independent from the last. Then be open to exceptions. A good example
of this is seasonality. If GBPUSD is up 8 Aprils in a row, does that mean it
is more likely to go up in April of Year 9? Probably not. There are 10 or 15
actively traded currency pairs and 12 months in every year, so odds are high
that if you look hard enough you’ll find some months that show a seasonal
pattern. Especially if your sample size is just eight years. But this seasonal
pattern is probably simply a random streak.
There 
are, 
however, 
many 
examples 
of 
persistent, 
non-random
seasonality and price patterns. The Halloween Effect, more commonly
known as “Sell in May and Go Away” has been in existence for more than
300 
years 
and 
has 
worked 
out-of-sample 
for 
decades 
after 
it 
was
discovered. It is almost impossible to dismiss this effect as an artifact of
randomness. It is far too persistent.
If a pattern is persistent, then we try to explain it. In the case of “Sell in
May and Go Away”, the explanation could be a pattern of human optimism
where we start the year optimistic, eventually overshoot, pull back from that
bit of irrational exuberance, then rally into year end.
Similarly, there are micro patterns of seasonality and repetition that
make sense and repeat for a reason. The first day of the month is a day
when a big lump of automatic contributions go into US employee 401k
retirement plans. A good proportion of these contributions end up in index
funds and as such the first day of the month tends to be a bullish day for
stocks. Same goes for the start of the year.
There are other seasonal patterns like this in various markets and ideally
when you spot a pattern, you want to be able to ascribe some sort of logic to
it. If you can’t, assume it is random unless you are studying a large sample
of data or have some other reason to think the streak is not just a product of
chance.
The paper “The hot hand belief and the gambler’s fallacy in investment
decisions under risk”
96 
is an excellent summary of two ways in which
investors fail to understand that most events are independent. Here is the
abstract:
We conduct experiments to analyze investment behavior in decisions
under risk. Subjects can bet on the outcomes of a series of coin tosses
themselves, 
rely 
on 
randomized 
‘experts’, 
or 
choose 
a 
risk-free
alternative. We observe that subjects who rely on the randomized experts
pick those who were successful in the past, showing behavior consistent
with the hot hand belief. Obviously the term ‘expert’ suffices to attract
some subjects. For those who decided on their own, we find behavior
consistent with the gambler’s fallacy, as the frequency of betting on heads
(tails) decreases after streaks of heads (tails).
Assume most events in financial markets are independent, but always
look for ones that are not. When you find a pattern, dig deeper. Keep
digging until you find patterns that might logically repeat in the future.
Most streaks and patterns in finance are random. But not all of them.
There are literally 100s of ways behavioral bias influences traders and
investors. I have gone through a short list of some types of bias that I
believe are particularly important but there is an entire academic field (and
a library-full of books) devoted to the topic. At some point, make sure you
read Thinking, Fast and Slow (Kahneman), Fooled by Randomness (Taleb),
and Irrational Exuberance (Shiller). Those are my three favorite books on
behavioral finance.
Also, just Google “behavioral bias trading” occasionally and go down
the rabbit hole of academic research and blog posts. It is such an interesting
topic 
and 
there 
are 
many 
people 
writing 
about 
and 
researching 
it
passionately. Humans are so silly, there will never be a shortage of foibles
to unpack.
Before we complete this chapter on rational thinking, I want to venture
into the weird and wonderful world of counterintuitive math facts. I want to
open your eyes to just how counterintuitive mathematical reality can be.
Your takeaway from this section should be that it is important to coldly
examine your assumptions and interpretations when looking at data because
your intuition can often be wrong.
Also, math is fun.
COUNTERINTUITIVE MATH FACTS
Education has made all the difference for me. It builds software for your
brain. Mathematics taught me to reason logically and understand numbers,
tables, charts, and calculations. Even more valuable, I learned at an early
age to teach myself.
EDWARD O. THORP, A Man for All Markets
One of the most fun parts of math is that even though it is 100%
objective and rational, it can still surprise us and it can sometimes feel a
little 
bit 
like 
magic. 
Part 
of 
acquiring 
a 
higher-level 
and 
rational
understanding of math and probability is to simply understand that math,
statistics, and probability are not always 100% intuitive. Many empirical
and statistical outcomes can be surprising.
In this section I will take a look at a few instances, not so much because
these specific examples are critical for trading but more so you can see that
it is worth challenging your system 1 assumptions if you want to get to the
right 
mathematical 
answers. 
Alpha 
Traders 
have 
a 
strong 
basic
understanding of numbers and statistics. You should constantly be working
to improve your numeracy.
The counterintuitive math facts that follow highlight just how wrong
your gut can be when it jumps to conclusions and should reinforce that your
slow rational mind is where it’s at.
Example 1a and 1b: The bat and ball problem
Even simple problems can be counterintuitive
The classic counterintuitive math problem is the bat and ball problem. If
you have not heard this before, take a quick second to answer. The question
is:
A baseball bat and a ball cost $1.10 total. The bat costs $1.00 more than
the ball. How much does the ball cost?
Did you answer 10 cents?
That is the standard System 1 answer but if you stop to think for just a
moment, you will see that the answer is 5 cents.
Let x represent the cost of the ball x + ($1.00 + x) = $1.10
$1.00 + 2x = $1.10
2x = $1.10 - $1.00
2x = $0.10
x = $0.05
This is question one in the Cognitive Reflection Test discussed earlier. It
shows how, if we listen to our gut, we get the wrong answer. Our brains can
take data and jump to seemingly logical, but completely wrong conclusions.
Slow 
down 
and 
use 
System 
2 
for 
mathematical 
analysis. 
Evaluate
alternative hypotheses, even when the answer seems obvious.
When it comes to trading, the more obvious the conclusion, the more
likely it is already priced into the market and thus the more likely the trade
you enter based on the conclusion will lose money
97
.
Another quick one: You have $100,000 split evenly between ten stocks.
They all drop one percent. What percentage of your portfolio did you just
lose in total?
Most people get that one right (1%) but hear the wrong answer in their
head first (10%).
Example 2 : Up / down / up / down is actually… Down?
People don’t always understand log returns
A $100 stock goes down 10% one day then up 10% the next. What is
the stock worth now?
If you answered $100, you used System 1. And you are wrong.
If you answered $99, you used System 2 and you are right.
This is another simple example of a mathematical result that is not
always obvious on first inspection. If you ask someone what happens to a
stock that goes down 20% one day then up 20% the next, their kneejerk or
System 1 response would be that the stock is unchanged. But anyone that
worked at Lehman Brothers in 2008 (to pick just one of many examples)
knows that if something goes up and down 20% over and over, it will
eventually end up much, much lower.
Here’s a chart:
This truth can be painful in trading. If you lose 10% of your capital, you
need to make 11.1% to get back to flat. If you drop 50% of your capital,
you need to gain 100% to recover. If you lose your mind and drop 90% of
your capital, you will need to make 1,000% just to get back to flat! The
further you fall from your starting capital, the harder it will be to ever come
back.
Example 3 : NBA superstars
98
People don’t always understand averages
Take a look at the statistics from these two star basketball players and
tell me who has the better career shooting percentage:
One would reasonably think that if Miller’s shooting percentage is
higher from both 2-point and 3-point range, he must have the higher career
shooting percentage, right? Wrong. Overall shooting percentage is weighted
and 
Jordan 
took 
many 
more 
2-point 
shots, 
so 
his 
lifetime 
shooting
percentage was 49% while Miller’s was 47%.
So the lesson again is: Don’t just jump to a conclusion. Think.
A simple check you should always employ when analyzing data is to
compare the average to the median. If they are similar, you are probably
good but if there is a big difference, then something is up and you need to
dig deeper.
A common source of discrepancy in my backtesting work is that when I
include data from 2008, the moves that year can often swamp the average
and distort the analysis. This will show up in the median vs. average
validation check and then I can either cut the 2008 data from the series or
use the median figures.
You should never overestimate the meaning of an average. If you put
one foot in a bucket of boiling water and one foot in a bucket of ice water,
are you feeling warm, on average? The more extreme the data points in
your average, the less meaningful your median and average outputs will be.
The 1956 classic “How to Lie with Statistics” by Darrell Huff does a
super job of explaining the basics of how to handle statistics like this. I
think every human being should read that book, even if they don’t care
about statistics or finance.
Example 4 : Arcsine Law
People don’t always understand random walks
This example has a direct application to trading and finance. In fact,
before I knew about Arcsine Law, I made a mistake that I now see others
making from time to time. This one is crazy complicated, so if you don’t
understand 
the 
reasoning, 
just 
at 
least 
make 
sure 
you 
remember 
the
conclusion. Arcsine Law is about as annoying and difficult to understand as
the Monty Hall problem. But worth the effort to understand.
First, let me reprint some faulty analysis I did in 2017. If you know why
it’s wrong before you read the whole thing, you are either a genius or you
already know about Arcsine Law. The following is an excerpt from a daily
wrote toward the end of 2017.
Have you ever noticed that the yearly highs and lows in G7 FX tend to
happen more at the start and end of the year (and less in the middle)? It
is true. We ran the numbers and they were so extreme that I did not
believe them. So we ran them again and I manually checked a bunch of it
because again, I was shocked at the non-randomness of the distribution.
Here is how annual highs and lows are distributed (by month) over the
year for the G7 currencies:
EURUSD USDJPY USDCAD NZDUSD AUDUSD USDCHF and GBPUSD y-axis shows
sum of how many times it happened
Now obviously there is a USD component to all these pairs so if one
makes a high or low at a certain time, it is likely all the others probably will
too. But the extremeness of the skew in the distribution is amazing. But
wait! It gets crazier!
If you look at all the times a currency makes its year high or low in
January, check out the day of January that it happens:
Y-axis is number of occurrences. 1980 to now. Synthetic EUR used for EUR pre-1999
Can you guess what December looks like?
Insane, right? This is a massive anomaly in what should be close to
randomly-distributed data. Clearly year end transactions (which are often
not price sensitive and more timing-related), window dressing, positioning
for the new year and reduced liquidity create enough distortions to make
even the most unrepentant ivory tower academic question EMH. The front
of 
the 
month 
sees 
NFP 
and 
back 
of 
the 
month 
sees 
month-end
rebalancing so that is a partial explanation. Am I missing any other
explanations?
I grind up the data like this all the time and rarely have I seen a more
extreme result.
Pretty cool stuff, I thought. Until I learned… MY ANALYSIS WAS
TOTALLY WRONG.
I 
have 
seen 
others 
make 
this 
same 
mistake 
since 
and 
you 
will
occasionally see excited commentaries like mine remarking on the U-
shaped pattern of highs and lows in a data set. This can relate to data on any
time 
slice, 
monthly, 
daily 
or 
hourly. 
For 
example, 
I 
have 
seen 
blogs
comment recently that stock market highs and lows are more likely to occur
near the open and the close, vs. the middle of the day. It’s the same fallacy.
In a random walk process, there is not a uniform distribution of highs
and lows throughout the day, week, month or year. Instead, we see a U-
shaped pattern with more highs and lows near the start and the end of the
series. This fundamental property of random walks is described by a
counterintuitive branch of probability known as Arcsine law.
If you spend a bit of time thinking about a random walk, it starts to
make sense that the high or low is more likely to occur at the start or end of
the year. Imagine a series of coin flips where you simply add 1 for heads or
subtract 1 for tails. The longer you flip the coin, the farther the sum will
move away from the starting point (zero) and thus the start and end point
are more likely to be the extreme points relative to any point in between.
Our intuition is that they would oscillate around zero, but this is not the
case. They slowly move away.
Figure 7.18 demonstrates how random walks slowly make their away
further and further from their starting point of zero. Therefore, the extreme
low and high points appear more often near the start or the end of the series.
Example 5 : The Birthday Paradox
People don’t always understand probability
Here’s a simpler one. There are 70 people in a room, what are the odds
that two of them will have the same birthday?
If you don’t know this problem, you might start with 70/365 and then
realize it’s much higher than that so maybe guess 50%? Or… 60%?
How about 99.9%? Most people’s intuition is to start with one birthday
and think through the odds of someone in the room having that birthday, but
really all you need is one of any 70 birthdays to match any other birthday in
the room. Figure 7.19 shows you the numbers.
You only need 23 people in a room to have a 50/50 shot of two
matching birthdays. I learned this 20 years ago and it still gives me a mild
case of vertigo when I think about it. It’s weirdly counterintuitive.
When you analyze market data and come to conclusions, make sure you
are confident that your conclusions are logical. Not just intuitive. Logical.
Even if something seems obvious, check it. Think about it.
Image by Rajkiran g via Creative Commons 3.0 (Wikipedia)
Example 6 : Non-linear craziness
People don’t always understand non-linear relationships
When you go to a casino, you know you have a good chance of losing,
but do you truly appreciate how your equity evolves over time in an
environment with negative leakage? Think about this: If you start the night
with $100 and play a fair game (50% chance of winning, bet $1 to win $1),
what are the odds you will hit +$100 before you lose your $100?
Trick question! Because it’s not a trick. 50%.
OK, now what are the odds you get to $100 before losing $100 in the
same $1 game, but now the odds of winning each time are 49.5%? Answer
11.5%.
What about if the odds in the game are 49%? Answer 1.8%.
As you repeat a game with negative edge, the probability of loss is non-
linear. This is why the only way to make money at a casino is with highly
variable, or lumpy bets. If you want maximum odds to win in Vegas, go to
the roulette table when you arrive and put your entire stake on black (or
red). Another “strategy” is to place lumpy bets with your $100. Bet $50
then $2. $60, then $1, etc. At least this way you have a chance. Any
methodical application of a strategy that has a sub-50% win rate will lead to
almost guaranteed loss.
When I’m trading badly, my P&L kind of looks like the $1 bet with the
49% odds.
Note that this is just an example of how math can be counterintuitive.
The takeaway should not be that you want to randomly make lumpy bets in
in trading. In trading your bet-sizing should:
Eliminate risk of ruin.
Be proportionate to conviction level.
Be large enough (even if it’s a low conviction trade) to move the
needle toward your goal.
Finally, note that if your capital is slowly bleeding lower over an
extended period, it is a sign that you have negative edge. Figure 7.20 is the
chart of 10 simulations of a 48%/52% game where you risk $1 to make $1.
If your P&L chart has that steady top-left to bottom-right skew like these
simulations, it is time to think about your edge. Has it disappeared? Have
markets changed and you didn’t adapt? Are you paying too much in
transaction costs (a major source of negative edge)?
250 trials (that is, the game is played 250 times in each simulation)
Example 7: Survivors and incomplete samples
People don’t always think about whether their sample is
complete or biased
In World War 2, the US Navy wanted to reduce the number of its fighter
planes being shot down and wanted to add armor at various points to
reinforce the fighters. Armor increases a plane’s weight and makes it less
efficient, so you need to be selective about where to put armor. The
statisticians in the wartime Statistical Research Group received a diagram
showing data something like this:
By McGeddon - Own work, CC BY-SA 4.0
The intuitive or obvious answer is to reinforce the areas that are getting
hit by enemy fire. The wings, fuselage, and tail look like natural places to
add armor since they get shot up the most.
But 
legendary 
mathematician 
Abraham 
Wald 
ignored 
the 
intuitive
answer and thought more deeply. He thought to ask: “Why are there so
many holes in the fuselage and wings, but no bullet holes in the engines?”
This is like asking: why are there so many ER patients with gunshot
wounds to the arm but so few with gunshot wounds to the heart, even
though both sections of the human body are in a similar area? The answer,
of course, is that the planes that got shot in the engine went down and were
destroyed, so they couldn’t be examined. There are no bullet holes in the
engines of the planes that return to base because the planes that are shot in
the engine don’t make it back to base. Victims shot in the heart don’t make
it to the ER.
Survivorship bias is the phenomenon where we evaluate a sample (say
planes returning from battle or mutual funds) and then draw conclusions
based on that sample without considering all the parts of the sample that did
not survive. We look at planes that returned to base without considering the
ones that got shot down. We look at performance of existing mutual funds
without considering all the ones that went out of business. This is another
way we misinterpret data.
Here’s one way this applies to trading. A friend of yours shows you a
specific strategy that earned 1105% returns last month. Your first reaction
might be “Wow, tell me more!” When really your first reaction should be:
“What other strategies did you test before coming up with this one?”
When analyzing data, look for missing evidence.
This is a common trick in the sports gambling industry. Say the Tigers
are 
playing 
the 
Bears 
tonight. 
You 
send 
10,000 
e-mails 
out 
to 
new
prospects. 5,000 of the e-mails read: “Attention subscribers: OUR GOLD
STAR, GUARANTEED PICK TONIGHT IS: TIGERS TO WIN!” and
5000 say: “Attention subscribers: OUR GOLD STAR, GUARANTEED
PICK TONIGHT IS: BEARS TO WIN!” Then, they wait to see who wins.
Let’s say it’s the Tigers.
The next game is Lions vs. Panthers. The marketer now takes the list of
5,000 e-mails that received the correct Tigers pick e-mail and splits those
into two groups of 2,500. Half the e-mails predict the Lions and half predict
the Panthers. They do this twice more and now have a list of 625 people
that just received FOUR STRAIGHT GOLD STAR PICK WINNERS!
Then, 
they 
call 
up 
those 
625 
prospects 
(many 
of 
whom 
are 
suitably
impressed—nobody else had the Panthers to beat the Lions in that game!)
and try to close the deal on a $1,200/year subscription to the GOLD STAR
PICK SHEET.
Those bettors that got the four accurate e-mails in a row have to be very
smart to think of the hidden evidence they might be missing. More likely,
their emotional desire to win overrides their logical or rational mind and
they hand their credit card number over to the waiting operator.
Numbers on their own do not always tell the full story. You need to
think more deeply about conclusions and treat even the most obvious
answers with rational skepticism.
Remember, skepticism is not cynicism. It doesn’t mean you assume
everything is wrong and everyone is lying and nothing is true. Alpha
Traders 
filter 
information 
with 
slow 
System 
2 
thinking, 
even 
if 
the
conclusion drawn from that information seems simple or obvious at first.
Skepticism is a healthy state of mind that represents quality thinking.
The healthy skeptic understands that most knowledge is uncertain to some
degree and looks to support statements with evidence. She listens to experts
but does not take their claims or forecasts at face value. She uses research
and logic to see through false claims and avoid hasty, incorrect conclusions.
The goal of this section was not to provide examples of counterintuitive
math that you could apply directly to your trading. The idea, instead, is to
get 
you 
thinking 
on 
the 
next 
level. 
Don’t 
just 
scan 
the 
surface 
of
information you receive and let it make its way into your mind, unfiltered.
Think deeply. Seek accuracy and truth, and identify and ignore bad thinking
when you encounter it.
That concludes our discussion of counterintuitive math. I hope you
found it interesting and fun and I hope that it shakes you up a bit and gets
you thinking more actively about your own thinking. If you enjoyed this
section, I highly recommend Darrell Huff’s book How to Lie with Statistics.
It is a classic that explains in clear language how innocent-looking data and
statistics can often be devilishly deceptive.
Be curious. Be open-minded. Seek evidence.
That is the essence of high-quality thinking.
ALWAYS QUESTION COMMON KNOWLEDGE
This is also a useful rule when you run into “common knowledge” in
markets. Don’t just listen to pundits and take their word or accept their
forecasts at face value. Quite often, even Wall Street professionals on
Bloomberg or CNBC will spout non-truths as if they were fact. Be on the
lookout for statements that are presented as fact but could be totally false.
When you hear forecasts, no matter how smart the person sounds,
assume they are probably pretty random. Analyze declarations, verify them
with data and come to your own conclusions.
Here are some examples of questionable “common knowledge” that you
hear in markets all the time.
1. Higher interest rates are bad for stocks
FACT CHECK: Sometimes true
Very often, when interest rates are rising, it is in response to a strong
economy. A strong economy can be good for stocks if the central bank is
accommodative, and bad for stocks if it leads the central bank to hike into
restrictive territory. Rising interest rates and falling bond prices can be good
or bad for stocks. It depends on many factors, especially where the Fed is in
the cycle. If the Fed has hiked seven times and the economy is still strong
and yields are ripping higher, then sure, that kind of rising rate move is
probably bad for stocks.
On the other hand, almost every time US interest rates went up in recent
years, that was likely good news for stocks as it signaled reflation and
momentum 
away 
from 
the 
dreaded 
deflationary 
secular 
stagnation
environment. Any time someone posts or blogs or tweets that rising rates
are bad for stocks, stop and think. What do higher rates represent? Why are
rates rising? Where are we in the interest rate and economic cycles? Unless
you’re near the end of the cycle, rising rates are usually good news for
stocks, not bad news.
2. Bonds are smarter than stocks
Or: “The bond market knows something.”
Or: “The bond market smells a rat in the economy.”
FACT CHECK: False
Bond traders sit only a few rows from equity traders in most banks.
They have the same information as multi-asset macro PMs with billions of
capital under management. Bond traders do not have access to secret
information about the economy that is kept hidden from traders in every
other asset class.
No, no, no, no… No.
Many permabear pundits feel nauseous when they see the stock market
going up, so they will come up with any excuse for why the rally is “on thin
ice” or “set to falter”. If bonds happen to be rallying along with stocks,
these fear-peddling pundits assume that the bond market has some sort of
secret information that hasn’t yet been disclosed to the stock market. They
will say that the bond market knows something and stocks are going to
crash any minute.
When people say any of the three clichés listed above, chuckle to
yourself and hit ignore. Figure 7.22 is a chart of stocks and bonds for the
last 10 years.
Does it look like bond rallies have been bad for stocks? Nope. It would
be just as dangerous to say stocks and bonds always go up together. That’s
not true either. It’s more complicated than a simple soundbite will allow.
Quantitative easing creates long periods where stocks and bonds go up in
tandem.
The relationship between stocks and bonds is complicated and varies
considerably 
depending 
on 
the 
regime. 
It 
depends 
what 
part 
of 
the
economic and Fed rate hike or rate cut cycle the world is in. Any simplistic
comment formulated as: “Bonds are doing X so stocks should do Y” is a
waste of time.
The stock vs. bond relationship is dynamic and unstable. Any statement
about correlation or cross-market signal between stocks and bonds needs to
be evaluated with a heavy dose of critical thinking and analysis. Mostly,
your starting point should be: bonds don’t predict stocks. Then work from
there.
If you are astute, you might have noticed that these first two sections on
“common knowledge” can be boiled down to:
1. Higher rates are bad for stocks
2. Lower rates are bad for stocks
The 
permabears 
leave 
many 
heaping 
piles 
of 
steaming 
hot 
brown
nonsense in the financial forest every day. Learn to step over and around it
and don’t waste your time trying to convince the bears that their guano
smells. Just slowly and quietly walk away.
3. Gold is a safe haven
FACT CHECK: Kinda. But not really.
A safe haven is an asset that goes up or at least holds its value during
periods of risk aversion. Bonds typically perform this role, though with
interest rates approaching zero in most countries by the year 2020, that role
is likely to be questioned going forward.
The Japanese yen and Swiss franc are traditionally viewed as safe
havens though their role as safe havens has diminished in recent years due
to 
central 
bank 
and 
semi-official 
currency 
intervention 
(perceived 
or
actual). Many prognosticators and journalists talk about gold as if it is a
safe haven. When you see a headline like: “Gold rallies as US stock market
sell-off accelerates”, ignore it. Gold is just as likely to go down on days or
during weeks that stocks go down.
Gold’s behavior during periods of risk aversion depends mostly on
positioning and overall financial market and USD liquidity. If stocks sell off
because of economic worries, you might see gold rally. On the other hand,
if stocks sell off because of liquidity fears (like in March 2020), expect gold
to plummet right along with stocks.
The correlation between changes in the price of gold and changes in
stock prices is usually mildly positive, meaning gold and stocks go up and
down together, a tad. In Figure 7.23, I present a simple chart to quickly
demonstrate.
I found the 25 worst weeks for the stock market (largest fall, in
percentage terms) between 1980 and 2020 and then checked what gold did
during those same weeks. If gold is a safe haven, it should reliably remain
unchanged or go higher at these moments. The table shows the results,
sorted by worst SPX performance, starting with the worst week in S&P 500
history.
The average move for gold in big down weeks for stocks is -0.4%.
There are 13 down weeks vs. 15 up. The takeaway is that gold is not a
reliable safe haven. If stocks collapse, gold might go up, or it might not.
4. Bad economic news is bad for stocks
FACT CHECK: Sometimes true.
The economy is one of many, many factors that influence stock prices.
Analysts often overweight the importance of the economy when discussing
stocks and giant question marks appear over their heads as they discuss the
baffling divergence between equities and the economy.
Sometimes it’s all about the economy; sometimes the economy has
nothing to do with stocks.
2020 was the most glaring example in history of a feature of the stock
market that really bothers some people (especially journalists, pundits, and
noob traders): the stock market is not always a reflection of the economy,
nor is it a reflection of social mood. It reflects supply and demand for
stocks.
Often, nobody really understands what is driving the stock market (in
either direction), and most of the “analysis” you see is simply ex-post
rationalization 
for 
things 
that 
have 
already 
happened. 
If 
we 
really
understood stocks, we could probably predict them better!
There are so many variables that can drive a wedge between stocks and
the economy. For example:
Excess liquidity provided by central banks.
Expectations of future economic conditions are often more important
that the current economic situation or economic numbers.
Valuations can expand and contract in the same direction as the
economy or in the opposite direction. This makes it hard to trace the
direct connection between stocks and economic output. Multiple
expansion and contraction (higher and lower price/earnings ratios) and
many other factors unrelated to the economy can move stock prices.
Supply and demand. If companies are buying back stock, other
companies are going private, M&A activity is frenzied and retail
traders are furiously opening new accounts, there can be a mismatch
between supply and demand for stocks. These technical factors do not
always correlate with economic growth.
Sentiment. If everyone is raging bullish and caught in a speculative
mania, economics don’t matter much. Stocks are going higher.
5. The stock market is going to crash this week, this month, any
day, etc.
FACT CHECK: Almost always false.
Fear sells. Dire predictions get clicks. Predicting crashes is a great
media strategy. This is a fact and it has been confirmed by a huge pile of
research. Human beings are attracted to dark narratives and scary headlines.
As mentioned earlier, research shows that negative views on the stock
market are perceived to be smarter while bullish views tend to be perceived
as 
naïve, 
unrealistic, 
or 
rose-colored, 
despite 
the 
fact 
that 
empirical
evidence strongly supports a bullish stance most of the time.
The fact that “the stock market is about to crash” is common knowledge
on many websites and is a frequent theme on Twitter. People are always
saying this; yet oddly enough, the stock market barely ever crashes! Take a
look at history.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Regularly predicting a crash is for people that want clicks and
followers, not for people that want to make money.
When 
you 
see 
nonsense 
like 
“stocks 
can’t 
fight 
gravity 
forever”
remember Figure 7.24.
Prices operate in a vacuum; there is no gravity. Most people that
“successfully” predicted a crash in the past (say 2008) just predict crashes
all the time. A stopped clock is right twice a day.
Here are some statistics about the stock market that I hope will dissuade
you from joining the permabear sloth.
It is true that stocks have a left tail, which means that the fastest,
craziest moves in the stock market are down, not up. This is part of the
reason it is more fun to be bearish than bullish. You are more likely to get
instant gratification.
There is a crash (15% drop in one month) about once every five to eight
years. Still, despite the four crashes between 2000 and 2020, the S&P went
from 1,320 to 3,420 in that period (including four separate months when
stocks ripped higher by more than 15%).
If your goal is to make money trading, you should be comfortable
shifting between long or short risky assets depending on market conditions.
You should trade without a directional bias. It’s fine to be bearish, just don’t
let it become your religion.
Don’t be a permabear. Don’t be a permabull.
Keep an open mind and analyze the evidence, then make a rational and
unbiased short-term forecast of market direction. That’s the essence of
good trading.
That concludes this chapter on rational, unbiased thinking. The biggest
challenge with human bias is that studies show that even when we know
about a bias, we can still fall victim to it. Therefore, it is important not just
to know about various forms of bias and bad thinking, but to implement
strategies and tactics to counteract bias in a rigorous and systematic way.
At 
this 
point, 
I 
hope 
you 
have 
a 
better 
understanding 
of 
the
characteristics that make up an Alpha Trader and where you are strong,
medium, and weak. I hope I have given you a few new ideas on how to
improve your trading, tighten up your game, eliminate leaks and become
more self-aware.
That’s Part Two done. Now, it’s time for some fun stuff. I’ve laid the
ground- work and it’s time to take action. You know what it means to be a
rational thinking trader and you have learned many of the strengths and
weaknesses 
that 
enhance 
or 
hamper 
trading 
success. 
Now, 
let’s 
talk
markets.
In Part Three, we look at how to become an expert in your market
(Chapters 8 to 10) and then examine the topic of risk management in
Chapter 11. Chapter 12 brings the entire book together as I explain exactly
how I come up with, structure and execute trade ideas. Finally, I walk you
through a detailed, real-life trade example in a way that I hope you will find
both interesting and informative.
You are more than half-way through the book.
Let’s move on to Part Three.
68. Svenson, O., “Are we all less risky and more skillful than our fellow drivers?” (1980).
69. 
Biais, 
B., 
et 
al. 
“Judgemental 
Overconfidence, 
Self-Monitoring, 
and 
Trading
Performance in an Experimental Financial Market,” The Review of Economic Studies
(2005).
70. Barber and Odean, “Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence and common stock
investment” (2001).
71. Julia Michailova and Ulrich Schmidt, “Overconfidence and bubbles in experimental
asset markets”, Kiel Institute for the World Economy (2011).
72. Seo-Young Cho, “Explaining Gender Differences in Confidence and Overconfidence in
Math” (2017).
73. Lundeberg, M. A., Fox, P. W., & Punćcohać, J., “Highly confident but wrong: Gender
differences and similarities in confidence judgments” (1994).
74. Patrick Ring, Levent Neyse, et al., “Gender Differences in Performance Predictions:
Evidence from the Cognitive Reflection Test” (2016)
75. 
Breiter, Aharon, 
Khaneman 
et 
al., 
“Functional 
Imaging 
of 
Neural 
Responses 
to
Expectancy and Experience of Monetary Gains and Losses” (2001)
76. Brown, Stephen and Lu, Yan and Ray, Sugata and Teo, Melvyn, “Sensation Seeking
and Hedge Funds” (2016).
77. For example: Grinblatt and Keloharju, “Sensation seeking, overconfidence and trading
activity,” (2009).
78. 
https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/gambling-disorder/what-is-gambling-
disorder
79. Lu, Yan and Mortal, Sandra and Ray, Sugata, “Hedge Fund Hold ‘em” (2019).
80. It is theoretically possible to play Blackjack with positive expectation but with 6-deck
shoes and security cameras everywhere, not so much!
81. https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/02/27/why-facts-dont-change-our-minds
82. Koriat, A., Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B., “Reasons for confidence.” (1980)
83. Stanovich, K.E., West, R.F. and Topiak, M.E., “Myside Bias, Rational Thinking and
Intelligence.” (2013)
84. https://psychcentral.com/lib/why-intelligent-people-do-foolish-things/
85. Copyright 2021, Angus Greig.
86. Erik Snowberg, E., and Wolfers, J. “Explaining the favorite-longshot bias: Is it risk-love
or misperceptions?” (2010).
87. Baseball betting is an interesting exception. Despite some underdogs paying 2:1 or
even 3:1, baseball bettors prefer to bet favorites.
88. Multiple investor biases are explained by Prospect Theory. To read more about this
huge topic, just Google ‘Prospect Theory Kahneman Tversky’.
89. Tong, Sean, “The anchoring and adjustment bias in estimates of US employment”
(2014).
90. Campbell and Sharpe, “Anchoring bias in consensus forecasts and its effect on market
prices” (2007).
91. For the record, Jared Dillian wrote a whole novel, All the Evil of this World, centered on
the 3COM/PALM spinoff. I loved it, but apparently it was a love it/hate it type of book so
it’s a risky one to recommend. If you like dark stuff, and you want to know what 1999 felt
like—go for it.
92. Generally, the main explanation for these illogical moves is that it’s difficult or expensive
to borrow a stock that is overpriced. Regardless, these large disconnects from basic math
are usually a symptom of Bubbliciousness. See Cherkes, Jones and Spatt: “A solution to
the PALM, 3COM spin off puzzles” (2013) for an academic paper that does a good job of
explaining the PALM/3COM non-arbitrage.
93. http://www.deirdremccloskey.org/docs/pdf/PikettyReviewEssay.pdf
94. 
https://www.fool.com/investing/general/2016/01/21/why-does-pessimism-sound-so-
smart.aspx I learned of the mcloskey quote (footnote 1) from this article, too.
95. Teresa Amabile, “Brilliant but Cruel: Perceptions of negative evaluators” (1983).
96. Huber, J., Kirchler, M. & Stöckl, T. “The hot hand belief and the gambler’s fallacy in
investment decisions under risk” (2010).
97. This is not always true! Sometimes the obvious trade is the right trade. But if it’s
obvious, spend even more time than usual thinking about what could go wrong because
obvious trade usually means crowded trade.
98. 
This 
example 
is 
from 
a 
December 
2, 
2019 
blog 
post 
by 
Noah 
Xiao 
on
towardsdatascience.com.
I
PART THREE
METHODOLOGY AND MATHEMATICS
“Nothing in the world is worth having or worth doing unless it means effort,
pain, difficulty… I have never in my life envied a human being who led an
easy life.”
THEODORE ROOSEVELT
n Part Three I will outline the specific steps you must take to master your
market. Your goal must be to become an expert in the product or markets
that you trade. Stay narrow (focus on one or two markets) and go deep
(learn as much as possible, right down to the nitty-grittiest details). This
approach gives you the best shot at a sustainable edge. Wide and shallow
can work, but has a much lower probability of success than narrow and
deep.
Here is the abstract of an interesting study of Twitter sentiment that
supports the idea that narrow focus yields higher returns
99
.
Using 
tweets 
from 
StockTwits 
and 
machine-learning 
classification
techniques, we find that social-media sentiment predicts positively and
significantly 
future 
stock 
returns, 
and, 
importantly, 
such 
positive
predictability 
decreases 
when 
the 
number 
of 
stocks 
users 
follow
increases. The return predictability appears to stem from users’ ability to
forecast future earnings. Further tests reveal that reduced predictability
due to stock coverage is significant only for firms that are complex,
opaque, and thus hard to analyze. The evidence suggests that stock
analysis by users with a more complex portfolio is inferior due to attention
and time constraints.
Key words: “attention” and “time constraints”. You have a limited
supply of attention and time and the more you spread it out, the less chance
you have of achieving mastery.
I can 100% confirm this from experience. Traders who master one area
succeed much more often than traders that dabble in every market. That is
why the term “macro tourist” tends to be used in a derogatory way
100
.
Locals have expert knowledge and can find a great meal for a reasonable
price. Tourists eat at the overpriced restaurants and leave disappointed.
The next three chapters will outline the three steps you must take to
become an expert in your market. Step one: understand microstructure. Step
two: understand the narrative. Finally, step three: understand technicals,
positioning and sentiment. Do the work to master these three areas and you
are on the way to trading success.
Think of the examples ahead as starting points for the deep dive you
will take into your own market. Each product and security trades differently
and has its own idiosyncrasies. I hope I give you enough detail here to both
teach you some aspects that I find important. I also want to open your eyes
to the many different ways one can think about, analyze and study markets.
Ultimately you should be able to analyze and dissect the market(s) you
trade, using a framework you’ve created.
In other words, the examples and ideas I present in these chapters are
not exhaustive. Take my ideas and build on them. Come up with your own
smarter, better, more up-to-date ideas. Think about a long game where each
day you stack more and more expertise on top of your existing knowledge.
Always maintain a philosophy of continuous improvement and lifelong
learning.
The two greatest sources of edge in trading are expert-level knowledge
of 
a 
specific 
market, 
and 
a 
rigorous 
execution 
and 
risk 
management
process. To succeed, you must know your product inside and out, and you
must have a process that maximizes leverage but also eliminates risk of
ruin. Then you are smarter, more knowledgeable and more nimble than the
competition and built to survive in the long run. Part Three is a study of the
specific methodologies and mathematics you need to understand to achieve
these goals.
Let’s go to Chapter 8, where we will go into some depth on a topic I
have always found supremely fascinating: market microstructure.
99. Leung, Woon Sau and Wong, Gabriel and Wong, Woon K., “Social-Media Sentiment,
Portfolio Complexity, and Stock Returns” (2019).
100. A Macro Tourist is a trader or investor who takes a position in a market they don’t know
very well, in an attempt to profit from a popular narrative. The appearance of macro
tourists often makes the locals want to run for the hills.
E
CHAPTER 8
UNDERSTAND MICROSTRUCTURE
Step one towards becoming an expert in your market
xcellent traders understand microstructure and have a deep knowledge
of the products they trade. This chapter will explain how to become an
expert in microstructure and how to use this deeper understanding to make
more money trading.
You are playing in one of the most complex, competitive games in the
world. You can’t dabble in 14 products and expect to have an edge.
Occasionally, traders can be experts in a particular strategy and apply that
strategy across products, but in general most traders that succeed have
knowledge that is narrow and deep, not shallow and wide. They are product
experts. How do you become an expert?
Read. Observe. Study.
Let’s say you have been trading for a while without much success and
so you decide to day trade Tesla (TSLA) and focus all your energy there.
You will trade nothing else. There are pros and cons to trading TSLA (like
any stock).
Pros:
it’s liquid
it’s volatile
there are opportunities in the stock every day
many non-professionals trade it
Cons:
there are 1000s of people trading it who probably know more than you
do
it’s extremely volatile
many traders are biased one way or the other when it comes to Tesla
because of their love or hate for the product and/or its larger-than-life
founder. Never trade the stock of a company you have an emotional
connection to
101
.
So how do you become an expert in TSLA? You start by studying its
microstructure. Start by watching the price action for a few days. How does
it trade on the open and close? Who are the players trading it and talking
about it? What is the average daily range? Average hourly range? What is
the average range on the day after earnings? How does liquidity vary by
time of day? Does it trade differently around option expiries? How big are
the close to open gaps after news comes out?
Those are sample questions you might ask about microstructure. Let me
explain microstructure in detail so that you can ask the right questions in
your market. A market’s microstructure is determined by the following:
1. Types of participants
2. Liquidity
a. Transaction costs and bid / offer spread
b. Gap risk
3. Intraday activity patterns
4. Volatility
Let’s start with a brief discussion of market participants then make our
way through the list.
1. Market participants
Who trades your product? Depending on your seat, you may have more
or less visibility into who trades your product and who does not. If you
trade futures you have very little insight, while if you are a market maker,
you have a ton of insight. When I was day trading equities, I could often
figure out by studying the Level 2 screen all day which market makers
mattered 
and 
which 
did 
not. 
In 
general, 
there 
are 
six 
major 
market
participants:
1. Retail. People sitting at home trading their own money or trading on
their phones. The influence of retail varies from minimal (most of the
time) to total dominance (Hertz stock in April 2020). Even in the
largest 
market 
of 
all, 
foreign 
exchange, 
retail 
can 
matter. 
For
example, Japanese retail investors can move the entire currency
market sometimes with large mean reversion and stop loss activity.
2. Institutional. There are five main types of institutions:
a. Banks. Commercial and investment banks are active players in
most securities. They act as market makers, agents, principals and
speculators.
b. Real money. This is traditional investor capital, usually invested in
stocks and bonds, but also other asset classes. It is pensions,
mutual funds, 401k money etc.
c. Hedge funds. These are pools of capital formed to invest and
generate alpha. Hedge funds execute a wide range of strategies
from trend following and systematic to discretionary macro. Hedge
fund activity tends to be herd-like in aggregate, even though many
individual portfolio managers run individual and unique strategies.
Hedge 
funds 
generally 
employ 
more 
leverage 
than 
other
institutional participants.
d. Corporates. Corporations issue stock, buy back stock, hedge via
futures, buy and sell currencies to hedge income and balance sheet
exposure, etc. Their activity is hard to track unless you work at a
bank. Decision making tends to be more timing or transaction-
focused, not market or macro driven. That is, a company might
have a large need to buy euros due to a cross-border acquisition.
That does not necessarily mean they are bullish euro, they just
need to buy the euros to complete their asset purchase.
e. Central banks. Central banks around the world hold huge reserves
and manage those reserves by investing in countries and securities
they expect to outperform. Second, central banks buy and (rarely)
sell assets as a part of their monetary policy. The Federal Reserve
bought a laundry list of assets in 2020 in response to the massive
economic 
damage 
caused 
by 
COVID-19. 
Central 
bank
participation in some asset markets is the primary determinant of
price, while they are secondary actors in other markets.
Who are the players in your market? Can you identify any particular
activity by specific participants? In some markets, this is impossible, but it
is worth thinking about your market and whether or not you can monitor the
activity of the largest players and use this as an input into your process.
Below are some examples of how to monitor these players. This is
mostly expert-level stuff that you would not know when you are just
starting out. As you spend more time studying your market, you will learn
how to identify what the big players are up to. These are six real-world
examples of how you can see the larger participants in action:
1. There is a well-known pattern where large real-money flows take
place in currency markets on the last day of each month, peaking at 4
p.m. London time. I will give a short example later in the chapter.
2. If you are trading equities, study the supply and demand from
institutions on the Level 2 screen. While the Level 2 info was much
more useful and yielded much more edge in the late 1990s and early
2000s, there is still value in watching and studying it.
3. Track cross-border mergers and acquisitions to monitor possible
currency flows.
4. Monitor equity moves around triple witching as market makers and
real money hedgers trade actively.
5. Study a central bank’s activities and operations and see if there is any
pattern to trading activity when the central bank is active in the
market vs. when it is not. Does it impact markets at a particular time
of day or price level?
6. Learn how stocks trade on the day they are added to the S&P 500
index (as real money adds the stock to stay on benchmark) and trade
that pattern.
Think about what you know about the various actors in your market and
see if you can unpack any useful, predictive information about future moves
by analyzing their actions. It sounds esoteric but in most markets there is
some visibility into what people are doing, especially if you read like a
fiend. Note that due to efficient markets, patterns that become well known
tend to lose their predictability over time.
Assume markets are very, but not perfectly, efficient.
When you think you have found an inefficiency or exploitable pattern in
the market, be skeptical but optimistic. Don’t be so naïve as to think there
are high-Sharpe pots of gold lying around all over the place but also don’t
fall into the negative trap of these two economists who believe that every
good idea has already been found:
Two economists are walking down the street when one points to the
ground and says, “Look, a ten-dollar bill!”
The second economist replies, “That’s crazy. If that was a ten-dollar bill
someone would have picked it up already.”
This is a common trap in all areas of innovation. You have an idea for a
novel and think “oh, I’m sure that’s been done before” or you think of a
product idea and imagine “Ah, someone must have thought of that already.”
That 
is 
a 
losing 
mentality. 
New 
ideas 
are 
the 
absolute 
lifeblood 
of
capitalism 
and 
creativity. 
Never 
dismiss 
any 
idea 
on 
the 
assumption
someone must have already thought of it.
2. Liquidity
Understand liquidity. Some products, like FX, are extremely liquid and
trade continuously all day and all week. Some markets, like lumber and
wheat, are much less liquid, trade short sessions with a defined open and
close, and offer minimal price transparency and poor liquidity outside
primary trading hours.
Some assets trade freely all the time while some futures contracts can
hit limit up or limit down for multiple days in a row, leaving specs trapped
on the wrong side. How does your product trade? Is there plenty of liquidity
all the time, or do you need to consider liquidity when you execute? Let’s
drill into liquidity a bit so you can think about the specific features of your
market.
Transaction costs and bid /ask spread
The difference between the bid and the ask in a market is called the
spread.
102
Transaction costs are the amount of spread you pay when you
trade.
(SPREAD) X (NUMBER OF UNITS) = TRANSACTION COST
If AAPL is trading 350.00 / 350.08, the spread is eight cents. This is
often expressed either as a percentage of the mid-price
103
or in basis points:
= 0.08 / 350.04
= 0.029%
= 2.9bps
104
2.9bps is one of the tightest bid/offer spreads you will see. Spreads vary
dramatically by asset class and by product within an asset class. In FX,
spreads in EURUSD (the most liquid pair) are often less than 1/10 of
spreads in USDTRY (Turkish lira). The bid/ask in a small cap or microcap
stock 
can 
be 
50X 
the 
AAPL 
bid/ask. 
Gold 
trades 
way 
tighter 
than
palladium. Spreads in credit are generally wider than spreads in fixed
income. 
Spreads 
in 
agricultural 
commodities 
are 
generally 
wider 
than
spreads in short-term interest rate futures. And so on.
Every market has a different texture and part of this texture comes from
the bid/offer spread. Trading activity on each side of the spread is called
bid/ ask bounce.
Think about your average trade size and call that one unit. How much
does it cost you to trade one unit in normal markets? For example: If your
normal trade size is 10 million EURUSD and EURUSD trades 2 pips wide
in 10 million (1 pip = 0.0001). Each round trip (buy and sell) costs:
= 10,000,000 * (0.0002)
= $2,000
That is to say: if the market in EURUSD is 1.1000 bid / 1.1002 offer
and you buy and sell without the market moving, you have paid 0.0002 in
transaction costs which is $2,000 per 10 million transacted.
When you buy and sell stocks at zero commission, you are still paying a
toll of somewhere between 0.02% and 0.50% (2bps to 50bps) due to the
bid/ask spread. Some stocks are much wider than 0.50% but you probably
should not be trading those. Spreads and commissions are the main reason
trading is a negative-sum game, not a zero-sum game. Spread is the
invisible enemy, like a slow leak in a tire. It costs you a ton of P&L but it
can be very hard to observe or measure correctly.
Tiffany is an active day trader. She executes 15 round-trips per day (15
buys and 15 sells) and the stock she specializes in (Take Two Interactive,
TTWO) has an average bid/ask of 38bps. That means if the stock is trading
at $173, the average bid/ask is about 66 cents
105
. Her account size is
$100,000 and her average trade size is 150 shares. So she is leaking:
150 shares X 15 round trips X $0.66 per round trip
= $1,485 per day
X 5 days
= $7,425 per week
X 48 weeks
106
= $356,400 per year
Insane, right? These are realistic assumptions and they give you a good
sense of just how expensive it can be to cross big spreads. She can reduce
her transaction costs by using other execution strategies like limit orders,
but we don’t know if this will hurt her performance.
Obviously she can’t keep doing this for very long unless her strategy
has significant edge. If she used the same strategy but switched over to
AAPL (and we assume 3bps bid/ask in AAPL), her transaction costs drop
to:
$117 per day
$585 per week
$28,080 per year
I am not saying you should only trade AAPL! What I am saying is that
you should have a clear and thorough understanding of how much it costs
you to transact. When you fully grok how expensive it is to transact, you
will probably transact less. As we have discussed, transacting less is almost
always a good thing.
Accurate data on bid/offer spreads can be hard to come by. In FX, the
banks collect this data and some are willing to share it with clients while
others view it as proprietary. In the stock market, the easiest thing to do is
watch the stock you trade and take occasional snapshots of the spread.
Bid/offer spreads in an individual stock will vary substantially by time
of day and around events. In times of stress, bid/offer spreads can widen
dramatically but in normal markets, they are somewhat consistent. In other
words, if AAPL trades 3bps wide today at 10 a.m., it will probably trade
around 3bps wide tomorrow at 10 a.m. unless there is news, or a profound
change in the markets.
In contrast, at the open (9:30 a.m.) it could be tighter or wider, and at
times of higher volatility it will almost certainly trade wider. Your estimate
of bid/offer spreads does not have to be perfect, just eyeball it and multiply
by your estimated number of trades per day to get a rough sense of your
transaction 
costs 
(TC). 
TC 
is 
a 
slow 
and 
steady 
leak 
that 
adds 
up
substantially.
You need a significant edge to make money in any market because you
don’t just need to generate alpha, you need to generate alpha net of
transaction costs. Figure 8.1 and Figure 8.2 show the theoretical P&L for
two 
different 
traders. 
The 
thinner 
gray 
line 
shows 
the 
P&L 
before
transaction costs (known as “gross”) and the black line shows the P&L after
TC (known as “net”).
I used realistic bid/offer spreads to show the impact of trading costs on
two realistic P&L streams so you can get a sense of the enormous strain TC
exerts on performance.
You should not obsess over TC but you need to be smart about it. Most
of all, you need to quantify and monitor it. TC is a serious and important
leak that you need to reduce as much as possible.
At the same time, TC is a cost of doing business in trading and you
don’t want an unhealthy approach to reducing TC that could jeopardize
your reputation or your future liquidity. Be smart, but not obsessive about
reducing TC. We will discuss some ways to do this in the section on
execution in Chapter 12.
Average bid/offer spread is 10 cents. Zero commission. She trades 252 days per year. Her
average up day is +$3,000, her average down day is -$2,000 and her WIN% is 50%
Assumes average bid/ask spread of 2 pips. His average up day is +$800k, his average
down day is -$350k and his WIN% is 50%
Gap risk
Another element of Liquidity is Gap risk. There are three types of gap
risk. The first is when markets close and then reopen. A stock closes at $50
on Friday and then over the weekend their CFO quits and the company
announces that they have fired their auditor. That doesn’t sound good! The
stock opens at $25 on Monday morning. Yikes. If you have a $50,000
account and you went home long at 2X margin, you’re done. Ruined. That’s
gap risk number one.
Usually the timing of close-to-open gap risk can be predicted in advance
since we know the trading hours of whatever securities we trade, but this is
not 100% the case. Many futures have trading limits: if they move a certain
amount, trading is halted
107
. Individual stocks are often halted for pending
news or due to extreme volatility. You must have a complete understanding
of how your market trades and avoid risk of ruin before everything else.
The second type of gap risk relates to events. When the US jobs report
comes out the first Friday of each month at 8:30 a.m., you will often see
S&P futures and USDJPY (and other markets) jump to a new level without
trading 
continuously 
from 
A 
to 
B. 
For 
example, 
USDJPY 
might 
be
112.10/15 at 8:29:29 and then the jobs number comes in strong and the first
trade after 8:30 could be 112.68. If you go into the number short and don’t
have a good understanding of the gap risk, you might get wrecked.
After economic releases and events, there is usually a fast market for 5
to 10 minutes as well, so not only do you need to worry about gap risk, but
also liquidity risk. Even if you are trading small size, it can be difficult to
get in and out in fast markets. You might deal on wrong prices or get error
messages or, if you trade bigger size, simply find you cannot transact your
full amount. Like I said earlier, unless you think you have a big edge on the
number or event, go in flat and react.
The third type of gap risk comes from markets that are pegged, capped
or floored by central banks or other entities. One famous example of this is
the EURCHF floor at 1.2000. The Swiss National Bank tried to enforce an
exchange rate and eventually, when they gave up, the largest one day move
in the history of foreign exchange happened. In about two hours. EURCHF
traded from 1.2000 to 0.8500 in a matter of minutes.
Pegs and caps and floors are most common in FX markets but also show
up in equity markets in the days after an IPO. Market makers representing
the investment bank(s) that underwrote the IPO are permitted to intervene
in the market to stabilize the price of the stock if it starts to fall below the
IPO 
price. 
This 
stabilization 
bid 
is 
not 
infinite. 
At 
some 
point, 
the
underwriter will say enough is enough and pull away and the stock will
usually gap aggressively lower.
There is a fantastic piece about the Facebook IPO stabilization effort on
the Liberty Street Economics Blog
108
. Figure 8.3 shows how the number of
shares on the bid (vertical bars) increased as Facebook’s share price reached
$38 (the IPO price) on its first day trading.
Chart used with permission of Liberty Street Economics (NY Fed)
The huge bids that came in are from the underwriter of the Facebook
IPO. The chart shows that the underwriter made a concerted effort to buy
nearly limitless stock at $38. Traders might see this huge intervention and
think it’s smart to go long with a stop below $38. Generally that is not the
right way to look at situations like this.
Instead, you should realize that the price is badly out of equilibrium.
With one buyer and myriad sellers, the stock is out of line and the second
the buyer disappears, it’s going to be chaos as the price will gap lower in
search of equilibrium. Figure 8.4 shows the first day of trading (same price
pattern as above) plus the next five days.
When the stock opened the next day, the stabilization bid wasn’t there
and Facebook gapped lower. Longs were lucky if they got out at $34. The
stock did not trade back above $38 again for more than a year.
While 
it’s 
tempting 
to 
go 
with 
a 
market 
distortion 
like 
the 
FB
stabilization bid or the SNB bid in EURCHF at 1.2000, counterintuitively
the best move is often to go against it. When you follow an intervention bid,
you are dead if that bid disappears. If you go short against it and the price
rallies, there will probably be a reasonable price where you can get out.
When an entity is supporting the price of a security or currency pair, it is
usually reasonable to assume that the price is out of equilibrium and the
entity supporting it is the only source of demand. Unless you have an edge
in predicting what that entity is going to do, you should stay away. These
setups present huge gap risk and can lead to risk of ruin.
Many retail investors and some large, well-known hedge funds were
ruined by the SNB fail at 1.2000. Is it worth betting your job, your client’s
capital or your entire fund on a single trade? No. Never.
When gap risk is extreme or hard to estimate, avoid it. The risk is not
worth the reward.
Be thoughtful about major gap risks in your product and avoid them.
This does not mean you can never carry a position through economic data.
Gaps around economic data can be reasonably estimated. What it does
mean is you should not go short a tech bubble stock into earnings. You
should not go long USDHKD at the bottom of the band, and you should
seriously consider your weekend positions and whether or not they are
worth it. Oil can gap 10% over a weekend. USDJPY can gap 100 to 150
pips.
Avoid gap risk. Avoid gap risk. Avoid gap risk.
That concludes our discussion of gap risk. Now let’s visit one of my
favorite topics, an area where true experts shine. A field of study that can be
an underappreciated source of edge: The idiosyncratic intraday trading
patterns of each asset class.
3. Intraday activity patterns
Every market has a specific pattern that it follows (on average) during
the day. Think about your favorite market. Are there specific times of day
when volume and volatility spike? In currency markets, for example, there
is a long list of key times that FX traders need to know including the US
open, economic data, options expiry, WMR fix, Tokyo fix, etc.
Hedge fund portfolio managers and other large institutional traders need
to know how liquidity ebbs and flows in their products over the course of
the day. If you want to take a big position in USDJPY, for example, you
should know that 10:57 a.m. NY time (3:57 p.m. LDN) is a much better
time to put it on than 11:51 a.m. because FX is deepest from 7 a.m. to 11
a.m. Even small lot traders need to know these patterns because they affect
not only liquidity but also volatility and volumes.
What are the key times of day for the products you trade? Let’s take a
look at a few major markets so you can get an idea of how time of day
activity varies in different asset classes.
Volume by time of day for major markets
If you are an expert in the market or products you trade, you will know
every important time of day and you will know the distribution of volume
by time of day.
First, this is useful because it tells you when the “real moves” happen in
your market. If there is very little volume going through, the probability of
random, meaningless moves is higher. Second, if you need to transact
meaningful size, volume by time of day is even more important as it tells
you the trading time that minimizes your footprint. Third, intraday volume
spikes often reveal important moments in the day like fixings and data
releases.
Let’s look at a few major markets. I will show you the volume by time
of day in 5-minute increments and then give you a few short takeaways
109
. I
wanted to include bitcoin but the volume data is too decentralized. Let’s
start with spooz.
S&P futures (aka, e-minis, aka spooz)
Figure 8.5 shows volume by time of day for S&P futures. You can see
the huge spikes on the open and close with dwindling volumes that trough
at lunch time.
This chart explains why most day traders make most of their money
from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m. and 3 p.m. to 4 p.m. This was 100% true for me
when I was day trading the NASDAQ. If you trade stocks: Concentrate
your efforts around the busy times and eat lunch, do research and lift
weights from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m.
First row of x-axis label is GMT, second row is NYC time
10-year bonds
Figure 8.6 shows TY futures, which is the US 10-year note futures
contract. The volume pattern for this one is not too surprising, though that
huge burst at 3:00 p.m. is larger than I would have guessed before I made
this chart. Otherwise, volumes are high in the NY morning with little spikes
around the economic data. Volumes are super low until London comes in
(7:00 a.m. GMT or 2:00 a.m. NY) and then pick up substantially when the
US gets to work.
The 3:00 p.m. spike is the close of the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT).
Many strategies and funds mark to market against this closing price so there
is a ton of activity at that time as these funds try to match the closing price.
You often see buying of bond futures into 3:00 p.m. due to rebalancing and
duration extension.
First row of x-axis label is GMT, second row is NYC time
Gold futures
Next, we look at gold futures (see Figure 8.7). Again, New York
dominates but you can also see a big spike at 8:00 p.m. NY time when
Shanghai 
opens. 
Shanghai 
gold 
markets 
have 
taken 
on 
increasing
importance but remain less important than US and London markets. Again,
you can see volumes pick up when London walks in and then huge spikes
when data comes out and at the 10:00 a.m. gold fix.
The COMEX close (1:30 p.m.) also sees a large spike in volume. Even
though the gold futures trading pit is not a thing anymore, many systems
still mark to the COMEX close and so activity jumps into 1:30 p.m. before
fizzling into the end of the New York day.
EURUSD currency spot
Currency markets are most active in the London / NY overlap which
runs from 7 a.m. to 11 a.m. NY (noon to 4 p.m. LDN). But even inside that
4-hour window, there are critical moments like the economic data at 8:30,
options expiry at 10:00 and the WMR fix at 11:00 (all NY time). You can
see this pattern in Figure 8.8.
Other currencies have important moments throughout the day, too, like
USDJPY and the Tokyo fix (9:55 a.m. Tokyo time) which is the highest
volume point of the entire 24-hour session for USDJPY. For a full and
detailed look at critical times of day in FX markets, check out my first
book: The Art of Currency Trading.
While volume and volatility do not always move together, it is generally
true to say that volatility and volumes correspond. For example, Figure 8.9
shows average EURUSD volatility by hour of the day. You can see that this
chart closely follows the intraday EURUSD volume pattern.
x-axis is GMT
NYMEX crude oil futures
Finally, Figure 8.10 shows how oil trades throughout the day.
If you are moving decent volume in US crude futures, you should be
aware of when liquidity might be a problem. Selling 5,000 CL (NYMEX
crude oil) futures at 2:25 p.m. will generally be easier than the same trade at
2:45 p.m. That insane volume spike at 2:30 p.m. is the NYMEX close.
Many participants use Trade at Settlement (TAS) orders to guarantee the
closing price on their fill and the hedging of these TAS orders creates a
monster volume spike in the minutes leading up to the close. If this volume
is not balanced, you will sometimes see a huge move at that time. If
someone yells “What’s going on in crude!” right at 2:30 p.m., just shake
your head and say “NYMEX close, dude. NYMEX close.” :]
You need to understand whether liquidity is a possible constraint in the
products you trade. If it is, track liquidity daily using a quantitative measure
like bid/ offer depth and ask traders or market makers for their opinion.
Adapt your tactics and position sizes as necessary to avoid liquidity issues.
If your products are deep and your volume is easily absorbed, life is good.
If not, be thoughtful and strategic about what time of day you execute, and
partner with a market maker you trust.
This concludes our discussion of liquidity and how activity varies by
time of day. The last facet of market microstructure we will cover is
volatility.
First row of x-axis label is GMT, second row is NYC time
4. Volatility
The next step in understanding how your market moves is to understand
your product’s volatility. Market professionals often call volatility “vol”.
Vol is a critical part of a market’s microstructure. It is the dispersion of
returns over time, usually measured as the standard deviation of logarithmic
returns. In simple English: How much does the thing move?
Volatility is not constant or static. A currency pair like USDJPY might
realize 6% volatility one year and 18% the next. Vol is a key concept to
understand and you should always know your product’s vol profile, how it
has evolved over time, and how it might change in the future.
A few things you need to know about vol:
1. Markets tend to be more volatile around events because equilibrium
is a function of all known information, and events introduce new
information and upset the equilibrium. For example, overnight vol
for AUDUSD might be 8% on a normal day and 20% on the day the
Reserve 
Bank 
of Australia 
(RBA) 
meets. 
Facebook 
trades 
with
higher vol on earnings day relative to other days.
2. Volatility within and across markets is correlated. If equity volatility
is 
exploding 
higher, 
it 
is 
likely 
that 
FX, 
bond 
market 
and
commodities volatility will go up too. There is often a single factor
driving 
volatility 
in 
capital 
markets. 
This 
can 
be 
economic
uncertainty, geopolitical drama or something else. Volatility and
uncertainty are usually associated.
3. It is hard to make money trading low vol markets. Most traders make
more money when things are moving. One of the keys to success in
trading is identifying the vol regime and adjusting your trading
accordingly. You probably won’t make money trading breakouts
when the VIX is at 11
110
. You probably can’t trade mean reversion
when the VIX is at 80. My P&L is highly correlated to volatility. If
you notice a meaningful drop in volatility in something you trade,
consider trading something else or monitor the situation closely and
see if your P&L is drifting lower along with vol.
To be 100% clear, when people talk about volatility, they usually mean
historical volatility, but it is important to understand the two different types
of volatility:
Historical volatility. This is the dispersion of returns in the past.
You can measure it different ways but unless you are an options
trader, I wouldn’t worry about where the number comes from. Just
know that when people say “volatility” they are mostly referring to
daily historical or realized volatility. The amount the security has
moved around in the past, based on daily data.
Implied volatility. This is the market price for volatility going
forward. This measure is used in option pricing, and is a better
proxy for future volatility than historical volatility. The distinction is
not important here and for the purposes of an exercise like vol-
adjusted position sizing, it rarely matters which data you use.
When it comes to the product you trade, what is the average daily range
for your product? Daily average ranges are useful and it is also good to
know the average hourly range and how that range varies by time of day.
For example, Figure 8.11 shows how that looks for Apple stock (AAPL). I
added SPY (the S&P 500 ETF) as well to give you some context.
Most stocks and equity futures have an intraday volatility profile similar
to the profiles shown above. Stock market activity is heavy at the open,
heavy at the close and troughs around lunchtime.
Using data from February, 2020 to August, 2020 First six bars are 60-minute average range.
Open (9:30 a.m.) to 10:30 a.m., 10:30 to 11:30, etc. Final bar is the average range for 3:30
to 4:00 p.m.
When thinking about volatility, it’s important to understand the current
regime but you should also know how volatility has changed over time. You
can 
get 
historical 
volatility 
for 
almost 
all 
financial 
time 
series 
on
Bloomberg, Refinitiv or the internet. For example, if you want to know how
vol is changing in Tesla stock, Just Google “TSLA historical volatility” and
have a look. The absolute number is less important than the relative change.
Is the stock becoming more or less volatile? What are the most extreme
periods of volatility, and what was going on then? The more you understand
volatility and get comfortable with when it’s likely to be high and low, the
more likely you will avoid getting punched in the mouth.
If you have the skills and the data, you should study how your security
trades on big event days. This information can be incredibly useful if you
catch the right side of a move on event day because you can leave limit
orders around the extremes and as the market extends or overshoots, you
will take profit. It is nice to be the person selling the spike instead of the
one buying it.
Here is a detailed example of what I mean.
Curve shows normal days, bars show earnings days
You can see in Figure 8.12 that the normal curve for 1-day percentage
returns in Apple shows most days are in the -2% to +4% range. On the other
hand, earnings days show 1-day returns more like -6% to +7%. This is
important information. If you are long on earnings day, you should modify
your parameters relative to a normal day to account for the higher expected
volatility. Most traders would know that a stock is more volatile on earnings
day but when you crunch the data you get a deeper level of understanding.
If you catch a positive earnings move in Apple, it makes sense to leave a
few limit orders around (yesterday’s close + 7%) because that is about as
big a move as you can expect based on historical data. As usual, this type of
study gives you clues, not answers. There could be a day Apple rallies 20%
in one day, but this analysis gives you one more piece of the puzzle and
helps you understand what sort of volatility is likely and what is not. For
one stock, 15% moves could be the norm on earnings day. For another, that
figure could be 3%.
The best way to truly understand the volatility of a product or security is
to watch it all day. The goal is to gain an intimate knowledge of how your
market moves so that you get a feel for what is a big move, what is a logical
stop loss, where you should take profit, and so on.
One way to enhance your feel for a specific market is to graph it by
hand. Maintain a simple point and figure chart for a few days and you will
be surprised how much your market feel improves, especially if you are
new to trading or have not traded the product all that much. Much like
keeping score at a baseball game or taking notes in class forces you to pay
keen attention, manually charting a market keeps you in the zone, engaged
and connected.
You can also create point and figure charts in Excel if you are too
embarrassed to whip out the graph paper and go old school. Point and
figure is one of the original charting methods. It filters out noise and lets
you focus on the meaningful changes in price. There is no time element in a
point and figure chart, it simply measures price changes of a certain size
(this is called the “price interval”). The x-axis is blank.
Figure 8.13 is a point and figure chart I made for TSLA on December
18, 2020 (the day TSLA was added to the S&P 500).
Here is how you create a chart like this:
The black line separating the two parts of the day is just there for display purposes to show
you how point and figure charts distort or eliminate the element of time
1. Get a piece of graph paper or create a grid of small squares in Excel.
2. Calculate the average daily range of your security and divide by 10.
That is your price interval. I looked back two years to calculate that
the average daily range for TSLA is 4.7%. The stock closed at
$655.90 on December 17 and 4.7% of that is about $30. $30 divided
by 10 means we will use $3 increments. Always round the number
here to make the math easy.
3. Write the current price (rounded to the nearest price interval) in the
middle of the y-axis. So using the previous day’s close, I go half way
up the y-axis and write $656. If you know where the stock is trading
pre-market, that’s even better.
4. 
Complete 
the 
y-axis 
by 
adding 
the 
interval 
as 
you 
go 
up 
and
subtracting it as you go down. So you write 659, 662, 665, 668, etc.
on the way up the y-axis and 653, 650, 647… on the way down.
5. When the stock opens, wait for $653 or $659 to trade. If $659 trades,
draw an X in the box next to $656 and $659. X means the stock went
up. If $653 trades, draw an O in the box next to $656 and $653. O
means the stock went down.
As the stock continues in the same direction, keep marking the X’s or
O’s. Or, if the stock reverses more than 3 intervals (in this case $9), switch
to a new column and fill it in with the new X’s or O’s. You wait three
intervals before reversing in order to cut out the noise, otherwise you would
be switching columns too much and the chart would be wide and noisy.
Point and figure charting is meant to cut out noise and capture meaningful
reversals. You can mess around with the parameters but the choice of
parameters is not important so I would not bother. Just use (daily range/10)
for your intervals and 3 intervals as your reversal parameter.
The most interesting aspect of the chart is how the y-axis has no
meaning and the chart is stripped of the time dimension. Instead, the chart
shows any meaningful reversal, however long it lasts. Therefore, in this
example, the violent final 15 minutes of TSLA trading takes up as much
room as the calmer trading that took place throughout the prior 6+ hours.
For context, Figure 8.14 shows a line chart of TSLA that day.
When you contrast the point and figure to the line chart, you see how
time disappears and volatility is all that matters.
The insane closing rally is the demand from indexers at the close
If 
alternative 
charting 
techniques 
appeal 
to 
you, 
I 
suggest 
you
investigate Market Profile too. It is more complicated, but can be another
useful and intuitive way of charting and analyzing markets. There are some
excellent resources online: see if you can find the CME Market Profile
guide (300+ pages) in pdf form
111
.
The book Mind Over Markets by Dalton, Jones and Dalton turned me
on to Market Profile charting more than 10 years ago, and I continue to use
some of the specific methods from that book to this day. You can play
around with it using the MKTP function on Bloomberg (they call it “Market
Picture”).
Some people think it’s stupid to create manual charts but this is not like
some luddite clacking away on a manual typewriter just because he hates
technology. There is a practical value to the tactile practice of closely
tracking the market and recording its movements in a spreadsheet or on a
piece of paper. I promise you will learn something from this process and if
you don’t, it hasn’t cost you anything other than one or two pieces of graph
paper. You were going to be watching the market anyway.
As 
you 
gain 
experience 
in 
your 
market, 
your 
familiarity 
with 
its
microstructure will improve your execution skills and it will give you the
ability to recognize when the market is deviating from its normal behavior.
This ability will prepare you for regime shifts or even allow you to
recognize 
them 
at 
transition 
points 
when 
your 
market 
moves 
from
rangebound to trending, or slow to fast. Expert traders have a detailed
understanding of the microstructure of their market.
This concludes our discussion of microstructure. While microstructure
is a topic that requires you to spend some time in the weeds, it is a critical
area of study if you want to be a real expert in your market. You cannot
expect your genius trade idea generation skills to carry you. You also need
to be excellent when it comes to execution (and risk management).
A solid understanding of microstructure will improve your executions,
increase the payout on your good ideas and reduce the cost of your bad
ones. Even if you are confident in your knowledge of your market’s
microstructure, 
be 
on 
the 
lookout 
for 
changes 
and 
stay 
abreast 
of
developments that might change how your market behaves. Simple changes
to market microstructure can often lead to significant changes in your P&L
and can turn profitable strategies into duds.
Now, let’s move to the next step. In Chapter 9, I will tell you how I stay
in touch with the narrative, and how that helps me forecast future moves
and come up with trade ideas.
101. If you are a huge Elon Musk fan or if you really can’t stand him for some reason, don’t
trade TSLA. You need to be equally prepared to trade a stock from the long or short side or
you should not be participating. If you Stan for Elon, trading TSLA is like a Real Madrid fan
betting on a Real Madrid / Barcelona game. Do you think he’s going to make an unbiased
bet on the team he thinks has the best chance of winning? Or is he going to bet on Real
Madrid? Trade with your rational mind not your silly, silly heart.
102. I use bid/ask and bid/offer interchangeably in this book.
103. The mid (or mid-price, or mid-rate) is the center of the bid/ask spread. If gold’s bid/ask
is 2000.00 / 2000.20 then the mid-price is 2000.10.
104. Spreads are often expressed in basis points (bps). A basis point is 1/100
th
of 1%.
Therefore, for example, 1.00% is 100bps, 0.50% is 50bps and 0.02% is 2bps.
105. $173 X 0.0038
106. She takes four weeks of holiday per year.
107. This information is usually easy to find on the interwebs. Or use DES {GO} for any
future on Bloomberg.
108. Eisenbach, Lucca and Shen, “Evidence of underwriters’ efforts to stabilize the share
price in the Facebook IPO”, Liberty Street Economics Blog, (2012).
109. Note regarding the charts that follow. All use four months of 5-minute data from
January 6, 2020 to April 6, 2020. This subset works as a proxy for any period as intraday
volume patterns are remarkably stable over time.
110. VIX is the most popular measure of equity market volatility. 10 is very low. 80 is
extremely high.
111. It used to be on the CME website but is harder to find these days.
T
CHAPTER 9
UNDERSTAND NARRATIVE
Step two towards becoming an expert in your market
In my whole life, I have known no wise people who didn’t read all the time –
none, zero. I’ve gotten paid a lot over the years for reading through the
newspapers.
CHARLIE MUNGER
his chapter will explain how to study narrative and fundamentals, and
how 
to 
use 
this 
knowledge 
to 
better 
forecast 
short-term 
market
direction. Excellent traders have an expert-level knowledge of the primary
narrative 
and 
competing 
sub-narratives 
that 
drive 
their 
market. 
They
understand the importance of the story the market is telling and can see,
hear and feel when that story is changing. They know what is common
knowledge, and what is not.
Once you understand the microstructure of your market and the basics
of who moves the market, and how and when it moves, you should work on
your understanding of what moves it, and why. The what and the why of
market movements are never simple and as you gain experience, you will
realize more and more that many explanations in the financial press are way
off base.
The narrative is the story the market tells itself to explain movements in
price. Like any good story, there is usually the main plot and then a few
subplots. The main arc is the most important to understand because markets
tend to focus on one thing at a time. But you also need to be ready for the
next story as it elbows today’s narrative out of the way. Here’s how Bruce
Kovner explains it in Market Wizards
112
:
One of the jobs of a good trader is to imagine alternative scenarios. I try
to form many different mental pictures of what the world should be like
and wait for one of them to be confirmed. You keep trying them on one at
a time. Inevitably, most of these pictures will turn out to be wrong — that
is, only a few elements of the picture may prove correct. But then, all of a
sudden, you will find that in one picture, nine out of ten elements click.
That scenario then becomes your image of the world reality.
Understanding narrative is what most people used to call fundamental
analysis but there is an important nuance. Narrative analysis is about
studying not just what you think is the story, but (more importantly) what
story market players are telling and what story the market itself is trying to
tell. When it is done well, narrative analysis is a coherent and fluid
combination of ever-changing macroeconomic fundamentals and behavioral
factors. It is often about nailing down the one, most important story the
market wants to trade.
For example, 2010 to 2012 was a remarkable period in FX markets as
the market watched the near implosion of the eurozone at the same time as
the 
US 
Federal 
Reserve 
enacted 
a 
series 
of 
quantitative 
easing 
(QE)
programs. The eurozone crisis was bearish EUR and US QE was bearish
USD. During this period, EURUSD was known as “two garbage trucks
colliding” because both currencies had huge issues.
The interesting thing about trading that period, though, was that one
story or the other clearly dominated most of the time. The market was either
freaking out about the eurozone or going bananas over US QE but it was
usually clear which theme was in the driver’s seat. This is typical. It is very
difficult 
for 
markets 
to 
hold 
two 
competing 
themes 
in 
its 
collective
hivemind at once, and so the focus oscillates back and forth instead of
going in two directions at once.
Understanding the narrative cycle is important because when you are
good at it, it is a critical tool that helps you identify turning points and
trends. You see the psychology and storytelling at work in the market and
you can predict where price is going to go. Surprisingly, the narrative
often turns before price because price has momentum of its own and a
propensity to overshoot.
Speculators invested in a trend have confirmation bias and will ignore
the changing narrative until the turn in price forces them to pay attention.
Those turning points when the narrative has changed but price remains in
the old trend can be some of the most exciting and profitable moments in
trading.
Figure 9.1 shows the general narrative cycle:
The numbers in figure 9.1 refer to the following section in which I will
briefly describe each phase of the narrative cycle. You might recognize this
as similar to other cycle analysis like the panic/euphoria model or the
famous SELL? SELL? SELL? BUY! BUY! comic by Kal. It also rhymes a
fair bit with Elliott Wave analysis
113
.
UNDERSTAND THE NARRATIVE CYCLE
It is important to note when reading this that the narrative cycle operates
on many time fractals. There are the big macroeconomic narratives but
there are also sometimes much shorter narrative cycles that can last as little
as 24 hours. Often news or economic data will appear to be important but
then run out of steam very swiftly as the market pivots back to the main
story.
Picture a web of interconnected narratives with one or two dominating
and the rest all swirling around and vying for attention. The goal is to
determine what stories are driving your market now and what stories will
jockey for position and come out ahead in the future. Traders with more
experience will recognize the stage of the narrative intuitively and will
often have a strong sense of when a story is running out of gas as the
signposts are often similar at various stages of the narrative cycle. Ben Hunt
(Epsilon 
Theory) 
is 
one 
of 
the 
kings 
of 
understanding, 
parsing 
and
forecasting the narrative (or zeitgeist). I strongly recommend you check out
his material if you want to excel in narrative analysis.
Each stage of every narrative cycle will look and feel familiar in many
ways, even when the stories themselves will be radically different each
time. Kind of like a Hollywood movie that follows a standard three act arc
but with different characters, setting and plot. Let’s go through the seven
stages of the narrative cycle described by Figure 9.1.
Stage 1: Under the radar. At this point, there is a new narrative forming,
but very few traders have heard about it. Some smart, independent thinkers
and research-oriented people are talking about it and a few contrarians are
putting on the position. There are usually a few pullbacks as initial believers
have low confidence. Traders testing the waters tend to get bored or jiggled
out because the price is not moving their way or they just figure they’re too
early and don’t want to waste time on a narrative that is not valid.
The Holy Grail of trading, of course, is to identify below-the-radar
stories that will eventually become important market narratives. You want
to be early to the good stories but if you are too early, you need to make
sure you don’t get bored and give up before the market catches on to the
theme.
Stage 2: Momentum Builds. At this point, the narrative goes a bit viral (at
least among professionals or experts) and price jumps or falls to reflect the
new zeitgeist. My narrative cycle chart shows a bullish story driving the
price of an asset upward but you can flip the whole thing for a bad news
narrative. As the price jumps (often on a particular piece of news that
suddenly clarifies what was previously still a foggy narrative), people take
notice.
Remember that at every stage of the narrative cycle, there is a dynamic
interplay between price and narrative. The story drives the price and the
price drives the story and often it is hard to tell which one is causing the
movement. For example, say a stock has a good story but it’s still in Stage 1
of the narrative cycle. Nobody is paying attention. A fund manager reads
some three-week old research and decides he loves the story. He starts
buying stock and liquidity is poor. The price rallies 4%. Some stale shorts
stop out and the fund manager keeps buying and soon the stock is up 11%
over the course of two days.
Because the stock rallied, it appears on a few radars (many firms and
individuals run scans for stocks with unusual volatility) and this generates
some new interest. Traders and investors look it up and some of them like
what they see (great story!) and that triggers more buying. In this little
description, the price is now feeding the narrative, not the other way
around. The narrative already existed three weeks ago.
As momentum builds and the stock hits (for example) a 60-day high,
trend followers and CTAs will start to buy. This feedback loop where
changes 
in 
price 
influence 
investor 
expectations, 
which 
influence 
the
narrative, which influences the price, is a form of reflexivity. Reflexivity is
a concept from sociology that was transferred over to finance by George
Soros. It is a fancier way of saying “circularity” or “feedback loops”.
As momentum buying feeds the narrative and feeds on itself, we enter
Stage 3.
Stage 3: The Primary Trend. This phase is where the narrative drumbeat
takes hold and there are more and more converts lined up behind the
apostles from Stage 1. Pullbacks are bought and the news reinforces the
price which reinforces the trend which reinforces the buying. This stage is
often the most profitable in a strong narrative because Stage 3 can last a
surprisingly long time. Just because a narrative is well-known, that does not
mean it’s exhausted.
Stage 3 involves a lot of hype, usually from financial media and tourists
who have joined the party fairly early. Again, just because there is hype,
don’t think the story is over. The hype phase can accompany dramatic price
moves as demand outstrips supply for an extended period and the market
ignores bad news and doubles down on good news.
Stage 4: First cracks. At this stage, some cracks appear. Bad news hits that
threatens the narrative. The story is crowded and early entrants think maybe
the story is over so they take some profits. There is a meaningful pullback
in price. This pullback shakes off the weaker and more recent buyers but
those that believe in the narrative appear on the bid and the price stabilizes.
Slowly, the importance of the bad news dissipates and price climbs back
towards the highs.
Stage 5: The final hype wave. As price breaks through and makes new
highs, the narrative often goes into overdrive. Longs are emboldened by the
price action and a strong feeling of FOMO comes over anyone that is not
participating. Depending on the story, you will often see the narrative cross
over from financial media to the mainstream media at this point if the
narrative is interesting and important enough.
Non-experts will join the party (retail and macro tourists) and this will
push price aggressively higher. Stage 5 is usually the most surprising and
volatile part of the narrative cycle as sellers step away and buyers get
desperate. In Elliott Wave, this is also Wave 5 and Elliott Wave Theory
warns that Wave 5 can often be the most impulsive part of a move. This
stage is often characterized by choppy, jumpy, volatile moves, euphoria and
overshooting. Trend following systems add all the way up.
Stage 6: The Peak and the Turn. The top in the narrative and price can be
a long drawn-out process or an impulsive overshoot and collapse. Often, it’s
like the climax in a movie with a huge flashy rip higher followed by a rapid
reversal that catches everyone on the wrong side.
Excellent traders will realize there has been a meaningful turn in the
narrative here, even when price continues to make new highs. Bad traders
hate to give up on winning trades and great stories and will fall victim to
powerful confirmation bias. As long as price continues to rise, most traders
will ignore information that goes against the narrative. It is a skill to filter
out what matters and what does not, of course, because powerful bull
markets often climb a wall of bad news.
Eventually, price will start to turn and suddenly bad news from four
hours or four weeks ago pops back into the mind of the market and
everyone is like: “What the hell am I doing still long up here! Things have
changed.” Then everyone reaches for the SELL button at once and BOOM.
It gaps lower and the top is in.
Quite often, the price rise itself will also change the supply and demand
dynamic at this stage. There is a saying that “the best cure for high prices is
high prices”, which means that higher prices ultimately reduce demand and
increase supply and that eventually leads to lower prices.
For example, when the price of oil rises or falls gradually, consumer and
producer behavior does not change much. On the other hand, when the
price of oil explodes higher from $50 to $120 (like it did in 2008),
producers rush to bring on new supply and consumers simultaneously cut
their demand because they can’t afford to fill up their SUVs. They drive
less. These shifts in supply and demand are not instantaneous, so price can
continue to rise even as new supply works its way into the system and
demand 
disappears. 
Then, 
suddenly, 
the 
new 
supply 
runs 
into 
falling
demand and prices whoosh lower.
Furthermore, depending on the market, the higher price can also have
other macroeconomic impacts that will lead to lower prices in the future.
For example, a rise in the euro might lead to more accommodative ECB
policy or a huge ramp up in Tesla stock might spur Elon Musk to sell stock
in a secondary offering. Be sure to understand what price levels in your
market might lead to major or non-linear changes in supply or demand.
If you are expert in your market and keenly attuned to its driving
narrative, you will recognize moments when the story has changed but price
is not yet paying attention. Those can be some of the juiciest setups in
finance.
These tops can be false break spike highs that happen in a flash, or
drawn out periods of distribution that trace out triple, quintuple or even
septuple tops before finally capitulating lower. When you see a turn in the
narrative you can use your knowledge of technical reversal patterns to help
you align your strategy (turning bearish near the highs due to a change in
the narrative) with your tactics (finding high-leverage setups that allow you
to test your theory that the narrative has turned without risking a ton if you
are wrong).
Stage 7: The End. As a narrative expires, people lose interest and only
those with bad discipline hang on. Shorts hammer the price down and longs
slowly but surely get out. Market themes are like fashion trends. The
market’s interest is fickle and limited. People get bored of a theme, and they
move on. Sometimes this will be justified by fundamentals and sometimes
it will simply be that a sexier, more interesting theme came along.
That is the narrative cycle. I am describing something clean and visible
but the tricky part is that these cycles are anything but clean and are only
easy to see in hindsight. As you gain experience, though, you will start to
see these cycles play out in real time and will learn to anticipate and act
before the cycle moves to its next stage.
Remember, this section is not about long-term investing. It is about
understanding the current equilibrium so that as new information arrives,
you can capitalize. If you know where you are in the story and understand
current positioning, you will have an edge as the cycle moves from stage to
stage. These narrative cycles can last hours, days or weeks.
Understand the stories the market is telling itself and learn to identify
when the market is falling in or out of love with a narrative.
Let’s look at a very simple example of how understanding the narrative
can help you when news comes out. You have been trading the stock of a
hydrogen-powered truck manufacturer for a while and it has been in a
steady up trend. The market has attached a huge premium to electric and
autonomous vehicle stocks and the stock you trade benefits from the halo
effect of TSLA. The main narrative is that autonomous vehicles have
massive upside and almost any market cap can be justified.
With this stock, there is a bearish counternarrative humming in the
background. That story is that the company has not yet delivered a single
working truck to any customer and behind the scenes there is strife inside
the company as the founder is viewed by some as a classic visionary
entrepreneur and by others as a marketing genius with no technical skill. In
contrast to TSLA, which has produced thousands of working automobiles,
the narrative of the off-the-rails visionary founder has more potential weight
because the company has yet to prove itself capable.
A famous short seller comes out with a detailed description of exactly
how the founder of the company has used marketing and outright deception
to 
convince 
people 
of 
the 
company’s 
future 
success 
despite 
repeated
product failures behind the scenes.
Short sellers come out with reports like this all the time. Some are
credible, some are not. Some hit the stock on the open and it rallies back by
the end of the day. Some are the start of a long slow march to zero. How do
you decide what to do?
Obviously, the first thing you do is read the report. You are already an
expert on the stock and the narratives that drive it. In this case, you know
the 
worries 
about 
the 
founder 
have 
been 
whispered 
for 
a 
while 
and
therefore this short seller’s report will have more force than if a comparable
report was issued on TSLA. You sell the stock short on the open and as
fears mount, the stock (which opened down 7%) closes down 20%.
You are expert in this stock so you know the market’s prior short
position has been nearly eliminated over the course of the recent violent up
trend. You know from all your reading that the high-profile bears mostly
gave up a few months ago. The chart is a perfect island reversal day as the
stock gapped up to make a new all-time high the day before the short
seller’s report came out. Your stop loss is clear: If the stock goes back above
today’s open, something is wrong with the idea, and you’re out.
The first price a security trades after news comes out is called the
NewsPivot. These 
are 
critical 
price 
points 
going 
forward. 
NewsPivots
become significant reference points in the mind of the market and if price
subsequently recaptures the NewsPivot, it often means that either a) the
news wasn’t all that important or b) larger medium and long-term players
are using the news as a liquidity event to go the other way. If bad news
comes out and your stock goes back above the NewsPivot: watch out! We
will talk more about NewsPivots in Chapter 10.
So now you have:
Abrupt flip from bullish narrative to bearish narrative
Large long position and almost no shorts
Textbook island reversal
NewsPivot held and stock closed on the lows
Given all this, you figure this is a multi-day trade. Today is Tuesday.
Knowing that historically the big, impulsive moves in the stock last an
average of three days, and considering you don’t like to take positions over
the weekend, you set your stop loss at the NewsPivot + 1% and plan to take
back the short either Friday morning or after another 15% drop. Naturally,
you closely follow the narrative from here too and try to assess whether the
company’s responses to the short seller’s report are credible or maybe just
make things worse.
Whether it’s a single stock or a macroeconomic narrative you follow,
the idea is the same. You must understand the current equilibrium as well as
anyone else does, and then when new information comes in or the narrative
starts to turn, you are on it.
Here’s how to be an expert on narrative.
1. Read like a fiend with a focus on quality. Seek out analysis,
thought processes, trade ideas, event previews and unique insights.
Avoid long-term forecasts, market summaries and recaps. You need
to find forward-looking analysis that contains useful, non-duplicative
information and ideas and incorporate that information and analysis
into your own process.
There is so much information available now, filtering has become an
important skill. You can waste your whole day reading bearish
NASDAQ 
tweets 
and 
pointless 
market 
recaps 
if 
you 
are 
not
selective. It’s important to curate a good list of reading and news
sources. Then keep refining it and improving it over time. Learn who
is good in your market and get your hands on their write-ups.
As you gain experience as a trader, learn which names are worth
reading and which ones are not. Do not simply take everything you
read at face value. You can find the most intelligent permabear
analysis from various funds but what value does that analysis have if
the writer has been bearish for 10 years and never changes his view?
Consider what you are reading, but also who wrote it.
Reading 
obviously 
teaches 
you 
different 
thought 
processes 
and
directly yields new information. It also gives you a sense of the
zeitgeist. What narratives are dominant right now? Understanding
the 
dominant 
narrative, 
and 
where 
your 
market 
stands 
in 
the
narrative cycle are two important skills.
2. Develop a network. To form a strong network, you need to both give
and receive information and ideas. Try to find peers and mentors
either within your organization or online. No human being can scour
all the information available. The better your network, the less likely
you will miss key information.
The way to form a strong network is by giving, not by asking for
information. Post interesting comments in a message board. If you
work at a bank, blast your best ideas to clients. If you trade from
home, post your trades on a bulletin board or on Twitter.
To build a network, be authentic and give more than you take.
Building a network takes a long time. You will not get much traction
at first because nobody knows you and nobody cares what the new
guy has to say. Once in a while, an idea you send out into the
universe might get some feedback. Over time, you will connect to a
few people, then a few more. But it’s exponential. If you work hard
at it and find a way to authentically connect to people, after maybe
10 years you will have a huge network of followers or contacts.
To 
build 
a 
network, 
play 
the 
long 
game. 
It 
can’t 
be 
done
overnight.
Building a network is hard, frustrating work. Gains are tiny at first.
But network effects scale geometrically. The eventual benefits are
tremendous.
3. Study the central banks. If you are a macro trader, this is obviously
key, but even if you trade single name stocks you should still
understand what is going on with the major central banks (Fed, ECB
and PBoC). Overall global liquidity is the number one factor driving
all global asset prices much of the time and you need to have a
decent 
sense 
of 
what 
is 
happening 
on 
that 
front. 
Central 
bank
speeches are boring but necessary material for good traders.
If you trade interest rates or FX, you should read every central bank
speech for the countries you trade. A huge part of the narrative in
rates and FX is driven by the central banks and you should know
which central bankers matter, what their bias is, how their views
have evolved and what they think right now.
You don’t need to forecast what the central banks are going to do.
But you have to understand the current environment and what any
future actions mean. Some of the best trades come from simply
preparing for a central bank meeting by reading all the available
materials and then going into the event with zero position.
Then, you react to the news with a solid and complete understanding
of what the new information means and how it will affect prices.
The only way you can do this is by reading and studying beforehand.
If you trade macro, each FOMC and ECB meeting is a major exam.
Are you going to study for a few days in advance? Or just cram a
few bank previews the morning of, and hope for the best?
Even if you specialize in TSLA or crude oil, you still need to
understand the Fed because its actions and statements are a major
input into the price of those assets.
4. Find the subject matter experts. Who is the best analyst in your
market? Can you get your hands on their writing? Much of the best
Wall Street analysis can be found online and you can follow some of
the best minds in finance on Twitter.
As you read more and more about your domain, you will start to pick
up on who is smart, who is biased, who is useless, and who to
follow. This takes time. Also: talk to people! Go online and ask
people on Reddit or on Twitter (for example): “Who is the best FX
analyst out there? Who is a must-follow?” etc.
As I mentioned earlier, building a curated list of experts to read and
follow is an important part of your effort in understanding the
narrative.
“How to understand the narrative” is fairly easy for me to explain but
requires significant time and effort from you. You will notice over time that
your ability to read the story the market is telling gets better and better.
Soon, you will start to get a sense of what is about to happen, before it
happens.
The narrative is the internal story of your market. But outside your
market, there are hundreds of other stories being told in other markets, and
each of those stories has some loose (or possibly tight) connection to your
market. Global growth expectations, for example, will impact Canadian
growth expectations and that will impact Bank of Canada policy and the
narrative around Canadian interest rates and the Canadian dollar. At the
same time, global growth expectations will influence demand forecasts for
copper and the price of copper itself. Therefore, one might expect there to
be a correlation between copper and the Canadian dollar (CAD), both
driven by a third variable: Global growth expectations.
There 
are 
literally 
100s 
of 
these 
connections 
all 
permeating 
the
impossibly complex system that is the global economy and global markets.
These connections create a huge matrix of correlations between markets
and fortunately for traders, many of the correlations operate with various
leads and lags. So copper might move right now and then CAD moves two
hours later. When lead/lag trading works, it can feel like you have been
given the answers to the test.
DRIVERS AND CATALYSTS
What drives the product or security you trade? What drivers matter for
your particular strategy? This question can be fairly easy to answer for
some traders and extremely difficult for others. For example, if you think of
yourself as a global macro trader and your focus is on interest rate products,
the answer is fairly easy. Growth, inflation and global monetary policy are
the main drivers you need to worry about.
When you know the drivers, the catalysts are pretty obvious. For the
trader concerned with growth, inflation and monetary policy, the catalysts
are usually economic data and central bank meetings.
This is all theory, of course, and is easy on paper but hard in real life.
While a strong US economic data point should be a catalyst for a higher
dollar, for example, there are plenty of days when data comes in strong and
the USD goes down.
There are many types of market catalyst. Here is a list of some biggies,
working from most macro to least.
Market catalysts
1. 
International 
geopolitics 
(e.g., 
trade 
war, 
G20 
Summit, 
global
pandemic, OPEC meeting, military conflict)
2. Domestic politics (elections, coups, scandals, passage of new laws,
court decisions)
3. Central bank action or speeches
4. Economic data
5. Company news a. Earnings
b. Analyst up/downgrades
c. Personnel changes (especially CEO or CFO)
d. Capital structure (dividends, buybacks, secondary issuance)
6. Catalyst in a correlated market
7. Technical breakout
8. Time of day, week or month
The first five are easy to understand. If you are an expert in your
market, you will know upcoming events in each of those five categories that
might impact your trading.
The bare minimum for every professional trader is to know all the
economic and market events that could impact the securities they trade.
When an economic number is coming out, you should know in advance and
you should be ready. If your stock reports earnings tomorrow morning, you
should know that. You should be prepared with a list of scenarios so that the
second the news hits, you can react intelligently.
If you are the person on a trading floor yelling “Is this bullish or
bearish?!” when news comes out… You are not an Alpha Trader.
You must be properly prepared, have an expert level of knowledge, and
understand the narrative. Then, when important news comes out, you can
react quickly and take massive, determined action.
Worse than the trader that does not know if news is bullish or bearish
for a particular market is the trader that is not even aware of a scheduled
release. 
I 
have 
heard 
traders 
yell: 
“Whoa, 
what 
just 
happened 
to
USDJPY!?” after it jumped 15 points higher on an economic release like
Consumer Confidence. They didn’t even know the number was coming out.
That’s not good!
While macro traders have the luxury of at least knowing what the
catalysts are (even if it’s not always obvious what impact they will have), in
other products, the drivers and catalysts are not as clear. Crypto is the most
extreme example. The market is so new and has few fundamental anchors,
so the drivers are mostly sentiment and technicals (charts). This is not true
all the time as new adopters (corporations or financial institutions adding
crypto to their balance sheet or approved products), forking and other
events can be fundamental catalysts.
Because the short-term drivers in crypto are poorly understood, and
regularly-scheduled events like economic data and central bank meetings
don’t matter much, catalysts often feel random. There is the occasional
scheduled halving or obvious fundamental catalyst visible in advance, but
mostly crypto is driven by sentiment shifts and randomly-timed news. That
said, you could also argue that the same is true with most stocks, most of
the time. For every move that is logically driven by a fundamental driver or
catalyst like earnings, there are ten that are impossible to explain with any
kind of macro or microeconomic logic.
Take time to understand the fundamental and technical drivers of your
particular security.
Item 6 in the list above, “Catalyst in a correlated market” relates to the
idea of lead/lag and correlation. For example, if you are long USDCAD and
the pair has been trading with an 80% negative correlation to crude oil over
the past 12 months, you should be aware if there is an OPEC meeting
coming up. OPEC meetings often lead to large changes in the price of oil
and as such can lead to large changes in USDCAD. If you want to be an
expert 
in 
USDCAD, 
you 
should 
read 
everything 
you 
can 
about 
the
upcoming OPEC meeting.
If you are long Citibank stock (C) and J.P. Morgan (JPM) reports
tonight, you should be ready and know what to expect. You should know
not just market expectation for JPM’s numbers but also whether or not C
tends to move in sympathy with JPM, on JPM earnings day. Understanding
these ins and outs of how things trade and move are key. I will discuss this
in more detail shortly in the section “Cross-market correlation”.
Item 
7 
on 
the 
list, 
“Technical 
breakout”, 
is 
important, 
but 
don’t
overestimate the importance of every tech level that you see. There is
always another level nearby and not every break of a 10-day high or low or
trendline or Fibonacci level has meaning. If you read about your market and
talk to and follow other traders, you will start to get a sense for the big
levels.
A big level isn’t a level that is important to you, it is a level that is
important to the market. This is a big distinction. You need to have your
own views and thoughts but Alpha traders are also inside the mind of the
market and know what matters most to the market as a whole.
This concept is best captured by Keynes’ beauty contest analogy from
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936). Keynes
asks us to imagine a newspaper which holds a contest where readers are
rewarded for choosing which contestant will be chosen by the most other
readers. The task is not to choose the most beautiful woman, but instead to
choose the woman others will think is most beautiful. Sometimes that’s the
same woman, but not always!
Participants 
in 
complex, 
multiplayer 
games 
with 
incomplete
information (like trading, poker, and bridge) play a superior metagame
where they understand not just their own strategy and preferences but also
the strategy and preferences of the other players. If everyone you talk to is
talking about the 122^00 level in 10-year bond futures, you should have
that level marked on your charts and you should closely observe how the
contract trades around there. The market converging to the opinion that a
particular level is important does not happen all that often but when it does
you should pay attention.
If 
that 
level 
breaks, 
the 
price 
action 
afterwards 
has 
important
implications for the future. A key level that breaks and follows through is
indicative of a trending market, while a false break of a level everyone is
watching (aka, a Slingshot Reversal
114
) is one of the best indicators for trend
reversal.
Strong up trends hold above major support, and they break through
major resistance.
Always monitor how your market behaves at important levels. If a
market has been trending and everyone is focused on a particular pullback
level, that level should hold. If it does not, this may signal the trend is out of
gas.
The final catalyst in that list earlier was Item 8, “Time of day, week or
month”. Often you will notice that trends exhaust themselves and turn
around at the end of the day, week or month. For example, in months where
the US stock market is up 3% or more, GBPUSD frequently rallies into
month end and then sells off in the first week of the new month
115
. Figure
9.2 is a chart of how GBPUSD trades around the turn of the month, at the
end of months where US stocks rallied 3% or more:
The point of this little section is not to tell you how FX trades on the
last day of the month—though if you trade FX, you definitely should know
this!—it is to show you a good example of how time of day, week or month
can impact price. In this case, the month end effect determines the direction
of the USD into month end and then the effect unwinds (mean reversion) in
the first week of the following month.
The reason price very often turns at the end of a day, week or month is
that many orders in the market are timed that way. A large CTA that needs
to buy 1,000,000 shares of a company will start its VWAP at the open and
end it at the close. A large corporation that needs to buy 1 billion USDCAD
will tell the bank doing the trade to get it done by the end of the day.
Month-end is a time when many real money investors rebalance so they
will complete all their activity by the end of the day on the last day of the
month, etc.
t = the first business day of the month. Sample size is 37 months.
Very large orders can often dominate the supply/demand profile of an
asset for a short period. Most large order executions take place during the
most liquid period of the day. When that period draws to a close, it is
reasonable to assume the supply/demand profile for the asset might change.
Mean reversion kicks in as the large order is done and the market drifts
back toward equilibrium. In other words, with the big buyer out of the way,
the price can drift lower.
In stocks, there are patterns around the start and end of the month and
around options expiry (triple witching, etc.) The takeaway here is that
trends often mean revert at the turn of the week, the turn of the month or
another key time such as options expiry. If you are looking to fade a strong
trend, these are often good moments to take a shot. This is an example of
something I think it’s important to remember:
There does not have to be an obvious exogenous catalyst for every
market move, reversal, peak, or bottom.
When you discuss a trade idea with someone and they say “OK, sure,
but what’s the catalyst?” … It is OK to say, “I don’t know.” Not every move
has a logical macro catalyst. Market catalysts are often endogenous as
supply 
and 
demand 
change 
for 
reasons 
unrelated 
to 
macro 
or
fundamentals
116
. A market high can happen simply because the last buyer
bought and the market has run out of buyers. Or because a single huge
buyer is done buying (as in the GBPUSD example above).
When there are suddenly no buyers in the market, this is called a
buyer’s strike. A market that was grinding higher for days can often
plummet suddenly. The catalyst for a sell-off after an aggressive up trend or
ramp higher can sometimes simply be: no more buyers.
CROSS-MARKET CORRELATION
An important driver or catalyst for your market can be activity and
moves in another security or asset class. Try to identify how price action in
other markets may send clues about your market. To take an obvious
example, if gold spikes $25 in three minutes and silver is unchanged, would
you rather be long or short silver? Probably long.
While correlated products tend to move in sympathy with one other,
there are usually leads and lags. If AAPL rips higher on good product
launch news, can you find the sympathy plays before other traders do?
Display makers and semiconductor stocks might benefit too.
This style of trading, where you follow many markets and try to
determine 
which 
ones 
are 
potentially 
leading 
or 
lagging 
is 
called
intermarket, cross-market or lead/lag analysis. This type of analysis can
give you a significant edge, though it has become mainstream in recent
years and does not have the edge it once did.
I use cross-market analysis all day, every day; it is a central pillar of my
trading process. If I am trading USDCAD, I know all the products that are
correlated with USDCAD (e.g., oil, US/Canada interest rate differential,
Canadian equities, copper, gold, etc.) and I watch them all closely. I do this
by setting up a series of separate charts which overlay the main asset
(USDCAD) with the correlated variables on top like you see in Figure 9.3.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
You can see in Figure 9.3 the remarkable and steady relationship
between US stocks and the Canadian dollar in 2020. Often, especially in
periods of high volatility and uncertainty, correlations rise and everything
seems to depend on risk appetite and not much else. With COVID-19 raging
for most of 2020, this was one of those periods. Note that S&P futures often
moved before CAD, providing some excellent signals for FX traders.
Australia is heavily reliant on Chinese growth and commodity prices
because a significant portion of its GDP comes from commodity production
and export. Therefore, there is a strong connection between the price of
copper and the Australian dollar (AUD). Notice in Figure 9.4 that in July
2020 you can see how copper moved before AUD, providing an excellent
bullish signal for the currency.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Let’s look at one more example. In Figure 9.5, we look at S&P 500
futures (the US stock market) against the equity volatility index (VIX). I
inverted the VIX for this overlay because the standard relationship is that
when stocks go down, volatility and the VIX go up (and vice versa).
Generally, 
when 
stocks 
rise, 
volatility 
falls 
and 
when 
stocks 
fall,
volatility rises. This is true almost all the time because investors buy puts to
protect themselves as markets fall. In a normal rising market, investors sell
calls to take profit, earn income and monetize gains. When vol rises as
stocks rise, it can be a warning sign… Something weird is going on.
Any strange behavior in markets or change in reaction function should
always pique your interest. Whenever something weird happens in the
market, go on high alert and investigate. Try to find out why. In Figure 9.6,
volatility was rising, even as stocks rose in September 2020, because a large
institutional player and a herd of retail investors were going nuts buying
calls. This is behavior you see in bubbly and overhyped environments. Can
you guess what stocks did next?
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
See Figure 9.6.
This is a textbook case of lead/lag trading. The rise in the VIX sent a
clear and strong signal that something strange was going on and the rally in
the stock market was highly suspect. This is not hindsight, I wrote about it
at the time, before stocks dumped.
Here is my complete analysis of that moment (published in my daily on
September 2, 2020) so you can see what other factors I incorporated into
my thinking.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
I feel that today or tomorrow will be a short-term peak for this mega reflation trade. If
I am correct, it would mean NASDAQ, lumber, gold, EURUSD and USD in general
will start a meaningful correction in the next 48 hours. A few reasons:
1. Fed doesn’t sound as dovish as I thought they would. Yesterday, Clarida had the
opportunity to tee up September and did not.
2. Vol rising along with stocks can be a sign of danger.
3. Breadth in equity markets has been horrendous.
4. Real rates not making new lows.
5. Gold not making new highs. Actually, it’s making lower highs. Gold has been trading
like a risky asset.
6. 1.2000 target reached in EURUSD. EURUSD has been moving up and down with
stocks.
7. September is historically the worst month for risk assets (weak seasonality).
8. USDCAD at key levels after doing a full round trip. USDCAD has also been highly
correlated with the S&P 500.
You can see that the VIX UP / Stocks UP was one of many factors that
went into my decision to turn bearish stocks on September 1. Each bit of
information adds to the last and eventually (sometimes) you have enough
building blocks stacked up that it results in a solid trade idea.
The more you understand your market, the better feel you will get over
time as to what it means when divergences build between primary and
correlated markets. I always feel more confident putting on a trade if the
most important correlated variables are stable or moving in my direction.
For example, if I have a strong view that the Canadian dollar is set to
rally based on my economic and technical analysis, but then I see oil has
just dropped $2 in the past 30 minutes, I will probably wait on my CAD
execution. In contrast, if I am bullish CAD and planning to get long and
then notice crude rallying hard, I will hurry up and buy the CAD ASAP. If I
am about to go short NFLX but then see DIS and GOOG rip higher, I will
hold off and wait for DIS and GOOG to stabilize or for NFLX to catch up
before I go short. And so on.
Correlated variables give you a hint as to where your product is going.
But not the answer.
As 
discussed 
earlier, 
these 
cross-market 
relationships 
often 
exist
because there is a third variable driving two correlated products. For
example, gold and the US dollar have a common driver: US real interest
rates. If the world thinks the Fed is going to do more QE and push real rates
lower, you might see that reflected in higher gold first and then a lower
USD shortly after.
All other things being equal, lower real rates mean stronger gold and a
weaker dollar. But these markets will not all move in perfect sync. Rates
and gold might be on the move but a big buyer of US dollars may be in the
market, so the USD doesn’t move. Then, when the buyer of US dollars is
done, the USD will catch up.
Lead/lag traders look at the entire board and hunt for an overall pattern.
Then, they find particular asset prices that don’t make sense, and try to
position before those out-of-line assets move back into line.
Think of the markets as one huge, interconnected organism where
information influences many assets at once, but not all at the exact same
time. 
If 
a 
market 
moves 
and 
that 
market 
is 
correlated 
to 
yours, 
pay
attention. What does it mean?
You can use common sense to come up with a list of correlated markets
fairly easily. When you read articles about your market, do they mention
other assets? You will often see a headline like: “Australian dollar rallies on
China growth optimism”. This tells you someone out there is equating AUD
with Chinese growth. What are some other proxies for Chinese growth?
Iron ore, the Shanghai Composite Index, FXI (the China A Shares ETF,
which trades in NY time), copper, BHP and FCX (mining stocks), etc.
Every individual security or market is part of a universe of other
securities and markets and they all orbit and influence one another. Figure
9.7 is a grid of examples to get you started.
If you have Bloomberg, you can play around with the CORR and CFND
functions to find things that are correlated to your market, but it is more
useful to use logic rather than data mining tools. Start with things that
should logically be correlated to your market, then calculate the correlation
to see if your guesses are correct
117
. You can also go to websites like:
market-topology.com and mess around with their correlation tools. Just
remember to use a logic filter because you can data mine all kinds of
nonsensical correlations if you try hard enough!
Eventually, as you approach expert level in your product, slowly branch
out from your market and learn more about a small list of correlated
markets. For example, over many years of trading currencies, I have
accumulated a ton of knowledge about markets outside of, but correlated to
FX. This knowledge helps me better understand and trade the currency
market.
For example, if you trade USDCAD, it’s good to know what the TAS
order type is in the oil market because oil is correlated to USDCAD. It’s
good to know how volumes and volatility are distributed throughout the day
in the oil market, too. It’s helpful to know when NYMEX crude closes. And
so on. But if you are going to trade USDCAD, first you need to be a
USDCAD expert. Later in your career, go learn the markets that orbit your
main area of expertise.
Seek to understand any market that is correlated to yours. Search for the
most stable and logical correlations and ignore transitory or nonsensical
correlations, even if they look statistically strong.
A full discussion of lead/lag trading could fill an entire book. Study the
behavior of correlated markets and watch how correlations change over
time. Correlations are not static. Sometimes stocks and bonds go up and
down together. Sometimes they are inversely correlated. Sometimes stocks
go up and down with the dollar. Sometimes they are inversely correlated.
Closely follow a small list of markets correlated to your primary market
and you will slowly get a feel for how markets move together, even as they
do not move in perfect sync. Lead/lag is part art and part science, so you
should expect that it will take a few years to get a feel for it. Once you do,
you will sometimes feel like you can tell what is going to happen before it
happens as you pick up on a strongly correlated, leading variable that drives
your market for a while. Regimes where lead/lag works well can be highly
satisfying and profitable trading periods.
Lead/lag and correlation trading is not the holy grail. It is a popular
systematic 
strategy, 
therefore 
much 
of 
the 
edge 
is 
now 
captured 
by
computers. It is an input into a good discretionary trading process, not an
entire discretionary trading process. When you understand the story that
drives your market and you understand the catalysts and drivers that move
prices, you are ready to start trading.
But where do trade ideas come from? That is probably the number one
question I am asked by new traders. How do you come up with ideas?
Where do you start? What is the process? Chapter 12 is called “Bringing it
all together” and that’s where I will take you from start to finish; from trade
idea to execution to take profit to post-trade analysis.
But before we can bring it all together, we need to cover a few more
topics. 
Next 
up: 
The 
importance 
of 
technical 
analysis, 
sentiment 
and
positioning.
112. Jack Schwager, Market Wizards (1989).
113. Elliott Wave is an esoteric form of technical analysis. I studied it for a while and found
its general approach useful but its specifics too subjective, arbitrary and confirmation
bias-y. If you’re bullish: There’s a wave count for that! If you’re bearish: There’s a wave
count for that too.
114. Google “Brent Donnelly Slingshot Reversal” for a full definition and explanation.
115. This is caused by large hedging by foreign asset managers at month end which
climaxes at 4 p.m. London time on the last day of the month. More detail on this in
Chapter 12.
116. Endogenous: having an internal cause or origin. Not attributable to any external factor.
The opposite of exogenous.
117. Use correlation of daily changes, not correlation of levels, when calculating correlation.
If you want to know more on this topic, just Google “levels vs. changes correlation”. It’s a
big topic, beyond the scope of this book.
S
CHAPTER 10
UNDERSTAND TECHNICALS,
SENTIMENT AND POSITIONING
Step three towards becoming an expert in your market
uccess in any complex game, puzzle, or battle relies on both intelligent
strategy and effective tactics. Tactics are just as important as strategy
yet are often overlooked. This chapter explains technical analysis, sentiment
and positioning and shows how a superior understanding of these subjects
will give you a significant tactical edge. To be clear, when it comes to
trading, strategy means coming up with trade ideas and tactics means how
you execute and implement those ideas.
Nearly all my trade ideas start from either microstructure or narrative.
They never come from looking at a chart or from any form of technical
analysis. And
I never put on a trade purely because of sentiment or positioning. My
highest conviction trades generally have multiple inputs, but they always
start with fundamentals or microstructure and then get refined, streamlined
(or filtered out) by other factors.
I use technical analysis, sentiment and positioning as timing tools, but
not as trade selection tools. My thinking on this has evolved over the years
partly because markets have evolved, but also because I have seen enough
evidence to conclude that technical analysis is not a source of alpha or edge.
Charts are not a good forecasting tool.
There is a pretty tall pile of research to back this up. I’ll give you a
quick 
rundown 
of 
one 
paper 
called: 
“Are 
Random 
Strategies 
More
Successful Than Technical Ones?”
118
They analyzed four popular technical
strategies: RSI, MACD, mean reversion and momentum. They ran them
against four major stock markets (USA, Germany, Italy and the UK) and
compared the results to a strategy that chose entry and exit levels 100%
randomly. Here is their conclusion:
Our main result, which is independent of the market considered, is that
standard trading strategies and their algorithms, based on the past history
of 
the 
time 
series, 
although 
have 
occasionally 
the 
chance 
to 
be
successful inside small temporal windows, on a large temporal scale
perform on average not better than the purely random strategy, which, on
the other hand, is also much less volatile. In this respect, for the individual
trader, a purely random strategy represents a costless alternative to
expensive professional financial consulting, being at the same time also
much less risky, if compared to the other trading strategies.
There are entire books that go through all the major technical patterns
and backtest them and come to the same result: technical analysis is not a
good forecasting tool. I explained my philosophy on technical analysis
when I discussed overreliance on simple indicators and apophenia. I want to
make it clear though: I use technical analysis in my trading every day. I just
don’t use it to predict markets.
Technical analysis gives you an important set of tactical execution and
risk management tools. It does not help you forecast market direction.
Good traders are quick to admit when they are wrong. They make
leveraged, asymmetric bets. Technical analysis can help you do these things
better and provide strong and clear signals of when it’s time to give up on a
bad idea or take profit on a good one.
Believe it or not, the exact technical indicators you choose are not all
that 
important. 
The 
mathematics 
and 
concept 
behind 
most 
technical
indicators are similar. RSI, MACD, and oscillators all give you a similar
feel for trend and momentum. Simple trendlines plus support and resistance
work just as well as more complicated or convoluted methods. The more
esoteric you get with your technical analysis, the more likely you are to find
yourself wasting time in the weeds. Keep it simple!
Remember: alpha traders do not use technical analysis to predict the
market, they use it to optimize execution and risk management.
Here are some of the techs I look at:
SIGNIFICANT REFERENCE POINTS
Significant reference points (SRPs) are levels that are likely to feature
prominently in the mind of the market. These are levels a majority of
market players view as important. As is the case in Keynes’ beauty contest
analogy, it is important to know not just what you think is important but
what others think is important. Here are some standard SRPs.
NewsPivots
A NewsPivot is the last trade in a market before important, market
moving news comes out. I find that NewsPivots are the most powerful
reference points in trading. You should be aware of all NewsPivots in your
markets. If AAPL is at $100 when good news comes out and the first trade
after the news is $103, the gap is $100/$103 with the NewsPivot ($100)
marking the bottom of the gap.
Remember that price is a momentary equilibrium determined by the
sum of all known information in the universe. When new information
appears, 
the 
market 
frantically 
tries 
to 
find 
the 
corresponding 
new
equilibrium. If the market believes the news to be meaningful, it should
abandon the old equilibrium from before the news came out (aka, the
NewsPivot) and find a new one.
A return to, or through the NewsPivot is important information. It tells
you: the market has rejected the news and the attempt to find a new
equilibrium, and reverted back to its old happy place.
When news comes out, the market fumbles around in the dark as it tries
to find a new balance between supply and demand. Buyers and sellers of
various time frames jostle for position. The first price that trades after news
comes out is also a significant reference point going forward. Figure 10.1 is
an example of a NewsPivot and price gap:
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
In the chart of HYG (Figure 10.1, the high-yield corporate bond ETF),
you can see that on the day the Fed announced their intention to buy high-
yield bonds, HYG gapped massively higher. It closed just below $78 the
day before then opened at $82 the day of the announcement. Therefore, the
NewsPivot (price before the news) is $78 and the other side of the gap is
$82. These are both significant reference points going forward.
In the weeks that followed, HYG closed the gap and retested the
NewsPivot. The NewsPivot held perfectly and HYG never fell back below
$78 despite four separate tests.
Astute traders of HYG would be aware of the closing level before the
Fed’s announcement and would also be aware that that level is likely to be
massive support. A simple strategy of buying just above the NewsPivot with
a stop below the NewsPivot would have worked perfectly.
Always take note of the level of any market you trade going into a
major event. This level is likely to be a significant reference point going
forward.
Support and resistance
The next type of significant reference point to identify is simple support
and resistance. If a stock is in a downtrend, but it starts to build a base and
bounces off $80 three times, you should take note of this. The beauty of
support and resistance are their simplicity. They are easy to identify, and
their existence is logical because often they are a simple reflection of
supply or demand at a particular level. A patient medium-term buyer in a
market might decide to work a massive bid at $80 in a stock. That massive
bid will be visible as the price repeatedly trades at $80, but fails to break
through that level.
Support and resistance in your market can be identified simply by
eyeballing both an hourly and then a daily chart. Here’s what to look for:
1. Any topside or downside level that held more than once. This can
often be a band, not an exact level. For example, you might see a
series of lows in gold at $1914, $1908 and $1904. Don’t use false
precision when you determine significant reference points. A band of
support often makes more sense than trying to identify an exact level.
2. Any level that represents a major high or low for your product (60-
day low, one year low, etc.)
3. Broken resistance or support. When a major support breaks, expect
that level to become important resistance in future.
4. Major round numbers. These do not always matter, but remember
how humans love round numbers!
In the GBPUSD chart in Figure 10.2, you can see strong support formed
at 1.3000/25 (marked with 1’s), and the important swing high just below
1.3500 (2). Then, note how the old support (1.3000/25) became resistance
once it broke (3). Also note that a round number (1.3000) is the critical
pivot on this chart.
If your market has been in a nice up trend for a few weeks and pulls
back to major support, bounces weakly off it, then breaks through the
support… That is a warning sign. The trend has lost its power as it fails to
hold above the levels that matter.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Strong up trends hold major support. Strong down trends stay below
major resistance.
In Figure 10.3, which shows the price of gold in the Summer of 2020,
there is major support at $1910. Before and after the “1” on the chart, there
are five separate tests and holds of $1910. In this chart, I also show volume
bars 
below 
the 
price. 
Volume 
can 
add 
an 
additional 
layer 
of 
useful
information.
You can see the huge volume spike when gold tested the key $1910
support level in late August (the price and volume points marked as “1”).
This tells you that aggressive selling was absorbed and therefore demand
was significant at $1910. Successful holds of major support on high volume
are super bullish.
High volumes reinforce the importance of a support or resistance level
or can signal that it has been decisively broken. At the points marked “2”
you can see another huge volume surge but this time, gold slices through
the bottom of an important triangle and through the critical $1910 level all
at once.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
High volumes provide signal confirmation for technical patterns.
Figure 10.4 shows another example of a massive volume spike at a
turning point. This chart of EURNOK shows a monster volume spike on the
very last day of August 2020. That marked the ding dong low in the pair.
Most likely, this was a huge rebalancing flow; many FX rebalancing flows
coincide with 4 p.m. London time on the last day of the month and that’s
the timing of that big volume bar. If you squint, you can also see the second
largest volume bar coincides with an important low in mid-June.
Remember that because support and resistance are simple and not
subject 
to 
much 
interpretation, 
most 
people 
in 
the 
market 
will 
be
monitoring roughly the same support and resistance levels. Therefore, you
need to think about the metagame and leave your stops far enough below
support (or above resistance) that you are not dinged by a weak stop loss
run that takes out an obvious level. It is often best to place your stop loss
about a half-day’s range below a major level to avoid any noisy whipsaws
around that point
119
.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
If all you know about technical analysis is NewsPivots, support and
resistance, you know enough to function as a competent trader. I will now
go through a few more indicators that I use, but like I said: indicator
selection is somewhat arbitrary and not especially important. If RSIs make
sense to you, use them. If you prefer MACD, great. Your success or failure
in trading will not be determined by the technical indicators you choose,
and it will most certainly not be determined by which parameters you
choose for those indicators.
If you have never read any technical analysis books or websites, my
suggestion is that you either take 10 or 15 hours to read a bunch of technical
analysis websites and watch YouTube videos about techs… Or read two or
three good books on technical analysis (e.g., John Murphy’s or Steve
Nison’s book
120
). Another great resource is the 6-part Market Profile Study
Guide from the CME. You can Google it and find the PDF free online.
Market Profile is a bit esoteric but I find it logical and easy to understand.
Your intention while reading about technical analysis is to find 2 to 5
simple indicators or patterns that you like. Use these as your primary risk
management and market screening tools. Then, you can add a few more
over time. You don’t need 74 different technical indicators when you use
techs 
to 
manage 
risk 
and 
improve 
execution 
tactics. 
Running 
14
spreadsheets screening for every technical indicator ever invented is a waste
of time. Keep it simple.
Make sure you allocate enough time to strategy (coming up with trade
ideas) and tactics (entry point, stop loss, etc.) Many traders find it is more
fun to come up with trade ideas and do not allocate enough resources to the
tactics of extracting as much money as possible from the ideas.
You cannot win without good strategy and solid tactics.
SYMMETRY
Another setup I look for in financial markets is symmetry. It is logical
that a quasi-natural system like financial markets would often produce
symmetrical patterns. Furthermore, since volatility tends to be steady in
many markets for much of the time, it makes sense that moves (whether
they be up or down) would tend to be of approximately the same size. If
something just rallied 5% in three months, it is intuitive and logical that it
could fall 5% in three months, but less intuitive or logical that it might fall
12% in 1 month
121
.
Let me show you two examples of symmetry that I found useful in
September 2020. The first was USDCAD. The COVID-19 crisis triggered a
massive shortage of USD as the market scrambled for liquidity and freaked
out about the dramatic drop in the stock market. This pushed USDCAD
from 1.2952 to 1.4669 in just two months. Then, the Fed launched an epic
QE bazooka and stocks quickly stabilized. This helped USDCAD form a
top and eventually the pair dropped all the way back down to within 30 pips
of where it started (1.2952). See Figure 10.5.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
See how USDCAD rallied 17.17 big figures then sold off 16.72? Just
about 
perfect 
symmetry. 
Pretty 
amazing. 
Once 
it 
completed 
that
symmetrical round trip, USDCAD held in the mid-1.29s and that was an
excellent buying opportunity. This is not hindsight, I used this symmetry as
one of several reasons to recommend a USDCAD long at the time.
Figure 10.6 is a thing of absolute beauty. It shows USDCNH as it
followed a perfect M-shaped pattern and respected both price and time
symmetry.
Each leg of the M was about 95 days with the first two exactly 99 days
and the last two 92 and 97 days. The first rally matched the ultimate selloff
just about perfectly and the V in the middle displayed just about perfect
symmetry too. When an asset is completing a symmetrical pattern, you
should be on high alert for a reversal.
Furthermore, 
when 
trading 
options, 
you 
should 
start 
with 
the
assumption of price symmetry when choosing targets and strike prices. If
you are buying USDCNH puts on the second run to 7.1965, it makes sense
to start with 6.68 as your price target and then adjust for any other
information you have on direction and expected volatility.
If you were short USDCNH at the point this chart ends, and you feel
like the trade is losing its luster, this would be another input and possible
reason to think it might be time to cut. If you are bullish USDCNH but want
a reason to get long, this gives you one.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Note that one reason (especially a chart-based reason) is never good
enough for a trade idea. More appropriate would be that you already have
three or four reasons derived from fundamental, positioning or cross-market
analysis and the chart symmetry gives you a nice entry point with a cheap
stop loss.
REVERSAL PATTERNS
When you decide that you want to take the other side of a trend, it is
helpful to have specific indicators and patterns that will give you a signal
that the time is right. Copious cash has been set on fire by traders blindly
fading strong trends for no reason, or using weak logic like “this is a big
level” or “it’s come too far too fast”.
When I have a strong countertrend view, I don’t execute right away.
Instead, I go on high alert and wait for a sign that it’s time to jump in. I
would never enter a trade simply because of a reversal pattern or signal. But
when I have a countertrend view already, for reasons unrelated to technical
analysis, here are three reversal patterns I watch for.
1. Ending diagonal or rising wedge
This pattern works at the lows, too, but here I describe how it works at
the highs.
An ending diagonal occurs when price rises in a slowly narrowing
wedge as volatility contracts even as the price continues to make new highs.
Figure 10.7 is a nice example using NYMEX crude oil in 2018.
An interesting feature of the rising wedge formation is that as the
triangle narrows, the triangle must eventually close and the pattern must
conclude. Therefore, you get a sense of when the turn might come, if it’s
going to happen, as the apex of the triangle is a timing tool.
My approach to trading wedges is simple. When I have a countertrend
view, I wait for price to close below the wedge (under the bottom line, in
the example above) and then I go short with a stop loss above the high. In
the example above, I would sell crude at $70.80 on the day it dropped out of
the wedge on the big down day. My stop loss is $72.85 (above the highest
high).
2. Dojis
A doji is a candlestick that forms when the opening and closing price of
a security are the same. The daily silver chart in Figure 10.8 has two dojis
in a row after a 30% rally. The dojis are marked with large arrows.
A doji is a sign of indecision. Price went up and down and closed
unchanged. When you see a doji or two dojis in a row, it is a sign that
momentum has waned. The prior trend is losing steam. If you were bearish
silver in the case of Figure 10.8, but wanted a sign that it was safe to get in
the water, the doji is a good signal. Again, my methodology is simple.
When I am bearish a market that is in a strong trend higher, and I see a doji,
I sell on the close that day. I also use dojis on hourly charts.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
If I had no other information here, I would put my stop 1.5 average day
ranges away. 1.5 times the average daily range is my baseline starting point
when picking a stop loss for a normal trade. Note that I also look for major
levels to consider before determining my stop loss level. In this case, using
one year of data as the lookback, the average daily range in silver was 36
cents. Therefore, the stop loss is placed at the entry ($12.91) plus (0.36
daily range X 1.5) = $13.45. There was another doji the next day (the high
traded was $13.22 that day) and then silver cratered, reversing the entire
July/August rally in 5 days. Dojis are simple and powerful warning signs of
trend exhaustion.
3. Hammers
A hammer is a reversal candle where price makes a hard push in one
direction and closes at the opposite extreme. These are especially powerful
if they come as a failed attempt at a major new high or low. Figure 10.9 is
an example of a bull hammer candle.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
If you were bullish bitcoin in early 2018 but wanted a signal to buy, you
got a nice one in early February as the market made a bull hammer after the
50%+ decline. The bull hammer is marked with a large arrow. The strategy
is to wait for the hammer, buy at the close, and put your stop loss below the
low. Of course, the same setup (in reverse) at the highs is called a bear
hammer and it is bearish.
Note these patterns don’t work every time! There is also a bull hammer
on that same chart in January and that candle gave a bullish signal that only
worked for 3 days. No technical signal or setup is going to be anywhere
close to perfect. These reversal indicators are extremely useful, though, as
they 
help 
you 
enter 
countertrend 
trades 
with 
a 
set 
of 
logical 
risk
management parameters that allow you to put on your reversal trade with
meaningful leverage.
Develop a short list of reversal indicators that you like and use them as
triggers when you have a strong countertrend view. Be patient, then strike
with maximum force.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
I have now outlined a few ways to identify important levels and turning
points. You should also have one or two indicators in your toolbox that help
you identify the trend, and if that trend is overbought or oversold. Here are
two indicator sets I use for trend and overbought/oversold.
TREND AND OVERBOUGHT/OVERSOLD INDICATORS
Moving averages
To measure the strength, slope and direction of trend, moving averages
are the simplest, most effective indicator. I use 55, 100 and 200-hour
moving averages on all my charts. I almost always use hourly charts for
technical analysis, though I sometimes zoom in with 10-minute charts or
zoom out to the daily for a different perspective. When I zoom in or out, I
still use 55, 100 and 200-period MAs.
Here are three ways I look at moving averages:
1. The 200-hour is a great trend indicator and I use it on its own for
trend direction and also as support and resistance. If I am bearish
crude oil futures and the price has been repeatedly capped by the
200-hour, I will use the next approach to the MA to get short. Many
traders use the 55-day in the NASDAQ as a trend indicator. If the
market 
is 
above 
the 
moving 
average 
and 
holding 
above 
it 
on
pullbacks, that is a nice uptrend. And vice versa. One of the most
basic and effective strategies in trading is to play the pullbacks in a
primary trend using a moving average. This strategy is simple and
effective.
2. Watch for crossovers. When the 55-hour crosses up through the 200-
hour, that is a bullish signal. At that point, buying a pullback to the
55-hour could be attractive if you have other good reasons to be
bullish.
3. Check the slope of the moving averages. If all three MAs are flat,
that’s a choppy rangebound market. If all three are sloping upwards,
that’s a strong bull trend.
Here is a variation of a simple and effective (bullish) tactical approach
many use once they have a strong bullish view in a market: wait for a fast
MA to cross above a slower MA, which signals that an uptrend has formed.
Wait for the price of the asset to retrace back to the fast MA. Buy with a
stop loss at least 1.5 day’s ranges away and below the 200-hour MA.
Simple and effective.
The selection of period for moving averages (55 vs. 50 vs. 20) is
somewhat arbitrary and not super-important. Just pick two or three moving
averages of different lengths and put them on all your charts. You can also
fit a moving average to the current trend much in the way you would draw a
trendline. Then, if price breaks through that MA, you know the trend has
lost its mojo.
Relative strength indicator ( RSI)
Every trader should have one or two indicators that tell them when their
market is extremely oversold or overbought on the time horizon they trade.
The big three are RSI, stochastics and deviation from a moving average.
RSI is the standard that everyone uses, and the textbook strategy is that
if it goes above 70, wait for it to fall back below 70 and then sell. I use it
differently.
I take as much data as possible (using hourly data because that suits my
trading time horizon) and find the extremes in the RSI going back as far as
possible. I then calculate the top and bottom 5% most extreme and use these
levels as “get out no matter what” levels. That is, if I’m long, and the RSI
gets into the top 5% of the series, I cut. I find that at the mega RSI
extremes, the risk of a reversal is too high so the risk reward on staying in
the trend is poor. If I am trying to trade against the trend, I will also use
these mega extremes as an entry point.
Here’s a super short excerpt from one of my dailies (December 2, 2020)
where I use an extreme in the RSI to get short NZDUSD:
The textbook approach to trading RSI is to wait for it to rise above 70 and
then fall back below 70 and then go short. I prefer to isolate the most
extreme levels and use those as reversal points right away. While RSI is
a trend indicator, generally, it can be an amazing reversal indicator at the
MEGA extremes.
I sorted all the daily NZDUSD RSI data from 2010 to now and the most
extreme readings occur when the RSI breaks above 75. That happened
this week. With the dramatic repricing in NZ rates and the non-stop flood
of good vaccine news, much goodness is in the price of NZDUSD now.
The table below shows how the pair performed in the twelve instances
where the RSI went above 75 (since 2010).
x+1 means performance one day after the first RSI reading above 75, x+3 means three
days later, x+5 means 5-day performance, etc.
You can see in this short example that if you isolate the times when the
RSI is historically extreme, you can find points where you have high
confidence to go the other way. When the NZD RSI is above 75, future
performance is raging bearish as NZD averages a drop of 2.7% over the
next 60 trading days and goes up only 25% of the time.
In this case, I was already bearish risky assets (NZD is a risky asset) so
this just added to my thesis and gave me a way to play it. I went short
NZDUSD at 0.7040 with a stop at 0.7111 and a take profit at 0.6911. A high
RSI on its own would not be enough to get me involved but it’s a nice seed
that might grow into a full trade idea.
The Deviation
The other overbought and oversold signal that I use is the deviation of
price from a moving average or what I simply call “The Deviation”. My
technique is pretty simple, as usual. I take the price of the asset I’m trading
and check how far it is from the 100-hour moving average. Then, I look as
far back as possible and see if The Deviation tends to oscillate in a steady
range or if it looks unreliable or random. For many markets, you will see
that The Deviation tends to peak and trough around the same levels over
and over when volatility is fairly stable.
This is easy to set up on your trading system or in a spreadsheet. Use
historical data to determine what the extremes are in The Deviation and
then use those extremes going forward as reversal signals. In this case, I
filtered for the 5% of most extreme values in the deviation and this
represents a move in the S&P 500 of about 3.5%.
When using The Deviation, it is important to understand the skew of
your market. Skew is the direction of the market that tends to happen faster
and be more volatile. For example, stocks tend to sell off much more
quickly than they rally, so you might want to use a more conservative entry
point for your deviation signal on the downside or scale in gradually
knowing that sell-offs can overshoot and are harder and more violent to
fade.
An important note about using overbought and oversold signals: think
think think. If the Fed just announced a massive QE program and stocks rip
higher to extreme overbought… That is probably not a signal that it is time
to go short. Things that are overbought can become more overbought and
then more overbought again. Overbought on its own is not a reason to sell
an asset. It’s a warning sign that the future distribution of returns might be
skewed lower and that’s all.
An elevated RSI reading or a sexy stochastic are not reason enough to
do 
a 
trade. 
Incorporate 
overbought 
and 
oversold 
indicators 
into 
your
process and use them to fine tune entries and exits, but don’t be the trader
who fades a move solely because “It’s come too far, too fast.” That is not a
valid trading strategy. Remember we are using these technicals as guidance
and tactical inputs and not as a systematic quantitative trading framework.
MORNING QUICK TECHS
Most trading jobs are busiest in the morning. Markets are already
moving when you sit down but still, you need to prepare for the day. By 7
a.m. each day, I am fielding client queries, producing content, planning my
day and going through 100s of e-mails. I need to keep my morning process
as simple as possible. I like to create a quick sheet of techs that looks like
Figure 10.11.
Note that R1, R2, and R3 refer to the first three resistance levels while
S1, S2, and S3 refer to the first three support levels. The grid does not take
long to update each morning because many of yesterday’s levels remain
valid today and all the stuff on the bottom updates automatically using a
data feed from Bloomberg. Good traders have an established morning
process to prepare for the day and part of that process should be to identify
significant reference points for the day ahead. You know the old saying
about luck and preparation.
That concludes this section on technical analysis. I strongly advise you
to keep things simple and stick with just a few indicators and techniques
that make sense to you. Remember that techs are just the frosting on the
trade idea cake. Don’t try to make an entire cake out of frosting!
SENTIMENT AND POSITIONING
The market cycle is always a complex dance featuring narrative and
sentiment. Sometimes the news drives the price but quite often, the price
drives the news. In other words, sometimes a strong trend takes on a life of
its own and unfolds faster than the story on the ground, which follows
behind.
While I believe sentiment and positioning are important variables to
consider in every trade, and can sometimes be the main driver of a trade
idea, I also believe they are overrated as indicators by many traders. We
discussed sentiment a fair bit in the section on herding bias but there are
some other important points to cover.
Here are the key points on sentiment and positioning:
1. Sentiment and positioning matter sometimes, but not most of the
time.
2. 80-90% of the time, sentiment just follows price so if you trade
against sentiment and positioning you are often just fighting the
trend.
3. At inflection points, a tuned-in feel for positioning and sentiment can
be a huge source of edge.
Positioning is packed with potential energy, like fuel for a future fire.
Positioning unwinds are like fires. They need heat (a spark or catalyst), fuel
(large positions) and oxygen (more bad news, or mark-to-market losses that
trigger feedback loops that lead to more position unwinds).
Image: Gustavb - Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
You need large positions, a catalyst, and mark-to-market losses all at
once and then you get a chain reaction that continues until it finally burns
itself out (or is put out by a central bank). When I was in grade school, they
taught us this process with the fire triangle.
Large positions are like piles of dry tinder that can potentially burst into
flame at any moment, but probably won’t. Remember, just because you
have a large stack of dry wood next to an open can of gasoline… That does
not mean there will be a fire.
Figure 10.12 is the simple positioning and sentiment framework I use.
In other words, going against sentiment works at the turning points but
not during the trend. If you can identify a palpable turn in sentiment via
observation of behavior or via data analysis, you can position ahead of the
crowd.
Sources of sentiment and positioning data
The 
best 
source 
of 
sentiment 
and 
positioning 
information 
is
knowledgeable observation of how people discuss a market. This is easier if
you have been trading for a few years and talk to many people in the
market, but you can also get a sense of this from reading news and social
media. Just remember that many channels are biased.
In terms of data, the most commonly-used positioning data comes from
the CFTC. This data shows the positioning of non-commercial speculators,
and while it is closely followed and can be interesting information, it has no
predictive power on its own. If you see “Copper longs on CFTC hit all-time
high” your instinct is probably to go short copper but the inconvenient truth
is that a setup like that is actually modestly bullish on all time horizons.
The CFTC data is slow-moving and trend-following and is directional,
not contrarian. Do not use CFTC data by itself as a contrarian
indicator.
A source of sentiment data that is contrarian is the Daily Sentiment
Index, produced by Jake Bernstein since the 1980s. That data is the output
from a survey of retail traders that simply asks: “Are you bullish or bearish
on X?” It shows what percentage of survey respondents are bulls. When
bulls get below 10 or above 90, that is a good indicator of a near-term
extreme. DSI data is available only via subscription.
Options markets often contain important positioning information. For
example, when stocks rise and VIX rises at the same time, you know that
something unusual is going on because the correlation is almost always
inverted between those two. Stocks up / VIX up is a sign that the market is
so bullish it is adding to upside with calls, instead of hedging the downside
with puts. You can also look at the put/call ratio for a read on equity
sentiment.
In currency markets, people look at the risk reversal to see if traders
have a strong preference for puts or calls, and how that preference is
changing. As with most sentiment data, the risk reversal mostly follows
price but when there is a divergence (USDJPY going up even as the risk
reversal is more bid for USD puts) that can be a signal that something is
amiss.
Positioning surveys can be a useful source of information. They are
timely and fast moving. People change their minds quickly, as opposed to
trend following systems which move much more slowly as they wait for
price 
confirmation. 
Again, 
with 
surveys, 
most 
of 
the 
time 
they 
are
directional and the only time they are contrarian is when they hit an
extreme. In the positioning surveys I have done when working at banks, I
found that when sentiment made a record high or low for the past year, that
could often be a good sign of a turn.
In the stock market there are many sentiment surveys and indicators
available. I like the AAII survey (bulls vs. bears). CNN’s Fear and Greed
indicator is a nice simple snapshot of equity sentiment.
Many banks publish sentiment and positioning data. In FX there is the
Citi Pain Index and the HSBC Positioning Indicators. In broad macro, the
Bank of America Global Fund Manager Survey gets a lot of attention and
highlights crowded positions and tail risks. Retail brokers like Oanda,
Dukascopy and DailyFX publish detailed positioning data. Each market has
its important sentiment and positioning data, and this is generally easy to
find simply by Googling. As you become expert in your market, you will
learn the best sentiment and positioning indicators to follow.
Finally, magazine covers can be the ultimate contrarian indicator. When
a financial theme hits the cover of a mainstream magazine, always take
note. By the time journalists believe a theme is worthy of a cover story, that
theme is (by definition) well-known. That means the theme is probably also
crowded. 
For 
more 
on 
the 
Magazine 
Cover 
Indicator, 
Google 
“Brent
Donnelly magazine cover indicator”.
How to use sentiment and positioning data
Sentiment and positioning data can help you significantly at turning
points. The number one takeaway on sentiment and positioning, whether
you are using surveys, options markets, or other sources of information, is
that only the super-mega-extremes are times when you should consider
fading. 
Otherwise, 
positioning 
and 
sentiment 
are 
mostly 
just 
trend
indicators and they move up and down with the price.
In Chapter 9 we discussed how sentiment and positioning evolve as a
market moves through its narrative cycle. I want to mention here that when
sentiment is at an extreme and the narrative starts to turn, this is a situation
where good sentiment and positioning analysis can make you money.
Extreme bearish sentiment usually reflects that the price has been going
down and there is a strong and compelling bearish story that explains the
sell-off. The interesting moment comes when the narrative starts to turn,
good news starts to emerge, but price does not turn higher right away.
Confirmation bias hampers the judgment of the individual and it also
impacts the judgment of the crowd in aggregate. You will often see the
news flow turn against a major trend but no reaction in the price at first.
Often, traders with lower confidence will defer to the market (they
might say “Oh, I guess the news isn’t that bullish after all, since the market
keeps going lower”) while expert traders with a strong understanding of the
narrative 
and 
of 
positioning 
will 
see 
an 
opportunity 
in 
the 
mismatch
between price and narrative. They will say something more like: “The news
flow has clearly turned bullish here but the market is clinging to the old
bearish narrative. Short positioning is in the 97% percentile and I bet there
is going to be a huge reversal soon.”
Then, that expert trader will go on high alert for signals that price has
bottomed. This could be as simple as waiting for a moving average to break
or waiting for a bullish reversal pattern like a hammer, ending diagonal or
key reversal day. The savvy trader sees that the sell-off is set to reverse but
waits. She looks for evidence that a reversal in price is happening and finds
setups that allow for a reasonable stop loss. She knows better than to simply
buy over and over as the price continues to plummet. Try not to catch
falling knives. Remember what they say about bottom pickers.
Wait for an indication that things have turned before you trade against a
powerful trend. In Chapter 12, I will go through a specific example of how I
used 
a 
divergence 
between 
sentiment 
and 
narrative 
to 
get 
set 
on 
a
countertrend trade.
Alpha Traders use multiple approaches to find high confidence trades.
They 
wait 
for 
multiple 
indicators 
to 
line 
up. They 
use 
fundamentals,
narrative analysis, positioning and sentiment, and other factors to get a
reading on the market. Then, they use technical analysis to fine tune timing,
entry and exit. They structure trades in a way that acknowledges that many
ideas will be wrong so that when they are inevitably wrong, the cost is
small. When they are right, the payoff is large.
Excellent traders are confident in their views but also know they are
frequently wrong.
Some hedge funds make all their trading decisions using macro analysis
but 
then 
simply 
filter 
every 
idea 
with 
one 
or 
two 
simple 
technical
indicators. Trade ideas remain in the OFF state until the technical indicator
puts them in the ON position.
For example, let’s say a fund has a pod comprised of three genius
analysts and two senior portfolio managers. They currently hold five core
views: Bullish USDJPY, AAPL and gold, and bearish bonds and AMZN.
The fund will then systematically apply a simple filter to the ideas, let’s
say a 55-day moving average. The pod will only put on the trades that are
on the correct side of the 55-day moving average. For example, they will
only go short AMZN if it’s below the 55-day.
This avoids extended periods of wrongness because if AMZN enters a
prolonged uptrend, the fund will stay flat the whole time as the stock trends
higher and remains above its 55-day MA. When price breaks below the 55-
day, the fund will put on their AMZN short. If AMZN closes back above the
55-day, they’re out.
This approach of trading macro with a technical filter is an excellent
model. It allows you to find your edge on the analysis side but then forces
you to admit you are wrong when price goes against you
122
.
I hope this chapter has given you a sense of how I use technical
analysis, sentiment and positioning in my trading process. There are no
correct answers when it comes to trading, so take what resonates with you
in this chapter and throw out what does not. You should develop a process
that fits your personality and suits your objectives. Never strictly follow
someone else’s advice.
Now it’s time to move on to the most important topic in trading: risk
management. You can do everything else right but if you fail at risk
management, you automatically fail at trading. No matter how good a chef
you are, you will never succeed in the restaurant business if you keep
blowing up your kitchen.
118. Biondo, Pluchino, Rapisarda and Helbing. “Are Random Trading Strategies More
Successful than Technical Ones?” (2013)
119. Reminder: As discussed in the chapter on microstructure… You should know what one
day’s range is in your product, on average and at the extremes. This is the most important
measure of volatility for short-term traders.
120. John J. Murphy: Technical Analysis of Financial Markets (1999) and Steve Nison:
Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (2001).
121. But still possible!
122. No approach is perfect. In choppy markets the trend signal will generate a ton of noise
and that can be costly. But overall, the multi-factor fundamental approach with a technical
filter is a strong, logical approach to trading.
I
CHAPTER 11
YOU FEELING LUCKY, PUNK?
Data collection, risk management and variance
Most of what I have learned from gambling is also true for investing.
People mostly don’t understand risk, reward and uncertainty. Their
investment results would be better if they did.
EDWARD O. THORP, A Man for All Markets
n this chapter, we will discuss risk management. If you are new to trading,
this chapter will help you build and implement a robust risk management
framework. If you are an experienced professional, I hope you will extract a
few 
nuggets 
of 
wisdom 
and 
alternative 
viewpoints 
and 
use 
these
observations to make incremental improvements to your current framework.
Risk management is the most important skill in trading. Everything else
is a distant second. You can have the best ideas, the greatest algorithms, the
best instinctive pattern recognition and the fastest execution systems but if
your risk management system is not adequate… You will fail. I could write
an entire book about risk management but a) that would be boring to write
so I’m not going to do that and b) the real essentials of risk management are
fairly simple and can be boiled down into one chapter.
The big challenges in risk management come from trading businesses
that employ complex strategies, huge portfolios, correlated assets, illiquid
markets, 
and 
non-linear 
derivative 
products. 
For 
short-term 
directional
traders in liquid markets, it’s pretty easy to establish an appropriate set of
risk management rules. The hard part is following them.
COLLECT AND ANALYZE P& L DATA
Before you develop a risk management system, you need to build a
solid data collection system. Collecting and analyzing P&L data is one of
the most important and powerful activities in trading. Much in the way a
trading 
journal 
provides 
qualitative 
feedback, 
P&L 
analysis 
provides
quantitative feedback. This does not need to be complicated. If you don’t
already have one, create a spreadsheet to track your daily P&L.
Columns should include: DATE, STOP LOSS, OPEN, HIGH, LOW,
CLOSE.
DATE is today’s date. STOP LOSS is your daily stop loss today (if you
have one). OPEN is how much you made overnight. That is, your P&L
when you start trading in the morning. This is useful to track because it’s a
different type of trading than what you do during the day. HIGH and LOW
give you a sense of your daily P&L volatility over time and also what the
extremes tend to be.
After collecting a year or so of data, you might notice that you tend to
top out at the same level all the time and then close lower. If you always
peak around the same HIGH and then close lower, consider setting a take
profit target for the day. Many traders will consistently have a tough time
breaking through a specific level of P&L in a given day. This tendency to
peak at a specific P&L level is not random. It reflects a combination of your
position size and the volatility of your market.
If you trade $100 million positions in a product that tends to move no
more than 1% per day, you are going to notice your P&L tops out around $1
million quite often. To break to a higher plateau, you first need to know the
level of your current plateau and then you need to calculate how you can
move to a higher level.
The next step to building a quality P&L tracking spreadsheet is to set up
individual P&L columns for each major product and sub-product you trade.
FX, BONDS, STOCKS if you’re macro, for example, or individual stocks if
you are an equity day trader that trades particular names.
This is highly individual and depends on what you think is worth
tracking. A note of caution here: keep it high level. If you trade 50 stocks,
there is not much point maintaining a column for each stock. There is a
point at which your spreadsheet has so much data that it yields mostly noise
and little actionable information. Note that if you are a day trader, you can’t
be an expert in 50 different stocks and you shouldn’t be trading that many
anyway.
Another idea is to set up columns for each strategy you run. If you have
one strategy to trade the market open, another strategy that trades during the
day and a third strategy that trades on news, you can create one column for
each strategy to track how they are doing over time. The idea here is to have
data that will help you answer: “What is working and what isn’t?” and then
you can do more of what is working and less of what is not.
This spreadsheet should not be more than 12 to 15 columns wide,
including MTD and YTD columns on the far right. If you have more than
15 columns, aggregate or combine some of them until you can see the
whole thing on one screen. There is a point where too much information is
bad. Be thoughtful about what data might be useful and collect that data.
You can always add new columns later. Keep it fairly basic for now.
Once you have about six months of data, calculate the following:
WIN% (number of winning days / total number of trading days)
Average winning day ($ or bps)
Average losing day ($ or bps)
WIN/LOSE $ or bps ratio. This is simply your average winning day
($) divided by your average losing day ($). This is the most important
statistic for most short-term traders. Your P&L is simply:
(# winning days * average winning day)
– (# losing days * average losing day)
There are just two numbers you need to control. Your WIN% and the
ratio of the size of your winning days to the size of your losing days.
That’s it!
There is no right answer for how these two stats should combine, but
WIN% is much more difficult to influence than the relationship
between your winning and losing days. Your WIN% is usually
determined more by your trading style and the seat you are in
whereas the ratio of your winning day P&L to your losing day P&L
is influenced by your discipline, patience, and ability to cut losses
and ride winners. That ratio tends to be the best reflection of trading
skill, in my opinion.
I have been keeping these trading stats since 2006 and it is surprising
how consistently my WIN% hovers around 50%. All my success (or
failure) is determined by the size of my winning days vs. the size of
my losing days. And more precisely, if I can keep the losers under
control, the winners tend to take care of themselves. I have no
trouble making money, but I often have trouble keeping it. This is
the profile of the active, risk-seeking trader.
On the other hand, a skilled but more risk averse trader might have a
higher WIN%, say 60%. The idea here is to collect enough data and
then start to think about changes you can make to either increase
your WIN% or increase the size of your up days relative to the size
of your down days. Like I said earlier, for most traders the up vs.
down day ratio is easier to influence than the WIN%.
What stocks (or currencies or commodities…) you made money in.
Also which ones cost you money. Important note here: don’t
overestimate the importance of this information. Good products and
good markets come and go. I have heard people say stuff like: “I keep
losing money in EURUSD, it’s just stuck in this stupid range! I really
need to take it off my screen.”
In that scenario, the problem is not EURUSD, the problem is that it is
in a range and it sounds like the trader isn’t very good at trading
ranges. If she takes EURUSD off her screen and then it trends higher
for 10 straight days, she’s probably going to miss a huge opportunity.
Collect data on specific assets and asset classes, not so you can put
them in the penalty box, but so that you can isolate what is working
and what isn’t. And why.
How many times did you breach your stop loss? What were the
causes, on each of those days? Any time your LOW or your CLOSE is
lower than your stop loss, that is a red flag. Something is wrong with
your process. Your positions are too big; you are too slow to stop out;
you are out of control in some way. If you are a manager, take stop
losses seriously. Don’t increase a trader’s stop when it hits; shut her
down.
Performance by day of the week and on event days. Are you
making all your money on Fed days and month end and losing money
every Monday? Look for patterns that make sense but be careful not to
be fooled by randomness here. If you can explain why a pattern exists,
it is much less likely that it’s an artifact of randomness.
What time of day do you make and lose money, on average? This is
a bit more work and involves a separate spreadsheet where you take a
snapshot of your P&L every 30 minutes. After a few months you will
have an interesting P&L curve that will show you how your
profitability evolves throughout the day.
Are you making all your money on the open then leaking half of it
back out over the course of the day? Do you lose money consistently
from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. every day? Many day traders make all their
money in the morning and then spend the rest of the day trying not to
give it back. This is dumb. If you make all your money in the morning,
shut down at noon and find other ways to be productive. Do research,
read, work out, etc. Even if you work at a bank, nobody is going to
force you to trade in the afternoon.
Try to get a strong sense of how time of day influences your
performance. Personally, I make most of my money overnight and
from 7 a.m. to 11 a.m. and the period from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. NY is a
P&L graveyard. Identify the juicy times to trade and act with focused
aggression during these times. For the lackluster parts of your trading
day, find replacement activities to keep you occupied so that you do
not press buttons out of boredom.
You should also look at monthly and yearly data as time goes on.
Ideally, your P&L should skew to the right on every time frame. In other
words, your biggest days should be up days, not down days. Your biggest
months should be positive, not negative. You should rarely lose money in a
year and never two years in a row. The more edge you have, the more this
paragraph will be true of your trading statistics.
DEVELOP A RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
You 
have 
your 
data 
collection 
system. 
Now 
you 
need 
a 
risk
management system.
This section is about risk management for short-term traders who trade
liquid products and take mostly directional risk. If you sell low-delta
options or run a 78-line portfolio or buy and sell frontier market bonds, this
section does not apply to you.
I think the most useful way to explain my risk management thought
process is to start with longer time horizons then gradually zoom in to
smaller and smaller increments. I will start with one trading year, then
discuss monthly risk management, then move all the way down to daily risk
management and individual trades.
There is no single correct answer when it comes to managing risk.
Your risk management system has to match your personality, your time
horizon, your trading style, your capital, your access to leverage and the
liquidity profile of the products you trade. I am going to outline how I think
about risk management and give you some of the details of my risk
management system. Take what makes sense to you. Discard what does not.
YEARLY RISK MANAGEMENT
In most trading jobs, one year is the most important unit of trading
performance. Almost all bank and real money traders are paid based on
annual performance and most hedge funds also use the calendar year as
their main unit of time for evaluation and compensation. Sure, some hedge
funds pay out more than once per year, and retail traders don’t think as
much about yearly increments, but all traders should think about, monitor,
analyze and target yearly performance.
In order to survive in the long run, you want your yearly performance to
look like that of a call option. This means flat or perhaps small losses in the
bad years and medium-sized to huge gains in the good years. Twenty years
of performance for a skilled, adaptable trader using the risk management
style I will describe in the pages to follow, might look something like
Figure 11.1.
To achieve this sort of distribution of P&L, you need to do three things.
1. Start slow and increase risk as YTD P&L builds
You cannot have the same risk appetite on January 1 with zero P&L in
the coffers as you can have on August 15 when you are up 15 million
dollars. This means there must be an arbitrary change in your risk appetite
each January, but that’s just the way things go. In an ideal world, you
should always be varying your risk appetite based on conviction and market
opportunity, but we live in the real world. As such, you need to start slow
and build risk over time.
There is something special and scary about the zero bound in P&L.
Let’s say a hypothetical trader named Steven Kirk wants to make $10
million this year and his stop loss is $4 million. He will find that going from
+$2 million to +$1 million feels significantly less bad than going from
+$500k to -$500k, even though both are P&L declines of $1 million. Any
red number next to your name feels bad. This is consistent with theory
which tells us that if a gain gives us x pleasure, a loss of the same
magnitude gives us 2x pain.
This is not all just psychological, though. As Steve’s P&L falls below
zero, his ability to take risk (his leverage) decreases. There is a non-linear
real-world impact of losses as he moves below zero and closer to his stop
loss. When you are below zero P&L, you wear a straitjacket.
Let’s say it’s February 15. How is Steve’s psychology at YTD P&L of
$750,000? He is not ecstatic, because he’s a bit behind plan, but not too
bad. How about at YTD P&L of zero? Still OK, probably. At minus $1
million? He’s getting a bit nervous now. At minus $2 million, Steve is
halfway to his stop loss after only six weeks. At that point, he is going to
need to reduce his risk in order to avoid hitting the disaster zone which is
around $3 million. Remember: even if your stop loss is $4 million, you are
in big trouble trading-wise much before then, because you will need to
reduce your position size in order to avoid getting the shoulder tap.
You need to start the year slow and build up.
The year has a great deal of path dependence which means that how you
start has a big influence on where you end up. If Steve loses $2 million in
January, the odds that he will hit his $10 million goal are almost zero. If he
makes $400k in January and $600k in February, he’s behind budget but still
in an OK position.
The idea is to get safely away from the zero bound and then when a
mega-opportunity arrives and you have a cushion… Go for it. If Steve is
+$1.5 million on February 25 and there is a fantastic opportunity, he is in a
position to risk a bigger chunk of cash, say $500k, on the idea without
worrying about putting himself underwater.
Remember that Rule #1 of trading is: don’t blow up. Always give
yourself a chance to play tomorrow. It is tricky to give precise mathematical
formulas 
for 
risk 
management 
because 
this 
implies 
there 
is 
a 
correct
answer. There is no precise answer in risk management. Every trader, every
bank and every hedge fund must manage risk differently. What I can tell
you is how I think about risk in different scenarios. You can either mirror
parts of this framework if it makes sense to you, or you can transform it to
fit your needs.
Before I can establish my basic yearly framework, I need to know my
free capital. Free capital is the amount of money you can afford to lose. For
retail traders, that’s the portion of your account you feel you can lose in a
year and still come back. For bank, real money and hedge fund traders, it’s
your annual stop loss.
My strategy is to start slow and build up capital, then get as aggressive
as possible (if there are juicy market opportunities) by June or July at the
latest. Hopefully earlier. Budgets vary over the years, but I will again use
the $10 million goal and $4 million stop loss because that is a realistic ratio
and the absolute numbers don’t matter as much as the relative figures.
Using the same 2.5 : 1 ratio, a retail trader might be risking a maximum
loss of $40,000 for the year with the goal of making $100,000. A hedge
fund trader might have a stop loss of $40 million and a target of $100
million. This 2.5 : 1 ratio is not a rule, it’s just a realistic ratio that’s in the
ballpark. Some bank traders might have a tighter stop loss of $2 million and
be looking to make $20 million if they have a great market making seat. A
retail trader might be risking $20,000 but hope to make $200,000.
Again, the numbers I am presenting in this chapter are not meant to be
immutable laws of finance. They are realistic parameters that work in my
world but may need to be adjusted in yours.
A trader with a maximum loss of $4 million and a target of $10 million
can allow more risk taking when he is doing well and should take less risk
when he is struggling. Based on year-to-date (YTD) P&L, a good system is
to allocate a new monthly stop loss on the first day of the month and
determine that stop loss using the YTD P&L. The better you are doing, the
more leverage you use in the next month if good opportunities arise. For
example, this is a reasonable scale for the $4 million stop loss trader who
wants to make $10 million.
The objective is never to get to your YTD goal and then put your feet
up. The objective is to get stronger and stronger over the course of the year
so that you can take maximum risk when rare opportunities appear. Under
this sort of framework, you might find yourself up $6 million in June and
able to spend $1 million on a strong trade idea that makes you $4 million.
Then, you’re up $10 million in July and you can sit on your hands until the
next huge opportunity comes. If your goal for the year was $10 million and
you are there in July, you have put yourself in a position to make $20
million or maybe more. Those chances don’t come along every year. Keep
trading.
Often the P&L chart of an alpha macro trader in a good year will look
like a series of steps with interval periods where the P&L flatlines. This is
the P&L trajectory of a trader that waits for the big opportunities and then
puts on meaningful risk at the right times. This is not the trajectory for
every alpha trader.
A good retail scalper or news trader, for example, will have a P&L chart
that looks more like a 45-degree angle. But even a trader that is consistent
should be taking more risk and making more money when they are strongly
positive for the year and taking less risk when they are close to zero or
negative YTD.
2. Understand the metagame
Trading successfully and moving the risk lever up and down throughout
the year requires a good understanding of the specific metagame you are
playing. You need to understand the internal rules, incentives, politics, and
risk management framework where you work and incorporate these into
your risk management decisions as well.
For example, does your boss freak out when you lose more than $X? If
so, you know that is the internal no-go line, even if there has never been a
rule set. Does your contract say you will be fired if you lose more than 9%
while history shows that traders at your firm tend to get derisked or fired
when they lose 5%? Forget the number in the contract, the metagame rules
say your stop loss should be 5%.
If you work at a bank, does your compensation flatline once your P&L
hits a certain threshold? If yes, then keep in mind that if you hit that
threshold, losses will cost you more in compensation than gains will help
you. Adjust your risk accordingly.
There are so many different metagames, depending on where you work.
Take a few minutes to think about the metagame in your seat. Even if you
are a retail trader, there is probably a metagame. For example, if you don’t
earn a certain amount of money in your first two years, will your spouse get
antsy and ask you to get a “real” job? If so, then you need to set your target
above that level!
You need your family on board or you will find life difficult. Trading is
incredibly hard. It will inevitably test your belief in yourself. If those
around you (management, family, the person who provided your trading
capital…) don’t believe in you, it will be impossible.
3. Don’t blow up
This one is so simple and yet traders blow up all the time. Trade liquid
products. If you are a retail equity trader, don’t short the biotech stock that
just tripled from $1.50 to $4.50. If you are a currency trader, don’t take
positions in pegged currencies. Manage your overnight and weekend risk
tightly. The smaller your account size or free capital, the more careful you
need to be. If you sell options, think about ridiculous worst-case scenarios
and avoid them.
The universe of trades is so large in every asset class that there is no
excuse for putting on trades that have unlimited downside. You should be
confident about your ability to stop out of any trade or you should keep it
small enough it’s not going to kill you if it goes pear-shaped. If a trade you
have on has a low probability of a huge tail risk, cover it and find
something better to trade.
Understand path dependence
Path dependence is an important concept for every professional trader to
understand. It comes into play in different ways. Path dependence means
future steps of a process depend on its history. A series of coin flips is not
path dependent. If you flip 10 tails, the coin has no memory and the 11
th
flip
is fair and 50/50.
On the other hand, each month in a trading year is path dependent. Your
performance in January will determine your free capital and your state of
mind for February. The most important thing to remember is to never take
actions in one period that could be overly detrimental to future periods.
For example: you work at a bank where P&L resets every January 1.
There is a perfect, 5-star set up in S&P futures and you have never been so
confident that they are about to (finally!) crash. Your approach to this trade,
the sizing you choose and the amount of capital you will risk should be
different in January than in August.
While this is irrational from a theoretical point of view, in real life there
is too much path dependence in January for you to go all-in; you must act
conservatively knowing that your performance in January will influence
your performance in the following 11 months. On the other hand, if your
annual target was $5 million, you are now up $7 million and it’s September,
you know that even if you lose $2 million on this trade idea, it won’t have
much negative impact on your trading for the final three months of the year.
I know this might not seem rational to you, but believe me, it is. Playing the
multi-period metagame correctly is just as important as maximizing P&L
for a given period.
Another way path dependence matters is when you start a new job in
trading. A trader that has made money 8 straight years doesn’t attract much
attention if she loses money in Year 9. On the other hand, a new hire that
loses money in his first four months of trading might make a manager
question why they hired him.
Financial firms are generally not very good at separating luck from skill
or 
at 
comparing 
market 
regimes 
to 
trader 
performance. 
The 
absolute
number next to your name matters much more than any context surrounding
it. Therefore, when you start a new trading job, it is crucial that you
understand how much runway you have.
As ridiculous as it sounds, your ultimate success or failure at a hedge
fund is usually determined within the first 18 months. Your entire career (or
lack of career) at the fund will be rooted in that initial performance. The
trader that comes out hot and shoots the lights out will be given plenty of
slack going forward and can probably draw down in future without too
much hassle.
The equally-skilled trader that comes in and loses money for the first
five months will be under heightened scrutiny, even if those five months
were the lowest volatility period in the history of his asset class and he is
known to be a trader that performs well in high-vol markets.
The way to protect against this path dependence when switching firms
is to ensure you have at least one (and hopefully two or three) strong
supporters within the organization. And make sure that the strong supporter
who brought you in is planning to stay! Once your sponsor leaves, your life
or death in that firm becomes even more path dependent. Try to avoid
relying on luck by ensuring that you have sufficient runway when you go to
a new firm.
Jerry, the greatest trader who never was
Jerry was one of the best pure traders I have ever seen. But he drove so
fast we all knew that eventually he would slam into the wall…
Jerry was a 21-year-old college dropout who worked in the same day
trading office as I did in the late 1990s. He had no financial markets
background. He was a pure gambler who found his way onto the trading
floor because of a few lucky coincidences. He loved to go out clubbing
until 3 a.m. and then come in and trade the pre-open at 8 a.m. He was
hilarious and immature and knew very little about markets.
Despite all this, he had incredible instincts. He had a professional
gambler’s eye for risk/reward and opportunity. He was like a modern-day
Jesse Livermore who could read the tape and sentiment and price action and
make money in ways that were incredibly skillful and fun to watch. Jerry
could feel what was going to happen before it happened. He was so
obviously good at trading that the 40-year-old trader that was randomly
seated next to him decided to close his own account and back Jerry instead.
But Jerry couldn’t stay away from the thinly-traded names. He would
yell out “Look at -insert ticker symbol of a thinly-traded stock nobody has
ever heard of here-. It’s exploding!” We would bring up the chart and see
some random microcap trading at $5.25, up 361% on the day. Instead of
trading one cent wide in 500 or more shares like most stocks, these stocks
jumped around in $1 increments, trading 30 cents wide in 100 shares. Jerry
would sell 3,000 shares, taking it down from $5.25 to $4.25 and this would
often trigger a waterfall move that let him quickly take profit at, say, $3.10.
There was yelling involved and it was incredibly fun to watch. He
would then go back to trading normal stocks and making money and
someone would say to him: “Jerry, you can’t trade those microcaps. One
day, one of them will just keep going up and you will get carted out of
here.”
He would listen closely and nod his head and say: “Yeah dude. You’re
right. I’ll stop doing that. For sure.”
Then three days later Jerry’s yelling across the floor: “Oh boy! I’m short
a lot of this one! This is not good!”
A stock went from $2 to $4, and he got short 14,000 shares. A few
minutes later it was $6, then $8. His $50,000 account was suddenly worth
minus $6,000. The manager of the trading floor issued a margin call and
forced Jerry to buy back all the shares at an average of $8.20. The stock
closed the day at $3.45.
Jerry was such an obviously talented kid that even after that incident, a
different trader seeded him another $50,000. Four months later, guess
what… The same thing happened. Jerry had amazing natural skill as a
trader but it didn’t matter. He blew up.
This is an extreme case, but a true story of how risk of ruin is the first
and most important risk to manage. Never enter a trade unless you know
you can get out. One of my previous bosses once said:
Trading is like driving a race car. You want to drive as fast as possible,
but you can never lose control or crash into the wall.
Don’t be like Jerry. Don’t crash into the wall.
Astute readers might notice that Jerry’s story sounds a bit like the story
of the hedge funds that were mega-short low-priced, illiquid stocks in
January 2021. Those funds, like Jerry, broke the first rule of trading: Don’t
blow up. The GameStop episode was a friendly reminder that no amount of
upside justifies putting on positions that you cannot properly risk manage. It
was also a friendly reminder that short positions in cheap stocks have
limited profit potential and unlimited risk. Stay away from trades with that
payoff profile.
MONTHLY RISK MANAGEMENT
At 
the 
start 
of 
each 
month, 
you 
should 
take 
stock 
of 
your YTD
performance and decide on a reasonable goal and stop loss for the month
ahead. As the year progresses, you have more ammunition to take more risk
so if you have been doing well, increase your monthly allocation. If you are
struggling, keep it flat or cut it.
Keep in mind that increasing your risk allocation does not mean you
have to start taking bigger positions on the first day of the month. What it
means is that when a juicy opportunity arrives in the new month, you
allocate more to it than you would have in the prior month.
Just before the start of a new month you should determine:
Monthly stop loss
Monthly profit goal
$ at risk for Type I, Type II and Type III trades (I will define these
trade types soon)
One personal goal (fitness, sleep, eating, etc.)
As we move down the fractals from yearly to monthly to daily to single
trades, there is an important concept you should always have in your mind:
variance. Let’s talk about variance for a few pages because it is a crucial
concept in trading. First, here’s a quote that sums it up nicely:
The laws of probability, so true in general,
so fallacious in particular.
EDWARD GIBBON, 1774
In statistics and probability, variance is the concept that in a series of
numbers with a given average, individual data points will be spread out
away from the average. So even if your average daily P&L over the last 10
years 
is 
+$23,000, 
you 
might 
still 
lose 
$25,000 
five 
days 
in 
a 
row
sometimes. This may not mean you did anything wrong. It’s just variance.
Variance is a prominent feature in poker. A well-rested professional
poker player will inevitably beat a drunk amateur over a long period, say 12
hours. But over any 10-minute or even 30-minute period, the drunk amateur
might prevail. The key to understanding variance is that it is most visible in
short samples. The larger the sample, the closer the aggregate data will
approach the true average.
Luck is a short-term thing. In the long run, skill prevails.
Then again, as Keynes famously said… “In the long run, we are all
dead.” 
A 
very 
solid 
trading 
strategy 
with 
significant 
edge 
generates
substantial variance, even year to year. This is why it is incredibly difficult
to evaluate traders, portfolio managers and hedge funds. Was it luck or was
it skill? Michael Mauboussin’s book: The Luck Equation: Untangling Skill
and Luck in Business is the go-to book on this topic.
To give you a sense of how variance impacts a year of performance in
trading, let’s run a few simulations. For simplicity, we’ll use a static risk
management approach where the trader does not change their risk appetite
during the year, regardless of performance. That said, I strongly advocate
increasing your risk as your P&L rises.
I include these simulations because I think very few people, even expert
traders, truly appreciate just how dramatic the impact of variance can be on
performance. It is probably a defense mechanism. If we truly appreciated
how important variance was, we would feel like we barely control our own
fate. And humans love to believe they are in control.
The first simulation (Figure 11.2) approximates the performance of a
retail trader. She makes money 50% of days and loses money 50% of days.
Her average winning day (net P&L) is +$2,000 and her average losing day
is minus $1,200. Based on these figures, she will expect to make $100,800
in an average year. Here is her cumulative YTD P&L simulated 100 times.
The same trader using the same strategy in a world with the same
probabilities might make $50,000 one year and $150,000 the next, with
variance—and literally nothing else—to blame.
The second simulation (Figure 11.3) represents a bank trader. He makes
money 55% of days and loses money 45% of days. His average winning
day (net P&L) is +$150,000 and his average losing day is minus $120,000.
Based on these figures, his expected value is +$7.2 million. But you see in
Figure 11.3 how he fares in 100 simulations.
You can see that despite employing a process with substantial edge and
positive EV, a trader’s annual performance is all over the place simply due
to 
variance. 
This 
is 
a 
big 
reason 
why 
it 
is 
so 
flipping 
difficult 
for
management 
to 
properly 
assess 
traders 
and 
for 
traders 
to 
evaluate
themselves. It’s easy to be fooled by randomness!
One of the most difficult and most important skills in trading is the
ability to distinguish between variance and bad decision making. If you are
losing money right now, is it because your process has broken down, your
discipline sucks and the market has completely changed? Or is it because of
the inevitable variance within the P&L distribution?
When you are on a bad streak, you need to ask yourself this. The longer
you have been trading, the easier this is to answer (usually). For me, I can
usually look back on a losing streak and determine with a fair amount of
confidence whether it was variance. When you are starting out, it’s almost
impossible to tell.
Here are some examples of how I look at a losing streak and determine
whether it’s a product of variance or bad process.
Variance
1. I was wrong a lot. Being wrong is part of trading. It’s OK to be
wrong!
2. I got unlucky. I was long and some bad news came out yesterday.
Today, I got stopped out at the highs.
When I am wrong and I lose money, I barely care. That’s trading. As
long as I have been sticking to my risk management system, I shrug and
move on. Being wrong is where variance comes from in trading. Don’t
worry about it. On the other hand, some things can’t be attributed to
variance.
Not Variance
1. I have been right, and I am reading the market pretty well, but I am
losing money. This is a strong indicator that there is something
wrong with my process or risk management. For much of 2020, I
was in synch with the market and my percentage of accurate calls
was very high. But my performance was disappointing because of
multiple breakdowns in discipline and process. I was wrong-sizing
my trades and bleeding on random, low conviction ideas. If you are
reading the market well and losing money, that’s a red flag:
something is wrong with your process and it’s not just variance.
2. I traded with no plan. I walked in each day and started hitting buttons
without a good sense of what I was trying to do. I cut out of good
ideas early because I was bored.
3. I am overtrading. I should be tight/aggressive but instead I’m making
a series of small bets on random, dumb ideas and leaking money
every day.
4. I left a stale order in the system overnight and it triggered a loss. Poor
attention to detail is not bad luck.
5. My discipline is poor. I broke my risk management rules. My
positions were way too big. I kept moving my stop lower instead of
cutting. I doubled a losing position.
6. The market regime has changed and I have not adapted.
7. My boss is giving me a hard time and making me nervous.
8. If I keep losing money, I am going to lose my job.
9. I am tired. I am arguing with my spouse or children. I think I might
get a divorce. I am drinking too much. I feel depressed. I don’t want
to do this anymore.
If losses stem from any of 1 to 9 above; that’s not variance. That is bad
trading, bad process or bad mindset. Cut all your risk and figure out how to
get things back on track. When you trust yourself to do the right thing, you
are trading well. It should not matter all that much whether you make or
lose money on any given day.
When you are trading with a good mindset, you see each trade and each
day as a series of independent events with a probabilistic nature and you
understand that some trades and some days you will lose money. Each day,
you come in and do your best without getting too high or too low. You
invest most of your energy in the process and very little in the outcome.
Each trade, you go through a thoughtful process and execute in a rational
and systematic way.
If you trade sloppy, don’t say “I suck” or “I traded SO bad today”.
Instead ask: “Why was I so sloppy today? Am I burnt out? Discouraged?
Disengaged?” Robotic application of a process keeps you sane and lets you
know you can trust yourself. If you break your stop loss repeatedly, you
should quickly figure out why. Bad discipline? No automation of stop loss?
Don’t care anymore?
If you go through the above lists (variance vs. not variance) and are still
not sure whether a recent losing streak is caused by variance or bad trading,
take a step back. The more experience you have, the easier it is to make this
determination but if you are new, it can be very difficult, especially if you
tend to be critical of yourself.
Traders with a healthy mindset who are confident in their process have a
much easier time dealing with losing streaks because they can confidently
identify the cause as variance and move on. Traders with a less healthy
mindset or less confidence will tend to assume that a losing streak is the
result of bad decisions and a lack of trading skill.
Alpha traders with a solid process and excellent risk management still
hit losing streaks. In the long run, a solid process will win but in the short
run, there are always going to be ups and downs due to variance. If you
make money 50% of days, you can expect to lose money 6 or 7 days in a
row once in a while. That is fine! When you lose money six days in a row
and determine that it is simply because of variance, you need to double
down on your process and believe in what you are doing more than ever.
Variance can be managed, but never controlled.
Get comfortable with variance.
If you understand your edge and can confidently explain it, you will be
much more comfortable with variance. Furthermore, if you continually
spend time thinking about the current regime and how to adapt to present
market conditions, you will reduce your variance and maintain steadier
performance over time. No matter how good you are, though, you still need
to understand that variance is a thing.
DAILY RISK MANAGEMENT
Daily 
stop 
losses 
can 
be 
good 
for 
some 
styles 
of 
trading 
and
counterproductive for others. Daily stops work best for very short-term day
traders. If your time horizon is generally two minutes to two hours and you
square up your risk at the end of each day, a daily stop loss is probably right
for you. If you trade a 1-week time horizon and often buy short-dated
options, a daily stop loss makes no sense.
For retail traders, one of the simplest risk management systems is to
simply multiply your free capital by 1% every morning and risk that much
and no more. Then start fresh and do the same thing tomorrow. This
increases your risk as you make money, decreases it as you lose money and
keeps you in the game. If you are new to trading and plan to trade short-
term views only, I highly recommend this approach. It is conservative but
not ridiculously conservative. It will keep you safe but give you plenty of
opportunity to succeed.
Daily stop losses are best for retail traders, day traders and junior
institutional traders but less useful for most institutional or macro traders.
Daily stop losses create a timing mismatch for traders whose time horizon
spans beyond one day. They make it difficult to ride impulsive multi-day
moves.
Say you are a bank trader with a $250,000 daily stop loss, a $1 million
monthly stop loss and a $10 million budget. Some huge news comes out
and it looks like a game changer for euro. You buy 50 million euros at
1.1800 with a 50 pip stop loss, risking $250,000. EURUSD rips 50 pips
higher in 15 minutes and ends the day 100 pips higher at 1.1900. You are up
$500,000 on the day and think the move will continue.
You believe the logical stop loss is your original entry minus 10 pips
(1.1790) because you are a big fan of NewsPivots and feel if EURUSD
goes back below the NewsPivot (1.1800) the news has been rejected.
If you go home long EURUSD with a stop at 1.1790, your total risk on
the trade is just $50,000. But if you get stopped out your daily P&L
tomorrow will be the $500,000 you made today plus the $50,000 loss =
$550,000. That is way more than your daily stop of $250,000 so you either
need to cut your risk by more than half or you need to move your stop
closer. This is the tricky part of marking to market each day.
Very often in a case like this, you will see the trader simply put their
stop 50 points (or less) away in order to stay below their daily limit. Instead
of trading the market, they are trading their P&L. Inevitably, there is a 60-
point dip overnight and the trader gets stopped out before EURUSD goes
on a 400-point topside rampage.
On the other hand, if the trader’s limits match their time horizon, there
will be no such problem. If this trader is running with a $1 million monthly
stop, they can trade the market the way they believe it is meant to be traded
knowing that if it all goes horribly wrong, all they lost was $50,000. They
can get back on their horse and keep riding the next day.
The key with any risk management system is that it needs to match your
free capital, your trading style and your time horizon. Daily stops don’t
work with week-long ideas. Monthly stops don’t make much sense for day
traders, other than as a backup or overlay to a daily stop loss system.
INDIVIDUAL TRADE RISK MANAGEMENT
Managing the risk of an individual trade starts with understanding what
kind of trade it is. Is this a standard day trade, i.e., the type of trade you do
almost every day? Or is this a super rare opportunity that comes around a
few times per year? Clearly those two scenarios require a different position
size and risk management approach. Before I go through exactly how I
choose position sizes, let’s talk about conviction first.
Thoughts on conviction
Conviction level is one of the critical inputs into sizing your position.
Good traders vary their bet size based on conviction. That said, if your
conviction on a trade idea is not somewhere between “high” and “very
high” … You probably should not do the trade.
Once you find a trade you like, and determine that your conviction is
high, can you really extract a deeper level of granularity and determine
what trades are “somewhat high”, “high” or “very high” conviction? My
experience suggests that most of the time, you can’t.
You are unlikely to be able to judge, ex-ante, which routine day trades
or short-term swing trades have a higher probability of success. On the
other hand, there are some outlier trades that are clearly different from the
norm and will come with a higher level of conviction.
Most good traders use some sort of tiered risk management system and
the most common system involves three levels. A, B and C trades or 3-star,
4-star and 5-star trades are common ways of labelling conviction. These
systems are simple, and they work, but there is a fundamental error in most
of these systems: the increase in risk as you move up the scale is way too
linear. I believe risk should increase exponentially on super high conviction
trades.
The reason is that almost all trades have similar conviction. When you
do a day trade or trade some lead/lag relationship, or execute against a
pattern you see at the equity open… Those are the bread and butter trades
you do all day, every day.
My view is that attaching a finer, granular determination of conviction
or confidence level on those trades is kind of pointless. There is, however,
an important exception. Once every three to six months, an unbelievably
attractive trade comes along and you should allocate much more capital
than usual to those trades.
I’m talking about those rare opportunities where the timing, risk/reward
and probability of success all come together in a highly unusual and
attractive way. The clearest examples of this can happen at a watershed
moment for your asset market. For example: long hedged Nikkei futures in
2012 for Abenomics. The day they add your favorite stock to the S&P 500.
Short the bitcoin bubble on the day futures started trading in 2017. Short
Hertz and Chesapeake stock when the market bid them up even though they
were bankrupt. These moments that are nearly once-in-a-lifetime require a
different approach.
There can also be these super-high-probability trades that are less epic
in terms of news flow but where all the planets align.
For me, there are three levels of conviction
123
:
TYPE I
Run of the mill trade you would do on any given day. Your conviction is
high or you do not do the trade. This is not a rare opportunity, it is part of
your regular process. Allocate 1% to 3% of your free capital, depending on
your edge, experience level and historical performance. If you are new,
keep 
to 
the 
1% 
area, 
newish, 
stick 
to 
2% 
or 
below 
and 
if 
you 
are
comfortable with your process and know your success rate and statistics
well enough, venture up to 3% max.
TYPE II
High conviction: This is a trade where something unique is going on,
but not a watershed moment or extremely rare event. Maybe the Fed has
turned hawkish after a period of dovishness. Or a stock you are expert in
has a meaningful change of narrative. A 3-year trend in oil looks ready to
reverse as Saudi Arabia has said “no mas” to production cuts.
Type II trades almost always involve a big narrative shift or some sort
of 
significant 
dislocation. 
These 
are 
not 
routine 
trades. 
Allocate 
a
meaningful chunk of capital to the idea based on your predetermined
parameters. 3% to 5% of free capital generally makes sense but if you are
having an excellent year, you may want to add 10% of your YTD profits on
top.
The way you get outsized upside with limited downside is you reinvest
profits when excellent opportunities arise. A TYPE II opportunity at the
start of the year is a bummer because you cannot invest beyond 3% (or
maybe 5% max) of free capital. On the other hand, if you are having a great
year and it’s only June… You can overbet the TYPE II opportunity knowing
if you’re wrong, it’s completely fine.
Let’s say a high net worth individual has given you $100 million of
capital to trade with instructions to shoot for 15% returns and a $5 million
stop loss (i.e., stop trading if you drop to $95 million). On January 1, your
free capital is $5 million and your target is $15 million. Your compensation
is simple. You get paid 20% of your P&L in cash, once per year. Now it’s
June, your P&L is +$11 million and a TYPE II opportunity presents itself.
Remember free capital is your stop loss ($5 million) + your YTD P&L
($11 million) so free capital in this situation is $16 million.
Scenario
The USD has ripped higher over the past six months as the Fed hikes
rates. Money is piling into the USA because of the attractive yield and you
think the USD is overvalued. The long USD position is crowded; all your
metrics (and anecdotal evidence) suggest the market is max long USD. You
want to sell the USD, but you are waiting for some sort of fundamental or at
least technical catalyst. Hopefully both.
Today could be the day. The USD rips higher all morning, rallying to a
new YTD high in the hours before the Fed meets. Everyone has added to
their dollar longs as consensus calls for a hawkish meeting. The Fed is
likely to ratify market expectations of at least two more rate hikes this year.
You are ready for anything that sounds a bit dovish because that might be a
catalyst for your reversal trade (short USD).
2:29:45 p.m. Fifteen seconds to the Fed announcement. Your palms are
sweaty. Knees weak. Hands are heavy. You feel nervous but on the surface,
you look calm and you’re ready to sell dollars if the Fed moves to a more
dovish setting.
2:30:00 p.m. BOOM! The red headline hits Bloomberg:
*FEDERAL 
RESERVE 
SAYS 
CURRENT 
LEVEL 
OF 
RATES 
IS
APPROPRIATE 
AND 
FURTHER 
TIGHTENING 
UNLIKELY 
TO 
BE
WARRANTED.
Whoa. This is a major change in the narrative and you want to get short
USD. The USD gaps hard lower, you get short some USD and by the end of
the day the chart shows a massive key reversal day off the new yearly high
and the fundamental story has completely changed. You plan to hold this
position for a multi-day drop of around 4% in the dollar.
Now, you need to determine how much capital to risk on the idea. It’s
not a once-in-a-lifetime trade but it’s also clearly not a TYPE I. How do you
decide how much to risk?
As a baseline, start with a simple high-end TYPE I or low-end TYPE II
risk calculation. That would be around 3% of free capital. Free capital is the
original $5m you are allowed to lose + the $11m year-to-date P&L which =
$16m.
$16 million X 3% = $480,000
OK so that is the bare minimum, but that’s high-end TYPE I risk sizing,
not TYPE II.
You get outsized returns (right tail) by making big bets when you are in
a strong capital position.
You are more than 2/3 of the way to your yearly goal and it’s only June.
TYPE II opportunities are rare. In this situation, a simple formula for TYPE
II is:
TYPE II RISK = 3% of free capital plus 10% of YTD P&L
In this case that would be $480,000 + $1,100,000 = $1,580,000
I like this formula. It’s simple, and effective. But you don’t have to stick
to it religiously. Think about how you will feel if you drawdown that much.
Is it going to kill you psychologically? $11m minus $1.58m will take you to
around $9.5m YTD. That’s still not too shabby and in my opinion, that
would be perfectly manageable.
This is a good starting point and you can always scale up or down from
there depending on other factors such as how strongly you feel about the
trade and how sensitive your manager is to large drawdowns. This also
depends somewhat on how loose or tight you are with defining trades as
TYPE I and TYPE II. If you’re finding yourself thinking two trades per
month are TYPE II trades, you need to be more conservative. If you only
find 4 or 5 TYPE II trades per year, 3% of free capital + 10% of YTD is
probably about right.
Remember: Understand the Metagame
If you plan to take abnormally large risk on a trade, it never hurts to
overcommunicate with your manager. If management is used to seeing your
daily P&L fluctuate +/- $300k and then you drop $1.5 million in two
days… That will generate some discomfort. The best strategy is to fire off a
quick email saying you have a high conviction trade idea and plan to risk
more 
capital 
than 
usual 
on 
it 
given 
your 
strong 
YTD 
and 
elevated
confidence in the set up. Managers hate surprises. Whether you work at a
bank, hedge fund or other institution, my experience is that all managers
prefer a trader that overcommunicates.
TYPE III
Outlier 
opportunity: 
This 
is 
a 
dislocation, 
policy 
change, 
historic
moment or economic event so large it demands a huge bet—but only if you
are in a strong position to make that outsized bet. If you are down on the
year or near your monthly stop loss or near bossman shoulder tap level…
Unfortunately, you just have to keep it small. Allocate TYPE I or TYPE II
money and hope you are in a stronger position next time.
But… If you are in a strong capital position, you should rationally
assess what is the most you can invest in this idea. Keep in mind that no
matter how good the opportunity might seem—you could still be wrong!
You could still lose money.
No matter how great the opportunity, you must remember that a) your
assessment of the probabilities may not be accurate and b) you only get to
run the experiment once. You never bet more than you can afford to lose. A
roulette wheel will sometimes come up green and you will occasionally roll
a “1” on a 20-sided die.
The point with these TYPE III opportunities is that they can make your
year. They can make your career. And I think, in general, good traders know
them when they see them. If a TYPE III opportunity presents itself, think
long and hard about the optimal bet size. Have courage. Go big.
Here’s a short excerpt from Stan Druckenmiller’s famous Lost Tree
Club speech:
The only way to make long-term returns in our business that are superior
is by being a pig. The first thing I heard when I got in the business, not
from my mentor, was “bulls make money, bears make money, and pigs
get slaughtered.”
I’m here to tell you I was a pig. And strongly believe the only way to make
long-term returns in our business that are superior is by being a pig. I
think diversification and all the stuff they’re teaching at business school
today is probably the most misguided concept everywhere.
Bulls, bears, pigs, sharks, snakes, hedgehogs, foxes, hawks, doves and
owls. There are plenty of animals on Wall Street.
When a Type III trade comes along and you are in a strong position, you
need to take the most possible risk. That could mean as much as 50% of
your YTD P&L, depending on your risk management framework and your
role. I cannot tell you an exact formula because it depends too much on
where you work and how you manage your risk. But start with the TYPE II
formula and then increase as much as possible without introducing any
major path dependence problems. In other words, risk as much as you
possibly can knowing that you still might be wrong and don’t want to ruin
the rest of your year by destroying your momentum. Yes, you want to be a
pig in situations like this but you also need to consider you could be wrong.
Be like a call option
I have created a simple graphic (Figure 11.4) to show you why it is
important to structure your process so that you take more risk when you are
doing well and less when you are not. The chart shows is a P&L simulation
for three traders who start out with $100,000, risk 3% of capital each day,
make money 50% of days and whose average P&L on winning days is 1.5X
the P&L on an average losing day.
250 trades per year, simulated 1000 times
The factors represent how much of YTD P&L each trader risks on each
trade. The “zero factor” trader risks 3% each day, the “10% factor” trader
risks 3% of free capital plus 10% of YTD P&L and the “20% factor” trader
risks 3% of free capital plus 20% of YTD. You can see that the downside is
similar for all three traders: A bad year is around +$50,000. This is because
if the trader is struggling, they reduce risk and all three methodologies
would take similar risk.
On the other hand, a great year for the “20% factor” trader is closer to
$450,000 while a great year for the “zero factor” trader is more like
$300,000. More upside without more downside! Nice.
Why not go to 50% or 100% of YTD then? In an experiment with
unlimited time and infinite trials, higher percentages are best, but in real
life, 
where 
you 
only 
get 
to 
live 
each 
year 
once, 
lower 
numbers 
are
preferable. Higher numbers introduce unacceptable levels of variance. Even
20% is very high; I am just using it to make the point and show you how the
average annual returns vary as you tweak your risk factor higher.
This is a toned-down version of the Kelly criterion at work
124
. As you
make money, you take more risk and as you lose, you take less. This is the
core of how you behave like a call option over the years. A hedge fund or
trading business with a bunch of traders all behaving this way will have low
downside volatility with a ton of upside.
When I suggest you allocate 1% to 3% of your free capital to TYPE I
trades, this assumes you have only one trade on at a time. If you have more
than one trade on, you need to very carefully assess the correlation of the
trades and the probability that they could all go wrong at the same time.
Fewer trades = better trading =
lower transaction costs = easier risk management
Generally, when I have more than one TYPE I trade on at the same
time, I just treat them all as one trade for risk management purposes. In
other words, I size my positions so that if every single one gets stopped out,
I will not lose more than 3% of my free capital. Life is much easier if you
trade 
one 
position 
at 
a 
time 
or 
treat 
all 
your 
positions 
as 
one 
risk
management blob. If you try to take on more risk and start assuming
correlation between different trades, you might suddenly wake up one
morning down 8% of free capital because the correlations didn’t work out
the way you thought they would.
Furthermore, are you an investor or a trader? If you have 14 line items,
you are a portfolio manager or an investor, but not really a trader. Do you
have 14 good ideas at one time? Probably not. Do you have 7 good ideas at
one time? Again, probably not. Focus on one or two strong ideas and
monetize them. Concentrate your bets in the places you think you have the
most edge and the highest conviction. Spreading bets around is a recipe for
higher 
transaction 
costs, 
lazy 
risk 
management, 
diluted 
returns 
and
correlation confusion.
The big takeaway from this section is that when an epic, watershed
trade comes along and you are in a strong capital position, it is time to go
all-in. Allin does not mean risk your job or risk your fund. It means risk the
maximum possible within the parameters you have set. Play tight when
you’re weak. Play extremely aggressively when you’re strong and the
opportunity is exceptional. Huge opportunities do not come along all that
often. Jump on them.
Good trading takes courage.
Position sizing
One of the most common questions I get from new traders is: How do
you size your positions? For me, the answer is pretty simple. Here are the
five steps:
1. You have a trade idea. Let’s say you think bonds are going to sell
off in the days leading up to non-farm payrolls (aka The US Jobs
Report) because the market is massively long, everyone has been
super bullish for months and the whisper number for the jobs number
is creeping higher and higher in recent days. This is a classic run-up
trade as I will describe in Chapter 12. You have decided the best way
to trade this is to buy TBT, the ultrashort bond ETF. While TBT is
not a good way to short the bond market for more than a day or two,
your time horizon is just two days so you have decided this will be
the easiest, most liquid and levered way to execute the trade.
2. Determine your conviction level. You think this is a classic run-up
trade and you love a good run-up trade. You decide this is a Type II
trade, which this month means $250,000 of risk would normally be
allocated to this idea.
3. Decide how much to risk. You are up $1.0 million this year and have
a particularly strong feeling about this trade. The chart set up is great,
too, so you can take a big position. Since you plan to cover the trade
BEFORE the non-farm payrolls release, you don’t have to worry
about gap risk through the number. You decide to risk the standard
$250,000, 
plus 
10% 
of 
your YTD 
P&L 
($1 
million 
X 
10% 
=
$100,000) so you are risking $350,000 on the trade.
4. Determine the stop loss. Use technical analysis and other inputs
(average daily range, expected volatility, an understanding of round
number bias, etc.) to determine the stop loss on the trade. You have a
rule that you always place your stop loss at least one average day’s
range away from your entry point. This is a good rule of thumb for
new traders. If I know absolutely nothing about a security, the first
thing I do when looking to put in a stop loss is calculate the
security’s average daily range. Any stop loss closer than 1-day’s
range away is at high risk of getting dinged by short-term noise.
5. Determine the position size. To make the math easy, let’s say TBT is
trading at $100.00 and you have determined, after looking at the
charts and studying the volatility of TBT, that the appropriate stop
loss is $102.02. Liquidity is excellent and slippage is not an issue.
You estimate 3 cents of slippage on your stop. So you are risking
$2.05 / share and you decided in step 3 to risk $350,000. Here is how
you calculate the correct sizing:
Position size
= $ at risk / (entry point - stop loss level)
= $350,000 / (102.05 - 100.00)
= 170,731
Therefore, the trader in this example should buy 170,731 shares of TBT.
The formula for determining position size is always the same:
position size = $ at risk / (entry point - stop loss level)
Let’s do one more just to make sure it’s clear.
I am a retail trader and I want to sell AUDUSD because: reasons. The
currency pair is trading at 0.7500 right now and after studying the pair’s
volatility and doing 20 minutes of technical analysis, I have determined that
0.7572 is the correct stop loss. My trading account balance is currently
$165,000 and I always risk 2% of capital on every trade. I never run more
than one trade at a time so this is a safe way to run my account. I will add 3
pips to my stop loss level to allow for slippage on execution.
2% of 165,000 is $3,300.
Position size
= $ at risk / (entry point - stop loss level)
= $3,300 / (0.7500 - 0.7575)
= $3,300 / -0.0075
= - 440,000
So our short position in AUDUSD should be 440,000 AUD. If we get
stopped out, we will lose $3,300, which is 2% of capital.
Bad traders work in the opposite direction. They say: I’m short 2
million AUDUSD at 0.7500 but I can’t afford to lose more than $10,000 so
my stop loss will be 0.7550. This makes no sense because 0.7550 is a
totally arbitrary level that does not take market factors like volatility or
technical analysis into consideration. Always start with $ at risk, then
determine your stop loss by analyzing the market. The position size is the
output, not the input.
To summarize the five steps explained above:
1. You have a trade idea.
2. Determine your conviction level (TYPE I, II or III).
3. Decide how much to risk. This amount to risk can be in USD or in
basis points, depending where you work. This amount is determined
by your conviction level, YTD P&L and your risk management
system.
4. Determine your stop loss using technical analysis and other inputs.
5. Do the math to back out the correct position size.
Using this methodology, your position size can vary substantially. A low
conviction position with a wide stop loss for a good hedge fund trade might
be 20 million AUDUSD while a high conviction trade with a tighter stop
loss for the same trader could be 200 million AUDUSD.
Good traders vary bet size.
Good traders vary bet size.
Good traders vary bet size.
Whenever you see a trader that always trades in 1,000 share lots or $10
million USD FX positions, there is a good chance they don’t know what
they are doing. Alternatively, some traders are able to vary their position
size to a point but then hit a plateau. Above a certain amount of risk, they
feel uncomfortable and dial it back, even if that is not the optimal sizing.
Keep an eye out for plateaus like this in your trading. If you tend to top out
at 
a 
specific 
risk 
level, 
even 
when 
you 
know 
your 
capital 
and 
risk
management system allow you to take more, figure out why.
The best traders have the largest variation in bet size. A great trader
might trade lower conviction size of 1,000 shares of AAPL early in the year
and then 15,000 shares of AAPL by summer when she has high conviction
and a big chunk of P&L to work with.
Let me clarify something important here. When I talk about increasing
risk as your P&L grows, I am not saying you keep doubling down until you
bust. There is a bias known as the house money effect in which studies
show that traders and gamblers treat money they have won differently from
money they started out with. If you start the night at a casino with $100 and
now have $500, the incremental $400 feels different than the initial $100.
It’s free money. Studies show that gamblers treat house money with less
respect and are more likely to gamble it away recklessly. Don’t do that!
That is not what I am recommending.
What I am talking about is a methodical increase in risk appetite as your
bankroll grows. This is like the Kelly Criterion in sports gambling. As your
bankroll and your edge grow, you should take more risk. As your bankroll
and edge fall, you should take less risk.
Note: Be on the lookout for the house money effect. When you are up
huge on the day, do you trade sloppier? Many people do. I do. Remember
the 
story 
from 
earlier, 
“Joyful 
yelling 
signals 
imminent 
P&L 
crash?”
Systematic increases in risk appetite as capital increases are completely
different from winner’s tilt and the house money effect. Make sure you
understand the difference.
THE EVOLUTION OF EXPECTED VALUE OVER THE LIFE OF A TRADE
There is a particularly tricky concept in the mathematics of trading
which is that the risk/reward of a given trade changes as prices move. An
example is if you have a trade where you were risking 1% to make 2% and
then it quickly moves 1.5% in your favor. At that point the question is, are
you now risking 2.5% to make 0.5% (unattractive!) or do you ignore the
mark to market and stick with your original plan. The answer is not
obvious.
Most people respond that you should mark to market because the
current market price is the only thing that matters. The problem with this
approach is that you will never let your trades run to the take profit because
the risk/reward is so bad once the trade moves more than halfway towards
the take profit level. If you are risking 1 to make 2, but then you always
take profit when it moves 1.5… Your risk/reward ratio was never 1 to 2, it
was 1 to 1.5. Even worse, if you get nervous when it has moved just 1% …
You take profit and then your trading system is just risking 1 to make 1.
Decide where the finish line is before you start the race.
One way to deal with this is to move your stop loss higher as the trade
moves deeper in the money. This is generally logical, but introduces more
noise risk as a random pullback might knock you out when the trade would
have been safe under the original parameters. The most effective way to
trail your stop is to use a moving average that matches the trend and update
your stop loss once every 12 or every 24 hours.
There is no correct answer here, but my general feeling is that if you put
a trade on risking 1 to make 2, you cannot take profit all the time once you
make 1.4 because that means your original plan was not really true and your
risk/ reward on every trade is much worse than you think it is on inception.
You are putting on a trade with a certain plan in mind and then moving the
goalposts once the trade moves in the money.
Either trail your stop loss higher in a systematic way while still giving
the trade plenty of room to breathe, or take partial profits at predetermined
levels.
Trailing the stop systematically breaks the rule of setting stops based on
technical analysis and market logic, which is not ideal. But you can always
fine tune whatever stop loss the system spits out by looking at a few charts.
What you should not do is cut every trade early because “the risk/reward
sucks now”.
That is a logical fallacy that ignores the original structure of the trade
and ignores the fact that a core skill in successful trading is the ability to
find trades that offer substantially more reward than risk. Don’t truncate
your right tail all the time. Trying to extract the last 20% of a trade may
cause you to give back all your gains. That’s just the way it is. That’s just
trading.
As an FYI, this discrepancy between actual payout on trades and
forecast payout happens all the time and it’s something you need to monitor.
If you are structuring all your trades risking 1 to make 3 but then you cut
everything early because you get antsy or bored or are risk averse and
looking for excuses to reduce… Your risk/reward is not 1 to 3. It might be 1
to 2, or worse. Monitor this.
This is frequently an issue in options trading too. Often you will see an
exotic option like a reverse knock-out that pays something like 8 : 1. But
the only way for it to pay off that way is if the option expires exactly one
basis point away from the barrier. That is a totally unrealistic assumption. If
you are buying low-delta digital options at 8% because they look like juicy
leverage but then you sell them every time they double to 16%… You might
have been better off trading a simpler, more liquid structure.
If you are structuring trades for maximum leverage, make sure you get
the leverage you thought you were getting.
STICKING TO THE PLAN
There is always a tension between sticking to the plan and adjusting to
new information. The problem with adjusting to new information is that a
substantial percentage of the information you receive in a given trading day
is noise. Some days are 100% noise. Your predisposition, once you have a
trade on, should always be to do nothing. Leave it alone and follow your
original 
plan. 
Plans 
are 
generally 
made 
in 
a 
rational 
state 
of 
mind.
Adjustments on the fly are often emotional and biased reactions to the non-
stop onslaught of stimulus.
Prices 
are 
almost 
always 
changing. 
New 
information 
is 
arriving
constantly. Most of it is meaningless.
If you have a trade on, stick to the original plan until there is new
information you cannot possibly ignore.
That is, assume new information is mostly noise and react only when
there is an unambiguous signal. Some traders impose a restrictive rule to
avoid overtrading. For example, “Once I put on a trade, I will re-evaluate it
once per day at 11 a.m. and otherwise leave it until the stop loss or take
profit trigger.” This avoids the problem of sitting there, staring at the screen
as the dumb voices in your head say stuff like:
It’s trading heavy… Maybe I should get out.
That headline is making me nervous.
If this trade goes south, I’ ll be down on the month.
Look, a squirrel!
KNOW YOUR DEFAULT MODE
Part of this calculus is knowing your own default mode network. The
default mode network (DMN) is a cognitive science concept. Research
shows that there is a particular part of your brain that becomes active when
you are not busy thinking about anything in particular (wakeful rest). This
area tends to have the same thoughts over and over. These are the thoughts
you circle back to when you are not thinking about anything.
Mendel Kaelen suggests we think of the mind like a hill covered in
fresh snow. Each thought is a sled that slides down that hill, leaving a trail.
The more sleds that slide down those same trails, the deeper those trails
become and the more difficult it becomes to avoid sliding into the same
repetitive thought patterns.
What are your default modes?
When there is a trading lull, how do you typically think? What is the
action you default to? When you have a trade on, and you’re sitting in front
of the screen, what is your default mode? Do you generally want to add to
the position? Or cut it? Or are you fine to wait patiently and let it simmer
until it’s ready? Become familiar with your default thought and action
patterns and think about whether they are destructive, whether they add to
or subtract from your process, and whether they lead to productive or
suboptimal actions.
When you’re not busy at work, where does your mind go? Is it a
positive or negative place? Are your typical thoughts constructive or self-
critical? Do they encourage action or inaction? Does your DMN help you or
hurt you? How do you break the bad habits?
One part of my default mode is to scan through charts and think about
random market-related ideas. That’s a positive and productive DMN. I
default to thinking things like: “Hmm, VIX has dropped three days in a row,
is that bullish for stocks?” or “I wonder what lumber and soybeans are
doing; I haven’t checked the soft commodities in a while” or “When’s the
next RBNZ meeting?” I also default to tossing around ideas for upcoming
editions of AM/FX, my daily macro newsletter. I add them to a Word doc of
future ideas.
The negative part of my default mode is a strong and steady urge to
press the BUY and SELL buttons. I always want to put on or add to
positions. Whenever markets slow down and enter a quieter intraday phase,
I find myself tempted to increase my position size. I should be doing
nothing, 
because 
unnecessary 
increases 
in 
position 
size 
often 
lead 
to
suboptimal risk management scenarios, if price goes the wrong way.
This default mode is such a known part of who I am that my manager
Pete once wrote “REDUCE” on a sticky note and stuck it to the bottom
right corner of one of my monitors. Anyone who knows me as a trader
knows my positions are either the right size or too big. Almost never too
small. This is not good.
The “REDUCE” sign helped me maintain awareness of my default
mode, which is a subconscious desire to increase risk even when there is no
reason to do so. It helps me keep my hands off the BUY and SELL buttons
when 
there 
is 
no 
logical 
action 
to 
be 
taken. Alpha 
traders 
hold 
two
contradictory skills at once: they can sit there and do nothing for long
periods, and they can act aggressively, without hesitation. Most people can
do one but struggle with the other. I’m great at acting without hesitation, but
I will always be working on my patience.
Listen to your default thoughts when your mind is quiet and determine
if they are beneficial or toxic. For what it’s worth, this is a useful exercise to
run outside of trading too. Do the default voices in your head criticize or
motivate 
you? 
Do 
they 
spur 
you 
toward 
action 
or 
convince 
you 
to
procrastinate?
I believe that navigating the cacophony of competing voices in your
head and choosing which ones to ignore and which ones to listen to is one
of the most important determinants of survival and success in both trading
and in life. Shutting out the toxic voices and following the beneficial ones is
the definition of conscientiousness, willpower, and discipline. It also the
primary purpose of meditation and mindfulness exercises.
When you have a choice to either watch TV or go lift weights, there are
two competing voices that go something like this:
VOICE 1
You will feel great if you go work out.
All you need to do is get up off the couch and—
VOICE 2
(INTERRUPTING)
South Park is on! The really funny one from 2006! There’s
Sour Cream and Onion Ruffles in the cupboard!
Your health and fitness will be determined by which voice you listen to.
Same thing in trading. The voices are there too. For example, you slowly
piece together a strong trade idea, execute, and write down your planned
stop loss and take profit level. You like the trade idea and you have a clear
plan. Then half an hour later, the voices start:
VOICE 1
Why hasn’t it moved by now? This idea must be wrong. You should get out. Last thing we
want to do is lose money on a--
VOICE 2
(INTERRUPTING)
You are so cold right now. Like… Arctic cold.
Cucumber cold. You should just--
VOICE 1
(INTERRUPTING)
Wait! It’s rallying now! Double your position!
It is remarkable that even the smartest people in the world have these
dumb voices in their head. It’s all part of the fun of being a human being.
Ignore the negative voices and slowly tune your default mode network to
think: stick to the plan. Stick to the plan. Stick to the plan. Treat it like a
mantra. Stick to the plan. Stick to the plan. When that dumb voice in your
head tries to steer you towards the rocks, throw it off the boat. Stick to the
plan. Stick to the plan.
YOU CAN’T ALWAYS STICK TO THE PLAN !
Of course, there are times when you should abandon your plan and get
out of Dodge. Like a commercial pilot, stick with the flight plan as long as
humanly possible, but change course in the face of major new information.
A good example of when it makes sense to deviate from plan is if a
trade has moved substantially in your favor just before a market-moving
event (economic data, central bank meeting, etc.) You don’t want to risk a
major portion of your capital on a coin toss especially when you know there
is gap and liquidity risk around big events. Unless you have a strong view
on the outcome of a particular economic event, it usually makes sense to
lighten up on risk beforehand.
That said, if your trade plan was solid, you probably saw that event
coming and considered it in your trade plan. Upcoming catalysts should
always be reassessment triggers.
That concludes Chapter 11. I hope you now have a solid understanding
of how I think about risk. I hope you can use some of these tactics and fold
some of my ideas into your process. I could say this 100 times and it would
not be enough:
The number one rule of trading is: avoid ruin.
Before we hit Chapter 12, let’s take a little detour here to talk about
Jesse Livermore and the book Reminiscences of a Stock Operator.
END OF CHAPTER DETOUR :
A QUICK BOOK REVIEW KINDA THING
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator is a quintessential (and slightly
misunderstood) piece of trading literature. This 1923 classic is a slightly
fictionalized biography of Jesse Livermore written by Edwin Lefèvre.
Livermore was a famous speculator and Bobby-Axelrod-style celebrity-
rich-guy. The book is epic entertainment and full of all kinds of cool trading
wisdom and nifty old timey Wall Street jargon like “tape reading” and
“bucket shops”. It is also a cautionary tale and a case study in overtrading,
bad discipline, poor money management, and the dark side of trading.
Livermore, 
oft 
celebrated 
as 
a 
genius 
and 
as 
one 
of 
the 
greatest
speculators of all time, went bankrupt three times and eventually committed
suicide in the cloak room of the Sherry Netherland Hotel in New York City.
By all accounts, he was an incredible trader—with fatal flaws.
An interesting fact that tells me he was a classy guy: each time he
declared bankruptcy, he would borrow a small stake from a friend so he
could 
start 
trading 
again. 
Then, 
he 
would 
build 
it 
up 
substantially,
eventually making himself rich again. Once he was fully liquid, he would
pay back all the creditors he owed from before he declared bankruptcy. He
did this even though he was clear of the debts and was not legally required
to repay, thanks to the bankruptcy proceeding. He just paid people back
because it was the right thing to do.
Here are some of my favorite quotes from the book, with a bit of my
own commentary sprinkled in.
Fear and hope remain the same; therefore the study of the psychology of
speculators is as valuable as it ever was. Weapons change, but strategy
remains strategy, on the New York Stock Exchange as on the battlefield. I
think the clearest summing up of the whole thing was expressed by
Thomas F. Woodlock when he declared: “The principles of successful
stock speculation are based on the supposition that people will continue
in the future to make the mistakes that they have made in the past.
In other words, this time is not different.
A stock operator has to fight a lot of expensive enemies within himself.
Learning the rules is easy. Following them is hard. Self-awareness is
key.
One of the most helpful things that anybody can learn is to give up trying
to catch the last eighth— or the first. These two are the most expensive
eighths in the world.
It feels SO GOOD when you sell the ding dong highs or buy the ding
dong lows but it’s not something that can be done on a regular basis. Don’t
bother trying.
It takes a man a long time to learn all the lessons of all his mistakes. They
say there are two sides to everything. But there is only one side to the
stock market; and it is not the bull side or the bear side, but the right side.
It took me longer to get that general principle fixed firmly in my mind.
I 
also 
was 
better 
equipped 
than 
the 
average 
customer 
of 
Harding
Brothers in that I was utterly free from speculative prejudices. The bear
side doesn’t appeal any more than the bull side, or vice versa. My one
steadfast prejudice is against being wrong.
In other words: be nimble. Good traders are flexible and are not biased
toward a particular direction in any market. I often ask people who work for
some 
of 
the 
legends 
of 
trading, 
“What 
qualities 
make 
that 
trader 
so
successful?” Just about every time, the answer includes something like: “He
is happy to change his mind very quickly” or “He can be max short one day
and max long the next”. Bad traders are perma-something. Good traders are
intellectually flexible. Strong opinions, weakly held.
Another lesson I learned early is that there is nothing new in Wall Street.
There can’t be because speculation is as old as the hills. Whatever
happens in the stock market to-day has happened before and will happen
again.
The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that which is
done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the sun.
Ecclesiastes 1:9
What beat me was not having brains enough to stick to my own game –
that is, to play the market only when I was satisfied that precedents
favoured my play. There is the plain fool, who does the wrong thing at all
times everywhere, but there is also the Wall Street fool, who thinks he
must trade all the time. No man can have adequate reasons for buying or
selling 
stocks 
daily 
– 
or 
sufficient 
knowledge 
to 
make 
his 
play 
an
intelligent play.
#overtrading
No, sir, nobody can make big money on what someone else tells him to
do.
Trade your own view.
If you do not know who you are, the stock market is an expensive place to
find out.
I love this one. It reminds me of a famous Ed Seykota quote: “Win or
lose, everybody gets what they want out of the market.”
I was nearly twenty-seven years old. I had been at the game twelve
years. But the first time I traded because of a crisis that was still to come I
found that I had been using a telescope. Between my first glimpse of the
storm cloud and the time for cashing in on the big break the stretch was
evidently so much greater than I had thought that I began to wonder
whether I really saw what I thought I saw so clearly. We had had many
warnings and sensational ascensions in call-money rates. Still some of
the great financiers talked hopefully at least to newspaper reporters and
the ensuing rallies in the stock market gave the lie to the calamity
howlers. 
Was 
I 
fundamentally 
wrong 
in 
being 
bearish 
or 
merely
temporarily wrong in having begun to sell short too soon?
This quote rang particularly true in 2007 when the market sniffed out a
financial calamity very early on but many traders were too early to the trade
and got shoulder-tapped before they could capitalize. For every legend of
The Big Short winners, there were two or three bears who committed too
big, too early and lost as they were forced to stop out near the highs. You
only hear the stories of those who survive.
I did precisely the wrong thing. The cotton showed me a loss and I kept it.
The wheat showed me a profit and I sold it out. Of all the speculative
blunders there are few greater than trying to average a losing game.
Always sell what shows you a loss and keep what shows you a profit.
Cut your losses, run your winners.
The game taught me the game. And it didn’t spare the rod while teaching.
The best way to learn about the psychology of trading is to experience
mind-numbing losses. As my boss once told me after a particularly bad day
of trading: you don’t learn anything when you win.
You are now around 79% of the way through this book. I hope you feel
most of what you have read so far makes sense, and you see how you can
incorporate some of my techniques into your process. In the next chapter, I
will go step by step through my process, using many of the concepts and
tactics described to this point. I hope to take all this disparate information
and bring it together so you can see the entire trade selection and execution
process from start to finish.
123. FYI, in The Art of Currency Trading I used the terms 3-star, 4-star and 5-star. Upon
further review, I feel a) Why have a system that starts at 3? Doesn’t make a ton of sense,
and b) calling each trade “TYPE” helps clarify that the system is not linear or incremental.
TYPE I trades and TYPE III trades are completely different animals and should be handled
with a totally different approach.
124. The Kelly Criterion is a formula used by gamblers to calculate optimal bet size. Using
the Kelly Criterion leads to higher wealth compared to any other bet-sizing strategy (in the
long run). The Kelly Criterion relies on known odds and so it is not directly applicable to
trading because the probability of winning or losing in trading can only be loosely
estimated, it is not directly observable. Still, the concept behind the Kelly Criterion is
directly applicable to trading and risk management, even if the precise mathematics are
not. For an entertaining book that includes plenty of information about the Kelly Criterion,
check out Fortune’s Formula by William Poundstone.
T
CHAPTER 12
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
The lifecycle of a trade, from idea to execution to exit
he preceding chapters have covered a wide range of topics. In this
chapter, I will bring it all together as I walk you through my real-world
thought process and detail the lifecycle of a trade from start to finish.
Chapter 9 introduced some questions people frequently ask me, like:
“Where do trade ideas come from?” “How do you come up with ideas?”
“Where do you start?” “What is the process?” My philosophy has always
been about combining as many disciplines as possible in an effort to narrow
down and filter out ideas, with the hope of discovering the rare trade where
all the planets are aligned. Many factors contribute to good trade ideas; they
are not born from a simple chart pattern or single bit of fundamental
analysis.
As mentioned earlier, I use fundamentals and microstructure to come up
with most of my ideas. Then, I use other disciplines like technical analysis,
sentiment, and cross-market analysis to filter and enhance the idea, and
optimize execution.
Below, I present a visual that details the essentials of my process from
start to finish. I will use this visual to walk you through how I come up
with, execute, risk manage and analyze my trades. We’ll start with generic
explanations of each step (each box in the table) and then I will walk
through a real-life trade I did recently to show you how it all works in real
life.
Generally, the process flows through the table from left to right and top
to bottom. Keep in mind that this table and the explanations that follow are
a general framework. There are times when you may be doing this in a
different order, or in your head, or in a less formal way.
For example, while this grid is laid out as a “Ready, Aim, Shoot” type of
process, when it comes to headlines, my framework is more like “Ready,
Shoot, Aim” (see Chapter 4). There is not enough time to think everything
through when a headline comes out, so I allow myself to react as quickly as
possible and execute the trade right away. Then, once I have the trade on, I
go back through the remaining steps in the grid to make sure that my logic
and risk management are sound. If they are not, then I quickly exit the trade
or recalibrate my plan.
This is less risky if you are experienced and deeply engaged in the
markets (i.e., have a strong knowledge of the narrative and an intuitive feel
for volatility and weak side/strong side of the market without having to
think about it much). “Ready, Shoot, Aim” is not recommended for noobs.
Figure 12.1 is the table; we will go through it step by step.
1. IDEA GENERATION
The number one way I come up with trade ideas is by surfing the
narrative. I explained this fully in Chapter 9 and I hope you have a sense of
what I mean by now.
Surfing the narrative
Before you can come up with a trade idea in your market, you need to
be an expert on the narrative that drives it. This narrative is an evolving
story that drives price over time and can often be comprised of one major
narrative along with multiple smaller narratives vying for attention. Rarely
will 
the 
market 
embrace 
two 
major 
narratives 
at 
once. 
That 
is 
too
complicated. Usually, one narrative dominates and the remaining narratives
hum in the background, waiting to potentially emerge as important drivers.
When you understand the narrative in your market, you have taken the
first 
and 
most 
important 
step 
toward 
becoming 
an 
expert 
trader. The
evolution of the narrative is one of the major sources of trade ideas and can
be a tremendous help even if you are a very short-term trader.
For example, if you are a short-term trader, you cannot possibly trade a
news headline unless you fully understand what it means. Let’s say your
main market is gold. It’s the Summer of 2020. You are short a decent-sized
position in gold futures, risking 3% of your capital. A red headline hits
Bloomberg:
*GOLD IMPORTS BY INDIA MORE THAN DOUBLE TO 35.5 TONS IN
AUGUST
What does that mean? Is it bullish? Or bearish? Or meaningless? If you
are an expert in gold, you know whether the market cares about physical
demand out of India right now and you know what was expected and what
is normal for Indian Gold Imports in August. Often, the answer may be:
nobody cares, that headline is irrelevant.
On the other hand, the market might be worried about Indian demand
because so many weddings have been cancelled due to COVID-19. If
speculators were worried that the only demand was institutional and ETF
demand, this number might be highly reassuring and could trigger a $10
rally in gold. You need to know. If you are an expert in your market, you
know what matters and what doesn’t. You know what your market is trading
off 
and 
what 
it 
is 
not. And 
then, 
as 
the 
narrative 
changes 
and 
new
information comes in… You can react faster and smarter than others, ride
the price to the new equilibrium, and get off as it overshoots.
Over time, this knowledge of the narrative will inevitably lead you to
trade ideas. You will feel the winds change direction before others and you
will jump on the turn before prices move. You may identify a new narrative
before others, catch the impulsive middle part of a strong trend, or smell
that an existing narrative is stale, crowded and ready to turn.
If you are still struggling to see how you can follow the narrative and
come up with trade ideas, the walkthrough later in this chapter should help.
For now, just remember that as you continuously study the narrative in your
market and rise to expert level, you gain valuable intuition and insight into
what matters and what doesn’t. You get a feel for what is in the price, and
what is not. You understand which catalysts will move the market and
which will not.
Beyond understanding the narrative as described in Chapter 9, there are
three other primary ways I come up with trade ideas. Note that generally I
have more than one reason for a trade. Part of the filtering process is to
make sure that wherever your idea comes from originally, it is supported by
the narrative, sentiment, positioning, technicals, correlated markets and
seasonals. We want ideas that are supported by multiple types of analysis,
but also please remember:
There is no such thing as a perfect trade.
In trading, and in life, the quest for perfection is commendable but the
expectation that the world, any situation, or any trade will be perfect is
flawed. You need to know when you have reached “good enough” or you
will wait forever for the perfect trade, perfect spouse, or perfect job. This
doesn’t mean you settle for a crappy relationship or put on sub-par trades, it
means you must have the wisdom to understand that life is not meant to be
perfect. Perfection is rare and fleeting and anything perfect should come as
a positive surprise, not as an expectation.
As the Italian proverb made famous by Voltaire says:
Perfect is the enemy of good.
This applies to self-evaluation too. Many traders spend way too much
time beating themselves up. Unless you finish the day at the ding dong
highs, you will always wish you took profit earlier or had a bigger position
or did something a little different. Assess your performance rationally. Set
high standards but do not expect perfection from yourself, or every day will
be a disappointment. When you do a good job: be proud. Don’t niggle away
at small performance glitches when you have generally run well. This is
draining and pointless.
Once you understand the narrative, you are in a strong position to trade
news and events as you will understand their meaning and how they might
disrupt or transform the prevailing story.
News and events
News and events can be a tremendous source of edge and trade ideas. If
you understand the current equilibrium and are familiar with the mind of
the market and what information and events led to the current pricing, then
when new info arrives, you are a ninja. Events like company earnings,
FOMC meetings, other central bank meetings, product announcements,
economic data and unexpected headlines are opportunities for the fastest,
most informed traders to capitalize on mispricing.
Prices do not find their happy place right away. When new info arrives,
there 
is 
a 
period 
of 
fast 
market 
action 
as 
hundreds 
of 
humans 
and
algorithms disagree on fair market value and trade aggressively against
each other until a few winners emerge and trading eventually settles at a
new price. Often, these waves of intense trading are when you can enter a
state of flow and capture outsized gains. These moments of in-the-zone
trading sometimes last just 10 or 15 minutes but can account for an entire
week of P&L.
Identify events in your market, educate yourself, read every preview
and every word of pre-game analysis. Create a clear plan. When the news,
event or announcement happens: attack.
Into events: Flat = strong
I don’t always have the discipline to do this, but I try to go into major
economic and central bank events as close to flat as possible. If you are a
short-term news trader, this should be your approach. Here are some
reasons it is suboptimal to hold positions into events.
1. Gap risk. Quite often you won’t get out as fast as you want, and you
will 
lose 
more 
money 
than 
you 
thought 
you 
would. You 
can’t
properly control risk in a gapping market.
2. You are biased. If you go into a Fed meeting short USD because you
think they are going to be dovish, your interpretation of the news
release and press conference are likely to be biased. You will be
looking for headlines that confirm your prior dovish view instead of
looking at the outcome through clear eyes. Flat is the most powerful
position in trading because it is the only time you are fully and
completely unbiased.
3. It is hard to flip if you’re wrong. If you are positioned for a dovish
outcome and the result is hawkish, you want to flip from short
dollars to long dollars. This is difficult because 1) You will react
slower when you are biased and leaning the wrong way and 2)
liquidity is not unlimited. If you have a decent-sized short USD
position, you may have trouble buying enough USD to flip long at a
reasonable rate.
It is easier to react to events than predict them.
As a rule, if you are fast and well-prepared, the Sharpe ratio of reacting
to events is higher than the Sharpe of trying to predict them. As we
discussed last chapter: a big part of successful trading is to understand the
current equilibrium and then when new information appears, react smarter
and 
faster 
than 
your 
competitors, 
before 
the 
market 
finds 
the 
new
equilibrium. If you are flat when new information comes out, you are
stronger, faster, and unbiased. You don’t always need to have a position.
Good traders know when to be flat.
Although predicting the outcome of an event often has very little edge,
predicting what the market will do in the days leading up to the event can
be a good source of trade ideas. Instead of trying to predict what everyone
else is predicting (the event itself ), smart traders can often more easily
forecast what the crowd will do into the event, and position ahead of the
crowd before it starts to move.
The run-up trade
The run-up trade is a phenomenon where prices move in a logical and
predictable direction in the days leading up to a major event. These run-up
trades are often easier to predict and monetize than the events that follow.
The idea behind the run-up trade is to identify an upcoming market
event and then estimate what traders will do before the event. If AAPL
earnings are coming up this week, which way are traders likely to play it? If
non-farm payrolls are a few days from now, what might the market do in
the days leading up to the release? The run-up trade is usually a function of
three things:
1. Positioning: Medium-term traders, investors and systematic strategies
tend to reduce risk into major events. They do this because volatility
tends to be higher and more difficult to predict through events. If
they are sizing their bets using forecast volatility (which most do,
because that makes sense), they need to reduce their exposure as
high-vol events near. If everyone is long, expect prices to fall in the
run-up to the day of the event.
2. What is the obvious trade? Quite often, the obvious trade works!
Plus, traders feel stupid missing obvious macro catalysts so they will
tend to position for them in advance then take them off quickly if
they do not materialize. If the US economy has been hot, the Fed is
thinking about hiking rates, and most indicators point to strong job
growth… Expect bonds to sell off in the days leading up to the jobs
report as traders get set for a blockbuster figure.
3. What is the lotto ticket trade? If a biotech company is announcing
Phase 1 results on Friday morning and it looks like a good result
could cause the stock to triple while a bad result will cause it to drop
20%… Expect the stock to rally into the news, even if the probability
of a positive outcome does not justify the trade from an expected
value 
point 
of 
view. 
Asymmetrical 
bets 
will 
always 
attract
speculators, even if they are bad trades with good optics. So the run-
up trade ahead of an event will often be driven by speculators putting
on lotto tickets beforehand.
Sometimes, all three factors above will apply: that’s a top-quality run-up
trade. When you catch a run-up trade, you will be tempted to keep it
through the event because you have a nice cushion by that point. Resist that
temptation! It is often easier to forecast the madness of crowds going into
an event than it is to forecast the outcome of the event itself. Furthermore,
the very fact that you caught the run-up trade means the security has moved
a fair bit already into the event and thus it is probably getting crowded in
that direction and offers asymmetric risk/reward (in a bad way).
Everybody’s bearish and nobody’s short
Sticking with the topic of events, there is a subtler way that upcoming
events can influence markets. Often, when a major risk event is coming up,
risk managers and traders lean on the conservative side until it is out of the
way (due to gap risk and concerns about extreme volatility). They reduce
their risk as the event nears, regardless of their view.
Once the event passes (regardless of the result), risk appetite returns to
normal and a move that probably should have happened before the event
happens afterwards. Speculators put on the trade they wanted to have
before, because now that the event (and associated gap risk) is out of the
way, it’s safe to do so.
This is one of my favorite setups. When there is a strong consensus
view but no positioning to match the view, you often see highly impulsive
moves. Once the event passes, the consensus move is free to unfold at high
speed. Often the event itself contains no new information, it is simply the
passing of the event (and thus the elimination of gap risk) that allows the
move that should have happened earlier to happen now. This setup is
powerful and has a high expected value, so watch for it.
Deviation from fair value
Another important source of trade ideas is scanning for moments when
your market deviates from fair value. Fair value is a slippery concept and is
almost impossible to measure with certainty so when I say “fair value” I
mean “loose or best estimate of fair value”. You never know what the real
fair value of a market is, but you know that if oil drops $2 and copper drops
5% at the same time, fair value for the Canadian dollar has probably just
gone down, not up.
I tend to think of fair value more in terms of direction and not level.
That is, I might say: “Today’s economic data was bad and oil is down 4%
today, yields look way too high.” But I would never say: “Given these
numbers and the move in oil, I think 10-year yields should be 1.10 not
1.20.”
One way to measure deviations from fair value is to use cross-market
correlation. This is explained in Chapter 9. Start by identifying one or two
markets that should logically be correlated to the market you trade. Follow
them. You don’t need to create a sophisticated regression model to track
deviations and movements. Just track momentum in the correlated markets
and get a feel for what it means for the market you trade. Over time, you
will slowly learn to watch other markets for clues and you will experience
how lead/lag trading can give you a forecasting edge.
Lead/lag or cross-market trading is not just about watching one market
move higher then buying the other market. It is about putting together a
coherent 
story 
using 
fundamental 
narratives 
plus 
moves 
in 
correlated
markets. Let’s look at an example of how deviation from fair value might
lead me not to put on a trade.
Let’s say I am an expert in trading FCX and BHP, two of the world’s
largest mining stocks. I am flat and US markets are closed, but since I’m a
highly-motivated and curious guy, at 9 p.m. I flick on Bloomberg TV to
check out the Chinese Export and New Loans data. There is a high degree
of uncertainty about the direction of the Chinese economy right now so
everyone is watching the release. The data comes out super-weak, much
worse than expected.
Since China is a huge consumer of commodities, this weak economic
data should be bad news for FCX and BHP. The market has been trading
mining stocks from the long side for months on the back of a popular
narrative that China stimulus and strong Chinese growth should boost
earnings. The trade is crowded and the narrative looks stale. My metrics
show there is a massive long position in copper so I expect it to get hit hard.
I care about markets, but I also care about health and sleep so I go to bed at
10 p.m.
I spend the night dreaming about how much FCX and BHP I will go
short in the morning and hope that the stocks have not sold off too much in
Asia/ London time. This seems like a solid multi-day trade idea with good
risk/reward but I don’t like trading on my phone when US markets are
closed.
When I wake up, I’m surprised to see FCX and BHP are unchanged.
Awesome! My entry point will be amazing here. Then, I flick to copper,
expecting it to be down between 2% and 3%. It’s up 1.4%. Huh, that’s
weird. The market has had seven hours to digest the bad China news, I
thought the market was mega-long and yet copper is up 1.4%?
At this point, my interest in shorting FCX and BHP would fizzle fast.
My thesis was that the market was long the whole China narrative but if
that were true, copper should be down on the bad news, not up. By
monitoring other, correlated markets, I can get clues about my thesis and
filter out bad trade ideas while homing in on good ones.
The 
better 
you 
understand 
a 
suite 
of 
related 
securities 
and 
the
underlying fundamental drivers of those securities, the more trade ideas you
will come up with, and the more likely you are to weed out bad ideas before
they cost you.
Here, I used deviation from fair value (copper rallying and BHP and
FCX unchanged = BHP and FCX look low) to avoid a bad short. Let’s look
at a simple example where deviation from fair value helps get me into a
trade.
I am bearish the US dollar as it has recently rolled over after a multi-
year rally. I believe we are entering a new down trend and I am looking for
opportunities but haven’t pulled the trigger yet. The dollar had a huge
interest rate advantage for the past few years, but the Fed recently cut rates
all the way to near zero while the rest of the world kept rates on hold. The
dollar is overvalued, the market is max long, the narrative is turning, and I
want to find a USD pair to get short.
Today is the last day of the month and I know from my research that in
months when stocks have gone up significantly, real money hedgers tend to
buy USDJPY as 4 p.m. London time approaches. I also know that the most
correlated market to USDJPY is US 10-year rates, which are still hovering
around 1.20% despite many interest rate cuts by the Fed. Big moves in US
rates almost always coincide with big moves in USDJPY.
USDJPY rallies from 107.00 to 107.60 as 4 p.m. London approaches. I
check to see if interest rates are moving higher (which would justify the
USDJPY rally). They are not. In fact, US yields are dribbling a bit lower.
The USDJPY rally is probably just flow—it makes zero macro sense.
Meanwhile, significant resistance I identified on my techs sheet this
morning lurks just above at 107.80. There is one more push up in USDJPY
right at 4 p.m. London and I sell at 107.74. Again, I check the US rates
market and see 10-year yields continue to trade lower. US stocks are also
lurching a bit lower. This is a great setup. Working in my favor are:
1. Bigger-picture bearish USD view as narrative turns.
2. Time of day effect in USDJPY signals my timing is likely decent.
3. US rates and US stock market both say USDJPY should be going
lower, not higher (cross-market supports the idea) and I can explain
why USDJPY is rallying (non-price-sensitive rebalancing flow) and
when the rally is likely to end (4 p.m. London).
4. Major resistance very close means I can put on a big trade with a
tight stop (high leverage situation).
A trade like this is not unrealistic. For most good trades, I will have 3 to
5 decent reasons and very few arguments the other way. This trade is a good
example of how cross-market analysis gives me greater confidence to take
the other side of a flow-driven move that is not supported by fundamentals
or by action in other markets.
Pattern recognition and indicator scanning
The 
final 
major 
source 
of 
trade 
ideas 
(after 
narrative, 
news, 
and
dislocations from fair value) is pattern recognition and indicator scanning.
This can mean many things and depends greatly on what products you
trade. Good traders recognize patterns in their market and understand which
patterns are the result of randomness and which are sending a persistent
signal. In the section above, I talked about the fact that USDJPY rallies into
month end when stocks have done well that month, and we discussed other
patterns of activity in various parts of this book.
When I say patterns here, I am not talking about technical analysis. I am
talking about recurring price patterns. The more you read and study your
market, the more you will learn about, identify and backtest these types of
patterns. Here are a few examples:
Stocks trade poorly from September 16 to October 9 then rip higher into
year end
This seasonal is well-known and persistent. The worst week of the year
for stocks has been the week after options expire in September (the week
after the 3
rd
Friday of September). September 21-25 is the 5-day window in
which you had the least chance of making money long US stocks from 1990
to 2020. Figure 12.2 shows the chart.
x-axis shows day of year (1 = 01JAN, 2 = 02JAN, etc.)
And Figure 12.3 shows the average path of equities over the course of
the year, again going back to 1990.
x-axis shows January 1 to December 31
There are all sorts of seasonal patterns like this in many markets. You
need 
to 
be 
very 
careful 
with 
seasonality, 
as 
much 
of 
it 
is 
random.
Experience and statistical acumen can help you sort through what is random
and what is persistent.
Analogs
When you have a few years of market experience, you will start to see
trades and narratives evolving in ways that you recognize from the past.
History doesn’t repeat but it rhymes. When you can compare the current
period to some period in the past, that analog can help you predict what
might happen next. For example, the EURUSD rally in 2017 and 2020 were
both incredibly similar:
Started with a relief rally after a euro-positive political event. In 2017
it was the election of Macron and in 2020 it was the agreement on a
European Economic Recovery Plan.
First wave of the rally went from 1.08 to 1.20.
Both times, the ECB eventually pushed back as EURUSD neared
1.2000.
Very few pullbacks in the first wave higher.
Here is a write-up I did on this topic in June 2020:
Going into round one of the French presidential election on April 23, 2017,
Emmanuel Macron held a narrow lead over Marine Le Pen. Markets
viewed Le Pen as a danger to the euro because (despite softening at the
last minute) she spoke frequently of euro exit, arguing it would allow
France to gain from competitive devaluation. Here are two representative
Le Pen quotes:
“The euro is not a currency. It is a political weapon to force
countries to implement the policies decided by the EU and keep
them on a leash.”
“(The end of the euro) would be an unbelievable opportunity. If
we don’t all leave the euro behind, it will explode. Either there
will be a popular revolt because the people no longer want to be
bled out. Or the Germans will say: Stop, we can’t pay for the
poor anymore.”
So far, so wrong. Anyway, when Macron’s round one win all but assured
him a second-round victory, EURUSD gapped and trended higher. The
current rally has a similar feel as the market has been waiting years for
the EU to loosen the purse strings and take some baby steps toward
fiscal union. The Macron-Merkel agreement on May 18, 2020 got the ball
rolling.
Event dates: April 23, 2017 and May 18, 2020
Comparing the 2017 rally with the current move, you get a chart that
looks like Figure 12.4.
The first takeaway is that this move in EURUSD matches the 2017 move
pretty well. The second takeaway is that around this point in the 2017
rally, there was a 5-week consolidation. The third takeaway is that most
dips were small on the way up. You didn’t get more than a 1.5%
retracement until the 4% correction in October 2017. Next, Figure 12.5
shows the rolling 40-day drawdown in EURUSD starting (once again) 60
days before the event date.
So if you believe in this EURUSD rally, and think it should follow a similar
path to the 2017 move, scale in from 1% to 1.5% off the rolling high. Note
that 1-month vol was in a 6%-8% range after Macron won in 2017 and is
currently around 7%; so using the analog makes sense from a volatility
perspective.
We touched a high of 1.1384 on Friday, so the 2017 playbook would put
the current buy zone at 1.1213/1.1270.
The analog was pretty good! It worked for months and correctly called
the approximate path of the euro for the next 1000 points.
Analogs are never going to be perfect but they are excellent tools that
will help you contextualize market action and set reasonable targets when
you catch a move. If the EUR rally in 2017 was 1.08 to 1.25 and the rally
looks similar in 2020 (and also started around 1.08)… You could do worse
than to guess the 2020 rally might target 1.2500 too.
Analogs bolster your understanding of narratives and volatility.
Month-end dollar effect
On the morning of the last trading day of the month, European pension
funds execute massive rebalancing trades. Any month that saw significant
moves higher in US equities will see large USD selling by pension funds as
4 p.m. approaches while any month where US equities tumbled will see
large USD buying. This pattern has existed since at least 2005. It does not
work every time (nothing works every time) but it is about as reliable as
patterns get.
This hedging goes the opposite direction of stocks and only matters
when US equities have moved meaningfully during the month. Here is why
it happens: imagine a foreign holder of US stocks who owns a billion USD
of S&Ps and is short one billion USD to hedge the position. If stocks rally
10%, he now has 1.1 billion of stocks and 1.0 billion of USD hedges. So he
needs to sell 0.1 billion ($100 million) USD to rebalance his hedges.
These asset managers are benchmarked to 4 p.m. London on the last day
of the month so activity peaks at that time as managers attempt to match the
benchmark rate. The huge volumes going through on the last day of the
month create some large and often illogical moves and these dislocations
can create significant patterns and opportunities for astute traders.
Bubbles tend to deflate by about 85% before rebounding
Looking at the major bubbles in recent history, here is how much price
sold off from high to low before making the ultimate bottom:
Bitcoin
2017/2018
84.2%
XLF (financial stocks ETF)
2007/2008
84.6%
US homebuilder stocks
2005/2008
84.6%
NASDAQ bubble
2000/2002
83.6%
Japan's Nikkei bubble
1989/2008
82.0%
USA Crash of 1929
1929/1932
86.2%
If you are looking to buy a deflated bubble asset, look for the 80%/85%
discount area. It is remarkably common for burst bubbles to bottom around
there.
Highs and lows are more likely on round numbers than on other
numbers
I explained this in the section on Round Number Bias. If you are
looking for an optimal entry point and there is a major round number
nearby, that’s helpful.
Bankrupt stocks usually rally on the open
When stocks re-open after being halted for a bankruptcy announcement,
that is often the ideal time for shorts to take profit. This is because once a
stock trades sub-$1.00 after beginning bankruptcy proceedings, it can take
months or even years before the stock is zeroed out. It is not worth it for
speculators to stay short all that time where the is so little juice left in the
trade.
This is kind of a ridiculous trade given you are buying the shares of a
bankrupt company but it doesn’t always have to make sense. Often, buying
the shares of a bankrupt company when the stock reopens after the halt for
the bankruptcy announcement can be highly profitable as a short-term (1
day to 1 week) trade.
The patterns I have described are just the tip of the iceberg. As you gain
expertise in your market and watch markets in general over the years, you
will discover more and more patterns. Remember that if you can explain a
pattern, and why it should continue to repeat, there is a much higher
likelihood that pattern will be useful for trading.
Random patterns that you observe or discover by data mining are quite
often simply the inevitable result of the fact that random data is chock full
of mostly meaningless patterns. Find patterns and do your best to explain
them. Then make a rational determination of whether they might repeat in
the future.
Indicator scanning
Indicator scanning is a process where you have specific filters that will
identify trading opportunities. This might be volume or large move filters in
the equity market or a dashboard that shows abnormal moves in options
markets. Scanning for large moves and unusual activity can often lead you
in the direction of a good idea. The markets are mostly a sea of efficient
tranquility and you are looking for whirlpools and weirdness that might tell
you something abnormal is happening.
Once you have a trade idea, hopefully with the help of the four headings
above (Surfing the narrative, News and events, Deviation from fair value
and Pattern recognition), you need to filter the idea using the other criteria
in the grid. You also need to figure out whether or not the trade can be
structured in a way that offers compelling leverage and risk/reward.
Can you profitably put this trade on at current levels or does it make
more sense to wait? Does the action in related markets support the idea, or
invalidate it? Are positioning and sentiment a headwind or tailwind for your
idea? Sticking with the huge grid, let’s move on to the next row and talk
about how we filter good ideas from bad.
2. FILTERING
Your initial idea can now be filtered using the steps listed in row 2 of
the diagram. Let’s go through how that works, column by column.
A. The narrative cycle
Depending on what your trade idea is, or where it came from, it may
have occurred to you totally independent of the narrative cycle. Say you
have seen a pattern where bonds rally at month end and you think it might
make sense to go long at noon on the last day of the month and take profit
at 4 p.m.
It’s just a four-hour trade, surely the narrative cycle doesn’t matter,
right? Well, it depends. You should still have an idea of what the story is in
bonds, generally, and what might disrupt that story during the short time
you plan to have this trade on.
Are there any Fed speakers, for example? If so, and the narrative has
been one of a dovish Fed while the most hawkish member of the committee
is set to come on CNBC at 3 p.m., that could be important. Are stocks
volatile these days? In bear markets, stocks often squeeze higher into the
end of the day. Is this a risk to your trade? The shorter your trade, the less
likely the narrative cycle will matter but it’s rare that it doesn’t matter at all.
Say news comes out that TSLA plans to release a battery that lasts 3X
longer 
than 
its 
previous 
model. 
You 
buy 
TSLA 
on 
instinct, 
and 
it’s
immediately $8 in the money. Now, you can filter a bit here. Where are we
in the TSLA narrative? Has there been chatter for weeks about a possible
battery advance and has everyone been building long positions on the back
of that? Is the market short TSLA because GM just came out with a battery
that lasts 2X as long as the original TSLA battery?
In these two narrative scenarios, price action after the initial knee-jerk
pop is going to be completely different. In scenario one, you are probably
stopping out as TSLA crumbles back down through the NewsPivot while in
narrative scenario two, the stock probably grinds higher all the way into the
close. No matter what logic you use for a trade and what time horizon you
are trading, think about where your market is in the narrative cycle and
what that means for the potential upside and downside on your time
horizon.
B. Positioning and sentiment
Positioning and sentiment are closely related to the narrative, usually. Is
the market long or short? Are positions strong or weak? Generally, if a
market has climbed significantly, the longs are confident and strong. If a
market was in a bull market but has now transitioned to a correction phase,
longs are going to be more nervous. If you know who has been buying or
selling, that can help too. Hedge funds are generally going to be much
weaker hands than real money or central banks.
Chapter 10 has a complete discussion of positioning and sentiment. For
this section, just ask yourself whether your idea is made weaker or stronger
by the current positioning. For example, if there is a bearish seasonal
pattern, but everyone is talking about it and short because of it, that
seasonal pattern becomes much less exciting. If you spot an analog to a
move you remember from last year, and then remember that positioning at
the time was very similar to positioning right now… Your analog just got
stronger.
I want to repeat something critical here. You don’t always go against
positioning. It’s a factor but it’s not the be all/end all. Traders who go
against positioning all the time miss every major trend because price loves
to trend and sentiment and positioning mostly follow price. Be flexible,
smart, rational and open minded when it comes to positioning.
C. Events and catalysts
What events and potential catalysts are coming up? Do they work for or
against you? How will they impact liquidity? If you are bullish S&P futures
for 7 good reasons but it’s 2:45 p.m. on the day before non-farm payrolls, it
might not be worth putting on the trade. Or you may be able to use non-
farm payrolls to get an even better entry point.
Events and catalysts can create opportunity, but they can also impact
liquidity and lead to discontinuous price action, random jumps and so on.
Sometimes you want a position into an event because you have a strong
view on that event, but often events should be avoided due to their random
and illiquid nature. Once again, think about whether upcoming events and
catalysts are pros or cons for your original trade idea.
D. Correlated markets
Earlier, I explained how I use correlated markets not just as a source of
ideas but as a critical filter for ideas that come from other sources. Once
you have your idea, flip through the most important correlated markets and
figure out whether those variables are supporting or contradicting your
thesis. Is there a coherent theme to those other assets that reinforces or
pushes back against your idea? Smart filtering with correlated markets will
help you dodge some bad trades.
E. Technical analysis
Charts are the worst place to come up with trade ideas but one of the
best ways to filter ideas you come up with elsewhere. Good technical
analysis (and the patience to wait for good entries) can give you the
leverage that makes the difference between disappointing and amazing
returns on a specific trade idea. A good idea, poorly executed is sometimes
worse than a dumb idea with razor-sharp execution parameters.
As an example, say there is a bullish AUDUSD headline but I know that
overall the narrative in the currency has recently turned bearish, and the
market is dying to add to its small short position. I react to the news and
buy some AUDUSD but then when I look at the chart I see:
1. We are mid-range with no support nearby.
2. There is a huge triple top close-by, just 20 pips above market.
3. My stop loss will need to be 80 points away for the trade to make any
sense, but even if the triple top breaks, there is a trendline and the 2-
year high 25 pips above that, so this is starting to look like a trade
where I am risking 80 to make 45.
So, the narrative overall is bearish, people are in “sell rallies” mode and
it’s a poor tech setup. The market is more likely to use the bullish headline
to sell more AUDUSD at better levels than it is to rip the pair higher.
This is a situation where the tech and narrative filters just don’t support
the trade. I get out, and move on. Don’t fall in love with your trades, treat
them like they are a dime-a-dozen. Every day presents new ideas, new
opportunities and new trades. Don’t overvalue your ideas. There will be no
shortage of them going forward. Learn to love small losses.
Another example: it’s 10 a.m., and as you walk to get a coffee from the
kitchen, a fantastic trade idea crystallizes in your mind. You have been
thinking about the spot rhodium market for a few weeks but finally realize
that it’s time to get long. Sentiment is at an extreme, supply is drying up and
nobody has talked about rhodium in ages even though the other precious
metals are all ripping higher. What are the odds that the spot rhodium
market is in the perfect place to buy, at the exact moment you come up with
your trade idea? Probably pretty low!
So now step back and take a look at some charts. Figure out the optimal
entry point or an optimal entry band. Is there an area where multiple
significant reference points converge and you can go long with maximum
leverage and a reasonably tight stop? 
125
Once you have completed this filtering process, your trade idea will
either be stronger, weaker or dead in the water. Do the filters support your
analysis, or do they point to crosswinds? This is a critical point in your
trade idea process. Do you move forward, or pause? Or do you nix the trade
because it is simply not supported by enough factors? Bad trades often start
out as cool ideas but then the trader ignores a series of obviously contrary
information and does not filter because he is so excited about his cool trade
idea that he can’t accept the contrary evidence.
That’s how confirmation bias works in this part of the process. Trade
ideas are hard to come up with, so the last thing you want to do when you
finally think of one is nix it because of a bunch of filters. But often that’s
exactly what you should do. While good trades have very few crosswinds,
that does not mean you only take the perfect trades. There is no such thing
as a perfect trade.
You go through the filtering process with an open mind and then make a
sound, unbiased judgment when you’re done.
The 
final 
step 
in 
the 
process 
is 
a 
critical 
one: 
consider 
alternate
hypotheses. We discussed this in depth in Chapter 5 and I mentioned
Richards Heuer of the CIA and his eight-step process. I said it then, and I
will say it again here: you should read Heuer’s book. It’s free on the CIA
website and is an excellent training manual for good thinking that will
benefit you not just in trading, but in any area of life that benefits from
rational thought.
At this stage of the trade idea process, you need to think about the other
side. If your trade idea is bearish corn futures, think about what the bulls are
saying. Find research notes that are bullish corn and go through their
arguments. Can you debunk them? Sometimes I read counterarguments to
my view and think: “That’s pretty unconvincing” and so I remain confident
in my view. Sometimes I read the counterarguments and think: “Oh crap, I
totally missed that.”
Remember that your brain is programmed to find supporting evidence
that confirms your existing hypothesis. You need to work hard to fight
against that programming and honestly pursue alternative stories that might
make sense.
A useful tool when attempting to embrace alternative hypotheses is to
picture how the trade could go against you. What would that look like?
What specific factors or events might derail your idea and stop you out?
This helps you think about your idea from different angles (and hopefully
with 
greater 
objectivity) 
and 
also 
gets 
you 
thinking 
about 
possible
reassessment triggers. If I’m wrong… What’s it gonna look like? This is
sometimes called a “pre-mortem”, as discussed in Chapter 7.
Bounce your trade idea off people you respect and see what comes
back. Don’t blindly defer to them or hope they agree with you. It doesn’t
really matter if they agree or disagree. What matters is any new information
or evidence that they offer up. If a ton of people disagree with your idea,
but you remain confident about it, that can be powerful because now you
know you are not part of the consensus. You have rigorously tested your
idea and it is resilient to scrutiny.
When someone smart gives me a good reason to doubt my idea and I
can’t really refute their argument… I am happy to toss my trade idea in the
trash and wait for a better one to come along. Don’t hold on to your ideas
too tightly. This goes back to the idea of “strong opinions, weakly held”
which I discussed earlier. You need to come up with strong trade ideas
backed by significant research and multiple streams of analysis, but then
have an open mind, admit error and change course if need be, as new
information comes in.
This is easy to say and hard to do. Strong opinions that are too weakly
held will be scared off by the first bit of noise. Determining when to give up
on a trade idea is tough; we’ll deal with that a bit later in this chapter.
3. TACTICS
OK, after filtering is done, it’s game on. Your idea is good and now it’s
time to determine tactics. Don’t rush to your keyboard and start pressing the
BUY or SELL buttons yet. First, it’s time to fine tune the tactics to
maximize leverage and make the most money possible if you are right.
Being right and making money are not always the same thing. You can be
right and get stopped out because of a poorly chosen stop loss level. You
can buy an option that expires worthless the day before your beloved asset
rips to the moon. You can enter a trade mid-range and make 11bps when the
guy next to you threads the needle at major support and makes 111bps.
Being right is just the start.
Before you can put on your trade idea, you need to decide what to trade.
In many cases, this is obvious, but not always. For example, I often have
ideas driven by stock market views, but due to the nature of my role, I can’t
trade stocks. Therefore, once I come up with a view on where stocks are
going, I need to figure out what the best FX proxy is for stocks. Often, that
means AUDJPY or USDJPY but sometimes it might mean AUDUSD or
even EURCHF. I analyze 90-day correlation stats and think about what
makes sense going forward, then finally pick what product to trade.
If you are bearish the NASDAQ, you need to decide between QQQ,
SQQQ, QID, PSQ, and NASDAQ futures. You might even decide that a
specific subgroup (short FANG via FNGD?) makes sense or you might take
a view in a single name like AMZN or NVDA. Which choice will give you
the exposure, leverage and directional movement you want with the lowest
transaction costs?
Be thoughtful about the product you choose to express your view. It
matters.
Once you have chosen your product, it’s time to pick your entry point,
stop loss and take profit. The first thing I do here is pull up a chart. What is
the dream entry point? What is a realistic entry point? Is the exact place
where the market is trading right now the best place to get in, or are you
better off waiting? Obviously this will often come down to the type of trade
it is. If you are trading news, you don’t have time to wait for the ideal entry
point. You get in and then determine your tactics after. But if this is a
scenario where you are playing a turn in narrative and your trade is likely to
last three to five days, you can finesse your entry point.
Using technical analysis, I will determine the ideal entry and stop loss at
this point. Rarely will I have a stop loss closer than one day’s range away
unless the trade is ultra-short-term. While a risk:reward ratio of 1:2 or 1:3 is
a decent rule of thumb for most trades, there is no hard and fast rule. If you
think there is a 70% chance you can risk 1 to make 1, and you have high
confidence in your 70% probability estimate… Do the trade! It has high
expected value. On the other hand, given the significant uncertainty around
probabilities in trading, higher payout ratios give you a wider margin of
safety.
Solid tactics give you superior leverage because the more fine-tuned
your entry point and the tighter your stop loss, the larger position you can
take with the same amount of money at risk. If you buy AAPL at $100 with
a stop loss at $99 you can take a 5X larger position than if you buy AAPL at
$100 with a stop loss at $95. Then again, your odds of getting stopped out
at $99 are clearly higher than getting stopped out at $95 so choosing a stop
loss is always about the tension between ‘as tight as possible’ and ‘lowest
chance of getting stopped out’.
If you want a system that is simple and generally effective, start by
risking one day’s range to make two. Or, if you are day trading, risk 35% of
an average day’s range to make 70% of a day’s range. Those are finger in
the air starting points and you can adjust as you gain experience.
When things are going well and you have a strong feeling for your
market, you will sometimes find trades where you can risk much less to
make much more. Sometimes you can sell right against a major resistance
point and risk just 20% of a day’s range knowing that if you catch the turn,
it might be a major top and you can extract two full day’s ranges from the
trade. 
Those 
trades 
are 
dreamy. 
Each 
trade 
will 
have 
its 
own 
ideal
parameters based on technical analysis and the unique timing features of the
trade.
Tactics are just as important as strategy. You need both to succeed in
trading.
Once 
you 
have 
your 
entry, 
stop 
loss 
and 
take 
profit 
determined,
automate everything as much as possible. If AAPL is at $100 and you have
determined that $101.50 is the perfect entry point, put the limit order in the
system, along with your stop loss. If you don’t put it in a system right away,
what do you think is going to happen in two hours when AAPL spikes from
$100 to $101.50? Your dumb lizard brain will say stuff like:
Whoa, it looks bid, I better check if there’s some news
out!
Hmmm, maybe I can sell at $103.00 and get an even
better entry point.
Somebody must know something! Why is it rallying so
hard???
Selling into a rally can be hard, just like buying dips is hard. Much
easier is to calmly enter a limit order to sell at $101.50 when nothing is
going on and the stock is bouncing around near $100.00. Automate and
outsource as much of the execution process as you can and you will find
you get better results. No matter how disciplined you are: computers are
more disciplined than you!
The last stage in the tactics phase is to write down or record your list of
reassessment triggers. A trader who clearly lays out her plan is way ahead
of most traders. She has cemented a concrete process and listed specific
triggers for reassessment or exit.
Reassessment triggers are important because once you have a trade on,
you will be influenced by all sorts of new information that is mostly noise.
Numbers jiggle on a screen. Random headlines scroll by. Your heart rate
picks up. Those are not reasons to adjust your risk. It is easier to list action
triggers ex-ante than to hope you will be sane and unbiased once the trade
starts to move.
Reassessment triggers will always include a stop loss and a take profit
but can also be other things such as:
Time trigger. For example, any day trade can have a reassessment (or
firm exit) time of 4 p.m. (when the main NYSE trading session ends).
Many good trades have a time trigger. Another example: say you have
done a ton of work on today’s US Retail Sales number and you expect
it will be weak. You go long bonds at 7:45 a.m. in anticipation of the
release at 8:30 a.m. You believe that most of the new information from
economic data gets fully priced within 10 minutes
126
. Does it make any
sense to keep the trade past 8:45 a.m. or maybe 9:00 a.m. at the latest?
Probably not. So you put a reassessment trigger at 8:45 a.m.
Level at which to tighten the stop loss. Once a trade has made most
of its gains, it makes sense to tighten up the stop loss.
New information trigger. You need to be as specific as possible here
to avoid undue reaction to noise. If a trader gets long oil on a Saudi
Arabia / Russia squabble, the trader should logically have a
reassessment trigger as: Truce or conciliatory Saudi Arabia and Russia
headlines. That is a logical reassessment trigger. A bad reassessment
trigger would be something like: “Re-evaluate if price action does not
cooperate.” Be specific.
Cross-market variable trigger. If you are long S&P futures and one
of your main reasons for entering the trade is that the VIX just dropped
below the key 20 level, it makes sense to use the VIX as a potential
cross-market reassessment trigger. Again, make it specific. For
example: “If VIX trades above 21, I will cut the position.”
Note that I am using the term “reassessment triggers” but often these are
action triggers. The last example is an action trigger. I use reassessment
trigger and action trigger interchangeably since often a reassessment leads
to an action.
The first two reassessment triggers for any trade are always the stop loss
and take profit. After that, you record anything else that might change your
mind. The goal for this stage of the process is to try to guess ex-ante what
might be signal and what is noise going forward.
When you have a trade on, every price movement feels like a signal or a
sign of danger for your position while in reality most price movement is
noise. Every time price jiggles lower or ratchets higher, you will have an
emotional reaction because you are invested. The idea with reassessment
triggers is to codify what will make you change your mind and what will
not before the price starts flickering and jiggling around and those dumb
voices in your head start to react to that flickering and jiggling.
Some other examples of good reassessment triggers:
I am long stocks because I think the Fed has turned more dovish and
the market hasn’t caught on yet. There are two Fed speakers this week.
If either one of those speakers is more hawkish than I expect, I should
reassess my view.
I am short bonds because I think the economy is strengthening. Any
major US data point that comes in more than one standard deviation
below consensus will trigger a reassessment.
One of my main reasons for going long AUDUSD was the rebound in
copper and iron ore prices. If either copper or iron ore break below
their 200-hour moving average, I will reassess my AUDUSD long
position.
If you take the time to record these reassessment triggers, you should
find very few occasions where you make on the fly decisions mid-trade.
Once you have a trade on, leave it alone and let it bake. Don’t rush it. Don’t
keep opening the oven to peek. The market doesn’t care about your time
frame. A market that is not moving is boring, but it’s not telling you
anything. 
Wait 
for 
your 
stop 
loss, 
your 
take 
profit 
or 
one 
of 
your
reassessment triggers to hit. Stop white-knuckling.
Of course, there are going to be times when you are long and bad news
comes out and you hit a bid and save yourself some cash. But these are not
all that common. Just as often, you will hit the bid and then find yourself
buying the stock back ten minutes later after realizing the news wasn’t as
bad 
as 
you 
thought 
and 
in 
fact 
the 
news 
was 
actually 
meaningless.
Remember that when you have a trade on, you are biased. Information
processing is distorted by your emotional state.
The best action is almost always no action.
This is true when you have a position on and it’s also true most of the
time when you don’t. Limit your actions as much as possible and you will
put on only the best trades. Then, you will stay in those trades long enough
for them to bear fruit. This is my kryptonite and the greatest strength and
greatest weakness in my life.
I can do 1,000 pushups in a day every Wednesday for 10 straight weeks
(action!) 
but 
have 
an 
incredibly 
tough 
time 
going 
two 
hours 
without
touching the BUY or SELL buttons (inaction). This bias to action gives me
the energy to write a decent macro newsletter every day and to pump out a
book every year or two but it also makes it shockingly difficult for me to sit
at work and keep my hands off the trading controls.
My default mode is action. I have known that for 20 years and yet it is
still my greatest weakness in trading. I never stop working on it, but I also
accept it is who I am. I forgive myself more easily now than I did when I
was 30. I try to automate as much as possible and convince myself to sit
there and do nothing as much as possible. Once you know your personal
kryptonite, fine tune your process and redesign your framework to address
it.
4. POSITION SIZING
Position size is a function of six factors:
1. Conviction level (TYPE I, TYPE II or TYPE III)
2. Free capital
3. YTD P&L
4. Market volatility
5. Distance from entry point to stop loss
6. Gap and liquidity risk
Here’s a quick summary of how to determine position size.
a. Decide on your conviction level (Type I, II or III as discussed in
chapter 11).
b. Given your YTD P&L and free capital, decide on a percentage of
your capital to put at risk. This tells you how many $ (or bps) to risk
on the trade.
c. Using market volatility and technical analysis, choose the appropriate
stop loss.
d. Calculate the position size: ($ at risk) divided by (risk per unit) … To
get the total number of units.
e. Think about liquidity. Is this a reasonable position size? Can you get
in and out without much of an issue? If not, can you scale in and out
and maintain the economics of the trade?
f. Think about gap risks. What major events are coming up? How has
the product been trading? Do you need to worry about limit up and
limit down? Is there enough liquidity for this position size? In this
step, you might reduce your position size because of gap risk, or
consider exiting the trade before an upcoming event.
I will go through this process again in the trade walkthrough at the end
of this chapter. That should solidify your understanding.
5. EXECUTION
Good execution reduces transaction costs and improves returns. This is
important at all skill levels and in all trading businesses. Remember those
charts that show the impact of transaction costs in Chapter 8? Transaction
costs are important. It is lazy to ignore them or minimize their importance.
Take TC seriously.
Here are a few ways to reduce transaction costs and pay less spread. I
discuss these approaches from the point of view of an equity trader, but
these concepts apply to trading in most markets.
1. Use limit orders. If TSLA is trading 1281.00 / 1281.30 and you want
to buy, you have some choices. You can:
a. send a market order and likely get filled around $1281.30.
b. leave a limit order at mid (if you want to buy leave a bid at
1281.15, if you want to sell leave an offer at 1281.15)
c. leave a limit order to buy just ahead of the best bid or sell just
ahead of the best offer (+@1281.01 or -@1281.29 in this case)
The decision depends mostly on the level of urgency you feel.
Option a) gets you filled every time and is the way to go if there is
news, it is a fast market, or you are stopping out of a position.
Option b) is less likely to get filled, but still has a high probability of
execution. The risk is that you bid 1281.15, and the market goes
straight up. In that case you will not get filled. Then again, if you bid
or offer at mid, you will get filled the majority of the time in most
markets if you show a bit of patience.
Option c) saves you the most on transaction costs but can be riskiest
since you need to wait for someone to cross a full spread. This can
be a good strategy when nothing is going on, but you need to weigh
the risk of the trade going hard in your direction before you get
filled.
I think people tend to use too many market orders and not enough
limit orders but I have seen a change in FX markets over the past
five years as more clients now use limits. Some people feel that
when you leave a limit order, you give a free option to market
makers or high-frequency traders (HFTs) and it is true that limit
orders have some value and optionality for banks and HFTs. Still, the
money you save by strategically using limit orders to minimize your
transaction costs is worth it.
There is not one correct execution method for all markets and all
regimes.
As a general comment, there is no strictly correct way to execute. No
order type or execution style is optimal at all times. It depends on the
market and situation. In a product with a wide bid/offer spread, you
are more likely to miss the trade if you don’t aggress, but you are
also saving more by using a passive strategy. It comes down to your
view of what is going to happen in the very short-term.
If you are worried about the trade ripping in a straight line before
you can get it on with a limit order, use a market order. If you think
nothing is going on or the market might even move against you a bit
before your idea works, use a limit order or algorithm to trade. When
in doubt, consult an expert or market maker in the product you trade
to get an idea of liquidity, bid/offer bounce and what might be the
weak side in the short term.
2. If you are a large institutional trader, don’t stick to one execution
style 
all 
the 
time. 
Learn 
about 
the 
different 
order 
types 
and
algorithms you have at your disposal and mix in various methods
depending on your urgency and on market conditions. Talk to a few
market makers you trust and ask them how they transact. There is a
time and a place for TWAPs
127
but there is also a time and a place to
pick up the phone and do a risk transfer.
Execution strategy always comes down to the trade-off between
footprint and market risk. Fast, aggressive execution has a larger
footprint but less market risk. If you go slow, you pay less in TC but
you take the risk the market will move against you in the meantime.
When it is time to execute, you need to decide how to balance the
tension between minimizing footprint and market risk at the same
time.
Generally for larger trades, I find a hybrid of human and electronic
(algorithmic) execution is best. You run a few algorithms in the
background to take care of half of your size and make sure the trade
won’t take all day, and you run the other half with discretion, using
limit orders while absorbing any meaningful chunks of liquidity
more aggressively.
One weakness with TWAP and VWAP orders is that they generally
ignore the amount of liquidity available in the market. Let’s say
EURUSD is 1.1500 and a client wants to buy 500 million EURUSD.
They decide to run a 50-minute TWAP (i.e., buy 10 million EUR per
minute for 50 minutes). The computer starts buying, slowly but
surely, and the market doesn’t move. Drip, drip, drip, the computer
buys euros slowly but surely at 1.1501 and 1.1502. After 3 minutes,
a large seller appears. Someone shows a large limit order, an offer to
sell 250 million euros at 1.1502.
A rational human trader would almost always buy those 250 million
euros because that is a huge chunk of the order to fill just 1 pip off
the bid. On the other hand, a TWAP won’t care. It will just keep
buying 10 euros per minute even though it could snag a huge clip of
euros all at once if it was smarter. A hybrid algo/human strategy
gives you the best of both worlds.
3. Are there securities or products to trade within your asset class that
have lower transaction costs? Many products trade as cash, over-the-
counter, futures, ETFs, and so on. ETFs are great for some traders,
but futures often have tighter bid/offer spreads with the identical
exposure. For example, you might be better off trading S&P futures,
not the SPY ETF when you have the choice. Futures also offer more
leverage than ETFs.
If you have a longer holding period, you might also discover that
futures are cheaper to hold than ETFs because futures do not charge
a management fee while ETFs do. For example, SLV, the silver ETF,
charges 0.65% / year. This is not an epic fee by any means but if you
can 
trade 
silver 
futures 
you 
might 
find 
that 
more 
attractive,
depending on funding costs. I am not telling you which products are
best, I am simply saying you should take the time to figure out the
best way to trade your product if there are various expressions
available.
Currencies trade over-the-counter but it is not always efficient for a
hedge fund to set up credit with a bank; sometimes it’s cheaper for a
fund 
to 
trade 
currency 
futures. 
Often 
it 
is 
better 
for 
smaller
participants to execute through an online FX broker. But sometimes
they would be better off in futures. The point here is to think about
the various ways of trading your asset or market, if more than one
avenue exists.
4. When you trade a particular asset, ask yourself whether there is
another asset or security within your asset class that will give you the
same exposure with better liquidity. For example, a hedge fund PM
who manages $1.4 billion expects China growth to pick up in the
next few months. He decides to buy $500 million NZDUSD (long
New Zealand dollars, short USD). Given AUDUSD is substantially
more liquid than NZDUSD, would he have been better off just
buying AUD? Very likely the answer in this scenario is yes.
Sticking with FX markets, sometimes a basket will also give you the
same exposure with better liquidity and lower transaction costs. If a
speculator wants to take a huge bet on a falling USD, she is better off
to execute 20% of her risk across a basket of five different currencies
instead of 100% short USDCHF. This situation applies to credit, too,
where a basket of names can often give you bigger exposure with
lower transaction costs than piling into a single name.
Retail traders rarely have to worry about liquidity and this is a huge
advantage for small traders. They can trade anything, whenever it’s open
and never have to worry about liquidity. Yes, they need to worry about
transaction costs but they don’t have to worry about being able to buy or
sell when they want (or need) to. I have heard retail traders complain that if
they only had a bigger account, they could succeed in trading. That is
almost always false. It’s like saying: “I can’t win this race on a jet ski… If
only I had an aircraft carrier!”
A larger account is more difficult to trade, especially now that almost
every asset class has minis, or fractional shares or unlimited divisibility
(crypto). The only time a small account is a handicap is if you need to make
X amount of money and your account size is too small to do that. Generally,
smaller accounts can achieve more leverage, pay lower transaction costs,
have more assets to choose from and can achieve higher returns.
In contrast, when funds grow larger than about $1 billion, the list of
products they can trade slowly shrinks. Small caps and thinly-traded credits
or some short-dated options (for example) become impossible to trade when
you are a behemoth.
Smart execution improves performance.
Once you have executed your trade, automate your stop loss and your
take profit (if you can) and record the trade in your journal. These final
steps should always be part of your execution process.
Here are a few more thoughts on stop losses.
1. If you trade huge size, it is more difficult to automate your stops. This
is a difficult fact of life for very large traders but does not apply to
most. Even a stop loss for 100 million euros (a decent position size in
FX) is perfectly manageable. If I am trading a position that is too
large 
to 
automate 
my 
stop 
loss, 
I 
simply 
automate 
whatever
percentage I can. If I’m short 200 million AUDUSD and I think
anything above 50 million AUD is too much to automate, I put a stop
loss for 50 million in my system. At least that is a placeholder and
serves as an alert when my level triggers. Once the 50 million has
been purchased automatically, I will get busy and cover the rest of
the position ASAP. This is less than ideal since it relies on discipline
and can lead to dumb-brain comments like: “Let me wait to see if it
pulls back and maybe I can get these on the bid” or “Man, AUD has
rallied so much already, I can’t pay way up here!” When your stop
loss level hits, you must act to get out of the position so you can
survive to play again tomorrow. Don’t screw around trying to get the
best-possible execution. That’s what you do on the way in, not on the
way out.
2. Sell stops should always be below a round number and buy stops
should always be above a round number. This is because of round
number bias. If you ever see a trader leave a buy stop in a stock at
$99.99 or $100.00… That trader probably doesn’t know what he’s
doing. Experts always leave their stops on the correct side of the
round numbers.
3. If your stop loss is in a really obvious place where a ton of stops are
likely to be, it’s probably going to get done! You need a bit of
second-level thinking when placing stop losses. If there is a triple
bottom at $101 and everyone in the market is talking about it…
Expect there will be a pocket of stop losses at $100.80. Leave your
stop below $100 instead. The extra space will protect you from a
whipsaw through $101.00 and could be the difference between a
winning and losing trade.
4. When deciding between two stop loss levels, pick the wider stop.
Surviving the trade is more important than maximizing leverage,
though obviously there is always an important tension between those
two goals. When you get stopped out at the lows before a huge rally,
it really hurts.
6. TRACKING
Once you put a trade on, take a few breaths and relax. Don’t sit there
staring at your screen trying to decide whether to add, cut or reverse. Your
plan is in place and you should not alter course unless one of your
predetermined reassessment triggers hits, or substantial new information
comes in. Stick to the plan. When the risk reward has changed substantially,
consider tightening up your stop loss.
7. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
High performing trading professionals constantly iterate through this
process:
It’s a never-ending cycle of action and analysis that should yield better
and better results as errors are corrected and strengths are leveraged. The
information and feedback from your detailed trade records and analysis will
help improve your process. Each month that you trade, your process gets a
bit more solid and you use these improvements to plan better and trade
more successfully.
The time to analyze performance is when you are well rested and calm.
After you exit a trade, record the information in your trading journal with as
much detail as possible. Your journal entries should emphasize the decision-
making process. Once a month, go through your journal to look for patterns.
Are you sticking to your plan? Do you take profit halfway to your target
because you get nervous? Do you move your stop loss for no reason or
ignore it sometimes?
Compare your trading statistics to your history. Are you improving or
getting worse? Focus specifically on the size of your winning days vs. the
size of your losing days. This is a key metric. If it’s getting better or worse,
can you explain why?
The number one question you need to ask is: what is working and what
is not? Search for patterns and adjust your strategy and tactics to eliminate
leaks and repeat errors. Are you biased to a particular direction (i.e., are you
always short S&P futures and never long)? If yes, either stop trading that
product or open your mind to both sides. Directional bias is a huge
weakness for short-term traders.
Once you complete your analysis and tweak your process, stop thinking
about trades in the past and go back to thinking forward. What I mean by
this is, you should ringfence your performance analysis and do it all at once,
then move on. Don’t keep thinking about trades you did in the past.
Now that you understand my process and framework in general, I want
to walk you through the specifics of a real trade from start to finish, in
detail. When you are done reading this example, I hope you have a clear
idea of how a trade comes to life. The trade I will describe is not some epic
once in a lifetime trade, it’s just a good trade of the sort you should
encounter fairly regularly. For confidentiality purposes, I have obscured a
few specific details like exact position size but this description is a very
accurate walkthrough of a real trade I did in 2020.
DETAILED TRADE WALKTHROUGH
Short EURUSD trade
September 2020
The setup
In June and July of 2020, EURUSD rallied in a steady up trend from
1.08 to 1.19 (see Figure 12.6). By the end of summer, the market was all-in
on this bullish EURUSD narrative:
Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel agree to a framework to bring
Europe closer to fiscal union. After approval at an EU Summit in July,
this removes eurozone break-up risk and makes the EUR a more
attractive alternative to the USD as a reserve currency.
ECB is quiet, saying fiscal policy (not monetary policy) needs to do
the heavy lifting on COVID-19 relief. No further easing from ECB is
bullish EURUSD.
The Fed has been mega-dovish in response to COVID-19 and is ready
to get even more dovish on the back of a new Average Inflation
Targeting (AIT) framework. The details of the framework are not yet
clear, and the market is excited to hear more from Fed Chairman
Jerome Powell at Jackson Hole (late August) and the next Fed
(FOMC) meeting (mid-September). The market assumes these events
will be dovish and USD-negative.
EUR long positioning (as measured the Daily Sentiment Index and
many other metrics) is at a multi-year extreme.
The stock market has rallied on global fiscal and monetary stimulus
and optimism around the economic bounce back as the world economy
reopens after COVID-19. Stronger global growth and world trade tend
to be bullish EURUSD.
Gold, silver, lumber and other hard assets have ripped higher in
sympathy as hard assets are viewed as reflationary/anti-dollar trades
and benefit from copious global liquidity.
US twin deficits have exploded, and this worries foreign investors.
You can see the chart in Figure 12.6.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
This was an amazing bullish narrative and many traders (most of the FX
market, actually) caught some or most of it. By the time we reached 1.1900
in July, bullish forecasters and traders were busy extrapolating as they
moved 
their 
1.2000 
targets 
to 
1.2500. 
Bearish 
forecasters 
meanwhile,
ratcheted their forecasts up from 1.05 to 1.15. A big series of forecast
revisions can often be a sign that we have come too far too fast. Strategists
cannot leave stale forecasts hanging out there for too long
128
. At this stage, a
great deal of good news was priced in.
Then, the narrative slowly started to shift.
Fed Chair Powell delivered an uneventful launch of the Fed’s new
Average Inflation Targeting regime at Jackson Hole. Markets were
hoping for a strong signal that the Fed was ready to act at its
September meeting. There was no such signal.
The ECB started to push back on euro strength with Chief Economist
Philip Lane and President Christine Lagarde both commenting
separately that a higher euro made the inflation target more difficult to
reach. When a central bank comments on its currency, pay attention.
Sometimes it’s irrelevant but other times it can be trend changing.
Gold, which had been leading, was making a series of lower highs.
Stocks were about to enter their worst month of the year (September)
and were trading with a very high positive correlation to EURUSD at
that time. Furthermore, I had several other reasons to feel bearish
stocks. Bullish retail hysteria was strong as Davey Day Trader and the
Robinhoodies gambled in stocks instead of sports. As retail bought
calls, VIX went up as stocks rallied. That is unusual. When stocks are
going up, volatility should be going down. If they go up in tandem,
that can be a serious danger sign.
As 
we 
approached 
the 
first 
FOMC 
meeting 
after 
the 
Fed’s
announcement of Average Inflation Targeting, speculators clung to the old
bullish EURUSD narrative even though it seemed fairly clear that the
narrative had expired, or at least made much less sense. This was especially
true as we had a 10%+ rally in EURUSD that already touched most
people’s original target of 1.2000. It’s funny how once a trade gets to a
target, many analysts and traders just raise their target instead of cashing
out of the idea.
The day of the FOMC meeting, I sent a survey to my readers and
responses showed a) there was a very low expectation of any major USD-
negative announcement but … b) check out the survey responses in Figure
12.7.
It was an interesting dichotomy: people didn’t expect much, but mostly
stayed short USD anyway. This is typical. The market will usually hold
onto a position or narrative until price forces them out, regardless of how
stale the narrative has become.
Since EURUSD was still near the highs then, people stuck with their
USD shorts into the Fed meeting. Furthermore, this is a classic bad trade
with good optics because the asymmetry favors short USD on the outside
chance of a big policy shift and a huge move lower in the dollar. Holding
short USD into the FOMC was the lottery ticket trade and speculators love
lotto tickets as we discussed in the section on favorite/longshot bias.
Based on this information, I believed it was an excellent time to take the
other side and go short EURUSD at the prevailing level (1.1865) the
morning of the FOMC meeting. Note for the record I am not writing all this
with the benefit of hindsight, this trade all happened in real-time and I
wrote about it before EURUSD moved. Here is an excerpt from my pre-Fed
write-up (which I published the morning of FOMC) to give you a sense of
how I was thinking about the trade:
If you want to fade the crowd and join me long USD, a good expression
would be short EURUSD here with a stop at 1.1951. Here’s the rationale:
EURUSD is the best vanilla expression of straight USD views these days
and EURUSD longs are still out there. 1.1917 was the high after Lagarde
(ECB meeting) and 1.1929 was the level when Philip
Lane spoke (talking down the euro) so you have a clear stop loss level
just above there.
It looks like the market does not expect much from the Fed but is going in
short USD just in case. To me that means there is a good chance of a
USD higher move as the meeting disappoints and weaker USD shorts /
lotto tickets unwind.
The result
The Fed meeting delivered nothing special and EURUSD sold off
aggressively down to 1.1788 in NY time and then hit 1.1737 in Asia time,
the same night. Still, participants mesmerized by the bullish EUR narrative
stayed in “buy the dip” mode and so the key 1.1700 level held again and we
got one last push to 1.1850. Figure 12.8 shows the chart. See the FOMC
meeting right in the middle.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
You can see we rallied all the way back up to 1.1850 in the 24 hours
after the FOMC. At that point, the trade was extremely frustrating because
it looked to me like the narrative had clearly turned (bearish EURUSD), but
price just would not cooperate. I hung on to the view but my confidence
was dented by the rebound off 1.1737.
Then, the weekend after the FOMC meeting, Supreme Court Justice
Ruth Bader Ginsburg died. This is a great example of a catalyst that triggers
a move, even when the catalyst really makes no sense. Sometimes moves
that were meant to happen just need a random bit of news to kick up
volatility and then the market will go where you thought it should have
gone days ago.
If anything, the vibe on the weekend RBG passed away was that the
news would be bad for the USD because it increased the chances of a
constitutional crisis around election time. The first clients to trade on the
open sold dollars.
You can see that a few hours after Justice Ginsburg died, EURUSD
entered a steep, aggressive decline. As mentioned earlier, 1.1700 was
considered the bottom of the range and a major support for EURUSD so I
covered (too early!) at 1.1710. Net, I risked 86 pips to make 155 pips
(1.1865 entry vs. 1.1951 stop loss).
Astute observers will note that there was more money to be made in the
primary trend from 1.0800 to 1.2000 than there was playing the pullback.
That is true! In fact, the rally from 1.0800 was a textbook macro news trade
as the good news for euro (the Macron/Merkel agreement) came out right as
the market was max bearish EURUSD and still very bearish stocks.
When I went short EURUSD, I considered the possibility that it might
trade symmetrically and go all the way back down to 1.0800. But I believed
it was a countertrend move and the decaying US fiscal story would keep the
dollar on a downward trend in the bigger picture. That is why I played the
trade as a short-term pullback (not a new down trend) and took profit at
1.1710. In an ideal world, it would have been a major turn and I could try to
ride the thing all the way back down to 1.0800 but in this case that is not
what I believed.
I often trade countertrend and “narrative is turning” style trades but the
juiciest trades occur when you identify a new trend where positioning is
max short, you get in early, then you ride it all the way up until the market
is 
max 
long. 
The 
EURUSD 
move 
from 
1.0800 
to 
1.2000 
fits 
that
description and was rather tradable in real time because the pair hung
around 1.0900 for a full week after the Macron/Merkel news broke. Then it
finally ripped higher.
This is not meant to be a recap of one of the greatest trades of all time.
It is the detailed story of a good trade that made sense and made money. But
it is not some rare bird that can only be spotted once every seventy-pleven
fortmoons. This is a typical short-term global macro trade you will see all
the time.
Now that you have the overview of the trade, let’s go through each of
the seven steps in the “Lifecycle of a trade” grid to provide more granular
detail.
1. IDEA GENERATION
The idea comes to me gradually as I see the market build a bigger and
bigger long position in EURUSD even as it seems clear that the bull story
has become patchy and much less compelling. Crosswinds blow all over the
place and EUR bulls are still heading out to sea with full confidence.
The ECB pushback and the disappointment from the Fed (on the AIT
story, 
which 
had 
generated 
significant 
market 
excitement 
and 
media
attention) make me think we are past peak narrative and price is sure to
follow. This is a classic “stale narrative” trade.
2. FILTERING
The narrative cycle, positioning and sentiment all work in favor of the
short EURUSD trade idea. Correlated markets do not have much to say,
though 
there 
is 
a 
huge 
triangle 
forming 
in 
gold
129

and 
the 
weakest
seasonality of the year is coming up in stocks
130
.
Events and catalysts work strongly in the trade’s favor as the upcoming
FOMC looks likely to hurt anyone hanging on to the bearish USD trade. In
fact, there is a strange dichotomy where speculators expect nothing from
FOMC but hold large short USD positions anyway. Technical analysis
suggests two key NewsPivot highs (1.1910 and 1.1929, both on ECB
comments) represent a meaningful double top.
Alternative hypotheses: the main alternative hypothesis is that the Fed
might deliver something very dovish at the FOMC meeting. This is a real
possibility but I rate it about a 10% chance; I am comfortable with the risk.
Otherwise, I am fully aware of and steeped in the EURUSD bull narrative (I
have been participating in it and/or studying it for four months). Being
expert in the current narrative, I feel like I can shoot down the bulls’
arguments one by one, with high confidence.
That sounds a bit arrogant, but honestly, I am never as confident as that
last paragraph sounds. Still, I am as confident in this case as one can
reasonably be in a game where the rules and probabilities are constantly
changing. It’s more about being confident enough, not perfectly confident.
If risk/reward is 1 : 1, you need supreme confidence but at 1.8 : 1, there is
some margin of error to work with.
3. TACTICS
The whole story is about EURUSD so product choice here is easy.
EURUSD, obv. With regard to the stop loss, I consider the 1.1910/1.1929
area important, so I place my stop at 1.1951, above those two levels, plus
another 25% of a daily range (and one pip above the round number,
1.1950).
My take profit is 1.1710. There is a huge support at 1.1700 from July
and August so I simply place my take profit just ahead of that. Risking 86
pips to make 155 (1: 1.8 ratio) is fine by me. As you know, I don’t stick to
an arbitrary ratio. Instead, I think about my expected probability of success
vs. my upside.
In this case, I think I am better than 50/50 to be correct so risking 86 to
make 155 is excellent leverage. My reassessment trigger is easy in this case
and it is an automatic exit trigger: if the Fed meeting is unambiguously
dovish, my idea is wrong and I will get out as quickly as possible. I also add
“topside break of gold triangle” as a reassessment trigger (but not an
automatic exit). If gold starts ripping higher, that’s probably not good news
for my short EURUSD trade.
4. POSITION SIZING
I have to be a bit opaque here because when you work at a bank you are
not allowed to discuss specific trade details. So here I introduce a young
trader with four years of experience: Phoebe. She has a yearly stop loss of
$3 million. She is +$2 million P&L on the year and views this short
EURUSD idea as a Type II trade. She has free capital of $5 million (max
loss $3m + YTD P&L $2m) and decides to risk 4% of free capital on the
trade. That is 4% of $5 million, which is $200,000. Then, she calculates:
Position size
= $ at risk / (entry point - stop loss level)
= 200,000 / (1.1951 - 1.1865)
= 23.2 million EURUSD
She rounds it off and thus plans to go short 23 million EURUSD at
1.1865. The market can easily handle both an entry and a stop loss for 23
million euros, so liquidity is not a constraint here. Her stop loss is far
enough away that she believes with high certainty that she will be able to
access 23 million EUR of liquidity at or before 1.1951, even on the worst
possible FOMC outcome.
She thinks about the catastrophic outcome (Fed announces a massive
new QE program) and runs through her memory of similar incidents in the
past. She is confident that she will not blow herself up on this trade, even if
the Fed fires a bazooka. There is no risk of ruin.
5. EXECUTION
Because the Fed meets in a few hours, and she wants the trade on before
the meeting, there is no chance to fine tune the execution. She places a
1.1865 limit order to sell and gets a fill within a minute or two. The moment
she is filled, she inputs a stop loss order to buy 23 million euros at 1.1951.
She flips open her journal and enters the details of the trade, along with
a 
quick 
note 
saying 
she 
is 
nervous 
because 
she 
doesn’t 
usually 
take
positions through major events. She feels proud that she is keeping the full
size (23 million euros) whereas in the past she would have cut back to 10
million euros through an event like this, just in case. Her confidence in her
own judgment of event and gap risk has grown.
Once the trade is on, Phoebe literally sits on her hands to keep herself
from trading. The FOMC meeting starts, the statement is released and
EURUSD flies around during Powell’s speech. The currency pair goes up
first (for no reason?) then crumples under the weight of the disappointing
outcome. Nothing new from the Fed = disappointed USD bears. Phoebe
watches with minimal emotion knowing this is just one of many, many
trades she will do this year. She updates her stop loss by adding a take profit
OCO
131
to buy at 1.1710. She leaves the office and bicycles home.
That night, Phoebe is awoken by her loud neighbor at 2:14 a.m. and she
breaks her own sleep through the night don’t check your phone rule by
checking her phone. She sees EURUSD is trading around 1.1741. She does
a quick fist pump and falls back to sleep. She dreams of waking up with
EURUSD at 1.1660. She dreams of giant cartoon dollar signs. She dreams
of more fist pumping.
But… Sad trombone. When she wakes up, she sees that EURUSD has
rallied back to 1.1801. By the time she leaves work the next day it’s all the
way back at 1.1850! GRRRRR. #disappointing.
Her conviction is not broken, just bent. She knows nothing’s changed
and her thesis remains valid and intact. The Fed wasn’t dovish, gold has not
broken the triangle, her stop loss hasn’t hit and her take profit is nowhere
close. So… She sticks to the plan. That is the whole point of reassessment
triggers. If none of them have triggered: hands off the keyboard!
Eventually, a few days later, despite what looks like USD-negative news
(Ruth Bader Ginsburg dies, triggering a possible constitutional crisis into
the US election) EURUSD dumps lower and her take profit hits.
She made $356,000 profit on the trade. EURUSD keeps going straight
down but she is smart and rational and doesn’t much care what happens in a
market after she gets out of a trade. Once you exit a trade, don’t sit there
saying woulda/coulda/shoulda if it keeps going. Nobody cares and neither
should you. Start thinking about new trade ideas.
Think forward. Not back.
The ability to flush past trades quickly from your mind is a useful skill
that will help keep you sane and productive. Like the tattoo says: No
Regerts.
There are lessons to be extracted from most trades, but you should
extract them quickly and move on. Write any impressions and lessons you
take away immediately in your NOTES column and then start thinking
about what’s next. Here, Phoebe writes:
Took a good-sized position through a major event. STUCK WITH THE
PLAN 
despite 
some 
scary 
whipsaw 
moves. 
Good 
process 
/ 
good
outcome.
Record your trade results at the appropriate level of detail so that you
can go back and analyze your trading once per month. By conducting post-
mortems just once a month (and not on each trade individually), you will
view your trading more holistically and will be less likely to get bogged
down in the emotional joy or pain of specific trades.
That 
completes 
this 
walkthrough 
of 
the 
short 
EURUSD 
trade 
of
September 2020. I hope it helps you understand my thought process and
provides enough granular detail so that the giant grid numbered 1 to 7
makes complete sense at this point.
This concludes Chapter 12 and our discussion of the specific steps that
go into finding, executing and monetizing trade ideas. The methodology
and mathematics you use to develop and optimize your trading process are
critical to your success as a professional trader.
Now, let’s head to Part Four and dig into the two most critical aspects of
trader mindset: Adaptation and attitude.
125. “Tight stop in rhodium” is not really a thing, but let’s not quibble over details in a
theoretical scenario, OK? :]
126. This is a reasonable belief, by the way. Most studies show the directional impact (half-
life) of economic data lasts five to ten minutes and then the price action after that is
random.
127. TWAP stands for time-weighted average price. VWAP stands for volume-weighted
average price. They are similar electronic strategies that take a large order and break it
up into smaller pieces then execute those smaller pieces over time. For example, a client
wants to buy 200 million USDCAD. That’s too big of a ticket to do all at once, so they
might send a TWAP to buy the 200 USDCAD over 200 minutes. Then, the computer will
buy 1 million USDCAD per minute for 200 minutes (3h20m) until the order is completed.
With a TWAP like this is, you reduce your footprint substantially because you spread the
order out over a long period. The problem is, you are taking a ton of market risk because
if you are a buyer, the market could go substantially higher in the 3 hours and 20 minutes
it takes to complete the trade. TWAPs and VWAPs are best used when markets are quiet
or when the user thinks the market is likely to move in their direction in the time allotted to
the TWAP (i.e., if you are a buyer and you think the price is going lower, a TWAP makes
sense).
128. For example, if your forecast was 1.05 when EURUSD was 1.08… Then EURUSD
rallies to 1.1900… Your 1.05 forecast looks a bit ridiculous now. You don’t want to have a
ridiculous forecast. So you stay bearish and move your forecast up to 1.1500. That’s how
forecasting works, generally. “Forecasts” go up and down with the market price.
129. Gold usually has a strong positive correlation to EURUSD and negative correlation to
the USD in general.
130. Stock market correlation to EURUSD is very erratic and regime sensitive but at this
point in time, the correlation was positive. So if stocks dumped, that would help my
EURUSD short position.
131. OCO means “One cancels the other”. If her stop gets done, the take profit will cancel,
and vice versa. This is a standard order type.
Y
PART FOUR
ADAPTATION AND ATTITUDE
ou can memorize every method and synthesize every strategy in this
book, but if your mindset is bad, your trading will be bad. As an
experienced trader and the author of two books on trading, I am intimately
familiar with what needs to be done to trade successfully. Still, I go through
periods of terrible performance and sometimes struggle under the weight of
bad attitude or mindset. Experience helps, but even wily veterans like me
are not immune to periods of poor adaptation, sluggish mental energy,
sloppy trading, and frustration. A rigid mindset, negative mental loops and
low energy will derail the best-laid plans and render even the most carefully
planned process, strategy, and tactics all but worthless. Without the right
attitude, there can be no sustained success in trading. The next chapter will
discuss the importance of adaptation and then we will close with Chapter 15
and some final thoughts on the importance of a healthy attitude.
T
CHAPTER 14
ADAPT OR DIE
Stay flexible and achieve long-term trading success
Adapt or perish, now as ever, is nature’s inexorable imperative.
H. G. WELLS
rading success can be fleeting or sustained. In this chapter, we discuss
the mindset and approach that will allow you to thrive and survive as a
trader over the course of years and then decades. Latching on to one style or
overcommitting to a specific methodology is not the answer. The answer is
adaptation and flexibility.
Excellent 
traders 
adapt 
to 
changes 
in 
market 
conditions 
and
microstructure over time. Alpha Traders recognized, for example, that trend
following was delivering lower and lower returns in the 1990s. Instead of
complaining 
and 
sticking 
with 
a 
failing 
strategy, 
they 
developed 
new
strategies and found new ways to trade in the 2000s.
When they saw algos enter the market in the mid-2000s, they did not
scream: “These algos are stupid! This is dumb!” Instead, they thought “OK,
this is a major change in market structure. How am I going to adapt? How
can I beat the algos? How do I make money in this new regime?”
No market regime lasts forever. Profitable strategies slowly disappear
because efficient markets discover them and crowd into them. If everyone is
making 
money 
trading 
correlation, 
you 
can 
bet 
it 
will 
attract 
more
participants. With more participants, profits shrink and strategies die.
You saw this with the high-frequency firms in the 2010s. Initially, high-
frequency traders were obscenely profitable across the board but as the
decade wore on, the arms race heated up (faster and smarter strategies) and
by the end of the 2010s most high-frequency strategies barely generated
enough returns to cover costs. A small group of highly adaptable firms
crowded out all the less nimble participants.
Study and adapt to ongoing changes in market structure.
Markets are in a constant state of evolution and good traders need to be
aware of this. The big structural changes happen every 5 to 7 years, and
these are of epic importance. However, probably more important are the
continual changes in the market that require adaptation in real time. A poker
player cannot expect to win in the long run by employing the same style
and strategy over and over. She must adapt as the game changes, and
respond in real-time as the metagame evolves.
Here are the most important markers of market structure, and how to
continually adapt to them.
ORDER VS. CHAOS
Markets alternate between order and chaos. Chaotic markets (often
called 
“fast 
markets”) 
generate 
temporary 
inefficiencies 
and 
outsized
opportunities but also tend to be short-lived, dangerous, and volatile. Order
and equilibrium are the market’s default state, but when chaos arrives, so
does disequilibrium. Dislocations present the opportunity for traders to
capture abnormal returns. Fast markets are high risk and high reward. Here
is a primer on trading fast markets.
Trading fast markets
In World War 1, there was a famous quote:
Modern 
warfare 
is 
months 
of 
boredom 
punctuated 
by 
moments 
of
extreme terror
132
.
I would paraphrase here and say modern trading is hours of boredom
punctuated by minutes of extreme terror. Things are quiet most of the time
but what matters is how you act and react when the guano hits the rotating
blades.
Crisis markets can provide the best opportunities for profit and the
greatest chance of ruin. Markets can lay dormant for months, then go
completely insane. A whole day can go by without excitement, then a
headline hits at 4:00PM and everything boots off.
In this section, I discuss fast markets and, more specifically, trading
during a crisis or extreme high volatility event. Trading crisis markets and
trading idiosyncratic bursts of extreme high volatility involve most of the
same skills and concepts.
It 
is 
usually 
easy 
to 
identify 
when 
a 
crisis 
is 
happening 
but 
for
simplicity, I would say any time the VIX is above 40, that’s a crisis market.
Looking at all days since 1990, the VIX closed above 40 just 2.2% of the
time. Check out Figure 14.1.
The vertical bars are all famous events in financial market history:
There is nothing special about the number 40, it’s just a level we rarely
see in the VIX.
When markets are in crisis, you need to trade differently. You need to be
faster and smarter. The challenge is to be both more careful and more
courageous at the same time. That is hard to balance! Fast markets are
scary, but they are the best times to make money, and to truly excel at
trading you need to crush fast markets.
Here are some tips to help you trade fast markets:
1. Correct position size is the difference between winning and losing
in a crisis. Too big is not OK; you might blow up or get fired. Too
small is not OK either; you need to seize the moment. Trading in fast
markets is when the most money gets made and the alpha traders
emerge.
I remember as volatility went to the moon in 2008, I changed my
normal trade size in USDMXN from 20 million to 3 million and I
was still amazed (scared) by the volatility of my P&L. If you can
size dynamically using forward-looking estimates of volatility, that is
ideal. Look at what options markets are pricing for 1-week volatility.
If you can’t do that, look at the average daily range over the past 5,
10 or 20 days.
As a rough logic check: for day traders, your stop loss should rarely
or never be closer than within 1/3 of a day’s range. For swing
traders, use one full day’s range. In other words, if you are trading
Apple common stock and the average daily range over the past 5, 10
and 20 days is $25: day traders’ stops should be $8 or more away
from the entry point and swing traders stops should be at least $25
away from entry. This should be a good starting point in most
markets.
If you are getting stopped out and chopped up every day, your stops
are too tight. A smaller position with a wider stop is necessary in
crisis markets but you need to be mindful that you don’t get so small
that you are trading meaningless positions that won’t move the
needle on your P&L. Yes, a lot of traders get blown up in a crisis, but
a lot just hide under the desk and reveal they are fundamentally
riskaverse actors who are not really fit to trade moving markets.
Striking the balance between too big and too small is vital in trading
and that balance can be the difference between crushing a crisis
period or getting crushed by it.
2. Keep an open mind and use your imagination. When COVID-19
hit in 2020, the market took oil from $65 to $50 as concerns about
consumer demand knocked a market that was already bulled up on
“cheap” energy stocks. Then the OPEC meeting in early March
crumbled and crude plummeted from $50 to $27 in a week. The
pressure from COVID-19 started the ball rolling then the Saudi
pledge to pump like crazy broke the back of the oil market. Anyone
watching oil go from $65 to $50 might have thought that was enough
of a move. “It’s a big move! I’m going the other way!” Not a good
plan. Eventually oil went to MINUS $40. This leads to the next point
about crisis markets.
3. In crisis markets, there is no such thing as overbought and
oversold. Don’t be the person that fades the whole bear market all
the way down. In a crisis, stocks can stay oversold for ages and then
get wildly overbought days later. You need to differentiate between
run-of-the-mill risk aversion and crisis-level risk aversion.
Most risky asset sell-offs are routine affairs that should be traded
using sentiment and overbought and oversold signals. When you see
put/ call ratios or the Greed & Fear Index or DSI or whatever
positioning indicators flashing a reversal signal, it is normally time
to pounce. But in a real economic or financial crisis, these signals are
useless.
For example, there is a simple metric I use to calculate overbought
and oversold which I call The Deviation, as discussed in Chapter 10.
It measures the difference between the current price of an asset and
the 100-HOUR moving average. As The Deviation gets to prior
extremes, it can give a nice mean reversion signal. Figure 14.2
shows an example using EURUSD.
You can see that The Deviation (the gray line in the bottom panel)
oscillated consistently between -80 pips and +80 pips
133
over the
course of five months and the overbought and oversold readings
offered up some decent reversal trades. Then, the COVID-19 crisis
hit and all hell broke loose. Now look at the same chart, adding
February 2020 (see Figure 14.3).
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
As the crisis hit, the old measures of overbought were blown away
as EURUSD ripped higher.
4. Have courage. Insane markets are the reason you got into this
business. Don’t hide under your desk and hope for the tornado to
pass. Get involved and trade like you know you can. Don’t put
yourself in a position where you look back years later with regret. It
is better to try and fail than to forever wonder what kind of trader
you could have been.
By the time the 2008/2009 Global Financial Crisis was over, careers
were made and lost. Some of those lost were not people that blew up
but 
just 
traders 
that 
sat 
there 
doing 
nothing 
while 
their 
peers
extracted insane P&L out of thin air. Most of my best trading
memories are from crisis periods because these periods deliver fast,
volatile, and exciting markets.
Like 
any 
high 
stress 
profession 
(pro 
sports, 
jet 
fighter 
pilot,
professional poker…), it all comes down to how you respond in the
periods of extreme stress. Don’t be shy, get involved.
Recognize when your product transitions from normal trading to a fast
market and adjust your position size and trading strategies accordingly.
VOLATILIT Y
Fast markets are temporary, but changes in volatility can be more
permanent. Do you know how to size your risk correctly to reflect current
levels of volatility? Does your methodology respond systematically to
changes in volatility? It should. For example, higher volatility means you
should be trading smaller positions. Lower volatility means larger positions.
Bad traders always put on the same position size.
Many traders are not very good at adjusting their position size and risk
management strategies in response to volatility. If S&P futures are moving
1% per day, should you have the same position size or stop loss parameters
as if they are moving 3% per day? Clearly the answer is no. Actively adjust
your trading as volatility changes.
The easiest way to volatility-adjust (or vol-adjust, as most professionals
say) is to use a spreadsheet that determines position size and stop loss
parameters 
based 
on 
a 
volatility 
input. 
This 
does 
not 
have 
to 
be
complicated.
The figure you use for volatility adjustment will never be perfect
because we don’t know future volatility until it happens. That said, there are
many ways to estimate future volatility, and those estimates will generally
be accurate enough for our purposes. For example, Figure 14.4 shows the
VIX on a given day plotted against the percent range in the S&P futures the
day after.
You can see from the that plot that tomorrow’s range has a strong
relationship with today’s VIX. The relationship between VIX and S&P
ranges is not linear or normal as you see by the many outliers. The point is
not to be perfect here.
Here is a simplified but realistic example of how a trader can apply this
information and use good thinking to determine position size.
Frank trades only S&P futures and has $1,000,000 in his account. He
buys or sells on the open each day and risks 2% of his account ($20,000) on
each trade. He does not believe much in technical analysis so he simply sets
his stop loss and take profit this way:
STOP LOSS = (entry level) + (half of one average daily range) TAKE
PROFIT = 2 * stop loss
In other words, he risks half a day’s range to make one day’s range.
These parameters are not unreasonable and a simple methodology like this
will work in real life. The point of the example is to show that changes in
volatility should change your sizing and risk management parameters.
Frank looks at yesterday’s close in VIX and plugs it into a formula in
Excel. Figure 14.5 shows Frank’s risk in six different volatility regimes.
Assume index at 3500 so 1% = 35 points 35 points X $50 per contract = $1,750 Therefore
each 1% move costs $1,750 per contract
You can see here that as volatility rises, Frank takes smaller positions. If
he 
normally 
trades 
50 
e-mini 
contracts 
and 
market 
volatility 
falls
substantially, he will find the volatility of his P&L falls if he doesn’t adjust
the number of contracts he trades. In contrast, if he sticks with the same
number of contracts and the same P&L parameters as volatility rises, he
will get stopped out of good trades all the time before they have a chance to
work. All other things being equal, the probability that your trade hits its
stop loss level is a direct function of volatility.
I cannot emphasize this enough. Your position size should change as
volatility changes. This is the easiest and most automatic adaptation you can
make as markets change.
Rangebound vs. Trending
While markets can be volatile or quiet, and liquid or illiquid, they can
also be viewed through the lens of Rangebound vs. Trending. Rangebound
markets favor mean reversion strategies (buy low/sell high) while trending
markets favor breakout or “go with” strategies (buy high/sell higher). You
should always have a good sense of whether each market you trade is
trending, rangebound or neither. It is not always easy to tell.
It is usually straightforward to figure out whether a market has been
trending 
or 
rangebound. 
Start 
by 
looking 
at 
the 
chart 
and 
making 
a
subjective, common sense assessment. Sometimes a rangebound or trending
market is easy to identify at a glance. The harder part is identifying when
the market is transitioning from one to the other.
The simplest way to identify the range or trend status of a market (and a
possible change) is with technical analysis tools. I prefer simple technical
analysis to more esoteric methods, so here are a few simple approaches to
gauge 
whether 
a 
market 
is 
rangebound 
or 
trending 
(note 
that 
this
methodology is suited to short-term trading with a 1-hour to 5-day time
horizon).
1. Has the price made a new 20-day high or low in the last ten days? If
yes, it is trending that way; if no, rangebound.
2. Put a 100-HOUR and 200-HOUR moving average on an hourly chart
and look at this matrix:
You can substitute different moving averages depending on what you
find generally fits the trend of the product and time frame you trade.
If you are trading a longer time horizon you can also put three
moving averages on your daily chart. Say, 20, 50 and 100-day
moving averages. When they are in order it is a trend (20 > 50 > 100
= uptrend or 20 < 50 < 100 = downtrend). When they are not in
order, there is no trend or the trend is weak.
3. Eyeball it. This sounds kind of stupid but generally no advanced
mathematics degree is required to determine if a market is trending
or rangebound. Often a cursory glance at a chart (or your experience
sitting there trading the market for the past month or two) reveals the
type of regime.
It’s not difficult to figure out if you are in a range or trend regime, but
the challenge is to trade appropriately and to figure out when the regime is
changing. Assume trends and ranges are somewhat persistent, and wait for
evidence of a regime shift before altering your approach. It is better to wait
for a signal to tell you the regime has changed than to try to anticipate or
front run that regime change.
Volatility, liquidity, and trend are the three features you should always
be able to describe with confidence for each market you trade. You should
always know where volatility is relative to recent history, whether liquidity
is good, bad, or ugly and whether your market is in a trend or a range. If
you update your view of these three variables daily, you will adapt in real
time better than most of your competitors.
Here are some other ways to adapt to bigger macro changes in market
structure.
Realize no trading method works always and forever. No matter how
well your methodology works right now, there is a chance it won’t work
tomorrow. Be vigilant to changes in the market and monitor the success of
different trading strategies. For example, if you notice that breakout trading
has not been working for you over the past two years, spend some time
thinking 
about 
why. 
Has 
your 
methodology 
changed? 
Did 
you 
stop
following your own rules? Or… Are there new algorithms doing the same
thing you used to do, but faster? Are the basic breakout trading strategies
such 
common 
knowledge 
that 
they 
no 
longer 
provide 
any 
edge? 
If
everybody is doing the same thing, the odds are low that it will make
money.
William Faulkner’s advice to fiction writers was: “Kill your darlings.”
What he means is no matter how much you love some paragraph or
character or scene you’ve written, if it doesn’t work in the bigger picture:
cut it. The same applies to trading strategies. Don’t be the trader that is a
one-trick pony and can’t drop a strategy even though he knows (and the
P&L shows) that it doesn’t work. Do not fall in love with strategies that
made you money in the past. Kill your darlings.
I tell you this from experience because throughout my career, my bread
and butter was always trading lead/lag and correlation between currencies
and variables like oil, gold, interest rates and equities. This made me a pile
of money from 2003 to 2013 or so, but since then it has been much more
difficult to extract profit from this approach. Too many people know about
the methodology, too many blogs post about it and too many algos trade it.
In 2006, very few FX traders had live feeds for gold, oil, and single
name equities. Now every single trader does. In 2006 there might have been
a few expensive, PhD-built algorithms trading correlation, now you can
build a correlation trading algo in Excel in two hours and plug it directly
into the market through an online broker.
Efficient markets eventually prevail. Always.
It took me a few years to transition, but now I use correlation more
selectively and question the logic more aggressively before I employ it as a
tactical or strategic decision-making tool. My first assumption now is to
assume lead/lag will not work, and then see if I can find reasons why it
might work in this particular instance. In the past, my base assumption was
the opposite. I’d assume it would work and then try to think of reasons it
might not.
When there is a major change to the structure of markets, STOP
AND THINK. How is this going to impact me? Here are a few examples of
major structural changes that have changed markets in my lifetime.
1996
Currency market trading moves from voice brokers to electronic
brokers.
2001
US stock markets stop trading in fractions and trade in decimals
instead.
2002 
-
2005
Algorithmic trading becomes an important part of most markets.
2010 
-
2015
Flash 
crashes 
become 
an 
important 
liquidity 
risk 
in 
many
markets.
Octobe
r 2019
Free stock trading for retail traders triggers several euphoric
“runnings of the bulls” in US stocks.
I believe that adaptation is one of the keys to survival and professional
longevity in almost every industry. A good athlete adapts as her sport
changes, just like a good trader adapts as markets change. Be thoughtful
about the current environment, how it is changing and how it might change
in the future. Think about how you can adapt your trading to stay ahead.
As Billy Beane says to the aging baseball scout in Moneyball, “Adapt or
die.”
This all circles back to the discussion near the start of the book where I
discussed conscientiousness and the growth mindset. Good traders adapt
because they are thoughtful about adaptation and employ it as a conscious
strategy in their trading. But they are also more likely to have a growth
mindset in life, too. Keep adding new knowledge on the existing base and
never say things like “I’m not good at that” or “I don’t trade that kind of
market”. The market won’t always be in your favorite regime. Identify and
trade the reality, not the ideal.
Since the market is a huge, adaptive system, you need to constantly
adapt to it. As the Red Queen in Through the Looking-Glass (Lewis Carroll)
says:
Now, here, you see, it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the
same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you must run at least
twice as fast as that!
You need to work twice as hard as everyone else if you want to get
ahead. Understand the market regime and fit your trading strategy to that
regime. Don’t embrace a trading style and hope the market complies with it.
“Trading 
style” 
should 
describe 
your 
time-horizon, 
risk 
management
approach and preferred analysis methodology, it should not describe the
specific strategies you prefer. Specific strategies work in specific market
regimes and you need to adapt your overall style to the regime.
Like most important trading behaviors, adaptation is easy to understand,
but hard to continually execute successfully. It is especially difficult to give
up particular strategies that worked for many years. Think about the areas
where you have been slow to adapt, and how you can catch up. Think about
how your market has changed, or is changing. And change with it.
That’s it for our discussion of adaptation. You are now more than 91%
done this book. In the final chapter, I will give you some parting thoughts
on healthy mindset and positive thinking. Your attitude and mindset will
determine some part of your success and help you bounce back when the
market pummels you into submission now and then.
132. 
https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/103851/where-does-the-phrase-of-
boredom-punctu-ated-by-moments-of-terror-come-from
133. See dark, horizontal lines. Note: 80 pips = 0.0080
I
CHAPTER 15
THANK GOD IT’S MONDAY!
It is impossible to succeed without the right attitude
n this chapter, I offer some final thoughts on how proactive goal setting,
selfawareness, and attitude shape our trading experience and impact
trading success. Before we dive in, let’s start with a Chinese fable.
There was once a farmer in ancient China who owned a horse. “You are
so lucky!” his neighbors told him, “to have a horse to pull the cart for you.”
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
One day the farmer forgot to latch the gate and his horse bolted. “Oh no!
This is terrible news!” his neighbors cried. “Such terrible misfortune!”
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
A few days later the horse returned, bringing with it six wild horses. “How
fantastic! You are so lucky,” his neighbors told him. “Now you are rich!”
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
The next week, the farmer’s son was breaking in one of the wild horses
when he fell off and broke his leg. “Oh no!” the neighbors cried, “such bad
luck!”
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
The next day soldiers came and took away all the young men to fight in
the war. The farmer’s son was left behind due to his injury. “You are so
lucky!” his neighbors cried.
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
I like this story because it is a great reminder that we never know how
the movie is going to end. Your life is a big, long story and everything that
happens along the way is driven by six heaping spoonfuls of variance.
Don’t get too triggered by any specific short-term outcome.
This chapter explains what it takes to find and maintain a healthy
mindset over many years of trading. It is pretty easy to come in to work all
revved up when you’re 23 years old and in year two of your trading career.
But how do you find a state of mind that will let you trade for ten, twenty or
even thirty years? What kind of mindset do you need to keep trading well
into your 40s?
In this Chapter, I am going to once again ask you to complete a few
quick exercises. It is easy to be lazy and just skim over exercises in books
like this. Please don’t. When you passively absorb information from a book
it is so, soooo different from when you engage with questions, stop to think,
write things down, and actively and honestly assess your strengths and
weaknesses.
Self-Evaluation
Introspection can feel a bit cheesy at times and it makes some people
uncomfortable. I know I used to gag when this sort of stuff came up in
business school. Please, suspend your cynicism. This first exercise will take
less than 10 minutes.
Professionals who self-evaluate,
set specific goals, and create clear action
plans outperform those who do not.
The first exercise is to complete a super-quick self-evaluation. Feel free
to write directly in the book
134
. To give you a bit of inspiration and
momentum, I have completed the self-evaluation myself, just now. I plan to
follow through on the results. Below my responses, you’ll find blank boxes
for you to complete.
Now your turn:
People in the business world spend a lot of time working on their
weaknesses. Personally, I think working on strengths often has more value.
Not to say you ignore your weaknesses, just make sure you keep levelling
up your strengths, too.
It’s a bit like when you coach kids in a sport. If you spend all your time
focused 
on 
the 
weakest 
players, 
because 
they 
tend 
to 
demand 
more
attention, you neglect the athletes with all the upside. That’s clearly not
good for the best players but it’s also just generally bad for the team overall.
As I mentioned in Chapter 5, I am a big fan of setting just one or two
goals, no more. Look at the two goals you wrote in the boxes above and put
reminders in your calendar for three months and six months from now. Did
you complete both goals in the six months allotted?
If you didn’t fill in the assessment, go back and do it now. If you choose
not to, read this angry footnote instead
135
. Now let’s cover a few more facets
of quality trading mindset.
Passion
What is your purpose when it comes to trading? Organizations have
mission statements that help them stay on a path towards success. What is
your mission statement? Why do you trade? Write a simple statement of
purpose. Here’s mine:
Come in to work energized and positive. Wait for opportunity then trade
as aggressively as possible within clear, rule-based risk limits. Write
something interesting every day. Make clients happy. Avoid random, low
EV trades.
A simple statement of purpose can serve as a compass when you are
feeling lost. Print it out and stick it to your desk. Whether you are crushing
it, sucking wind or something in between, circle back to the statement and
ask yourself: “Am I on track?”
Now stop reading and write your statement of purpose. Don’t come
back until you’re done.
Notice that there is nothing in my mission statement about making
money. It is more about process and attitude. If I wrote a mission statement
when I was 25, money would have been front and center. I am not going to
pooh pooh money as a motivation. It is a great motivator! A bit later, I
discuss how money was my number one motivator when I entered the
business of trading. But now, it is way down the list.
Trading pays well if you are good at it. It’s an outcome that derives
from a process. Focus on the process and let the money take care of itself.
The longer you trade, the more you will find yourself focused on becoming
the best possible trader and the less you will focus on how much money
you’re going to make. The time to worry about compensation is when you
are 
negotiating 
an 
employment 
contract. 
Negotiate 
the 
most 
lucrative
contract you can, then be glad you are employed in one of the most fun jobs
in the world, and get to work.
I worked at a day trading shop called SwiftTrade in the late 1990s. They
had a huge banner across one wall that read: “Thank God It’s Monday!“ If
you don’t feel this excited about trading most of the time, that’s a bad sign.
The role of emotions in trading
We discussed emotions in Chapter 6 and here I give you a few more
thoughts. Emotions can cloud judgment and hurt your trading behavior
when extreme, but overall, I don’t think there is anything wrong with
emotions in trading. When you watch elite athletes perform, you see plenty
of emotion and yet their performance is at the highest level. The important
thing is to not ignore or repress your emotions. Observe and understand
them.
Don’t suppress your emotions, observe and understand them.
Emotions are not bad. You do not need to be a robot. In fact, you need
to be something that robots are not: self-aware.
When you are too high, you get sloppy and overconfident. When you
are too low, you lose confidence. Therefore, you need to be aware of these
emotions and include them in your decision-making. For example, you
might say:
“I just high-fived the trader next to me because we both jumped on the
same headline and are hugely in the money. That is clearly a sign I am
euphoric. I am going to cut half my position. Actually, I’m going to take
profit on the whole thing.”
Or…
“I have a lump in my throat because I am so angry about the terrible fill
that bank just gave me. And now I get a voice mail saying my sprinkler
system repair is going to cost $3,400? Grrr. My entry point on this trade
sucks and I can barely think straight…” Pauses and moves outside his body
to observe himself and his raging thoughts… “Shoot. I really can’t think
straight right now. I still like this position but given my emotional state I am
better off cutting it in half and moving my stop farther away to give it some
room to breathe. And to give myself a chance to breathe.”
This is how good self-awareness and metacognition work. When you
can think about how you are thinking, you move to the next level of trading
awesomeness because you will start to see errors happen in real time and
you will gain the ability to course-correct before a faulty decision hurts you.
Also note that the trader in the second quote is using time delay, a
proven strategy to avoid the potentially negative affect of emotions on
decision making. Time delay is the simplest and most effective way to
ensure 
an 
emotion 
will 
not 
impact 
a 
decision. 
Full-blown 
emotions
naturally dissipate over time and physiological responses fade. The best
way to stop strong emotions from leading to poor decisions is to simply
avoid making decisions when you are in a strong emotional state.
If you are feeling super high or super low, square up and go for a walk.
Take a moment to think back over the last week. What emotions have
you felt while trading? How strong were these emotions? List physiological
and behavioral markers that you can readily identify. For example: my face
gets flushed and hot when I am near or through my daily stop loss limit. I
feel like singing and joking around more when I am up huge on the day. I
feel kind of sick when I am in the process of breaking one of my own rules,
especially with regard to position size or P&L tolerance.
Think about your physiology and behavior throughout every day and
take note of irregularities.
Commitment, engagement, and hard work
Nobody succeeds in trading by doing it half-assed. You need to do the
work. If you are too tired to do the work, get some sleep. Again, if you can’t
bring yourself to complete the few 5 or 10-minute exercises in this book,
you are probably not ready to commit to maximum trading success. Get
motivated.
In trading, hard work means you must work to become an expert in
the 
products 
or 
markets 
you 
trade. 
You 
cannot 
become 
an 
expert
overnight; that is why I strongly advise new traders to pick a short list of
products to trade (one particular currency pair, a single commodity, or
maybe 3 to 5 different single name stocks in the same industry) and go as
deep as possible on those products.
Healthy body leads to healthy mindset
I know you know this but I’m going to say it anyway: you can never
reach peak mental performance without proper exercise. Sluggish body =
sluggish mind. Find a way to eliminate the decision-making process when it
comes to working out, and make it a regular habit that is not a choice or
option. The easiest way to do this is to work out every single day, even if
it’s just for 20 or 30 minutes.
Soon, you will find that if you don’t work out, you feel bad and you
want to get back in the gym. Rely as little as possible on willpower and as
much as possible on the power of habit.
Superstitions
In a book about rational trading, the section on superstition should just
be three words, like: superstitions are dumb.
There, done.
The thing is, even a person who takes a placebo knowing it is a placebo
still derives some benefit from it! The human mind is strange and complex.
If you are afraid of the number 13, why mess with it? It might put you off
your game. Personally, I avoid transacting in amounts of 13, even though I
know technically it’s not rational because I believe there is a non-zero
possibility my subconscious views it as bad luck and this subconscious
belief could infect my trading or confidence.
Nils Bohr, the famous atomic scientist, had a horseshoe hung above his
office door. Many viewed this as surprising or confusing as they viewed
Bohr as a scientist and a man of logic. When asked, “Do you, a Nobel Prize
winning 
scientist, 
believe 
in 
such 
superstitions 
as 
the 
magic 
of 
a
horseshoe?” His response was:
“Of course not, but I understand it’s lucky whether you believe in it or not.”
This is similar to the concept of Pascal’s Wager. Pascal said that no
matter how tiny the odds that God actually exists, it is still worth believing
in God given the huge upside (eternal life in heaven) versus the downside (a
few earthly sacrifices).
Anyway, I just included this bit about superstition in case you were
wondering why a book about rational thinking has no Chapter 13.
Forgive yourself
Don’t be too hard on yourself. Look at your failures as objectively as
possible. Analyze them but don’t waste your time smashing your head
against the keyboard. First of all, the sun will always come up tomorrow, no
matter how badly you traded today. After a big failure you should:
Step away. Calm down. Analyze. Extract any lessons
(often, there are none!) Move on. Get ready for tomorrow.
Every trade is a spoonful of water in a huge ocean. Flush your mind
quickly after a failure and come in each day with thoughts like this in your
mind: “Today is a new day. All I can do is work hard and do my best.”
Even the Gods of Trading experience huge failures. Here’s a passage
from Stan Druckenmiller’s famous speech at the Lost Tree Club in 2015. In
this excerpt, he recalls the devastating moment in 2000 when he paid the
ding dong highs for size at the peak of the dotcom bubble.
So, like, around March, I could feel it coming. I had to play. I couldn’t help
myself. And three times during the same week I pick up a – don’t do it.
Don’t do it. Anyway, I pick up the phone finally. I think I missed the top by
an hour. I bought $6 billion worth of tech stocks and in six weeks I had left
Soros and I had lost $3 billion in that one play.
You ask me what I learned. I didn’t learn anything. I already knew that I
wasn’t supposed to do that. I was just an emotional basket case and
couldn’t help myself. So, maybe I learned not to do it again. But I already
knew that.
You are just like Stan Druckenmiller; you are human. You will make
mistakes. That’s OK. Hitting a baseball in the major leagues is similar to
trading in that there is a high expected failure rate baked in to the process. A
hall of fame hitter will get on base maybe 35% of the time. The other 65%
of the time, he fails.
Billy Beane, the Oakland Athletics general manager immortalized in the
book and movie “Moneyball”, was asked why Lenny Dykstra succeeded in
baseball while he did not. Lenny was an inferior athlete to Billy and was
drafted much lower. Beane replied:
Lenny was so perfectly designed, emotionally, to play the game of
baseball. He was able to instantly forget any failure and draw strength
from every success. He had no concept of failure. And he had no idea
where he was. And I was the opposite.
Lenny understood, whether subconsciously or not, that failure is part of
the game. You strike out; you move on. You hit a home run. You move on.
Each at bat is a new test. Just like in trading. Each day is a new test.
This anonymous quote nicely sums up the inevitability of mistakes in
trading:
“Good judgment comes from experience. And experience comes from
bad judgment.”
Find your mantra
A mantra is something we repeat over and over out loud or in our heads.
Mantras can be positive or negative. For example, an insecure person’s
mantra might be “I’m too fat. I’m too ugly.” While a positive mantra might
be something like “I can succeed if I just try hard every day.” Develop your
own mantra and say it over and over. Use it to drown out negative thoughts.
My mantra is “stick to the plan”.
P.S., I still don’t always stick to the plan.
Think about your trading history
The strongest and most solid legs are formed by personal experiences that
we have a lot of emotion attached to because they were painful or
pleasurable experiences.
TONY ROBBINS
If you have been trading for more than a few years… Think about how
your trading history and experience to date influence your current approach.
If you started in a highly volatile year, are you more comfortable trading
breakouts and volatile markets? If your best year was 2008, are you always
hoping for a bear market? If you started in a less-volatile period, do you
favor mean reversion? And so on.
Research shows that salient memories are often an important driver of
future behavior. Think about your salient trading memories and how they
might influence you now. I sometimes find myself thinking, “I made so
much money with this strategy in the past, it’s really hard to give it up.”
Instead of dumping a losing strategy that I know doesn’t work anymore, I
stick with it like you stick with that old friend who is now a bad influence
and always borrows money from you but never pays it back.
You can go pretty deep into the psychology and dig into traumatic or
salient moments from your past and link them to current behaviors. I’m not
qualified to talk about that, plus I find it’s often a bit of a stretch when I
read about connecting (for example) that salient memory of being bullied in
the playground (or whatever) to your current trading leaks. Do whatever
works for you.
A true professional works hard and does their best each day, even if
they don’t feel like it.
Trading requires endurance and a commitment to work hard every day.
When I get sloppy or lazy, I pay the price. There is someone else out there
willing to do the work every single day and they want the same money you
want. The global alpha pie is a certain size and the competition for slices
(and crumbs!) is epic.
When I’m finding things hard, I narrow my focus to the current day. I
think about what doing a good job today means, and I try not to think about
the mediumor long-term. The long-term is just a whole bunch of single days
added together and what you do in each of those individual days determines
where you end up in the long run. I am often surprised by how some
random thing I did five years ago or random person I made an effort to
connect with three years ago comes back to help me.
The game of life is incredibly long. Make each turn count.
Think about your personal history
Think about your history (childhood and young adult years especially)
and how it might influence your trading. For example: if your dad was an
electrician and your mom was an entrepreneur… Your subconscious might
have trouble with the idea that in trading you magically pull money out of
thin air without any traditional hard work and without producing or creating
anything.
Many traders from blue-collar families struggle with this when they first
find success. It is a strange and sometimes surreal feeling to generate huge
income without producing anything. Clearly trading is not the only job
where this is the case, but the sometimes gigantic and sudden income
stream from trading make it different from most other pursuits.
I grew up in a lower middle-class family, in the second house down
from the top in this row of five attached houses:
Photo circa 1980-something, courtesy of the Donnelly Archives
We had enough money to live normally and not worry about cash but
when there was a school trip to Europe or whatever… No chance. There
was no extra money, just the minimum required amount.
Meanwhile, my godparents successfully created and sold an advertising
agency and retired when they were 40 years old. They had one child and to
keep her company (she was around my age), they used to take me on their
two-week trips to the Caribbean every March. I got to see a whole different
world of opportunity and awesomeness. “I want that!” I thought.
A fridge with a button you can press to get water!??! A full-sized
basketball hoop with fiberglass backboard, right on your driveway? I want
that!
That goal (getting out of suburban Ottawa and into something exciting
and new) had a huge influence on my perception of money as a giver of
freedom and novelty, and kept the fire in my belly through late high school
and university.
My high school years were the days of Gordon Gekko and Wall Street
(the movie) and after I read Liar’s Poker cover to cover at age 15, I knew
what I wanted to do. My one and only goal was to become a trader on Wall
Street
136
. I had a crystal-clear and laser-focused motivation: money. That
singular focus was good.
However, as I matured and built a decent life for myself and my family,
money became less important. There is a minimum level everyone must
reach before they can stop worrying about money. Above that amount, the
correlation between money and happiness usually flatlines. The naïve and
singleminded pursuit of a high-paying job when I was young made my life
pretty simple. I had one clear goal and all I had to do was work towards it.
The weird thing about dreams though, is that once you achieve them, there
is a hole where that dream once was.
So for many, including me, achieving a dream can produce a fleeting
sense of elation followed by a deeper existential disorientation as the thing
that was pushing you forward all those years no longer has any power. A
feeling of: now what?
By the time I hit my 30s and realized that any increase in money would
not give me new freedoms or happiness, I hit a bit of an existential wall. It
was not as clear or obvious what my motivation was. I still sometimes have
tricky thoughts about what I’m doing here still trading at age 47 when there
are so many other interesting things to do out there in the world. My early-
life focus on money meant I needed to find new reasons to trade as I got
older.
After looking inward and thinking about things for a few years, I
developed a new set of motivations.
1. I love trading. I enjoy going to work every day. Going in to an office
where I enjoy what I do, I like the people I work with, and I respect
the management I report to, have been the most important drivers of
my happiness over the years. The constantly evolving macro picture
and 
the 
ever-changing 
market 
regimes 
and 
nearly 
impossibly
complicated process of trying to solve the market is enjoyable. If you
enjoy coming into work each day, the money doesn’t matter as much.
No job is fun all the time, but if trading isn’t fun most of the
time, you’re not doing it right.
2. I want to publish my writing. One of my favorite things to do is write
about finance and markets. Working at a bank and writing AM/FX
every 
day 
is 
the 
ideal 
platform 
to 
do 
that. Again, 
intellectual
stimulation before money.
3. I want to maintain my current level of monetary success but do not
really aspire to anything more than what I have now, financially. The
idea of getting super rich does not excite me. Working as a trader at a
bank is a high-paying job that involves skills that most people don’t
have. I should just be thankful and keep trading until the day they tap
me on the shoulder or the day I don’t love it anymore. Until then, I
am grateful for the job I have, and I don’t need to dream of making
5X what I’m making now because I know that will not make me
happier.
Everyone has a money vs. happiness curve. Think about the shape of
yours. There is a point for everyone (except sociopaths) where more money
will not deliver more happiness. The shape of your curve will depend on
where you live, how many kids you have, how you grew up, your values,
your ambition and your opportunity set. Don’t be one of those people that
just always wants more. That will put you on a treadmill, running towards
an impossible-to-reach goal. Be thoughtful about what kind of money you
need to do what you want to do and aim there. Don’t keep moving the
goalposts or you will never be happy. Life is not a video game.
Think about your own upbringing, how you value money (or don’t) and
how that will influence your motivation. More money is not always the
answer. In fact, it usually is not the answer unless you are struggling to pay
rent or cannot afford to pursue specific, costly passions like travel or
owning a boat.
Many people believe that success leads to money and money leads to
happiness. I think that chain of causality is mostly wrong. In real life, if you
are happy (i.e., you enjoy coming in to work each day, are passionate about
what you do, and have a positive attitude) you will succeed and in trading,
an inevitable output of that process will be a whole bunch of money.
The number one reason to trade is that you love trading.
FINAL MINDSET ADVICE: SPEED ROUND
Don’t get too high or too low, don’t be an asshole, don’t burn bridges,
don’t sing on the desk when you are making money. Arrive on time. Do the
work. Enjoy yourself. Treat the gate keepers and the back office and support
staff with respect. Don’t bitch about algos. Turn off your phone at night.
Take cold showers. Take responsibility for everything that happens to you.
Learn about the size of the universe. Lift weights. Watch less TV. Or no TV.
Have outside interests. Don’t look back in anger. Fast, cheap, or good, pick
two. Don’t talk about trades you missed. Always go to the funeral. If you
have heartburn, don’t take a pill to fix it, figure out what foods are causing
it and stop eating them. Drink more water, especially if you are prone to
headaches. Be open and transparent. In business relationships, give more
than you take. If it comes down to luck, you are doing it wrong. Smile at
yourself in the mirror. Be nice. Call your mom.
134. Unless it’s not yours.
135. Are you serious about becoming a better trader? If you want to be good at something,
you have to put in the work. You have invested hours into reading this book. Take 10 or
15 minutes to look inward. :]
136. Not exactly true as I wanted most to be a major league infielder. But that was more of a
dream than a real goal. I didn’t work hard enough or lift weights or do the things
necessary to become a professional baseball player. On the other hand, I did do
everything possible to become a trader. There is some overlap between pro athlete and
professional trader in terms of the stress and excitement. In fact, I still remember a
Lehman Brothers recruitment brochure from 1993 that featured this Q&A with a senior
trader: “Q: Why did you decide to work at Lehman Brothers? A: Because I wasn’t good
enough to play for the New York Yankees.” Man, the 1990s were amazing.
I
CONCLUSION
hope you found this book educational and also not boring. I hope that I
improved 
your 
overall 
knowledge 
of 
markets 
and 
gave 
you 
some
interesting and random insights about trading, mathematics, and life. And I
hope you can extract some useful information from this book and use that
information to make more money and to achieve whatever goals you have
set for yourself. If you take nothing else from this book, remember these six
points:
The first rule of trading is: Don’t blow up.
To succeed in trading, you must be rational, and you need to put in the
work.
It’s OK to be wrong.
Variance is part of trading. Deal with it.
There is no single trading methodology that will work always and
forever.
Trading should be fun (most of the time).
Now before you go, please complete one final assignment. Flip back to
the questionnaire from Chapter 1. Pick a few categories where you want to
make a change, and draw small arrows from the current box to the box
where you would like to be. Be realistic. If you are generally risk averse
and have trouble committing to full sized positions, don’t target a 10 in risk
appetite. Try moving from 5 to 7 first.
You don’t need to change on every metric. This is about incremental
improvement. Pick traits where you think a change will make you a better
trader. If you are comfortable with your discipline score at 8 and think there
is not much value trying to change it: leave it. You want to find two or three
traits at most, and think about how to move the needle on them.
What is the date today? Go get your phone and put a reminder in for this
date, one year from now. It should read: “Redo questionnaire in Donnelly’s
Alpha Trader book”. Come back to this book once per year on this date for
as long as you are trading and do the survey again. Keep improving every
month and every year. You can change, it just takes time. Play a long game.
Keep pushing yourself. Do not give up, no matter how hard things get.
I almost gave up. A few times.
In December 2007, I was beaten down and frustrated. It was my worst
trading year ever and it looked like I might finish negative on the year.
When you work in a market making seat at a bank, it is fairly uncommon to
have a down year and I was proud of never having finished in the red. After
this long and frustrating period, all I wanted to do was finish the year in the
black. Even by $1.
Every time I got close to zero P&L, I would lose money again. By
midNovember, I had gone from down $2.5 million back to $250,000 in the
black and was thinking about making one last push to finish with a number
that might be at least respectable. I finally felt mildly optimistic for the first
time 
in 
ages, 
after 
almost 
an 
entire 
year 
battling 
repeated 
cycles 
of
frustration and despair.
Then, a brutal turn. A salesman slinked over to me with his tail between
his legs and told me there was an out trade in my book. Negative $700,000.
That put me back to minus $450,000 with less than two months in the year.
Gross. I grinded out the next few weeks and was finally up tiny YTD, about
$200k, on the very last day of the year.
At 10 a.m., our toughest client called and wished me a happy new year
by ripping my face off to the tune of $600,000. Despite what felt like a
heroic effort to the very last day, I ended the year in the red.
I’m done with this. I am the worst trader in the world.
I e-mailed my wife: “This is impossible. I don’t think I can do it
anymore.”
I walked out of the office miserable that day. But the sun came up on
January 1. Slowly, the frustration dissipated a bit, and the prospect of a new
year gave me some hope. Despite that exhausting and disappointing year, I
hung on and kept going.
Twelve months later, I was staring at my best year ever: I made more
than $50 million of trading profits in 2008. Sometimes the thing is just to
keep going. As Joe Mauro said in his classic 2016 e-mail to the Goldman
Sachs analyst class: “Keep running”
137
.
Thanks for taking the time to read my book. I really appreciate it. Please
feel free to reach out with feedback, criticism, or questions. You can follow
me on Twitter (@donnelly_brent) and LinkedIn.
I plan to publish future updates, fresh trading stories and new lessons,
tactics and strategies, exclusively for readers of Alpha Trader. If you are
interested, please sign up at brentdonnelly.com.
137. https://www.businessinsider.com/goldman-sachs-partner-email-2016-3#-4
B
ONE LAST STORY BEFORE YOU GO
efore I sign off, I want to take you on one last trip down memory lane.
Back to the year 2000, around the time of Napster and Limp Bizkit and
the hanging chad. The moment, some would argue, American optimism
peaked. A time before the dotcom crash and before 9/11 and the Global
Financial Crisis and waaaaay before COVID-19. A time when the world
was less cynical and bull markets were much loved and quantitative easing
was 
a 
weird 
experimental 
form 
of 
monetary 
policy 
that 
only 
PhD
economists knew or cared about.
Note: 
This 
story 
is 
written 
from 
the 
point 
of 
view 
of 
my 
wildly
overconfident, 27-year-old self
JULY 26, 2000
It’s 3:05 p.m.
I am sitting at my workstation in a 50-person day trading operation in
Toronto, Canada. I don’t have much risk on. Waiting for the 4 p.m. close.
A few months ago, in March 2000, the NASDAQ topped out just above
5,000 then crashed to 3,200. Everyone thought the tech bubble had gone
permanently Tango Uniform. People thought: “Finally, game over.”
But not so fast. Now it’s summer and we’re trading back above 4,000,
the Fed’s cutting rates and new all-time highs are within reach.
About a year ago, I deposited my entire net worth ($25,000) into a day
trading account. Now I’m running $350,000+. And it is worth noting this
factors in a fair number of purchases including a nice library of PS2 games,
two years of rent in downtown Toronto, a sweet-ass Sony 200-disc CD
player and a black 1996 BMW M3.
Many days I bail out of here by 2 p.m. because there isn’t much trading
to do after lunch, but today I’m here for the close. It could be a big one.
JDS Uniphase, a Canadian optical networking stock and internet darling,
(NASDAQ: JDSU) will be added to the S&P 500 today. When a stock is
added to an index, it creates a ton of demand for the stock because many
funds simply track the indexes and so they need to buy the stock that’s
added in order to accurately mirror the index. The JDSU inclusion was
announced a few weeks ago and there has been some excitement about it.
Today is the day.
The indexers are not particularly smart about how they add the stock.
They just buy it at the end of the day. This leads to a situation where large
S&P 500 adds create nearly impossible-to-fill demand for a stock in the
closing moments of trading on the day the stock is added. Stocks close at
4:00:00 p.m.
I own 800 shares of JDSU, a decent but not super aggressive position
size. Risking $4/share ($3,200 maximum loss or just under 1% of my
capital).
It’s 3:56 p.m.
To give you a sense of the hysteria around JDSU and Canadian tech
darlings at that time… From October 1999 to March 2000, JDSU Uniphase
stock rallied 600%, splitting two-for-one three times in just six months.
Meanwhile, Nortel Networks, another Canadian technology favorite,
represented 35% of the entire Toronto Stock Exchange market capitalization
in July 2000. That’s right. One Canadian company accounted for 35% of the
Canadian 
stock 
market, 
dwarfing 
the 
Big 
Six 
banks 
and 
the 
hugely-
profitable Western Canadian oil companies.
It’s 3:57 p.m.
JDSU is trading around $132 and everyone in the day trading office
(around 50 traders) owns some. I’m nervous because when everyone knows
something in markets, it’s usually wrong. The idea is to know something
before everyone else, and then get out once everyone knows it. But I don’t
want to miss the last push higher as every index fund in the world comes in
to hoover JDSU.
It’s 3:58 p.m.
The stock rallies to $136.50. I tap a few buttons and I’m out. No way
am I holding on until exactly 4 p.m. It’s way too dangerous. Sometimes
with these index adds, too many people are positioned in advance and the
buying from indexers isn’t big enough to offset all the day traders trying to
take profit so the price crashes right at 4 o’clock.
I am satisfied with the profits. I bought 500 shares at $129 about an
hour ago and sold them at $136.50 for a profit of $3,750 minus brokerage.
Brokerage is tiny so that’s pretty much $3,750 in my pocket. Traders here
keep 100% of P&L after brokerage fees. I settle into my seat to watch the
last two minutes of fireworks. I feel like I should have a bucket of popcorn
in my lap for this.
It’s 3:58:40 p.m.
Tension builds in the room. There is always a ton of activity at the close,
even when there is no index add, so with the JDSU thing happening,
everyone is still here and everyone is locked and loaded for any last second
opportunities. The greediest JDSU holders hope for one last push higher.
Our trading screen looks something like Figure QS.1. This is a sample
showing Cisco Systems (NASDAQ: CSCO), not the JDSU window.
This is called the NASDAQ Level 2 screen and it shows all the buyers
on the left and sellers on the right. MMID means “Market Maker ID”, BID
is the price someone is willing to buy, SIZE is the number of shares (in
100s). Ask is the price someone is willing to sell. If the bid price matches an
ask price, they match and the buyer transacts with the seller: a trade
happens and both prices disappear. For reasons that I hope are obvious, the
BID price is always lower than the ASK price.
The MMIDs indicate different banks and electronic communication
networks (ECNs, or brokers) that place orders. For example, JPMS is JP
Morgan, BOFA is Bank of America, LEHM is Lehman Brothers. ARCA,
ISB, SIZE and BTRD are examples of ECN prices. ECNs are used by day
traders and banks to show liquidity and execute in the market.
Our setup trades mostly with ISB, BTRD and ARCA. We trade using
hot buttons assigned to the function keys. You set up your default number of
shares (mine is set to 1,000) and the F keys on the left are F1: Sell on ISB,
F2: Sell on BTRD, F3: Sell on ARCA. Then to buy you press F6 F7 and F8.
You can operate these keys very quickly because there is no confirm dialog.
You press F1 and you have instantly sold 1,000 shares of whatever stock
window you are on at the best BID available on ISB.
It’s 3:58:50 p.m.
I am relaxed, watching the prices spin higher and lower in the JDSU
window. My PC can barely keep up with the number of quotes and trades
being jammed down the pipe but somehow it manages and the information
continues to flow smoothly and impossibly fast. Then I notice something
weird. JDSU is $141 bid on ISB. And $140 ASK on ARCA. Impossible.
And it’s not just there for a microsecond. It’s just sitting there.
“Guys, you see this?”
Everyone is in the zone, doing their own thing. Nobody has noticed the
discrepancy.
I tap F1 and then F8 in succession, selling 1,000 shares at $141 and
buying them back at $140 in less than a second. My P&L clicks $1,000
higher. I do it five more times in about 5 seconds. Still believing this is
probably too good to be true, I check my P&L. This must be a mindfart
right? Wrong. My P&L is $5,000 higher than it was before I made the
keystrokes. “Dude! ARBITRAAAGGGGGE!”
I yell out, to no one in particular (channeling the 1994 Beastie Boys
song: Sabotage). Then I go nuts on the keyboard. F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8
F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 as fast as I possibly
can. Like a kid playing the 1980s coin-op video game “Track and Field”.
I pause for breath and check my P&L. Up another $12,000 in about 12
seconds. The ISB and ARCA feeds both reset at 4:00:00 because the market
makers drop out at the official close. I can only do this arbitrage ‘til 4.
It’s 3:59:35 p.m.
F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8
F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1
F8 F1 F8
24 more times I press the F1 to F8 combo and my P&L jumps another
$24,000 in less than 30 seconds.
My final P&L that day is +$48,500, the best day anyone had ever
realized in that office to that point. Everyone gathers around my desk. My
heart is pounding, vision pulsating. My buddy points to my P&L.
“Nice!”
POSTSCRIPT
Never before or after that day did I ever see a market inverted like that
again. It was a one-time deal. JDSU stock never again traded higher than
the 4:00 p.m. print on that day: July 26, 2000. It went on to lose 99% of its
value in the next few years. The chart is shown in Figure QS.2.
Note that due to reverse splits, the prices on this chart don’t match the prices in my story.
That day was also high water for my P&L and the peak equity for my
trading account. The NASDAQ made its final last-gasp high a few weeks
later. 
Never 
in 
my 
life 
was 
I 
more 
overconfident 
than 
in 
the 
weeks
immediately following that day. By mid-2002, I shut down my account with
a balance below $35,000 and I was out looking for a “real” job by early
2003. Insult to injury: I had to accept a ridiculous low-ball bid to sell my
M3 to pay the rent.
I got crushed by a confluence of overconfidence and some epic market-
altering 
events. 
The 
two 
biggest 
changes 
that 
killed 
the 
day 
trading
community were decimalization (effective April 2001) and the collapse in
price of every single NASDAQ stock.
My main strategy was to capture the bid/offer on high-priced stocks.
Each morning, starting in 1999, I printed off sheets listing every NASDAQ
stock trading above $100. In 1999, that list was four pages long. By 2002, it
was four stocks.
Four lessons learned:
Markets don’t stay inefficient forever. The NASDAQ was wildly
inefficient from 1998 to 2002. If you find an inefficiency, make hay
while the sun shines and then stash away as many nuts as you can for
winter. Winter is always around the corner.
If you are overconfident, the market will swiftly and harshly beat that
overconfidence out of you.
Trading can be incredibly fun.
Indexes don’t tell the full story.
R
CODA
emember the flash crash USDJPY story from the start of this book?
Now, here’s the same story annotated with all the concepts I have
outlined 
throughout. 
I 
hope 
this 
demonstrates 
the 
way 
good 
and 
bad
decisions, great calls, dumb mistakes, and heaps of trader bias can all
influence a single trading day.
FAIRFIELD COUNTY, CONNECTICUT MAY 6, 2010 | 4:55AM
The Connecticut air is cold and damp. The trader moves in silence. He
steps quietly through the pitch-black darkness of his Colonial McMansion
and toward the door. As he disarms the home security system, the BEEP
BEEP BEEP of the keypad code he enters is impossibly loud in the quiet of
the predawn morning. He steps out of the house, closes and locks the door,
and hops into his car.
As he rolls down the driveway and into the foggy morning, he inserts a
Deadmau5 CD and blasts it at high volume in an effort to wake up and get
pumped for another day of trading. But this will not just be another day of
trading. This will be one of the most insane trading days of his career.
It has been a frustrating year so far. The Eurozone Crisis has been
smoldering for months but the trader’s attempts to sell the euro have been
met with massive countertrend rallies as the Fed embarks on another round
of USD-negative QE. They call EURUSD a collision of two garbage trucks.
The trader struggles to steer clear of the wreckage.
His strongest view recently has been lower USDJPY. There is risk
aversion popping up all over the place as markets worry about a domino
effect where Greece crashes out of the Eurozone, followed by Spain,
Portugal, Ireland and then finally Italy. Everyone is bearish stocks as the
S&P 500 rally from 666 in March 2009 to 1050 now is seen as a mirage; the
side effect of a money printing magic trick performed by central bankers.
Totally unsustainable. [grizzly bias]
EURUSD opened the year at 1.4500 and now trades sub-1.25 so the
short trade is now hard to stomach. Even when you know it’s the right thing
to do, it takes a lot of courage to sell something down >15%. [anchoring
bias] So the trader has shifted his attention to USDJPY and he expects it to
go substantially lower as global risk aversion remains elevated and safe
haven currencies like the yen should find demand.
The chart covers the period up to May 5. This story takes place May 6. Chart courtesy of
Refinitiv
USDJPY has been inexplicably well-bid given recent risk aversion and
the Fed “money printing”. It just rallied from 90 to 94 on air over the last
two weeks. Meanwhile, the best leading indicator for USDJPY is always
US bond yields and they have been plummeting for a month. USDJPY
looks completely wrong.
The trader stares at Figure C.1, which shows US 10-year bond yields
and USDJPY. The black bars are USDJPY and the dotted line shows US
bond yields. Note they usually follow in lockstep. The divergence is a
strong signal to the trader that he should be short USDJPY. [relative value,
lead/lag trading]
If you look in the top right corner, you can see that USDJPY is a bit off
the highs, but not much. Two days in a row, the high has been 94.99 [round
number bias] and USDJPY is now bouncing aimlessly around 93.80 as he
rolls into the hedge fund’s parking lot. It is still early so there are only three
Porsche 911s in the lot right now. More will arrive later. [money does not
buy happiness but it does buy nice cars]
This USDJPY trade has been tiring and painful as the trader got short at
94.00 with a stop loss at 95.05 and those two daily highs mean he has come
within a hair (6 pips, or 0.064%) of getting stopped out, two days in a row.
[endurance] Holding on to a trade like this is exhausting as the trader’s
fight-or-flight stress system remains activated for long stretches. Cortisol
overload. [ability to handle stress]
Now, he can relax a bit and let things play out. His target is 91.00.
Average daily range has been about 100 points lately so he figures we might
get there in the next week or so.
10 :45 AM
It has been a boring morning with USDJPY in a tight range. [hours of
boredom, moments of terror] The sun comes out and it’s almost shorts
weather outside so the trader decides to go for a run before lunch. [healthy
body, healthy mindset] Less than a mile into his run, he gets his first
indication that this is not a random, ordinary day. His Blackberry rings.
Bank sales on the line to tell him that USDJPY has just dumped 100 points
in 15 minutes. Trading 92.80 now… Odd. He turns around and sprints back
to the office, Spidey-sense tingling. [intuition is useful, though often
overrated]
By the time he grabs a quick shower and returns to the desk, USDJPY is
91.50. He is short $100 million USDJPY so that puts his profit (aka P&L or
profit and loss) around +$2.8 million on the day. That’s more P&L than this
trader typically makes in an excellent month. A huge haul. [fat tails and
variance] He scans the headlines and Bloomberg chats and finds no good
explanation for what is going on. The stock market is down, but not enough
to explain 100 points in USDJPY. This makes no sense. [it doesn’t always
have to make sense] When a trade shows a big profit that makes no sense,
he likes to cover it and move on.
The trader buys 100 million USDJPY at 91.50. He is back to flat with
no position and nearly 3 bucks of P&L in the bank. [flat is the strongest
position]
He sits there calmly and processes what has happened. He allows
himself to feel happy, just for a second. He stuck to his plan and had the
patience to sit with a decent-sized position for three days. [it’s OK to be
happy] He relaxes and basks in the satisfaction of a job well done.
[overconfidence]
Then… Some dumb voice in his brain says:
2.8 million dollars is an amazing day. But… Maybe I can make 5 million
today?
And his hands, as if possessed by some mischievous or evil force, move
slowly toward the BUY and SELL buttons. For no reason. And like a
moron… He goes long USDJPY. [don’t bleed out on dumb trades with
no rationale]
First, he buys $50 million at 91.50 and then another $50 million at
91.25. It’s an impulsive trade with no rationale. [lizard brain] His planned
stop loss is 90.85 but before he has time to input a stop loss order, he
notices S&Ps lurch lower on a huge volume surge. [automate your risk
management process] He puts on his headset and fires up the S&P squawk
to see what’s going on.
If you want to hear the soundtrack to what happens next, Google “Flash crash stock
market 2010 squawk” and select one of the YouTube replay videos
The announcer’s voice is strained as he narrates an unexplained fall in
stocks from 1150 to 1120. USDJPY skips through 91.00 and the trader’s
P&L shrinks to $2.0 million. He tries to sell at 90.80 and whiffs. USDJPY is
suddenly in freefall. 90.10 trades. 90.00 breaks. USDJPY has just dropped
more than four percent in a few hours. A monster move. [fast markets] The
trader’s eyes flick over to his P&L which has now shrunk back to six digits.
Two-thirds of three days’ work, gone in 60 seconds. [time dilation]
And then… Stocks sell off hard out of nowhere. Like… REALLY
HARD. The S&P squawk guy is losing it. Screaming. 1100 breaks in the
S&P. 1080, 1070, 1060. USDJPY is a waterfall. The squawk loses his mind
as he yells:
“We have some BIG paper sellers here… 7 evens are trading. 6 evens
are trading! 5 EVENS ARE TRADING!!!. New lows here…” [herding]
USDJPY breaks 89.00 and the trader has still sold only 23 million USD,
leaving him stuck with a position of 77 million USD. It is a fast market,
nearly impossible to transact. He picks up a phone to two different banks
and neither one answers. He tries to hit the 88.60 and gets a reject notice
from the aggregator. The price feed is stale and crossed now; it shows 89.00
/ 88.10, which is not possible. The trader is now down on the day. In the
red. His face is hot and feels red like his P&L. Urge to slam fist on desk is
rising. [do not let emotions control you] The trader feels like he is falling,
falling::::::::::::::::::::in cinematic slow-mo.
USDJPY stabilizes a bit even as the S&P squawk continues to go nuts.
“65 even offered! 60 trades… 60 even bid, this is the widest we have
seen in years,” his voice cracks, he’s yelling like the announcer at Churchill
Downs as the horses turn for the stretch.
“60s trading! 50s trading! 50 at 70 now! We are twenty wide!”
1060 trades in S&Ps now, just about 10% down today, on zero news. [it
doesn’t always have to make sense] Nobody knows what the hell is going
on and there is panic in the air. The squawk dude continues to scream. He is
pouring gasoline on the trader’s agitation.
The trader’s P&L is now six figures in the red. Sadness. Anger. He is
furious with himself [forgive yourself ] because he had the right trade,
waited patiently for almost three days for it to work, caught the move
perfectly according to plan [stick to the plan, you win] … And then
flipped the other way on a whim, for no reason and gave everything and
more back in half an hour. [when you don’t stick to the plan, you lose]
$2.8 million is a good month for this trader. He just made and lost that
much in less than two hours. [time dilation]
I am an idiot. How did I get into this mess?
He needs to make a decision here and quick but he realizes that he is
flooded. [Alpha Traders are self-aware] It is impossible to make a good
trading decision when you’re flooded. [Alpha Traders make rational,
quality decisions] He needs a second to clear his mind. He tears off the
headphones, drops them on his desk, and stands up.
He walks over to the window and tries to find a moment of lucid calm.
He has been through these emotional storms before and knows how to get
back to shore. [experience is an asset] He stares over the waters of the
Long 
Island 
Sound. 
Gradually, 
his 
heart 
rate 
lowers. 
Clarity 
slowly,
slowwwwly returns. His lizard brain retreats and his rational mind takes
over. [System 1 vs. System 2] He talks to himself, out loud:
It doesn’t matter how you got here. What are you going to do about it?
88.00 was the low in March. It’s a massive level. The panic is fading.
USDJPY is down 700 points in two days and now bonds are reversing
lower. This is the place to buy USDJPY, not sell.
He returns to his keyboard, puts his headphones back on. The squawk
guy has stopped screaming. He is noticeably more composed. S&P futures
have bottomed within a whisker of limit down. They are stable but have not
rebounded significantly. The bid/offer is super wide so it is hard to tell
whether they are moving higher or just bouncing along the bottom. [how to
trade fast markets]
The trader looks around the room and sees the panic and electricity
levels have dropped. Not as many phones are ringing. Voices in the room
are no longer frantic. [trading requires focused, decisive action] He buys
50 million USDJPY at 88.85. And another 73 million at 88.95. Max long
now, long $200 million USDJPY. But this time it’s thought out, not random
and he feels good about what he is doing. He feels confident but fully in
control. [there is a time and place to be a pig] He calmly thinks forward:
USDJPY could easily rally to 92.50 from here. When you catch a turn like
this, you can be greedy.
He leaves a stop loss for half his position (sell 100 million USDJPY at
87.94) [automate your risk management] and then sits back to let the
thing play out. He has his plan and now he knows all he can do is watch and
see if it works. There is one more frenetic whipsaw and USDJPY briefly
prints to a low of 87.95. One pip from his 100 million USD stop loss.
Amazing luck. [quality decisions sometimes look like luck] Seconds later,
stocks stabilize, and then it’s like everyone realizes all at once that whatever
the heck just happened… It’s over. [markets are efficient most of the
time, but not always]
USDJPY is paid at 88.70, then up through 89.50. It breaks 90.00 and as
it hits 90.40, the trader flicks his eyes to the P&L. It is almost exactly back
to the level where it peaked earlier: $2.8 million. He praises the trading
gods and squares up. NICE! [anchoring bias]
Figure C.2 shows the chart of that day in USDJPY:
The trader made a multitude of both good and bad decisions in the three
hours around the 2010 Flash Crash. The trading I describe in this story is a
microcosm of everything that can go right and wrong in trading. Traders
make good, careful decisions and get rewarded, they make bad decisions
and get punished … but sometimes a good decision leads to a bad outcome
… or a bad decision is rescued by good luck.
That’s it. We’re officially done. Thanks again for reading!
THE END
M
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
any people helped me write this book. Number one on the list is
Christine, who always supports me and backs my dreams. The one
who continues to love me despite, and also because. Thank you for carrying
all of us on your back through the endless, half-lit, mind-numbing tunnel of
distorted mirrors that was 2020. You literally built a house and filled it with
love, hard work, and pumpkin muffin smells (and two awesome kids).
There is light at the end of the tunnel. I am pretty sure I can see it now.
Adam, you are a handsome, mature young man whose understanding of
right and wrong far exceeds mine when I was your age. You make life
better for everyone you come in contact with and I am proud to be your
father. Oliver, you are a super-smart, funny and huggable little sloth-lover
and I could not love you more than I already do. I am so glad I get to be
your dad.
Thanks Mom, for playing catch with me when I was 8, for taking me to
Crock and Block on Thursdays, and for giving me total freedom to choose
my own life. Thanks Dad for teaching me there is extraordinary and
unforgettable joy to be had from airborne pickles (in or outside the jar). I
wish there was a way back to Olympic Stadium circa 1982 so I could keep
score with you at just one more Expos game.
Thanks Steve for all the fun and creative interactions over the last few
years and for the many gifts of Magic. Thanks Brother Craig, the last
remaining unconditional optimist on earth… Sometimes it feels like the
whole world is held together by your optimism (no pressure, though). Our
trip to the World Series will always be one of my best ever memories.
Thank 
you, 
Ben 
Hunt, 
for 
the 
intellectual 
stimulation 
and 
life
inspiration, the unmatched writing skill, and the non-stop original thought.
Thank you for writing the foreword to this book. And thanks be to Benajah,
who crushed my soul more than once with a ridiculous late-night oof-y boat
over boat. So sick!
I appreciate the support of the five men who put their names on my
book, backing it by blurbing on my behalf. I put them in alphabetical order
because I have a ton of respect for each one and I am secretly super
intimidated by all of them and don’t want to make anyone mad.
Jared Dillian, the hardest-working man in finance with new content
dropping daily on the intertubes, TV, radio and SoundCloud. Your
courage to talk about hard subjects makes me feel that I can do that
too.
Dave Floyd, the cool dude from the West Coast and a true student of
the market.
John Mauldin, whose long and prolific career is the epitome of the
long-run success and adaptation I outline in this book.
Ben Melkman: the man, the myth, the legend. Coolest hedge fund
office art in the business. Call level at 05 in USDCAD.
Jens Nordvig, possibly the smartest person I have ever met and
definitely the most handsome.
Thanks Nick Jonas, AM/FX proofreader supreme, Aussie trader, and #1
Newcastle-born Mets fan. The man who loves trading and a Shane Warne
flipper more than almost anything else. His ideas make my daily better.
Nick had a major role in editing this book and our on-desk conversations
inspired many sections.
Thanks Matt Thompson for his rare combo of smartness, generosity,
courageous integrity, and ludicrous chart-formatting skills. Also, one of the
most important things in life (to me) is working with people that are fun and
interesting—and that’s Matt in a nutshell. This is also Matt in a nutshell:
Illustration by Mr. Peter Little
Gus and Christina, thank you for contributing to this book and for being
consistently 
fun 
to 
work 
with. 
Corbi 
thanks 
for 
your 
wisdom 
and
friendship; I am sorry that you are not better at billiards. Joe Mauro: thanks
for the “keep running” inspiration and Twitter hilarity. Sal, thanks for all the
timely news and ideas and for being an excellent sounding board. And
GM@SatskoPickles.
I am grateful for Sam, Pete, Bracco!, MG, Locky, Witz, BH, and the rest
of the RNG crew who helped me survive all those numb ‘rona nights while
stationed abroad in Jersey City… When I was supposed to be writing this
book, but longed for distraction, human interaction and a bit of fun. RAD.
Gitt and Suv helped improve portions of this book. My life is strictly
better in the current timeline compared to any timeline where they do not
exist. Vin Chopra helped me brainstorm a section of this book when I was
stuck and he is also just one hell of a brainstormer in general (he’s also
really good at Googling). {VW} Saed, thanks for your camaraderie and
market knowledge and for the deep dive you did on this book. And sorry I
never answer the phone. :]
Thanks 
to 
B-Mac, 
Libardo, 
Clyde, 
Volkan 
and 
Richard 
for 
your
personal 
and 
professional 
support, 
not 
to 
mention 
the 
platform 
and
paycheck you have provided me for the past four years. Thanks to Refinitiv
for all the charts.
And thank you reader, for dedicating the time to read my book. I
appreciate it.
Special thanks to Stephen K. Donnelly, for all the hours
he poured into editing this project.
Good luck. Be nimble.
New Canaan, Connecticut
2021
APPENDIX A
FURTHER READING
BOOKS
Trading classics
Market Wizards (series), Jack Schwager (1989)
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, Edwin Lefèvre (1923)
Luck vs. skill, process vs. outcome
The Success Equation, Michael Mauboussin (2012)
Thinking in Bets, Annie Duke (2018)
Be disciplined
Willpower, Baumeister and Tierney (2012)
The Science of Self-Discipline, Peter Hollins (2017)
The Disciplined Trader, Mark Douglas (1990)
Behavioral finance bibles
Thinking, Fast and Slow, Daniel Kahneman (2011)
Irrational Exuberance, Robert Shiller (2000)
Get organized
The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen Covey (1988)
The Checklist Manifesto, Atul Gawande (2009)
The Power of Habit, Charles Duhigg (2012)
Be self-aware
The Power of Now, Eckhart Tolle (1997)
Breath, James Nestor (2020)
The Hour Between Dog and Wolf, John Coates (2012)
Get quantitative
Fortune’s Formula, William Poundstone (2005)
Superforecasting, Dan Gardner and Philip Tetlock (2015)
Fooled by Randomness, Nassim Taleb (2001)
Fooled by Technical Analysis, Michael Harris (2015)
A Man for All Markets, Edward Thorp (2017)
Risk, Dan Gardner (2008)
How to Lie with Statistics, Darrell Huff (1954)
BLOGS, PODCASTS AND NEWSLETTERS
Aspen Trading daily and intraday trading newsletter, Dave Floyd
Epsilon Theory website, podcast and newsletter, Ben Hunt and Rusty
Guynn
Exante blog on Substack, Jens Nordvig et al.
“Outside the Box” weekly newsletter, John Mauldin
“The Daily Dirtnap” newsletter, Jared Dillian
“No mercy / No Malice” blog, Scott Galloway
“Cheap Convexity” on Substack, Jon Turek
APPENDIX B
21 WAYS TO SUCCEED AT TRADING
AND 13 WAYS TO FAIL
Excellent traders:
1. Adapt.
2. Are rational.
3. Are self-aware.
4. Do not blow up.
5. Study metacognition.
6. Don’t mind being wrong.
7. Can clearly describe their edge.
8. Love trading more than money.
9. Understand process vs. outcome.
10. Use the tight/aggressive approach.
11. Are experts in the markets they trade.
12. Are creative and independent thinkers.
13. Understand variance and the metagame.
14. Fall down, get back up, and keep running.
15. Work hard, even when they don’t feel like it.
16. Have the discipline to both make a plan and stick to it.
17. Recognize biased thinking (in themselves, and others).
18. Employ a rigorous and systematic risk management process.
19. Have an unshakable belief in themselves, but are not overconfident.
20. Are intelligent problem solvers with above-average quantitative
skill.
21. Have courage to put on high conviction trades in max appropriate
size.
Losing traders:
1. Overtrade.
2. Have no edge.
3. Hate to be wrong.
4. Are overconfident.
5. Can’t pull the trigger.
6. Rely too much on simple indicators.
7. Think much more about trade ideas than risk management.
8. Always trade the same position size.
9. Are impulsive and undisciplined.
10. Rely on System 1 thinking.
11. Don’t read much.
12. Lie to themselves.
13. Gamble.
Come in to work each day with a positive attitude.
Do the work. Focus. Behave rationally.
Go home. Do it again tomorrow.
That is the 22-word recipe for trading success.
INDEX
Italicized page numbers indicate graphs and charts
AAII survey, 345
Abe, Shinzo, 175
Abenomics, 162, 175-176, 245, 370
action triggers. See reassessment triggers
activity bias, 241
adaptability, trader attribute of, 35, 75, 104, 106-107
See also adaptation, trader adaptation, trader, 439—451
to fast/crisis markets, 440—445
growth mindset and, 451
to major structural market changes, 450—451
to new trading methods, 449
to rangebound markets, 447—448
to trending markets, 448, 449
to volatile markets, 445—447
algorithms, 163, 164, 173
All-Weather portfolio, 87
alpha, definitions of, 21
alpha trader
feeling uncomfortable and, 112
formula for success, 72, 75
grit and, 92
having plan, 126
as healthy skeptic, 104
intellectual humility, 184
numeracy, 248
as rational thinker, 34, 76
as risk-seeker, 32
See also trader attributes, positive cognitive;
trader attributes, positive miscellaneous; trader
attributes, positive non-cognitive
“AM/FX” newsletter, 84, 96, 202, 220
Amazon (AMZN) stock, 231, 347, 412
analogs, idea generation and, 402—405
analytical skill, 69
anchoring bias, 67, 225—229, 480, 484
See also disposition effect; loss aversion
Anderson, Irina, 69
apophenia, 64, 216—225
See also pattern recognition; Turnaround
Tuesday
Apple (AAPL) stock, 219, 241, 276, 277, 278, 289, 290, 291, 291, 442
Arcsine Law, 251—254
Art of Currency Trading, The (B. Donnelly), 172
Asch, Solomon, 82
Asch Conformity Experiment, 82, 82, 83
Asian Financial Crisis (1998), 441
“Aspen Trading” (newsletter), 492
asymmetrical information, 156, 160
Axelrod, Bobby, 102
backtesting, 81, 221
curiosity and, 89—90
Bank of America, 42
Global Fund Manager Survey, 345
Bank of Canada, 308
bank traders
annual performance and pay, 354
free capital, 356
information asymmetry and, 156
simple indicators and, 166
success rate, 40
bankrupt company, common stock of
idea generation and, 406
rallies, 406
typical path followed by, 238
Batnick, Michael, 67—68
Baumeister, Roy, 56—57, 95, 106, 491
Bayes Theorem, 80, 81
Bayesian thinking, 201
Bayesian updating, 80, 81, 84
Beane, Billy, 451, 460—461
beauty contest analogy (Keynes), 311, 325
behavioral bias, 66, 179—180, 198
See also specific types of bias', biased thinking
Bernanke, Ben, 208
Bernstein, Jake, 234, 345
bet size, varying, 107, 379
bet sizing, 256
better-than-average effect, 182—183
bias
idea generation and, 396
post-trade, 416
See also specific types of bias', apophenia; biased
thinking; gambler’s fallacy; herding; hot hand biased thinking, 155
See also specific types of bias; behavioral bias;
bias
bid/offer spread, 276
finding data on, 278
Big Five Personality Traits, 46—49
agreeableness, 47, 49, 50
conscientiousness, 47—48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 56-58, 71
effect of IQ and on male earnings, 49, 50
extraversion, 47, 49, 50
financial success and, 49—50, 52
lifetime stability of, 48
neuroticism, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 58, 71
openness to experience, 47, 49
versus Myers-Briggs (MBTI), 47
See also grit; personality; self-control
birthday paradox, 254—255, 255
bitcoin bubble (2017-2018), 185, 239, 370, 405
bleed, slow, 167—168
blogs, 77
“Cheap Convexity,” 492
“Exante,” 492
“Liberty Street Economics,” 280
“No Mercy, No Malice,” 492
Bloomberg, 65, 97, 162, 194, 218, 259, 290, 321, 371, 393, 399, 482
blowups, 117—118
bonds
as safe haven, 262
stocks and, 260—261, 261
Borish, Peter, 87, 163
breakout traders, 106
breakout trading, 173
breakouts, 161, 289
Breath (J. Nestor), 135, 491
bubbles, 236—240
bitcoin (2017—2018), 185, 239, 370, 405
Crash of 1929 (US, 1929—1932), 405
deflation before rebounding, 405—406
herding and, 236—240
NASDAQ (2000—2002), 155—156, 174, 405
Nikkei (1989—2008), 405
nonsensical moves and, 237—239
reasons for, 236
US homebuilder stocks (2005—2008), 405
XLF (2007—2008), 405
Buffett, Warren, 52, 61, 245
burnout, trader, 132
buyer’s strike, 314
call option, trader behavior like, 114, 177, 354—355, 355, 374, 374—376
Campbell, Sean D., 228—229
capacity, 150
capital, appropriate, 148—150
bank traders, 149
portfolio managers, 149—150
retail traders, 148
as trader attribute, 75, 143, 148—150
catalysts. See market catalysts
central banks
idea generation and meetings of, 395
liquidity and, 263
as market participants, 274
studying, 307—308
See also specific central banks
charts, creating, 292—293
bar chart, 294
Bloomberg “Market Picture,” 294
Market Profile, 294
point and figure, 292, 293
charts, forecasting and, 324
chasing bias, 241
Checklist Manifesto, The (A. Gawande), 95, 491
Cheer Hedge, 172, 204
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), 284
China deval (2015), 441
China/US Trade War (2018—2019), inaccurate
media accounts about, 98
Citi Pain Index, 345
clustering illusion, 217
See also apophenia
CME Market Profile guide, 294, 331
CNBC, 83, 104, 235, 243, 259, 407
CNN Fear and Greed indicator, 345, 443
coach, trading, 106, 121, 122
Coates, John, 132, 491
Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT), 62, 65—66, 69, 70, 71, 179, 186, 249
COMEX, 286
commissions, 277
commodity trading advisors (CTAs), 159, 301, 312
common knowledge, questionable, 259—265
bad economic news and stocks, 263—264
examples, 260—265
gold, 262-263
interest rates, 260, 261
stock market crashes, 264—265
stocks and bonds, 260—261
company earnings, idea generation and, 395
Comprehensive Assessment of Rational Thinking
(CART), 62
confidence, calibrated, 34, 180—181
as trader attribute, 72, 75, 81
See also overconfidence
confirmation bias, 80—81, 171, 197—203, 346
endowment effect and, 199
filtering trade ideas and, 410
highly intelligent people and, 63
how to combat, 199—203
narrative cycle and, 299
Stanford experiment, 200
conformity, social, 82—83
conformity bias, 83
conscientiousness, 47—48, 72, 383
academic achievement and, 51, 52
age and, 48, 48, 76
decisiveness as sub-trait of, 56, 119
growth mindset and, 95
how to boost, 56—58
impulse control as sub-trait of, 56
income and, 49, 50, 51
industriousness as sub-trait of, 56
orderliness as sub-trait of, 56
organized people as, 95
persistence as sub-trait of, 56
reliability as sub-trait of, 56
sport achievement and, 51, 52
success, 52, 56, 58, 71
See also self-control; self-discipline
continuation patterns, 161
continuous improvement mindset, 58, 91
contrarians, 32, 34, 82, 83, 233—234, 300, 345
conviction, 107, 112, 113, 194, 256, 323, 355, 365, 369—370, 379, 493
See also conviction levels
conviction levels, 370—377
Type I normal trade, 370, 372, 373, 375
Type II unique trade, 370—373, 374
Type III outlier trade, 373—374, 376—377
cooling off levels, 118—119
Corgnet, Brice, 66
correlated markets, filtering trade ideas and, 409
correlation and intermarket analysis, 162
costs. See trading costs; transaction costs
courageous, trader attribute of being, 75, 104, 107—119, 376
Covey, Stephen, 95, 491
COVID-19 pandemic, 393, 441, 443, 445, 471
beginnings, 212
cross-market correlation and, 315
ECB and, 425
Federal Reserve and, 274, 331, 425
Great Dollar Shortage and, 235
liquidity crisis and, 235
oil market and, 443
U.S. stock market and, 331, 425
USD shortage and, 331
Crash of 1987, prediction of, 87, 163
Crash of 1929, 405
creativity, 35, 86—89
increasing in trading, 88—89
as trader attribute, 75, 86—89
versus herding, 232
crisis markets, 440—441
See also crisis markets, trading tips in
crisis markets, trading tips in, 442—445
being courageous, 445
for day traders, 442
disregarding overbought and oversold, 443
dynamic position sizing, 442—443
keeping open mind, 443
stop losses and, 442
for swing traders, 442
using imagination, 443
cross-market analysis, 230, 261, 333, 391, 400
See also cross-market correlation
cross-market correlation, 314—322
Australian dollar vs. copper futures, 315, 316
Canadian dollar vs. S&P futures, 315, 315
correlated variables in different asset classes, 320
COVID-19 and, 315
interest rates and, 319
to measure deviations from fair value, 398
S&P 500 futures vs. VIX inverted 6/15/20—9/1/20, 316, 317
S&P 500 futures vs. VIX inverted, 6/15/20—9/30/20, 316—317, 318
See also cross-market analysis
cross-market trading, 173, 398
See also lead/lag trading
crude oil futures, NYMEX, 287—288
Trade at Settlement (TAS) orders, 287
volume by time of day, 288
cryptocurrency, 310—311, 421
curiosity, 35, 89—90
academic performance and, 89
backtesting and, 89—90
as trader attribute, 75, 89-90
cynicism, 103, 259, 454
“Daily Dirtnap, The” (newsletter), 492
Daily FX positioning data, 345
Daily Sentiment Index (J. Bernstein), 234, 345, 425, 443
Daily Sheet, morning prep with, 129-131
Dalio, Ray, 87
Dalton, James F., 294
Dalton, Robert B., 294
data trading, 162-163
day traders
daily stop losses and, 367, 368
decisiveness and, 121
success rate, 41-42
tips for in crisis markets, 442
day trading community, decimation of, 476
decision trees, 78
decisiveness, 35, 119-121
continuum, 120-121
as sub-trait of conscientiousness, 56, 119
as trader attribute, 104, 119-121, 484
default mode network (DMN), 382-384
DeSantis, Mark, 66
desk, going off, 133-134
deviation, crisis market and, 443-444
EURUSD vs. deviation from 100-hour MA (9/19-1/20), 443, 444
EURUSD vs. deviation from 100-hour MA (9/19-3/20), 444
deviation from fair value, idea generation and, 392, 398-400, 407
deviation from moving average, 338, 340-341
as overbought/oversold indicator, 337-341
S&P 500 futures with 100-hour MA, 340
skew and, 341
Dillian, Jared, 492
directional bias, 424
discipline. See self-discipline
Disciplined Trader, The (M. Douglas), 106, 491
discomfort, 372
of being in a trade, 112
getting used to, 112, 234
of nearing stop loss, 139
disposition effect, 226
See also anchoring bias
divestiture aversion, 67
See also endowment effect
doji, 334-336
reversal pattern, 334-335, 336
two dojiis in silver signal major top, 334, 336
dotcom bubble burst (2001-2002), 441, 471
Douglas, Mark, 106, 491
Druckenmiller, Stan, 161
Lost Tree Club speech, 373, 460
DSM-V, gambling disorder in, 190-191
Duckworth, Angela, 92
Duhigg, Charles, 95, 491
Dukascopy positioning data, 345
Duke, Annie, 81, 100, 140, 141, 241, 491
Dweck, Carol, 90
Dykstra, Lenny, 460-461
ECB. See European Central Bank (ECB)
economic event/news, 67
bias and, 396
central bank meetings, 395
company earnings, 395
economic data, 395
FOMC meetings, 395
gap risk and, 395
holding positions into, 395-396
idea generation and, 392, 395-398, 407
overtrading and major, 188
product announcements, 395
stocks and bad, 263-264
unexpected headlines, 395
Economist, The, 77
edge, 40, 138
creative thinking, 232
informational, 230
probability and, 79
See also edge, negative; edge, sources of edge, negative, 255, 256
10 simulations of 48%/52% game, 256
edge, sources of, 159-164, 268
analyzing price action, 161-162
asymmetrical information, 160
correlation and intermarket analysis, 162
data trading, 162-163
global macro, 162
leverage, carry and selling risk premium, 163-164
pattern recognition, 163
quant/discretionary combo, 164
technical analysis, 160-161
trend following, 159-160
electronic communication networks (ECNs), 474
Elliott Wave, 160, 299, 302
Ellis, Charles, 197
e-mail
checking, 58
closing, 136-137
communicating with experts via, 77, 84
reading, 341
turning off notifications, 58
Eminem, 202
emotion, 35, 191
euphoria, 169—173
frustration, 168-169
losing money and, 156, 168—173
observing one’s own, 457
role of in trading, 457—458, 483
time delay and, 458
See also Cheer Hedge; house money effect;
Winner’s Tilt
Emotional Quotient (EQ), 62
end-of-period effect, 108
ending diagonal, 334—335
crude oil breaks down out of rising wedge, 335
reversal pattern, 334, 346
endowment effect, 67—68, 195
confirmation bias and, 199
See also divestiture aversion
endurance, trader, 462, 481
See also grit; mental endurance
energy, 35
bias to action and, 416
exercise and, 137
investing in trading process versus outcome, 366
low, 437, 455
mental, 129
to work hard, 41, 56
Energy Crisis (2015), 441
environment, healthy trading, 150—154
bank traders, 151—152
hedge funds, 152
management risk appetite, 153—154
mentor, 154
peers, 153
performance and pay connection, 154
portfolio managers, 152—153
retail traders, 150—151
rules-based limits/risk-taking framework, 153
supportive for risk-taking, 75, 143, 148, 150—154
“Epsilon Theory” (website/podcast/newsletter), 300, 492
equity volatility index (VIX), 316
close today vs. S&P futures range tomorrow, 446
closed above 40, 441, 442
crisis markets and, 441
See also volatility
ETF. See Exchange Traded Fund (ETF)
European Central Bank (ECB)
comment on euro strength, 427
COVID-19 and, 425
quantitative easing (QE), 162, 175
study, 307
Eurozone Crisis (2010—2011), 175, 298, 441, 479
EURUSD currency spot, 286—287
volatility by time of day, 287
volume by time of day, 286
events, famous financial market history, 441
See also specific events
events and potential catalysts, upcoming
filtering trade ideas and, 408—409
Excel, 80, 81, 93, 123, 165
Exchange Traded Fund (ETF), 88, 289, 320, 326, 376, 393, 405, 420
execution, trade, 392, 418—423
automate/outsource stop loss, 392
hybrid algo/human strategy, 420
round number bias and, 422
stop losses and, 422—423
trade journal entry, 392, 422
transaction costs and, 418—419
vary style of, 419—420
exercise, 105, 131, 137, 459
expected value (EV), 77, 79, 85, 113, 211, 213, 363, 397
evolution over life of trade, 380—381
high/positive, 101, 191, 193, 235, 365, 398, 413
learning about, 78, 80
low/negative, 188, 189, 191, 214, 232, 456
overconfidence and, 181
experience, trader, 31, 32, 33, 35, 75, 119, 143, 145, 146, 151, 295, 297,
392, 484
conviction level and, 370
filtering information and, 306
judgment and, 461
losses and, 388
narrative cycle and, 300, 303—304
overconfidence and, 182
recognizing seasonal patterns and, 402
recognizing variance versus bad trading, 367
self-knowledge and, 36
as trader attribute, 75, 143, 146, 484
See also mentors
expert trader, 271, 346—347
extrapolation bias, 203—209, 241
impact on traders, 206—209
negative, 207—209
as recency bias, 205
See also forecasts
extraversion, 47
income and, 49, 50
extroverts, 36
Facebook, 280-282, 288
earnings day trading vol, 288
IPO stabilization effort, 280-282
order book depth and share price on IPO day, 281
stock price May 12, 2012, and five days after, 282
failure, trader, 467, 468-469
to adapt, 173
locus of control and, 140
persistence in spite of, 91
pre-mortem and, 187
reaction to, 460-461
risk management and, 167
self-forgiveness and, 460, 483
fair value, 398
deviation from, 392, 398-400
fast markets, trading, 440-445, 482
tips, 442-445, 484
See also crisis markets
fat tails, 482
favorite-long shot bias, 209-214
example, 212-214
in option pricing, 214
reasons for, 210-211
Federal Reserve
COVID-19 and, 274, 331, 425
launch of Average Inflation Targeting (AIT)
regime, 427, 431
“money printing,” 14, 481
quantitative easing (QE), 13, 162, 175, 235, 298, 319, 331, 341, 480
rate cuts, 78, 79, 399-400, 471
speakers, 407
study, 307
trader heart rate on announcement, 133
USD-negative QE, 13, 480
FedEx, 53
Fiat Money in France, 90
Financial Crisis of 2008, Global, 162, 175, 208, 441, 445, 471
financial success. See success, financial
FinTwit, 104
Flash Crash of 2010, 19, 54, 479, 485
flat position, 112, 158, 193, 280
monthly risk management and, 362
moving averages and, 338
as strong/powerful, 395, 396, 482
unbiased mind and, 86, 200
flexibility/open-mindedness, trader attribute of, 75, 83-86, 387, 477
flow, 138-139
flow traders, 106
Floyd, Dave, 492
focus, 35
working to improve, 76, 136-138
See also focused
focused, trader attribute of being, 75, 104, 135—138, 484
See also focus
FOMC meetings, 308, 425, 427, 429, 430, 431
idea generation and, 395
in September 2020, 425, 432, 433
survey of USD positions traders will hold into, 428
Fooled by Randomness (N. Taleb), 81, 247, 492
Fooled by Technical Analysis (M. Harris), 492
forecasts, 203, 244
crude oil, 206, 207
EURUSD vs. average analyst EURUSD
12-month, 204
See also extrapolation bias
Fortune’s Formula (W. Poundstone), 492
franc, Swiss, 262
Frederick, Shane, 65
friction, 57, 193
future orientation, trader attribute of, 75, 102, 103
FX traders, 283, 315
adaptations to market changes, 450
FX trading, 86, 421
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 197
Galloway, Scott, 492
gambler’s fallacy, 245-247
gambling, 157, 190-192
sensation-seeking and, 190-191
trading and, 191-192
GameStop shorts, 118, 362
gap risk, 272, 279-282, 377, 417
avoiding, 282
idea generation and, 392, 395-398
types, 279-280
See also liquidity
Gardner, Dan, 81, 95, 203
Gawande, Atul, 95, 491
GBPUSD, average performance of around turn of month, 313
General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
The (J. M. Keynes), 311
Gensowski, Miriam, 49
Gibbon, Edward, 362
Ginsburg, Ruth Bader
death of, 430, 434
Gittins, Matthew, 180
global financial crisis. See Financial Crisis of 2008,
Global
global macro, 162
goal-setting, 57, 454, 456
gold, 262, 263, 425
interest rates and, 319
as safe haven, 262, 263
stocks and, 262—263
weekly performance of in weeks where S&P
500 dropped 5% or more (since 1990), 262
See also gold futures
gold futures, 285—286
volume by time of day, 285, 286
Google Scholar, 80
Grant, Adam, 47
grit, 47-48, 147
as trader attribute, 75, 91—94
Grit; The Power of Passion and Perseverance (A. Duckworth), 92
grizzly bias, 242—245, 480
See also negativity
Groupthink, 83
growth expectations, global, 308
growth mindset, 147, 451
conscientiousness and, 95
as trader attribute, 75, 90—91
versus fixed mindset, 91
Gunther, Max, 216
gut feeling, trading and, 70, 71, 84, 127, 242, 248, 249
importance of, 32—33
logic/rational thinking versus and, 34, 64, 69
See also intuition
Guynn, Rusty, 492
Halloween Effect, 246
hammers, 335—337, 346
bear, 336
bull, 335—336
bull hammer signals the bottom in bitcoin, 335, 337
reversal pattern, 335—337, 346
Harris, Michael, 492
Harvard Study of Adult Development, 128
head and shoulders, 161
headlines, 67
idea generation and unexpected, 395
See also economic event/news; NewsPivot
“Heads I win, tails it’s chance” (E. J. Langer & J.
Roth), 140
health, trader, 459, 481
See also exercise; meditation; mindfulness; yoga
hedge fund traders/PMs, 78, 96, 106, 111, 116, 117, 118, 152, 189, 190,
195, 211
annual stop loss, 356, 357
appropriate capital, 149—150
evaluation and compensation, 354
free capital, 356
information asymmetry and, 156
Kelly Criterion and, 375
liquidity and, 283
as poker players, 192
success or failure of, 360
success rate, 40
hedge funds, 40, 78, 114, 150, 273
currency futures and, 421
macro analysis and, 347
pod-based, 162
hedonic treadmill, 128
Hefti, Andreas, 68
Heinke, Steve, 68
herding, 229-240, 483
belief in good stories and, 231
bubbles and, 236—240
conformity and, 230
fear of missing out and, 231—232
how to detect and combat, 234—236
incentives and, 232—233
reasons for market participant, 230—233
versus creative thinking, 232
See also Asch Conformity Experiment
Hermann Grid Illusion, 180
Heuer, Richards J., 85—86, 88, 410
hindsight bias, 242
history, trader personal, 462—465
blue collar upbringing, 462—463
money versus happiness curve, 465
perception of money and, 463—464
thinking about, 462—465
Hollins, Peter, 106, 491
hot hand, 245—247
Hour Between Dog and Wolf, The (J. Coates), 132, 491
house money effect, 108, 114, 169—170, 173, 379
Housel, Morgan, 243
How to Lie with Statistics (D. Huff), 44, 251, 259, 492
HSBC Positioning Indicators, 345
Huff, Darrell, 44, 251, 259, 492
Hunt, Ben, 300, 492
ideas, filtering trade, 392, 407—411
confirmation bias and, 410
considering alternative hypotheses and, 411
correlated markets and, 409
narrative cycle and, 407—408
positioning and sentiment and, 408
technical analysis and, 409—411
upcoming events and potential catalysts and, 408-409
ideas, generating trade, 392, 393—407
analogs, 402—405
bankrupt stock rallies, 406
bubble deflation before rebounding, 405—406
deviation from fair value, 392, 398—400, 407
economic event/news, 392, 395—398, 407
indicator scanning, 406—407
month-end dollar effect, 405
narrative understanding, 392, 393—395, 407
pattern recognition, 392, 400—406, 407
round number bias, 406
run-up trade, 396—397
trader bearishness and not short, 397—398
impulse control, 56
in the zone moments, 189
Inbox Zero, 58, 137
income, 44—45, 49—52
agreeableness and, 49, 50
conscientiousness and, 50, 51, 52
extraversion and, 50
good person—job fit and, 49
IQ and, 44, 45, 45
neuroticism and, 49, 50
personality and IQ on male, 49, 50
independent thinking, trader attribute of, 75, 82—83, 234
indicator scanning, idea generation and, 406—407
industriousness, 56
informational edge, 230
institutional traders, junior
daily stop losses and, 368
intelligent/knowledgeable/informed, trader
attributes of, 75, 77—78
interest rates
Federal Reserve cuts, 78, 79, 399—400, 471
gold and, 319
stocks and, 260, 261
intraday activity patterns, market, 283—288
gold futures volume by time of day, 285, 286
S&P futures volume by time of day, 284
10-year bond futures volume by time of day, 284, 285, 285
volume by time of day, 283—288
introverts, 36, 84
intuition, 32—33, 69, 71, 481
See also gut feeling
IQ, 62, 72, 77
academic success and, 45—46, 46, 51
effect of personality and on male earnings, 49, 50
income and, 44, 45, 45
RQ and, 62, 63
success and, 44—46, 49—50, 51, 52, 58, 71
trading success and, 71
versus RQ, 66, 68
Irrational Exuberance (R. J. Shiller), 247, 491
Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (S.
Nison), 331
JDSU (JDS Uniphase), 472
added to S&P 500, 472
common stock 1998 to 2019, 476
July 26, 2000, rally, 473—476
Jones, Eric T., 294
Jones, Paul Tudor, 87, 163
journal, trading. See trading journal
junk bonds, 87
Kaelen, Mendel, 382
Kahneman, Daniel, 198, 247, 491
Kaizen, 91
Kelly Criterion, 375, 379
Keynes, John Maynard, 311, 363
knowledge, 35
of specific markets, 268
ways to expand, 77—78
See also common knowledge, questionable;
experience, trader
Kovner, Bruce, 298
Lagarde, Christine, 427, 428
Lane, Philip, 427, 428—429
Langer, E. J., 140
lead/lag analysis, 321, 322
See also cross-market correlation; lead/lag
trading
lead/lag traders, 319
lead/lag trading, 309, 317, 398, 481
See also lead/lag analysis
leaks and leakage
addressing one’s, 125
bias and, 245
chasing price and, 241
bad discipline and, 157
eliminating, 424
emotion and, 157
negative, 255
overconfidence and, 81, 171
overtrading and, 194, 197, 366
time of day and, 353
trading journal and, 124
transaction costs and, 278
Lefevre, Edwin, 385, 491
left tail, 265
Lehman Brothers, 78, 87, 93, 114, 162, 249, 464, 474
leverage, carry and selling risk premium, 163—164
Lewis, Michael, 464
See also Moneyball
Liar’s Poker (M. Lewis), 464
limit orders, 70, 290, 291, 413, 414, 418, 419, 420
Lincoln, Abraham, 53—54
Linkedln, 77
liquidity, 272, 275-279, 287, 449
after economic releases/events, 280
bank access to, 159
capacity and, 150
central banks and, 263
COVID-19 and, 235
daily stops and, 117
ECNs and, 474
global, 307, 425
hedge fund PMs and, 283
risk, 280, 385, 417, 450
transaction costs and future, 278
See also gap risk; transaction costs
list-making, 57, 85, 96, 112, 197, 201, 320, 336, 414, 458
Livermore, Jesse, 190, 191, 385, 386
lizard brain, 17, 64, 413, 482, 484
Lo, Andrew, 188
locus of control, understanding
as trader attribute, 35, 75, 104, 139-142, 147
logical thinking, 34, 67, 69, 82, 126, 127, 255, 321, 415
“Loser's Game, The” (C. Ellis), 197
loss, pain of, 94
loss aversion, 226
See also anchoring bias
lotto ticket trade, 214, 397, 428
Lotus 1-2-3, 161
LTCM meltdown (1998), 441
luck, 35, 54-55
extreme success and, 53
success and, 52—54, 58, 71
as trader attribute, 75, 143, 146—147
versus variance, 146
Luck Equation, The: Untangling Skill and Luck in
Business (M. Mauboussin), 363
lumber, 275, 425
MACD, 324, 325, 330
macro analysis, 163
hedge funds and, 347
with technical filter, 347—348
macro strategists, internet, 162
macro trader, 162, 309, 357-358, 368
macro tourist, 268
Macron, Emmanuel, 204, 425
2017 election of, 402, 403
See also Merkel/Macron European recovery plan agreement
Magazine Cover Indicator, 204, 346
Man for All Markets, A (E. O. Thorp}, 248, 349, 492
mantra, trader, 461
market efficiency, 42, 484
market catalysts, 309—310
central bank action/speech, 309
company news, 309
in correlated market, 310, 311
domestic politics, 309
international geopolitics, 309
technical breakout, 310, 311
market events, overtrading and, 188—189
market orders, 70, 418
market structure, important markers of, 440—449
order versus chaos, 440—445
rangebound versus trending, 447—449
volatility, 445—447
See also fast markets, trading
market structure, major changes to, 450, 476
adapting to, 449—451
Market Wizards (J. Schwager}, 161, 298, 491
math facts, counterintuitive, 247—259
Arcsine Law/random walk process, 251—254
averages, 250—251
bat and ball problem, 248—249
incomplete samples, 257—258
log returns, 249—250
non-linear relationships, 255—256
probability, 254—255
survivorship bias, 257—258
math literacy. See numeracy
Mauboussin, Michael, 363, 491
Mauldin, John, 492
Mauro, Joe, 469
McCloskey, Deirdre, 243, 245
mean reversion, 312, 313, 443
Japanese retail investors and, 273
rangebound markets and, 447—448
as trading style/strategy, 173, 206, 207, 324
VIX and, 289
media, narrative and, 301, 302
media bias, staying objective and, 235—236
meditation, 106, 131, 135, 158, 383
meetings, scheduling, 131, 136
mental endurance, 93—94
mentalizing, 68, 69, 71
mentors, 97, 146
bank traders and, 40
risk-taking environment and, 154
Merkel, Angela, 425
Merkel/Macron European recovery plan agreement, 402, 404, 425, 430
EURUSD rally after, 426
microstructure, market, 295, 323, 391
bid/offer spread, 272
gap risk, 272, 279—282
intraday activity patterns, 272, 283—288
liquidity, 272, 275-283
transaction costs, 272
types of participants, 272, 273—275
volatility, 272, 286, 288—294
Milken, Michael, 87
Mind Over Markets (J. F. Dalton, E. T. Jones & R.
B. Dalton), 294
mindfulness, 55, 106, 135, 158, 383
Mitchell, Cory, 40
MMIDs, 474
momentum
building, 300, 301
dojis and waning, 334
price, 299
stocks, 23
strategy, 324
technical indicators and, 325
tracking in correlated markets, 398
traders, 224
money, reasons for losing, 156—173
bad discipline, 156, 157—158
emotion, 156, 168—173
failure to adapt, 173
lack of focus on risk management, 156, 167—168
not enough edge, 156, 159—165
overreliance on simple indicators, 156, 165, 166—167
See also gambling; overtrading; sensation-
seeking traders; stimulation, trading for
Moneyball (M. Lewis), 451, 460
month-end dollar effect, idea generation and, 405
Monty Hall problem, 251
morning quick techs, 341—343
sheet, 341—342
motivation to succeed, 128—129
moving averages, 338—341
deviation from, 338, 340, 340—341
flat position and, 338
as trend indicator, 337—338
Muehlfeld, Katrin, 70
Munger, Charlie, 297
Murphy, John J., 331
narrative, 297—298, 308
See also narrative analysis; narrative cycle
narrative analysis, 298, 347
See also narrative cycle
narrative cycle
becoming expert on, 306—309
confirmation bias and, 299
filtering trade ideas and, 407—408
idea generation and understanding, 392, 393—395, 407
importance of understanding, 298—299, 304
stylized view of typical, 299
See also narrative cycle, stages of
narrative cycle, stages of, 300—303
end (stage 7), 303
final hype wave (stage 5), 302
first cracks (stage 4), 302
momentum builds (stage 2), 300—301
peak and turn (stage 6), 302—303
primary trend (stage 3), 301
under the radar (stage 1), 300
NASDAQ, 284, 471, 472, 476
bubble (2000—2002), 155—156, 174, 405
bullish, 222
inefficient 1998 to 2002, 477
Level 2 screen, 474
1999, 185
price collapse of every stock, 476
roaring back, 477
negative interest rates, 208
negativity, 103, 243, 437
as attention magnet, 245
in social media comments, 98
versus positivity, 244
Nestor, James, 135, 491
Netflix (NFLX) stock, 215, 216, 319
networking, 35, 89
neuroticism, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 58, 71
negative outcomes, 55
ways to combat, 55
NewsPivot, 305, 368, 408, 431
HYG gaps higher on news, then successfully
tests and holds, 326
as significant reference point, 325—327, 330
Nikkei bubble (1989—2008), 405
9/11, 441, 471
Nison, Steve, 331
Nordvig, Jens, 492
numeracy, 34, 64, 69, 70, 78, 248
See also math facts, counterintuitive
Oanda positioning data, 345
objectivity, trader, 86, 235—236
OCEAN. See Big Five Personality Traits
OPEC meetings
March 2020, 443
as market catalyst, 311
opinions, weakly held strong, 34, 83, 387, 411
orderliness, 56
organization skills, working to improve, 76
See also organized/meticulous
organized/meticulous, 35, 95—100
build/optimize information network, 97—98
daily plan, 95-97
data collection, 97
as trader attributes, 75, 95—100
oscillators, 325
outcome bias, 240—241
“Outside the Box” (newsletter), 492
overbought/oversold indicators, 234, 337—341
deviation from moving average, 338, 340—341
relative strength indicator (RSI), 338—339, 341
overconfidence, 65, 180—187, 476, 477, 482
how to combat, 187
as leak, 81
men versus women and, 35—36, 171, 186, 187
miscalibration, 183—184
overestimation, 182
overplacement, 182—183
overtrading and, 171, 173, 181, 185, 187
risk-seeking behaviors and, 186
trading and, 62, 66, 71
types of, 182—183
See also emotion
oversold indicators, 234
overtrading, 57, 157, 187—197, 381—382
how to combat, 193—197
as leak, 194
major economic announcements/market events
and, 188—189
overconfidence and, 171, 181, 185
time dilation and, 189, 483
trading as stimulant/sensation-seeking and, 188, 190
See also gambling
p-hacking, 222
Pallesen, Jonatan, 45
panic/euphoria model, 299
Panigrahi, Asha, 69
participants, market, 273—275
banks, 273
central banks, 274
institutional, 273
monitoring, 274—275
retail, 273
Pascal’s Wager, 459
passion for trading, 34, 456—457, 465
as trader attribute, 75, 143, 144—146
trader statement of purpose and, 456—457
versus obsession, 145
path dependence, 54, 176, 192, 356
trading month, 359
understanding, 359—362
when starting new trading job, 359—360
when switching firms, 360
patience, trader attribute of, 75, 104, 138—139
pattern recognition, 163, 216, 218, 219, 349
analogs, 402—405
average path of equities since 1990, 401, 402
EURUSD after Macron and after Merkel-
Macron proposal, 402—403, 403
EURUSD rolling 40-day peak to trough
drawdown after Macron won, 404
idea generation and, 392, 400—406, 407
rolling 5-day percentage of SPX positive days, 401
seasonal, 401—402
patterns, method for accepting or rejecting, 219
Peoples Bank of China (PBoC), 307
performance analysis, trade, 392, 423—424
directional bias and, 424
monthly analytics, 392, 424, 434
postmortem, 392, 424, 434
recording detailed results, 392, 424, 434
persistence, 56
personality, 46—58
effect of IQ and on male earnings, 49, 50
financial success and, 49—58
success and, 46—49
See also Big Five Personality Traits
perspective, trader, 132
phone, 134—135, 138
plan, 454
trading process and, 194, 483
inability to stick to, 157
Porter, David, 66
portfolio managers. See hedge fund traders/PMs
Portnoy, Dave, 29
position size. See position sizing
position sizing, 376—379, 392, 417
conviction level and, 376—377, 378, 392, 417
determining, 377—378, 392, 417
market liquidity/gap risk and capacity, 392, 417
poor, 171
risk capital amount and, 377, 378, 392, 417
static, 168
steps, 376—378
stop loss and, 377, 378, 392, 417
trade idea and, 376, 378
varying, 379
positioning, 333, 343-347
CFTC and, 344—345
data sources, 344—345
data use, 346, 347
as indicator, 343
as overrated indicator, 343
run-up trade and, 397
tactical edge and, 323
as timing tool, 323
See also positioning and sentiment
positioning analysis, value of, 230
positioning and sentiment, 344—348
data sources, 344—346
data use, 346—348
filtering trade ideas, 408
sentiment vs. market price regimes, 344
See also positioning; sentiment
positive attitude, 34, 72
Powell, Jerome, 425, 427, 433
Power of Habit, The (C. Duhigg}, 95, 491
Power of Now, The (E. Tolle}, 128—129, 158, 491
preparedness, working to improve, 76
price action, analyzing, 161—162
probability, 64, 69, 147, 191, 246, 254—255
accurately estimating, 79
actual vs. human estimates of, 211, 212
birthday paradox, 254—255, 255
trading edge and, 79
process-oriented, trader attribute of being, 75, 100—103
product announcements, idea generation and, 395
product selection, 392, 412, 432, 459
profit and loss (P&L) data, trader, 350—354
average losing day, 351
average winning day, 351
collecting and analyzing, 350—353
daily tracking spreadsheet, 350—351
day of week/event day performance, 352—353
monthly, 353
number of times stop loss breached, 352
stocks trader made money on, 352
time of day money made or lost, 353
WIN/LOSE $ or bps ratio, 351
WIN%, 351
yearly, 353, 354
Psychology of Intelligence Analysis (R. Heuer), 85—86, 88, 410—411
punctuality, 57—58
Python, 78, 80, 96
quantitative analysis/discretionary combo, 164
quantitative easing (QE), 29, 176, 261, 471
ECB, 162, 175
Federal Reserve, 13, 162, 175, 235, 298, 319, 331, 341, 480
quantitative skills, 75, 78—81
See also numeracy
quick reaction time trades, 67
random sampling, 68
random walk process, 251—254
cumulative sum of heads and tails, 254
randomness, 64, 68, 191, 217, 246, 353, 365, 401
range traders, 106
rangebound markets, 447—448
rating agency announcements, major
Greek yields and, 205, 206
rational thinkers, 127
logical acting and, 64—65
numeracy and, 62
System 2 thinking and, 62
as trader attribute, 75, 76
See also rationality
rationality, 34, 61, 69, 467
measuring, 62, 65—66
trading success and, 61, 62, 71, 72, 76, 127, 203
See also Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT);
Comprehensive Assessment of Rational
Thinking (CART); rational thinkers; Rationality
Quotient
Rationality Quotient (RQ), 61, 62
IQ and, 62, 63
versus IQ, 66, 68
real money traders, 84, 149, 274, 313, 400
annual performance and pay, 354
free capital, 356
reassessment triggers, 112, 195, 413—416
cross-market variable, 415
examples of good, 415—416
new information, 415
stop loss, 392, 413, 414, 415
stop loss tighten level, 414
take profit, 392, 413, 414, 415
time, 414
as trading tactics, 392, 414—415
recency bias, 65, 205
reflexivity, 87, 301
relative strength indicator (RSI), 324, 325, 330, 341, 481
as overbought/oversold indicator, 338—339
relaxing, 132—133, 423
reliability, 56
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator (E. Lefevre), 161, 385-388, 491
Reserve Bank of Australia, 213—214
AUDUSD 5-minute chart around the 2/20
meeting of, 213
analyzing Short AUDUSD into the 2/20
meeting ex-ante and ex-post, 213, 214
resulting, 141
retail traders, 148, 149, 421
daily stop losses and, 368
free capital, 356
free stock trading, 450
healthy risk-taking environment for, 150
liquidity and, 421
peers, 153
risk management system, 367—368
reversal patterns, 334—337
doji, 334—335, 336
ending diagonal, 334
hammer, 335—337
trading wedge, 334
reverse knock-out, options trading, 381
right tail, 114, 381
returns, 372
Risk (D. Gardner), 81, 492
risk allocation, 107, 362, 374
risk appetite, 72
assessing, 108—119
banks and, 151
effects influencing, 108, 172—173
moderate, 113—117
strong, 117—119, 186
systematic increases in versus winner’s tilt, 379
too much, 119, 186
varying, 355
See also risk-averse trader
risk-averse trader, 109—113, 116—117, 186, 352
tips, 110—113
See also risk aversion
risk aversion, 13, 14, 113
in Europe, 480
global, 481
periods, 262
regular versus crisis, 443
risk management, 191
automated system, 158, 482, 484
challenges, 349
daily, 367—368
importance of, 349
lack of focus on, 156, 167—168
process, 268
risk of ruin and, 361
rule creation, 106
See also risk management, individual trade;
risk management, monthly; risk management,
yearly; risk management system, developing
risk management, individual trade, 369—385
abandoning plan, 385
conviction level and, 369—374
evolution of expected value over life of trade, 380-381
knowing default mode network (DMN), 382-384
moving stop loss and, 380
position sizing and, 376—379
rare attractive trade and, 369—370
sticking to plan, 381-382, 384
tiered system, 369
type of trade and, 369
risk management, monthly, 362—367
determining $ at risk for Type I, II, and III
trades, 362
determining goals before month, 362
determining monthly stop loss, 362
See also variance
risk management, yearly, 354—362
avoid blowing up, 358—359
family and, 358
path dependence, 356, 359—362
slow start and gradual P&L buildup, 354—358
understanding of metagame, 358
risk management system, developing, 353—354
capital of trader and, 354, 356, 368
leverage access of trader and, 354
liquidity of products traded and, 354
personality of trader and, 354
time horizon and, 354, 368
trading style and, 354, 368
risk of ruin, 167, 168, 191, 256
risk management and, 361
Risk Parity, 87
risk-seeker, 34
risk-taking continuum, 72
risk tolerance, 72
Robbins, Tony, 138, 461
Robinhood, 9, 24
Roosevelt, Theodore, 267
Roth, J., 140
round number bias, 214—216, 481
idea generation and, 406
NFLX, 216
TSLA, 215
round trip, 276
RSI. See relative strength indicator (RSI)
run-up trade, 396—397
idea generation and, 396—397
lotto ticket trade and, 397
obvious trade and, 397
positioning and, 397
Russia Crisis (1998), 441
S&P 500, 222, 243, 263, 274, 341, 370, 472
futures, 316, 420
performance, 224, 262, 264, 284, 317, 318, 340
rally, 14, 480
since World War II, 264, 265
TSLA added to, 292, 294
safe haven, gold as, 262, 263
Saffo, Paul, 83—84
Saudi/Russia oil price war (2020), 441
Schneider, Frédéric, 68
Schwager, Jack, 491
Science of Self-Discipline, The (P Hollins), 106, 491
screen breaks, 194—195
seasonality, 246, 319, 402, 431
self-assessment. See Trader Self-Assessment
self-awareness, 29, 35, 36, 121-131, 386, 457-458, 483
building, 121-131, 158
metacognition and, 458
as trader attribute, 75, 104, 121-131
See also trading journal
self-control, 34, 47, 48, 104-106
books, 106
as trader attribute, 75, 104, 105-106
trading success and, 71
working to improve, 76, 127
See also self-discipline
self-discipline, 29, 104-106, 383
tips for improving, 105—106, 157
as trader attribute, 75, 104, 105—106
self-evaluation, trader, 394—395, 454—456
exercise, 455
See also Trader Self-Assessment
self-knowledge, 36
See also self-awareness
sensation-seeking traders, 70, 119, 189, 190
sentiment, 343—347, 391
bear market and, 344
being alert for turns in, 234—235
bull market and, 344
data sources, 344, 345
date use, 346, 347
going against, 344
as indicator, 343
as overrated indicator, 343
price and, 343
quantify, 234
stocks and, 264
study, 234
tactical edge and, 323
as timing tool, 323
value of, 230
See also positioning and sentiment
“Serenity Prayer,” Alcoholics Anonymous, 141
Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, The (S.
Covey), 95, 491
Seykota, Ed, 388
Sharpe, Steven A., 228—229
Sharpe ratio, 114, 139, 150, 160, 161, 162, 396
Shiller, Robert J., 247, 491
signals, 156, 234, 239, 317, 334, 336, 346, 392, 415
bearish, 218
breakout, 161
bullish, 336, 337, 338
cross-market, 261
for FX traders, 315
high volumes, 329
overbought and oversold, 340, 341, 443
price action, 161, 162
private, 185
public, 185
reversal, 341, 443
reversion, 443
See also doji; hammers
significant reference points (SRPs), 325—331
NewsPivots, 305, 325-327, 330, 368, 408, 431
support and resistance, 327—331
silver, 425
skeptic, healthy, 103, 259
skepticism, healthy
trader and financial press, 242
as trader attribute, 103—104
versus cynicism, 259
skew, 341
skill, trader success and, 23, 42, 58, 72, 75, 349, 351—352, 363, 380—381,
434
analytical, 69
estimating probability, 79, 211
filtering, 302, 306
focus, 136
quantitative, 104
risk management, 349
slippage, 40, 155
Snowberg, Erik, 209
sophomore jinx, 204
Soros, George, 87, 301
Soto, Christopher, 48
Spearman’s positive manifold, 63
sports. See success, sport
Sports Illustrated jinx, 204
spreads, 276—278
squirrel-chasing bias. See chasing bias
Stanford Prison Experiments, 83
Stanovich, Keith, 62—63
stealing thunder technique, 202
stimulation, trading for, 157, 188
See also overtrading; sensation-seeking traders
stochastics, 338, 341
stock indexes, 477
stock market, Canadian, 473
stock market, U.S., 42, 163, 222, 253, 260, 263, 278, 290
bullish retail hysteria in, 427
COVID-19 and, 331, 425
crash predictions, 264—265
sentiment surveys and indicators, 345
statistics, 265
VIX and, 427
See also bubbles; Flash Crash of 2010;
NASDAQ; Reminiscences of a Stock Operator;
S&P 500
stocks, 260-265
bad economic news and, 263—264
gold and, 262—263
total return of bonds and (Jan to Oct 2020), 261
up more than down, 265
versus bonds, 260—261
See also NASDAQ; S&P 500
StockTwits, 267
stop losses, 227
automated, 105—106, 134, 157, 392
determining, 392, 413, 414
discipline, 57
on the downside, 119
trade executions and, 422—423
trigger, 195
See also stop losses, daily
stop losses, daily, 116
day traders and, 367, 368
junior institutional traders and, 368
retail traders and, 368
strategy, trading, 323, 331, 413
evaluating, 101
See also specific trading strategies
stress management ability, 34, 72, 481
as trader attribute, 75, 104, 131—135
stress testing, 118
Strowger, Vanessa, 69
success, 43—49, 51—54, 58, 71
avoidance of negative outcomes and, 43
birth month and, 53, 54
educational achievement and, 43, 51, 52, 58
effort and, 52
environment and, 52
formula for, 58
happiness and, 43
health and, 43
income and, 43
IQ and, 44—46
longevity and, 43
luck and, 52—53, 58, 71
personality and, 46—49
skill and, 52, 58, 71
talent and, 52, 58, 71
See also conscientiousness; success, financial;
success, sport; success, trading
success, financial, 49—53
Big Five Personality Traits and, 49—51, 52
birth month and, 53
success, sport, 43, 51, 52, 58
birth month and, 53, 54
success, trading, 37, 469
bank traders, 40
day traders, 41—42
environment and, 52
financial literacy and, 71
hedge fund traders, 40
high intelligence and, 71, 72
luck and, 54, 55
numeracy and, 71
professional investors, 42
rationality and, 61, 62, 66—72
rate, 40—42
recipe for, 142, 494
research, 66—71
self-control and, 71
See also alpha trader; trader attributes,
positive cognitive; trader attributes, positive
miscellaneous; trader attributes, positive non-
cognitive
Success Equation, The (M. Mauboussin), 491
Super Bowl, 2020, 181—182
Superforecasting (P. Tetlock & D. Gardner), 81, 103, 492
superstitions, 459—460
support and resistance, 327—331
EURNOK hourly 4/20 to 9/20, 329—330, 330
GBPUSD hourly chart 7/16 to 9/15/20, 327—328, 325
gold hourly chart 7/16 to 9/26/20, 328—329, 329
how to identify in market, 327
as significant reference point, 327—331
survivorship bias, 257—258
distribution of bullet holes in damaged US
fighter planes, 257
in sports gambling industry, 258
in trading, 258
SwiftTrade, 457
Swiss franc, 262
Swiss National Bank, 280
abandons 1.20 EURCHF floor and cuts rates, 208, 209
symmetry, 331-333
USDCAD Daily Oct 2019 to Sept 2020, 332, 332
USDCNH Daily Jan 2019 to Sept 2020, 333, 333
System 1 thinking, 64, 67, 84, 179, 248, 249
versus System 2 thinking, 64, 484
System 2 thinking, 64, 66, 67, 70, 179, 249, 259
versus System 1 thinking, 64, 484
tactics, trading, 323, 392, 412—416
automation of execution process, 413, 414
choosing best product/market, 392, 412
determining entry point, 392, 412—413
determining stop loss, 392, 413, 414
determining take profit, 392, 413, 414
reassessment trigger list, 392, 414—415
take profit, 227
determining, 392, 413, 414
trigger, 195
Taleb, Nassim, 81, 247, 492
talent, success and, 52, 58, 71
technical analysis, 323—325, 391
as edge, 160—161, 167
filtering trade ideas and, 409—411
as risk management tool, 324, 325
tactical edge and, 323
as tactical execution tool, 324, 325
as timing tool, 323, 324, 347
See also reversal patterns; significant reference
points (SRPs); symmetry
Technical Analysis of Financial Markets (J. J.
Murphy), 331
technical strategies, 324
See also MACD; mean reversion; momentum;
relative strength indicator (RSI)
Tesla (TSLA) stock, 126, 215, 271, 272, 293, 303, 407—408, 418
added to S&P 500, 292, 294
halo effect, 304
Tetlock, Phil, 81, 203
Theory of Mind, 71
Thiel, Peter, 83
thinking. See biased thinking; rational thinkers;
rationality; System 1 thinking; System 2 thinking
Thinking, Fast and Slow (D. Kahneman), 247, 491
Thinking in Bets (A. Duke), 81, 100, 140, 241, 491
Thoma, Volker, 69
Thorp, Edward O., 248, 349, 492
Tierney, John, 56—57, 106, 491
tight/aggressive trading style, 138, 197
time dilation, 189, 483
time of day/week/month
bid/offer spread, 278
FX trades and, 312
as market catalyst, 310, 312
volume, 283—286, 288
Tolle, Eckhart, 128—129, 158, 491
Toronto Stock Exchange, 473
tracking, trade, 392, 423
trade, lifecycle of hypothetical, 392—424
execution, 392, 418—423
filtering, 392, 394, 407—411
grid showing, 392
idea generation, 392, 393—407
performance analysis, 392, 423—424
position sizing, 392, 417
tactics, 392, 412—416
tracking, 392, 423
trade, lifecycle of short EURUSD (Sept 2020), 425—435
EURUSD hourly chart Aug and Sept 2020 and, 429, 430
execution, 433—434
filtering, 431—432
idea generation, 431
overview, 425—431
position sizing, 432—433
as stale narrative trade, 431
tactics, 432
trade quotas, 113
trader attributes, positive cognitive, 75—104
confidence, calibrated, 75, 81
creative, 75, 86—89
curious, 75, 89—90
flexible and open-minded, 75, 83—86
future-oriented, 75
grit/perseverance/mental endurance, 75, 91—94
growth mindset, 75, 90—91
healthy skeptic, 103—104
independent thinker, 75, 82—83
intelligent/knowledgeable/informed, 75, 77—78
organized/meticulous, 75, 95—100
process-oriented, 75, 100—103
quantitative, 75, 78—81
rational, 75, 76
trader attributes, positive miscellaneous, 75, 143—154
appropriate capital, 75, 143, 148—150
experience, 75, 143, 146
healthy and supportive risk-taking environment, 75, 143, 148, 150-154
luck, 75, 143, 146-147
passion for trading, 75, 143, 144—146
raw trading instinct, 75, 143—144
trader attributes, positive non-cognitive, 75, 104—142
ability to manage stress, 75, 104, 131—135
adaptable, 75, 104, 106—107
courageous, 75, 104, 107—119
decisive, 119—121, 484
disciplined/self-control, 75, 104, 105—106
focused, 75, 104, 135—138, 484
locus of control understanding, 75, 104, 139—142
patient, 75, 104, 138—139
self-aware, 75, 104, 121—131
Trader Self-Assessment, 30—37
traders, evaluating, 101
See also specific types of traders
traders, traits of excellent, 493
See also trader attributes, positive cognitive;
trader attributes, positive miscellaneous; trader
attributes, positive non-cognitive
traders, traits of losing, 494
trades, evaluating, 101
trading
gambling and, 191—192
information asymmetry, 156
as negative sum game, 39, 155, 156, 277
quitting, 145—146
rules, 101, 467
technology asymmetry, 156
See also trading costs; trading methods; strategy,
trading; transaction costs
trading costs, 155, 156
See also transaction costs
trading history, personal, 461—462
trading instinct, raw
as trader attribute, 75, 143—144
as x-factor, 143
trading journal, 99—100
building self-awareness with, 121—126
improving trading process with, 424
monthly review, 124
recording trade executions in, 392, 422
sample, 123
takeaway goals, 125
trading self-awareness and, 124
trading methods
adapting to new, 449—451
varying, 467
See also strategy, trading
transaction costs, 40, 70, 155, 276, 277—279, 418-422
bid/offer, 155
commissions, 155
day trader P&L before and after, 279
FX trader P&L before and after, 279
how to reduce, 418—422
slippage, 155
trend following, 159—160, 173
trend indicators
moving averages, 337—338
trend reversal indicator, 312
trending markets, 448
identifying, 448, 449
Turek, Jon, 492
Turnaround Tuesday, 222, 223—225
anatomy of a sell-off, 223
total cumulative performance of Tuesdays in 2008, 225
Tuesday 1-day S&P 500 return, 224
Tversky, Amos, 198
TWAP order, 419, 420
Twitter, 78, 83, 98
bias, 235, 236
confirmation bias on, 198
information and analysis source, 156
finance experts on, 308
monitoring, 35
real-time news from, 230
sentiment, 267
sharing hypotheses on, 84
stock market crash speculation on, 264
USDJPY
Hourly, April to July 2020, 221
May 3—7, 2010, 18, 485
vs. US 10-year rates. Nov 2009 to May 5, 2010, 14, 480
Value at risk (VAR), 118
Van Witteloostuijn, Arjen, 70
Vantage Point Trading, 40—41
variance, 117, 141, 362—367
accepting, 367, 467
bank trader simulation, 363, 364
in life, 454
losing money and, 147
monthly risk management and, 362—367
poker and, 363
retail trader simulation, 363, 364
short-term, 54
versus bad decision making, 365—367
versus luck, 146
VIX. See equity volatility index (VIX); volatility
volatility, 272, 286, 288-294, 331, 445-449
adjusting for, 446, 447
common stock distribution of 1-day returns, 291
concerns about extreme, 398
correlated within and across markets, 288—289
economic uncertainty and, 289
events and, 288
historical, 289, 290
implied, 289
intraday profile, 289, 290
larger positions and, 445
smaller positions and, 445
volume and, 286, 316
See also VIX
volume, time of day and, 283-286, 288
EURUSD currency spot, 286
gold futures, 285
10-year bond futures, 284, 285
VWAP order, 420
Wald, Abraham, 257
Wall Street Journal (WSJ), 77, 97
Wason, Peter, 198
Wave 5, 302
Wells, H. G., 439
White, Elliott, 69
willpower, 56—57, 106, 127, 383
See also self-control
Willpower; Rediscovering the Greatest Human
Strength (R. Baumeister & J. Tierney), 56—57, 95, 106, 491
Winner's Tilt, 170, 173, 379
See also house money effect
Winton study, 160
Wiseman, Richard, 54—55
Wolfers, Justin, 209
women, trading performance of versus men, 35—36, 171, 186, 187
Woodlock, Thomas E, 386
work, hard
trader commitment to, 458—459, 462, 467
trader as doer, 34
writing down plans/ideas, 98—99
See also list-making; trading journal
XLE bubble (2007-2008), 405
yen, Japanese, 14, 78, 262, 481
yoga, 106, 131, 135
Youtube, technical analysis videos on, 331
Zagorsky, Jay, 44—45
Zeigarnik Loops, 57
zero-bound effect, 108, 139
Zerohedge, 98, 235
Zurich Axioms, The (M. Gunther), 216
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Brent Donnelly has been trading currencies since 1995 and is currently a senior FX trader
at HSBC New York. He is the author of The Art of Currency Trading (Wiley, 2019). He writes
a widely-read, highly-respected macro and FX daily called AM/FX. Over the course of his
career, he has been a market maker, trader, and senior manager at some of the top banks
in foreign exchange. He trades tactical global macro.
He has extensive experience trading currencies, FX options, stock index futures, NASDAQ
stocks, and commodities. Brent is a respected macro thinker with the unique perspective of
a senior risk taker. He has been quoted by, or featured in, the Economist, Epsilon Theory,
Real Vision, the Wall Street Journal, Financial Times, Bloomberg, and CNBC.
Before joining HSBC, Brent was head of G10 Spot Trading at Citi New York and global head
of G10 FX Trading at Nomura New York. He was also a portfolio manager at a major hedge
fund in Connecticut for three years. He created and wrote a cartoon called ‘‘Daft Planet,’’
which aired on TV in Canada, and he dreams of one day winning the Man Booker Prize.
Sign up for updates at brentdonnelly.com
