A Tale of Two Premiums: The Role of Hedgers and 
Speculators in Commodity Futures Markets*  
 
Wenjin Kang  
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics  
 
K. Geert Rouwenhorst  
Yale School of Management 
 
Ke Tang  
Tsinghua University 
 
First Draft: August 15, 2013  
This version: December 4, 2016  
 
Abstract  
 
This paper studies the dynamic interaction between the net positions of hedgers and 
speculators and risk premiums in commodity futures markets. Short-term position 
changes are mainly driven by the trading demands of impatient speculators, while long-
term variation is primarily driven by the hedging demands from commercial hedgers. 
Variation in hedging pressure - the central variable in tests of the theory of normal 
backwardation- reflects both the liquidity demands of speculators and the demand for 
price insurance of hedgers. We provide empirical evidence that these two components 
influence expected futures returns with opposite signs. 
 
 
Keywords: Commodity futures, liquidity provision, return predictability, theory of 
normal backwardation, hedging pressure, risk premium  
 
* We have benefited from comments and suggestions from Hendrik Bessembinder, Geetesh 
Bhardwaj, Ing-haw Cheng, Gary Gorton, Ravi Jagannathan, Pete Kyle, Peng Liu, Anna Pavlova, 
Neil Pearson, Tarun Ramadorai, Matthew Spiegel, Dimitry Vayanos, and seminar participants 
at 2013 NBER Meetings on the Economics of Commodity Markets, 2015 Western Finance 
Association Annual Conference, 2015 China International Conference in Finance, First 
Commodity Conference, Leibnitz University Hannover, the CFTC, the City University of Hong 
Kong, CKGSB, Notre Dame, Hong Kong Polytech University, JP Morgan Commodity Centre 
at University of Colorado Denver, Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai University of 
Finance and Economics, SKKU Graduate School of Business (Seoul), and Yale University.  
 
 

2 
 
1. Introduction  
An important question in the commodity futures literature concerns the influence 
of speculative activity on the functioning of futures markets. According to the 
traditional view of Keynes (1923) and Hicks (1939), the presence of speculative capital 
facilitates risk sharing with hedgers who seek insurance against future price fluctuations. 
A central assumption of the theory of normal backwardation is that the hedging demand 
for futures is net short, and that hedgers induce speculators to absorb the risk of 
commodity price fluctuations by setting futures prices at a discount relative to expected 
future spot prices. While this view of insurance provision is not controversial per se, at 
the same time there are several reasons to believe that speculators have motives to trade 
that are independent from accommodating commercial hedging demands. First, the 
positions of hedgers and speculators observed in data published by the Commodity 
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) exhibit large variation over short time periods 
(weekly horizon), and while hedgers are on average net short in most commodity 
futures markets, there are frequent episodes where the net balance of their positions is 
long. This is unlikely to be entirely driven by changes in the hedging plans of 
commercial producers, which are by nature more stable over time. 1  Second, 
speculators are in aggregate short-term trend followers. For example, Commodity 
Trading Advisors, which represent an important source of speculative capital in futures 
markets, have been shown to actively pursue momentum style investment strategies.2 
                                                           
1 Cheng and Xiong (2014) observe that hedgers trade a large amount relative to their fundamental 
hedging demand.  
2 Several papers have studied the trading behavior of hedge funds, which have become a major source 
of speculative capital over recent decades. Fung and Hsieh (1997, 2001) analyze trend following 
strategies by hedge funds. More recently, Bhardwaj, Gorton, and Rouwenhorst (2014) show that the 

3 
 
It seems unlikely that these investment styles simply originate from passively meeting 
hedging demands by commercial market participants. Third, the empirical support for 
the relation between hedging pressure and the expected futures risk premium as 
predicted by the theory of normal backwardation is mixed (see Rouwenhorst and Tang 
(2012)).  
In this study, we examine futures returns around the weekly position changes 
reported by the CFTC, and provide evidence that active trading decisions by speculators 
influence the price setting in commodity futures markets independently from the 
demand for insurance by hedgers. Our empirical strategy follows Kaniel, Saar, and 
Titman (2008) by testing for the predictability of short-term returns following position 
changes of traders, and uses the direction of this return predictability to infer who 
provides and who consumes liquidity in futures markets.3 We find that during the 
weeks following a position change, commodities that are most heavily bought by 
speculators earn significantly lower returns than commodities that are sold by them. 
And commodities that are most heavily purchased by hedgers subsequently outperform 
those that are sold by them. These findings parallel the prediction from the 
microstructure theory literature on liquidity provision (e.g., Grossman and Miller (1988) 
                                                           
returns of Commodity Trading Advisors correlate with simple momentum and carry strategies in stocks, 
currencies, and commodities. Rouwenhorst and Tang (2012) document that changes in speculative 
positions are positively correlated with relative returns in commodity futures markets. Moskowitz, Ooi 
and Pedersen (2012) find that speculators follow time-series momentum strategies in many futures 
markets.  
3 Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2008) study the dynamic relation between net individual investor trading 
and short-horizon returns for a large cross-section of NYSE stocks, and show how the demand of 
immediacy for trade execution by institutions leads to the liquidity provision by individual investors and 
predictable returns following their trades. In our context of commodity futures markets, we test for the 
predictability of short-term returns following position changes by commercial hedgers and non-
commercial speculators, and use such return predictability to make inferences about who provides 
liquidity in these markets.  

4 
 
and Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993)). According to these models, liquidity 
providers (or market makers) tend to trade against the market trend as contrarians, while 
impatient traders (e.g., momentum followers) consume liquidity and need to offer a 
price concession to encourage risk-averse market makers taking the other side of their 
trades. Put into the context of commodity futures markets, hedgers trade as contrarians 
and earn a compensation for liquidity provision by accepting a price concession offered 
by impatient momentum traders (i.e., speculators) who demand immediacy.  
The short-term underperformance of commodity futures sold by hedgers is 
opposite to the prediction of Keynes’ theory of normal backwardation, which associates 
an increase in hedging pressure with higher expected risk premiums. We conjecture 
that variation in hedging pressure has two components: short-term variation that is 
primarily driven by the liquidity demands of speculators, and longer-term component 
that is driven by changes in hedging demands of commercial market participants. We 
hypothesize that the latter is relatively stable over short horizons due to the slow 
evolution of underlying production decisions in physical markets. We provide 
empirical evidence to support these conjectures. A main finding of our paper is that the 
expected excess return to a commodity futures contract embeds two return premiums 
related to position changes: one premium paid by hedgers to speculators for obtaining 
price insurance associated with, and one premium paid by speculators to hedgers for 
accommodating their short-term liquidity needs. The opposite sign of these two 
premiums implies that cost of short-term liquidity consumption paid by speculators 
partially erodes the insurance premium they receive from hedgers for providing price 

5 
 
insurance. Our analysis suggests that a large portion of the premium that speculators 
earn from providing price insurance is returned to hedgers by demanding liquidity.  
Our findings contribute to the literature on commodity futures in the following 
ways. First, the notion that short-term speculative traders are consuming liquidity runs 
counter to the traditional view of speculators as providers of liquidity in futures 
markets. 4 Second, the relative impatience of speculative trading provides a new 
explanation for the question of why hedgers appear to trade so much (Cheng and Xiong 
(2014)): they are induced by speculators and are compensated for providing short-term 
liquidity to them. Third, our findings explain why regression tests of Keynes’ theory of 
normal backwardation often fail to find a strong link between hedging pressure and 
expected futures returns (see Rouwenhorst and Tang (2012)).5 Variation in hedging 
pressure embeds two components that predict futures returns with opposite signs. 
Failure to control for liquidity provision introduces a bias that attenuates the estimated 
influence of insurance demand on future excess returns. Finally, the presence of two 
premiums can explain why empirical estimates of speculative profits in commodity 
future markets have been low: 6  the profits earned by speculators for providing 
insurance are diminished by the compensation paid for their desire to obtain short-term 
liquidity.  
                                                           
4 See for example Keynes (1930), Blau (1944) and Gray (1967). There is a large literature on the effect 
of speculators on the level and volatility of prices reviewed in Gray and Rutledge (1971).  
5 Gray and Rutledge (1971) also review the early literature on the ability of speculators to forecast prices. 
Chang (1985) and Bessembinder (1992) observe that positions of traders can predict futures returns to 
some extent. Rouwenhorst and Tang (2012) find that these findings become weaker in a more recent data 
sample. See also Basu and Miffre (2013) and Szymanowska et al. (2014) for recent studies on hedging 
pressure.  
6 See for example Working (1931), Rockwell (1967), and Hartzmark (1987) who do not detect profits to 
speculators in commodity futures markets. See also Keim (2003) who reports similar findings in US 
equity markets.  

6 
 
Our study also contributes to the broader literature on demand-based asset pricing, 
which argues that the changes in demand for an asset can have a significant impact on 
its expected return. In option markets, recent studies find that fluctuations in implied 
volatility reflect buying pressure (see Bollen and Whaley (2004), Garleanu, Pedersen, 
and Poteshman (2009)). In the stock market, Shleifer (1986) shows that the price 
increase of stocks added to the S&P500 index is related to the demand for index funds, 
and Frazzini and Pedersen (2013) suggest that investors’ demand for leverage increases 
the relative price of high-beta stocks, thereby lowering their expected returns. Our study 
links variation in long-term hedging pressure – net selling by commercial hedgers – to 
variation in excess futures returns.  
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 summarizes our data and presents 
some stylized facts about the CFTC positions reports, trading behaviour, and futures 
returns. Section 3 presents our empirical findings on short-term liquidity provision. 
Section 4 re-examines the theory of normal backwardation and tests the predictive 
power of long-term hedging pressure for expected returns after controlling for short-
term fluctuations in hedging pressure that are related to liquidity provision. We conduct 
a variety of robustness checks on our results in Section 5. Section 6 concludes our paper.  
 
2. Data and Summary Statistics  
We use publicly available data provided by the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission (CFTC) to study the trading behavior of various types of investors in 
commodity futures markets. The weekly Commitment of Trader (COT) Report details 

7 
 
the aggregate long and short positions of commodity futures market participants by 
trader type: commercials, non-commercials, and non-reportables. Positions are 
measured every week on Tuesday, and publicly released three days later, after the 
market close on Friday. Our data sample covers 26 commodities that are traded on four 
North American exchanges (NYMEX, NYBOT, CBOT, and CME) from 1994/01/02 
to 2014/11/01. The CFTC classifies a trader as “commercial” if she uses futures 
contracts for hedging purposes as defined in CFTC Regulation 1.3(z), 17 CFR 1.3(z). 
There is a long tradition in the literature to view commercials as hedgers, and non-
commercials as speculators. 7 While our classification of hedgers and speculators 
follows the tradition of the literature, we acknowledge the imperfection of this 
classification method. In Section 5, we conduct a robustness check based on the 
Disaggregated COT (DCOT) data published by the CFTC since 2006, which uses a 
finer breakdown of the speculative traders and excludes swap dealers from commercials 
traders.8  
Based on the CTFC data we construct three variables to characterize the position and 
trading behaviour of futures markets participants: hedging pressure (HP), net trading 
(Q), and the propensity to trade (PT). Hedging pressure (HP) is defined as the number 
of contracts that hedgers are short (HS) minus the number of contracts that they are long 
(HL), divided by open interest (OI), which is defined as the total number of contracts 
outstanding for commodity i in week t:  
                                                           
7 For example, see Houthakker (1957), Rockwell (1967), Chang (1985), Bessembinder (1992), DeRoon 
et al. (2000).  
8 Cheng et al. (2014) find that for the purpose of their study the finer classifications using CFTC internal 
data yield the same conclusions as those based on the DCOT data.  

8 
 
  ܪܲ௜,௧ൌ
ுௌ೔,೟ିு௅೔,೟
ைூ೔,೟
ൌെ
௛௘ௗ௚௘௥௦ ௡௘௧௟௢௡௚ ௣௢௦௜௧௜௢௡೔,೟
ைூ೔,೟
        (1) 
Our net trading measure (Q) is defined as the net purchase of futures contracts, 
calculated as the change in the net long position for commodity i from week t-1 to week 
t, normalized by the open interest at the beginning of week:  
ܳ௜,௧ൌ
௡௘௧௟௢௡௚ ௣௢௦௜௧௜௢௡ ೔,೟ି௡௘௧௟௢௡௚ ௣௢௦௜௧௜௢௡೔,೟షభ
ைூ೔,೟షభ
.                   (2) 
Assuming constant open interest, the trading measure for hedgers in commodity i is the 
decrease in hedging pressure between weeks t-1 and t.  
Finally we define the propensity to trade as the sum of the absolute changes of the 
aggregate long and the aggregate short positions of each trader category, scaled by their 
total gross positions at the beginning of the week.9 For example, the propensity to trade 
for hedgers is calculated as:  
  ܲܶ௜,௧ൌ
௔௕௦൫ு௅೔,೟ିு௅೔,೟షభ൯ା௔௕௦ሺுௌ೔,೟ିுௌ೔,೟షభሻ
ு௅೔,೟షభାுௌ೔,೟షభ
 
                (3) 
Futures price data are obtained from Pinnacle Corp. We construct weekly excess 
returns (Tuesday-Tuesday) to match the measurement of the positions by the CFTC. 
We compute excess returns using the front-month (nearest-to-maturity) contract and 
roll positions on the 7th calendar day of the maturity month into the next-to-maturity 
contract.10 The excess return ܴ௜,௧ on commodity i in week t is calculated as:  
ܴ௜,௧ൌ
ி೔ሺ௧,்ሻିி೔ሺ௧ିଵ,்ሻ
ி೔ሺ௧ିଵ,்ሻ
                             (4) 
                                                           
9 This propensity to trade can be understood as an analog to the portfolio turnover rate for stock market 
investors. Unlike the trading measures which sum to zero, the propensities can be quite different across 
traders and can vary over time. 
10 If the 7th is not a business day we use the next business day as our roll date. Our contract selection 
strategy generally takes positions in the most liquid portion of the futures curve. Popular commodity 
indexes follow similar strategy to ensure sufficient liquidity for each component contract in the index. 
For example, contracts in the SP-GSCI index are rolled from the fifth to ninth business day of each 
maturity month with 20% rolled during each day of the five-day roll period.  

9 
 
where ܨ௜ሺݐ, ܶሻ is the futures price at the end of week t for a futures contract maturing 
on date T.  
Table 1 provides summary statistics for our data and trading measures for each of 
the 26 commodities listed in column 1. Columns 2 to 3 show that the average excess 
return has been positive in 18 out of 26 markets, and has averaged 4.0% per annum 
across commodities, with an average annualized standard deviation of 28.1%. Column 
4 shows that average hedging pressure was positive for all commodities, except feeder 
cattle. The large average standard deviation of 17.1% across commodities implies that 
the balance of hedging demands is not always on the short side of the market. The 
average frequency of hedgers being net short was 71.3% across markets, indicating that 
net long positions by hedgers are not uncommon. The volatility of hedging pressure is 
further illustrated in Figure 1 which provides time series plots of hedging pressure for 
oil, copper, coffee, and wheat. Weekly changes in hedging pressure are closely linked 
to the absolute values of net position changes (Q) of hedgers and speculators, which 
average about 3% of the total open interest.11 The final three columns of Table 1 depict 
the propensity to trade for both speculators and hedgers, which is analogous to the 
portfolio turnover rate in the stock market. Columns 9 and 10 show that the propensity 
to trade is almost twice as high for speculators (9.38% per week) as it is for hedgers 
(5.40% per week). Column 11 shows that this difference is statistically significant.  
These summary statistics motivate the following empirical observations. First, the 
average net short positions of hedgers and the positive average risk premium to long 
                                                           
11 Changes in positions (our trading measure Q) differs between hedgers (commercials) and speculators 
(non-commercials) by the change in the net non-reportable positions.  

10 
 
futures positions are consistent with Keynes’ theory of normal backwardation. Figure 
2 shows that the slope coefficient of cross-sectional regression of the average risk 
premium on the average hedging pressure is significantly positive, with a t-statistic of 
2.53. Second, there is large weekly variation in hedging pressure. Cheng and Xiong 
(2014) have questioned whether the variation in net short positions of commercial 
participants in agricultural futures markets can be explained by their attempts to hedge 
price and output risk. Moreover, there is little predictability of futures excess returns 
using hedging pressure at short-term horizons. The average slope coefficient of a 
weekly Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regression of weekly excess futures returns on 
prior week hedging pressure in the previous week is insignificantly different from zero 
with a t-statistic of -0.43.12 Thus, while there is a long-term correlation between 
average hedging pressure and average returns, there is no short-term predictability. 
Third, the high propensity to trade by speculators opens the possibility that much of the 
speculative trading is not motivated by accommodating commercial hedging demands. 
Since hedgers have to absorb the net short-term trading demands of speculators, 
changes in hedging pressure will not only reflect their demands for price insurance but 
also the demand for immediacy by speculators to the extent that they follow investment 
styles that are independent from these hedging plans.  
 
3. Liquidity Provision in Commodity Futures Markets  
In this section we characterize the trading behaviour of various commodity market 
                                                           
12 Table 6 contains the details of these cross-sectional estimates. See also Gorton, Hayashi, and 
Rouwenhorst (2013) who show that the monthly correlation between returns and hedging pressure is 
contemporaneous, but not predictive. 

11 
 
participants, and infer the direction of liquidity provision from the predictable 
component of futures prices following their trades.  
 
3.1 How do Hedgers and Speculators Trade? 
For each of the three trader categories identified by the CFTC, we run weekly 
Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions of their trading measure Q on 
contemporaneous futures excess returns, or on past excess returns and lagged position 
changes. Table 2 reports the time series average of the slope coefficients and the 
corresponding t-statistics of the means. We find that the changes of both speculative 
and hedging positions are significantly related to contemporaneous and lagged 
commodity futures returns, but their correlations with returns have opposite signs: 
speculators increase positions in commodities that exhibit relative price strength, 
whereas hedgers buy commodity futures that experience price declines or for which 
prices have fallen in the prior week. In other words, speculators are momentum traders 
and hedgers are contrarians. The smaller traders in the non-reportable category act like 
speculators. These cross-sectional results are consistent with early studies in the 
literature such as Houthakker (1957), as well as the more recent time-series findings of 
Rouwenhorst and Tang (2012).   
  
3.2 Regression Test of Return Predictability and Liquidity Provision  
The strong correlation between positions changes and returns does not identify 
which group of traders initiates these trades. We infer the direction of liquidity 

12 
 
provision by studying the impact of position changes on subsequent futures returns. 
This approach is inspired by microstructure models as in Grossman and Miller (1988) 
and Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993), which predict that market makers typically 
trade against price trends and are compensated for providing liquidity through 
subsequent price reversals.13 We run both univariate Fama-MacBeth regressions of 
commodity futures excess returns in week t+1 on position changes in week t, as well as 
multivariate regressions that include a set of controls that have been suggested in the 
literature to capture variation in expected futures returns:14  
ܴ௜,௧ାଵൌܾ଴൅ܾଵܳ௜,௧൅ܾଶܤ௜,௧൅ܾଷܵ௜,௧ݒො௜,௧൅ܾସܴ௜,௧൅ߝ௜,௧ାଵ, 
(5) 
where ܤ௜,௧ is the log basis15, at the end of week t, ݒො௜,௧ is the annualized standard 
deviation of the residuals from the regression of commodity futures returns on S&P500 
returns (calculated using a 52-week rolling window); ܵ௜,௧ is a sign variable that is equal 
to 1 when speculators are net long and -1 when speculators are net short.  
Table 3 shows that commodities that are bought by hedgers in week t deliver 
significantly higher returns in week t+1 than commodities sold by them (t-statistic = 
4.84).  The estimated return impact becomes larger if we include controls for expected 
                                                           
13 This prediction is supported by empirical studies in equity markets (e.g., Conrad, Hameed, and Niden 
(1994), Avramov, Chordia, and Goyal (2006), Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2008)). Our empirical strategy 
parallels this approach for commodity futures markets.  
14 The (log) basis is motivated by the theory of storage (Working (1949) and Brennan (1958)) and the 
empirical evidence that links the basis to inventories and the commodity futures risk premium. For 
example, Fama and French (1987) find that futures basis can forecast the risk premium of commodity 
futures in time-series regressions. Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006) and Erb and Harvey (2006) show that 
sorting commodity futures into portfolios on the basis spreads the returns, and Gorton, Hayashi and 
Rouwenhorst (2013) empirically link variation of the basis and risk premiums to inventories. The 
interactive term ܵ௜,௧ݒො௜,௧ is motivated by Bessembinder (1992) as a proxy for priced idiosyncratic risk in 
commodity futures, based on the work by Hirshleifer (1988). Our lagged return variable captures short-
term momentum, as documented by Pirrong (2005), Erb and Harvey (2006), and Miffre and Rallis (2007).  
15 ܤ௜,௧ is defined as 
௟௡ ሺி೔ሺ௧,்భሻሻି௟௡ ሺி೔ሺ௧,்మሻሻ
்మି்భ
, where ܨ௜ሺݐ, ܶଵሻ and ܨ௜ሺݐ, ܶଶሻ are the prices of the closest 
and next closest to maturity contracts for commodity i.  

13 
 
returns in our regression (t-statistic = 6.55). On the other hand, commodities that are 
bought by speculators witness a significant predictable price decline in the week 
subsequent to trading.  
To gauge the economic significance of the effect of investors’ position changes on 
subsequent futures returns, consider the return impact of an average position change by 
hedgers, which is equal to 3.5% of total open interest (reported in Table 1). The cross-
sectional slope of 4.77% indicates that this changes the expected return in the 
subsequent week by 4.77%*3.5% = 0.168%, or by 9.1% annualized. A parallel 
calculation for a typical speculative position change gives a similar return impact of 
5.56%*3.0%=0.167% in the subsequent week. Position changes by small traders as a 
group do not seem to significantly impact subsequent returns, which suggests that the 
return predictability is a transfer among the reportable (large) players in commodity 
futures markets. For this reason, we will suppress the results for non-reportables in the 
remainder of our paper. Also, for sake of brevity we will report results for one side of 
the market (i.e, hedgers or speculators), as the results closely mirror each other.  
 
3.3 Portfolio Sorts on Hedgers’ Position Changes 
As an alternative non-parametric test, we construct portfolios by sorting commodities 
according to past position changes, and compare their post-ranking returns. More 
precisely, at the end of Tuesday of each week, the measurement day of the CFTC 
positions report, we rank the 26 commodity futures in ascending order based on the 
prior week change in commercial positions (i.e., hedgers’ Q). We form five equally-

14 
 
weighted “quintile” portfolios, containing 5, 5, 6, 5, and 5 commodity futures 
respectively, and calculate the excess returns of these five portfolios during the 40-
trading-day period following the portfolio construction. Because the CFTC report is 
released after the market close on the Friday following the Tuesday measurement of 
positions, we separately report the excess returns during days 1-4 when the report is not 
yet released and days 5-40 when the information contained in the report is in the public 
domain.  
Panel A of Table 4 summarizes the average excess returns for the sorted portfolios. 
The second column illustrates the contrarian nature of the trading by hedgers, who most 
intensively buy commodities that have fallen in price during the prior two weeks (prior 
return of -3.09%), and most intensively sell winners (prior return of 3.68%). The third 
column shows that during the 4 days after portfolio formation, commodities in the top 
quintile (largest Q) earn on average 0.20% compared to -0.01 % for commodities in the 
bottom quintile portfolio (smallest Q). The return difference of 0.21% is significant, 
with a t-statistic of 3.04.16 The next columns shows that a positive excess return spread 
persists during days 5-20 following the release of the CFTC report: 0.30% during days 
5-10 (t = 3.62) and 0.15% (t = 1.23) during days 11-20. These numbers are 
economically large: a spread of 67 basis points during the four weeks (1-20 days) 
following a position change translates to an annualized excess return of about 9% per 
year. This is about twice the unconditional risk premium earned on an equally-weighted 
                                                           
16 When estimating the t-statistics for the return difference between the commodity futures portfolios 
with the highest and lowest past hedgers trading measure Q, we use the Newey-West adjustment with 
four lags to adjust heteroskedasticity and serial correlation.  
 

15 
 
portfolio across all commodities reported in Table 1. By this measure the liquidity cost 
of rebalancing the extreme quintile portfolios exceeds the premium earned by taking a 
passive long position in an equally-weighted commodity futures market portfolio.  
Panel B tracks the position changes by hedgers in the quintile portfolios during the 
weeks following portfolio formation. Induced by the momentum trading of speculators, 
hedgers sell the winners during the first two weeks after the portfolio construction. A 
similar short-term persistence is present in the buying of losers. However, by week 3 
hedgers begin to buy back the commodities they sold before, and sell out of the 
positions that they bought before. The last column of panel B shows that over the 8 
week period following portfolio ranking hedgers partially reverse the previous 
transactions during the week of the ranking.  
Combining our empirical results regarding the short-term interaction between 
trading behavior and returns, a clearer picture starts to emerge about liquidity provision 
in commodity markets. Hedgers follow contrarian strategies to accommodate the 
pressure from speculators’ momentum trading. They take long (short) positions when 
the selling (buying) pressure from speculators pushes commodity futures price down 
(up). Microstructure models suggest that traders who demand immediacy (e.g., 
speculators) need to offer price concession to attract liquidity-supplying orders from 
other risk-averse investors (e.g., hedgers). The price concession offered by speculators 
to hedgers explains why we observe that commodity futures prices increase after 
speculators sell and hedgers buy, and decline after speculators buy and hedgers sell.  

16 
 
Our empirical finding suggests that speculators in commodity markets consume 
liquidity and their short-term loss can be understood as the cost of demanding 
immediacy. We show in Table 1 that speculators have a higher propensity to trade than 
hedgers, partly because their momentum strategies require more frequent trading 
compared to the implementation of hedging plans by hedgers that are by nature more 
stable over time. Following short-term price trends consumes liquidity, and speculators 
have to pay a cost to hedgers so that they can accommodate the trading demands from 
speculators.  
 
3.4 Liquidity versus Private Information 
An alternative explanation for our finding that position changes predict futures 
returns is that hedgers exploit private information about the fundamentals of 
commodity markets. This informational advantage could be the by-product of their 
activities in the underlying physical commodities markets, which allows hedgers access 
to information about fundamentals that is not easily observed by non-commercial 
investors. In this section we present several pieces of empirical evidence that favours 
our interpretation of liquidity provision.  
The first is the direction of trading by hedgers in the week prior to the positions 
report. In the quintile sorts of Table 4 we document that the prices of commodities in 
the quintile that are bought most heavily by hedgers on average underperform the 
quintile that are sold most heavily by hedgers by 6.77% during the two weeks prior to 
the positions report, followed by a partial reversal of 0.61% during the next 40 trading 

17 
 
days, leaving (on net) a permanent component to the price change of 6.16%. If hedgers 
possess private information about the diverging fundamental values of these 
commodities, we expect the commodity price to change in the same direction as their 
trading: the price of commodities purchased by hedgers (quintile 5) should 
simultaneously increase, and the commodities sold by hedgers (quintile 1) should 
witness a contemporaneous price drop. Instead we find that hedgers are selling winners 
and buying losers during the week prior to the report, which is hard to reconcile with 
private information, but consistent with liquidity provision.17 Vayanos and Wang 
(2012) argue that if an investor’s position change co-moves negatively (positively) with 
prices changes, he provides (consumes) liquidity. As we showed in Tables 2 and 4, the 
negative (positive) contemporaneous relationship between the position change of 
hedgers (speculators) and the contemporaneous futures returns indicates that hedgers 
(speculators) are liquidity providers (consumers).  
Next we ask under what circumstances is the cost of liquidity expected to be 
relatively high?  We borrow several tests from the market microstructure literature, 
and adapt them to our context. We label these tests loosely as the presence of a capital 
loss, order imbalance, and Amihud illiquidity.  
Capital Loss: Recent theoretical models suggest that a deterioration of the wealth or 
the collateral base of market makers can hinder their liquidity provision.18 By analogy, 
when hedgers have suffered a severe loss on their futures positions, they have to finance 
                                                           
17 Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2008) find similar trading pattern for individual investors in U.S. stock 
market: the stock price decreases (increases) when individual investors buy (sell). They argue that this 
observation is opposite to what the private information hypothesis would imply and consistent with the 
hypothesis that individual investors provide liquidity to the stock market (see their page 298). 
18 See Xiong (2001), Kyle and Xiong (2001), Vayanos (2004), and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009).  

18 
 
this loss by posting additional collateral. As a result, their willingness to provide 
liquidity could be negatively impacted after suffering a loss on their hedges, and 
therefore speculators need to offer a larger price concession to attract the reluctant 
hedgers to absorb their immediacy demand.19  
Order imbalance: Excess order imbalance can increase the market maker’s 
inventory concern and reduce liquidity in the stock market (e.g., Chordia, Roll, and 
Subrahmanyam (2002)). In the context of our study, when speculators trade in the same 
direction over several consecutive weeks, hedgers will be pushed further away from 
their desired hedging positions. As a consequence, hedgers will become less willing to 
absorb additional trades in that direction going forward, and speculators have to pay a 
higher cost for their liquidity consumption.  
Amihud illiquidity: Our final piece of empirical evidence is to compare the 
compensation for liquidity provision across commodities with different levels of 
illiquidity. Naturally, we expect such compensation to be larger for the less liquid 
commodities. To proxy for commodity market liquidity, we follow Marshall, Nguyen, 
and Visaltanachoti (2012) and use Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure.20  
Our hypothesis here is that the futures return predictability based on position changes 
                                                           
19 Hedgers face a more binding funding constraint in this scenario even if the loss on their futures 
hedging positions can be matched by a gain on the value of their physical output. This is because there 
is a cash flow mismatch – hedgers need to provide additional capital in a timely manner to meet the 
marginal calls once they suffer large loss on their futures positions, while the corresponding gains on 
their physical commodity positions are usually unrealized at this moment.  
20 For each commodity in a given week, we compute its Amihud illiquidity measure as the average of 
the daily ratio of the absolute value of its daily return divided by its dollar trading volume in the same 
day for all the trading days in the week. Then we take a past 52-week average of the weekly Amihud 
measure estimated above from week t-51 to t, and define a dummy variable Dm(Illiquidity), which equals 
to one for those commodities whose past 52-week average Amihud ratio is in the highest (most illiquid) 
quartile in a given week t.  

19 
 
should be stronger following a capital loss for hedgers, following weeks during which 
speculators repeatedly trade in the same direction, and in commodity futures markets 
that are more illiquid. We test for these hypothesis by conducting the following panel 
regression:  
ܴ௜,௧ାଵൌܾ଴൅ܾଵܳ௜,௧൅ܾଶܦሺ∙ሻ௜,௧ܳ௜,௧൅ܿ݋݊ݐݎ݋݈ݏ൅ߝ௜,௧ାଵ      (6) 
D is a dummy that takes on the value of 1 when we predict the cost of liquidity to be 
high: following large losses by hedgers, when hedgers’ positions have changed in the 
same directions in the prior 4 weeks, or when a commodity is illiquid. The other 
variables are defined in a same way as equation (5).  
The panel estimation results in Table 5 show that, consistent with our predictions, 
the coefficients on the dummy variables are significantly positive in each of the three 
scenarios. The first specification shows that following large losses of hedgers, the cost 
of liquidity consumption for speculators significantly increases. The regression 
coefficients indicate a net purchase by hedgers equal to 3.5% of the open interest would 
result in an expected price increase of 8.9 basis points in the next week. But in weeks 
following a large capital loss of hedgers, the return impact of this same position change 
more than doubles to 21.2 basis points. This finding is consistent with liquidity 
provision but harder to reconcile with private information.  A large loss suggests that 
the quality of private information signals received by hedgers is low, and it is unclear 
why hedgers would earn higher returns when their information becomes less precise.  
The second specification shows that coefficients for ܾଵ and ܾଶ are similar in 
magnitude, which suggests that the return impact of a speculative position adjustment 

20 
 
is about twice as large when net positions of hedgers have changed in the same direction 
in each of the prior 4 weeks.  
The coefficient estimate of the dummy variable in the third regression specification 
is significantly positive for hedgers. It suggests that there is a larger return impact 
associated with position changes for illiquid commodity futures than for liquid 
commodity futures. Consistent with our hypothesis of liquidity provision, our findings 
here imply that the cost of liquidity is indeed higher in less liquid commodity futures 
markets.  
In brief, our analysis here indicates that hedgers demand a higher liquidity premium 
from speculators in the presence of more binding capital constraints, larger concerns 
about order imbalances, and in more illiquid futures markets. These observations are 
consistent with our liquidity provision story and more difficult to reconcile with the 
private information hypothesis.  
 
4. The Theory of Normal Backwardation Revisited  
The conclusion from the previous section is that short-term fluctuations in hedging 
pressure are primarily driven by the liquidity demands of speculators, and represent a 
factor in the determination of futures prices that is separate from commercial hedging 
demands. This factor has not been considered in regression tests of the theory of normal 
backwardation, which has interpreted movements in hedging pressure as being 
motivated by the demand for price insurance by hedgers. Our hypothesis is that 
increases in hedging pressure can either have a positive or a negative influence on 

21 
 
expected futures returns depending on whether it stems from demand for price 
insurance by hedgers or from demand for liquidity by speculators. In this section we 
attempt to separate these two effects.  
While the demand for immediacy by speculators influences futures prices at short-
term horizons (i.e., weekly frequency), we hypothesize that the demand for insurance 
by hedgers is likely to be relatively stable from week to week, and is expected to change 
slowly over time as output decisions of producers and merchants adjust. Our empirical 
strategy is to distinguish between slow moving components of hedging pressure that 
can be used as a proxy for changes in hedging demand and higher frequency movements 
that are more likely to be associated with liquidity provision.  We propose a simple 
empirical approach in which we calculate a trailing moving average of hedging pressure 
to remove these short-term fluctuations.  
 
4.1 Fama-MacBeth Regression Results for Smoothed Hedging Pressure 
Table 6 revisits our basic Fama-MacBeth regression framework for excess return 
predictability including measures of hedging pressure and short-term trading, while 
controlling for other sources of variation in risk premiums as in Table 3. The first 
specification can be viewed as a traditional regression test of the theory of normal 
backwardation linking hedging pressure to risk premiums. We find that the average 
slope coefficient on the key independent variable, lagged hedging pressure (HP), is not 
significantly different from zero (t = −0.43).  
Next, we replace HP by ܪܲ, which is calculated as a trailing 52-week moving 

22 
 
average of hedging pressure. 21 This filters out short-term fluctuations in hedging 
pressure and we will refer to ܪܲ as smoothed hedging pressure. The second regression 
specification in Table 6 shows that the average slope coefficient on smoothed hedging 
pressure is positive and statistically significant (t = 3.35), which is consistent with the 
prediction of the theory of normal backwardation.  
The third specification shows that both short-term position changes Q and smoothed 
hedging pressure ܪܲ significantly predict risk premiums in a multivariate regression.  
The coefficient for smoothed hedging pressure is virtually unaffected by the inclusion 
of Q in the regression, which indicates that these two variables capture independent 
sources of variation in risk premiums. Since we have controlled for the futures basis 
and past returns in our cross-sectional regressions, our liquidity and hedging pressure 
factors capture variation in risk premiums that is different from previously documented 
factors such as carry and momentum.  
Our decomposition of variation in hedging pressure helps to explain why simple 
predictive regressions of excess returns on lagged hedging pressure fail to detect a 
significant influence (Rouwenhorst and Tang, 2012). Depending on the source of 
variation in hedging pressure, there are opposite effects on the risk premium. If an 
increase in hedging pressure is driven by demand for insurance of hedgers, it increases 
the risk premium, and if it is driven by liquidity demands of speculators it lowers the 
risk premium.  
                                                           
21  We have experimented with a variety of methods to smooth hedging pressure, including the 
application of a Hodrick-Prescott filter. Unreported results show that our findings are robust across 
methods, and not sensitive to the choice of the length of the moving average window.  

23 
 
 
4.2 Portfolio Sorting Results for Smoothed Hedging Pressure 
Panel A of Table 7 summarizes the performance of two-way sorted portfolios, 
constructed by first ranking commodities on smoothed hedging pressure ܪܲ, and then 
according to prior week net hedger buying activity, Q.  
During the first four trading days following the portfolio formation, high Q 
commodities significantly outperform low Q commodities regardless of the level of 
hedging pressure. For the next 16 days (days 5-20), the outperformance of high Q 
commodities is concentrated in the commodities experiencing higher hedging pressure. 
Overall the return impact of short-term trading is higher for commodities with high 
hedging pressure. Our conjecture for this observation is that a higher hedging pressure 
is the result of stronger hedging demand for futures, and therefore hedgers may be more 
reluctant to deviate from their hedging positions to accommodate the short-term trading 
needs of speculators. After 20 trading days, there is no significant difference between 
the returns of the commodities high and low Q portfolios, which illustrates the 
temporary nature of the premium for liquidity provision.  
We find that the high ܪܲ portfolios outperform the low ܪܲ portfolios at all 
horizons. The spread between the two portfolios increases with the length of the 
investment horizon, which reflects the persistent nature of smoothed hedging pressure. 
The return difference between high and low ܪܲ portfolios are statistically significant 
and economically important. For example, during the first twenty days following 
portfolio formation when the CFTC positions information is in the public domain, high 

24 
 
ܪܲ portfolios that experience high hedger buying (High Q) outperform low ܪܲ  
portfolios that experience high hedger buying by on average 105 bp, or more than 12% 
annualized.  
Panel B of Table 7 shows the associated trading measures for the double sorted 
portfolios. The high Q portfolios experience a brief net buying following the portfolio 
ranking, but witness net selling subsequently. The reverse is true for low Q portfolios, 
which initially experience continuation of selling followed by subsequent buybacks.  
Overall the documented return and trading patterns are consistent with mean 
reversion of temporary deviations of hedging positions from target levels, induced by 
liquidity provision to speculative traders. Commodities that have poor returns are 
subsequently sold by speculators and bought by hedgers, thereby reducing its hedging 
pressure. The reduction of hedging pressure has a temporary component that is reversed 
in subsequent weeks. During the weeks of reduced hedging pressure, these 
commodities temporarily earn higher risk premiums to compensate hedgers for their 
liquidity provision. Similarly, commodities that have good returns are subsequently 
bought by speculators and sold by hedgers. This temporarily increases observed 
hedging pressure of these commodities, and lowers their returns.  
In the broader context of the literature on commodity futures markets, our findings 
make an important contribution to the empirical design of tests of the theory of normal 
backwardation. We show that is important to distinguish between variation in the net 
position of hedgers (often called “hedging pressure”) that is driven by the insurance 
demands of hedgers, and variation in the net position that reflects short-term 

25 
 
“speculative pressure” induced by buying and selling of non-commercial market 
participants that is independent of these hedging demands. We propose a simple way to 
disentangle these two sources of variation, and show that both significantly predict risk 
premiums. Failing to distinguish between these two separate sources of variation 
renders the predictive power of hedging pressure for risk premiums to become 
insignificant.  
 
5. Robustness tests  
5.1 Liquidity Provision and Convective Risk Flows  
In a recent study, Cheng, Kirilenko, and Xiong (2015) (CKX hereafter) examine the 
response of commodity futures prices to shocks to the risk-absorbing capacity of 
financial traders during the recent financial crisis. With an increase in overall risk 
during a crisis, speculators experience a reduction in risk appetite. This causes 
speculators to cut down their risky positions in commodity futures, and hedgers 
facilitate this by reducing their net short positions accordingly. In their empirical work 
they document a contemporaneous correlation between changes in the VIX (proxy for 
risk appetite of financial traders), trader positions, and commodity futures returns. The 
CKX study of the financial crises shares resemblance to our paper in that it studies the 
price impact of speculator-induced trading that is absorbed by hedgers. To assess 
whether our study identifies a channel whereby speculative trading impacts prices that 
is different from the CKX paper, we conduct the following additional empirical tests.  

26 
 
First, we examine whether our results survive when we control for changes in the 
VIX in our regressions. More specifically, we estimate the following panel regression:  
ܴ௜,௧ାଵൌܾଵܳ௜,௧൅ܾଶ∆ܪܲ ௜,௧൅ ܾଷ∆ܸܫܺ௧ାଵ൅ܾସ∆ܸܫܺ௧൅ܿ݋݊ݐݎ݋݈ݏ൅ݑ௜൅ߝ௜,௧ାଵ  (7) 
The first specification in Table 8 excludes the VIX terms to show that our estimated 
coefficients in the panel regression qualitatively match our Fama-MacBeth estimates in 
Table 5. In the next regression we show that the coefficient on contemporaneous 
changes in the VIX is negative and statistically significant. This mirrors the findings of 
CKX. The final regression shows that the coefficient of lagged changes in the VIX is 
small and not significantly different from zero. Most importantly, we highlight that the 
inclusion of changes in the VIX does not alter the coefficients of either short-term 
trading Q or smoothed hedging pressure ܪܲ . Hence, we conclude that the impact of 
short-term liquidity provision and the role of long-term hedging pressure found in our 
study are separate from the influence of the shocks to intermediary risk-taking capacity 
as reported by CKX.  
Second, CKX find that a sudden increase of the VIX during the financial crisis was 
contemporaneously accompanied by a decrease of speculative long positions and a drop 
of commodity futures prices.  They do not examine the effect of an increase of the 
VIX on expected risk premiums. We document that the position change of hedgers or 
speculators can predict the return of commodity futures, controlling for 
contemporaneous or lagged change of VIX.  
Third, CKX report that the negative correlation between commodity returns and the 
change in the VIX is only present during the post-crisis period, whereas it is 

27 
 
insignificant in the pre-crisis period. By contrast, a sub-period analysis of Table 3 shows 
that our predictability results are present and significant in both halves of our sample, 
albeit some slightly stronger in the more recent part (see the Appendix Table A1).  
Therefore, our findings are not confined to the recent post-crisis period and can be 
attributed to a more general aspect of price formation in futures markets.  
Overall, these three findings indicate that our results capture a channel through 
which speculative positions affect futures prices in a way that is fundamentally different 
from Cheng, Kirilenko, and Xiong (2015).  
 
5.2 DCOT data 
In our analysis thus far, we have followed a convention that has been widely used in 
the literature, which designates the commercial traders (as defined by the COT reports) 
as hedgers and non-commercial traders as speculators.22 There are valid concerns 
about the accuracy of this classification. For example, a long futures positions by a 
financial intermediary to hedge an over-the-counter commodity index swap with an 
institutional investor would normally be classified as a commercial position, although 
the underlying position of the end investor is speculative in nature.23 In this section, 
we briefly discuss some recent empirical studies based on the COT data, and conclude 
that despite its shortcomings, the data are informative and therefore useful for our 
analysis. Our conclusion is supported by the results of additional tests using the DCOT 
                                                           
22 See Houthakker (1957), Rockwell (1967), Chang (1985), Bessembinder (1992), DeRoon et al. 
(2000), etc.  
23 Cheng, Kirilenko and Xiong (2014) contains a detailed discussion of trader misclassification based 
on a comparison of CTFT reports to the LTRS database of trader positions that is maintained internally 
by the CFTC. 

28 
 
dataset which employs finer breakdown of the speculator category.  
First, although it may be a somewhat coarse method to associate COT commercial 
traders with hedgers, this classification scheme remains effective in general, both in our 
study as well as elsewhere in the literature. The premise of the Keynesian theory of 
normal backwardation is that the aggregate hedging demand for futures is net short, and 
the prediction that hedgers are expected to pay a premium to speculators as a 
compensation for their insurance service is broadly supported by the data. In Table 1 
we documented that the commercials have short positions in commodity futures market 
more than 70% of the time, and that their net short position is on average, across time 
and commodities, 14% of the total open interest. Moreover, our study shows that non-
commercials earn a risk premium that varies with low frequency movements in hedging 
pressure as measured by the net short positions by commercials. In light of concerns 
about misclassification, these results are surprisingly robust. This finding mirrors CKX 
(2015) who report that their conclusions using the DCOT positions are qualitatively 
similar to those based a more detailed, proprietary dataset of trader positions that is 
maintained internally by the CFTC. Furthermore, Hong and Yogo (2012) find that 
higher aggregate market-wide hedging demand, measured as the average imbalance 
between the short and long positions of COT commercial traders, can marginally 
predict higher commodity futures market returns. Acharya, Lochstoer, and Ramadorai 
(2013) find that, consistent with their model predictions, COT commercials in energy 
futures increase their net short positions when listed energy firms face an increased risk 
of default. Therefore, the observation that all these empirical findings are consistent 

29 
 
with the corresponding theory predictions implies that despite the misclassification 
concern, the COT data still provides a reasonable measure for the hedgers’ hedging 
demand.  
Second, we check the robustness of our results using the Disaggregate Commitment 
of Trader (DCOT) data, which is published by CFTC since January 2006. The weekly 
DCOT data classifies commodity futures traders into five groups: producers/merchant/ 
processor/user, money managers, swap dealers, other reportable, and non-reportable (or 
small investors). The first group, which for brevity we will refer to as producers, 
consists of market participants that are thought to have a clear hedging motive, whereas 
money managers are generally considered to be speculators. Swap dealers are 
separately reported in the DCOT reports, unlike the COT reports where dealers with a 
hedging exemption would be included in the commercial category.  
Using the producers category in the DCOT reports as our alternative proxy for 
hedgers, we compute the net trading by hedgers (Q), and smoothed hedging pressure 
(ܪܲ
തതതത) as before. Table 9 report the results of re-estimating equation (5) using the DCOT 
classifications. We obtain results that closely resemble our findings using the COT data 
(Table 6), when we established the presence of two premiums associated with position 
changes. The commodity futures that are heavily bought (sold) by producers, on 
average earn higher (lower) returns in the following week. And smoothed hedging 
pressure is positively related to future expected returns, as predicted by the theory of 
normal backwardation.  
These findings confirm that producers (hedgers) are short-term liquidity providers. 

30 
 
Which traders do producers provide liquidity to? Because the DCOT reports provide a 
more detailed breakdown of the speculative category, it allows us to more narrowly 
isolate the demand for liquidity. We estimate a Fama-MacBeth regression as described 
by equation (5) for each trader category. The regression coefficient estimates are 
provided in the Appendix Table A2, and can be compared to the estimates based on the 
courser classifications reported in Table 3. Inspecting the average slope coefficients for 
Q across various trader categories, we find that producers are the only category with a 
positive sign. All other trader categories have negative point estimates, which indicates 
that they are all short-term consumers of liquidity. The category of money managers, 
which includes CTAs and hedge funds, stands out.  Based on the size and statistical 
significance of its coefficient on Q it appears to be the major liquidity consumer, and 
not the swap dealers which would include financial intermediaries that provide 
institutional investors with commodity index exposure through swaps.24  
Overall, we find that our empirical results obtained from the DCOT data closely 
resemble those based on the COT data. It suggests that our empirical finding are robust 
to concerns about potential COT data misclassification.  
 
6. A Concise Model  
We construct a concise model to better illustrate the economic intuition of our main 
empirical findings. In this model we show that the futures price change can be positively 
                                                           
24 We also conducted our analysis for the smaller set of commodities reported in the Commitment of 
Index Traders (CIT) report of the CFTC. Our previous finding that hedgers (speculators) are providers 
(consumers) of liquidity remains robust in the CIT data, and there is no significant evidence about 
whether that index traders are provider or consumers of liquidity on the commodity futures market. Our 
finding regarding the impact of CIT index traders is consistent with Sanders and Irwin (2016). 

31 
 
(negatively) predicted by the short-term trading of the hedger (the speculator), and the 
insurance premium predicted by the normal backwardation theory can be more 
precisely measured by controlling for the short-term fluctuation in the hedger’s position. 
The implication of the model is consistent with empirical results in this paper. For the 
brevity of the paper, the model and its proof are included in the Appendixes B and C 
respectively.  
 
7. Conclusion  
In this paper, we show that the traditional view of commodity futures markets, which 
emphasizes how speculative capital provides “liquidity” to hedgers, is incomplete 
because it abstracts from speculative motives to trade that are independent of meeting 
the demand for price insurance of hedgers. Speculators are short-term momentum 
traders and have a higher propensity to trade than hedgers. In this process, hedgers 
provide liquidity to speculators, and earn a compensation by benefiting from a reversal 
in prices following their trading activity. These findings parallel the results of Kaniel, 
Saar, and Titman (2008) for US equity markets, where individuals provide liquidity to 
institutions that demand immediacy in their trade execution. We further show that the 
cost to speculators for demanding liquidity from hedgers increases when hedgers face 
more binding capital constraints or when the positions of hedgers become more skewed.  
Commodity futures prices embed two premiums related to position (changes): one 
for providing price insurance to hedgers, and one for providing liquidity to speculators. 
The opposite nature of these premiums can explain why previous regression tests of the 

32 
 
theory of normal backwardation fail to find an influence of hedging pressure on risk 
premiums without controlling for liquidity provision. It can also potentially explain 
why prior research has documented that the profits to speculative activity has been low.  
 
 
 

33 
 
References 
 
Acharya, Viral, Lars Lochstoer and Tarun Ramadorai, 2013, Limits to arbitrage and 
hedging: Evidence from commodity markets, Journal of Financial Economics, 109, 
441–465.  
 
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series 
effects, Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.  
  
Avramov, Doron, Tarun Chordia, and Amit Goyal, 2006, Liquidity and autocorrelation 
of individual stock returns, Journal of Finance 61, 2365–2394.  
 
Basu, Devraj, and Joëlle Miffre, 2013, Capturing the risk premium of commodity 
futures: The Role of Hedging Pressure, Journal of Banking and Finance 37, 2652–
2664.  
 
Bessembinder, Hank, 1992, Systematic risk, hedging pressure, and risk premiums in 
futures markets. Review of Financial Studies, 4, 637–667.  
 
Bhardwaj,Geetesh, Gary Gorton, and K Geert Rouwenhorst, 2014, Fooling some of 
the people all of the time: the inefficient performance of commodity trading advisors, 
Review of Financial Studies 27, 3099-3112 
 
Blau, Gerda, 1944, Some aspects of the theory of futures trading, Review of Economic 
Studies, 7, 1-30 
 
Bodie, Zvi and Victor Rosanski, 1980, Risk and return in commodity futures. 
Financial Analysts Journal, 36, 27-39. 
 
Bollen, Nicolas and Robert Whaley, 2004, Does net buying pressure affect the shape 
of implied volatility functions, Journal of Finance, 59, 711-753 
 
Brennan, Michael, 1958, The supply of storage, American Economics Review, 48, 50–
72 
 
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding 
liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201–2238.  
 
Buyuksahin, Bahattin and Jeffrey H. Harris, 2011, Do speculators drive crude oil 
futures prices? The Energy Journal, 32, 167-202.  
 
Campbell, John Y., Sanford J. Grossman, and Jiang Wang, 1993, Trading volume and 
serial correlation in stock returns, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 905–939.  
 

34 
 
Chang, Eric C. 1985. Returns to speculators and the theory of normal backwardation. 
Journal of Finance 40, 193-208.  
 
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Andrei Kirilenko, and Wei Xiong, 2015, Convective risk flows in 
commodity futures markets, Review of Finance, 19:1733–81. 
 
Cheng, Ing-Haw and Wei Xiong, 2014, Why do hedgers trade so much, Journal of 
Legal Studies 43, S183-S207. 
 
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2002, Order 
imbalance, liquidity and market returns, Journal of Financial Economics 65, 111-
130.  
  
Conrad, Jennifer, Allaudeen Hameed, and Cathy Niden, 1994, Volume and 
autocovariances in short-horizon individual security returns, Journal of Finance 49, 
1305–1329.  
 
De Roon Frans, Theo E. Nijman, and Chris Veld, 2000, Hedging pressure effects in 
futures markets. Journal of Finance 55, 1437–1456.  
 
Erb, Claude and Campbell Harvey, 2006, The strategic and tactical value of commodity 
futures. Financial Analyst Journal, 62, 69–97.  
 
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 1987, Commodity futures prices: some evidence 
on forecast power, premiums, and the theory of storage. Journal of Business, 60, 
55–73.  
 
Frazzini, Andrea, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2014, Betting against beta, Journal of 
Financial Economics, 111, 1–25. 
 
Fung, William, and David Hsieh, 1997, The information content of performance track 
records: Investment style and survivorship bias in the historical returns of 
commodity trading advisors, Journal of Portfolio Management, 24, 30-41.  
 
Fung, William and David Hsieh, 2001, The risk in hedge fund strategies: Theory and 
evidence from trend followers, Review of Financial Studies, 14, 313-341.  
 
Garleanu, Nicolae, Lasse Heje Pedersen and Allen M. Poteshman, Demand-based 
option pricing, Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 4260-4299. 
 
Gorton Gary and K Geert Rouwenhorst 2006. Facts and fantasies about commodity 
futures. Financial Analyst Journal 62, 47-68.  
 
Gorton Gary, Fumio Hayashi and K. Geert Rouwenhorst 2013. The fundamentals of 

35 
 
commodity futures returns. Review of Finance 17, 35-105.  
 
Gray, Roger W., 1967, Price effects of a lack of speculation, Food research Institute 
Studies, 7, 177-194. 
 
Gray, Roger W and David J. Rutledge, 1971. The economics of commodity futures 
markets: a survey, Review of Marketing & Agricultural Economics, 39, 57 - 108 
 
Grossman, Sanford, and Merton Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, Journal 
of Finance 43, 617–633.  
 
Hamilton, James, 2009, Causes and consequences of the oil shock of 2007-2008. 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 03, 215-283. 
 
Hartzmark, Michael, 1987, Returns to individual traders of futures: Aggregate results. 
Journal of Political Economy, 95: 1292-1306. 
 
Hicks, John Richard, 1939, Value and Capital: An inquiry into some fundamental 
principles of economic theory. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.  
 
Hirshleifer, David, 1988, Residual risk, trading costs and commodity futures risk 
premia, Review of Financial Studies 1, 173–193. 
 
Hong, Harrison, and Motohiro Yogo, 2012, What does futures market interest tell us 
about the macroeconomy and asset prices? Journal of Financial Economics, 105, 
473-490.  
 
Houthakker H.S., 1957, Can speculators forecast prices? Review of Economics 
Statistics 39, 143–151.  
 
Kaniel, Ron, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2008, Individual investor trading and 
stock returns, Journal of Finance 63, 273–310.  
 
Keim, Donald B. 2003, The cost of trend chasing and the illusion of momentum profits, 
working paper, The Wharton School.  
 
Keynes, John, 1923, Some aspects of commodity markets. Manchester Guardian 
Commercial, 13, 784–786. 
 
Keynes, John Maynard, 1930, A treatise on money, Vol 2, New York, Harcourt 
 
Kyle, Pete, and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth effect, Journal of Finance, 
1401–1440.  
 

36 
 
Marshall, Ben, Nhut H. Nguyen and Nuttawat Visaltanachoti, 2012, Commodity 
liquidity measurement and transaction costs, Review of Financial Studies, 25, 599-
638.  
 
Miffre, Joelle and Georgios Rallis, 2007, Momentum in commodity futures markets. 
Journal of Banking and Finance 31, 1863–1886 
 
Moskowitz, Tobias J., Yao Hua Ooi, Lasse H. Pedersen, 2012, Time series momentum, 
Journal of Financial Economics 104, 228-250. 
 
Pirrong, Craig, 2005, Momentum in futures markets. Working Paper, University of 
Houston.  
 
Pirrong, Craig, 2010, No theory? No evidence? No problem! Cato Journal, summer, 
38-44. 
 
Rockwell, Charles S., 1967, Normal backwardation, forecasting and the returns to 
commodity futures traders. Food Research Institute Studies 7, 107–130. 
 
Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, and Ke Tang, 2012, Commodity investing, Annual Review of 
Finance and Economics, 447-467.  
 
Sanders, Dwight R. and Scott H. Irwin, 2016, Bubbles, Froth and Facts: Another look 
at the Masters Hypothesis in Commodity Futures Markets, Journal of Agricultural 
Economics, forthcoming.  
 
Shleifer, Andrei, 1986, Do demand curves for stocks slope down? Journal of Finance, 
41, 579-590.  
 
Singleton, Kenneth J., 2014, Investor flows and the 2008 boom/bust in oil prices, 
Management Sciences, 60, 300-318.  
 
Szymanowska, Marta, Frans de Roon, Theo Nijman and Rob van den Goorbergh, An 
anatomy of commodity futures risk premia, 2014, Journal of Finance, 69, 453-482.  
 
Tang, Ke, and Wei Xiong, 2012, Index investment and financialization of commodities. 
Financial Analyst Journal, 68, 54-74. 
 
Xiong, Wei, 2001, Convergence trading with wealth effects: An amplification 
mechanism in financial markets, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 247–292.  
 
Working, Holbrook, 1931, Financial results of speculative holding of wheat, Wheat 
Studies of the Food Research Institute, 7 (81) 
 

37 
 
Working, Holbrook 1949. The theory of the price of storage. American Economic 
Review, 39, 1254–1262.  
 
Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, Flight to quality, flight to liquidity and the pricing of risk, 
NBER working paper.  
 
Vayanos, D. and Jiang Wang 2012, Liquidity and asset prices under asymmetric 
information and imperfect competition, Review of Financial Studies, 25, 1339-1365. 
 
 

38 
 
Figure 1: Hedging Pressures of Four Commodities  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The figure shows the time series of hedging pressure for oil, copper, coffee, and wheat over the period 
from 1994/01/02 to 2014/11/01. The hedging pressure is defined as the hedgers’ net short position (short 
minus long position) divided by the total open interest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Copper
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Wheat
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Coffee
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Oil

39 
 
 
Figure 2: Average Futures Excess Returns and Average Hedging Pressure  
 
 
 
The figure provides a scatter plot of the average excess futures return and average hedging pressure for 
the 26 sample commodities between 1994 and 2014. The cross-sectional regression line has a slope 
coefficient of 0.50 with t-statistic of 2.53 and an R2 of 21%.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
Table 1: Summary Statistics  
 
The table provides summary statistics of the commodity futures price data and positions data obtained 
from weekly CFTC Commitment of Traders (COT) report between January 1994 and October 2014. The 
excess return in week t is defined as: ܴ௜,௧ൌሺܨ௜ሺݐ, ܶሻെܨ௜ሺݐെ1, ܶሻሻ/ܨ௜ሺݐെ1, ܶሻ, where T denotes the 
maturity of the front-month futures contract for commodity i. The front-month contract is rolled on the 
7th day of the month or the next day if the 7th is not a business day. Hedging pressure, HP for commodity 
i, is defined as the net short (short minus long) position of commercial traders in commodity futures 
contracts divided by its total open interest, i.e., ܪܲ௜,௧ൌሺܪ݁݀݃݁ݎ݄ܵ݋ݎݐ௜,௧െܪ݁݀݃݁ݎܮ݋݊݃௜,௧ሻ/
ܱ݌݁݊ܫ݊ݐ݁ݎ݁ݏݐ௜,௧. The probability of short hedging, Prob(HP>0), is defined as the fraction of weeks when 
hedgers hold net short positions for a given commodity. The net trading measure, Q, which is defined as 
the weekly change of the net long position normalized by open interest. ܳ௜,௧ൌሺ݊݁ݐ ݈݋݊݃ ݌݋ݏ݅ݐ݅݋݊௜,௧െ
݊݁ݐ ݈݋݊݃ ݌݋ݏ݅ݐ݅݋݊௜,௧ିଵሻ/ ܱ݌݁݊ܫ݊ݐ݁ݎ݁ݏݐ௜,௧ିଵ. We report the time-series average of the absolute value of 
the trading measure for hedgers and speculators. Finally, we examine the difference of the propensity of 
adjusting portfolio positions between speculators and hedgers. Denote SL, SS, HL and HS as the size of 
speculator’s long, speculator’s short, hedger’s long, hedger’s short positions, respectively, we define the 
propensity 
to 
trade 
as, 
ܲܶ௜,௧
ு௘ௗ௚௘௥ൌ
௔௕௦൫ு௅೔,೟ିு௅೔,೟షభ൯ା௔௕௦ሺுௌ೔,೟ିுௌ೔,೟షభሻ
ு௅೔,೟షభାுௌ೔,೟షభ
; 
 
ܲܶ௜,௧
ௌ௣௘௖ൌ
௔௕௦൫ௌ௅೔,೟ିௌ௅೔,೟షభ൯ା௔௕௦ሺௌௌ೔,೟ିௌௌ೔,೟షభሻ
ௌ௅೔,೟షభାௌௌ೔,೟షభ
. The t-statistic for the difference between hedgers and speculative 
propensity to trade is calculated by using Newy-West standard errors with 4 lags.  
 
 

 
Annualized % Excess Return  
Hedging Pressure (HP) % 
Average Absolute Value of 
Net Trading (|ܳ|) %  
Average Propensity to Trade (PT) % 
Commodity 
Mean 
Standard Dev 
Mean 
Standard Dev. 
Prob (HP>0) 
Hedgers 
Specs 
Specs 
Hedgers  
Difference 
(t-statistic) 
Oil 
13.1 
32.6 
5.13 
8.72 
73.66 
1.83 
1.48 
6.61 
3.28 
3.32 
(13.05) 
Heating Oil 
11.0 
31.2 
9.89 
8.82 
85.73 
2.66 
1.94 
10.03 
4.30 
5.73 
(12.57) 
Natural Gas 
-11.3 
46.9 
0.60 
11.36 
51.01 
1.70 
1.44 
7.47 
3.65 
3.83 
(8.04) 
Platinum 
9.1 
22.0 
49.77 
23.44 
95.30 
6.26 
5.43 
11.25 
7.42 
3.82 
(17.60) 
Palladium 
14.0 
34.7 
34.88 
34.05 
77.99 
4.46 
3.56 
10.10 
5.90 
4.21 
(18.89) 
Silver 
7.1 
29.2 
40.27 
16.68 
100.00 
3.75 
3.45 
7.27 
5.67 
1.59 
(17.57) 
Copper 
10.8 
25.2 
8.88 
21.27 
63.17 
4.16 
3.31 
10.51 
5.48 
5.02 
(14.83) 
Gold 
4.2 
16.6 
23.16 
28.12 
76.61 
5.06 
4.13 
8.26 
6.03 
2.23 
(17.32) 
Wheat 
-6.9 
28.8 
2.02 
14.49 
49.36 
3.09 
2.68 
6.88 
4.89 
1.99 
(10.36) 
KC Wheat 
2.1 
27.2 
9.54 
13.54 
75.23 
2.92 
2.37 
9.94 
4.74 
5.20 
(12.10) 
Minn Wheat 
7.1 
26.5 
9.08 
12.45 
76.52 
2.93 
2.20 
17.31 
5.89 
11.42 
(14.89) 
Corn 
-2.1 
27.3 
1.70 
13.62 
55.71 
2.41 
2.23 
6.52 
3.52 
3.00 
(10.10) 
Oat 
11.6 
34.4 
32.61 
16.84 
95.12 
4.17 
3.01 
12.62 
6.24 
6.38 
(14.73) 
Soybean 
8.4 
23.8 
10.31 
16.61 
72.93 
2.83 
2.64 
7.11 
4.56 
2.56 
(15.66) 
Soybean Oil 
-0.6 
23.8 
12.02 
17.71 
69.80 
4.01 
3.07 
8.18 
5.15 
3.03 
(-0.61) 
Soybean Meal 
16.8 
27.6 
19.70 
15.23 
85.64 
3.59 
2.77 
8.57 
4.80 
3.77 
(17.19) 
Rough Rice 
-6.8 
25.8 
12.34 
22.53 
68.97 
3.87 
2.87 
11.30 
6.15 
5.14 
(11.95) 
Cotton 
-1.4 
29.4 
6.67 
22.06 
62.15 
4.50 
3.88 
9.69 
5.12 
4.57 
  (15.26) 
Orange Juice 
3.6 
31.7 
25.5 
22.34 
85.64 
4.80 
4.00 
10.07 
6.02 
4.05  
  (11.08) 
Lumber 
-11.1 
31.5 
9.37 
18.8 
64.46 
4.41 
4.35 
12.65 
12.92 
-0.27 
  (7.17) 
Cocoa 
5.5 
30.5 
12.53 
16.88 
74.49 
2.86 
2.47 
8.76 
3.37 
5.39 
  (8.85) 
Sugar 
8.8 
32.0 
15.97 
17.89 
78.08 
3.83 
2.72 
9.81 
4.50 
5.32 
  (15.22) 
Coffee 
6.2 
38.2 
12.96 
15.68 
72.74 
3.97 
3.53 
9.68 
5.16 
4.53 
  (9.22) 
Lean Hogs 
-1.3 
24.9 
1.24 
13.74 
56.26 
2.64 
2.80 
7.98 
4.98 
3.00 
  (13.43) 
Live Cattle 
2.6 
15.2 
4.29 
10.38 
62.15 
1.83 
2.24 
6.18 
3.30 
2.88 
  (17.80) 
Feeder Cattle 
3.9 
14.2 
-7.39 
10.93 
24.59 
2.23 
3.29 
9.13 
7.38 
1.75 
  (6.89) 
Average  
4.0 
28.1 
13.96 
17.08 
71.28 
3.49 
3.00 
9.38 
5.40 
3.98 
  (12.74) 
 
 

Table 2: Weekly Position Changes, Contemporaneous and Lagged Returns  
 
The table reports the average slope coefficients and R-square of weekly Fama-McBeth cross-sectional 
regressions of the net position change (scaled by open interest) Qt in week t, on an intercept, the 
contemporaneous futures excess return (Rt) or the lagged return (Rt-1) and the lagged position change (Qt-
1). Separate regressions are run for each of three trader types using CFTC COT classifications: hedgers 
(commercials), speculators (non-commercials) and others (non-reportables). The table reports the time-
series average of the weekly cross-sectional slope coefficients and the average R-square. The t-statistics 
in parentheses below the coefficients are adjusted using the Newey-West method with 4 lags. 
 
 
Hedgers 
Speculators 
Others 
ܴ௧ 
-0.66 
 
0.52 
 
0.14 
 
 
(-34.45） 
 
(32.44) 
 
(20.16) 
 
ܴ௧ିଵ 
 
-0.20 
 
0.22 
 
0.02 
 
 
(-16.35) 
 
(20.00) 
 
(3.89) 
ܳ௧ିଵ 
 
0.17 
 
0.14 
 
-0.02 
 
 
(17.30) 
 
(15.46) 
 
(-1.93) 
R2 
24.25% 
16.67% 
20.64% 
16.76% 
10.4% 
12.62% 
 
 
 

43 
 
Table 3: Weekly Return Predictability Following Position Changes: Regression 
Approach 
 
The table reports the average slope coefficients and R-square of weekly Fama-McBeth cross-sectional 
regressions of the excess return (Rt+1) in week t+1 on an intercept, the net position change (scaled by 
open interest) Qt in week t, both with and without a set of controls for expected returns. The controls are 
the log futures basis (Bt), excess returns (Rt), and ܵ௧ݒො௧ where ݒ is the annualized standard deviation of 
the residuals from a rolling 52-week regression of futures excess returns on SP500 returns and S is an 
indicator variable that is 1 when speculators are net long and -1 when speculators are net short. Separate 
regressions are run for each of three trader types using CFTC COT classifications: hedgers (commercials), 
speculators (non-commercials) and others (non-reportables). The table reports the time-series average of 
the weekly cross-sectional slope coefficients and the average R-square. The t-statistics in parentheses 
below the coefficients are adjusted using the Newey-West method with 4 lags. 
 
 
Coefficient Estimates 
(ൈ૚૙૙) 
Hedgers 
Speculators 
Others 
ܳ௧ 
3.13 
4.77 
-4.04 
-5.56 
-1.15 
-2.16 
 
(4.84) 
(6.55) 
(-5.99) 
(-7.43) 
(-0.79) 
(-1.45) 
ܤ௧ 
 
-0.47 
 
-0.46 
 
-0.48 
 
 
(-2.54) 
 
(-2.50) 
 
(-2.55) 
ܵ௧ݒො௧ 
 
-0.04 
 
-0.01 
 
-0.04 
 
 
(-0.29) 
 
(-0.06) 
 
(-0.29) 
ܴ௧ 
 
4.43 
 
4.38 
 
2.02 
 
 
(3.91) 
 
(3.95) 
 
(2.00) 
R2 
4.76% 
25.21% 
4.55% 
25.08% 
2.46% 
24.94% 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
Table 4: Return Predictability Following Position Changes: Portfolio Sorting 
Approach  
 
On Tuesday of each week, commodities are ranked based on the change in net hedger positions Q. We 
sort commodities into five “quintile” portfolios containing 5, 5, 6, 5, 5 commodities each, respectively. 
The table reports the average excess returns (Panel A) and average position changes (Panel B) of hedgers 
(normalized by the open interest on the day of ranking) on the quintile portfolios during the 10 trading 
days prior to ranking and the 40 trading days following the ranking. Because the CFTC measures 
positions on Tuesdays but publishes the positions after the market close on Friday, we separately 
calculate the post ranking excess returns for days 1-4 and days 5-40. The t-statistics for the difference in 
the means of the top and bottom quintiles are in parentheses, adjusted using the Newey-West method 
using 4 lags.   
 
Panel A: Average Excess Returns (in %) 
 
 
-10 to 0 days 
1-4 days 
5-10 days 
11-20 days 21-40 days
1-40 days
Portfolio 1 (smallest Q)  
3.68 
-0.01 
-0.08 
0.15 
0.50 
0.55 
Portfolio 2  
1.61 
0.03 
0.04 
0.14 
0.25 
0.48 
Portfolio 3  
0.09 
0.10 
0.08 
0.18 
0.23 
0.59 
Portfolio 4  
-1.40 
0.19 
0.12 
0.14 
0.30 
0.75 
Portfolio 5 (largest Q)  
-3.09 
0.20 
0.21 
0.29 
0.43 
1.16 
Portfolio 5 − Portfolio 1  
-6.77 
0.21 
0.30 
0.15 
-0.07 
0.61 
(t-statistics)  
 
(3.04) 
(3.62) 
(1.23) 
(-0.39) 
(2.28) 
 
Panel B: Average Position Changes of Hedgers (in %) 
 
 
-2 to 0 week 
1 week 
2 week 
3-4 weeks
5-8 weeks
1-8 weeks 
Portfolio 1 (smallest Q) 
-7.85 
-1.52 
-0.20 
0.51 
0.88 
-0.33 
Portfolio 2 
-2.43 
-0.55 
-0.24 
0.08 
0.19 
-0.52 
Portfolio 3 
0.20 
-0.05 
-0.01 
0.03 
0.05 
0.01 
Portfolio 4 
2.60 
0.47 
0.03 
-0.43 
-0.53 
-0.46 
Portfolio 5 (largest Q) 
7.73 
1.40 
0.06 
-0.91 
-1.81 
-1.28 
Portfolio 5 − Portfolio 1 
15.58 
2.92 
0.26 
-1.43 
-2.69 
-0.94 
(t-statistics) 
 
(24.32) 
(2.17) 
(-7.24) 
(-8.53) 
(-2.37) 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
Table 5: Factors Affecting Liquidity Provision  
 
This table examines weekly return predictability in commodity futures markets by estimating panel 
regressions of weekly returns on past position changes of commercial hedgers. The dependent variable 
is the excess return (Rt+1) in week t+1, and the independent variables are an intercept, the weekly position 
Qt in week t for hedgers, a dummy ܦሺ∙ ሻݐ that is 1 when the cost of liquidity provision is expected to be 
high, and a set of controls for expected returns. The control variables are the same as in Table 3. The 
table reports the result of a panel regression using data for all 26 commodities with each commodity 
returns having a fixed effect, the t-statistics is adjusted by the Newey-West method with 4 lags. As 
follows, we explain the dummy variables in more details. 
Capital Loss: We first calculate capital loss D(CapitalLoss) for hedgers in week t as ܥܽ݌݅ݐ݈ܽܮ݋ݏݏ௧ൌ
ܪܲ௜,௧ିଵ∙ܴ௜,௧, where ܪܲ௜,௧ିଵ is the hedging pressure (i.e., the net short position of hedgers) for 
commodity i in week t-1. The dummy variable ܦሺܥܽ݌݅ݐ݈ܽ ܮ݋ݏݏሻ takes on the value 1 when the capital 
lost in past 4 weeks is in the highest quartile of all sample observations of a certain commodity, and zero 
otherwise.  
Order Imbalance: ܦሺܱݎ݀݁ݎܫܾ݈݉ܽܽ݊ܿ݁ሻ is set equal to one when hedger’s net trading (Q) is in the same 
direction (either buying or selling) in 4 continuous weeks from t-3 to t, and zero otherwise.  
Illiquidity: For each commodity in a given week, we compute its Amihud illiquidity measure as the 
average of the daily ratio of the absolute value of its daily return divided by its dollar trading volume in 
the same day for all the trading days in the week, and then take a past 52-week average of the weekly 
Amihud measure from week t-51 to t. We define a dummy variable Dm(Illiquidity) to be one for those 
commodities whose past 52-week average Amihud ratio is in the highest (most illiquid) quartile among 
all commodities in that week, and zero otherwise. When calculating the Amihud measure in the illiquidity 
test, we use the volume data from CRB dataset, which starts at January 2001. This time is also the starting 
point of the illiquidity regression.  
 
Coefficient Estimates  
(ൈ૚૙૙)  
Capital Loss 
Order 
Imbalance  
Illiquidity 
ܳݐ
  
2.55 
2.70 
1.89 
 
(5.07) 
(5.24) 
(2.12) 
ܳݐ
 ൈܦሺܥܽ݌݅ݐ݈ܽ ܮ݋ݏݏሻݐ 
3.50    
(2.82) 
 
 
ܳݐ
 ൈܦሺܱݎ݀݁ݎ ܫܾ݈݉ܽܽ݊ܿ݁ሻݐ 
 
2.35    
(2.04) 
 
ܳݐ
 ൈܦሺܫ݈݈݅ݍݑ݅݀݅ݐݕሻݐ 
 
 
   3.17 
 
 
 
(2.35) 
Controls 
yes 
yes 
yes 
R2 
0.30% 
0.28% 
0.33% 
 
 
 

46 
 
Table 6: Futures Return Predictability and Hedging Pressure 
 
The table reports the average slope coefficients and R-square of weekly Fama-McBeth cross-sectional 
regressions of the excess return (Rt+1) in week t+1 on an intercept, lagged hedging pressure HP t 
smoothed lagged hedging pressure ܪܲ
തതതത t, lagged net position changes of hedgers ܳݐ
  and a set of 
controls for expected returns. The controls are the log futures basis (Bt), excess returns (Rt), and ܵ௧ݒො௧ 
where ݒ is the annualized standard deviation of the residuals from a rolling 52-week regression of 
futures excess returns on SP500 returns and S is an indicator variable that is 1 when speculators are net 
long and -1 when speculators are net short. The table reports the time-series average of the weekly cross-
sectional slope coefficients and the average R-square. The t-statistics in parentheses below the 
coefficients are adjusted using the Newey-West method with 4 lags.  
 
 
Dependent Variable: Rt+1  
 
Coefficient 
Estimates (ൈ૚૙૙) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
ܪܲݐ  
-0.07 
 
 
 
(-0.43) 
 
 
ܪܲݐ
തതതതത  
 
0.54 
0.49 
 
 
(3.35) 
(2.80) 
ܳݐ
   
 
 
4.88 
 
 
 
(6.20) 
 
 
 
 
Controls  
yes 
yes 
yes 
R2  
25.67% 
25.54% 
29.60% 
 
 
 

47 
 
Table 7: Returns and Position Changes of Double Sorted Portfolios on Smoothed 
Hedging Pressure and Position Changes 
  
This table studies commodity futures return predictability based on previous week’s smoothed hedging 
pressure ܪܲ and hedgers’ lagged position changes Q. At the end of each Tuesday, we split our 26 
sample commodities into two groups of 13 based on their relative ranking on smoothed hedging pressure 
ܪܲ.  Within each group of 13 we then sort commodities based on hedger’s Q assigning 6 to Low Q and 
7 to the High Q cohort. Panel A reports the average excess returns on the double sorted portfolios, and 
Panel B reports the average position changes of hedgers (normalized by the open interest of the ranking 
day) in the days and weeks subsequent to the sorting. Because the CFTC measures positions on Tuesdays 
and publishes the positions after the market close on Friday, we separately calculate the average the post 
ranking returns for days 1-4 and days 5-40. The t-statistics for the difference in the means of the top and 
bottom halves are adjusted using the Newey-West method using 4 lags.  
 
Panel A: Average Excess Returns (in %) 
 
 
Low Q 
High Q 
H – L Q
t-stat 
Days 1-4 
Low ܪܲ 
-0.10 
0.13 
0.23 
(3.90) 
High ܪܲ 
0.09 
0.26 
0.17 
(2.66) 
H – L ܪܲ   
0.19 
0.13 
 
 
(t-statistics)  
(2.80) 
(2.10) 
 
 
Days 5-20 
Low ܪܲ 
-0.04 
-0.10 
-0.07 
(-0.48) 
High ܪܲ 
0.31 
0.82 
0.51 
(3.89) 
H – L ܪܲ   
0.34 
0.92 
 
 
(t-statistics)  
(1.76) 
(5.48) 
 
 
Days 21-40 
Low HP 
-0.06 
-0.09 
-0.03 
(-0.17) 
High HP 
0.79 
0.73 
-0.06 
(-0.39) 
H – L HP   
0.85 
0.82 
 
 
(t-statistics)  
(4.09) 
(3.77) 
 
 
Days 1-40 
Low ܪܲ 
-0.18 
-0.05 
0.13 
(0.57) 
High ܪܲ 
1.18 
1.80 
0.62 
(2.90) 
H – L ܪܲ   
1.36 
1.85 
 
 
(t-statistics)  
(3.87) 
(5.50) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
 
Panel B: Average Position Changes of Hedgers (in %) 
 
 
Low Q 
High Q 
H – L Q
t-stat 
1 Week  
Low ܪܲ 
-0.88 
0.34 
1.22 
(15.85) 
High ܪܲ 
-0.84 
0.95 
1.79 
(17.57) 
H – L ܪܲ   
0.04 
0.60 
 
 
(t-statistics)  
(0.34) 
(7.24) 
 
 
2-4 weeks 
Low ܪܲ 
-0.53 
-0.75 
-0.21 
(-1.29) 
High ܪܲ 
0.79 
-0.24 
-1.03 
(-5.06) 
H – L ܪܲ   
1.32 
0.51 
 
 
(t-statistics)  
(5.13) 
(2.34) 
 
 
5-8 weeks 
Low ܪܲ 
-0.09 
-1.26 
-1.16 
(-6.14) 
High ܪܲ 
0.88 
-0.28 
-1.16 
(-4.43) 
H – L ܪܲ   
0.97 
0.98 
 
 
(t-statistics)  
(3.28) 
(3.40) 
 
 
Week 1-8 
Low ܪܲ 
-1.50 
-1.66 
-0.16 
(-0.64) 
High ܪܲ 
0.83 
0.43 
-0.40 
(-1.16) 
H – L ܪܲ   
2.33 
2.09 
 
 
(t-statistics)  
(5.11) 
(5.16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
Table 8: Liquidity and Convective Risk Flows 
 
The table reports the slope coefficients and R-square of a panel regression of the excess return (Rt+1) in 
week t+1 on an intercept, lagged hedging pressure HP t smoothed lagged hedging pressure ܪܲ
തതതത t, and 
lagged net position changes of hedgers ܳ௧
 , the contemporaneous and lagged change of the VIX, and a 
set of controls for expected returns. The controls are the log futures basis (Bt), excess returns (Rt), and 
ܵ௧ݒො௧ where ݒ is the annualized standard deviation of the residuals from a rolling 52-week regression of 
futures excess returns on SP500 returns and S is an indicator variable that is 1 when speculators are net 
long and -1 when speculators are net short. The t-statistics in parentheses below the coefficients are 
adjusted using the Newey-West method with 4 lags. 
 
 
Coefficient Estimates (ൈ100)  
Model 1 
Model 2 
Model 3 
ܪܲ
തതതത 
0.44 
0.45 
0.44 
 
(2.25) 
(2.35) 
(2.25) 
ܳ௜,௧
  
3.03 
3.01 
3.05 
 
(6.30) 
(6.26) 
(6.34) 
ܸ݀ܫܺ௧ାଵ 
 
-0.19 
 
 
 
(-16.80) 
 
ܸ݀ܫܺ௧ 
 
 
0.01 
 
 
 
(1.18) 
Controls 
yes 
yes 
yes 
R2 
0.29% 
1.98% 
0.30% 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
Table 9: Hedging Pressure and Liquidity Provision: DCOT Data  
 
The table examines the robustness of our results using the Disaggregate Commitment of Traders (DCOT) 
dataset. DCOT data is from 2006/01/03 to 2014/11/01 at the weekly frequency. The DCOT report 
classifies traders into producers and merchant users, swap dealers, managed money, other reportables, 
and non-reportables, for the same set of commodities as in COT database. The table reports the time-
series average of slope coefficients and R-square of weekly Fama-McBeth cross-sectional regressions of 
the excess return (Rt+1) in week t+1 on an intercept, lagged hedging smoothed pressure ܪܲ
തതതതt, and lagged 
net position changes of hedgers ܳݐ
  with and without a set of controls for expected returns. The controls 
are the log futures basis (Bt), excess returns (Rt), and ܵ௧ݒො௧ where ݒ is the annualized standard deviation 
of the residuals from a rolling 52-week regression of futures excess returns on SP500 returns and S is an 
indicator variable that is 1 when speculators are net long and -1 when speculators are net short. The t-
statistics in parentheses below the coefficients are adjusted using the Newey-West method with 4 lags.  
 
Coefficient 
Estimates (ൈ૚૙૙) 
DCOT data 
Without controls 
DCOT data 
With controls 
ܪܲ
തതതത݅,ݐ 
0.85 
0.58 
 
(2.64) 
(1.61) 
ܳݐ
  
5.40 
8.59 
 
(3.69) 
(5.32) 
Controls 
no 
yes 
R2 
10.37% 
29.41% 
 
 
 

51 
 
Appendix A: Appendix Tables 
 
Table A1: Weekly Return Predictability Following Position Changes:  
Sub-period Results  
The table reports the average slope coefficients and R-square of weekly Fama-McBeth cross-sectional 
regressions of the excess return (Rt+1) in week t+1 on an intercept, the net position change (scaled by 
open interest) Qt in week t, with a set of controls for expected returns. The controls are the log futures 
basis (Bt), excess returns (Rt), and ܵ௧ݒො௧ where ݒ is the annualized standard deviation of the residuals 
from a rolling 52-week regression of futures excess returns on SP500 returns and S is an indicator variable 
that is 1 when speculators are net long and -1 when speculators are net short. Separate regressions are 
run for hedgers and speculators. The table reports the time-series average of the weekly cross-sectional 
slope coefficients and the average R-square. The t-statistics in parentheses below the coefficients are 
adjusted using the Newey-West method with 4 lags. In panel A, we divide the sample period into two 
equal sub-sample periods: from 1994/1/2 to 2003/12/31, and from 2004/1/2 to 2014/11/1. In panel B, we 
separate the sample to before and after the financial crisis (2008/9/15).  
 
Panel A: Two Equal-half Sub-periods  
 
1994/01/02 – 2003/12/31 
2004/01/02 – 2014/11/01 
Coefficient 
Estimates (ൈ100) 
Hedgers 
Speculators 
Hedgers 
Speculators 
ܳ௜,௧ 
4.07 
-4.28 
5.43 
-6.73 
 
(5.23) 
(-4.96) 
(4.52) 
(-5.68) 
ܤ௜,௧ 
-0.37 
-0.38 
-0.57 
-0.54 
 
(-1.53) 
(-1.57) 
(-2.03) 
(-1.94) 
ܵ௜,௧ݒො௜,௧ 
-0.16 
-0.12 
0.08 
0.10 
 
(-0.94) 
(-0.73) 
(0.41) 
(0.54) 
ܴ௜,௧ 
6.00 
5.75 
2.97 
3.11 
 
(3.73) 
(3.59) 
(1.89) 
(2.04) 
R2 
12.0% 
12.0% 
10.0% 
9.7% 
 
Panel B: Sub-periods before and after the Recent Financial Crisis  
 
1994/01/02 - 2008/09/15  
2008/09/16 - 2014/11/01  
Coefficient 
Estimates (ൈ100) 
Hedgers 
Speculators 
Hedgers 
Speculators 
ܳ௜,௧ 
3.66 
-4.37 
8.17 
-9.18 
 
(4.67) 
(-5.57) 
(4.69) 
(-4.80) 
ܤ௜,௧ 
-0.40 
-0.39 
-0.69 
-0.67 
 
(-2.11) 
(-2.04) 
(-1.81) 
(-1.74) 
ܵ௜,௧ݒො௜,௧ 
-0.03 
0.00 
-0.04 
-0.04 
 
(-0.23) 
(0.03) 
(-0.16) 
(-0.15) 
ܴ௜,௧ 
5.30 
5.25 
1.76 
1.72 
 
(4.03) 
(4.03) 
(0.87) 
(0.87) 
R2 
11.4% 
11.3% 
9.5% 
9.3% 
 
 

52 
 
Table A2:  
Weekly Return Predictability Following Position Changes: DCOT Dataset  
 
The table reports the average slope coefficients and R-square of weekly Fama-McBeth cross-sectional 
regressions of the excess return (Rt+1) in week t+1 on an intercept, the net position change (scaled by 
open interest) Qt in week t, with a set of controls for expected returns. The controls are the log futures 
basis (Bt), excess returns (Rt), and ܵ௧ݒො௧ where ݒ is the annualized standard deviation of the residuals 
from a rolling 52-week regression of futures excess returns on SP500 returns and S is an indicator variable 
that is 1 when speculators are net long and -1 when speculators are net short. Separate regressions are 
run for each of the trader types using CFTC DCOT classifications: producers and merchant users, swap 
dealers, managed money, other reportables, and non-reportables,. The table reports the time-series 
average of the weekly cross-sectional slope coefficients and the average R-square. The t-statistics in 
parentheses below the coefficients are adjusted using the Newey-West method with 4 lags.  
  
 
Coefficient 
Estimates (ൈ100) 
Producer 
Money 
Manager 
Swap Dealer 
Other 
Reportable 
Small 
Investor 
ܳ௜,௧ 
8.83 
-6.91 
-2.88 
-1.56 
-1.47 
 
(5.73) 
(-3.97) 
(-0.81) 
(-0.48) 
(-0.43) 
ܤ௜,௧ 
-0.72 
-0.79 
-0.80 
-0.76 
-0.77 
 
(-2.17) 
(-2.35) 
(-2.41) 
(-2.31) 
(-2.29) 
ܵ௜,௧ݒො௜,௧ 
-0.05 
-0.12 
-0.07 
-0.08 
-0.05 
 
(-0.22) 
(-0.47) 
(-0.28) 
(-0.34) 
(-0.21) 
ܴ௜,௧ 
3.84 
3.47 
0.52 
0.66 
0.92 
 
(2.12) 
(1.80) 
(0.32) 
(0.39) 
(0.55) 
R2 
10.5% 
10.7% 
9.5% 
9.8% 
9.6% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
Appendix B: A Concise Model  
In this section we present a concise model to better illustrate the economic intuition 
of our main empirical findings.  
B.1 Model Setup 
In the model, there are one representative producer (i.e., hedger) and one 
representative speculator, both with mean-variance utility. Information is symmetric 
for all investors in the economy. There are three time periods: ݐ∈ሼ0,1,2ሽ. The 
producer starts producing the physical commodity at time 0, and output is realized at 
time 2. The production amount G is scheduled in advance and cannot be changed once 
it is set at time 0.25 Commodity futures contracts are traded at times 0 and 1 at prices 
ܨ଴ and ܨଵ, and mature at time 2 with ܨଶൌܵଶ, where ܵଶ is the commodity spot price 
at time 2.  
The producer chooses her position in futures,݄௣,௧, at time 0 and 1 to maximize her 
terminal utility of wealth:  
max
௛೛,೟E௧ൣW௣,ଶ൧െ
ఊ೛
ଶܸܽݎ௧ሾW௣,ଶሿ , 
with W௣,ଶൌܵଶܩ൅∑
݄௣,௜ሺܨ௜ାଵെܨ௜ሻ
ଵ
௜ୀ଴
        
 
 
(B.1) 
where ݐ∈ሼ0,1ሽ, W௣,ଶ is producer’s wealth at time 2, and ߛ௣ is her coefficient of risk 
aversion.  
We denote the speculator’s position in commodity futures at time 0 and 1 by ݄௦,௧, 
with ݐ∈ሼ0,1ሽ. At time 1, the speculator is endowed with ݑଵ units of an asset with 
payoff ܵଶ൅ߟଶ at time 2. The value of the asset is correlated with the commodity price. 
                                                           
25 For parsimonious reason, we assume the producer cannot hold inventory. The main implication from 
our model does not change if we relax this constraint.  

54 
 
An example of such asset can be the equity shares of a firm for which the commodity 
is an input or output, an investment in an emerging country whose economic 
performance depends on the commodity price, or an asset that is correlated with 
inflation. ߟଶ is a random zero mean quantity that is independent of other variables.  
ݑଵ is a Gaussian random variable realized at time 1 with mean zero and variance ߪ௨
ଶ, 
and is also independent with other variables. 
Thus, for ݐ∈ሼ0,1ሽ the speculator’s optimization procedure can be described as  
max
௛ೞ,೟E௧ൣW௦,ଶ൧െ
ఊೞ
ଶܸܽݎ௧ሾW௦,ଶሿ , 
with W௦,ଶൌ∑
݄௦,௜ሺܨ௜ାଵെܨ௜ሻ
ଵ
௜ୀ௧
൅ݑଵሺܵଶ൅ߟଶሻ    
 
(B.2) 
where Wௌ,ଶ is speculator’s terminal wealth at time 2 and ߛ௦ is his risk aversion 
coefficient.  
The demand for the physical commodity at time 2 is ܳଶൌ݈ሺ݇ଶെܵଶሻ, where ݇ଶ is 
a stochastic variable representing a fundamental demand shock at time 2 and l is a 
constant. We assume that ݇௧ follows a random walk, with starting value ݇଴ and an 
incremental innovation drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard 
deviation σ for each time period. Thus, ݇ଶ can be considered as the demand shock 
realized at time 2, and ݇଴ and ݇ଵ can be interpreted as the investors’ expectation of 
this demand shock at time 0 and 1 respectively. Equating demand and supply to clear 
the spot market at time 2, we have ݈ሺ݇ଶെܵଶሻൌܩ, which implies a spot price of:  
ܵଶൌ݇ଶെܩ/݈ .   
 
 
 
 
 
 (B.3)  
 
B.2 Model Solution 

55 
 
As shown in Appendix C, the solution of the model provides  
݄௦,଴ൌሾ
ఊ೛ఙమ
൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯൅
ఊ೛మఊೞమఙరఙೠమ൫ఊ೛ିఊೞ൯
൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯
య൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯െ
ఊ೛ఊೞమఙమఙೠమ
൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯
మ௟ሿܩ   
 
(B.4a)  
  ݄௣,଴ൌെ݄௦,଴                           (B.4b)  
ܧ଴ሾܨଵെܨ଴ሿൌ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమீ
ఊ೛ାఊೞ൅
ఊ೛మఊೞమఙమீఙೠమ
ሺఊ೛ାఊೞሻమ௟ .       
 
 
 
 
 
(B.5)  
݄௦,ଵൌ
ఊ೛ீ
ఊೞାఊ೛െ
ఊೞ௨భ
ఊೞାఊ೛   
 
 
 
       (B.6a)  
݄௣,ଵൌെ݄௦,ଵ              
       (B.6b)  
ܧଵሾܵଶെܨଵሿൌ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞܩ൅
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞݑଵ.  
 
 
 
        
(B.7)  
where ܾൌ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞ.  
 
B.3 Model implications 
Futures Price Changes and Holdings:  
The futures price change from time 0 to 1 can be written as:  
∆ܨଵൌܨଵെܨ଴ൌ݇ଵെ݇଴െߪଶߛ௣∆݄௣൅ܥ 
=݇ଵെ݇଴൅ߪଶߛ௣∆݄௦൅ܥ  
 
 
 
 
   (B.8)  
where C ൌ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమீ
ఊ೛ାఊೞ൅
ఊ೛మఊೞమఙమఙೠమீ
൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯మ௟െ
௕మఙೠమఊೞఊ೛ఙమீ
൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯െ
௕మఙೠమீ
൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯௟ is a constant.  
Therefore, the futures price change is not only determined by the fundamental demand 
shock ሺ݇ଵെ݇଴ሻ, but is also related to the position change of the producer or speculator. 
More specifically, the futures price change is positively correlated with the speculator’s 
position change (∆݄௦) and negatively correlated with the producer’s position change 
(∆݄௣) in the same time period. This suggests that the speculator trades in the same 
direction as the futures price change, while the producer trades in the opposite direction 
of the contemporaneous futures price change. This implication is consistent with what 

56 
 
we have observed in Table 2, where the position change of speculators (hedgers) is 
positively (negatively) correlated with the contemporaneous futures price change.  
 
A Tale of Two Premiums:  
As shown in equation (B.7), the risk premium embedded in the commodity futures price 
consists of two components: the first part, 
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞܩ, is the risk premium corresponding 
to the producer’s hedging demands and can be interpreted as a hedging premium; the 
second part, 
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞݑଵ, stems from the trading demands of speculators and can be 
interpreted as a liquidity premium.  
To better understand the model’s predictions, we assume without loss of generality, 
ߪ௨
ଶ=0 in this sub-section. This implies ݄௦,଴ൌെ݄௣,଴ൌ
ఊ೛ீ
ఊೞାఊ೛. Starting with the simple 
case when ݑଵ is zero, we find that ݄௣,ଵൌ݄௣,଴ and ݄௦,ଵൌ݄௦,଴. In this situation, there 
is no need for the speculator or the producer to trade at time 1 since their positions have 
already been optimized based on their utility preference at time 0. Moreover, the 
expected futures risk premium at time 1 will be 
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞܩ, which is essentially an 
insurance premium offered by the producer for her hedging demand.  
When ݑଵ is not zero, the speculator needs to redo his utility maximization at time 
1 to determine his new optimal futures position. As shown by (B.6a), the speculator’s 
optimal position at time 1 will be different from his existing futures position established 
at time 0 by 
ିఊೞ௨భ
ఊೞାఊ೛. Therefore, a trading need arises for the speculator. For example, 
when ݑଵ is negative, the speculator needs to buy in the futures market (݄௦,ଵെ݄௦,଴൐
0), and his purchase will push the futures price to a level higher than the case without 

57 
 
speculator’s trading needs. The futures risk premium will be reduced since the extra 
price the speculator pays for his demand of immediacy erodes the hedging premium he 
receives from the producer. Similarly, when ݑଵ is positive, the speculator sells in 
futures market and futures risk premium increases by extra amount that the speculator 
pays for demand of liquidity. Hence, 
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞݑଵ thus represents liquidity premium that 
comes from the speculators’ trading demand.  
In brief, according to our model, the risk premium in the futures market consists of 
both the hedging premium stemmed from the producer’s hedging demand and the 
liquidity premium that arises from the trading needs of speculators. This is consistent 
with our empirical results. For example, in Table 6 and 7, we preform regression and 
double-sorting tests, and find that both premiums significantly exist in commodity 
futures markets.  
Next we illustrate the liquidity premiums and hedging premiums in more detail.  
Liquidity Premium: From equation (C.17a), the liquidity premium 
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞݑଵ can be 
written as: 
  
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞݑଵൌߪଶߛ௣∆݄௣െܤ=െߪଶߛ௣∆݄௦െܤ  
 
 
 
 
(B.9)  
where ܤൌ
௕మఙೠమఊೞఊ೛ఙమீ
൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯൅
௕మఙೠమீ
൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯௟ is a constant.  
Therefore, the liquidity premium is determined by the position change of the speculator 
(negative relationship) or of the producer (positive relationship). For example, if the 
speculator were to sell at time 1, the futures price will be pushed down. (See also 
equation B.8.) In this situation, the speculator offer a price concession (sell at a lower 
price level), to provide an incentive for the producer to deviate from her optimal 

58 
 
hedging position established previously and to accommodate the speculator’s trading 
desire. As a result, the premium embedded in futures that are sold by the speculator (or 
bought by the producer) will increase. Similarly, the premium embedded in futures that 
are bought by the speculator (or sold by the producer) will decrease. This return 
predictability can be interpreted as a liquidity premium, which the speculator pays to 
the producer to obtain immediacy for his trading demand. This supports our empirical 
findings in Table 3 and 4 in that the position changes of hedgers (speculators) can 
positively (negatively) predict next-week futures returns.  
Furthermore, as shown in (B.9), the liquidity premium increases in the risk aversion 
coefficient ߛ௣ of producers. When the producer is more risk averse, she would ask for 
a higher risk premium to absorb the speculator’s demand for immediacy. This is 
consistent with what we observe in Table 5, where hedgers with more binding capital 
constraints or with higher position imbalance tend to ask for higher liquidity premiums.  
Hedging premium: As shown in (B.6a) and (B.6b), the producer’s position contains 
a hedging component, െ
ఊ೛ீ
ఊೞାఊ೛, and a liquidity component, 
ఊೞ௨భ
ఊೞାఊ೛, hence producer’s 
position can be influenced by the short-term trading demands of the speculator. In 
empirical tests of the influence of hedging pressure on the risk premium (for example 
based on the theory of normal backwardation) this may lead to an attenuation of the 
results. It is important to control for the component in the producer’s position that is 
related to speculative trading to isolate the impact of the demand for price insurance on 
the risk premium. Hence, it is important to control the short-term fluctuation in the 
hedger’s position to obtain a more precise measure of the hedging premium as predicted 

59 
 
by the normal backwardation theory.  
More precisely, according to our model, from the equation (B.6a) and (B.6b) we 
have  
ܧ଴ሾ݄௣,ଵሿൌെ
ఊ೛
ఊೞାఊ೛ܩ  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (B.10) 
Equation (B.10) indicates that taking the expectation of the producer’s position yields 
a more accurate measure of her hedging needs, since the short-term trading shock ݑଵ 
is a zero-mean stochastic variable that will be canceled out by taking expectations. In 
empirical applications, this can be done by taking a long-term average of hedgers’ 
position. As shown in Table 6, smoothed (averaged) hedging pressure can predict 
futures excess returns, whereas unsmoothed hedging pressure fails to do so.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
Appendix C: Model Solution  
C.1 Market clearing at time 1:  
At time 1, given that the distribution of ݇ଶ conditional on investors’ information set is 
a normally distributed ܰሺ݇ଵ, ߪሻ, we have  
ܧଵሺܵଶሻൌ݇ଵെܩ/݈ ,  
 
 
 
 
 
(C.1a) 
ܸܽݎଵሺܵଶሻൌߪଶ .  
  
 
 
 
 
 
(C.1b) 
In the futures market, substituting in the expression of W௣,ଶ, we see that the producer 
solves the optimality problem 
max௛೛,భEଵൣܵଶܩ൅݄௣,ଵሺܵଶെܨଵሻ൧െ
ఊ೛
ଶܸܽݎଵൣܵଶܩ൅݄௣,ଵሺܵଶെܨଵሻ൧  
 
(C.2) 
Taking the first order condition with respect to the futures position ݄௣,ଵ we get,  
݄௣,ଵൌ
ாభሾௌమିிభሿ
ఊ೛ఙమ
െܩ  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C.3) 
The speculator needs to maximize his utility function as  
max
௛ೞ,భEଵൣ݄௦,ଵሺܵଶെܨଵሻ൅ݑଵሺܵଶ൅ߟଶሻ൧െ
ఊೞ
ଶܸܽݎଵൣ݄௦,ଵሺܵଶെܨଵሻ൅ݑଵሺܵଶ൅ߟଶሻ൧.   
(C.4) 
The optimization procedure leads to  
݄௦,ଵൌ
ாభሾௌమିிభሿ
ఊೞఙమ
െݑଵ .  
 
 
 
 
    (C.5) 
The market clearing condition is  
݄௣,ଵ൅݄௦,ଵൌ0 . 
 
 
 
 
 (C.6) 
The clearing of the futures market at time 1 suggests that   
ܧଵሾܵଶെܨଵሿൌ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞܩ൅
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞݑଵ , 
 
 
 
 
 (C.7) 
which leads to  
ܨଵൌ݇ଵെ
ீ
௟െ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమீ
ఊ೛ାఊೞെ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ௨భ
ఊ೛ାఊೞ .  
 
 
 (C.8) 
The futures positions of the producer and speculator at time 1 are  
݄௣,ଵൌെ
ఊ೛ீ
ఊೞାఊ೛൅
ఊೞ௨భ
ఊೞାఊ೛ ,   
 
 
 
(C.9a) 
݄௦,ଵൌ
ఊ೛ீ
ఊೞାఊ೛െ
ఊೞ௨భ
ఊೞାఊ೛ .  
 
 
 
 
(C.9b) 
C.2 Market clearing at time 0:  
In the futures market, the producer’s optimization at time 0 can be solved as  
max
௛೛,బܧ଴ൣܵଶܩ൅݄௣,ଵሺܵଶെܨଵሻ൅݄௣,଴ሺܨଵെܨ଴ሻ൧  

61 
 
െ
ఊ೛
ଶܸܽݎ଴ൣܵଶܩ൅݄௣,ଵሺܵଶെܨଵሻ൅݄௣,଴ሺܨଵെܨ଴ሻ൧ .  
 (C.10) 
Taking the first order condition of equation (C.10) with respect to the producer’s futures 
position ݄௣,଴, we have  
݄௣,଴ൌ
ாబሾிభିிబሿିఊ೛஺ିఙమఊ೛ீ
ఊ೛ሺఙమା௕మఙೠమሻ
  
 
 
 
 
 
 (C.11) 
where we define ܾൌ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ
ఊ೛ାఊೞ, A ൌ
ఊ೛మఊೞమఙరሺఊ೛ିఊೞሻீఙೠమ
ሺఊ೛ାఊೞሻయ
 .  
 
Similarly, the speculator solves  
݉ܽݔ௛ೞ,బE଴ൣ݄௦,଴ሺܨଵെܨ଴ሻ൅݄௦,ଵሺܵଶെܨଵሻ൅ݑଵሺܵଶ൅ߟଶሻ൧െ
ఊೄ
ଶܸܽݎ଴ሾ݄௦,଴ሺܨଵെܨ଴ሻ൅
݄௦,ଵሺܵଶെܨଵሻ൅ݑଵሺܵଶ൅ߟଶሻሿ  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           (C.12)  
we can solve the speculator’s optimization at time 0 and derive his futures position ݄௦,଴ 
as  
݄௦,଴ൌ
ாబሾிభିிబሿାఊೞሺ஺ିಸ
೗௕ఙೠమሻ
ఊೞሺఙమା௕మఙೠమሻ
 .  
 
 
 
 
 
 (C.13)  
The clearing of the commodity futures market at time 0 implies that 
ܧ଴ሾܨଵെܨ଴ሿൌ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమீ
ఊ೛ାఊೞ൅
ఊ೛మఊೞమఙమீఙೠమ
ሺఊ೛ାఊೞሻమ௟ ,  
 
 
 
 
 (C.14)  
This leads to  
ܨ଴ൌ݇଴െ
ீ
௟െ
ଶఊ೛ఊೞఙమீ
ఊ೛ାఊೞ
െ
ఊ೛మఊೞమఙమீఙೠమ
ሺఊ೛ାఊೞሻమ௟ .  
 
 
 
 
 
(C.15)  
And the futures positions of the producer and speculator at time 0 are  
݄௦,଴ൌሾ
ఊ೛ఙమ
൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯൅
ఊ೛మఊೞమఙరఙೠమ൫ఊ೛ିఊೞ൯
൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯
య൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯െ
ఊ೛ఊೞమఙమఙೠమ
൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯
మ௟ሿܩ ,  
 
 
 
 
 
 (C.16a)  
݄௣,଴ൌെ݄௦,଴ .   
 
 
 
 
  (C.16b)  
Also, it is easy to show 
∆݄௦ൌ݄௦,ଵെ݄௦,଴ൌሾ
௕మఙೠమఊೞ
൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯൅
ఊ೛ఊೞమఙమఙೠమ
൫ఙమା௕మఙೠమ൯൫ఊ೛ାఊೞ൯
మ௟ሿܩെ
ఊೞ௨భ
ఊೞାఊ೛ ,  
 
 
 
 
 
(C.17a)  
∆݄௣ൌ݄௣,ଵെ݄௣,଴ൌെ∆݄௦ .  
 
 
 
(C.17b)  
and 
∆ܨଵൌܨଵെܨ଴ൌ݇ଵെ݇଴൅
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమீ
ఊ೛ାఊೞ൅
ఊ೛మఊೞమఙమீఙೠమ
ሺఊ೛ାఊೞሻమ௟െ
ఊ೛ఊೞఙమ௨భ
ఊ೛ାఊೞ.  
 
 
 
(C.18)  
