1
Introduction: The Case for Financial Machine
Learning
1.1
Prices are Predictions
Modern analysis of ﬁnancial markets centers on the following deﬁnition
of a price, derived from the generic optimality condition of an investor:
Pi,t = E[Mt+1Xi,t+1|It].
(1.1)
In words, the prevailing price of an asset, Pi,t, reﬂect investors’ valuation
of its future payoﬀs, Xi,t+1. These valuations are discounted based on in-
vestors’ preferences, generically summarized as future realized marginal
rates of substitution, Mt+1. The price is then determined by investor
expectations of these objects given their conditioning information It. In
other words, prices are predictions—they reﬂect investors’ best guesses
for the (discounted) future payoﬀs shed by an asset.
It is common to analyze prices in an equivalent expected return, or
“discount rate,” representation that normalizes (1.1) by the time t price:
E[Ri,t+1|It] = βi,tλt,
(1.2)
where Ri,t+1 = Xi,t+1/Pi,t −Rf,t is the asset’s excess return, Rf,t =
E[Mt+1|It]−1 is the one-period risk-free rate, βi,t = Cov[Mt+1,Ri,t+1|It]
Var[Mt+1|It]
is
2

1.2. Information Sets are Large
3
the asset’s covariance with Mt+1, and λt = −Var[Mt+1|It]
E[Mt+1|It]
is the price
of risk. We can ask economic questions in terms of either prices or
discount rates, but the literature typically opts for the discount rate
representation for a few reasons. Prices are often non-stationary while
discount rates are often stationary, so when the statistical properties
of estimators rely on stationarity assumptions it is advantageous to
work with discount rates. Also, uninteresting diﬀerences in the scale of
assets’ payoﬀs will lead to uninteresting scale diﬀerences in prices. But
discount rates are typically unaﬀected by diﬀerences in payoﬀscale so
the researcher need not adjust for them.
More generally, studying market phenomena in terms of returns
alleviates some of the researcher’s modeling burden by partially ho-
mogenizing data to have tractable dynamics and scaling properties.
Besides, discount rates are also predictions, and their interpretation
is especially simple and practically important. E[Ri,t+1|It] describes
investors’ expectations for the appreciation in asset value over the next
period. As such, the expected return is a critical input to allocation
decisions. If we manage to isolate an empirical model for this expecta-
tion that closely ﬁts the data, we have achieved a better understanding
of market functionality and simultaneously derived a tool to improve
resource allocations going forward. This is a ﬁne example of duality in
applied social science research: A good model both elevates scientiﬁc
understanding and improves real-world decision-making.
1.2
Information Sets are Large
There are two conditions of ﬁnance research that make it fertile soil
for machine learning methods: large conditioning information sets and
ambiguous functional forms. Immediately evident from (1.1) is that
the study of asset prices is inextricably tied to information. Guiding
questions in the study of ﬁnancial economics include “what information
do market participants have and how do they use it?” The predictions
embodied in prices are shaped by the available information that is
pertinent to future asset payoﬀs (Xi,t+1) and investors’ feelings about
those payoﬀs (Mt+1). If prices behaved the same in all states of the
world—e.g. if payoﬀs and preferences were close to i.i.d.—then infor-

4
Introduction: The Case for Financial Machine Learning
mation sets would drop out. But even the armchair investor dabbling
in their online account or reading the latest edition of The Wall Street
Journal quickly intuits the vast scope of conditioning information lurk-
ing behind market prices. Meanwhile, the production function of the
modern asset management industry is a testament to the vast amount of
information ﬂowing into asset prices: Professional managers (in various
manual and automated fashions) routinely pore over troves of news
feeds, data releases, and expert predictions in order to inform their
investment decisions.
The expanse of price-relevant information is compounded by the
panel nature of ﬁnancial markets. The price of any given asset tends
to vary over time in potentially interesting ways—this corresponds to
the time series dimension of the panel. Meanwhile, at a given point in
time, prices diﬀer across assets in interesting ways—the cross section
dimension of the panel. Time series variation in the market environment
will aﬀect many assets in interconnected ways. For example, most asset
prices behave diﬀerently in high versus low risk conditions or in diﬀerent
policy regimes. As macroeconomic conditions change, asset prices adjust
in unison through these common eﬀects. Additionally, there are cross-
sectional behaviors that are distinct to individual assets or groups of
assets. So, conditioning information is not just time series in nature,
but also includes asset-level attributes. A successful model of asset
behavior must simultaneously account for shared dynamic eﬀects as well
as asset-speciﬁc eﬀects (which may themselves be static or dynamic).
As highlighted by Gu et al. (2020b),
The profession has accumulated a staggering list of predic-
tors that various researchers have argued possess forecasting
power for returns. The number of stock-level predictive char-
acteristics reported in the literature numbers in the hundreds
and macroeconomic predictors of the aggregate market num-
ber in the dozens.
Furthermore, given the tendency of ﬁnancial economics research to
investigate one or a few variables at a time, we have presumably left
much ground uncovered. For example, only recently has the information
content of news text emerged as an input to empirical models of (1.1),

1.3. Functional Forms are Ambiguous
5
and there is much room for expansion on this frontier and others.
1.3
Functional Forms are Ambiguous
If asset prices are expectations of future outcomes, then the statistical
tools to study prices are forecasting models. A traditional econometric
approach to ﬁnancial market research (e.g. Hansen and Singleton, 1982)
ﬁrst speciﬁes a functional form for the return forecasting model moti-
vated by a theoretical economic model, then estimates parameters to
understand how candidate information sources associate with observed
market prices within the conﬁnes of the chosen model. But which of the
many economic models available in the literature should we impose?
The formulation of the ﬁrst-order condition, or “Euler equation,”
in (1.1) is broad enough to encompass a wide variety of structural
economic assumptions. This generality is warranted because there is no
consensus about which speciﬁc structural formulations are viable. Early
consumption-based models fail to match market price data by most
measures (e.g. Mehra and Prescott, 1985). Modern structural models
match price data somewhat better if the measure of success is suﬃciently
forgiving (e.g. Chen et al., 2022a), but the scope of phenomena they
describe tends to be limited to a few assets and is typically evaluated
only on an in-sample basis.
Given the limited empirical success of structural models, most em-
pirical work in the last two decades has opted away from structural
assumptions to less rigid “reduced-form” or “no-arbitrage” frameworks.
While empirical research of markets often steers clear of imposing de-
tailed economic structure, it typically imposes statistical structure (for
example, in the form of low-dimensional factor models or other paramet-
ric assumptions). But there are many potential choices for statistical
structure in reduced-form models, and it is worth exploring the beneﬁts
of ﬂexible models that can accommodate many diﬀerent functional
forms and varying degrees of nonlinearity and variable interactions.
Enter machine learning tools such as kernel methods, penalized
likelihood estimators, decision trees, and neural networks. Comprised of
diverse nonparametric estimators and large parametric models, machine
learning methods are explicitly designed to approximate unknown data

6
Introduction: The Case for Financial Machine Learning
generating functions. In addition, machine learning can help integrate
many data sources into a single model. In light of the discussion in
Section 1.2, eﬀective modeling of prices and expected returns requires
rich conditioning information in It. On this point, Cochrane (2009)1
notes that “We obviously don’t even observe all the conditioning infor-
mation used by economic agents, and we can’t include even a fraction of
observed conditioning information in our models.” Hansen and Richard
(1987) (and more recently Martin and Nagel, 2021) highlight diﬀerences
in information accessible to investors inside an economic model versus
information available to an econometrician on the outside of a model
looking in. Machine learning is a toolkit that can help narrow the
gap between information sets of researchers and market participants
by providing methods that allow the researcher to assimilate larger
information sets.
The more expansive we can be in our consideration of large con-
ditioning sets, the more realistic our models will be. This same logic
applies to the question of functional form. Not only do market par-
ticipants impound rich information into their forecasts, they do it in
potentially complex ways that leverage the nuanced powers of human
reasoning and intuition. We must recognize that investors use informa-
tion in ways that we as researchers cannot know explicitly and thus
cannot exhaustively (and certainly not concisely) specify in a parametric
statistical model. Just as Cochrane (2009) reminds us to be circumspect
in our consideration of conditioning information, we must be equally
circumspect in our consideration of functional forms.
1.4
Machine Learning versus Econometrics
What is machine learning, and how is it diﬀerent from traditional econo-
metrics? Gu et al. (2020b) emphasize that the deﬁnition of machine
learning is inchoate and the term is at times corrupted by the mar-
keting purposes of the user. We follow Gu et al. (2020b) and use the
term to describe (i) a diverse collection of high-dimensional models for
1Readers of this survey are encouraged to re-visit chapter 8 of Cochrane (2009)
and recognize the many ways machine learning concepts mesh with his outline of
the role of conditioning information in asset prices.

1.4. Machine Learning versus Econometrics
7
statistical prediction, combined with (ii) “regularization” methods for
model selection and mitigation of overﬁt, and (iii) eﬃcient algorithms
for searching among a vast number of potential model speciﬁcations.
Given this deﬁnition, it should be clear that, in any of its incar-
nations, ﬁnancial machine learning amounts to a set of procedures
for estimating a statistical model and using that model to make deci-
sions. So, at its core, machine learning need not be diﬀerentiated from
econometrics or statistics more generally. Many of the ideas underlying
machine learning have lived comfortably under the umbrella of statistics
for decades (Israel et al., 2020).
In order to learn through the experience of data, the machine
needs a functional representation of what it is trying to learn. The
researcher must make a representation choice—this is a canvas upon
which the data will paint its story. Part (i) of our deﬁnition points
out that machine learning brings an open-mindedness to functional
representations that are highly parameterized and often nonlinear. Small
models are rigid and oversimpliﬁed, but their parsimony has beneﬁts like
comparatively precise parameter estimates and ease of interpretation.
Large and sophisticated models are much more ﬂexible, but can also be
more sensitive and suﬀer from poor out-of-sample performance when
they overﬁt noise in the system. Researchers turn to large models
when they believe the beneﬁts from more accurately describing the
complexities of real world phenomena outweigh the costs of potential
overﬁt. At an intuitive level, machine learning is a way to pursue
statistical analysis when the analyst is unsure which speciﬁc structure
their statistical model should take. In this sense, much of machine
learning can be viewed as nonparametric (or semi-parametric) modeling.
Its modus operandi considers a variety of potential model speciﬁcations
and asks the data’s guidance in choosing which model is most eﬀective
for the problem at hand. One may ask: when does the analyst ever
know what structure is appropriate for their statistical analysis? The
answer of course is “never,” which is why machine learning is generally
valuable in ﬁnancial research. As emphasized by Breiman (2001), its
focus on maximizing prediction accuracy in the face of an unknown
data model is the central diﬀerentiating feature of machine learning
from the traditional statistical objective of estimating a known data

8
Introduction: The Case for Financial Machine Learning
generating model and conducting hypothesis tests.
Part (ii) of our deﬁnition highlights that machine learning chooses a
preferred model (or combination of models) from a “diverse collection”
of candidate models. Again, this idea has a rich history in econometrics
under the heading of model selection (and, relatedly, model averaging).
The diﬀerence is that machine learning puts model selection at the
heart of the empirical design. The process of searching through many
models to ﬁnd top performers (often referred to as model “tuning”)
is characteristic of all machine learning methods. Of course, selecting
from multiple models mechanically leads to in-sample overﬁtting and
can produce poor out-of-sample performance. Thus machine learning
research processes are accompanied by “regularization,” which is a
blanket term for constraining model size to encourage stable performance
out-of-sample. As Gu et al. (2020b) put it, “An optimal model is a
‘Goldilocks’ model. It is large enough that it can reliably detect potentially
complex predictive relationships in the data, but not so ﬂexible that it is
dominated by overﬁt and suﬀers out-of-sample.” Regularization methods
encourage smaller models; richer models are only selected if they are
likely to give a genuine boost to out-of-sample prediction accuracy.
Element (iii) in the machine learning deﬁnition is perhaps its clear-
est diﬀerentiator from traditional statistics, but also perhaps the least
economically interesting. When data sets are large and/or models are
very heavily parameterized, computation can become a bottleneck. Ma-
chine learning has developed a variety of approximate optimization
routines to reduce computing loads. For example, traditional economet-
ric estimators typically use all data points in every step of an iterative
optimization routine and only cease the parameter search when the
routine converges. Shortcuts such as using subsets of data and halting
a search before convergence often reduce computation and do so with
little loss of accuracy (see, e.g., stochastic gradient descent and early
stopping which are two staples in neural network training).

1.5. Challenges of Applying Machine Learning in Finance (and the
Beneﬁts of Economic Structure)
9
1.5
Challenges of Applying Machine Learning in Finance (and the
Beneﬁts of Economic Structure)
While ﬁnancial research is in many ways ideally suited to machine learn-
ing methods, some aspects of ﬁnance also present challenges for machine
learning. Understanding these obstacles is important for developing
realistic expectations about the beneﬁts of ﬁnancial machine learning.
First, while machine learning is often viewed as a “big data” tool,
many foundational questions in ﬁnance are frustrated by the decidedly
“small data” reality of economic time series. Standard data sets in macro
ﬁnance, for example, are conﬁned to a few hundred monthly observations.
This kind of data scarcity is unusual in other machine learning domains
where researchers often have, for all intents and purposes, unlimited
data (or the ability to generate new data as needed). In time series
research, new data accrues only through the passage of time.
Second, ﬁnancial research often faces weak signal-to-noise ratios.
Nowhere is this more evident than in return prediction, where the forces
of market eﬃciency (proﬁt maximization and competition) are ever
striving to eliminate the predictability of price movements (Samuel-
son, 1965; Fama, 1970). As a result, price variation is expected to
emanate predominantly from the arrival of unanticipated news (which
is unforecastable noise from the perspective of the model). Markets
may also exhibit ineﬃciencies and investor preferences may give rise to
time-varying risk premia, which result in some predictability of returns.
Nonetheless, we should expect return predictability to be small and
ﬁercely competed over.
Third, investors learn and markets evolve. This creates a moving
target for machine learning prediction models. Previously reliable pre-
dictive patterns may be arbitraged away. Regulatory and technological
changes alter the structure of the economy. Structural instability makes
ﬁnance an especially complex learning domain and compounds the
challenges of small data and low signal-to-noise ratios.
These challenges present an opportunity to beneﬁt from knowledge
gained by economic theory. As noted by Israel et al. (2020),
“A basic principle of statistical analysis is that theory and
model parameters are substitutes. The more structure you

10
Introduction: The Case for Financial Machine Learning
can impose in your model, the fewer parameters you need
to estimate and the more eﬃciently your model can use
available data points to cut through noise. That is, models are
helpful because they ﬁlter out noise. But an over-simpliﬁed
model can ﬁlter out some signal too, so in a data-rich and
high signal-to-noise environment, you would not want to use
an unnecessarily small model. One can begin to tackle small
data and low signal-to-noise problems by bringing economic
theory to describe some aspects of the data, complemented
by machine learning tools to capture aspects of the data for
which theory is silent.”
1.6
Economic Content (Two Cultures of Financial Economics)
We recall Breiman (2001)’s essay on the “two cultures” of statistics,
which has an analogue in ﬁnancial economics (with appropriate modiﬁ-
cations). One is the “structural model/hypothesis test” culture, which
favors imposing fully or partially speciﬁed structural assumptions and
investigating economic mechanisms through hypothesis tests. The tra-
ditional program of empirical asset pricing analysis (pre-dating the
emergence of reduced form factor models and machine learning pre-
diction models) studies prices through the lens of heavily constrained
prediction models. The constraints come in the form of i) speciﬁc func-
tional forms/distributions, and ii) limited variables admitted into the
conditioning information set. These models often “generalize” poorly
in the sense that they have weak explanatory power for asset price
behaviors outside the narrow purview of the model design or beyond
the training data set. This is such an obvious statement that one rarely
considers out-of-sample performance of fully speciﬁed structural asset
pricing models.
The other is the “prediction model” culture, which values statis-
tical explanatory power above all else, and is born largely from the
limitations of the earlier established structural culture. The prediction
model culture willingly espouses model speciﬁcations that might lack
an explicit association with economic theory, so long as they produce
meaningful, robust improvements in data ﬁt versus the status quo. In

1.6. Economic Content (Two Cultures of Financial Economics)
11
addition to reduced-form modeling that has mostly dominated empirical
ﬁnance since the 1990’s, ﬁnancial machine learning research to date
falls squarely in this second culture.
“There is no economics” is a charge sometimes lobbed at the statisti-
cal prediction research by economic seminar audiences, discussants, and
referees. This criticism is often misguided and we should guard against
it unduly devaluing advancements in ﬁnancial machine learning. Let
us not miss the important economic role of even the purest statistical
modeling applications in ﬁnance. Relatively unstructured prediction
models makes them no less economically important than the traditional
econometrics of structural hypothesis testing, they just play a diﬀerent
scientiﬁc role. Hypothesis testing learns economics by probing speciﬁc
economic mechanisms. But economics is not just about testing theo-
retical mechanisms. Atheoretical (for lack of a better term) prediction
models survey the empirical landscape in broader terms, charting out
new empirical facts upon which theories can be developed, and for which
future hypothesis tests can investigate mechanisms. These two forms of
empirical investigation—precision testing and general cartography—play
complementary roles in the Kuhnian process of scientiﬁc advancement.
Consider the fundamental question of asset pricing research: What
determines asset risk premia? Even if we could observe expected returns
perfectly, we would still need theories to explain their behavior and
empirical analysis to test those theories. But we can’t observe risk
premia, and they are stubbornly hard to estimate. Machine learning
makes progress on measuring risk premia, which facilitates development
of better theories of economic mechanisms that determine their behavior.
A critical beneﬁt of expanding the set of known contours in the
empirical landscape is that, even if details of the economic mechanisms
remain shrouded, economic actors—ﬁnancial market participants in
particular—can always beneﬁt from improved empirical maps. The
prediction model culture has a long tradition of producing research
to help investors, consumers, and policymakers make better decisions.
Improved predictions provide more accurate descriptions of the state-
dependent distributions faced by these economic actors.
Economics is by and large an applied ﬁeld. The economics of the pre-
diction model culture lies precisely in its ability to improve predictions.

12
Introduction: The Case for Financial Machine Learning
Armed with better predictions—i.e., more accurate assessments of the
economic opportunity set—agents can better trade oﬀcosts and beneﬁts
when allocating scarce resources. This enhances welfare. Nowhere is
this more immediately clear than in the portfolio choice problem. We
may not always understand the economic mechanisms by which a model
delivers better return or risk forecasts; but if it does, it boosts the utility
of investors and is thus economically important.
Breiman’s central criticism of the structural hypothesis test culture
is that
“when a model is ﬁt to data to draw quantitative conclusions:
the conclusions are about the model’s mechanism, and not
about nature’s mechanism. If the model is a poor emulation
of nature, the conclusions may be wrong.”
We view this less as a criticism of structural modeling, which must
remain a foundation of empirical ﬁnance, but rather as a motivation
and defense of prediction models. The two-culture dichotomy is, of
course, a caricature. Research spans a spectrum and draws on multiple
tools, and researchers do not separate into homogenous ideological
camps. Both cultures are economically important. Breiman encourages
us to consider ﬂexible, even nonparametric, models to learn about
economic mechanisms:
“The point of a model is to get useful information about
the relation between the response and predictor variables.
Interpretability is a way of getting information. But a model
does not have to be simple to provide reliable information
about the relation between predictor and response variables;
neither does it have to be a [structural] data model.”
Prediction models are a ﬁrst step to understanding mechanisms. More-
over, structural modeling can beneﬁt directly from machine learning
without sacriﬁcing pointed hypothesis tests or its speciﬁcity of economic
mechanisms.2 Thus far machine learning has predominantly served the
prediction model culture of ﬁnancial economics. It is important to rec-
ognize it as a similarly potent tool for the structural hypothesis testing
2See, for example, our discussion of Chen and Ludvigson (2009), in Section 5.5.

1.6. Economic Content (Two Cultures of Financial Economics)
13
culture (this is a critical direction for future machine learning research
in ﬁnance). Surely, a research program founded solely on “measurement
without theory” (Koopmans, 1947) is better served by also considering
data through the lens of economic theory and with a deep understanding
of the Lucas Jr, 1976 critique. Likewise, a program that only interprets
data through extant economic models can overlook unexpected yet
economically important statistical patterns.
Hayek (1945) confronts the economic implications of dispersed in-
formation for resource allocation. Regarding his central question of how
to achieve an eﬀective economic order, he notes
If we possess all the relevant information, if we can start
out from a given system of preferences, and if we command
complete knowledge of available means, the problem which
remains is purely one of logic... This, however, is emphat-
ically not the economic problem which society faces. And
the economic calculus which we have developed to solve this
logical problem, though an important step toward the solu-
tion of the economic problem of society, does not yet provide
an answer to it. The reason for this is that the ‘data’ from
which the economic calculus starts are never for the whole
society ‘given’ to a single mind which could work out the
implications and can never be so given.
While Hayek’s main interest is in the merits of decentralized planning,
his statements also have implications for information technologies in
general, and prediction technologies in particular. Let us be so presump-
tuous as to reinterpret Hayek’s statement as a statistical problem: There
is a wedge between the eﬃciency of allocations achievable by economic
agents when the data generating process (DGP) is known, versus when
it must be estimated. First, there is the problem of model speciﬁcation—
economic agents simply cannot be expected to correctly specify their
statistical models. They must use some form of mis-speciﬁed paramet-
ric model or a nonparametric approximating model. In either case,
mis-speciﬁcation introduces a wedge between the optimal allocations
achievable when the DGP is known (call this “ﬁrst-best”) and the allo-
cations derived from their mis-speciﬁed models (call this “second-best”).

14
Introduction: The Case for Financial Machine Learning
But even second best is implausible, because we must estimate these
models with ﬁnite data. This gives rise to yet another wedge, that due
to sampling variation. Even if we knew the functional form of the DGP,
we still must estimate it and noise in our estimates produces deviations
from ﬁrst-best. Compound that with the realism of mis-speciﬁcation,
and we recognize that in reality we must always live with “third-best”
allocations; i.e., mis-speciﬁed models that are noisily estimated.
Improved predictions derived from methods that can digest vast
information and data sets provide an opportunity to mitigate the wedges
between the pure “logic” problem of ﬁrst-best resource allocation noted
by Hayek, and third-best realistic allocations achievable by economic
agents. The wedges never shrink to zero due to statistical limits to
learnability (Da et al., 2022; Didisheim et al., 2023). But powerful
approximating models and clever regularization devices mean that ma-
chine learning is economically important exactly because they can lead
to better decisions. The problem of portfolio choice is an illustrative
example. A mean-variance investor who knows the true expected re-
turn and covariance matrix of assets simply executes the “logic” of a
Markowitz portfolio and achieves a ﬁrst-best allocation. But, in analogy
to Hayek, this is emphatically not the problem that real world investors
grapple with. Instead, their problem is primarily one of measurement—
one of prediction. The investor seeks a sensible expected return and
covariance estimate that, when combined with the Markowitz objective,
performs reasonably well out-of-sample. Lacking high-quality measure-
ments, the Markowitz solution can behave disastrously, as much research
has demonstrated.
