2
The Virtues of Complex Models
Many of us acquired our econometrics training in a tradition anchored
to the “principle of parsimony.” This is exempliﬁed by the Box and
Jenkins (1970) model building methodology, whose inﬂuence on ﬁnancial
econometrics cannot be overstated. In the introduction to the most
recent edition of the Box and Jenkins forecasting textbook,1 “parsimony”
is presented as the ﬁrst of the “Basic Ideas in Model Building”: “It is
important, in practice, that we employ the smallest possible number of
parameters for adequate representations” [their emphasis].
The principle of parsimony appears to clash with the massive pa-
rameterizations adopted by modern machine learning algorithms. The
leading edge GPT-3 language model (Brown et al., 2020) uses 175 billion
parameters. Even the comparatively skimpy return prediction neural
networks in Gu et al. (2020b) have roughly 30,000 parameters. For an
econometrician of the Box-Jenkins lineage, such rich parameterizations
seem proﬂigate, prone to overﬁt, and likely disastrous for out-of-sample
performance.
Recent results in various non-ﬁnancial domains contradict this view.
In applications such as computer vision and natural language processing,
1Box et al. (2015), ﬁfth edition of the original Box and Jenkins (1970).
15

16
The Virtues of Complex Models
models that carry astronomical parameterizations—and that exactly
ﬁt training data—are often the best performing models out-of-sample.
In sizing up the state of the neural network literature, Belkin (2021)
concludes “it appears that the largest technologically feasible networks
are consistently preferable for best performance.” Evidently, modern
machine learning has turned the principle of parsimony on its head.
The search is underway for a theoretical rationale to explain the suc-
cess of behemoth parameterizations and answer the question succinctly
posed by Breiman (1995): “Why don’t heavily parameterized neural
networks overﬁt the data?” In this section we oﬀer a glimpse into the
answer. We draw on recent advances in the statistics literature which
characterize the behavior of “overparameterized” models (those whose
parameters vastly outnumber the available training observations).2
Recent literature has taken the ﬁrst step of understanding the sta-
tistical theoretical implications of machine learning models and focus
on out-of-sample prediction accuracy of overparameterized models. In
this section, we are interested in the economic implications of overpa-
rameterization and overﬁt in ﬁnancial machine learning. A number of
ﬁnance papers have documented signiﬁcant empirical gains in machine
learning return prediction. The primary economic use case of these
predictions is constructing utility-optimizing portfolios. We orient our
development toward understanding the out-of-sample risk-return trade-
oﬀof “machine learning portfolios” derived from highly parameterized
return prediction models. Our development closely follows Kelly et al.
(2022a) and Didisheim et al. (2023).
2.1
Tools For Analyzing Machine Learning Models
Kelly et al. (2022a) propose a thought experiment. Imagine an analyst
seeking a successful return prediction model. The asset return R is
generated by a true model of the form
Rt+1 = f(Xt) + ϵt+1
(2.1)
2This line of work falls under headings like “overparameterization,” “benign
overﬁt,” and “double descent," and includes (among others) Spigler et al. (2019),
Belkin et al. (2018), Belkin et al. (2019), Belkin et al. (2020), Bartlett et al. (2020),
Jacot et al. (2018), Hastie et al. (2019), and Allen-Zhu et al. (2019).

2.1. Tools For Analyzing Machine Learning Models
17
where the set of predictor variables X may be known to the analyst, but
the true prediction function f is unknown. Absent knowledge of f and
motivated by universal approximation theory (e.g., Hornik et al., 1990),
the analyst decides to approximate f with a basic neural network:
f(Xt) ≈
P
X
i=1
Si,tβi.
Each feature in this regression is a pre-determined nonlinear transfor-
mation of raw predictors,3
Si,t = ˜f(w′
iXt).
(2.2)
Ultimately, the analyst estimates the approximating regression
Rt+1 =
P
X
i=1
Si,tβi + ˜ϵt+1.
(2.3)
The analyst has T training observations to learn from and must choose
how rich of an approximating model to use—she must choose P. Simple
models with small P enjoy low variance, but complex models with large
P (perhaps even P > T) can better approximate the truth. What level
of model complexity (which P) should the analyst opt for?
Perhaps surprisingly, Kelly et al. (2022a) show that the analyst
should use the largest approximating model that she can compute!
Expected out-of-sample forecasting and portfolio performance are in-
creasing in model complexity.4 To arrive at this answer, Kelly et al.
(2022a) work with two key mathematical tools for analyzing complex
nonlinear (i.e., machine learning) models. These are ridge regression
with generated nonlinear features (just like Si,t above) and random
matrix theory for dealing with estimator behavior when P is large
relative to the number of training data observations.
3Our assumption that weights wi and nonlinear function ˜f are known follows
Rahimi and Recht (2007), who prove that universal approximation results apply
even when the weights are randomly generated.
4This is true without qualiﬁcation in the high complexity regime (P > T) and is
true in the low complexity regime as long as appropriate shrinkage is employed. Kelly
et al. (2022a) derive the choice of shrinkage that maximizes expected out-of-sample
model performance.

18
The Virtues of Complex Models
2.1.1
Ridge Regression with Generated Features
Their ﬁrst modeling assumption5 focuses on high-dimensional linear
prediction models according to (2.3), which we refer to as the “empirical
model.” The interpretation of (2.3) is not that asset returns are subject
to a large number of linear fundamental driving forces. It is instead
that the DGP is unknown, but may be approximated by a nonlinear
expansion S of some (potentially small) underlying driving variables,
X.6 In the language of machine learning, S are “generated features”
derived from the raw features X, for example via nonlinear neural
network propagation.
A deﬁnitive aspect of this problem is that the empirical model is
mis-speciﬁed. Correct speciﬁcation of (2.3) requires an inﬁnite series
expansion, but in reality we are stuck with a ﬁnite number of terms, P.
Small P models are stable because there are few parameters to estimate
(low variance), but provide a poor approximation to the truth (large
bias). A foundational premise of machine learning is that ﬂexible (large
P) model speciﬁcations can be leveraged to improve prediction. Their
estimates may be noisy (high variance) but provide a more accurate
approximation (small bias). It is not obvious, ex ante, which choices
of P are best in terms of the bias-variance tradeoﬀ. As economists, we
ultimately seek a bias-variance tradeoﬀthat translates into optimal
economic outcomes—like higher utility for investors. The search for
models that achieve economic optimality guides Kelly et al. (2022a)’s
theoretical pursuit of high complexity models.
The second modeling assumption chooses the estimator of (2.3) to
be ridge-regularized least squares:
bβ(z) =
 
zI + T −1 X
t
StS′
t
!−1 1
T
X
t
StRt+1,
(2.4)
5We introduce assumptions here at a high level. We refer interested readers to
Kelly et al. (2022a) for detailed technical assumptions.
6As suggested by the derivation of (2.3) from equation (2.1), this sacriﬁces little
generality as a number of recent papers have established an equivalence between
high-dimensional linear models and more sophisticated models such as deep neural
networks (Jacot et al., 2018; Hastie et al., 2019; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019). For simplicity,
Kelly et al. (2022a) focus on time-series forecasts for a single risky asset (extended
to multi-asset panels by Didisheim et al. (2023)).

2.1. Tools For Analyzing Machine Learning Models
19
where z is the ridge shrinkage parameter. Not all details of this estimator
are central to our arguments—but regularization is critical. Without
regularization the denominator of (2.4) is singular in the high complexity
regime (P > T), though we will see it also has important implications
for the behavior of bβ(z) in low complexity models (P < T).
Finally, to characterize the economic consequences of high complexity
models for investors, Kelly et al. (2022a) assume that investors use
predictions to construct a trading strategy deﬁned as
Rπ
t+1 = πtRt+1,
where πt is a timing weight that scales the risky asset position up and
down in proportion to the model’s return forecast. For their analysis,
πt is set equal to the expected out-of-sample return from their complex
prediction model. And they assume investor well-being is measured in
terms of the unconditional Sharpe ratio,
SR =
E[Rπ
t+1]
q
E[(Rπ
t+1)2]
.
(2.5)
While there are other reasonable trading strategies and performance
evaluation criteria, these are common choices among academics and
practitioners and have the beneﬁt of transparency and tractability.
2.1.2
Random Matrix Theory
The ridge regression formulation above couches machine learning models
like neural networks in terms of linear regression. The hope is that,
with this representation, it may be possible to say something concrete
about expected out-of-sample behaviors of complicated models in the
P →∞limit with P/T →c > 0. The necessary asymptotics for
machine learning are diﬀerent than those for standard econometric
characterizations (which use asymptotic approximations for T →∞
with P ﬁxed). Random matrix theory is ideally suited for describing the
behavior of ridge regression in the large P setting. To simplify notation,
we eliminate T from the discussion by always referring to the degree of
model parameterization relative to the amount of training data. That
is, we will simply track the ratio c = P/T, which we refer to as “model
complexity.”

20
The Virtues of Complex Models
The crux of characterizing bβ(z) behavior when P →∞is the P × P
sample covariance matrix of signals, bΨ := T −1 P
t StS′
t. Random matrix
theory describes the limiting distribution of bΨ’s eigenvalues. Knowledge
of this distribution is suﬃcient to pin down the expected out-of-sample
prediction performance (R2) of ridge regression, as well as the expected
out-of-sample Sharpe ratio of the associated timing strategy. More
speciﬁcally, these quantities are determined by
m(z; c) := lim
P→∞
1
P tr
 (bΨ −zI)−1
(2.6)
which is the limiting Stieltjes transform of the eigenvalue distribution of
bΨ. From (2.6), we recognize a close link to ridge regression because the
Stieltjes transform involves the ridge matrix (bΨ −zI)−1. The functional
form of m(z; c) is known from a generalized version of the Marcenko-
Pastur law. From m(z; c) we can explicitly calculate the expected out-of-
sample R2 and Sharpe ratio and its sensitivity to the prediction model’s
complexity (see Sections 3 and 4 of Kelly et al. (2022a) for a detailed
elaboration of this point).
In other words, model complexity plays a critical role in understand-
ing model behavior. If T grows at a faster rate than the number of
predictors (i.e., c →0), traditional large T and ﬁxed P asymptotics kick
in. In this case the expected out-of-sample behavior of a model coincides
with the behavior estimated in-sample. Naturally, this is an unlikely and
fairly uninteresting scenario. The interesting case corresponds to highly
parameterized machine learning models with scarce data, P/T →c > 0,
and it is here that surprising out-of-sample model behaviors emerge.
2.2
Bigger Is Often Better
Kelly et al. (2022a) provide rigorous theoretical statements about the
properties of high complexity machine learning models and associated
trading strategies. Our current exposition focuses on the main qualitative
aspects of those results based on their calibration to the market return
prediction problem. In particular, they assume total return volatility
equal to 20% per year and an infeasible “true” predictive R2 of 20% per
month (if the true functional form and all signals were fully available
to the forecaster). Complexity hinders the model’s ability to hone in

2.2. Bigger Is Often Better
21
R2
∥bβ∥
0
2
4
6
8
10
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
Figure 2.1: Expected Out-of-sample Prediction Accuracy From Mis-speciﬁed Models
Note: Limiting out-of-sample R2 and bβ norm of ridge regression as a function of
c and z from Proposition 5 of Kelly et al. (2022a). Calibration assumes Ψ is the
identity matrix, b∗= 0.2, and the complexity of the true model is 10.
on the true DGP because there is not enough data to support the
model’s heavy parameterization, thus the best feasible R2 implied by
this calibration is closer to 1% per month. We focus on the mis-speciﬁed
setting by considering empirical models that use various subsets of the
true predictors.7
In this calibration, the true unknown DGP is assumed to have a
complexity of c = 10. The parameter q ∈[0, 1] governs the complexity
of the empirical model relative to the truth. We analyze the behavior
of approximating empirical models that range in complexity from very
simple (q ≈0, cq ≈0 and thus severely mis-speciﬁed) to highly complex
(q = 1, cq = 10 corresponds to the richest approximating model and in
fact recovers the correct speciﬁcation). Models with very low complexity
are poor approximating models but their parameters can be estimated
with precision. As cq rises, the empirical model better approximates the
truth, but forecast variance rises (if not regularized). The calibration
also considers a range of ridge penalties, z.
First consider the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator, bβ(0),
which is a special case of (2.4) with z = 0. When c ≈0 the model is
7For simplicity the predictors are assumed to be exchangeable, so only the size
of a subset matters and not the identity of the speciﬁc predictors within the subset.

22
The Virtues of Complex Models
very simple, so it has no power to approximate the truth and delivers
an R2 of essentially zero. As P rises and approaches T from below,
the model’s approximation improves, but the denominator of the least
squares estimator blows up, creating explosive forecast error variance.
This phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 2.1. When P = T, the model
exactly ﬁts, or “interpolates,” the training data (for this reason, c = 1
is called the “interpolation boundary”), so a common interpretation of
the explosive behavior of bβ(0) is severe overﬁt that does not generalize
out-of-sample.
As P moves beyond T we enter the overparameterized, or high
complexity, regime. In this regime, there are more parameters than
observations, the least squares problem has multiple solutions, and
the inverse covariance matrix of regressors is not deﬁned. However, its
pseudo-inverse is deﬁned, and this corresponds to a particular unique
solution to the least squares problem:
 T −1 P
t StS′
t
+ 1
T
P
t StRt+1.8
Among the many solutions that exactly ﬁt the training data, this one
has the smallest ℓ2 norm. In fact, it is equivalent to the ridge estimator
as the shrinkage parameter approaches zero:
bβ(0+) = lim
z→0+
 
zI + T −1 X
t
StS′
t
!−1 1
T
X
t
StRt+1.
The solution bβ(0+) is called the “ridgeless” regression estimator (the
blue line in the Figure 2.1). When c ≤1, OLS is the ridgeless estimator,
while for c > 1 the ridgeless case is deﬁned by the limit z →0.
Surprisingly, the ridgeless R2 rises as model complexity increases
above 1. The reason is that, as c becomes larger, there is a larger space of
solutions for ridgeless regression to search over and thus it can ﬁnd betas
with smaller ℓ2 norm that still interpolate the training data. This acts as
a form of shrinkage, biasing the beta estimate toward zero. Due to this
bias, the forecast variance drops and the R2 improves. In other words,
despite z →0, the ridgeless solution still regularizes the least squares
estimator, and more so the larger is c. By the time c is very large, the
expected out-of-sample R2 moves into positive territory. This property
8Recall that the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse A+ of a matrix A is deﬁned via
A+ = (A′A)−1A′ if A′A is invertible, and A+ = A′(AA′)−1 if AA′ is invertible.

2.2. Bigger Is Often Better
23
of ridgeless least squares is a newly documented phenomenon in the
statistics literature and is still an emerging topic of research.9 The result
challenges the standard ﬁnancial economics doctrine that places heavy
emphasis on model parsimony, demonstrating that one can improve
the accuracy of return forecasts by pushing model dimensionality well
beyond sample size.10
Figure 2.1 describes the statistical behavior of high complexity
models. Figure 2.2 turns attention to their economic consequences. The
right panel shows volatility of the machine learning trading strategy as
a function of model complexity. The strategy’s volatility moves one for
one with the norm of bβ and with the R2 (all three quantities are diﬀerent
representations of forecast error variance). The important point is that,
as model complexity increases past c = 1, trading strategy volatility
continually decreases. Complexity raises the implicit shrinkage of the
ridgeless estimator, which reduces return volatility (and z > 0 reduces
volatility even further).
The left panel of Figure 2.2 shows the key economic behavior of high
complexity models—the out-of-sample expected return of the timing
strategy. Expected returns are low for simple strategies. Again, this is
because simple models give a poor approximation of the DGP. Increas-
ing model complexity gets you closer to the truth and monotonically
increases trading strategy expected returns.11
What does this mean for investor well-being? The bottom panel
in Figure 2.2 shows utility in terms of expected out-of-sample Sharpe
ratio.12 Out-of-sample Sharpe ratios boil down to a classic bias-variance
tradeoﬀ. Expected returns purely capture bias eﬀects. For low complexity
9See Spigler et al. (2019), Belkin et al. (2018), Belkin et al. (2019), Belkin et al.
(2020), and Hastie et al. (2019).
10The remaining curves in Figure 2.1 show how the out-of-sample R2 is aﬀected
by non-trivial ridge shrinkage. The basic R2 patterns are the same as the ridgeless
case, but allowing z > 0 can improve R2 further.
11In the ridgeless case, the beneﬁt of added complexity reaches its maximum
when c = 1. The ridgeless expected return is ﬂat for c ≥1 because the incremental
improvements in DGP approximation are exactly oﬀset by the gradually rising bias
of ridgeless shrinkage.
12In the calibration, the buy-and-hold trading strategy is normalized to have a
Sharpe ratio of zero. Thus, the Sharpe ratio in Figure 2.2 is in fact the Sharpe ratio
gain from timing based on model forecasts, relative to a buy-and hold investor.

24
The Virtues of Complex Models
Expected Return
Volatility
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.00
0.01
0.02
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
Sharpe Ratio
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Figure 2.2: Expected Out-of-sample Risk-Return Tradeoﬀof Timing Strategy
Note: Limiting out-of-sample expected return, volatility, and Sharpe ratio of the
timing strategy as a function of cq and z from Proposition 5 of Kelly et al. (2022a).
Calibration assumes Ψ is the identity matrix, b∗= 0.2, and the complexity of the
true model is c = 10.
models, bias comes through model misspeciﬁcation but not through
shrinkage. For high complexity models, the mis-speciﬁcation bias is
small, but the shrinkage bias becomes large. The theory, which shows
that expected returns rise with complexity, reveals that misspeciﬁcation
bias is more costly than shrinkage bias when it comes to expected
returns. Meanwhile, the strategy’s volatility is purely about forecast
variance eﬀects. Both simple models (c ≈0) or highly complex models

2.2. Bigger Is Often Better
25
(c ≫1) produce low variance. Given these patterns in the bias-variance
tradeoﬀ, it follows that the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio is also increasing
in complexity, as shown in Figure 2.2.
It is interesting to compare these ﬁndings with the phenomenon
of “double descent,” or the fact that out-of-sample MSE has a non-
monotonic pattern in model complexity when z is close to zero (Belkin
et al., 2018; Hastie et al., 2019). The mirror image of double descent
in MSE is “double ascent” of the ridgeless Sharpe ratio. Kelly et al.
(2022a) prove that the ridgeless Sharpe ratio dip at c = 1 is an artifact
of insuﬃcient shrinkage. With the right amount of shrinkage (explicitly
characterized by Kelly et al. (2022a)), complexity becomes a virtue even
in the low complexity regime: the hump disappears, and “double ascent”
turns into “permanent ascent.”
In summary, these results challenge the dogma of parsimony dis-
cussed at the start of this section. They demonstrate that, in the realistic
case of mis-speciﬁed empirical models, complexity is a virtue. This is
true not just in terms of out-of-sample statistical performance (as shown
by Belkin et al., 2019; Hastie et al., 2019, and others) but also in the
economic terms of out-of-sample investor utility. Contrary to conven-
tional wisdom, the performance of machine learning portfolios can be
theoretically improved by pushing model parameterization far beyond
the number of training observations.
Kelly et al. (2022a) conclude with a recommendation for best prac-
tices in the use of complex models:
“Our results are not a license to add arbitrary predictors
to a model. Instead, we encourage i) including all plausibly
relevant predictors and ii) using rich nonlinear models rather
than simple linear speciﬁcations. Doing so confers prediction
and portfolio beneﬁts, even when training data is scarce, and
particularly when accompanied by prudent shrinkage.”
To derive the results above, Kelly et al. (2022a) impose an assump-
tion that predictability is uniformly distributed across the signals. At
ﬁrst glance, this may seem overly restrictive, as many standard pre-
dictors would not satisfy this assumption. However, the assumption is
consistent with (and is indeed motivated by) standard neural network

26
The Virtues of Complex Models
models in which raw features are mixed and nonlinearly propagated
into ﬁnal generated features, as in equation (2.2). The ordering of the
generated features S is essentially randomized by the initialization step
of network training. Furthermore, in their empirical work, Kelly et al.
(2022a), Kelly et al., 2022b, and Didisheim et al. (2023) use a neural
network formulation known as random feature regression that ensures
this assumption is satisﬁed.
2.3
The Complexity Wedge
Didisheim et al. (2023) extend the analysis of Kelly et al. (2022a) in a
number of ways and introduce the “complexity wedge,” deﬁned as the
expected diﬀerence between in-sample and out-of-sample performance.
For simplicity, consider a correctly speciﬁed empirical model. In a
low complexity environment with c ≈0, the law of large numbers
applies, and as a result in-sample estimates converge to the true model.
Because of this convergence, the model’s in-sample performance is
exactly indicative of its expected out-of-sample performance. That is,
with no complexity, there is no wedge between in-sample and out-of-
sample behavior.
But when c > 0, a complexity wedge emerges, consisting of two com-
ponents. Complexity inﬂates the trained model’s in-sample predictability
relative to the true model’s predictability—this is the traditional deﬁni-
tion of overﬁt and it is the ﬁrst wedge component. But high complexity
also means that the empirical model does not have enough data (relative
to its parameterization) to recover the true model—this is a failure of
the law of large numbers due to complexity. This gives rise to the second
wedge component, which is a shortfall in out-of-sample performance
relative to the true model. This shortfall can be thought of as the “limits
to learning” due to model complexity. The complexity wedge—the ex-
pected diﬀerence between in-sample and out-of-sample performance—is
the sum of overﬁt and limits to learning.
The complexity wedge has a number of intriguing implications for
asset pricing. Given a realized (feasible) prediction R2, one can use
random matrix theory to back out the extent of predictability in the
“true” (but infeasible) model. A number of studies have documented

2.3. The Complexity Wedge
27
signiﬁcantly positive out-of-sample return prediction using machine
learning models, on the order of roughly 1% per month for individual
stocks. This fact, combined with a theoretical derivation for the limits
to learning, suggest that the true infeasible predictive R2 must be
much higher. Relatedly, even if there are arbitrage (or simply very high
Sharpe ratio) opportunities implied by the true model, limits to learning
make these inaccessible to real-world investors. In a realistic empirical
setting, Didisheim et al. (2023) suggest that attainable Sharpe ratios
are attenuated by roughly an order of magnitude relative to the true
data-generating process due to the infeasibility of accurately estimating
complex statistical relationships.
Da et al. (2022) consider a distinct economic environment in which
agents, namely arbitrageurs, adopt statistical arbitrage strategies in
eﬀorts to maximize their out-of-sample Sharpe ratio. These arbitrageurs
also confront statistical obstacles (like “complexity” here) in learning
the DGP of alphas. Da et al. (2022) show that regardless of the machine
learning methods arbitrageurs use, they cannot realize the optimal
infeasible Sharpe ratio in certain low signal-to-noise ratio environments.
Moreover, even if arbitrageurs adopt an optimal feasible trading strategy,
there remains a substantial wedge between their Sharpe ratio and the
optimal infeasible one. We discuss more details of each of these papers
in Chapter 4.6.
