3
Return Prediction
Empirical asset pricing is about measuring asset risk premia. This
measurement comes in two forms: one seeking to describe and under-
stand diﬀerences in risk premia across assets, the other focusing on
time series dynamics of risk premia. As the ﬁrst moment of returns,
it is a natural starting point for surveying the empirical literature of
ﬁnancial machine learning. The ﬁrst moment at once summarizes i) the
extent of discounting that investors settle on as fair compensation for
holding risky assets (potentially distorted by frictions that introduce an
element of mispricing), and ii) the ﬁrst-order aspect of the investment
opportunities available to a prospective investor.
A return prediction is, by deﬁnition, a measurement of an asset’s
conditional expected excess return:1
Ri,t+1 = Et[Ri,t+1] + ϵi,t+1,
(3.1)
Related to equation (1.2), Et[Ri,t+1] = E[Ri,t+1|It] represents a forecast
conditional on the information set It, and ϵi,t+1, collects all the remain-
ing unpredictable variation in returns. When building statistical models
of market data, it is worthwhile to step back and recognize that the
1Ri,t+1 is an asset’s return in excess of the risk-free rate with assets indexed by
i = 1, ..., Nt and dates by t = 1, ..., T.
28

29
data is generated from an extraordinarily complicated process. A large
number of investors who vary widely in their preferences and individual
information sets interact and exchange securities to maximize their well-
being. The traders intermittently settle on prices, and the sequence of
price changes (and occasional cash ﬂows such as stock dividends or bond
coupons) produce a sequence of returns. The information set implied
by the conditional expectation in (3.1) reﬂects all information—public,
private, obvious, subtle, unambiguous, or dubious—that in some way
inﬂuences prices decided at time t. We emphasize the complicated gene-
sis of this conditional expectation because we next make the quantum
leap of deﬁning a concrete function to describe its behavior:
Et[Ri,t+1] = g⋆(zi,t).
(3.2)
Our objective is to represent Et[Ri,t+1] as an immutable but otherwise
general function g⋆of the P-dimensional predictor variables zi,t available
to we the researchers. That is, we hope to isolate a function that, once
we condition on zi,t, fully explains the heterogeneity in expected returns
across all assets and over all time, as g⋆depends neither on i nor t.2
By maintaining the same form over time and across assets, estimation
can leverage information from the entire panel, which lends stability
to estimates of expected returns for any individual asset. This is in
contrast to some standard asset pricing approaches that re-estimate a
cross-sectional model each time period, or that independently estimate
time series models for each asset (see Giglio et al., 2022a). In light
of the complicated trading process that generates return data, this
“universality” assumption is ambitious. First, it is diﬃcult to imagine
that researchers can condition on the same information set as market
participants (the classic Hansen-Richard critique). Second, given the
constantly evolving technological and cultural landscape surrounding
markets, not to mention the human whims that can inﬂuence prices, the
concept of a universal g⋆(·) seems far-fetched. So, while some economists
might view this framework as excessively ﬂexible (given that it allows
for an arbitrary function and predictor set), it seems that (3.2) places
2Also, g⋆(·) depends on z only through zi,t. In most of our analysis, predictions
will not use information from the history prior to t, or from individual stocks other
than the ith, though this is generalized in some analyses that we reference later.

30
Return Prediction
onerous restrictions on the model of expected returns. For those that
view it as implausibly restrictive, then any ability of this framework
to robustly describe various behaviors of asset returns—across assets,
time, and particular on an out-of-sample basis—can be viewed as an
improbable success.
Equations (3.1) and (3.2) oﬀer an organizing template for the ma-
chine learning literature on return prediction. This section is organized
by the functional form g(zi,t) used in each paper to approximate the true
prediction function g⋆(zi,t) in our template. We emphasize the main
empirical ﬁndings of each paper, and highlight new methodological
contributions and distinguishing empirical results of individual papers.
We avoid discussing detailed diﬀerences in conditioning variables in
diﬀerent papers, but the reader should be aware that these variations
are also responsible for variation in empirical results (above and beyond
diﬀerences in functional form).
There are two distinct strands of literature associated with the
time series and cross section research agendas discussed above. The
literature on time series machine learning models for aggregate assets
(e.g., equity or bond index portfolios) developed earlier but is the smaller
literature. Eﬀorts in time series return prediction took oﬀin the 1980’s
following Shiller (1981)’s documentation of the excess volatility puzzle.
As researchers set out to quantify the extent of excess volatility in
markets, there emerged an econometric pursuit of time-varying discount
rates through predictive regression. Development of the time series
prediction literature occurred earlier than the cross section literature
due to the earlier availability of data on aggregate portfolio returns and
due to the comparative simplicity of forecasting a single time series. The
small size of the market return data set is also a reason for the limited
machine learning analysis of this data. With so few observations (several
hundred monthly returns), after a few research attempts one exhausts
the plausibility that “out-of-sample” inferences are truly out-of-sample.
The literature on machine learning methods for predicting returns in
panels of many individual assets is newer, much larger, and continues to
grow. It falls under the rubric of “the cross section of returns” because
early studies of single name stocks sought to explain diﬀerences in
unconditional average returns across stocks—i.e., the data boiled down

3.1. Data
31
a single cross section of average returns. In its modern incarnation,
however, the so-called “cross section” research program takes the form
of a true panel prediction problem. The objective is to explain both time-
variation and cross-sectional diﬀerences in conditional expected returns.
A key reason for the rapid and continual expansion of this literature is
the richness of the data. The panel’s cross-section dimension can multiply
the number of time series observations by a factor of a few thousand or
more (in the case of single name stocks, bonds, or options, for example).
While there is notable cross-correlation in these observations, most of
the variation in single name asset returns is idiosyncratic. Furthermore,
patterns in returns appear to be highly heterogeneous. In other words,
the panel aspect of the problem introduces a wealth of phenomena for
empirical researchers to explore, document, and attempt to understand
in an economic frame.
We have chosen an organizational scheme for this section that
categorizes the literature by machine learning methods employed, and
in each section we discuss both time series and panel applications. Given
the prevalence of cross section studies, this topic receives the bulk of
our attention.
3.1
Data
Much of the ﬁnancial machine learning literature studies a canonical
data set consisting of monthly returns of US stocks and accompanying
stock-level signals constructed primarily from CRSP-Compustat data.
Until recently, there were few standardized choices for building this
stock-month panel. Diﬀerent researchers use diﬀerent sets of stock-level
predictors (e.g., Lewellen (2015) uses 15 signals, Freyberger et al. (2020)
use 36, Gu et al. (2020b) use 94) and impose diﬀerent observation ﬁlters
(e.g., excluding observations stocks with nominal share prices below
$5, excluding certain industries like ﬁnancials or utilities, and so forth).
And it is common for diﬀerent papers to use diﬀerent constructions
for signals with the same name and economic rationale (e.g., various
formulations of “value,” “quality,” and so forth).
Fortunately, recent research has made progress streamlining these
data decisions by publicly releasing data and code for a standardized

32
Return Prediction
stock-level panel, available directly from the Wharton Research Data Ser-
vices server. Jensen et al. (2021) construct 153 stock signals, and provide
source code and documentation so that users can easily inspect, analyze,
and modify empirical choices. Furthermore, their data is available not
just for US stocks, but for stocks in 93 countries around the world, and
is updated regularly to reﬂect annual CRSP-Compustat data releases.
These resources may be accessed at jkpfactors.com. Jensen et al. (2021)
emphasize a homogenous approach to signal construction by attempting
to make consistent decisions in how diﬀerent CRSP-Compustat data
items are used in various signals. Chen and Zimmermann (2021) also
post code and data for US stocks at openassetpricing.com.
In terms of standardized data for aggregate market return prediction,
Welch and Goyal (2008) post updated monthly and quarterly returns
and predictor variables for the aggregate US stock market.3 Rapach and
Zhou (2022) provide the latest review of additional market predictors.
3.2
Experimental Design
The process of estimating and selecting among many models is central
to the machine learning deﬁnition given above. Naturally, selecting a
best performing model according to in-sample (or training sample) ﬁt
exaggerates model performance since increasing model parameterization
mechanically improves in-sample ﬁt. Suﬃciently large models will ﬁt
the training data exactly. Once model selection becomes part of the
research process, we can no longer rely on in-sample performance to
evaluate models.
Common approaches for model selection are based on information
criteria or cross-validation. An information criterion like Akaike (AIC)
or Bayes/Schwarz (BIC) allows researchers to select among models based
on training sample performance by introducing a probability-theoretical
performance penalty related to the number of model parameters. This
serves as a counterbalance to the mechanical improvement in ﬁt due
to heavier parameterization. Information criteria aim to select a model
from the candidate set that is likely to have the best out-of-sample
3Available at sites.google.com/view/agoyal145.

3.2. Experimental Design
33
prediction performance according to some metric.
Cross-validation has the same goal as AIC and BIC, but approaches
the problem in a more data-driven way. It compares models based on
their “pseudo”-out-of-sample performance. Cross-validation separates
the observations into one set used for training and another (the pseudo-
out-of-sample observations) for performance evaluation. By separating
the training sample from the evaluation sample, cross-validation avoids
the mechanical outperformance of larger models by simulating out-of-
sample model performance. Cross-validation selects models based on
their predictive performance in the pseudo-out-of-sample data.
Information criteria and cross-validation each have their advantages
and disadvantages. In some circumstances, AIC and cross-validation
deliver asymptotically equivalent model selections (Stone, 1977; Nishii,
1984). A disadvantage of information criteria is that they are derived
from certain theoretical assumptions, so if the data or models violate
these assumptions, the theoretical criteria must be amended and this
may be diﬃcult or infeasible. Cross-validation implementations are often
more easily adapted to account for challenging data properties like serial
dependence or extreme values, and can be applied to almost any machine
learning algorithm (Arlot and Celisse, 2010). On the other hand, due to
its random and repetitive nature, cross-validation can produce noisier
model evaluations and can be computationally expensive. Over time,
the machine learning literature has migrated toward a heavy reliance
on cross-validation because of its apparent adaptivity and universality,
and thanks to the reduced cost in high-performance computing.
To provide a concrete perspective on model selection with cross-
validation and how it ﬁts more generally into machine learning empirical
designs, we outline example designs adopted by Gu et al. (2020b) and
a number of subsequent studies.
3.2.1
Example: Fixed Design
Let the full research sample consist of time series observations indexed
t = 1, ..., T. We begin with an example of a ﬁxed sample splitting scheme.
The full sample of T observations is split into three disjoint subsamples.
The ﬁrst is the “training” sample which is used to estimate all candidate

34
Return Prediction
models. The training sample includes the Ttrain observations from t =
1, ..., Ttrain. The set of candidate models is often governed by a set of
“hyperparameters” (also commonly called “tuning parameters”). An
example of a hyperparameter that deﬁnes a continuum of candidate
models is the shrinkage parameter in a ridge regression, while an example
of a tuning parameter that describes a discrete set of models is the
number of components selected from PCA.
The second, or “validation,” sample consists of the pseudo-out-of-
sample observations. Forecasts for data points in the validation sample
are constructed based on the estimated models from the training sample.
Model performance (usually deﬁned in terms of the objective function
of the model estimator) on the validation sample determines which
speciﬁc hyperparameter values (i.e., which speciﬁc models) are selected.
The validation sample includes the Tvalidate observations t = Ttrain +
1, ..., Ttrain + Tvalidate. Note that while the original model is estimated
from only the ﬁrst Ttrain data points, once a model speciﬁcation is
selected its parameters are typically re-estimated using the full Ttrain +
Tvalidate observations to exploit the full eﬃciency of the in-sample data
when constructing out-of-sample forecasts.
The validation sample ﬁts are of course not truly out-of-sample
because they are used for tuning, so validation performance is itself
subject to selection bias. Thus a third “testing” sample (used for neither
estimation nor tuning) is used for a ﬁnal evaluation of a method’s pre-
dictive performance. The testing sample includes the Ttest observations
t = Ttrain + Tvalidate + 1, ..., Ttrain + Tvalidate + Ttest.
Two points are worth highlighting in this simpliﬁed design example.
First, the ﬁnal model in this example is estimated once and for all
using data through Ttrain + Tvalidate. But, if the model is re-estimated
recursively throughout the test period, the researcher can produce more
eﬃcient out-of-sample forecasts. A reason for relying on a ﬁxed sample
split would be that the candidate models are very computationally
intensive to train, so re-training them may be infeasible or incur large
computing costs (see, e.g., the CNN analysis of Jiang et al., 2022).
Second, the sample splits in this example respect the time series
ordering of the data. The motivation for this design is to avoid inad-
vertent information leakage backward in time. Taking this further, it

3.2. Experimental Design
35
Figure 3.1: Illustration of Standard K-fold Cross-validation
Source: https://scikit-learn.org/
is common in time series applications to introduce an embargo sample
between the training and validation samples so that serial correlation
across samples does not bias validation. For stronger serial correlation,
longer embargoes are appropriate.
Temporal ordering of the training and validation samples is not
strictly necessary and may make ineﬃcient use of data for the model
selection decision. For example, a variation on the temporal ordering
in this design would replace the ﬁxed validation sample with a more
traditional K-fold cross-validation scheme. In this case, the ﬁrst Ttrain +
Tvalidate observations can be used to produce K diﬀerent validation
samples, from which a potentially more informed selection can be made.
This would be appropriate, for example, with serially uncorrelated data.
Figure 3.1 illustrates the K-fold cross-validation scheme, which creates
K validation samples over which performance is averaged to make a
model selection decision.

36
Return Prediction
Figure 3.2: Illustration of Recursive Time-ordered Cross-validation
Note: Blue dots represent training observations, green dots represent validation observations,
and red dots represent test observations. Each row represents a step in the recursive design. This
illustration corresponds to the case of an expanding (rather than rolling) training window.
3.2.2
Example: Recursive Design
When constructing an out-of-sample forecast for a return realized at
some time t, an analyst typically wishes to use the most up-to-date
sample to estimate a model and make out-of-sample forecasts. In this
case, the training and validation samples are based on observations at
1, ..., t−1. For example, for a 50/50 split into training/validation samples,
the ﬁxed design above would be adapted to train on 1, ..., ⌊t−1
2 ⌋and
validate on ⌊t−1
2 ⌋+ 1, ..., t −1. Then the selected model is re-estimated
using all data through t −1 and an out-of-sample forecast for t is
generated.
At t + 1, the entire training/validation/testing processes is repeated
again. Training uses observations 1, ..., ⌊t
2⌋, validation ⌊t
2⌋+ 1, ..., t, and
the selected model is re-estimated through t to produce out-of-sample
forecast. This recursion iterates until a last out-of-sample forecast
is generated for observation T. Note that, because validation is re-
conducted each period, the selected model can change throughout the
recursion. Figure 3.2 illustrates this recursive cross-validation scheme.
A common variation on this design is to use rolling a training window
rather than an expanding window. This is beneﬁcial if there is suspicion
of structural instability in the data or if there are other modeling or

3.3. A Benchmark: Simple Linear Models
37
testing beneﬁts to maintaining equal training sample sizes throughout
the recursion.
3.3
A Benchmark: Simple Linear Models
The foundational panel model for stock returns, against which any
machine learning method should be compared, is the simple linear
model. For a given set of stock-level predictive features zi,t, the linear
panel model ﬁxes the prediction function as g(zi,t) = β′zi,t:
Ri,t+1 = β′zi,t + ϵi,t+1.
(3.3)
There are a variety of estimators for this model that are appropriate
under various assumptions on structure of the error covariance matrix.
In empirical ﬁnance research, the most popular is Fama and Macbeth
(1973) regression. Petersen (2008) analyzes the econometric properties
of Fama-MacBeth and compare it with other panel estimators.
Haugen and Baker (1996) and Lewellen (2015) are precursors to the
literature on machine learning for the cross section of returns. First,
they employ a comparatively large number of signals: Haugen and Baker
(1996) use roughly 40 continuous variables and sector dummies, and
Lewellen (2015) uses 15 continuous variables. Second, they recursively
train the panel linear model in (3.3) and emphasize the out-of-sample
performance of their trained models. This diﬀerentiates their analysis
from a common empirical program in the literature that sorts stocks
into bins on the basis of one or two characteristics—which is essentially
a “zero-parameter” return prediction model that asserts a functional
form for g(zi,t) without performing estimation.4 Both Haugen and Baker
(1996) and Lewellen (2015) evaluate out-of-sample model performance
in the economic terms of trading strategy performance. Haugen and
Baker (1996) additionally analyze international data, while Lewellen
(2015) additionally analyzes model accuracy in terms of prediction R2.
4To the best of our knowledge Basu (1977) is the ﬁrst to perform a characteristic-
based portfolio sort. He performs quintile sorts on stock-level price-earnings ratios.
The adoption of this approach to by Fama and French (1992) establishes portfolio
sorts as a mainstream methodology for analyzing the eﬃcacy of a candidate stock
return predictor.

38
Return Prediction
Table 3.1: Average Monthly Factor Returns From Haugen and Baker (1996)
1979/01 through 1986/06
1986/07 through 1993/12
Factor
Mean
t-stat
Mean
t-stat
One-month excess return
-0.97%
-17.04
-0.72%
-11.04
Twelve-month excess return
0.52%
7.09
0.52%
7.09
Trading volume/market cap
-0.35%
-5.28
-0.20%
-2.33
Two-month excess return
-0.20%
-4.97
-0.11%
-2.37
Earnings to price
0.27%
4.56
0.26%
4.42
Return on equity
0.24%
4.34
0.13%
2.06
Book to price
0.35%
3.90
0.39%
6.72
Trading volume trend
-0.10%
-3.17
-0.09%
-2.58
Six-month excess return
0.24%
3.01
0.19%
2.55
Cash ﬂow to price
0.13%
2.64
0.26%
4.42
Variability in cash ﬂow to price
-0.11%
-2.55
-0.15%
-3.38
Source: Haugen and Baker (1996).
Haugen and Baker (1996) show that optimized portfolios built from
the linear model’s return forecasts outperform the aggregate market,
and does so in each of the ﬁve countries they study. One of their most
interesting ﬁndings is the stability in predictive patterns, recreated
in Table 3.1 (based on Table 1 in their paper). Coeﬃcients on the
important predictors in the ﬁrst half of their sample have not only
the same sign but strikingly similar magnitudes and t-statistics in the
second half of their sample.
Lewellen (2015) shows that, in the cross section of all US stocks, the
panel linear model has a highly signiﬁcant out-of-sample R2 of roughly
1% per month, demonstrating its capability of quantitatively aligning
the level of return forecasts with realized returns. This diﬀerentiates
the linear model from the sorting approach, which is usually evaluated
on its ability to signiﬁcantly distinguish high and low expected return
stocks—i.e., its ability to make relative comparisons without necessar-
ily matching magnitudes. Furthermore, the 15-variable linear model
translates into impressive trading strategy performance, as shown in
Table 3.2 (recreated from Table 6A of Lewellen (2015)). An equal-weight
long-short strategy that buys the highest model-based expected return
decile and shorts the lowest earns an annualized Sharpe ratio of 1.72 on
an out-of-sample basis (0.82 for value-weight deciles). Collectively, the

3.3. A Benchmark: Simple Linear Models
39
Table 3.2: Average Monthly Factor Returns And Annualized Sharpe Ratios From
Lewellen (2015)
Equal-weighted
Value-weighted
Pred
Avg
Std
t-stat
Shp
Pred
Avg
Std
t-stat
Shp
Panel A: All stocks
Low (L)
-0.90
-0.32
7.19
-0.84
-0.15
-0.76
0.11
6.01
0.37
0.06
2
-0.11
0.40
5.84
1.30
0.24
-0.10
0.45
4.77
1.89
0.32
3
0.21
0.60
5.46
2.06
0.38
0.21
0.65
4.65
2.84
0.49
4
0.44
0.78
5.28
2.74
0.51
0.44
0.69
4.67
2.97
0.51
5
0.64
0.81
5.36
2.82
0.52
0.63
0.81
5.01
3.34
0.56
6
0.83
1.04
5.36
3.62
0.67
0.82
0.88
5.22
3.28
0.58
7
1.02
1.12
5.55
3.68
0.70
1.01
1.04
5.67
3.46
0.64
8
1.25
1.31
5.97
4.04
0.76
1.24
1.15
6.03
3.62
0.66
9
1.55
1.66
6.76
4.38
0.85
1.54
1.34
6.68
3.80
0.69
High (H)
2.29
2.17
7.97
4.82
0.94
2.19
1.66
8.28
3.73
0.70
H - L
3.20
2.49
5.02
10.00
1.72
2.94
1.55
6.56
4.51
0.82
Source: Lewellen (2015).
evidence of Haugen and Baker (1996) and Lewellen (2015) demonstrates
that simple linear panel models can, in real time, estimate combinations
of many predictors that are eﬀective for forecasting returns and building
trading strategies.
Moving to time series analysis, the excess volatility puzzle of Shiller
(1981) prompted a large literature seeking to quantify the extent of time-
variation in discount rates, as well as a productive line of theoretical work
rationalizing the dynamic behavior of discount rates (e.g. Campbell and
Cochrane, 1999; Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Gabaix, 2012; Wachter, 2013).
The tool of choice in the empirical pursuit of discount rate variation is
linear time series regression. As noted in the Rapach and Zhou (2013)
survey of stock market predictability, the most popular predictor is
the aggregate price-dividend ratio (e.g. Campbell and Shiller, 1988),
though dozens of other predictors have been studied. By and large, the
literature focuses on univariate or small multivariate prediction models,
occasionally coupled with economic restrictions such as non-negativity
constraints on the market return forecast (Campbell and Thompson,
2008) and imposing cross-equation restrictions in the present-value
identity (Cochrane, 2008; Van Binsbergen and Koijen, 2010). In an
inﬂuential critique, Welch and Goyal (2008) contend that the abundant
in-sample evidence of market return predictability from simple linear

40
Return Prediction
models fails to generalize out-of-sample. However, Rapach et al. (2010)
show that forecast combination techniques produce reliable out-of-
sample market forecasts.
3.4
Penalized Linear Models
To borrow a phrase from evolutionary biology, the linear models of Hau-
gen and Baker (1996) and Lewellen (2015) are a “transitional species”
in the ﬁnance literature. Like traditional econometric approaches, the
researchers ﬁx their model speciﬁcations a priori. But like machine learn-
ing, they consider a much larger set of predictors than their predecessors
and emphasize out-of-sample forecast performance.
While these papers study dozens of return predictors, the list of
predictive features analyzed in the literature numbers in the hundreds
(Harvey et al., 2016; Hou et al., 2018; Jensen et al., 2021). Add to this an
interest in expanding the model to incorporate state-dependence in pre-
dictive relationships (e.g. Schaller and Norden, 1997; Cujean and Hasler,
2017), and the size of a linear model’s parameterization quickly balloons
to thousands of parameters. Gu et al. (2020b) consider a baseline linear
speciﬁcation to predict the panel of stock-month returns. They use
approximately 1,000 predictors that are multiplicative interactions of
roughly 100 stock characteristics with demonstrated forecast power
for individual stock returns and 10 aggregate macro-ﬁnance predictors
with demonstrated success in predicting the market return. Despite
the fact that these predictors have individually shown promise in prior
research, Gu et al. (2020b) show that OLS cannot achieve a stable ﬁt
of a model with so many parameters at once, resulting in disastrous
out-of-sample performance. The predictive R2 is −35% per month and a
trading strategy based on these predictions underperforms the market.
It is hardly surprising that OLS estimates fail with so many pre-
dictors. When the number of predictors P approaches the number of
observations NT, the linear model becomes ineﬃcient or even incon-
sistent. It begins to overﬁt noise rather than extracting signal. This is
particularly troublesome for the problem of return prediction where the
signal-to-noise ratio is notoriously low.
A central conclusion from the discussion of such “complex” models

3.4. Penalized Linear Models
41
in Section 2 is the following: Crucial for avoiding overﬁt is constraining
the model by regularizing the estimator. This can be done by pushing
complexity (deﬁned as c in Section 2) far above one (which implicitly
regularizes the least squares estimator) or by imposing explicit penaliza-
tion via ridge or other shrinkage. The simple linear model does neither.
Its complexity is in an uncomfortably high variance zone (well above
zero, but not above one) and it uses no explicit regularization.
The prediction function for the penalized linear model is the same
as the simple linear model in equation (3.3). That is, it continues to
consider only the baseline, untransformed predictors. Penalized methods
diﬀer by appending a penalty to the original loss function, such as the
popular “elastic net” penalty, resulting in a penalized loss of
L(β; ρ, λ) =
N
X
i=1
T
X
t=1
 Ri,t+1 −β′zi,t
2 + λ(1 −ρ)
P
X
j=1
|βj| + 1
2λρ
P
X
j=1
β2
j
(3.4)
The elastic net involves two non-negative hyperparameters, λ and ρ, and
includes two well known regularizers as special cases. The ρ = 1 case
corresponds to ridge regression, which uses an ℓ2 parameter penalization,
that draws all coeﬃcient estimates closer to zero but does not impose
exact zeros anywhere. Ridge is a shrinkage method that helps prevent
coeﬃcients from becoming unduly large in magnitude. The ρ = 0 case
corresponds to the lasso and uses an absolute value, or “ℓ1”, parameter
penalization. The geometry of lasso sets coeﬃcients on a subset of
covariates to exactly zero if the penalty is large enough. In this sense,
the lasso imposes sparsity on the speciﬁcation and can thus be thought
of as both a variable selection and a shrinkage device. For intermediate
values of ρ, the elastic net encourages simple models with varying
combinations of ridge and lasso eﬀects.
Gu et al. (2020b) show that the failure of the OLS estimator in the
stock-month return prediction panel is reversed by introducing elastic
net penalization. The out-of-sample prediction R2 becomes positive and
an equal-weight long-short decile spread based on elastic net predictions
returns an out-of-sample Sharpe ratio of 1.33 per annum. In other words,
it is not the weakness of the predictive information embodied in the
1,000 predictors, but the statistical cost (overﬁt and ineﬃciency) of the

42
Return Prediction
heavy parameter burden, that is a detriment to the performance of
OLS. He et al. (2022a) analyze elastic-net ensembles and ﬁnd that the
best individual elastic-net models change rather quickly over time and
that ensembles perform well at capturing these changes. Rapach et al.
(2013) apply (3.4) to forecast market returns across countries.
Penalized regression methods are some of the most frequently em-
ployed machine learning tools in ﬁnance, thanks in large part to their
conceptual and computational tractability. For example, the ridge re-
gression estimator is available in closed form so it has the same computa-
tional simplicity as OLS. There is no general closed form representation
of the lasso estimator, so it must be calculated numerically, but eﬃcient
algorithms for computing lasso are ubiquitous in statistics software
packages (including Stata, Matlab, and various Python libraries).
Freyberger et al. (2020) combine penalized regression with a gener-
alized additive model (GAM) to predict the stock-month return panel.
In their application, a function pk(zi,t) is an element-wise nonlinear
transformation of the P variables in zi,t:
g(zi,t) =
K
X
k=1
˜β′
kpk(zi,t).
(3.5)
Their model expands the set of predictors by using k = 1, ..., K such
nonlinear transformations, with each transformation k having its own
Q × 1 vector of linear regression coeﬃcients ˜βk. Freyberger et al. (2020)
use a quadratic spline formulation for their basis functions, though the
basis function possibilities are endless and the nonlinear transformations
may be applied to multiple predictors jointly (as opposed to element-
wise).
Because nonlinear terms enter additively, forecasting with the GAM
can be approached with the same estimation tools as any linear model.
But the series expansion concept that underlies the GAM quickly
multiplies the number of model parameters, thus penalization to control
the degrees of freedom tends to beneﬁt out-of-sample performance.
Freyberger et al. (2020) apply a penalty function known as group lasso

3.4. Penalized Linear Models
43
(Huang et al., 2010), which takes the form
λ
Q
X
j=1
 K
X
k=1
˜β2
k,j
!1/2
,
(3.6)
where ˜βk,j is the coeﬃcient on the kth basis function applied to stock
signal j. This penalty is particularly well suited to the spline expansion
setting. As its name suggests, group lasso selects either all K spline
terms associated with a given characteristic j, or none of them.
Freyberger et al. (2020)’s group lasso results show that less than half
of the commonly studied stock signals in the literature have independent
predictive power for returns. They also document the importance of
nonlinearities, showing that their full nonlinear speciﬁcation dominates
the nested linear speciﬁcation in terms of out-of-sample trading strategy
performance.
Chinco et al. (2019) also use lasso to study return predictability.
Their study has a number of unique aspects. First is their use of high
frequency data—they forecast one-minute-ahead stock returns trained
in rolling 30-minute regressions. Second, they use completely separate
models for each stock, making their analysis a large collection of time
series linear regressions. And, rather than using standard stock-level
characteristics as predictors, their feature set includes three lags of one-
minute returns for all stocks in the NYSE cross section. Perhaps the
most interesting aspect of this model is its accommodation of cross-stock
prediction eﬀects. Their ultimate regression speciﬁcation is
Ri,t = αi + β′
i,1Rt−1 + β′
i,2Rt−2 + β′
i,3Rt−3 + ϵi,t,
i = 1, ..., N
(3.7)
where Rt is the vector including all stocks’ returns in minute t. The
authors estimate this model for each stock i with lasso using a stock-
speciﬁc penalty parameter selected with 10-fold cross-validation. They
ﬁnd that the dominant predictors vary rather dramatically from period
to period, and tend to be returns on stocks that are reporting fundamen-
tal news. The economic insights from these patterns are not fully ﬂeshed
out, but the strength of the predictive evidence suggest that machine
learning methods applied to high frequency returns have the potential
to reveal new and interesting phenomena relating to information ﬂows
and the joint dynamics they induce among assets.

44
Return Prediction
Avramov et al. (2022b) study how dynamics of ﬁrm-level fundamen-
tals associate with subsequent drift in a ﬁrm’s stock price. They take
an agnostic view on details of fundamental dynamics. Their data-driven
approach considers the deviations of all quarterly Compustat data items
from their mean over the three most recent quarters, rather than hand-
picking speciﬁc fundamentals a priori. This large set of deviations is
aggregated into a single return prediction index via supervised learning.
In particular, they estimate pooled panel lasso regressions to forecast the
return on stock i using all of stock i’s Compustat deviations, and refer
to the ﬁtted value from these regressions as the Fundamental Deviation
Index, or FDI. A value-weight decile spread strategy that is long highest
FDI stocks and short lowest FDI stocks earns an annualized out-of-
sample information ratio of 0.8 relative to the Fama-French-Carhart
four-factor model.
3.5
Dimension Reduction
The regularization aspect of machine learning is in general beneﬁcial
for high dimensional prediction problems because it reduces degrees of
freedom. There are many possible ways to achieve this. Penalized linear
models reduce degrees of freedom by shrinking coeﬃcients toward zero
and/or forcing coeﬃcients to zero on a subset of predictors. But this
can produce suboptimal forecasts when predictors are highly correlated.
Imagine a setting in which each predictor is equal to the forecast target
plus some i.i.d. noise term. In this situation, the sensible forecasting
solution is to simply use the average of predictors in a univariate
predictive regression.
This idea of predictor averaging is the essence of dimension reduction.
Forming linear combinations of predictors helps reduce noise to better
isolate signal. We ﬁrst discuss two classic dimension reduction techniques,
principal components regression (PCR) and partial least squares (PLS),
followed by two extensions of PCA, scaled PCA and supervised PCA,
designed for low signal-to-noise settings. These methods emerge in the
literature as dimension-reduction devices for time series prediction of
market returns or macroeconomic variables. We next extend their use
to a panel setting for predicting the cross-section of returns, and then

3.5. Dimension Reduction
45
introduce a more recent ﬁnance-centric method known as principal
portfolios analysis tailored to this problem. In this section, we focus on
applications of dimension reduction to prediction. Dimension reduction
plays an important role in asset pricing beyond prediction, and we
study these in subsequent sections. For example, a variety of PCA-
based methods are at the heart of latent factor analysis, and are treated
under the umbrella of machine learning factor pricing models in Section
4.
3.5.1
Principal Components and Partial Least Squares
We formalize the discussion of these two methods in a generic predictive
regression setting:
yt+h = x′
tθ + ϵt+h,
(3.8)
where y may refer to market return or macroeconomic variables such
as GDP growth, unemployment, and inﬂation, xt is P × 1 vector of
predictors, and h is the prediction horizon.
The idea of dimension reduction is to replace the high-dimensional
predictors by a set of low-dimensional “factors”, ft, which summarizes
useful information in xt. Their relationship is often cast in a standard
factor model:
xt = βft + ut.
(3.9)
On the basis of (3.9), we can rewrite (3.8) as:
yt+h = f′
tα + ˜ϵt+h.
(3.10)
Equations (3.9) and (3.10) can be represented in matrix form as:
X = βF + U,
Y = Fα + E,
(3.11)
where X is a P × T matrix, F is K × T, F is the K × (T −h) matrix
with the last h columns removed from F, Y = (yh+1, yh+2, . . . , yT )′,
E = (˜ϵh+1, ˜ϵh+2, . . . , ˜ϵT )′.
Principal components regression (PCR) is a two-step procedure.
First, it combines predictors into a few linear combinations, bft = ΩKxt,

46
Return Prediction
and ﬁnds the combination weights ΩK recursively. The jth linear com-
bination solves
wj = arg max
w
d
Var(x′
tw),
s.t.
w′w = 1,
d
Cov(x′
tw, x′
twl) = 0,
l = 1, 2, . . . , j −1.
(3.12)
Clearly, the choice of components is not based on the forecasting objec-
tive at all, but aims to best preserve the covariance structure among the
predictors.5 In the second step, PCR uses the estimated components bft
in a standard linear predictive regression (3.10).
Stock and Watson (2002) propose to forecast macroeconomic vari-
ables on the basis of PCR. They prove the consistency of the ﬁrst-stage
recovery of factors (up to a rotation) and the second-stage prediction,
as both the number of predictors, P, and the sample size, T, increase.
Among the earliest uses of PC forecasts for stock return prediction is
Ludvigson and Ng (2007). Their forecast targets are either the quarterly
return to the CRSP value-weighted index or its quarterly volatility.
They consider two sets of principal components, corresponding to dif-
ferent choices for the raw predictors that comprise X. The ﬁrst is a
large collection of indicators spanning all aspects of the macroeconomy
(output, employment, housing, price levels, and so forth). The second is
a large collection of ﬁnancial data, consisting mostly of aggregate US
market price and dividend data, government bond and credit yields,
and returns on various industry and characteristic-sorted portfolios.
In total, they incorporate 381 individual predictors in their analysis.
They use BIC to select model speciﬁcations that include various com-
binations of the estimated components. Components extracted from
ﬁnancial predictors have signiﬁcant out-of-sample forecasting power
for market returns and volatility, while macroeconomic indicators do
not. Fitted mean and volatility forecasts exhibit a positive association
providing evidence of a classical risk-return tradeoﬀat the aggregate
market level. To help interpret their predictions, the authors show that
“Two factors stand out as particularly important for quarterly excess
returns: a volatility factor that is highly correlated with squared returns,
5This optimization problem is eﬃciently solved via singular value decomposition
of X, a P × T matrix with columns in {x1, . . . , xT }.

3.5. Dimension Reduction
47
and a risk-premium factor that is highly correlated with well-established
risk factors for explaining the cross-section of expected returns.”
Extending their earlier equity market framework, Ludvigson and
Ng (2010) use principal components of macroeconomic and ﬁnancial
predictors to forecast excess Treasury bond returns. They document
reliable bond return prediction performance in excess of that due to
forward rates (Fama and Bliss, 1987; Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2005).
They emphasize i) the inconsistency of this result with leading aﬃne
term structure models (in which forward rates theoretically span all
predictable variation in future bond returns) and ii) that their estimated
conditional expected returns are decidedly countercyclical, resolving the
puzzling cyclicality of bond risk premia that arises when macroeconomic
components are excluded from the forecasting model.
Jurado et al. (2015) use a clever application of PCR to estimate
macroeconomic risk. The premise of their argument is that a good
conditional variance measure must eﬀectively adjust for conditional
means,
Var(yt+1|It) = E
h
(yt+1 −E[yt+1|It])2 |It
i
.
If the amount of mean predictability is underestimated, conditional
risks will be overestimated. The authors build on the ideas in Ludvigson
and Ng (2007) and Ludvigson and Ng (2010) to saturate predictions
of market returns (and other macroeconomic series) with information
contained in the principal components of macroeconomic predictor
variables. The resulting improvements in macroeconomic risk estimates
have interesting economic consequences. First, episodes of elevated
uncertainty are fewer and farther between than previously believed.
Second, improved estimates reveal a tighter link between rises in risk
and depressed macroeconomic activity.
PCR constructs predictors solely based on covariation among the
predictors. The idea is to accommodate as much of the total variation
among predictors as possible using a relatively small number of dimen-
sions. This happens prior to and independent of the forecasting step.
This naturally suggests a potential shortcoming of PCR—that it fails to
consider the ultimate forecasting objective in how it conducts dimension
reduction.

48
Return Prediction
Partial least squares (PLS) is an alternative to PCR that reduces
dimensionality by directly exploiting covariation between predictors
and the forecast target. Unlike PCR, PLS seeks components of X that
maximize predictive correlation with the forecast target, thus weight in
the jth PLS component are
wj = arg max
w
d
Cov(yt+h, x′
tw)2,
s.t.
w′w = 1,
d
Cov(x′
tw, x′
twl) = 0,
l = 1, 2, . . . , j −1.
(3.13)
At the core of PLS is a collection of univariate (“partial”) models
that forecast yt+h one predictor at a time. Then, it constructs a linear
combination of predictors weighted by their univariate predictive ability.
To form multiple PLS components, the target and all predictors are
orthogonalized with respect to previously constructed components, and
the procedure is repeated on the orthogonalized dataset.
Kelly and Pruitt (2015) analyze the econometric properties of PLS
prediction models (and a generalization called the three-pass regression
ﬁlter), and note its resilience when the predictor set contains dominant
factors that are irrelevant for prediction, which is a situation that lim-
its the eﬀectiveness of PCR. Related to this, Kelly and Pruitt (2013)
analyze the predictability of aggregate market returns using the present-
value identity. They note that traditional present-value regressions (e.g.
Campbell and Shiller, 1988) face an errors-in-variables problem, and
propose a high-dimensional regression solution that exploits strengths
of PLS. In their analysis, Z consists of valuation (book-to-market or
dividend-to-price) ratios for a large cross section of assets. Imposing
economic restrictions, they derive a present-value system that relates
market returns to the cross section of asset-level valuation ratios. How-
ever, the predictors are also driven by common factors in expected
aggregate dividend growth. Applying PCR to the cross section of valua-
tion ratios encounters the problem that factors driving dividend growth
are not particularly useful for forecasting market returns. The PLS
estimator learns to bypass these high variance but low predictability
components in favor of components with stronger return predictabil-
ity. Their PLS-based forecasts achieve an out-of-sample R2 of 13% for
annual returns. This translates into large economic gains for investors

3.5. Dimension Reduction
49
willing to time the market, increasing Sharpe ratios by more than a
third relative to a buy-and-hold investor. Furthermore, they document
substantially larger variability in investor discount rates than accommo-
dated by leading theoretical models. Chatelais et al. (2023) use a similar
framework to forecast macroeconomic activity using a cross section of
asset prices, in essence performing a PLS-based version of the Fama
(1990) analysis demonstrating that asset prices lead macroeconomic
outcomes.
Baker and Wurgler (2006) and Baker and Wurgler (2007) use PCR
to forecast market returns based on a collection of market sentiment
indicators. Huang et al. (2014) extend this analysis with PLS and show
that PLS sentiment indices possess signiﬁcant prediction beneﬁts relative
to PCR. They argue that PLS avoids a common but irrelevant factor
associated with measurement noise in the Baker-Wurgler sentiment
proxies. By reducing the confounding eﬀects of this noise, Huang et al.
(2014) ﬁnd that sentiment is a highly signiﬁcant driver of expected
returns, and that this predictability is in large part undetected by
PCR. Similarly, Chen et al. (2022b) combine multiple investor attention
proxies into a successful PLS-based market return forecaster.
Ahn and Bae (2022) conduct asymptotic analysis of the PLS esti-
mator and ﬁnd that the optimal number of PLS factors for forecasting
could be much smaller than the number of common factors in the origi-
nal predictor variables. Moreover, including too many PLS factors is
detrimental to the out-of-sample performance of the PLS predictor.
3.5.2
Scaled PCA and Supervised PCA
A convenient and critical assumption in the analysis of PCR and PLS
is that the factors are pervasive. Pervasive factor models are preva-
lent in the literature. For instance, Bai (2003) studies the asymptotic
properties of the PCA estimator of factors in the case λK(β′β) ≳P.
Giglio et al. (2022b) show that the performance of the PCA and PLS
predictors hinges on the signal-to-noise ratio, deﬁned by P/(TλK(β′β)),
where λK(β′β) is the Kth largest eigenvalue. When P/(TλK(β′β)) ̸→0,
neither prediction method is consistent in general. This is known as the

50
Return Prediction
weak factor problem.6
Huang et al. (2021) propose a scaled-PCA procedure, which assigns
weights to variables based on their correlations with the prediction
target, before applying PCA. The weighting scheme enhances the signal-
to-noise ratio and thus helps factor recovery.
Likewise, Giglio et al. (2022b) propose a supervised PCA (SPCA)
alternative which allows for factors along a broad spectrum of factor
strength. They note that the strength of factors depends on the set of
variables to which PCA is applied. SPCA involves a marginal screening
step to select a subset of predictors within which at least one factor
is strong. It then extracts a ﬁrst factor from the subset using PCA,
projects the target and all the predictors (including those not selected)
on the ﬁrst factor, and constructs residuals. It then repeats the selection,
PCA, and projection step with the residuals, extracting factors one by
one until the correlations between residuals and the target vanish. Giglio
et al. (2022b) prove that both PLS and SPCA can recover weak factors
that are correlated with the prediction target and that the resulting
predictor achieves consistency. In a multivariate target setting, if all
factors are correlated with at least one of the prediction targets, the
PLS procedure can recover the number of weak factors and the entire
factor space consistently.
3.5.3
From Time-Series to Panel Prediction
The dimension reduction applications referenced above primarily focus
on combining many predictors to forecast a univariate time series.
To predict the cross-section of returns, we need generalize dimension
reduction to a panel prediction setting as in (3.3). Similar to (3.9) and
(3.10), we can write
Rt+1 = Ftα + Et+1,
Zt = Ftγ + Ut,
where Rt+1 is an N × 1 vector of returns observed on day t + 1, Ft is an
N × K matrix, α is K × 1, Et+1 is N × 1 vector of residuals, Zt is an
6Bai
and
Ng
(2021)
extend
their
analysis
to
moderate
factors,
i.e.,
P/(TλK(β′β)) →0, and ﬁnd PCA remains consistent. Earlier work on weak factor
models includes Onatski (2009), Onatski (2010), and Onatski (2012), who consider the
extremely weak factor setting in which the factors cannot be recovered consistently.

3.5. Dimension Reduction
51
N × P matrix of characteristics, γ is K × P, and Ut is N × P matrix
of residuals.
We can then stack {Rt+1}, {Et+1}, {Zt}, {Ft}, {Ut} into NT × 1,
NT × 1, NT × P, NT × K, NT × P matrices, R, E, Z, F, and U,
respectively, such that
R = Fα + E,
Z = Fγ + U.
These equations follow exactly the same form as (3.11), so that the
aforementioned dimension reduction procedures apply.
Light et al. (2017) apply pooled panel PLS in stock return prediction,
and Gu et al. (2020b) perform pooled panel PCA and PLS to predict
individual stocks returns. The Gu et al. (2020b) equal-weighted long-
short portfolios based on PCA and PLS earn a Sharp ratio of 1.89 and
1.47 per annum, respectively, which outperforms the elastic-net based
long-short portfolio.
3.5.4
Principal Portfolios
Kelly et al. (2020a) propose a diﬀerent dimension reduction approach to
return prediction and portfolio optimization called “principal portfolios
analysis” (PPA). In the frameworks of the preceding section, high
dimensionality comes from each individual asset having many potential
predictors. Most models in empirical asset pricing focus on own-asset
predictive signals; i.e., the association between Si,t and the return on
only asset i, Ri,t+1. PPA is motivated by a desire to harness the joint
predictive information for many assets simultaneously. It leverages
predictive signals of all assets to forecast returns on all other assets. In
this case, the high dimensional nature of the problem comes from the
large number of potential cross prediction relationships.
For simplicity, suppose we have a single signal, Si,t, for each asset
(stacked into an N-vector, St). PPA begins from the cross-covariance
matrix of all assets’ future returns with all assets’ signals:
Π = E(Rt+1S′
t) ∈RN×N.
Kelly et al. (2020a) refer to Π as the “prediction matrix.” The diagonal
part of the prediction matrix tracks the own-signal prediction eﬀects,

52
Return Prediction
Sharpe Ratio
Information Ratio
Forecast Horizon (Days)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
PP 1-3
PEP 1-3
PAP 1-3
PEP and PAP 1-3
Factor
Figure 3.3: Principal portfolio performance ratios.
Source: Figure 3 of KMP.
which are the focus of traditional return prediction models. Oﬀ-diagonals
track cross-predictability phenomena.
PPA applies SVD to the prediction matrix. Kelly et al. (2020a)
prove that the singular vectors of Π—those that account for the lion’s
share of covariation between signals and future returns—are a set of
normalized investment portfolios, ordered from those most predictable
by S to those least predictable.
The leading singular vectors of Π are “principal portfolios.” Kelly et
al. (2020a) show that principal portfolios have a direct interpretation as
optimal portfolios. Speciﬁcally, they are the most “timeable” portfolios
based on signal S and they oﬀer the highest average returns for an
investor that faces a leverage constraint (i.e., one who cannot hold
arbitrarily large positions).
Kelly et al. (2020a) also point out that useful information about asset
pricing models and pricing errors is encoded in Π. To tease out return
predictability associated with beta versus alpha, we can decompose Π
into its symmetric part (Πs) and anti-symmetric part (Πa):
Π = 1
2(Π + Π′)
|
{z
}
Πs
+ 1
2(Π −Π′)
|
{z
}
Πa
.
(3.14)

3.6. Decision Trees
53
Kelly et al. (2020a) prove that the leading singular vectors of Πa (“prin-
cipal alpha portfolios”) have an interpretation as pure-alpha strategies
while those of Πs have an interpretation as pure-beta portfolios (“princi-
pal exposure portfolios”). Therefore, Kelly et al. (2020a) propose a new
test of asset pricing models based on the average returns of principal
alpha portfolios (as an alternative to tests such as Gibbons et al., 1989).
While Kelly et al. (2020a) focus on the case of a single signal for each
asset, He et al. (2022b) show how to tractably extend this to multiple
signals. Goulet Coulombe and Göbel, 2023 approach a similar prob-
lem as Kelly et al. (2020a)—constructing a portfolio that is maximally
predictable—using a combination of random forest and constrained
ridge regression.
Kelly et al. (2020a) apply PPA to a number of data sets across
asset classes. Figure 3.3 presents one example from their analysis. The
set of assets Rt+1 are the 25 Fama-French size and book-to-market
portfolios, and the signals St are time series momentum for each asset.
The ﬁgure shows large out-of-sample Sharpe ratios of the resulting
principal portfolios, and shows that they generate signiﬁcant alpha
versus a benchmark model that includes the ﬁve Fama-French factors
plus a standard time series momentum factor.
3.6
Decision Trees
Modern asset pricing models (with habit persistence, long-run risks, or
time-varying disaster risk) feature a high degree of state dependence
in ﬁnancial market behaviors, suggesting that interaction eﬀects are
potentially important to include in empirical models. For example, Hong
et al. (2000) formulate an information theory in which the momentum
eﬀect is modulated by a ﬁrm’s size and its extent of analyst coverage,
emphasizing that expected stock returns vary with interactions among
ﬁrm characteristics. Conceptually, it is straightforward to incorporate
such eﬀects in linear models by introducing variable interactions, just
like equation (3.5) introduces nonlinear transformations. The issue is
that, lacking a priori assumptions about the relevant interactions, this
generalized additive approach quickly runs up against computational
limits because multi-way interactions increase the number of parameters

54
Return Prediction
combinatorially.7
Regression trees provide a way to incorporate multi-way predictor
interactions at much lower computational cost. Trees partition data
observations into groups that share common feature interactions. The
logic is that, by ﬁnding homogenous groups of observations, one can
use past data for a given group to forecast the behavior of a new
observation that arrives in the group. Figure 3.4 shows an example with
two predictors, “size” and “b/m.” The left panel describes how the tree
assigns each observation to a partition based on its predictor values.
First, observations are sorted on size. Those above the breakpoint of
0.5 are assigned to Category 3. Those with small size are then further
sorted by b/m. Observations with small size and b/m below 0.3 are
assigned to Category 1, while those with b/m above 0.3 go into Category
2. Finally, forecasts for observations in each partition are deﬁned as the
simple average of the outcome variable’s value among observations in
that partition.
The general prediction function associated with a tree of K “leaves”
(terminal nodes) and depth L is
g(zi,t; θ, K, L) =
K
X
k=1
θk1{zi,t∈Ck(L)},
(3.15)
where Ck(L) is one of the K partitions. Each partition is a product of
up to L indicator functions. The constant parameter θk associated with
partition k is estimated as the sample average of outcomes within the
partition.
The popularity of decision trees stems less from their structure
and more in the “greedy” algorithms that can eﬀectively isolate highly
predictive partitions at low computational cost. While the speciﬁc
predictor variable upon which a branch is split (and the speciﬁc value
where the split occurs) is chosen to minimize forecast error, the space of
7As Gu et al. (2020b) note, “Parameter penalization does not solve the diﬃculty
of estimating linear models when the number of predictors is exponentially larger
than the number of observations. Instead, one must turn to heuristic optimization
algorithms such as stepwise regression (sequentially adding/dropping variables un-
til some stopping rule is satisﬁed), variable screening (retaining predictors whose
univariate correlations with the prediction target exceed a certain value), or others.”

3.6. Decision Trees
55
Size
True
False
Value>0.4
Category
True
False
1
Category
2
Category
3
<0.5
Value
<0.3
0
0.5
1
0.3
1
Value
Size
Category 3
Category 2
Category 1
Figure 3.4: Regression Tree Example
Source: Gu et al. (2020b).
Note: This ﬁgure presents the diagrams of a regression tree (left) and its equivalent representation
(right) in the space of two characteristics (size and value). The terminal nodes of the tree are
colored in blue, yellow, and red, respectively. Based on their values of these two characteristics,
the sample of individual stocks is divided into three categories.
possible splits is so expansive that the tree cannot be globally optimized.
Instead, splits are determined myopically and the estimated tree is a
coarse approximation of the infeasible best tree model.
Trees ﬂexibly accommodate interactions (a tree of depth L can
capture (L −1)-way interactions) but are prone to overﬁt. To counter-
act this, trees are typically employed in regularized “ensembles.” One
common ensembling method is “boosting” (gradient boosted regression
trees, “GBRT”), which recursively combines forecasts from many trees
that are individually shallow and weak predictors but combine into
a single strong predictor (see Schapire, 1990; Friedman, 2001). The
boosting procedure begins by ﬁtting a shallow tree (e.g., with depth
L = 1). Then, a second simple tree ﬁts the prediction residuals from
the ﬁrst tree. The forecast from the second tree is shrunk by a factor
ν ∈(0, 1) then added to the forecast from the ﬁrst tree. Shrinkage helps
prevent the model from overﬁtting the preceding tree’s residuals. This
is iterated into an additive ensemble of B shallow trees. The boosted
ensemble thus has three tuning parameters (L, ν, B).
Rossi and Timmermann (2015) investigate Merton (1973)’s ICAPM
to evaluate whether the conditional equity risk premium varies with
the market’s exposure to economic state variables. The lynchpin to this
investigation is an accurate measurement of the ICAPM conditional

56
Return Prediction
covariances. To solve this problem, the authors use boosted trees to pre-
dict the realized covariance between a daily index of aggregate economic
activity and the daily return on the market portfolio. The predictors
include a collection of macro-ﬁnance data series from Welch and Goyal
(2008) as well as past realized covariances. In contrast to prior litera-
ture, these conditional covariance estimates have a signiﬁcantly positive
times series association with the conditional equity risk premium, and
imply economically plausible magnitudes of investor risk aversion. The
authors show that linear models for the conditional covariance are badly
misspeciﬁed, and this is likely responsible for mixed results in prior tests
of the ICAPM. They attribute their positive conclusion regarding the
ICAPM to the boosted tree methodology, whose nonlinear ﬂexibility
reduces misspeciﬁcation of the conditional covariance function.
In related work, Rossi (2018) uses boosted regression trees with
macro-ﬁnance predictors to directly forecast aggregate stock returns
(and volatility) at the monthly frequency, but without imposing the
ICAPM’s restriction that predictability enters through conditional vari-
ance and covariances with economic state variables. He shows that
boosted tree forecasts generate a monthly return prediction R2 of 0.3%
per month out-of-sample (compared to −0.7% using a historical mean
return forecast), with directional accuracy of 57.3% per month. This
results in a signiﬁcant out-of-sample alpha versus a market buy-and-
hold strategy and a corresponding 30% utility gain for a mean-variance
investor with risk aversion equal to two.
A second popular tree regularizer is the “random forest” model which,
like boosting, creates an ensemble of forecasts from many shallow trees.
Following the more general “bagging” (bootstrap aggregation) procedure
of Breiman (2001), random forest draws B bootstrap samples of the data,
ﬁts a separate regression tree to each, then averages their forecasts. In
addition to randomizing the estimation samples via bootstrap, random
forest also randomizes the set of predictors available for building the
tree (an approach known as “dropout”). Both the bagging and dropout
components of random forest regularize its forecasts. The depth L of the
individual trees, the number of bootstrap samples B, and the dropout
rate are tuning parameters.
Tree-based return predictions are isomorphic to conditional (sequen-

3.6. Decision Trees
57
tial) sorts similar to those used in the asset pricing literature. Consider
a sequential tercile sort on stock size and value signals to produce
nine double-sorted size and value portfolios. This is a two-level ternary
decision tree with ﬁrst-layer split points equal to the terciles of the
size distribution and second-layer split points at terciles of the value
distribution. Each leaf j of the tree can be interpreted as a portfolio
whose time t return is the (weighted) average of returns for all stocks
allocated to leaf j in time t. Likewise, the forecast for each stock in leaf
j is the average return among stocks allocated to j in the training set
prior to t.
Motivated by this isomorphism, Moritz and Zimmermann (2016)
conduct conditional portfolio sorts by estimating regression trees from
a large collection of stock characteristics, rather than using pre-deﬁned
sorting variables and break points. While traditional sorts can accom-
modate at most two or three way interactions among stock signals, trees
can search more broadly for the most predictive multi-way interactions.
Rather than conducting a single tree-based sort, they use random for-
est to produce ensemble return forecasts from 200 trees. The authors
report that an equal-weight long-short decile spread strategy based on
one-month-ahead random forest forecasts earns a monthly return of
2.3% (though the authors also show that this performance is heavily
inﬂuenced by the costly-to-trade one-month reversal signal).
Building on Moritz and Zimmermann (2016), Bryzgalova et al. (2020)
use a method they call “AP-trees” to conduct portfolio sorts. Whereas
Moritz and Zimmermann (2016) emphasize the return prediction power
of tree-based sorts, Bryzgalova et al. (2020) emphasize the usefulness of
sorted portfolios themselves as test assets for evaluating asset pricing
models. AP-trees diﬀer from traditional tree-based models in that it
does not learn the tree structure per se, but instead generates it using
median splits with a pre-selected ordering of signals. This is illustrated
on the left side of Figure 3.5 for a three-level tree that is speciﬁed (not
estimated) to split ﬁrst by median value, then again by median value
(i.e., produce a quartile splits), and ﬁnally by median ﬁrm size. AP-trees
introduce “pruning” according to a global Sharpe ratio criterion. In
particular, from the pre-determined tree structure, each node in the
tree constitutes a portfolio. The AP-trees procedure ﬁnds the mean-

58
Return Prediction
Split by Value
Value
Value
Size
Size
Size
Size
1
11
111
1111
1112
112
1121
1122
12
121
1211
1212
122
1221
1222
Split by Value
Value
Size
1
11
12
121
1211
Figure 3: Illustration of pruning with multiple characteristics
The ﬁgure shows sample trees, original and pruned for portfolios of depth 3, and constructed based on size and book-to-market
as the only characteristics. The fully pruned set of portfolios is based on eight trees, where the right ﬁgure illustrates a potential
outcome for one tree.
Figure 3.5: Source: Bryzgalova et al. (2020)
variance eﬃcient combination of node portfolios, imposing an elastic
net penalty on the combination weights. Finally, the procedure discards
any nodes that receive zero weight in the cross-validated optimization,
while the surviving node portfolios are used as test assets in auxiliary
asset pricing analyses. The authors repeat this analysis for many triples
of signals, constructing a variety of pruned AP-trees to use as test
assets. Bryzgalova et al. (2020) highlight the viability of their optimized
portfolio combinations as a candidate stochastic discount factor, linking
it to the literature in Section 5.5.8
Cong et al. (2022) push the frontier of asset pricing tree methods
by introducing the Panel Tree (P-Tree) model, which splits the cross-
section of stock returns based on ﬁrm characteristics to develop a
conditional asset pricing model. At each split, the algorithm selects a
split rule candidate (such as size < 0.2) from the pool of characteristics
(normalized to the range −1 to 1) and a predetermined set of split
thresholds (e.g., -0.6, -0.2, 0.2, 0.6) to form child leaves, each representing
a portfolio of returns. They propose a compelling split criterion based
on an asset pricing objective. The P-tree algorithm terminates when
a pre-determined minimal leaf size or maximal number of leaves is
8Giglio et al. (2021b) point out that test asset selection is a remedy for weak
factors. Therefore, creating AP-trees without pruning is also a reasonable recipe for
constructing many well-diversiﬁed portfolios to serve as test assets which can be
selected to construct hedging portfolios for weak factors.

3.7. Vanilla Neural Networks
59
met. The P-tree procedure yields a one-factor conditional asset pricing
model that retains interpretability and ﬂexibility via a single tree-based
structure.
Tree methods are used in a number of ﬁnancial prediction tasks
beyond return prediction. We brieﬂy discuss three examples: credit risk
prediction, liquidity prediction, and volatility prediction. Correia et al.
(2018) use a basic classiﬁcation tree to forecast credit events (bankruptcy
and default). They ﬁnd that prediction accuracy beneﬁts from a wide
collection of ﬁrm-level risk features, and they demonstrate superior
out-of-sample classiﬁcation accuracy from their model compared to
traditional credit risk models (e.g. Altman, 1968; Ohlson, 1980). Easley
et al. (2020) use random forest models to study the high frequency
dynamics of liquidity and risk in a truly big data setting—tick data for 87
futures markets. They show that a variety of market liquidity measures
(such as Kyle’s lambda, the Amihud measure, and the probability of
informed trading) have substantial predictive power for subsequent
directional moves in risk and liquidity outcomes (including bid-ask
spread, return volatility, and return skewness). Mittnik et al. (2015) use
boosted trees to forecast monthly stock market volatility. They use 84
macro-ﬁnance time series as predictors and use boosting to recursively
construct an ensemble of volatility prediction trees that optimizes the
Gaussian log likelihood for monthly stock returns. The authors ﬁnd large
and statistically signiﬁcant reductions in prediction errors from tree-
based volatility forecasts relative to GARCH and EGARCH benchmark
models.
3.7
Vanilla Neural Networks
Neural networks are perhaps the most popular and most successful
models in machine learning. They have theoretical underpinnings as
“universal approximators” for any smooth predictive function (Hornik
et al., 1989; Cybenko, 1989). They suﬀer, however, from a lack of
transparency and interpretability.
Gu et al. (2020b) analyze predictions from “feed-forward” networks.
We discuss this structure in detail as it lays the groundwork before more
sophisticated architectures such as recurrent and convolutional networks

60
Return Prediction
Output Layer
Input Layer
Hidden Layer 
Output Layer
Input Layer
f
f
f
f
f
Figure 3.6: Neural Networks
Note: This ﬁgure provides diagrams of two simple neural networks with (right) or
without (left) a hidden layer. Pink circles denote the input layer and dark red circles
denote the output layer. Each arrow is associated with a weight parameter. In the
network with a hidden layer, a nonlinear activation function f transforms the inputs
before passing them on to the output.
(discussed later in this review). These consist of an “input layer” of raw
predictors, one or more “hidden layers” that interact and nonlinearly
transform the predictors, and an “output layer” that aggregates hidden
layers into an ultimate outcome prediction.
Figure 3.6 shows two example networks. The left panel shows a
very simple network that has no hidden layers. The predictors (denoted
z1, ..., z4) are weighted by a parameter vector (θ) that includes an inter-
cept and one weight parameter per predictor. These weights aggregate
the signals into the forecast θ0 + P4
k=1 zkθk. As the example makes
clear, without intermediate nodes a neural network is a linear regression
model.
The right panel introduces a hidden layer of ﬁve neurons. A neuron
receives a linear combination of the predictors and feeds it through a non-
linear “activation function” f, then this output is passed to the next layer.
E.g., output from the second neuron is x(1)
2
= f

θ(0)
2,0 + P4
j=1 zjθ(0)
2,j

.
In this example, the results from each neuron are linearly aggregated
into a ﬁnal output forecast:
g(z; θ) = θ(1)
0
+
5
X
j=1
x(1)
j θ(1)
j .
There are many choices for the nonlinear activation function (such

3.7. Vanilla Neural Networks
61
as sigmoid, sine, hyperbolic, softmax, ReLU, and so forth). “Deep”
feed-forward networks introduce additional hidden layers in which non-
linear transformations from a prior hidden layer are combined in a
linear combination and transformed once again via nonlinear activation.
This iterative nonlinear composure produces richer and more highly
parameterized approximating models.
As in Gu et al. (2020b), a deep feed-forward neural network has
the following general formula. Let K(l) denote the number of neurons
in each layer l = 1, ..., L. Deﬁne the output of neuron k in layer l as
x(l)
k . Next, deﬁne the vector of outputs for this layer (augmented to
include a constant, x(l)
0 ) as x(l) = (1, x(l)
1 , ..., x(l)
K(l))′. To initialize the
network, similarly deﬁne the input layer using the raw predictors, x(0) =
(1, z1, ..., zN)′. The recursive output formula for the neural network at
each neuron in layer l > 0 is then
x(l)
k = f

x(l−1)′θ(l−1)
k

,
(3.16)
with ﬁnal output
g(z; θ) = x(L−1)′θ(L−1).
(3.17)
The number of weight parameters in each hidden layer l is K(l)(1 +
K(l−1)), plus another 1 + K(L−1) weights for the output layer. The ﬁve-
layer network of Gu et al. (2020b), for example, has 30,185 parameters.
Gu et al. (2020b) estimate monthly stock-level panel prediction
models for the CRSP sample from 1957 to 2016. Their raw features
include 94 rank-standardized stock characteristic interacted with eight
macro-ﬁnance time series as well as 74 industry indicators for a total of
920 features. They infer the trade-oﬀs of network depth in the return
forecasting problem by analyzing the performance of networks with
one to ﬁve hidden layers (denoted NN1 through NN5). The monthly
out-of-sample prediction R2 is 0.33%, 0.40%, and 0.36% for NN1, NN3,
and NN5 models, respectively. This compares with an R2 of 0.16% from
a benchmark three signal (size, value, and momentum) linear model
advocated by Lewellen (2015). For the NN3 model, the R2 is notably
higher for large caps at 0.70%, indicating that machine learning is not
merely picking up small scale ineﬃciencies driven by illiquidity. The

62
Return Prediction
out-of-sample R2 rises to 3.40% when forecasting annual returns rather
than monthly, illustrating that the neural networks are also able to
isolate predictable patterns that persist over business cycle frequencies.
Table 3.3: Performance of Machine Learning Portfolios
Panel A: Equal Weights
NN1
NN3
NN5
Pred
Avg
Std
SR
Pred
Avg
Std
SR
Pred
Avg
Std
SR
L
-0.45
-0.78
7.43
-0.36
-0.31
-0.92
7.94
-0.40
-0.08
-0.83
7.92
-0.36
2
0.15
0.22
6.24
0.12
0.22
0.16
6.46
0.09
0.33
0.24
6.64
0.12
3
0.43
0.47
5.55
0.29
0.45
0.44
5.40
0.28
0.51
0.53
5.65
0.32
4
0.64
0.64
5.00
0.45
0.60
0.66
4.83
0.48
0.62
0.59
4.91
0.41
5
0.80
0.80
4.76
0.58
0.73
0.77
4.58
0.58
0.71
0.68
4.56
0.51
6
0.95
0.85
4.63
0.63
0.85
0.81
4.47
0.63
0.80
0.76
4.43
0.60
7
1.12
0.84
4.66
0.62
0.97
0.86
4.62
0.64
0.88
0.88
4.60
0.66
8
1.32
0.88
4.95
0.62
1.12
0.93
4.82
0.67
1.01
0.95
4.90
0.67
9
1.63
1.17
5.62
0.72
1.38
1.18
5.51
0.74
1.25
1.17
5.60
0.73
H
2.43
2.13
7.34
1.00
2.28
2.35
8.11
1.00
2.08
2.27
7.95
0.99
H-L
2.89
2.91
4.72
2.13
2.58
3.27
4.80
2.36
2.16
3.09
4.98
2.15
Panel B: Value Weights
NN1
NN3
NN5
Pred
Avg
Std
SR
Pred
Avg
Std
SR
Pred
Avg
Std
SR
L
-0.38
-0.29
7.02
-0.14
-0.03
-0.43
7.73
-0.19
-0.23
-0.51
7.69
-0.23
2
0.16
0.41
5.89
0.24
0.34
0.30
6.38
0.16
0.23
0.31
6.10
0.17
3
0.44
0.51
5.07
0.35
0.51
0.57
5.27
0.37
0.45
0.54
5.02
0.37
4
0.64
0.70
4.56
0.53
0.63
0.66
4.69
0.49
0.60
0.67
4.47
0.52
5
0.80
0.77
4.37
0.61
0.71
0.69
4.41
0.55
0.73
0.77
4.32
0.62
6
0.95
0.78
4.39
0.62
0.79
0.76
4.46
0.59
0.85
0.86
4.35
0.68
7
1.11
0.81
4.40
0.64
0.88
0.99
4.77
0.72
0.96
0.88
4.76
0.64
8
1.31
0.75
4.86
0.54
1.00
1.09
5.47
0.69
1.11
0.94
5.17
0.63
9
1.58
0.96
5.22
0.64
1.21
1.25
5.94
0.73
1.34
1.02
6.02
0.58
H
2.19
1.52
6.79
0.77
1.83
1.69
7.29
0.80
1.99
1.46
7.40
0.68
H-L
2.57
1.81
5.34
1.17
1.86
2.12
6.13
1.20
2.22
1.97
5.93
1.15
Note: In this table, we report the performance of prediction-sorted portfolios over
the 1987-2016 testing period (trained on data from 1957-1974 and validated on data
from 1975-1986). All stocks are sorted into deciles based on their predicted returns
for the next month. Column “Pred”, “Avg”, “Std”, and “SR” provide the predicted
monthly returns for each decile, the average realized monthly returns, their standard
deviations, and Sharpe ratios, respectively.
Next, Gu et al. (2020b) report decile portfolios sorts based on neural
network monthly return predictions, recreated in Table 3.3. Panel A
reports equal-weight average returns and Panel B reports value-weight
returns. Out-of-sample portfolio returns increases monotonically across

3.7. Vanilla Neural Networks
63
deciles. The quantitative match between predicted returns and average
realized returns using neural networks is impressive. A long-short decile
spread portfolio earns an annualized equal-weight Sharpe ratio of 2.1,
2.4, and 2.2 for NN1, NN3, and NN5, respectively. All three earn
value-weight Sharpe ratios of 1.2. So, while the return prediction R2
is higher for large stocks, the return prediction content of the neural
network models is especially proﬁtable when used to trade small stocks.
Avramov et al. (2022a) corroborate this ﬁnding with a more thorough
investigation of the limits-to-arbitrage that impinge on machine learning
trading strategies. They demonstrate that neural network predictions are
most successful among diﬃcult-to-value and diﬃcult-to-arbitrage stocks.
They ﬁnd that, after adjusting for trading costs and other practical
considerations, neural network-based strategies remain signiﬁcantly
beneﬁcial relative to typical benchmarks. They are highly proﬁtable
(particularly among long positions), have less downside risk, and continue
to perform well in recent data.
As a frame of reference, Gu et al. (2020b)’s replication of Lewellen
(2015)’s three-signal linear model earns an equal-weight Sharpe ratio of
0.8 (0.6 value-weight). This is impressive in its own right, but the large
improvement from neural network predictions emphasizes the important
role of nonlinearities and interactions in expected return models. Figure
3.7 from Gu et al. (2020b) illustrates this fact by plotting the eﬀect of a
few characteristics in their model. It shows how expected returns vary as
pairs of characteristics are varied over their support [-1,1] while holding
all other variables ﬁxed at their median value. The eﬀects reported are
interactions of stock size (mvel1) with short-term reversal (mom1m),
momentum (mom12m), total volatility (retvol) and accrual (acc). For
example, the upper-left ﬁgure shows that the short-term reversal eﬀect
is strongest and is essentially linear among small stocks (blue line).
But among mega-cap stocks (green line), the reversal eﬀect is concave,
manifesting most prominently when past mega-cap returns are strongly
positive.
The models in Gu et al. (2020b) apply to the stock-level panel. Feng
et al. (2018) use a pure time series feed-forward network to forecast ag-
gregate market returns using the Welch-Goyal macro-ﬁnance predictors,
and ﬁnd signiﬁcant out-of-sample R2 gains compared to linear models

64
Return Prediction
mom1m
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-0.6
0
0.6
mvel1=-1
mvel1=-0.5
mvel1=0
mvel1=0.5
mvel1=1
mom12m
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-0.6
0
0.6
retvol
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-0.6
0
0.6
acc
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-0.6
0
0.6
Figure 3.7: Expected Returns and Characteristic Interactions (NN3)
Note: Sensitivity of expected monthly percentage returns (vertical axis) to interactions
eﬀects for mvel1 with mom1m, mom12m, retvol, and acc in model NN3 (holding all
other covariates ﬁxed at their median values).
(including those with penalization and dimension reduction).
3.8
Comparative Analyses
A number of recent papers conduct comparisons of machine learning
return prediction models in various data sets. In the ﬁrst such study,
Gu et al. (2020b) perform a comparative analysis of the major machine
learning methods outlined above in the stock-month panel prediction
setting. Table 3.4 recreates their main result for out-of-sample panel
return prediction R2 across models. This comparative analysis helps
establish a number of new empirical facts for ﬁnancial machine learning.
First, the simple linear model with many predictors (“OLS” in the
table) suﬀers in terms of forecast accuracy, failing to outperform a naive
forecast of zero. Gu et al. (2020b) deﬁne their predictive R2 relative to
a naive forecast of zero rather than the more standard benchmark of

3.8. Comparative Analyses
65
OLS
OLS-3
PLS
PCR
ENet
GLM
RF
GBRT
NN1
NN2
NN3
NN4
NN5
+H
+H
+H
+H
+H
All
-3.46
0.16
0.27
0.26
0.11
0.19
0.33
0.34
0.33
0.39
0.40
0.39
0.36
Top 1000
-11.28
0.31
-0.14
0.06
0.25
0.14
0.63
0.52
0.49
0.62
0.70
0.67
0.64
Bottom 1000
-1.30
0.17
0.42
0.34
0.20
0.30
0.35
0.32
0.38
0.46
0.45
0.47
0.42
Table 3.4: Monthly Out-of-sample Stock-level Prediction Performance (Percentage
R2
oos)
Note: In this table, Gu et al. (2020b) report monthly R2
oos for the entire panel of
stocks using OLS with all variables (OLS), OLS using only size, book-to-market, and
momentum (OLS-3), PLS, PCR, elastic net (ENet), generalize linear model (GLM),
random forest (RF), gradient boosted regression trees (GBRT), and neural networks
with one to ﬁve layers (NN1–NN5). “+H” indicates the use of Huber loss instead
of the l2 loss. R2
oos’s are also reported within subsamples that include only the top
1,000 stocks or bottom 1,000 stocks by market value.
the historical sample mean return, noting:
Predicting future excess stock returns with historical aver-
ages typically underperforms a naive forecast of zero by a
large margin. That is, the historical mean stock return is so
noisy that it artiﬁcially lowers the bar for “good” forecasting
performance. We avoid this pitfall by benchmarking our R2
against a forecast value of zero. To give an indication of
the importance of this choice, when we benchmark model
predictions against historical mean stock returns, the out-
of-sample monthly R2 of all methods rises by roughly three
percentage points.9
Regularizing with either dimension reduction or shrinkage improves
the R2 of the linear model to around 0.3% per month. Nonlinear models,
particularly neural networks, help even further, especially among large
cap stocks. Nonlinearities outperform a low-dimensional linear model
that uses only three highly selected predictive signals from the literature
(“OLS-3” in the table).
Nonlinear models also provide large incremental beneﬁts in eco-
nomic terms. Table 3.5 recreates Table 8 of Gu et al. (2020b), showing
9He et al. (2022a) propose an alternative cross-section out-of-sample R2 that
uses the cross section mean return as the naïve forecast.

66
Return Prediction
OLS-3
PLS
PCR
ENet
GLM
RF
GBRT
NN1
NN2
NN3
NN4
NN5
+H
+H
+H
+H
Risk-adjusted Performance (Value Weighted)
Mean Ret.
0.94
1.02
1.22
0.60
1.06
1.62
0.99
1.81
1.92
1.97
2.26
2.12
FF5+Mom α
0.39
0.24
0.62
-0.23
0.38
1.20
0.66
1.20
1.33
1.52
1.76
1.43
t-stats
2.76
1.09
2.89
-0.89
1.68
3.95
3.11
4.68
4.74
4.92
6.00
4.71
R2
78.60
34.95
39.11
28.04
30.78
13.43
20.68
27.67
25.81
20.84
20.47
18.23
IR
0.54
0.21
0.57
-0.17
0.33
0.77
0.61
0.92
0.93
0.96
1.18
0.92
Risk-adjusted Performance (Equally Weighted)
Mean Ret.
1.34
2.08
2.45
2.11
2.31
2.38
2.14
2.91
3.31
3.27
3.33
3.09
FF5+Mom α
0.83
1.40
1.95
1.32
1.79
1.88
1.87
2.60
3.07
3.02
3.08
2.78
t(α)
6.64
5.90
9.92
4.77
8.09
6.66
8.19
10.51
11.66
11.70
12.28
10.68
R2
84.26
26.27
40.50
20.89
21.25
19.91
11.19
13.98
10.60
9.63
11.57
14.54
IR
1.30
1.15
1.94
0.93
1.58
1.30
1.60
2.06
2.28
2.29
2.40
2.09
Table 3.5: Risk-adjusted Performance, Drawdowns, and Turnover of Machine Learn-
ing Portfolios
Note: The tables reports average monthly returns in percent as well as alphas,
information ratios (IR), and R2 with respect to the Fama-French ﬁve-factor model
augmented to include the momentum factor.
out-of-sample performance of long-short decile spread portfolios sorted
on return forecasts from each model. First, it is interesting to note
that models with relative small out-of-sample R2 generates signiﬁcant
trading gains, in terms of alpha and information ratio relative to the
Fama-French six-factor model (including a momentum factor). This is
consistent with the Kelly et al. (2022a) point that R2 is an unreliable
diagnostic of the economic value of a return prediction; they instead rec-
ommend judging ﬁnancial machine learning methods based on economic
criteria (such as trading strategy Sharpe ratio). Nonlinear models in
Table 3.5 deliver the best economic value in terms of trading strategy
performance.
Subsequent papers conduct similar comparative analyses in other
asset classes. Choi et al. (2022) analyze the same models as Gu et al.
(2020b) in international stock markets. They reach similar conclusions
that the best performing models are nonlinear. Interestingly, they demon-
strate the viability of transfer learning. In particular, a model trained
on US data delivers signiﬁcant out-of-sample performance when used to
forecast international stock returns. Relatedly, Jiang et al. (2018) ﬁnd
largely similar patterns between stock returns and ﬁrm characteristics

3.8. Comparative Analyses
67
OLS
PCA
PLS
Lasso
Ridge
ENet
RF
FFN
LSTM
Combination
R2
oos
−3.36
2.07
2.03
1.85
1.89
1.87
2.19
2.37
2.28
2.09
Avg. Returns
0.16
0.51
0.63
0.39
0.33
0.43
0.79
0.75
0.79
0.67
Table 3.6: Machine Learning Comparative Bond Return Prediction (Bali et al.,
2020)
Note: The ﬁrst row reports out-of-sample R2 in percentage for the entire panel of
corporate bonds using the 43 bond characteristics (from Table 2 of Bali et al. (2020)).
The second row reports the average out-of-sample monthly percentage returns of
value-weighted decile spread bond portfolios sorted on machine learning return
forecasts (from Table 3 of Bali et al. (2020)).
in China using PCR and PLS. Recently, Leippold et al. (2022) compare
machine learning models for predicting Chinese equity returns and
highlight how liquidity, retail investor participation, and state-owned
enterprises play a pronounced role in Chinese market behavior.
Ait-Sahalia et al. (2022) study the predictability of high-frequency
returns (and other quantities like duration and volume) using machine
learning methods. They construct 13 predictors over 9 diﬀerent time
windows, resulting in a total of 117 variables. They experiment with
S&P 100 index components over a sample of two years and ﬁnd that all
methods have very similar performance, except for OLS. The improve-
ments from a nonlinear method like random forest or boosted trees are
limited for most cases when compared with lasso.
Bali et al. (2020) and He et al. (2021) conduct comparative analyses
of machine learning methods for US corporate bond return prediction.
The predictive signals used by Bali et al. (2020) include a large set of 43
bond characteristics such as issuance size, credit rating, duration, and
so forth. The models they study are the same as Gu et al. (2020b) plus
an LSTM network (we discuss LSTM in the next subsection). Table
3.6 reports results of Bali et al. (2020). Their comparison of machine
learning models in terms of predictive R2 and decile spread portfolio
returns largely corroborate the conclusions of Gu et al. (2020b). The
unregularized linear model is the worst performer. Penalization and
dimension reduction substantially improve linear model performance.
And nonlinear models are the best performers overall.
In addition, Bali et al. (2020) investigate a machine learning predic-

68
Return Prediction
tion framework that respects no-arbitrage implications for consistency
between a ﬁrm’s equity and debt prices. This allows them to form
predictions across the capital structure of a ﬁrm—leveraging equity
information to predict bond returns. They ﬁnd that
“once we impose the Merton (1974) model structure, equity
characteristics provide signiﬁcant improvement above and
beyond bond characteristics for future bond returns, whereas
the incremental power of equity characteristics for predicting
bond returns are quite limited in the reduced-form approach
when such economic structure is not imposed.”
This is a good example of the complementarity between machine learning
and economic structure, echoing the argument of Israel et al. (2020).
Lastly, Bianchi et al. (2021) conduct a comparative analysis of ma-
chine learning models for predicting US government bond returns. This
is a pure time series environment (cf. comparative analyses discussed
above which study panel return data). Nonetheless, Bianchi et al. (2021)
reach similar conclusions regarding the relative merits of penalized and
dimension-reduced linear models over unconstrained linear models, and
of nonlinear models over linear models.
3.9
More Sophisticated Neural Networks
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are popular models for capturing
complex dynamics in sequence data. They are, in essence, highly param-
eterized nonlinear state space models, making them naturally interesting
candidates for time series prediction problems. A promising use of RNNs
is to extend the restrictive model speciﬁcation given by (3.2) to capture
longer range dependence between returns and characteristics. Speciﬁ-
cally, we consider a general recurrent model for the expected return of
stock i at time t:
Et[Ri,t+1] = g⋆(hi,t),
(3.18)
where hi,t is a vector of hidden state variables that depend on zi,t and
its past history.
The canonical RNN assumes that
g⋆(hi,t) = σ(c + V hi,t),
hi,t = tanh(b + Whi,t−1 + Uzi,t),

3.9. More Sophisticated Neural Networks
69
where b, c, U, V , and W are unknown parameters, and σ(·) is a sigmoid
function. The above equation includes just one layer of hidden states.
It is straightforward to stack multiple hidden state layers together to
construct a deep RNN that accommodates more complex sequences.
For instance, we can write h(0)
i,t = zi,t, and for 1 ≤l ≤L, we have
g⋆(h(L)
i,t ) = σ(c + V h(L)
i,t ),
h(l)
i,t = tanh(b + Wh(l)
i,t−1 + Uh(l−1)
i,t
).
The canonical RNN struggles to capture long-range dependence. Its
telescoping structure implies exponentially decaying weights of lagged
states on current states so the long-range gradient ﬂow vanishes rapidly
in the learning process.
Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) propose a special form of RNN
known as the long-short-term-memory (LSTM) model. It accommodates
a mixture of short-range and long-range dependence through a series
of gate functions that control information ﬂow from ht−1 to ht (we
abbreviate the dependence on i for notation simplicity):
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct),
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙˜ct,
(3.19)
where ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication, ct is so-called cell state,
it, ot, and ft are “gates” that are themselves sigmoid functions of zt
and ht−1:
at = σ(Wazt + Uaht−1 + ba),
(3.20)
where a can be either gate i, o, or f, and Wa, Ua, and ba are parameters.
The cell state works like a conveyor belt, representing the “memory”
unit of the model. Past values of ct−1 contributes additively to ct (barring
from some adjustment by ft). This mechanism enables the network to
memorize long-range information. Meanwhile, ft controls how much
information from the past to forget, hence it is called the forget gate.
Fresh information from ht−1 and zt arrive through ˜ct:
˜ct = tanh(Wczt + Ucht−1 + bc),
(3.21)
which is injected into the memory cell ct. The input gate, it, controls the
content of ˜ct to be memorized. Finally, ot determines which information
is passed on to the next hidden state ht, and is hence called output gate.

70
Return Prediction
Intuitively, not all information memorized by ct needs be extracted for
prediction (based on ht).
Despite their usefulness for time series modeling, LSTM and related
methods (like the gated recurrent unit of Cho et al., 2014) have seen
little application in the empirical ﬁnance literature. We have discussed
a notable exception by Bali et al. (2020) above for predicting corporate
bond returns. (Guijarro-Ordonez et al., 2022) use RNN architectures to
predict daily stock returns. Another example is Cong et al. (2020), who
compare simple feed-forward networks to LSTM and other recurrent
neural networks in monthly stock return prediction. They ﬁnd that
predictions from their LSTM speciﬁcation outperform feed-forward
counterparts, though the description of their speciﬁcations is limited and
their analysis is conducted more in line with the norms of the computer
science literature. Indeed, there is a fairly voluminous computer science
literature using a wide variety of neural networks to predict stock
returns (e.g. Sezer et al., 2020). The standard empirical analysis in this
literature aims to demonstrate basic proof of concept through small scale
illustrative experiments and tend to focus on high frequencies (daily
or intra-daily, rather than the perhaps more economically interesting
frequencies of months or years) or tend to analyze one or a few assets at
a time (as opposed to a more representative cross section of assets).10
This is in contrast to the more extensive empirical analyses common in
the ﬁnance and economics literature that tend to analyze monthly or
annual data for large collections of assets.
3.10
Return Prediction Models For “Alternative” Data
Alternative (or more colloquially, “alt”) data has become a popular
topic in the asset management industry, and recent research has made
strides developing machine learning models for some types of alt data.
We discuss two examples in this section, text data and image data, and
some supervised machine learning models customized to these alt data
sources.
10Examples include Rather et al. (2015), Singh and Srivastava (2017), Chong
et al. (2017), Bao et al. (2017).

3.10. Return Prediction Models For “Alternative” Data
71
3.10.1
Textual Analysis
Textual analysis is among the most exciting and fastest growing frontiers
in ﬁnance and economics research. The early literature evolved from
“close” manual reading by researchers (e.g. Cowles, 1933) to dictionary-
based sentiment scoring methods (e.g. Tetlock, 2007). This literature is
surveyed by Das et al. (2014), Gentzkow et al. (2019), and Loughran
and McDonald (2020). In this section, we focus on text-based supervised
learning with application to ﬁnancial prediction.
Jegadeesh and Wu (2013), Ke et al. (2019), and Garcia et al. (2022)
are examples of supervised learning models customized to the problem
of return prediction using a term count or “bag of words” (BoW)
representation of text documents. Ke et al. (2019) describe a joint
probability model for the generation of a news article about a stock
and that stock’s subsequent return. An article is indexed by a single
underlying “sentiment” parameter that determines the article’s tilt
toward good or bad news about the stock. This same parameter predicts
the direction of the stock’s future return. From a training sample of
news articles and associated returns, Ke et al. (2019) estimate the set
of most highly sentiment-charged (i.e., most return-predictive) terms
and their associated sentiment values (i.e., their predictive coeﬃcients).
In essence, they provide a data-driven methodology for constructing
sentiment dictionaries that are customized to speciﬁc supervised learning
tasks.
Their method, called “SESTM” (Sentiment Extraction via Screening
and Topic Modeling), has three central components. The ﬁrst step
isolates the most relevant terms from a very large vocabulary of terms
via predictive correlation screening. The second step assigns term-speciﬁc
sentiment weights using a supervised topic model. The third step uses
the estimated topic model to assign article-level sentiment scores via
penalized maximum likelihood.
SESTM is easy and cheap to compute. The model itself is analytically
tractable and the estimator boils down to two core equations. Their
modeling approach emphasizes simplicity and interpretability. Thus, it
is “white box” and easy to inspect and interpret, in contrast to many
state-of-the-art NLP models built around powerful yet opaque neural

72
Return Prediction
Negative Words
Positive Words
Figure 3.8: Sentiment-charged Words
Note: This ﬁgure reports the list of words in the sentiment-charged set S. Font size
of a word is proportional to its average sentiment tone over all 17 training samples.
network embedding speciﬁcations. As an illustration, Figure 3.8 reports
coeﬃcient estimates on the tokens that are the strongest predictors
of returns in the form of a word cloud. The cloud is split into tokens
with positive or negative coeﬃcients, and the size of each token is
proportional to the magnitude of its estimated predictive coeﬃcient.
Ke et al. (2019) devise a series of trading strategies to demon-
strate the potent return predictive power of SESTM. In head-to-head
comparisons, SESTM signiﬁcantly outperforms RavenPack (a leading
commercial sentiment scoring vendor used by large asset managers) and
dictionary-based methods such as Loughran and McDonald (2011).
A number of papers apply supervised learning models to BoW text
data to predict other ﬁnancial outcomes. Manela and Moreira (2017)
use support vector regression to predict market volatility. Davis et al.
(2020) use 10-K risk factor disclosure to understand ﬁrms’ diﬀerential
return responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, leveraging Taddy (2013)’s
multinomial inverse regression methodology. Kelly et al. (2018) introduce
a method called hurdle distributed multinomial regression (HDMR) to

3.10. Return Prediction Models For “Alternative” Data
73
improve count model speciﬁcations and use it to build a text-based
index measuring health of the ﬁnancial intermediary sector.
These analyses proceed in two general steps. Step 1 decides on the
numerical representation of the text data. Step 2 uses the representations
as data in an econometric model to describe some economic phenomenon
(e.g., asset returns, volatility, and macroeconomic fundamentals in the
references above).
The ﬁnancial text representations referenced above have some limi-
tations. First, all of these examples begin from a BoW representation,
which is overly simplistic and only accesses the information in text that
is conveyable by term usage frequency. It sacriﬁces nearly all informa-
tion that is conveyed through word ordering or contextual relationships
between terms. Second, the ultra-high dimensionality of BoW repre-
sentations leads to statistical ineﬃciencies—Step 2 econometric models
must include many parameters to process all these terms despite many
of the terms conveying negligible information. Dimension reductions like
LDA and correlation screening are beneﬁcial because they mitigate the
ineﬃciency of BoW. However, they are derived from BoW and thus do
not avoid the information loss from relying on term counts in the ﬁrst
place. Third, and more subtly, the dimension-reduced representations
are corpus speciﬁc. For example, when Bybee et al. (2020) build their
topic model, the topics are estimated only from The Wall Street Journal,
despite the fact that many topics are general language structures and
may be better inferred by using additional text outside of their sample.
Jiang et al. (2023) move the literature a step further by constructing
reﬁned news text representations derived from so-called “large language
models” (LLMs). They then use these representations to improve models
of expected stock returns. LLMs are trained on large text data sets that
span many sources and themes. This training is conducted by specialized
research teams that perform the Herculean feat of estimating a general
purpose language model with astronomical parameterization on truly
big text data. LLM’s have billions of parameters (or more) and are
trained on billions of text examples (including huge corpora of complete
books and massive portions of the internet). But for each LLM, this
estimation feat is performed once, then the estimated model is made
available for distribution to be deployed by non-specialized researchers

74
Return Prediction
in downstream tasks.
In other words, the LLM delegates Step 1 of the procedure above
to the handful of experts in the world that can best execute it. A Step
2 econometric model can then be built around LLM output. Like LDA
(or even BoW), the output of a foundation model is a numerical vector
representation (or “embedding”) of a document. A non-specialized
researcher obtains this output by feeding the document of interest
through software (which is open-source in many cases). The main
beneﬁt of an LLMS in Step 1 is that it provides more sophisticated and
well-trained text representations than used in the literature referenced
above. This beneﬁt comes from the expressivity of heavy nonlinear model
parameterizations and from training on extensive language examples
across many domains, throughout human history, and in a wide variety
of languages. The transferability of LLMs make this unprecedented
scale of knowledge available for ﬁnance research.
Jiang et al. (2023) analyze return predictions based on a news text
processed through a number of LLMs including Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformer (BERT) of Devlin et al. (2018),
Generative Pre-trained Transformers (GPT) of Radford et al. (2019),
and Open Pre-trained Transformers (OPT) by Zhang et al. (2022). They
ﬁnd that predictions from pre-trained LLM embeddings outperform
prevailing text-based machine learning return predictions in terms
of out-of-sample trading strategy performance, and that the superior
performance of LLMs stems from the fact that they can more successfully
capture contextual meaning in documents.
3.10.2
Image Analysis
Much of modern machine learning has evolved around the task of image
analysis and computer vision, with large gains in image-related tasks
deriving from the development of convolutional neural network (CNN)
models. Jiang et al. (2022) introduce CNN image analysis techniques
to the return prediction problem.
A large ﬁnance literature investigates how past price patterns fore-
cast future returns. The philosophical perspective underpinning these
analyses is most commonly that of a hypothesis test. The researcher

3.10. Return Prediction Models For “Alternative” Data
75
formulates a model of return prediction based on price trends—such as
a regression of one-month-ahead returns on the average return over the
previous twelve months—as a test of the weak-form eﬃcient markets
null hypothesis. Yet it is diﬃcult to see in the literature a speciﬁc
alternative hypothesis. Said diﬀerently, the price-based return predic-
tors studied in the literature are by and large ad hoc and discovered
through human-intensive statistical learning that has taken place be-
hind the curtain of the academic research process. Jiang et al. (2022)
reconsider the idea of price-based return predictability from a diﬀerent
philosophical perspective founded on machine learning. Given recent
strides in understanding how human behavior inﬂuences price patterns
(e.g. Barberis and Thaler, 2003; Barberis, 2018), it is reasonable to
expect that prices contain subtle and complex patterns about which
it may be diﬃcult to develop speciﬁc testable hypotheses. Jiang et al.
(2022) devise a systematic machine learning approach to elicit return
predictive patterns that underly price data, rather than testing speciﬁc
ad hoc hypotheses.
The challenge for such an exploration is balancing ﬂexible mod-
els that can detect potentially subtle patterns against the desire to
maintain tractability and interpretability of those models. To navigate
this balance, Jiang et al. (2022) represent historical prices as an image
and use well-developed CNN machinery for image analysis to search
for predictive patterns. Their images include daily opening, high, low,
and closing prices (ofter referred to as an “OHLC” chart) overlaid
with a multi-day moving average of closing prices and a bar chart for
daily trading volume (see Figure 3.9 for a related example from Yahoo
Finance).
A CNN is designed to automatically extract features from images
that are predictive for the supervising labels (which are future realized
returns in the case of Jiang et al., 2022). The raw data consists of
pixel value arrays. A CNN typically has a few core building blocks that
convert the pixel data into predictive features. The building blocks are
stacked together in various telescoping conﬁgurations depending on the
application at hand. They spatially smooth image contents to reduce
noise and accentuate shape contours to maximize correlation of images
with their labels. Parameters of the building blocks are learned as part

76
Return Prediction
Figure 3.9: Tesla OHLC Chart from Yahoo! Finance
Note: OHLC chart for Tesla stock with 20-day moving average price line and daily
volume bars. Daily data from January 1, 2020 to August 18, 2020.
of the model estimation process.
Each building block consists of three operations: convolution, ac-
tivation, and pooling. “Convolution” is a spatial analogue of kernel
smoothing for time series. Convolution scans through the image and,
for each element in the image matrix, produces a summary of image
contents in the immediately surrounding area. The convolution oper-
ates through a set of learned “ﬁlters,” which are low dimension kernel
weighting matrices that average nearby matrix elements.
The second operation in a building block, “activation,” is a nonlinear
transformation applied element-wise to the output of a convolution ﬁlter.
For example, a “Leaky ReLU” activation uses a convex piecewise linear
function, which can be thought of as sharpening the resolution of certain
convolution ﬁlter output.
The ﬁnal operation in a building block is “max-pooling.” This oper-
ation uses a small ﬁlter that scans over the input matrix and returns
the maximum value the elements entering the ﬁlter at each location in
the image. Max-pooling acts as both a dimension reduction device and
as a de-noising tool.
Figure 3.10 illustrates how convolution, activation, and max-pooling
combine to form a basic building block for a CNN model. By stacking
many of these blocks together, the network ﬁrst creates representations

3.10. Return Prediction Models For “Alternative” Data
77
Figure 3.10: Diagram of a Building Block
Note: A building block of the CNN model consists of a convolutional layer with 3 × 3
ﬁlter, a leaky ReLU layer, and a 2 × 2 max-pooling layer. In this toy example, the
input has size 16 × 8 with 2 channels. To double the depth of the input, 4 ﬁlters
are applied, which generates the output with 4 channels. The max-pooling layer
shrinks the ﬁrst two dimensions (height and width) of the input by half and keeps
the same depth. Leaky ReLU keeps the same size of the previous input. In general,
with input of size h × w × d, the output has size h/2 × w/2 × 2d. One exception is
the ﬁrst building block of each CNN model that takes the grey-scale image as input:
the input has depth 1 and the number of CNN ﬁlters is 32, boosting the depth of
the output to 32.
of small components of the image then gradually assembles them into
representations of larger areas. The output from the last building block
is ﬂattened into a vector and each element is treated as a feature in
a standard, fully connected feed-forward layer for the ﬁnal prediction
step.11
Jiang et al. (2022) train a panel CNN model to predict the direction
of future stock returns using daily US stock data from 1993 to 2019. A
weekly rebalanced long-short decile spread trading strategy based on
the CNN-based probability of a positive price change earns an out-of-
sample annualized Sharpe ratio of 7.2 on an equal-weighted basis and
1.7 on a value-weighted basis. This outperforms well known price trend
strategies—various forms of momentum and reversal—by a large and
signiﬁcant margin. They show that the image representation is a key
driver of the model’s success, as other time series neural network speci-
ﬁcations have diﬃculty matching the image CNN’s performance. Jiang
11Ch. 9 of Goodfellow et al. (2016) provide a more general introduction to CNN.

78
Return Prediction
et al. (2022) note that their strategy may be partially approximated by
replacing the CNN forecast with a simpler signal. In particular, a stock
whose latest close price is near the bottom of its high-low range in recent
days tends to appreciate in the subsequent week. This pattern, which is
not previously studied in the literature, is detected from image data by
the CNN and is stable over time and across market size segments and
across countries.
Glaeser et al. (2018) study the housing market using images of
residential real estate properties. They use a pre-trained CNN model
(Resnet-101 from He et al., 2016) to convert images into a feature vector
for each property, which they then condense further using principal
components, and ﬁnally the components are added to an otherwise
standard hedonic house pricing model. Glaeser et al. (2018) ﬁnd that
property data derived from images improves out-of-sample ﬁt of the he-
donic model. Aubry et al. (2022) predict art auction prices via a neural
network using artwork images accompanied by non-visual artwork char-
acteristics, and use their model to document a number of informational
ineﬃciencies in the art market. Obaid and Pukthuanthong (2022) apply
CNN to classify photos on the Wall Street Journal and construct a daily
investor sentiment index, which predicts market return reversals and
trading volume. The association is strongest among stocks with more
severe limits-to-arbitrage and during periods of elevated risk. They also
ﬁnd that photos convey alternative information to news text.12
12Relatedly, Deng et al. (2022) propose a theoretical model to rationalize how the
graphical content of 10-K reports aﬀects stock returns.
