5
Optimal Portfolios
In this section, we discuss and analyze machine learning approaches
to portfolio choice. The portfolio choice problem lies at the heart of
ﬁnance. It aims for eﬃcient allocation of investor resources to achieve
growth-optimal savings, and all major problems in asset pricing have an
intimate association with it. Under weak economic assumptions (such as
the absence of arbitrage), the mean-variance eﬃcient portfolio (MVE) in
an economy is a tradable representation of the stochastic discount factor
(SDF), and thus summarizes the way market participants trade oﬀrisk
and return to arrive at equilibrium prices (Hansen and Richard, 1987).
Likewise, individual assets’ exposures to the MVE portfolio map one-
for-one into assets expected returns, meaning that the MVE amounts to
a one-factor beta pricing model that explains cross-sectional diﬀerences
in average returns (Roll, 1977). And, in the return prediction problem
analyzed in Section 3, prediction performance is ubiquitously evaluated
in terms of the beneﬁts it confers in optimal portfolios.
There are many statistical approaches available for pursuing optimal
portfolios. All approaches combine aspects of the distributional prop-
erties of assets (their risk and reward) and investors’ preferences over
the risk-return tradeoﬀ. The seminal Markowitz (1952) problem endows
105

106
Optimal Portfolios
investors with knowledge of the return distribution.1 Without the need
to estimate this distribution, portfolio choice is a one-step problem of
utility maximization. Invoking Hayek’s quote from the introduction,
“if we command complete knowledge of available means, the problem
which remains is purely one of logic.” This, once again, is emphatically
not the economic problem the investor faces. The investor’s portfolio
choice problem in inextricably tied to estimation, which is necessary
to confront their lack of knowledge about the return distribution. The
investor makes portfolio decisions with highly imperfect information.
Since Markowitz, a massive literature proposes methodological tools
to solve the estimation problem and arrive at beneﬁcial portfolios. It is
a stubborn problem whose nuances often thwart clever methodological
innovations. Practical success hinges on an ability to inform the utility
objective with limited data. In other words, the portfolio problem is
ripe for machine learning solutions.
An emergent literature proposes new solutions rooted in machine
learning ideas of shrinkage, model selection, and ﬂexible parameteriza-
tion. First, machine learning forecasts, derived from purely statistical
considerations (such as return or risk prediction models) may be plugged
into the portfolio choice problem and treated as known quantities. An
investor that treats the estimation and portfolio objectives in isolation,
however, is behaving suboptimally. Estimation noise acts as a source of
risk for the investor’s portfolio, so a complete segregation of the esti-
mation problem unnecessarily sacriﬁces utility. Intuitively, the investor
can do better by understanding the properties of estimation noise and
accounting for it in their risk-return tradeoﬀcalculations. This calls for
integrated consideration of estimation and utility optimization, leading
once again to problem formulations that are attractively addressed with
machine learning methods. We begin our discussion by illustrating the
limitations of naive solutions that segregate the estimation and utility
maximization problems. This provides a foundational understanding
1There is a substantial theoretical literature that extends the Markowitz problem
with sophisticated forms of preferences, return distributions, portfolio constraints, and
market frictions, while maintaining the assumption that investors have all necessary
knowledge of the return distribution. Brandt (2010) and Fabozzi et al. (2010) survey
portions of this literature.

5.1. “Plug-in” Portfolios
107
upon which we build our discussion of machine learning tools that
improve portfolio choice solutions.
5.1
“Plug-in” Portfolios
We begin with an illuminating derivation from Kan and Zhou (2007)
who analyze the impact of parameter estimation in a tractable portfolio
choice problem. The one period return on N assets in excess of the risk
free rate, Rt, is an i.i.d. normal vector with ﬁrst and second moments
µ ∈RN and Σ ∈RN×N. Investor attitudes are summarized by quadratic
utility with risk aversion γ, and the investor seeks a portfolio of risky
assets w ∈RN (in combination with the risk-free asset) to maximize
one-period expected utility:
E[U(w)|µ, Σ] = w′µ −γ
2w′Σw.
(5.1)
When the distribution of returns is known, the utility maximizing
portfolio solution is
w∗= 1
γ Σ−1µ.
(5.2)
Once we account for the reality of imperfect knowledge of the return
distribution, investors must decide how to use available information in
order to optimize the utility they derive from their portfolio. We assume
that investors have at their disposal an i.i.d. sample of T observations
drawn from the aforementioned return distribution.
A simple and common approach to portfolio choice treats the statis-
tical objective of estimating return distributions in isolation. First, the
investor infers the mean and covariance of returns while disregarding
the utility speciﬁcation. Second, the investor treats estimates bµ and bΣ
as the true return moments and, given these, selects portfolio weights to
optimize utility. This is known colloquially as the “plug-in” estimator,
because it leads to a solution that replaces inputs to the solution (5.2)
with estimated counterparts
bw = 1
γ
bΣ−1bµ.
(5.3)
The motivation of the plug-in solution comes from the fact that, if
bµ and bΣ are consistent estimates, then bw is also consistent for w∗. It

108
Optimal Portfolios
oﬀers a simple and direct use of machine learning forecasts to achieve
the desired economic end. While consistency of bw can be an attractive
theoretical property, rarely do we have suﬃcient data for convergence
properties to kick-in. When N is large, consistency is in peril. Thus,
unfortunately, the plug-in portfolio solution has a tendency to perform
poorly in practice, and is disastrous in settings where the number of
assets begins to approach the number of training observations (Jobson
and Korkie, 1980; Michaud, 1989).
Kan and Zhou (2007) connect the portfolio estimation problem
to statistical decision theory by noting that the diﬀerence in investor
utility arising from the “true” optimal portfolio (w∗) versus the plug-in
portfolio ( bw) can be treated as an economic loss function with expected
value
E[L(w∗, bw)|µ, Σ] = U(w∗) −E[U( bw)|µ, Σ].
(5.4)
This is the well known statistical “risk function,” which in the current
environment can be viewed as the certainty equivalent cost of using a
suboptimal portfolio weight.
Suppose the investor estimates µ and Σ using the sample suﬃcient
statistics
bµ = 1
T
T
X
t=1
Rt,
bΣ = 1
T
T
X
t=1
(Rt −bµ)(Rt −bµ)′,
then Kan and Zhou (2007) show that the risk function of the plug-in
portfolio is
E[L(w∗, bw)|µ, Σ] = a1
SR2
2γ + a2
(5.5)
where SR2 is the squared Sharpe ratio of the true optimal strategy w∗
and (a1, a2) are constants that depend only on the number of sample
observations T and the number of assets N.2 The formula shows that
the expected loss is zero for w∗and is strictly positive for any other
weight. Holding N ﬁxed, both a1 and a2 approach zero as T increases,
suggesting that the loss is inconsequential when T is large relative to
2The explicit formulae are given by a1 = 1−
T
T −N−2
h
2 −
T (T −2)
(T −N−1)(T −N−4)
i
, a2 =
NT (T −2)
(T −N−1)(T −N−2)(T −N−4).

5.1. “Plug-in” Portfolios
109
N. Holding T ﬁxed, both a1 and a2 are increasing in N, meaning that
the loss becomes more severe when there are more parameters (more
assets), all else equal. And the investor suﬀers a bigger loss when the
Sharpe ratio is higher or risk aversion is lower as both of these lead the
investor to tilt toward risky assets, which in turn increases the investor’s
exposure to estimation uncertainty.
Equation (5.5) makes it possible to quantify the utility cost of the
plug-in estimator in reasonable calibrations. These costs suggest large
utility shortfalls for investors that unduly rely on consistency properties
of bw. But beyond its high dimensional challenge, a glaring disadvantage
of the plug-in solution is its inadmissibility. Other portfolio rules, such
as those based on shrinkage or Bayesian decision theoretic approaches,
improve expected out-of-sample performance for any values of the true
moments µ and Σ. The plug-in estimator is in this sense an especially
unattractive portfolio solution. Its inadmissibility stems from the failure
to account for dependence of end-use utility on parameter estimation.
By placing their analysis in a decision theoretical framework, Kan
and Zhou (2007) next provide a straightforward demonstration that
investors have tools at their disposal to mitigate out-of-sample utility
loss and easily improve over the plug-in portfolio. In particular, an
investor can understand ex ante how estimation uncertainty impacts
their out-of-sample utility, and how she can internalize this impact with
modiﬁed portfolio rules that reduce the deleterious eﬀects of estimation
noise. Kan and Zhou (2007) demonstrate plug-in portfolio inadmissibility
by proving that simple portfolio tweaks (like tilting the plug-in solution
toward a heavier weight in the risk-free asset or mixing it with the
plug-in minimum variance portfolio) produce higher expected utility for
any value of µ and Σ. This insight is the essence of statistical decision
theory—outcomes are improved by integrating aspects of the investor’s
utility objective into the statistical problem of weight estimation, rather
than treating estimation and utility maximization as distinct problems.3
3There is a large literature analyzing portfolio choice through a Bayesian and
economic decision theoretical lens (see the survey of Avramov and Zhou (2010)).
Early examples such as Jorion (1986) and Frost and Savarino (1986) demonstrate
the utility beneﬁts conferred by Bayes-Stein shrinkage solutions. Other contributions
in this area use informative and economically motivated priors (Black and Litterman,

110
Optimal Portfolios
But the decision theoretical approach also gives rise to a paradox.
The problem formulation above is extraordinary simple. Returns are i.i.d.
normal. Preferences are quadratic. There is no aspect of the problem
that is ambiguous or unspeciﬁed. It would seem, then, that any solution
to this problem (decision theoretical or otherwise) must be similarly
clear cut and unambiguous. But this is not the case! To see this, let
us take stock of what each assumption buys us. The i.i.d. normality
assumption implies that sample means and covariances are suﬃcient
statistics for the investor’s information set (the sample of T return
observations). From this we know that any eﬀective solution to the
quadratic utility problem should depend on data through these two
statistics and no others, so we know to restrict solutions to the form
bw = f(bµ, bΣ).
(5.6)
Next, quadratic utility plus i.i.d. normality buys us some analytical
tractability of the expected loss in (5.5).4 We seek a portfolio rule
that minimizes E[L(w∗, bw)|µ, Σ]. But, without further guidance on the
function f, the problem of minimizing expected loss is ill-posed. Herein
lies the paradox. The seemingly complete formulation of the Markowitz
problem delivers an unambiguous solution only when the parameters
are known. Once estimation uncertainty must be accounted for, the
problem provides insuﬃcient guidance for estimating portfolio rules
that maximize expected out-of-sample utility.
Some make progress by imposing a speciﬁc form of f. For example,
to demonstrate inadmissibility of the plug-in solution, Kan and Zhou
(2007) restrict f to a set of linear functions and show that within this set
there are portfolio solutions that uniformly dominate the plug-in rule.
Meanwhile they note that good choices for bw “can potentially be a very
complex nonlinear function of bµ and bΣ and there can be inﬁnitely many
ways to construct it. However, it is not an easy matter to determine the
1992; Pastor, 2000; Pastor and Stambaugh, 2000; Tu and Zhou, 2010). While these
are not machine learning methods per se, they paved the way for development of
integrated estimation and utility optimization solutions that are now the norm among
machine learning portfolio methods.
4But this analytical tractability only obtains for certain choices of f (for example,
those linear in bµ, bΣ−1, or bΣ−1bµ).

5.2. Integrated Estimation and Optimization
111
optimal f(bµ, bΣ).” Tu and Zhou (2010) and Kan et al. (2022) elaborate on
this idea with alternative portfolio combinations and propose portfolio
rules that aim to minimize utility loss under estimation uncertainty.
Yuan and Zhou (2022) extend this analysis to the high-dimensional case
where N > T. Instead of restricting the functional form of portfolio
strategies f, Da et al. (2022) make progress on this problem by imposing
restrictions on the data generating process of returns.
5.2
Integrated Estimation and Optimization
So where does the inadmissibility paradox leave us more generally? We
have an unknown function f appearing in an economic problem—this
is an ideal opportunity to leverage the strengths of machine learning.
In the current setting how might this work? Perhaps we can choose
a ﬂexible model like a neural network to parameterize f and search
for function parameter values that maximizes expected out-of-sample
utility (or, equivalently, minimizes the risk function E[L(w∗, bw)|µ, Σ])?
The problem is that E[L(w∗, bw)|µ, Σ] can only be derived for certain
special cases like the plug-in estimator. For general f, the expected
out-of-sample utility is not available in closed form, and if it were it
depends on the unknown true parameters µ and Σ.
A feasible alternative approach is to choose the portfolio rule f to
optimize in-sample utility, and to regularize the estimator to encourage
stable out-of-sample portfolio performance (e.g., via cross-validation).
This falls neatly into the typical two-step machine learning workﬂow:
Step 1. Choose a class of functions indexed by a tuning parameter
(for example, the class might be linear ridge models, which are
indexed by the ridge penalty z) and use the training sample to
estimate model parameters (one set of estimates for each value of
z). Take note of how immediately the simple, analytical Markowitz
paradigm morphs into a machine learning problem. When the true
parameters are known, the tightly speciﬁed Markowitz environ-
ment gives a simple and intuitive closed-form portfolio solution.
Yet with just a sprinkling of estimation uncertainty, the decision
theoretical problem is only partially speciﬁed and the portfolio rule

112
Optimal Portfolios
that minimizes out-of-sample loss cannot be pinned down. This
leads us to use the economic objective as the estimation objective.
In other words, the decision theoretical structure of the problem
compels us to integrate the statistical and economic objectives
and to consider open-minded machine learning speciﬁcations.
Step 2. In the validation sample, choose tuning parameters (e.g.,
a speciﬁc ridge penalty z) to optimize expected out-of-sample
performance. The theoretical underpinnings of regularization are
rooted minimization of estimation risk. In the Kan and Zhou
(2007) framework these underpinnings are explicit and regulariza-
tion is pursued through analytical calculations. The more standard
course of action replaces the theoretical calculations with empirics.
Expected out-of-sample utility is approximated by realized utility
in the validation sample, and the value of z that maximizes vali-
dation utility is selected. This empirical cross-validation obviates
the need for theoretical simpliﬁcations that would be necessary
to optimize expected utility directly.
Once the portfolio choice problem is cast in the machine learning
frame, one can begin generalizing any otherwise restrictive assumptions.
For example, the return distribution need not be normal nor i.i.d., since
we do not need to explicitly calculate expected out-of-sample utility.
We can thus write the general portfolio rule as
bw = f(XT ),
(5.7)
where XT collates all data relevant to the decision making process. It
may include the return sample {Rt}T
t=1 itself as well as any conditioning
variables that modulate the conditional return distribution. We can
likewise swap out preference speciﬁcations to accommodate tail risk
concerns, multiple-horizon objectives, or other complications.
5.3
Maximum Sharpe Ratio Regression
Frontier machine learning methods for portfolio choice directly take
utility optimization into consideration when estimating portfolio rules.

5.3. Maximum Sharpe Ratio Regression
113
Important early progress in machine learning portfolio choice comes
from Ait-Sahalia and Brandt (2001), Brandt and Santa-Clara (2006),
and Brandt et al. (2009). Their central contribution is to formalize the
portfolio problem as a one-step procedure that integrates utility maxi-
mization into the statistical problem of weight function estimation. The
approach makes no distributional assumptions for returns. Instead, it
speciﬁes investor utility and an explicit functional form for the investor’s
portfolio weight function in terms of observable covariates. Parameters
of the weight function are estimated by maximizing average in-sample
utility. Following Brandt (1999), we refer to this as the “parametric
portfolio weight” approach.
To keep our presentation concrete, we continue in the spirit of
Markowitz and specialize our analysis to the mean-variance utility
framework. Our primary motivation for doing so is that we can cast the
“parametric portfolio weight” as an OLS regression. To do so, we rely on
Theorem 1 of Britten-Jones (1999) who shows that the Markowitz plug-
in solution in (5.3) is proportional to the OLS coeﬃcient in a regression
of a constant vector on the sample asset returns. In particular, the OLS
regression
1 = w′Rt + ut
(5.8)
delivers coeﬃcient5
wOLS ∝bΣ−1bµ.
Intuitively, regression (5.8) seeks a combination of the risky excess
returns Rt that behaves as closely as possible to a positive constant.
This is tantamount to ﬁnding the combination of risky assets with the
highest possible in-sample Sharpe ratio. While this is exactly propor-
tional to identifying the in-sample tangency portfolio of risky assets, we
will see that the regression formulation is attractive for incorporating
machine learning methods into parameterized portfolio problems. Going
forward, we dub regressions of the form (5.8) as “maximum Sharpe
ratio regression,” or MSRR.
Brandt et al. (2009) focus on the portfolio weight parameterization
wi,t = ¯wi,t + s′
i,tβ
(5.9)
5To derive this result, note that wOLS = (bΣ + bµbµ′)−1bµ = bΣ−1bµ(1 + bµbΣ−1bµ)−1.

114
Optimal Portfolios
where ¯wi,t is some known benchmark weight of asset i at time t, and
si,t is a set of K signals that enter linearly into the portfolio rule with
K-dimensional coeﬃcient vector β. This introduces scope for dynamic
portfolio weights that vary with conditioning variables. For notational
simplicity, we normalize ¯wi,t to zero and stack weights and signals into
the vector equation6
wt = Stβ,
(5.10)
where wt is N × 1 and St is N × K. Substituting into (5.8), MSRR
becomes
1 = β′(S′
t−1Rt) + ut = β′Ft + ut.
(5.11)
We may view wt as a set of dynamic weights on the N base assets Rt. Or,
equivalently, β is a set of static weights on K “factors” (characteristic-
managed portfolios):
Ft = S′
t−1Rt.
(5.12)
In other words, the restriction that the same signal combo applies for all
assets immediately converts this into a cross-sectional trading strategy
(since F represents portfolios formed as a cross-sectional covariance
of returns with each of the signals individually). The estimated port-
folio coeﬃcients are bβ = d
Cov(F)−1bE(F). In the language of Brandt
and Santa-Clara (2006), the MSRR weight parameterization in (5.10)
“augments the asset space,” from the space of base returns to the space
of factors. With this augmentation, we arrive back at the basic problem
in (5.8) that estimates ﬁxed portfolio weights on factors. A beneﬁt of
the MSRR formulation is that we have simple OLS test statistics at
our disposal for evaluating the contribution of each signal (as originally
proposed by Britten-Jones, 1999).
Brandt (1999) summarizes the beneﬁts of parametric portfolio rules,
noting
“the return modeling step is without doubt the Achilles’ heel
of the traditional econometric approach.... Focusing directly
6Brandt et al. (2009) also note the ease of accommodating industry neutrality or
other weight centering choices as well as handling time-varying cross-section sizes
(in which case they recommend the normalization
1
Nt s′
i,tβ in (5.9), where Nt is the
number of assets at period t). We abstract from these considerations for notational
simplicity.

5.3. Maximum Sharpe Ratio Regression
115
on the optimal portfolio weights therefore reduces consid-
erably the room for model mispeciﬁcation and estimation
error.”
They emphasize that estimation error control stems from a highly
culled parameter dimension (relative to estimating all assets’ means
and covariances).
The Brandt et al. (2009) empirical application studies portfolio rules
for thousands of stocks using only three parameters (that is, condition-
ing only on stocks’ size, value, and short-term reversal characteristics).
The least squares formulation for parameterized portfolio rules prompts
a brainstorm of adaptations to incorporate machine learning struc-
tures. We are immediately tempted to consider large K regressions
for incorporating a rich set of conditioning information, including for
example the full zoo of factor signals and perhaps their interactions with
macroeconomic state variables, along with the usual machine learning
regularization strategies for shrinkage and model selection. The idea of
lasso-regularized parametric portfolios is broached by Brandt and Santa-
Clara (2006) and Brandt et al. (2009), and thoroughly investigated by
DeMiguel et al. (2020).7 The beauty of MSRR is that eﬃcient software
for lasso and elastic-net regression can be deployed for the portfolio
choice problem straight oﬀ-the-shelf. This covers essentially all varieties
of penalized regression that employ ℓ1 or ℓ2 parameter penalties, which
includes a range of realistic portfolio considerations like leverage control
(often formulated as an ℓ1 penalty) or trading costs adjustments (often
modeled as an ℓ2 penalty). In the special case of ridge regression with
penalty z, the penalized MSRR objective is
min
w
X
t
(1 −β′Ft)2 + zβ′β
(5.13)
with solution
bβ ∝( d
Cov(F) + zI)−1bE(F),
(5.14)
which modiﬁes the standard sample tangency portfolio of factors by
shrinking the sample covariance toward identity. This naturally connects
7Ao et al. (2018) also study a related lasso-regularized portfolio choice problem
that they call MAXSER.

116
Optimal Portfolios
with the broader topic of covariance shrinkage for portfolio optimization
discussed by Ledoit and Wolf (2004) and Ledoit and Wolf (2012).
Together with the ease of manipulating MSRR speciﬁcations, the
viability of penalized linear formulations raises exciting prospects for
parametric portfolio design. For example, we can break the restriction
of identical coeﬃcients for all assets in (5.10) with the modiﬁcation
wi,t = s′
i,tβi
(5.15)
and associated regression representation
1 = vec(B)′{vec(St−1) ⊙(Rt ⊗1K)} + ut,
(5.16)
where B = [β1, ..., βN]. This regression has the interpretation of ﬁnding
the tangency portfolio among NK “managed” strategies, with each
individual strategy an interaction of return on asset i with one of its
signals. A minor modiﬁcation of this problem makes it possible to
accommodate assets with diﬀerent sets of predictors. As a twist on the
applicability of penalized MSRR, one interesting approach would be
to penalize βi −¯β, which allows some heterogeneity across assets but
shrinks all assets’ weight rules toward the average rule, in the spirit of
empirical Bayes.
Brandt et al. (2009) discusses a number of extensions and reﬁne-
ments to their parametric portfolio problem, including non-negative
transformations of weights for long-only strategies, trading cost consid-
erations, and multi-period investment horizons. Most of these extensions
can be folded into the MSRR framework outlined here as long as the
mean-variance objective is retained. For more general utility functions,
estimation must step out of the OLS regression framework and requires
numerical optimization. This is more computationally challenging for
high-dimensional parameterization but adds very little conceptual com-
plexity.
5.4
High Complexity MSRR
MSRR is adaptable to sophisticated machine learning models such as
neural networks. One simple example of a potential MSRR network
architecture is shown in Figure 5.1. A set of L “raw” signals for stock

5.4. High Complexity MSRR
117
θ
β
wi,t=β′Si,t(θ)
Si,t(θ)=q(Xi,t; θ)
Xi,t
Figure 5.1: MSRR Neural Network
Note: Illustration of a simple neural architecture mapping conditioning variables Xi,t
into optimal portfolio weights wi,t.
i, denoted Xi,t, are inputs to the network. These propagate through
a sequence of nonlinear transformations (parameterized by network
coeﬃcients θ) to produce a vector of K output signals, Si,t(θ) = q(Xi,t; θ)
where q ∈RL →RK. Then an otherwise standard MSRR formulation
uses the transformed characteristics to derive the mean-variance eﬃcient
portfolio rule:
1 = β′St−1(θ)′Rt + ut.
(5.17)
Estimation of the parameters (β, θ) is a nonlinear least squares prob-
lem that is straightforward to implement with oﬀ-the-shelf neural net-
work software packages. The interpretation of this estimation is that it
searches for ﬂexible nonlinear transformations of the original signals set
to engineer new asset characteristics that can actively manage positions
in the base assets and produce high Sharpe ratio strategies.
Simon et al. (2022) pursue this framework using a feed-forward
neural network in the portfolio weight function with three hidden layers
of 32, 16, and 8 neurons in each layer, respectively. They show that the
neural network enhances parametric portfolio performance. The linear
portfolio speciﬁcation with the same predictors earns an annualized
out-of-sample Sharpe ratio of 1.8, while the neural network portfolio
achieves a Sharpe ratio of 2.5, or a 40% improvement.
Didisheim et al. (2023) prove theoretically that the “virtue of com-
plexity” also holds in mean-variance eﬃcient portfolio construction.
Under weak assumptions, the Sharpe ratio of a machine learning portfo-
lio is increasing in model parameterization. Empirically, they present one
especially convenient neural speciﬁcation derived within the framework

118
Optimal Portfolios
of Section 2. In particular, they propose a neural architecture using
random feature ridge regression. The formulation is identical to (5.17)
except that the neural coeﬃcients θ are randomly generated rather than
estimated. As predicted by theory, the realized out-of-sample Sharpe
ratio in their empirical analysis is increasing with the number of model
parameters and ﬂattens out around 4 when 30,000 parameters are used.
5.5
SDF Estimation and Portfolio Choice
The equivalence between portfolio eﬃciency and other asset pricing
restrictions, like zero alphas in a beta pricing model or satisfaction
of SDF-based Euler equations, imply that there are statistical objec-
tives (besides utility objectives) to work from when estimating optimal
portfolios. Much of the ﬁnancial machine learning literature focuses on
SDF estimation. Knowledge of the SDF is interesting for a number of
economic questions, such as inferring investor preferences, quantifying
pricing errors, and eliciting the key sources of risk that inﬂuence asset
prices. In practice, however, the ﬁnancial machine learning literature
has placed insuﬃcient restrictions on the SDF estimation problem to
answer questions about speciﬁc economic mechanisms. Instead, this
literature tends to evaluate estimation results in terms of the out-of-
sample Sharpe ratio of the estimated SDF. That is, machine learning
approaches to SDF estimation focus on the mean-variance portfolio
choice problem, motivated by Hansen and Richard (1987)’s theorem of
SDF and mean-variance frontier equivalence.
The typical formulation of the SDF estimation problem is the follow-
ing. If an SDF exists (given, for example, the absence of arbitrage), it
can be represented as a portfolio w of excess returns (barring a constant
term)
Mt = 1 −w′Rt.
(5.18)
Furthermore, an SDF must satisfy the standard investor Euler equation
at the heart of asset pricing theory:
E[MtRt] = 0.
(5.19)
Combining these we see:
E[Rt −RtR′
tw] = 0.
(5.20)

5.5. SDF Estimation and Portfolio Choice
119
This equation identiﬁes a tradable SDF. Note that it is also the ﬁrst-
order condition to the Britten-Jones (1999) MSRR problem,
min
w E
h
(1 −w′Rt)2i
,
which formally connects the problems of SDF estimation and Sharpe
ratio maximization, and thus it results in the tangency portfolio as the
estimated SDF weights.
Kozak et al. (2020) propose an SDF estimation problem in a condi-
tional and parameterized form that has a close connection to MSRR.
In particular, they posit an SDF portfolio wt = Stβ just as in (5.10),
and note that this implies an SDF of the form
Mt = 1 −β′Ft
(5.21)
with Ft deﬁned in (5.12).8 In other words, the SDF that prices assets con-
ditionally can be viewed as a static portfolio of characteristic-managed
factors. The main contribution of Kozak et al. (2020) is to introduce reg-
ularization into the conditional SDF estimation problem. They primarily
analyze ridge regularization, which directly maps to the MSRR ridge
estimator in equation (5.14). Rotating their estimator into the space of
principal components of the factors, Kozak et al. (2020) show that ridge
shrinkage induces heavier shrinkage for lower ranked components. They
oﬀer an insightful take on this derivation: “The economic interpretation
is that we judge as implausible that a PC with low eigenvalue could con-
tribute substantially to the volatility of the SDF and hence to the overall
maximum squared Sharpe ratio.” Kozak (2020) uses a kernel method
to estimate a high dimensional SDF with a clever implementation of
the “kernel trick” that circumvents the need to estimate an exorbitant
number of parameters.
The empirical results of Kozak et al. (2020) indicate that their
methodology of estimating a factor-based SDF with penalized regres-
sion delivers a portfolio with economically potent (and statistically
signiﬁcant) out-of-sample performance relative to standard benchmark
8Kozak et al. (2020) normalize the SDF to have mean 1: Mt = 1−β′(Ft −E(Ft)).
We adopt a diﬀerent normalization to conform to the MSRR problem in Britten-Jones
(1999).

120
Optimal Portfolios
asset pricing models. Constructing the SDF from 50 anomaly factor
portfolios results in an SDF with an annualized information ratio of
0.65 versus the CAPM. If instead of using 50 characteristics for their
set of signals, they supplement the raw characteristics with second and
third powers of those characteristics as well as pairwise characteristic
interactions (for a total of 1,375 signals), this information ratio increases
to 1.32.9
Giglio et al. (2021b) analyze and compare the asymptotic properties
of Kozak et al. (2020)’s estimator with PCA and RP-PCA-based estima-
tors proposed by Giglio and Xiu (2021) and Lettau and Pelger (2020a),
in a common unconditional factor model framework (4.1). With bγ and
bV deﬁned by (4.6) and (4.4) the PCA-based SDF estimator is given by
c
Mt = 1 −bγ′ bVt.
Giglio et al. (2021b) show that the ridge and PCA-based estimators are
consistent as long as factors are pervasive.
Unlike Kozak et al. (2020) who model the SDF as a portfolio of
anomaly factors, Chen et al. (2021) extend the SDF estimation problem
by modeling weights on individual stocks. Their model deviates from
MSRR and the parametric portfolio problem in a few interesting ways.
First, they allowing for a ﬂexible weight function that includes a recur-
rent neural network component. Second, they formulate their estimator
via GMM with a sophisticated instrumentation scheme. Beginning from
a conditional version of the basic Euler equation in (5.20), Chen et al.
(2021) rewrite the GMM objective function as
min
w max
g
1
N
N
X
j=1
E
" 
1 −
N
X
i=1
w(SM,t, Si,t)Ri,t+1
!
Rj,t+1g(SM,t, Sj,t)
# .
(5.22)
The function w(SM,t, Si,t) describes the weight of the ith stocks in the
tradable SDF, which is a scalar function of macroeconomic predictors
(SM,t, which inﬂuence all assets’ weights) and stock-speciﬁc predictors
(Si,t, which only directly inﬂuence the weight of stock i). It uses an
LSTM to capture dynamic behavior of SM,t, whose output ﬂows into a
9Information ratios are inferred from alphas and standard errors reported in
Table 4 of Kozak et al. (2020).

5.5. SDF Estimation and Portfolio Choice
121
This ﬁgures shows the model architecture of GAN (Generative Adversarial Network) with RNN (Recurrent Neural
Network) with LSTM cells. The SDF network has two parts: (1) A LSTM estimates a small number of macroeco-
nomic states. (2) These states together with the ﬁrm-characteristics are used in a FFN to construct a candidate
SDF for a given set of test assets. The conditioning network also has two networks: (1) It creates its own set of
macroeconomic states, (2) which it combines with the ﬁrm-characteristics in a FFN to ﬁnd mispriced test assets for
a given SDF M. These two networks compete until convergence, that is neither the SDF nor the test assets can be
improved.
Figure 5.2: Chen et al. (2021)’s Network Architecture
Note: Source: Chen et al. (2021).
feed-forward network where it is combined with the stock-level predictors
to produce the ﬁnal portfolio weight output (see the top portion of
Figure 5.2).
The function g(SM,t, Sj,t) is a set of D instrumental variables which
provide the system of moment conditions necessary to estimate the
portfolio weight function. The instrumental variables, however, are
derived from the underlying data via the network function, g. The
structure of g mirrors the structure of w. Macroeconomic dynamics are
captured with an LSTM, and the output is combined with stock-speciﬁc
variables Sj,t in a feed-forward network to produce instruments for the
Euler equation pricing errors of asset j. The loss function is the norm
of the pricing errors aggregated across all stocks, which is minimized to
arrive at weight function estimates.
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of this speciﬁcation is that
instrumental variables are generated in an adversarial manner. While
the estimator searches for an SDF weight function that minimizes
pricing errors for given a set of instruments (the outer minimization
objective in (5.22)), it simultaneously searches for the instrumental
variables function that casts the given SDF in the worst possible light
(the inner minimization objective in (5.22)).
Motivated by these empirical studies of machine learning SDFs,

122
Optimal Portfolios
Didisheim et al. (2023) theoretically analyze the role that model com-
plexity plays shaping the properties of SDF estimators. Like Kelly et al.
(2022a), they focus on high-dimensional ridge estimators with two main
diﬀerences. First, they move from a single asset time series setting with
a single asset to a panel setting with an arbitrary number of risky
assets. Second, they reorient the statistical objective from time series
forecasting to SDF optimization. In this setting, Didisheim et al. (2023)
explicitly derive an SDF’s expected out-of-sample Sharpe ratio and
cross-sectional pricing errors as a function of its complexity. Their cen-
tral result is that expected out-of-sample SDF performance is strictly
improving in SDF model complexity when appropriate shrinkage is
employed. They report empirical analyses that align closely with their
theoretical predictions. Speciﬁcally, they ﬁnd that the best empirical
asset pricing models have an extremely large number of factors (more
than the number of training observations or base assets).
5.5.1
Non-tradable SDF Estimation
The preceding section focuses on estimating an SDF represented in the
space of excess returns, or as a tradable portfolio. As noted, the rather
minimal economic structure imposed in these estimation problems make
it diﬃcult to investigate economic mechanisms. A smaller but equally
interesting literature infers an SDF by balancing structure and ﬂexibility,
including using (semi-)nonparametric model components embedded in
a partial structural framework and conducting hypothesis tests.
It is fascinating to recognize that the idea of parameterizing asset
pricing models using neural networks appears as early in the litera-
ture as Bansal and Viswanathan (1993). These prescient speciﬁcations
have all of the basic ingredients that appear in more recent work, but
are constrained by smaller data sets and thus study small network
speciﬁcations.
Chen and Ludvigson (2009) is perhaps the ﬁnest example to date of
this approach. Their model environment is broadly rooted in the nonlin-
ear habit consumption utility speciﬁcation of Campbell and Cochrane
(1999) and related models of Menzly et al. (2004), Wachter (2006),
and Yogo (2006). As the authors rightly point out, the variety of habit

5.5. SDF Estimation and Portfolio Choice
123
speciﬁcations in the literature suggest “the functional form of the habit
should be treated, not as a given, but as part and parcel of any empirical
investigation,” and in turn they pursue a habit model by “placing as
few restrictions as possible on the speciﬁcation of the habit and no
parametric restrictions on the law of motion for consumption.”
The model of Chen and Ludvigson (2009) is best summarized by its
speciﬁcation of habit consumption, which is the key driver of investors’
marginal utility. In particular, habit consumption is
Xt = Ctg
Ct−1
Ct
, ..., Ct−L
Ct

,
where Ct is consumption level at time t and g is the “habit function”
that modulates the habit level as a function of consumption in the recent
L periods. Habit impacts investor well-being via the utility function
U = E
 ∞
X
t=0
δt (Ct −Xt)1−γ −1
1 −γ
!
,
which in turn deﬁnes the SDF (where δ and γ are the time discount
factor and risk aversion, respectively). In contrast to Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) who specify an explicit functional form for g, Chen
and Ludvigson (2009) use a feed-forward neural network as a generic
approximating model for the habit function.
Like Chen et al. (2021), they estimate an SDF by minimizing the
norm of model-implied Euler equation conditional moments with macro-
ﬁnance data as instruments. A particularly appealing aspect of the
analysis is the care taken to choose the size of the neural network and
conduct statistical tests in line with asymptotic theory upon which their
tests rely. First, they extend the asymptotic theory of Ai and Chen
(2003) and Ai and Chen (2007) for “sieve minimum distance (SMD)”
estimation of neural networks to accommodate the serial correlation in
asset pricing data. Ultimately, they decide on a small model by machine
learning standards (only 18 parameters), but with a sample of only 200
observations this restraint lends credibility to their tests.
The payoﬀfrom careful asymptotic analysis is the ability to conduct
hypothesis tests for various aspects of habit persistence in investor
preferences. Results favor a nonlinear habit function over linear, and

124
Optimal Portfolios
internal habit formation (i.e., dictated by one’s own consumption history)
rather than external habit (or “keeping up with the Joneses”). Lastly,
they conduct a comparison of pricing errors from their estimated habit
model versus other leading asset pricing models such as the three-
factor model (Fama and French, 1993) and the log consumption-wealth
ratio CAPM model (Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001), and ﬁnd signiﬁcant
improvements in pricing of size and book-to-market sorted portfolios
with neural network habit formulation.
5.5.2
Hansen-Jagannathan Distance
The GMM (and the related SMD) SDF estimation approach is rooted
in the problem of minimizing squared pricing errors. The pricing error
is deﬁned by the Euler equation, and may be represented as the average
discounted excess return (which should be zero according to the Euler
equation) or as the diﬀerence between the undiscounted average excess
return and the model-based prediction of this quantity. While it is
convenient to directly compare models in terms of their pricing errors,
Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) emphasize that the eﬃcient GMM
estimator uses a model-dependent weighting matrix to aggregate pricing
errors, which means we cannot compare models in terms of their opti-
mized GMM loss function values. As a solution to the model comparison
problem, Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) recommend evaluating all
models in terms of a common loss function whose weighting matrix
is independent of the models. In particular, they propose a distance
metric of the form
HJ2
m = min
θm e(θm)′ ˜Σ−1e(θm),
(5.23)
where e(θm) is the vector of pricing errors associated with the mth
model (which is parameterized by θm). The square root of equation
(5.23) is known as the “HJ-distance.” There are two key aspects to note
in its formulation. First, pricing errors are weighted by ˜Σ = 1
T
P
t RtR′
t,
which is model independent, and thus puts all models on equal footing
for comparison. Second, the pricing errors are based on the parameters
that minimize the HJ-distance, as opposed to those dictated by the
eﬃcient GMM objective.

5.5. SDF Estimation and Portfolio Choice
125
While these diﬀerences versus the standard GMM objective function
are subtle, they equip the HJ-distance with some extraordinary theoreti-
cal properties. First, Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) show that HJm is
equal to the pricing error of the most mispriced portfolio of base assets
(those corresponding to the vector e) arising from model m. That is,
the HJ-distance describes the best that model m can do in minimizing
the worst-case pricing error.10 Second, the HJ-distance describes the
least squares distance between the (potentially misspeciﬁed) SDF of
model m and the SDF family that correctly prices all assets.
Both of these properties imply that the HJ-distance is a particularly
attractive objective function for training machine learning models of the
SDF and optimal portfolios. A machine learning model that minimizes
the HJ-distance will be robust (as it seeks to minimize worst-case model
performance) and will deliver a model that is minimally misspeciﬁed in
an ℓ2 sense. Training machine learning models via HJ-distance aligns
with Ludvigson (2013)’s admonition
“for greater emphasis in empirical work on methodologies
that facilitate the comparison of competing misspeciﬁed mod-
els, while reducing emphasis on individual hypothesis tests
of whether a single model is speciﬁed without error.”
Progress has begun in integrating the HJ-distance into ﬁnancial
machine learning problems. Kozak et al. (2020) link their SDF estimation
approach to an HJ-distance minimization problem with a ridge (or lasso)
penalty. Theirs can be viewed as an unconditional HJ-distance applied to
the space of factors. Recently, Gagliardini and Ronchetti (2019), Antoine
et al. (2018), and Nagel and Singleton (2011) analyze approaches to
model comparison via a conditional HJ-distance. Didisheim et al. (2023)
derive the theoretical behavior of the HJ-distance in complex machine
learning models and show that the distance is decreasing in model
complexity. There remains large scope for future research into machine
learning models trained through the conditional or unconditional HJ-
distance.
10This worst-case portfolio is essentially the “Markowitz portfolio” of pricing
errors, achieving the highest pricing error per unit of volatility.

126
Optimal Portfolios
5.6
Trading Costs and Reinforcement Learning
The ﬁnancial machine learning literature provides a ﬂexible framework
to combine several characteristics into a single measure of overall ex-
pected returns (e.g. Gu et al., 2020b). The same literature documents
the relative “feature importance” of diﬀerent return prediction char-
acteristics (e.g. Chen et al., 2021). These ﬁndings suggest that the
prediction success of machine learning methods is often driven by short-
lived characteristics that work well for small and illiquid stocks e.g.
Avramov et al., 2022a, suggesting that they might be less important
for the real economy (e.g. Van Binsbergen and Opp, 2019). The high
transaction costs of portfolio strategies based on machine learning imply
that these strategies are diﬃcult to implement in practice and, more
broadly, raise questions about the relevance and interpretation of the
predictability documented in this literature. Do machine learning ex-
pected return estimates merely tell us about mispricings that investors
do not bother to arbitrage away because the costs are too large, the
mispricing too ﬂeeting, and the mispriced markets too small to matter?
Or, do trading-cost-aware machine learning predictions also work for
large stocks, over signiﬁcant time periods, and in a way that matters
for many investor types, thus leading to new and important economic
insights?
It is common in ﬁnancial research to separate the question of port-
folio implementability from the return prediction (or portfolio weight
estimation) component of the problem. In this approach, the estimation
problem abstracts from transaction costs and turnover, and it is not
uncommon for the resultant investment strategies to produce negative
returns net of transaction costs. There is a natural explanation for this
result. It’s not that the market doesn’t know predictive patterns are
there; it’s that the patterns are there because they are too costly to
trade or due to other limits-to-arbitrage. This is a critical challenge for
predictive methods in ﬁnance. Without somehow embedding limits-to-
arbitrage into the statistical prediction model, the model will tend to
isolate predictive patterns that are unrealistic to trade because these are
the ones currently unexploited in the market. This does not rule out the
possibility that there are predictable phenomena that may be practically

5.6. Trading Costs and Reinforcement Learning
127
exploited; i.e., predictability that is proﬁtable net of trading costs. It
just means that without guidance on costs, a statistical model cannot
distinguish between implementable and non-implementable predictive
patterns. So, if it’s the case that the most prominent predictable pat-
terns in returns are those that are associated with limits-to-arbitrage (a
plausible scenario given the unsparing competition in securities markets),
these will be the ﬁrst ones isolated by ML prediction models.
This section discusses attempts to derive machine learning portfolios
that can be realistically implemented by market participants with
large assets under management, such as large pension funds or other
professional asset managers. If a strategy is implementable at scale, then
the predictive variables that drive such portfolio demands are likely to
be informative about equilibrium discount rates.
5.6.1
Trading Costs
The literature on portfolio choice in the face of trading costs typically
solves the problem by assuming that the trading cost function is known
or that trading cost data is available. This obviates the need for an
“exploration” step in a machine learning portfolio choice algorithm,
keeping the problem more or less in a standard supervised learning
framework and avoiding reinforcement learning machinery. Brandt et al.
(2009) take this approach in the baseline parameterized portfolio setup.
Recently, Jensen et al. (2022) introduce a known trading cost function
into the portfolio choice objective, then use a combination of machine
learning and economic restrictions to learn the optimal portfolio rule.
We outline their model and learning solution here.
The ﬁnance literature has long wrestled with the technical challenges
of trading cost frictions in portfolio choice (e.g. Balduzzi and Lynch,
1999; Lynch and Balduzzi, 2000). Garleanu and Pedersen (2013) derive
analytical portfolios amid trading costs. Their key theoretical result is
that, in the presence of trading costs, optimal portfolios depend not
just on one period expected returns Et[Rt+1], but on expectations of
returns over all future horizons, Et[Rt+τ] τ = 1, 2, ....11 Because of this,
11Intuitively, the investor prefers to trade on long-lived predictive patterns because
the cost of trading can be amortized over many periods, while short-lived predictability

128
Optimal Portfolios
the idea of approaching the return prediction problem with machine
learning while accounting for trading costs faces tension. Garleanu and
Pedersen (2013) achieve a tractable portfolio solution by linking all
horizons together with a linear autoregression speciﬁcation, which keeps
the parameterization small and collapses the sequence of expectations
collapses to a linear function of prevailing signal values. Machine learn-
ing typically seeks ﬂexibility in the return prediction model; but if
separate return prediction models are needed for all future horizons
the environment quickly explodes into an intractable speciﬁcation even
by machine learning standards. How can we maintain ﬂexibility in the
model speciﬁcation without making restrictive assumptions about the
dynamics of expected returns?12
Jensen et al. (2022) resolve this tension with three key innovations.
First, they relax the linearity of expected returns in predictive signals
and allow for nonlinear prediction functions. Second, they relax the
autoregressive expected return assumption of Garleanu and Pedersen
(2013) by requiring stationary but otherwise unrestricted time series
dynamics. From these two solutions, they are able to theoretically derive
a portfolio rule as a generic function of conditioning signals. Their third
contribution is to show that a component of this portfolio rule (the “aim”
function to which the investor gradually migrates her portfolio) can be
parameterized with a neural network speciﬁcation, which sidesteps the
aforementioned diﬃculty of requiring diﬀerent machine learning return
prediction models for diﬀerent investment horizons.13 Their solution is
an example of a model that combines the beneﬁts of economic structure
with the ﬂexibility of machine learning. The economics appear in the
form of a solution to the investor’s utility maximization problem, which
imposes a form of dynamic consistency on the portfolio rule. Only after
this step is the ﬂexible machine learning function injected into the
portfolio rule while maintaining the economic coherence of the rule.
is quickly cannibalized due to frequent portfolio adjustments.
12Another complementary tension in this setting is that, if a trading cost portfolio
solution must build forecasts for many return horizons, the number of training
observations falls as the forecast horizon increases, so there is generally little data to
inform long horizons forecasts.
13This requires the assumption that signals are Markovian, but their dynamics
need not be further speciﬁed.

5.6. Trading Costs and Reinforcement Learning
129
Speciﬁcally, the investor seeks a portfolio wt to maximize net-of-cost
quadratic utility:
utility = E

µ(st)′wt −κt
2 (wt −gtwt−1)′ Λ (wt −gtwt−1) −γt
2 w′
tΣwt

(5.24)
where µ(st), Σ and Λ summarize asset means, covariances, and trading
costs, respectively. These vary over time in predictable ways related to
the conditioning variable set st, though for purposes here we discuss
the simpliﬁed model with static covariances and trading costs. κt is
investor assets under management (the scale of the investor’s portfolio
is a ﬁrst-order consideration for trading costs) and gt is wealth growth
from the previous period. Proposition 3 of Jensen et al. (2022) shows
that the optimal portfolio rule in the presence of trading costs is
wt ≈mgtwt−1 + (I −m)At
(5.25)
where the investor partially trades from the inherited portfolio wt−1
toward the “aim” portfolio At at time t:
At = (I −m)−1
∞
X
τ=0
(mΛ−1¯gΛ)τ cEt
 1
γ Σ−1µ(st+τ)
|
{z
}
Markowitzt+τ

.
(5.26)
The aim portfolio depends on m, a nonlinear matrix function of trading
costs and covariances, as well as the mean portfolio growth rate ¯g = E[gt].
The aim portfolio is an exponentially smoothed average of of period-by-
period Markowitz portfolios, which reﬂects the fact that adjustments
are costly so it is advantageous to smooth portfolio views over time.
The portfolio solution may be rewritten as an inﬁnite sum of past aim
portfolios and their growth over time:
wt =
∞
X
θ=0
 θ
Y
τ=1
m gt−τ+1
!
(I −m)A(st−θ) .
(5.27)
This solution in (5.27) embeds all of the relevant dynamic economic
structure necessary for an optimal portfolio in the presence of trading
costs. But it also shows that, if we substitute this solution into the
original utility maximization problem, the learning task may be reduced

130
Optimal Portfolios
to ﬁnding the aim portfolio function A(·) that maximizes expected
utility. Based on this insight, Jensen et al. (2022) use the random Fourier
features neural network speciﬁcation (as in Kelly et al., 2022a; Didisheim
et al., 2023), but rather than approximating the return prediction
function they directly approximate the aim function, A(·) = f(st)β for
f a set of P known random feature functions and β is the regression
coeﬃcient vector in RP . Empirically, their one-step, trading-cost-aware
portfolio learning algorithm delivers superior net-of-cost performance
compared to standard two-step approaches in the literature that ﬁrst
learn portfolios agnostic of trading costs then smooth the learned
portfolio over time to mitigate costs.
5.6.2
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning broadly consists of machine learning models for
solving a sequential decision making problem under uncertainty. They
are especially powerful for modeling environments in which an agent
takes an action to maximize some cumulative reward function but the
state of the system and thus the distribution of future outcomes is
inﬂuenced by the agent’s action. In this case, the agent’s choices are key
conditioning variables for learning the payoﬀfunction. But since most
state/action pairs are not observed in the past, the data can be thought
of as largely unlabeled, and thus the model does not lend itself to direct
supervision. Because relevant labels are only precipitated by the agent’s
actions, much of reinforcement learning splits eﬀort between learning
by experimentation (“exploration”) and optimizing future expected
rewards given what they’ve learned (“exploitation”).
That the agent seeks to optimize future rewards means that rein-
forcement learning may be a valuable tool for portfolio choice. However,
in the basic portfolio choice problem outlined earlier, the state of the
system is not inﬂuenced by the investor’s decisions. The investor is
treated as a price taker, so any portfolio she builds does not perturb
the dynamics of risk and return going forward. Thus, given data on
realized returns of the base assets, machine learning portfolio choice
can be pursued with supervised learning techniques. In other words,
the beneﬁts of reinforcement learning for a price taker may be limited.

5.6. Trading Costs and Reinforcement Learning
131
Of course, the price-taker assumption is unrealistic for many in-
vestors. Financial intermediaries such as asset managers and banks are
often the most active participants in ﬁnancial markets. Their promi-
nence as “marginal traders” and their tendency to trade large volumes
means that their portfolio decisions have price impact and thus alter
the state of the system. Such an investor must learn how their decisions
aﬀect market dynamics, and this introduces an incentive to experiment
with actions as part of the learning algorithm. That is, once investors
must internalize their own price impact, the tools of reinforcement
learning are well-suited to the portfolio choice problem.
The mainstream ﬁnance literature has seen minimal work on re-
inforcement learning for portfolio choice,14 though there is a sizable
computer science literature on the topic. The more prominent is an
investor’s price impact in dictating their future rewards, the more
valuable reinforcement learning methods become. As such, the ﬁnance
profession’s tendency to focus on relatively low frequency investment
strategies makes it somewhat unsurprising that reinforcement learning
has not taken hold, though we expect this to change in coming years.
Meanwhile, the computer science literature has largely applied reinforce-
ment learning to higher frequency portfolio problems related to market
making and trade execution. While we do not cover this literature here,
for interested readers we recommend the survey of Hambly et al. (2022).
14Cong et al. (2020) is one example.
