6
Conclusions
We attempt to cover the burgeoning literature on ﬁnancial machine
learning. A primary goal of our work is to help readers recognize machine
learning as an indispensable tool for developing our understanding of
ﬁnancial markets phenomena. We emphasize the areas that have received
the most research attention to date, including return prediction, factor
models of risk and return, stochastic discount factors, and portfolio
choice.
Unfortunately, the scope of this survey has forced us to limit or
omit coverage of some important ﬁnancial machine learning topics. One
such omitted topic that beneﬁts from machine learning methods is risk
modeling. This includes models of conditional variances and covariances,
and in particular the modeling of high-dimensional covariance matrices.
A large literature uses machine learning methods to improve estima-
tion of covariance matrices and, in turn, improve the performance of
optimized portfolios. Closely related to risk modeling is the topic of
derivatives pricing. In fact, some of the earliest applications of neu-
ral networks in ﬁnance relate to options pricing and implied volatility
surfaces. Prominent examples of machine learning or nonparametric
models for derivatives research include Ait-Sahalia and Lo (1998) and
132

133
Ait-Sahalia and Lo (2000), Anders et al. (1998), Rosenberg and Engle
(2002), Bollerslev and Todorov (2011), and Israelov and Kelly (2017),
among many others.
Most research eﬀorts to date involve machine learning to improve
performance in prediction tasks. This is the tip of the iceberg. One
critical direction for next generation ﬁnancial machine learning analysis
is to better shed light on economic mechanisms and equilibria. Another
is using machine learning methods to solve sophisticated and highly
nonlinear structural models. Separately, the evolutionary nature of
economies and markets, shaped by technological change and shifting
regulatory environments, presents economists with the challenge of
modeling structural change. An exciting potential direction for research
is to leverage the ﬂexible model approximations aﬀorded by machine
learning to better detect and adapt to structural shifts.
While this survey has focused on the asset pricing side of ﬁnance,
machine learning is making inroads in other ﬁelds such as corporate
ﬁnance, entrepreneurship, household ﬁnance, and real estate. For ex-
ample, Hu and Ma (2020) use machine learning techniques to process
video pitches of aspiring entrepreneurs to test the role of speaker per-
suasiveness in early stage ﬁnancing success. Li et al. (2021) use textual
analysis of earnings calls to quantify corporate culture and its impact
on ﬁrm outcomes. Lyonnet and Stern (2022) use machine learning to
study how venture capitalists make investment decisions. Erel et al.
(2021) provide evidence that machine learning algorithms can help ﬁrms
avoid bad corporate director selections. Fuster et al. (2022) quantify
the equilibrium impact of machine learning algorithms in mortgage
markets. While machine learning is has seen far more extensive use in
asset pricing, its further application to corporate ﬁnance problems is
an exciting area of future research.
