Foreword
During the 50 years of numerical weather prediction the number of textbooks dealing
with the subject has been very small, the latest being the 1980 book by Haltiner and
Williams. As you will soon realize, the intervening years have seen impressive devel-
opment and success. Eugenia Kalnay has contributed signiﬁcantly to this expansion,
and the meteorological community is fortunate that she has applied her knowledge
and insight to writing this book.
Eugenia was born in Argentina, where she had exceptionally good teachers. She
had planned to study physics, but was introduced to meteorology by a stroke of fate;
her mother simply entered her in a competition for a scholarship from the Argentine
National Weather Service! But a military coup took place in Argentina in 1966 when
Eugenia was a student, and the College of Sciences was invaded by military forces.
Rolando Garcia, then Dean of the College of Sciences, was able to obtain for her
an assistantship with Jule Charney at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She was the ﬁrst female doctoral candidate in the Department and an outstanding
student. In 1971, under Charney’s supervision, she ﬁnished an excellent thesis on the
circulation of Venus. She recalls that an important lesson she learned from Charney
at that time was that if her numerical results did not agree with accepted theory it
might be because the theory was wrong.
What has she written in this book? She covers many aspects of numerical weather
prediction and related areas in considerable detail, on which her own experience
enables her to write with relish and authority. The ﬁrst chapter is an overview that
introduces all the major concepts discussed later in the book. Chapter 2 is a pre-
sentation of the standard equations used in atmospheric modeling, with a concise
xi

xii
Foreword
but complete discussion of ﬁltering approximations. Chapter 3 is a roadmap to nu-
merical methods providing a student without background in the subject with all
the tools needed to develop a new model. Chapter 4 is an introduction to the pa-
rameterization of subgrid-scale physical processes, with references to specialized
textbooks and papers. I found her explanations in Chapter 5 of data assimilation
methods and in Chapter 6 on predictability and ensemble forecasting to be not only
inclusive but thorough and well presented, with good attention to historical devel-
opments. These chapters, however, contain many deﬁnitions and equations. (I take
this wealth as a healthy sign of the technical maturity of the subject.) This complex-
ity may be daunting for many readers, but this has obviously been recognized by
Eugenia. In response she has devised many simple graphical sketches that illustrate
the important relations and deﬁnitions. An added bonus is the description in an ap-
pendix of the use of Model Output Statistics by the National Weather Service, its
successes, and the rigid constraints that it imposes on the forecast model. She also
includes in the appendices a simple adaptive regression scheme based on Kalman
ﬁltering and an introduction to the generation of linear tangent and adjoint model
codes.
Before leaving the National Centers for Environmental Prediction in 1998 as
Director of the Environmental Modeling Center, Eugenia directed the Reanalysis
Project, with Robert Kistler as Technical Manager. This work used a 1995 state-of-
the-art analysis and forecast system to reanalyze and reforecast meteorological events
from past years. The results for November 1950 were astonishing. On November 24
of that year an intense snowstorm developed over the Appalachians that had not
been operationally predicted even 24 hours in advance. This striking event formed
a test situation for the emerging art of numerical weather prediction in the years
immediately following the ﬁrst computations in 1950 on the ENIAC computer dis-
cussed in Chapter 1. In 1953, employing his baroclinic model, and with considerable
“tuning” Jule Charney ﬁnally succeeded in making a 24-hour forecast starting on
November 23 1950 of a cyclonic development, which, however, was still located
some 400 kilometers northeast of the actual location of the storm. This “prediction”
played a major role in justifying the creation of the Joint Numerical Weather Pre-
diction Unit in 1955 (Chapter 1). By contrast, in the Reanalysis Project, this event
was forecast extremely well, both in intensity and location – as much as three days
in advance. (Earlier than this the associated vorticity center at 500 mbs had been
located over the Paciﬁc Ocean, even though at that time there was no satellite data!)
This is a remarkable demonstration of the achievements of the numerical weather
prediction community in the past decades, achievements that include many by our
author.
After leaving NCEP in 1998, Eugenia was appointed Lowry Chair in the School
of Meteorology at the University of Oklahoma, where she started writing her book.
She returned to Maryland in 1999 to chair the Department of Meteorology, where

Foreword
xiii
she continues to do research on a range of topics, including applications of chaos to
ensemble forecasting and data assimilation. We look forward to future contributions
by Professor Kalnay.
Norman Phillips

