Acknowledgements
I drafted about two thirds of this book while teaching the subject for the ﬁrst time
at Oklahoma University, during the fall of 1998. OU provided me with a supportive
environment that made it possible to write the ﬁrst draft. I made major revisions and
ﬁnished the book while teaching the course again in the fall in 1999 through 2001 at
the University of Maryland. The students that took the course at UM and OU gave
me essential feedback, and helped me ﬁnd many (hopefully most) of the errors in the
drafts.
In addition, several people helped to substantially revise one or more of the
manuscript chapters, and their suggestions and corrections have been invaluable.
Norm Phillips read an early draft of Chapter 1 and made important historical com-
ments. Anders Persson wrote the notes on the early history of numerical weather
prediction, especially in Europe, reproduced in an appendix. Alfredo Ruiz Barradas
reviewed Chapter 2. Will Sawyer reviewed and made major suggestions for improve-
ments for Chapter 3. Hua-lu Pan inﬂuenced Chapter 4. Jim Geiger reviewed Chapter 5
and pointed out sections that were obscure. Jim Purser also reviewed this chapter and
not only made very helpful suggestions but also provided an elegant demonstration of
the equivalence of the 3D-Var and OI formulations. Discussions with Peter Lyster on
this chapter were also very helpful. D. J. Patil suggested many improvements to Chap-
ter 6, and Bill Martin pointed out the story by Ray Bradbury concerning the “butter-
ﬂy effect”. Joaquim Ballabrera substantially improved the appendix on model output
post-processing.Shu-ChihYangandMatteoCorazzacarefullyreviewedthecomplete
book, including the appendices, and suggested many clariﬁcations and corrections.
I am grateful to Malaquias Pe˜na, who wrote the abbreviation list and helped
with many ﬁgures and corrected references. Dick Wobus created the beautiful 6-day
xv

xvi
Acknowledgements
ensemble forecast ﬁgure shown on the cover. Seon Ki Park provided the linear tangent
and adjoint code in Appendix B. The help and guidance of Matt Lloyd and Susan
Francis of Cambridge University Press, the editing of the text by Maureen Storey,
and the kind foreword by Norm Phillips are also very gratefully acknowledged.
I began to learn numerical weather prediction (NWP) in the late 1960s from pro-
fessors at the University of Buenos Aires, especially Rolando Garcia and Ruben
Norscini, and from the inspiring book of P. D. Thompson. At MIT, my thesis ad-
visor, Jule Charney, and the lectures of Norm Phillips and Ed Lorenz, inﬂuenced
me more than I can describe. The NWP class notes of Akio Arakawa at UCLA and
the NCAR text on numerical methods by John Gary helped me teach the subject at
MIT. Over the last 30 years I have continued learning from numerous colleagues
at other institutions where I had the privilege of working. They include the Univer-
sity of Montevideo, MIT, NASA/GSFC, OU, and UM. However, my most important
experience came from a decade I spent as Director of the Environmental Modeling
Center at the National Centers for Environmental Prediction, where my extremely
dedicated colleagues and I learned together how to best transition from research ideas
to operational improvements.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude for the tremendous support, patience
and encouragement that my husband, Malise Dick, my son, Jorge Rivas, and my
sisters Patricia and Susana Kalnay have given me, and for the love for education that
my parents instilled in me.
