4
1 Historical overview of numerical weather prediction
Center for Prediction of Storms (CAPS). Internationally, major research takes place
in large operational national and international centers (such as the European Center
for Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), NCEP, and the weather services
of the UK, France, Germany, Scandinavian and other European countries, Canada,
Japan,Australia,andothers).Inmeteorologytherehasbeena longtraditionof sharing
both data and research improvements, with the result that progress in the science of
forecasting has taken place on many fronts, and all countries have beneﬁted from
this progress.
In this introductory chapter, we give an overview of the major components and
milestones in numerical forecasting. They will be discussed in detail in the following
chapters.
1.2
Early developments
Jule G. Charney (1917–1981) was one of the giants in the history of numerical
weather prediction. In his 1951 paper “Dynamical forecasting by numerical process”,
he introduced the subject of this book as well as it could be introduced today. We
reproduce here parts of the paper (with emphasis added):
As meteorologists have long known, the atmosphere exhibits no periodicities of
the kind that enable one to predict the weather in the same way one predicts the
tides. No simple set of causal relationships can be found which relate the state
of the atmosphere at one instant of time to its state at another. It was this realization
that led V. Bjerknes (1904) to deﬁne the problem of prognosis as nothing less than
the integration of the equations of motion of the atmosphere.2 But it remained for
Richardson (1922) to suggest the practical means for the solution of this problem.
He proposed to integrate the equations of motion numerically and showed exactly
how this might be done. That the actual forecast used to test his method was
unsuccessful was in no way a measure of the value of his work. In retrospect it
2 The importance of the Bjerknes (1904) paper is clearly described by Thompson (1990), another
pioneer of NWP, and the author of a very inspiring text on NWP (Thompson, 1961a). His paper
“Charney and the revival of NWP” contains extremely interesting material on the history of
NWP as well as on early computers:
It was not until 1904 that Vilhelm Bjerknes – in a remarkable manifesto and testament of
deterministic faith – stated the central problem of NWP. This was the ﬁrst explicit, coherent
recognition that the future state of the atmosphere is, in principle, completely determined by its
detailed initial state and known boundary conditions, together with Newton’s equations of
motion, the Boyle–Charles–Dalton equation of state, the equation of mass continuity, and the
thermodynamic energy equation. Bjerknes went further: he outlined an ambitious, but logical
program of observation, graphical analysis of meteorological data and graphical solution of the
governing equations. He succeeded in persuading the Norwegians to support an expanded
network of surface observation stations, founded the famous Bergen School of synoptic and
dynamic meteorology, and ushered in the famous polar front theory of cyclone formation.
Beyond providing a clear goal and a sound physical approach to dynamical weather prediction,
V. Bjerknes instilled his ideas in the minds of his students and their students in Bergen and in
Oslo, three of whom were later to write important chapters in the development of NWP in the
US (Rossby, Eliassen and Fj¨ortoft).

1.2 Early developments
5
becomes obvious that the inadequacies of observation alone would have doomed
any attempt, however well conceived, a circumstance of which Richardson
was aware. The real value of his work lay in the fact that it crystallized
once and for all the essential problems that would have to be faced by future
workers in the ﬁeld and it laid down a thorough groundwork for their solution.
For a long time no one ventured to follow in Richardson’s footsteps. The
paucity of the observational network and the enormity of the computational task
stood as apparently insurmountable barriers to the realization of his dream that
one day it might be possible to advance the computation faster than the weather.
But with the increase in the density and extent of the surface and upper-air
observational network on the one hand, and the development of large-capacity
high-speed computing machines on the other, interest has revived in
Richardson’s problem, and attempts have been made to attack it anew.
These efforts have been characterized by a devotion to objectives more
limited than Richardson’s. Instead of attempting to deal with the atmosphere in
all its complexity, one tries to be satisﬁed with simpliﬁed models approximating
the actual motions to a greater or lesser degree. By starting with models
incorporating only what it is thought to be the most important of the
atmospheric inﬂuences, and by gradually bringing in others, one is able to
proceed inductively and thereby to avoid the pitfalls inevitably encountered
when a great many poorly understood factors are introduced all at once.
A necessary condition for the success of this stepwise method is, of course,
that the ﬁrst approximations bear a recognizable resemblance to the actual
motions. Fortunately, the science of meteorology has progressed to the point
where one feels that at least the main factors governing the large-scale
atmospheric motions are well known. Thus integrations of even the linearized
barotropic and thermally inactive baroclinic equations have yielded solutions
bearing a marked resemblance to reality. At any rate, it seems clear that the
models embodying the collective experience and the positive skill of the forecast
cannot fail utterly. This conviction has served as the guiding principle in the
work of the meteorology project at The Institute for Advanced Study [at
Princeton University] with which the writer has been connected.
As indicated by Charney, Richardson performed a remarkably comprehensive
numerical integration of the full primitive equations of motion (Chapter 2). He used
a horizontal grid of about 200 km, and four vertical layers of approximately 200 hPa,
centered over Germany. Using the observations at 7 UTC (Universal Coordinate
Time) on 20 May 1910, he computed the time derivative of the pressure in central
Germany between 4 and 10 UTC. The predicted 6-h change was 146 hPa, whereas in
reality there was essentially no change observed in the surface pressure. This huge
error was discouraging, but it was due mostly to the fact that the initial conditions
were not balanced, and therefore included fast-moving gravity waves which masked
the initial rate of change of the meteorological signal in the forecast (Fig. 1.2.1).
Moreover, if the integration had been continued, it would have suffered “computa-
tionalblow-up”duetotheviolationoftheCourant–Friedricks–Lewy(CFL)condition

6
1 Historical overview of numerical weather prediction
About one day
Figure 1.2.1: Schematic of a forecast with slowly varying weather-related variations
and superimposed high-frequency gravity waves. Note that even though the forecast
of the slow waves is essentially unaffected by the presence of gravity waves, the
initial time derivative is much larger in magnitude, as obtained in the Richardson
(1922) experiment.
(Chapter 3) which requires that the time step should be smaller than the grid size
divided by the speed of the fastest traveling signal (in this case horizontally moving
sound waves, traveling at about 300 m/s).
Charney (1948, 1949) and Eliassen (1949) solved both of these problems by
deriving “ﬁltered” equations of motion, based on quasi-geostrophic (slowly varying)
balance, which ﬁltered out (i.e., did not include) gravity and sound waves, and were
based on pressure ﬁelds alone. Charney points out that this approach was justiﬁed by
the fact that forecasters’ experience was that they were able to predict tomorrow’s
weather from pressure charts alone:
In the selection of a suitable ﬁrst approximation, Richardson’s discovery that
the horizontal divergence was an unmeasurable quantity had to be taken into
account. Here a consideration of forecasting practice gave rise to the belief that
this difﬁculty could be surmounted: forecasts were made by means of
geostrophic reasoning from the pressure ﬁeld alone – forecasts in which the
concept of horizontal divergence played no role.
In order to understand better Charney’s comment, we quote an anecdote from
Lorenz (1990) on his interactions with Jule Charney:
On another3 occasion when our conversations had turned closer to scientiﬁc
matters, Jule was talking again about the early days of NWP. For a proper
3 The previous occasion was a story about an invitation Charney received to appear on the
“Today” show, to talk about how computers were going to forecast the weather. Since the show
was at 7 am, Charney, a late riser, had never watched it. “He told us that he felt that he ought to
see the show at least once before agreeing to appear on it, and so, one morning, he managed to
pull himself out of bed and turn on the TV set, and the ﬁrst person he saw was a chimpanzee.

1.2 Early developments
7
perspective, we should recall that at the time when Charney was a student, pressure
was king. The centers of weather activity were acknowledged to be the highs and
lows. A good prognostic chart was one that had the isobars in the right locations.
Naturally, then, the thing that was responsible for the weather changes was the
thing that made the pressure change. This was readily shown to be the divergence
of the wind ﬁeld. The divergence could not be very accurately measured, and a
corollary deduced by some meteorologists, including some of Charney’s advisors,
was that the dynamic equations could not be used to forecast the weather.
Such reasoning simply did not make sense to Jule. The idea that the wind
ﬁeld might serve instead of the pressure ﬁeld as a basis for dynamical
forecasting, proposed by Rossby, gave Jule a route to follow.4 He told us,
however, that what really inspired him to develop the equations that later became
the basis for NWP was a determination to prove, to those who had assured him
that the task was impossible, that they were wrong.
Charney, R. Fjørtoft, and J. von Neuman (1950) computed a historic ﬁrst one-day
weather forecast using a barotropic (one-layer) ﬁltered model. The work took place
in 1948–9. They used one of the ﬁrst electronic computers (the Electronic Numerical
Integrator and Computer, ENIAC), housed at the Aberdeen Proving Grounds of the
US Army in Maryland. It incorporated von Neuman’s idea of “stored programming”
(i.e., the ability to perform arithmetic operations over different operands (loops)
without having to repeat the code). The results of the ﬁrst forecasts were quite
encouraging: Fig. 1.2.2, reproduced from Charney (1951) shows the 24-h forecast and
veriﬁcation for 30 January 1949. Unlike Richardson’s results, the forecast remains
meteorological, and there is a pattern correlation between the predicted and the
observed pressure ﬁeld 24-h changes.
It is remarkable that in his 1951 paper, just after the triumph of performing the
ﬁrst successful forecasts with ﬁltered models, Charney already saw that much more
progress would come from the use of the primitive (unﬁltered) equations of motion
as Richardson had originally attempted:
The discussion so far has dealt exclusively with the quasi-geostrophic
equations as the basis for numerical forecasting. Yet there has been no intention
to exclude the possibility that the primitive Eulerian equations can also be used
for this purpose. The outlook for numerical forecasting would be indeed dismal
if the quasi-geostrophic approximation represented the upper limit of attainable
accuracy, for it is known that it applies only indifferently, if at all, to many of the
small-scale but meteorologically signiﬁcant motions. We have merely indicated
two obstacles that stand in the way of the applications of the primitive equations:
He decided he could never compete with a chimpanzee for the public’s favor, and so he
gracefully declined to appear, much to the dismay of the computer company that had
engineered the invitation in the ﬁrst place” (Lorenz, 1990).
4 The development of the “Rossby waves” phase speed equation c = U −βL2/π 2 based on the
linearized, non-divergent vorticity equation (Rossby et al., 1939, Rossby, 1940), and its success
in predicting the motion of the large-scale atmospheric waves, was an essential stimulus to
Charney’s development of the ﬁltered equations (Phillips, 1990b, 1998).

8
1 Historical overview of numerical weather prediction
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.2.2: Forecast of 30 January 1949, 0300 GMT: (a) contours of observed z
and ζ + f at t = 0; (b) observed z and ζ + f at t = 24 h; (c) observed (continuous
lines) and computed (broken lines) 24-h height change; (d) computed z and ζ + f at
t = 24 h. The height unit is 100 ft and the unit of vorticity is 1/3 × 10−4 s–1.
(Reproduced from the Compendium of Meteorology, with permission of the
American Meteorological Society.)
First, there is the difﬁculty raised by Richardson that the horizontal divergence
cannot be measured with sufﬁcient accuracy. Moreover, the horizontal
divergence is only one of a class of meteorological unobservables which also
includes the horizontal acceleration. And second, if the primitive Eulerian
equations are employed, a stringent and seemingly artiﬁcial bound is imposed on
the size of the time interval for the ﬁnite difference equations. The ﬁrst obstacle
is the most formidable, for the second only means that the integration must
proceed in steps of the order of ﬁfteen minutes rather than two hours. Yet the
ﬁrst does not seem insurmountable, as the following considerations will indicate.
He proceeded to describe an unpublished study in which he and J.C. Freeman
integrated barotropic primitive equations (i.e., shallow water equations, Chapter 2)
which include not only the slowly varying quasi-geostrophic solution, but also fast
gravity waves. They initialized the forecast assuming zero initial divergence, and
compared the result with a barotropic forecast (with gravity waves ﬁltered out).
The results were similar to those shown schematically in Fig. 1.2.1: they observed

1.2 Early developments
9
that over a day or so the gravity waves subsided (through a process that we call
geostrophic adjustment) and did not otherwise affect the forecast of the slow waves.
From this result Charney concluded that numerical forecasting could indeed use the
full primitive equations (as eventually happened in operational practice). He listed in
the paper the complete primitive equations in pressure coordinates, essentially as they
are used in current operational weather prediction, but without heating (nonadiabatic)
and frictional terms, which he expected to have minor effects in one- or two-day
forecasts. Charney concluded this remarkable paper with the following discussion,
which includes a list of the physical processes that take place at scales too small
to be resolved, and are incorporated in present models through “parameterizations
of the subgrid-scale physics” (condensation, radiation, and turbulent ﬂuxes of heat,
momentum and moisture, Chapter 4):
Nonadiabatic and frictional terms have been ignored in the body of the
discussion because it was thought that one should ﬁrst seek to determine how
much of the motion could be explained without them. Ultimately they will have to
be taken into account, particularly if the forecast period is to be extended to
three or more days.
Condensational phenomena appear to be the simplest to introduce: one has
only to add the equation of continuity for water vapor and to replace the dry by
the moist adiabatic equation. Long-wave radiational effects can also be provided
for, since our knowledge of the absorptive properties of water vapor and carbon
dioxide has progressed to a point where quantitative estimates of radiational
cooling can be made, although the presence of clouds will complicate the
problem considerably.
The most difﬁcult phenomena to include have to do with the turbulent
transfer of momentum and heat. A great deal of research remains to be done
before enough is known about these effects to permit the assignment of even
rough values to the eddy coefﬁcients of viscosity and heat conduction. Owing to
their statistically indeterminate nature, the turbulent properties of the atmosphere
place an upper limit to the accuracy obtainable by dynamical methods of
forecasting, beyond which we shall have to rely upon statistical methods. But it
seems certain that much progress can be made before these limits can be reached.
This paper, which although written in 1951 has not become dated, predicted
with almost supernatural vision the path that numerical weather forecasting was to
follow over the next ﬁve decades. It described the need for objective analysis of
meteorological data in order to replace the laborious hand analyses. We now refer
to this process as data assimilation (Chapter 5), which uses both observations and
short forecasts to estimate initial conditions. Note that at a time at which only one-day
forecasts had ever been attempted, Charney already had the intuition that there was an
upper limit to weather predictability, which Lorenz (1965) later estimated to be about
two weeks. However, Charney attributed the expected limit to model deﬁciencies
(such as the parameterization of turbulent processes), rather than to the chaotic nature
of the atmosphere, which imposes a limit of predictability even if the model is perfect
