10
1 Historical overview of numerical weather prediction
(Lorenz, 1963b; Chapter 6). Charney was right in assuming that in practice model
deﬁciencies, as well as errors in the initial conditions, would limit predictability. At
the present time, however, the state of the art in numerical forecasting has advanced
enough that, when the atmosphere is highly predictable, the theoretically estimated
limit for weather forecasting (about two weeks) is occasionally reached and even
exceeded through techniques such as ensemble forecasting (Chapter 6).
Following the success of Charney et al. (1950), Rossby moved back to Sweden,
and was able to direct a group that reproduced similar experiments on a powerful
Swedish computer known as BESK. As a result, the ﬁrst operational (real time)
numerical weather forecasts started in Sweden in September 1954, six months before
the start-up of the US operational forecasts5 (D¨o¨os and Eaton, 1957, Wiin-Nielsen,
1991, Bolin, 1999).
1.3
Primitive equations, global and regional models,
and nonhydrostatic models
As envisioned by Charney (1951, 1962) the ﬁltered (quasi-geostrophic) equations,
although very useful for understanding of the large-scale extratropical dynamics of
the atmosphere, were not accurate enough to allow continued progress in NWP, and
were eventually replaced by primitive equation models (Chapter 2). The primitive
equations are conservation laws applied to individual parcels of air: conservation
of the three-dimensional momentum (equations of motion), conservation of energy
(ﬁrst law of thermodynamics), conservation of dry air mass (continuity equation),
and equations for the conservation of moisture in all its phases, as well as the equation
of state for perfect gases. They include in their solution fast gravity and sound waves,
and therefore in their space and time discretization they require the use of smaller
time steps, or alternative techniques that slow them down (Chapter 3). For models
with a horizontal grid size larger than 10 km, it is customary to replace the vertical
component of the equation of motion with its hydrostatic approximation, in which
the vertical acceleration is considered negligible compared with the gravitational
acceleration (buoyancy). With this approximation, it is convenient to use atmospheric
pressure, instead of height, as a vertical coordinate.
The continuous equations of motions are solved by discretization in space and in
time using, for example, ﬁnite differences (Chapter 3). It has been found that the ac-
curacy of a model is very strongly inﬂuenced by the spatial resolution: in general, the
higher the resolution, the more accurate the model. Increasing resolution, however, is
extremely costly. For example, doubling the resolution in the three space dimensions
also requires halving the time step in order to satisfy conditions for computational
5 Anders Persson (1999 personal communication) kindly provided the notes on the historical
development of NWP in the USA and Sweden reproduced in Appendix A.

1.3 Primitive equations
11
stability. Therefore, the computational cost of doubling the resolution is a factor of
24 (three space and one time dimensions). Modern methods of discretization attempt
to make the increase in accuracy less onerous by the use of semi-implicit and semi-
Lagrangian time schemes. These schemes (pioneered by Canadian scientists under
the leadership of Andre Robert) have less stringent stability conditions on the time
step, and more accurate space discretization. Nevertheless, there is a constant need for
higher resolution in order to improve forecasts, and as a result running atmospheric
models has always been a major application of the fastest supercomputers available.
When the “conservation” equations are discretized over a given grid size (typi-
cally from a few to several hundred kilometers) it is necessary to add “sources and
sinks” terms due to small-scale physical processes that occur at scales that cannot
be explicitly resolved by the models. As an example, the equation for water vapor
conservation on pressure coordinates is typically written as
∂q
∂t + u ∂q
∂x + v ∂q
∂y + ω∂q
∂p = E −C + ∂ω′q′
∂p
(1.3.1)
where q is the ratio between water vapor and dry air mass, x and y are horizontal
coordinates with appropriate map projections, p is pressure, t is time, u and v are
the horizontal air velocity (wind) components, ω = dp/dt is the vertical velocity
in pressure coordinates, and the product of primed variables represents turbulent
transports of moisture on scales unresolved by the grid used in the discretization, with
the overbar indicating a spatial average over the grid of the model. It is customary
to call the left-hand side of the equation, the “dynamics” of the model, which is
computed explicitly (Chapter 3).
The right-hand side represents the so-called “physics” of the model. For the mois-
ture equation, it includes the effects of physical processes such as evaporation and
condensation E −C, and turbulent transfers of moisture which take place at small
scales that cannot be explicitly resolved by the “dynamics”. These subgrid-scale
physical processes, which are sources and sinks for the equations, are then “parame-
terized” in terms of the variables explicitly represented in the atmospheric dynamics
(Chapter 4).
Two types of models are in use for NWP: global and regional models (Chapter 5).
Global models are generally used for guidance in medium-range forecasts (more than
2 d), and for climate simulations. At NCEP, for example, the global models are run
through 16 d every day. Because the horizontal domain of global models is the whole
earth, they usually cannot be run at high resolution. For more detailed forecasts it is
necessary to increase the resolution, and this can only be done over limited regions
of interest.
Regional models are used for shorter-range forecasts (typically 1–3 d), and are
run with a resolution two or more times higher than global models. For example,
the NCEP global model in 1997 was run with 28 vertical levels, and a horizontal
resolution of 100 km for the ﬁrst week, and 200 km for the second week. The regional

12
1 Historical overview of numerical weather prediction
(Eta) model was run with a horizontal resolution of 48 km and 38 levels, and later in
the day with 29 km and 50 levels. Because of their higher resolution, regional models
have the advantage of higher accuracy and the ability to reproduce smaller-scale
phenomena such as fronts, squall lines, and much better orographic forcing than
global models. On the other hand, regional models have the disadvantage that, unlike
global models, they are not “self-contained” because they require lateral boundary
conditions at the borders of the horizontal domain. These boundary conditions must
be as accurate as possible, because otherwise the interior solution of the regional
models quickly deteriorates. Therefore it is customary to “nest” the regional models
within another model with coarser resolution, whose forecast provides the boundary
conditions. For this reason, regional models are used only for short-range forecasts.
After a certain period, which is proportional to the size of the model, the information
contained in the high-resolution initial conditions is “swept away” by the inﬂuence
of the boundary conditions, and the regional model becomes merely a “magnifying
glass” for the coarser model forecast in the regional domain. This can still be
useful, for example, in climate simulations performed for long periods (seasons to
multiyears), and which therefore tend to be run at coarser resolution. A “regional
climate model” can provide a more detailed version of the coarse climate simulation
in a region of interest. Several other major NWP centers in Europe (United
Kingdom (http://www.met-ofﬁce.gov.uk/), France (http://www.meteo.fr/), Germany
(http://www.dwd.de/)), Japan (http://www.kishou.go.jp/), Australia (http://www.
bom.gov.au/nmoc/ab nmc op.shtml), and Canada (http://www.ec.gc.ca/) also have
similar global and regional models, whose details can be obtained at their web
sites.
More recently the resolution of some regional models has been increased to just
a few kilometers in order to resolve better storm-scale phenomena. Storm-resolving
models such as the Advanced Regional Prediction System (ARPS) cannot use the
hydrostatic approximation which ceases to be accurate for horizontal scales of the
order of 10 km or smaller. Several major nonhydrostatic models have been devel-
oped and are routinely used for mesoscale forecasting. In the USA the most widely
used are the ARPS, the MM5 (Penn State/NCAR Mesoscale Model, Version 5),
the RSM (NCEP Regional Spectral Model) and the COAMPS (US Navy’s Coupled
Ocean/Atmosphere Mesoscale Prediction System). There is a tendency towards the
use of nonhydrostatic models that can be used globally as well.
1.4
Data assimilation: determination of the initial
conditions for the computer forecasts
As indicated previously, NWP is an initial-value problem: given an estimate of
the present state of the atmosphere, the model simulates (forecasts) its evolution.
The problem of determination of the initial conditions for a forecast model is very

1.4 Data assimilation: determination of the initial conditions
13
important and complex, and has become a science in itself (Daley, 1991). In this
section we introduce methods that have been used for this purpose (successive cor-
rections method or SCM, optimal interpolation or OI, variational methods in three
and four dimensions, 3D-Var and 4D-Var, and Kalman ﬁltering or KF). We discuss
this subject in more detail in Chapter 5, and refer the reader to Daley (1991) as a
much more comprehensive text on atmospheric data analysis.
In the early experiments, Richardson (1922) and Charney et al. (1950) performed
hand interpolations of the available observations to grid points, and these ﬁelds
of initial conditions were manually digitized, which was a very time consuming
procedure. The need for an automatic “objective analysis” quickly became apparent
(Charney, 1951), and interpolation methods ﬁtting data to grids were developed
(e.g., Panofsky, 1949, Gilchrist and Cressman, 1954, Barnes, 1964, 1978). However,
there is an even more important problem than spatial interpolation of observations to
gridded ﬁelds: the data available are not enough to initialize current models. Modern
primitive equations models have a number of degrees of freedom of the order of
107. For example, a latitude–longitude model with a typical resolution of 1◦and
20 vertical levels would have 360 × 180 × 20 = 1.3 × 106 grid points. At each grid
point we have to carry the values of at least four prognostic variables (two horizontal
wind components, temperature, moisture), and the surface pressure for each column,
giving over 5 million variables that need to be given an initial value. For any given
time window of ±3 hours, there are typically 10–100 thousand observations of the
atmosphere, two orders of magnitude less than the number of degrees of freedom
of the model. Moreover, their distribution in space and time is very nonuniform
(Fig. 1.4.1), with regions like North America and Eurasia which are relatively data-
rich, while others much more poorly observed.
For this reason, it became obvious rather early that it was necessary to use addi-
tional information (denoted background, ﬁrst guess or prior information) to prepare
initial conditions for the forecasts (Bergthorsson and D¨o¨os, 1955). Initially clima-
tology was used as a ﬁrst guess (e.g., Gandin, 1963), but as the forecasts became
better, a short-range forecast was chosen as the ﬁrst guess in the operational data
assimilation systems or “analysis cycles”. The intermittent data assimilation cycle
shown schematically in Fig. 1.4.2 is continued in present-day operational systems,
which typically use a 6-h cycle performed four times a day.
In the 6-h data assimilation cycle for a global model, the background ﬁeld is a
model 6-h forecast xb (a three-dimensional array). To obtain the background or ﬁrst
guess “observations”, the model forecast is interpolated to the observation location,
and if they are different, converted from model variables to observed variables yo
(such as satellite radiances or radar reﬂectivities). The ﬁrst guess of the observations
is therefore H(xb), where H is the observation operator that performs the neces-
sary interpolation and transformation from model variables to observation space.
The difference between the observations and the model ﬁrst guess yo −H(xb) is
denoted “observational increments” or “innovations”. The analysis xa is obtained by

14
1 Historical overview of numerical weather prediction
RAOBS
SAT WIND
SFC SHIP
SFC LAND
SAT TEMP
AIRCRAFT
DATA DISTRIBUTION 01 SEP9700Z–01SEP9700Z
Figure 1.4.1: Typical distribution of observations in a ±3-h window.
Global analysis (statistical
interpolation) and balancing
Global forecast model
Initial conditions
Observations (±3h)
Background or first guess
(Operational forecasts)
6-h forecast
Figure 1.4.2: Flow diagram of a typical intermittent (6-h) data assimilation cycle.

1.4 Data assimilation: determination of the initial conditions
15
adding the innovations to the model forecast (ﬁrst guess) with weights W that are
determined based on the estimated statistical error covariances of the forecast and
the observations:
xa = xb + W[yo −H(xb)]
(1.4.1)
Different analysis schemes (SCM, OI, 3D-Var, and KF) are based on (1.4.1) but
differ by the approach taken to combine the background and the observations to pro-
duce the analysis. Earlier methods such as the SCM (Bergthorsson and D¨o¨os, 1955,
Cressman, 1959, Barnes, 1964) were of a form similar to (1.4.1), with weights deter-
mined empirically. The weights are a function of the distance between the observation
and the grid point, and the analysis is iterated several times. In OI (Gandin, 1963)
the matrix of weights W is determined from the minimization of the analysis errors
at each grid point. In the 3D-Var approach one deﬁnes a cost function proportional
to the square of the distance between the analysis and both the background and the
observations (Sasaki, 1970). The cost function is minimized directly to obtain the
analysis. Lorenc (1986) showed that OI and the 3D-Var approach are equivalent if
the cost function is deﬁned as:
J = 1
2{[yo −H(x)]T R−1[yo −H(x)] + (x −xb)T B−1(x −xb)}
(1.4.2)
Thecostfunction J in(1.4.2)measuresthedistanceofaﬁeld x totheobservations(the
ﬁrst term in the cost function) and the distance to the ﬁrst guess or background xb (the
second term in the cost function). The distances are scaled by the observation error
covariance R and by the background error covariance B respectively. The minimum
of the cost function is obtained for x = xa, which is deﬁned as the “analysis”. The
analysis obtained in (1.4.1) and (1.4.2) is the same if the weight matrix in (1.4.1) is
given by
W = BHT (HBHT + R−1)−1
(1.4.3)
The difference between OI (1.4.1) and the 3D-Var approach (1.3) is in the method
of solution: in OI, the weights W are obtained for each grid point or grid volume,
using suitable simpliﬁcations. In 3D-Var, the minimization of (1.4.2) is performed
directly, allowing for additional ﬂexibility and a simultaneous global use of the data
(Chapter 5).
More recently, the variational approach has been extended to four dimensions, by
including within the cost function the distance to observations over a time interval
(assimilation window). A ﬁrst version of this considerably more expensive method
was implemented at ECMWF at the end of 1997 (Bouttier and Rabier, 1997). Re-
search on the even more advanced and computationally expensive KF (e.g., Ghil et al.,
1981), and ensemble KF (Evensen, 1994, Houtekamer and Mitchell, 1998) is dis-
cussed in Chapter 5. That chapter also includes a discussion about the problem of
enforcing a balance in the analysis so that the presence of gravity waves does not

16
1 Historical overview of numerical weather prediction
mask the meteorological signal, as happened to Richardson (1922) (Fig. 1.2.1). The
method used for many years to solve this “initialization” problem was “nonlinear
normal mode initialization” (Machenhauer, 1977, Baer and Tribbia, 1977). The bal-
ance in the initial conditions is usually obtained by either adding a constraint to the
cost function (1.4.2) (Parrish and Derber, 1992), or through the use of a digital ﬁlter
(Lynch and Huang, 1992, Chapter 5).
In the analysis cycle, no matter which analysis scheme is employed, the use of
the model forecast is essential in achieving “four-dimensional data assimilation”
(4DDA). This means that the data assimilation cycle is like a long model integration,
in which the model is “nudged” by the observational increments in such a way that
it remains close to the real atmosphere. The importance of the model cannot be
overemphasized: it transports information from data-rich to data-poor regions, and
it provides a complete estimation of the four-dimensional state of the atmosphere.
Figure 1.4.3 presents the rms difference between the 6-h forecast (used as a ﬁrst
guess) and the rawinsonde observations from 1978 to the present (in other words, the
rms of the observational increments for 500-hPa heights). It should be noted that the
rms differences are not necessarily forecast errors, since the observations also contain
errors. In the Northern Hemisphere the rms differences have been halved from about
30 m in the late 1970s, to about 13 m in 2000, equivalent to a mean temperature
error of about 0.65 K, similar to rawinsonde observational errors. In the Southern
Hemisphere the improvements are even larger, with the differences decreasing from
about 47 m to about 12 m. The improvements in these short-range forecasts are a
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
Year
rms differences (m)
Southern Hemisphere
Northern Hemisphere
Figure 1.4.3: Rms observational increments (differences between 6-h forecast and
rawinsonde observations) for 500-hPa heights (data courtesy of Steve Lilly, NCEP).
