120
3 Numerical discretization of the equations of motion
certain conditions, and the choice of the condition gives rise to different types of
iterative methods (e.g., Sameh and Sarin, 1999). The requirement that the residual be
orthogonal to the Krylov subspace, F −Aφm⊥Km(A,r0) leads to the conjugate gra-
dient and the Lanczos methods. Methods like GMRES, MINRES and ORTHODIR
are obtained by requiring that the residual be minimized over the Krylov subspace.
The bi-conjugate gradient and QMR methods are derived requiring the residual to be
orthogonal to Km(AT ,r0). The discussion of these methods applicable to nonsym-
metric systems is beyond the scope of this book, but is given in the texts referred in
Section 3.4.1.
3.5
Lateral boundary conditions for regional models
3.5.1
Introduction
The use of regional models for weather prediction has arisen from the desire to reduce
the model errors through an increase in horizontal resolution that cannot be afforded
in a global model. Operational regional models have been embedded or “nested”
into coarser resolution hemispheric or global models since the 1970s. In the USA,
the ﬁrst regional model was the LFM model (Chapter 1). The nesting of regional
models requires the use of updated lateral boundary conditions obtained from the
global model.
We have seen that for pure hyperbolic equations there should be as many boundary
conditions imposed at a given boundary as the number of characteristics moving into
the domain. Parabolic equations with second order diffusion require one boundary
condition at every point in the boundary for each prognostic equation. Second order
elliptic equations (such as Laplace, Poisson, and Helmholtz equations) also require
one boundary condition. The ﬁrst forecast experiment of Charney et al. (1950) used
the barotropic vorticity equation (conservation of absolute vorticity), and already
had to deal with boundary conditions. They solved the hyperbolic equation ∂ζ/∂t =
−v · ∇(ζ + f ) followed by the Poisson (elliptic) equation ∇2∂$/∂t = ∂ζ/∂t.
Therefore, Charney et al. (1950) had to impose a boundary condition on the stream-
function at all the boundary points (needed to solve the Poisson equation) and a
boundary condition for the vorticity at the inﬂow points. They used persistence in
both cases: for the elliptic equation they used as boundary condition ∂$/∂t = 0
(i.e., the normal wind remains constant), and then speciﬁed that the vorticity also
remained constant (∂∇2$/∂t = 0) at the inﬂow points and extrapolated the vorticity
using upstream differences at the outﬂow points.
For the SWEs, there are three characteristics, one corresponding to a geostrophic
solution, moving with the speed of the ﬂow U, and the other two corresponding to
inertia-gravity waves, moving with speed U ±

f 2k2 + . At the boundaries, if
the speed of inertia-gravity waves is larger than U and the ﬂow is inward, we have

3.5 Lateral boundary conditions for regional models
121
to specify two boundary conditions. If the ﬂow is outward, we have to specify one
boundary condition (corresponding to the inertia-gravity waves moving in). If U
is greater than the speed of the inertia-gravity waves, we have to specify all three
boundary conditions at the inﬂow points and none at the outﬂow points. For parabolic
equations (with horizontal diffusion), each predicted variable has to be speciﬁed as
well at all lateral boundaries.
Oliger and Sundstrom (1978) showed that the hydrostatic primitive equations
are not purely hyperbolic (because of the loss of the time derivative of the vertical
velocity), and that they do not have a well-posed set of boundary conditions. In an
excellent review of the lateral boundary condition used in operational regional NWP
models, McDonald (1997) pointed out that with the presence of horizontal diffusion
in models there is a feeling that we can “over-specify slightly the lateral boundary
conditions and not do very much damage”.
In practice, boundary conditions are chosen pragmatically and tested numerically
to check their appropriateness. Several methods have been tried over the years, but
the most widely used is the boundary relaxation scheme introduced by Davies (1976).
Davies (1983) has a very illuminating analysis of the impact of the different types
of boundary conditions and their generation of spurious reﬂection using simple ex-
amples of wave equations and SWEs. He points out that an overspecifying boundary
condition scheme is satisfactory if: (a) it transmits incoming waves from the “host”
model providing boundary information without appreciable change of phase or am-
plitude, and (b) at the outﬂow boundaries, reﬂected waves do not reenter the domain
of interest with appreciable amplitude. We follow the Davies (1983) analysis and the
review by McDonald (1997) in the rest of this section. Durran (1999), Chapter 8,
is also devoted to this subject.
3.5.2
Lateral boundary conditions for one-way
nested models
The majority of regional models have “one-way” lateral boundary conditions, i.e.,
the host model, with coarser resolution, provides information about the boundary
values to the nested regional model, but it is not affected by the regional model
solution. This approach has some advantages: (a) it allows for independent develop-
ment of the regional model, and (b) the host model can be run for long integrations
without being “tainted” by problems associated with nonuniform resolution or from
the regional model. Overall, the regional one-way nesting can be considered to have
been successful, in the sense that the boundary information from the host model
is able to penetrate the regional model, and the regional model solution is able to
leave the domain without appreciable deterioration of the solutions. The success
can also be measured by the fact that there have been several attempts to perform
long-term integrations of nested regional models. In these long-term integrations, the

122
3 Numerical discretization of the equations of motion
initial regional information is swept out of the domain in the ﬁrst day or two, and all
the additional information comes from the global model integration. This approach
is denoted “regional climate modeling”. Takle et al. (1999) discuss the Project to
Intercompare Regional Climate Systems (PIRCS). In these extended integrations,
the regional model acts as a “magnifying glass” for the global solution, allowing the
large-scale ﬂow to interact with smaller scale forcing such as orography, variations
in soil moisture and land–sea contrast, and as a result tend to give a more realistic so-
lution. The “added value” over the global solutions empirically indicates the overall
success of the one-way boundary conditions used in different models.
Therearefourtypesof“pragmatic”boundaryconditionsthathavebeenformulated
for one-way lateral boundary conditions:
(a)
Pseudo-radiation boundary conditions
Orlanski (1976) proposed a ﬁnite difference approximation of the “radiation condi-
tion”, i.e., specifying well-posed boundary conditions for pure hyperbolic equations.
One assumes that the prognostic equations locally satisfy ∂u/∂t + c∂u/∂x = 0 and
then estimates the phase speed c using a ﬁnite difference equivalent of
c = −∂u
∂t
$
∂u
∂x
(3.5.1)
at the points immediately inside the boundary (denoted by b −1). Miller and Thorpe
(1981) used ﬁrst order upstream approximation
c′ = −un
b−1 −un−1
b−1
t
$
un−1
b−1 −un−1
b−2
x
(3.5.2)
as well as higher-order approximations. After estimating c′, if it points into the
domain, un+1
b
is speciﬁed. If it points out, the upstream scheme is used: un+1
b
=
un
b −c′t/x(un
b −un
b−1). If c′t/x > 1 because the space derivative of u is
small, Orlanski (1976) suggested limiting the value of c′ to c′ = x/t. Klemp and
Lilly (1978) pointed out reasons why the approximate “radiation schemes” are not
completely successful in avoiding spurious reﬂection: there can be overspeciﬁcation
at the boundaries, speciﬁcation of the right number of boundary conditions but not
their correct values, and errors in the estimation of c′. The radiation condition has
been used for research models (e.g., Durran et al. 1993). Klemp and Durran (1983)
and Bougeault (1983) used radiation boundary conditions at the top of the model.
Operational models generally do not use radiation boundary conditions and instead
impose the condition that the vertical velocity be zero at the top (e.g., ˙σ = 0 at
σ = σT for sigma coordinates). As a result, the presence of this artiﬁcial “rigid top”
leads to spurious wave reﬂections and even generates instabilities near the top (e.g.,
Kalnay and Toth, 1996, Hartman et al., 1997).

3.5 Lateral boundary conditions for regional models
123
(b)
Diffusive damping in a boundary zone or “sponge layer” (Burridge, 1975,
Mesinger, 1977)
In this method the global (or host) model boundary conditions are speciﬁed for all
variables, and horizontal diffusion is added over a boundary zone to dissipate the
noisy waves generated by the boundary conditions:
∂u
∂t + c∂u
∂x =
 ∂
∂x v ∂u
∂x

BZ
(3.5.3)
This would seem to be a natural choice for regional model boundary conditions since
by increasing the order of the equation to make it parabolic within a limited boundary
zone, it is possible to specify all variables at the boundary without overspecifying.
However, this approach also has clear disadvantages: it damps the incoming waves
from the global model (unless they are long compared to the width of the damping
zone). It also produces spurious reﬂections of outgoing waves if ν increases abruptly,
and if it increases slowly it may not be enough to damp the reﬂected waves. As a
result, this method is not very much in use at this time.
(c)
Tendency modiﬁcation scheme (Perkey and Kreitzberg, 1976)
The wave equation is replaced by
∂u
∂t + c∂u
∂x = −γ ∂(u −u)
∂t
(3.5.4)
where u is prescribed from the host model (which is assumed to be correct near the
boundary), and γ is zero in the interior and increases to large values at the boundaries.
Since the host model follows the wave equation
∂u
∂t + c∂u
∂x = 0
(3.5.5)
we can write an “error” equation for the difference u′ between the regional and the
host model:
∂u′
∂t + c∗∂u′
∂x = 0
(3.5.6)
where c∗= c/(1 + γ ). Therefore the time tendency scheme advects the error and
slows it down to almost zero at the boundaries, thus avoiding overspeciﬁcation. In
practice this scheme is also found to produce spurious reﬂections.
(d)
Flow relaxation scheme (Davies 1976, 1983)
As indicated before, this is the most widely used scheme. The forecast equations are
modiﬁed by adding a Newtonian relaxation term over a boundary zone:
∂u
∂t + c∂u
∂x = −K(u −u)
(3.5.7)

124
3 Numerical discretization of the equations of motion
The “error” equation is now
∂u′
∂t + c∂u′
∂x = −Ku′
(3.5.8)
indicating that the error is advected to or from the boundary and damped. At the
inﬂow boundaries only the differences between the regional and the host model
are damped. Therefore this scheme mitigates the effects of overspeciﬁcation at the
outﬂow boundaries without introducing deleterious effects in the inﬂow boundaries.
If K increases abruptly, it can also introduce some spurious reﬂection. For this
reason, Kallberg (1977) proposed the use of a smoothly growing function for K. Let’s
consider a complete prognostic equation for the regional model near the boundaries
∂u
∂t = F −K(u −u)
(3.5.9)
In (3.5.9) F includes all the regular “forcing terms” in the interior time derivative
(e.g., advection, sources/sinks, etc.). We can discretize it in time, using, for example,
the leapfrog scheme for the regular terms and backward implicit scheme for the
boundary relaxation term, as
un+1 −un−1
2t
= Fn −K
	
un+1
i
−un+1
(3.5.10)
Here the overbar represents the host model, un+1 is the updated regional model,
and the subscript i indicates the regional model (internal) solution obtained before
relaxing towards the host model values un+1:
un+1
i
= un−1 + 2t Fn
(3.5.11)
From (3.5.10) and (3.5.11) we can now write
un+1 = un+1
i
−K2tun+1
i
+ K2tun+1 = (1 −α)un+1
i
+ αun+1
(3.5.12)
Here α = 2t K varies from 0 in the interior (K = 0), to 1 at the boundary, where
the regional model solution is speciﬁed to coincide with the host model solution.
McDonald (1997) mentioned three functions that have been proposed for α( j), where
we deﬁne j = 0, α(0) = 1 at the boundary, and assume that the boundary zone
has n points so that for j ≥n, α( j) = 0. The ﬁrst function, found to be optimal
in minimizing false reﬂection of both Rossby and gravity waves by Kallberg (1977),
starts gently in the interior and has the steepest slope at the boundary: α = 1 −
tanh( j/2). Jones et al. (1995) used a linear proﬁle α = 1 −j/n, and McDonald
and Haugen (1992) proposed a cosine proﬁle α = [1 + cos( jπ/n)]/2, which has the
steepest slope at the center of the boundary zone. Benoit et al. (1997) in the MC2
model used α( j) = cos2( jπ/2n) and reported good results.
