3.5 Lateral boundary conditions for regional models
125
3.5.3
Other examples of lateral boundary conditions
Tatsumi (1983, 1986), following an idea of Hovermale, suggested adding an “error
diffusion” at the boundaries as well, which can also help to reduce the boundary
errors without affecting the incoming wave:
∂u
∂t + c∂u
∂x = −K(u −u) + ∂
∂x

ν ∂u −u
∂x

(3.5.13)
This is used in the regional spectral model of the Japan Weather Service (Tatsumi,
1986).
Juang and Kanamitsu (1994) and Juang et al. (1997) also developed a RSM nested
in the NCEP global spectral model, but they cast it as a perturbation model, so that the
full RSM solution includes the global model solutions plus the regional perturbations.
They use an “implicit” variation of the tendency modiﬁcation approach with
∂u
∂t = F −µ(un+1 −un+1)
(3.5.14)
where µ = α/T, T is an e-folding time (3 hours), and
un+1 = un−1 + 2t ∂u
∂t
un+1 = un−1 + 2t ∂u
∂t
(3.5.15)
so that for the perturbation u′ = u −u, the implicit relaxation is given by
∂u′
∂t =
F −∂¯u
∂t −µu′n−1
1 + 2µt
(3.5.16)
They found that the orography of the regional model also has to be blended with the
global orography in the boundary zone in order to avoid spurious noise.
The Eta model at NCEP (Mesinger et al., 1988, Janjic, 1994, Black, 1994) uses an
“almost well-posed” approach. It uses boundary values from the NCEP global model
only at the outermost row. When the ﬂow is inwards, all the prognostic variables are
prescribed from the global model. At the outﬂow points, the tangential velocities are
extrapolated from the interior of the integration domain. The variables in the second
row are a blend from the outermost and the third row. The “interior” is deﬁned as the
third row inwards, but the Eta model uses an upstream advection scheme for the ﬁve
outer rows of the domain in order to minimize possible reﬂections at the boundary.
3.5.4
Two-way interactive boundary conditions
Finally, we note that some regional models have been developed using two-way
interaction in the boundary conditions, i.e., the (presumably more accurate) regional
solution, in turn, also affects the global solution. Although, in principle, this would
seem a more accurate approach than the one-way boundary condition, care has to be
taken that the high-resolution information does not become distorted in the coarser

126
3 Numerical discretization of the equations of motion
resolution regions, which can result in worse overall results, especially at longer time
scales. There are basically two types of two-way boundary condition approaches.
The ﬁrst approach corresponds to a truly nested model, with abrupt changes in the
resolution, but with the inner or nested solution also used to modify the global or outer
model solution. The ﬁrst operational example of this type of two-way interaction was
the NGM developed by Phillips (1979). Zhang et al. (1986) implemented two-way
boundary conditions for the nesting in the MM5 model. See also Kurihara and Bender
(1980), and Skamarock (1989).
The second approach is simpler, and it involves the use of continuously stretched
horizontalcoordinatessothatonlytheregionofinterestissolvedwithhighresolution.
It is evident that with this approach, the equations in the regional high-resolution areas
do not require special boundary conditions, and that they do inﬂuence the solutions
in the regions more coarsely resolved, so that they can be considered as two-way
interactive nesting. There have been a few methods used to obtain regional high
resolution using stretched global coordinates:
(a) Uniform latitude–longitude stretching (Staniforth and Daley, 1977, Benoit
et al., 1989, Fox-Rabinovitz et al., 1997). This method is used by the
Canadian regional operational system.
(b) Stretched spherical harmonics (Courtier and Geleyn, 1988). This method is
used in the French regional operational system.
(c) A regular volume (such as a cube) projected on the sphere and then stretched
(Rancic et al., 1996, Taylor et al., 1997a). A variant of this approach is the
spherical geodesic grids explored somewhat unsuccessfully during the 1960s,
and now again in vogue (Williamson, 1968, Sadourny et al., 1968, Masuda
and Ohnishi, 1986, Heikes and Randall, 1995). The use of a regular volume to
generate the grid avoids the pole problem of the convergence of the meridians
in the latitude–longitude grid.
