4
Introduction to the parameterization
of subgrid-scale physical processes
4.1
Introduction
In Chapter 2 we derived the equations that govern the evolution of the atmosphere,
and in Chapter 3 we discussed the numerical discretizations that allow the numerical
integration of those equations on a computer. The discretization of the continuous
governing equation is limited by the model resolution, i.e., by the size of the smallest
resolvable scale. We have seen that in a ﬁnite difference scheme, the smallest scales
of motion that can be (poorly) resolved are those which have a wavelength of two grid
sizes. In spectral models, the motion of the smallest wave present in the solution is
more accurately computed, but for these and for any type of numerical discretization
there is always a minimum resolvable scale. Current climate models typically have
a horizontal resolution of the order of several hundred kilometers, global weather
forecast models have resolutions of 50–100 km, and regional mesoscale models of
10–50 km. Storm-scale models have even higher resolution, with grid sizes of the
order of 1–10 km. In the vertical direction, model resolution and vertical extent have
also been increased substantially, with current models having typically between 10
and 50 vertical levels, and extending from the surface to the stratosphere or even
the mesosphere. As computer power continues to increase, so does the resolution of
atmospheric models.
Despite the continued increase of horizontal and vertical resolution, it is obvious
that there are many important processes and scales of motion in the atmosphere that
cannot be explicitly resolved with present or future models. They include turbulent
motions with scales ranging from a few centimeters to the size of the model grid,
as well as processes that occur at a molecular scale, like condensation, evaporation,
127

128
4 Introduction to the parameterization of subgrid-scale physical processes
friction and radiation. We refer to all the processes that cannot be resolved explicitly
as “subgrid-scale processes”. An example of an important process that takes place at a
subgrid scale is the turbulent mixing in the planetary boundary layer. During the day-
time, the solar heating at the earth’s surface not only warms the soil but also causes the
plants to transpire and soil moisture to evaporate, thus transporting moisture into the
atmosphere. Surface heating leads to turbulent motion that is on the scale of a few me-
ters to a few hundred meters. With a horizontal grid size of 10–100 km, models cannot
resolve these motions. Yet the transport of the heat and moisture into the boundary
layer is very crucial to the development of afternoon thunderstorms and a host of
other phenomena that are important to the resolvable atmospheric ﬁelds. Another no-
table example is tropical cumulus convection. The cumulus clouds in the tropics are
known to be extremely important to the global energy balance, yet each cloud typi-
cally occupies only a few kilometers of space horizontally and vertically (Pan, 1999).
Although these processes occur at small scales, they depend on, and in turn, affect
the larger-scale ﬁelds and processes that are explicitly resolved by a numerical model.
For example, condensation of water vapor on a subgrid scale occurs if the resolved-
scale humidity ﬁeld is sufﬁciently high, and, in turn, condensation releases latent heat
that warms the grid-scale temperature ﬁeld. For this reason, it is not possible to ignore
the effect of the subgrid processes on the resolvable-scale ﬁelds without degrading
the quality of the forecast. To reproduce the interaction of the grid and subgrid-
scale processes, the subgrid-scale phenomena are “parameterized”, i.e., their effect
is formulated in terms of the resolved ﬁelds. Fig. 4.1.1, adapted from Arakawa (1997),
indicates schematically the resolved processes (usually referred to as the “dynamics
of the model”), and the processes that must be parameterized (“the model physics”),
DYNAMICAL
PROCESSES
Hydrological
processes
Cloud
processes
Boundary layer
processes
Radiation and
chemical processes
OCEAN AND LAND PROCESSES
Precipitation
Figure 4.1.1: Physical
processes in the atmosphere
and their interactions. The
dynamical processes for
resolvable scales, in bold,
are explicitly computed by
the model “dynamics”
(discussed in Chapters 2 and
3). The other subgrid-scale
processes are parameterized
in terms of the
resolved-scale ﬁelds.
(Adapted from Arakawa,
1997.)

4.2 Subgrid-scale processes and Reynolds averaging
129
and their interactions. Arakawa (1997) points out that some subgrid-scale processes
can be interpreted as adjustment processes. For example, the atmosphere adjusts to
the surface conditions through boundary layer adjustment processes, which are very
efﬁcient if the planetary boundary layer is unstable. Radiative ﬂuxes occur because
temperaturetendstoadjusttowardsradiativeequilibrium.Convectiveprocessesoccur
in the presence of an unstable stratiﬁcation and adjust the ﬁeld towards a more
neutrally stable state. Because radiative equilibrium is convectively unstable for the
lower troposphere, radiative–convective adjustment is a dominant process controlling
the vertical thermal structure of the troposphere.
The details of the parameterizations have a profound effect on the model forecast,
especially at longer time scales, and are the subject of very intense research. In this
chapter we provide only a very elementary introduction to model parameterizations.
A short but inspiring introduction is presented in Arakawa (1997). An overview
of different subgrid processes, and their parameterizations in atmospheric models
appears in Haltiner and Williams (1980), and a more recent review, including ocean
and land models, is available in Climate system modeling edited by Trenberth (1992).
Stull(1988)andGarrart(1994)aretextsontheatmosphericboundarylayerprocesses.
Emanuel and Raymond (1993) edited a volume including detailed discussions of
a number of cumulus parameterizations. Pan (1999) discusses the philosophy that
guides modelers in the development of parameterizations. Randall (2000) has edited a
book honoring Akio Arakawa on the occasion of his retirement, which includes many
review papers on areas related to physical parameterizations (as well as numerical
modeling).
4.2
Subgrid-scale processes and Reynolds averaging
Consider the prognostic equation for water vapor written in ﬂux form in z-coordinates
(Section 2.5):
∂ρq
∂t
= −∂ρuq
∂x
−∂ρvq
∂y
−∂ρwq
∂z
+ ρE −ρC
(4.2.1)
In the real atmosphere, both u and q contain scales that are resolved by the grid of
the model, and smaller, subgrid scales. We write then
u = u + u′
q = q + q′
%
(4.2.2)
where the overbar represents the spatial average over a grid, and the primes, the
subgrid-scale perturbation. We can neglect the subgrid-scale variations of ρ. By
deﬁnition, the grid-box average of all quantities linear in the perturbations is zero,
e.g.,q′ = 0, u′q = 0. Also, averaging a grid-average quantity does not change it, e.g.,
uq = uq. These are the rules for Reynolds averaging, a method originally developed

130
4 Introduction to the parameterization of subgrid-scale physical processes
by Reynolds in 1895 for use in time averages, but that we apply to grid-box averages.
We can substitute (4.2.2) in the moisture equation (4.2.1), take a grid average, and
obtain:
∂ρq
∂t
= −∂ρuq
∂x
−∂ρvq
∂y
−∂ρwq
∂z
−∂ρu′q′
∂x
−∂ρv′q′
∂y
−∂ρw′q′
∂z
+ ρE −ρC
(4.2.3)
The ﬁrst three terms of the right-hand side are the grid-scale (resolved) advection
terms, whose numerical discretization we have studied in the Chapter 3. They are
included in the “dynamical processes” box of Fig. 4.1.1. The next three terms are the
divergences of the eddy ﬂuxes of moisture or turbulent moisture transports. The last
two terms (evaporation and condensation) are subgrid-scale processes that occur at
a molecular scale and that we still need to parameterize. Both the molecular-scale
processes and eddy ﬂuxes that occur at scales much larger than molecular, but smaller
than the grid resolution, are denoted collectively as “subgrid-scale processes”. As
indicated in the introduction, the impact of at least some of these physical processes
on the larger scales explicitly represented in the model must be included. Without the
parameterization of at least the most important subgrid-scale processes, the model
integrations cease to be realistic in a very short period, from a day or two for large-
scale ﬂow, to less than an hour for storm-scale simulations.
There are several choices for the parameterization of the effect of turbulent trans-
port terms in terms of the resolved scales. Consider, for example, the vertical turbulent
ﬂux of moisture (which, because of the strong vertical gradients, especially in the
planetary boundary layer, is by far the dominant component of the eddy ﬂuxes). We
can choose to:
(a) Neglect the vertical turbulent ﬂux, assuming that, in the boundary layer, the
grid-scale ﬁeld is well mixed:
−ρw′q′ = 0
(4.2.4)
This is known as a “zeroth order” closure, in which only the average
properties are sought. An example is the bulk parameterization of the mixed
boundary layer (Deardorff, 1972), in which the potential temperature, water
vapor, and wind are assumed to be well mixed, and only the depth of the layer
is forecast.
(b) Parameterize the vertical ﬂux as a “turbulent diffusion process” in terms of q
and the other grid-scale variables (this is a ﬁrst order closure, and is the most
commonly used):
−ρw′q′ = K ∂q
∂z
(4.2.5)
This represents the effect of turbulent mixing due to parcels moving up or
down, bringing with them the moisture from their original level, and mixing

4.2 Subgrid-scale processes and Reynolds averaging
131
with the environment at the new level. The main problem in “K-theory”, as
this approach is also known, is to ﬁnd a suitable formulation of the eddy
diffusivity K, which also depends on the grid-average ﬁelds and the stability
of the ﬂow.
(c) Obtain a prognostic equation for w′q′ by multiplying the vertical equation of
motion by ρq and adding it to (4.2.1) multiplied by w. We obtain an equation
with many terms like
∂ρwq
∂t
= −∂ρuwq
∂x
−· · ·
(4.2.6)
We can then take its Reynolds average and subtract it from (4.2.6), and derive
a prognostic equation for the turbulent ﬂuxes ∂ρw′q′/∂t = · · · −∂ρw′w′q′/
∂z · · ·. This equation can be included as an additional model equation. Since
it contains triple products of turbulent terms, these terms, in turn, have to be
parameterized in terms of the double products:
−ρw′w′q′ = K ′ ∂ρw′q′
∂z
(4.2.7)
This is a second order closure. Second order closure models have many
additional prognostic equations (for all the products of turbulent variables)
but are an alternative to high-resolution models to obtain an estimate of
turbulent transports (e.g., Moeng and Wyngaard, 1989). Mellor and Yamada
(1974, 1982) show how to construct a hierarchy of closures for vertical ﬂuxes
and provide simplifying assumptions.
If an important physical process that occurs in the real atmosphere on a scale unre-
solved by the model is not parameterized, it may still appear in the model integration
“aliased” into the resolved scales. For example, primitive equation model integrations
will be ruined by dry convective instability if it is not parameterized. In the real at-
mosphere, if the potential temperature decreases with height, the unstable convective
circulation that takes place occurs at very small horizontal scales, of the same order
as the depth of the unstable layer, typically 1 km or less. Since this cannot be resolved
with horizontal grids of the order of 10–100 km, models with unstable layers develop
an unrealistic appearance of “vertical noodles”, with narrow columns moving up and
down side by side. In order to handle this problem, Manabe et al. (1965) developed
the dry convective adjustment, a simple parameterization of dry convection still used
in most present-day models. In this parameterization, when the grid-scale atmosphere
lapse rate exceeds the dry adiabatic lapse rate %d = g/C p ≈10 K/km, the unstable
atmospheric column is instantaneously adjusted to an adiabatic or very slightly stable
proﬁle, while keeping constant the layer total enthalpy. Moist (cumulus) convection
that occurs when there is grid-scale saturation and the temperature gradient exceeds
the moist adiabatic lapse rate also results in a “wet noodles” circulation. This led
to the moist convective adjustment, the ﬁrst parameterization of cumulus convection
(Manabe et al., 1965), adjusting to a moist adiabatic proﬁle. The moist convective

132
4 Introduction to the parameterization of subgrid-scale physical processes
adjustment was not found to be a sufﬁciently realistic cumulus parameterization,
and has since been replaced by other convective parameterizations by Kuo, 1974,
Arakawa and Schubert, 1974, Betts and Miller, 1986, Kain and Fritsch, 1990. See
the volume edited by Emanuel and Raymond (1993) for a detailed review of cumu-
lus parameterizations, and some updates in Randall (2000). Cumulus convection is
one of the most important parameterizations in determining the characteristics of the
model climatology (e.g., Miyakoda and Sirutis, 1977).
When a process occurs at scales not much smaller than the grid size, it presents
an additional difﬁculty: the resolved scales and the unresolved scales to be pa-
rameterized are not well separated. An example of a process only marginally re-
solved in present-day models, which therefore appears aliased into the shortest
waves present in the solution, is the sea-breeze circulation. A model with a grid
size of 50–100 km (or more) cannot resolve the real sea-breeze circulation that takes
place, for example, over a distance of the order of 1–20 km in the Florida penin-
sula on summer days. Therefore, in the model, the sea-breeze coastal circulation
becomes distorted into a 2x circulation, and because the scales are not well sep-
arated, its effects on the large scales are difﬁcult to parameterize. Similar effects
are observed near heated mountain slopes when they are not properly resolved. The
same problem of lack of scale separation complicates cumulus convection param-
eterization in models with a resolution of the order of 10 km, which is close to
the horizontal scale of the convection, but not high enough to resolve convection
explicitly.
4.3
Overview of model parameterizations
In a typical hydrostatic model on pressure coordinates, the governing equations
(Chapter 2), including subgrid-scale processes, denoted with a tilde, are written as:
dv
dt = −∇pφ −f k × v −g ∂˜τ
∂p
(4.3.1)
for the two horizontal equations of motion, including the effect of eddy ﬂuxes of
momentum,
∂φ
∂p = −α
(4.3.2)
the hydrostatic equation,
∇p · v + ∂ω
∂p = 0
(4.3.3)

4.3 Overview of model parameterizations
133
the continuity equation,
∂ps
∂t + v · ∇ps = −
∞

0
∇p · vdp
(4.3.4)
the rate of change of the surface pressure,
p α = RT
(4.3.5)
the equation of state,
C p
T
θ
dθ
dt = ˜Q = ˜Qrad −g ∂˜Fθ
∂p + L( ˜C −˜E)
(4.3.6)
and the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, which includes radiative heating and cooling,
sensible heat ﬂuxes and condensation and evaporation, and
dq
dt = ˜E −˜C −g ∂˜Fq
∂p
(4.3.7)
the conservation equation for water vapor. Condensation takes place when the grid
average value oversaturates (stable or grid-scale condensation), or when there is
moist convective instability and cumulus convection. The condensed water falls
as precipitation, and may evaporate if the layers below are not saturated. Addi-
tional conservation equations can be written for cloud and rain water in models
with prognostic (rather than diagnostic) clouds, and for other substances such as
ozone.
In these equations the quantities with an overbar are the grid-averaged quantities
computed by the model dynamics, and the terms with the tilde represent the terms
that are parameterized. In a typical model, the vertical eddy ﬂux of momentum
˜τ = ρw′u′ i + ρw′v′ j (also known as eddy stress) of sensible heat ˜FT = ρC pw′T ′
and of moisture ˜Fq = ρw′q′ may be represented using K-theory in the boundary
layer and neglected in the free atmosphere above the boundary layer (using K = 0
or a very small value). The vertical derivatives of the turbulent ﬂuxes that appear in
the right-hand sides of (4.3.1), (4.3.6), and (4.3.7) introduce a requirement for lower
boundary conditions for the surface ﬂuxes of heat, moisture, and momentum. These
surface ﬂuxes are computed using a bulk parameterization based on the Monin–
Obukhov (1954) similarity theory. This theory concludes that the proﬁles of wind
and temperature in the turbulent surface layer can be described by a set of equations
that depends only on a few parameters, including the surface roughness length z0. The
hypothesis of similarity, based on many observational studies, suggests that the ﬂuxes
of momentum and heat are nearly constant with height in the surface layer (of depth
10–100 m, which is much thinner than the planetary boundary layer). The ﬂuxes
in the surface or constant ﬂux layer are usually represented with bulk aerodynamic

134
4 Introduction to the parameterization of subgrid-scale physical processes
formulas:
τ = −ρCD|v|v
Fθ = −ρCH|v|C p(θ −θS)
Fq = −ρCE|v|β(q −qS)



(4.3.8)
Here, v, θ, q are the velocity, potential temperature, and mixing ratio in the surface
layer, respectively, and the variables with an S subscript are the corresponding values
at the underlying ocean or land surface (vS = 0). CD, CH, and CE are transfer coef-
ﬁcients (CD is known as “drag coefﬁcient”) and they depend on the stability of the
surface layer (measured by the bulk Richardson number RiB = gz

(θ −θS)/θ

/v2,
the height z and the surface roughness length). They are nondimensional and have
typical values of the order of 10−3 for stable conditions and 10−2 for unstable con-
ditions (Louis, 1979). β is a coefﬁcient representing the degree of saturation of the
underlying surface (1 for oceans, 0–1 for land depending on the degree of saturation
in the soil moisture content). The surface layer values are either obtained through the
use of a thin (order 10 m) prognostic layer or diagnosed.
The radiative heating in (4.3.6) is determined from the vertical divergence of the
upward and downward ﬂuxes of short- and long-wave radiation, obtained using the
radiative transfer equation. See Kiehl (1992) for a review of the parameterization of
radiation. The interaction between clouds and radiation is very complex, and is a
major area of research. Early models speciﬁed clouds climatologically (Manabe et al.,
1965). In the 1980s the cloud cover was speciﬁed diagnostically, based on relative
humidity (Slingo, 1987, Campana, 1994). More recently, cloud and rain water were
predicted using budget equations and cloud cover was deduced from the amount of
cloud water (e.g., Zhao et al., 1997). The cloud properties are also important: rather
than plane slabs, as generally assumed, clouds have a fractal structure, which effec-
tively reduces their albedo and increases atmospheric absorption of solar radiation
(Cahalan et al., 1994).
An important area of research is the effect of subgrid-scale mountains. Wallace
et al. (1983) proposed representing the blocking effect of subgrid-scale hills and
valleys by increasing the effective height of mountains above its grid average by a
factor of order one times the standard deviation of the subgrid-scale orography. This
approach has been denoted “envelope orography”. Similarly, Mesinger et al. (1988)
chose a method essentially that deﬁnes the grid mountain height by the tallest peaks
(“silhouette orography”). Lott and Miller (1997) formulated a new parameterization
using developments in the nonlinear theory of stratiﬁed ﬂows around obstacles, pay-
ing special attention to the parameterization of the blocked ﬂow when the effective
height of the subgrid-scale orography is high enough. They showed that this method
can duplicate the results using envelope orography. In addition to its blocking effect,
under stable conditions, small-scale orography generates internal gravity waves that
propagate upwards, increase their amplitude, and eventually break at upper levels,
depositing their low-level momentum (Lilly and Kennedy, 1973). The net result is

4.3 Overview of model parameterizations
135
a deceleration due to surface orography at upper levels. Modelers have introduced
a gravity-wave parameterization following Palmer et al. (1986), McFarlane (1987),
and Lindzen (1988). Kim and Arakawa (1995) developed a parameterization of the
drag due to gravity waves.
Other areas of research in the parameterization of subgrid processes are related
to the fact that the underlying surfaces (ocean and land) have their own evolution
and therefore provide a “longer memory” to the forecast model which cannot be
represented diagnostically. Equation (4.3.8) indicates that over ocean it is necessary
to know the surface stress τ and the SST. Short-range forecasts are performed with
observed SSTs, under the assumption that they do not change signiﬁcantly with time,
but this is clearly not a reasonable assumption for medium-range or longer forecasts
(e.g., Pe˜na et al., 2002).
For seasonal and interannual predictions, the SST is predicted using an ocean
model coupled to the atmospheric model (Jiet al., 1994, Trenberth, 1992). In addition,
the surface ﬂuxes over the ocean depend on the surface waves, which are driven by the
wind. Currently most models use the Charnock (1955) parameterization relating an
effective roughness length to the surface stress. In an iterative procedure the stress and
the roughness length are obtained and bulk-aerodynamical formulas used to deduce
the sensible and latent heat ﬂuxes. However, in reality, ocean waves have a memory
of their previous interactions with the atmosphere: swell (“old sea”) is smoother than
“new sea” where waves are driven by sudden changes in the wind, and, in turn, this
affects the surface stress and the ﬂuxes of heat and moisture. To take this effect into
account, it is necessary to couple atmospheric models with ocean wave models.
Over land, similarly, the surface ﬂuxes of heat and moisture are strongly depen-
dent on the vegetation and soil moisture. Older models followed Manabe et al. (1965)
by representing the effect of available soil moisture with a simple 15-cm “bucket”
model, whose content was reduced by evaporation and increased by precipitation,
with overﬂow representing river runoff. The surface temperature was obtained diag-
nostically assuming zero heat capacity for the land. Current models include coupling
the atmospheric model with multilevel soil models with prognostic equations for the
soil temperature and moisture, and include the very important controlling effect of
plants on evapotranspiration (see reviews by Sellers (1992), Dickinson (1992), Pan
(1990)).
