5
Data assimilation
5.1
Introduction
In previous chapters we saw that NWP is an initial/boundary value problem: given
an estimate of the present state of the atmosphere (initial conditions), and appropriate
surface and lateral boundary conditions, the model simulates (forecasts) the atmo-
spheric evolution. Obviously, the more accurate the estimate of the initial conditions,
the better the quality of the forecasts. Currently, operational NWP centers produce
initial conditions through a statistical combination of observations and short-range
forecasts. This approach has become known as “data assimilation”, whose purpose
is deﬁned by Talagrand (1997) as “using all the available information, to determine
as accurately as possible the state of the atmospheric (or oceanic) ﬂow.”
There are several excellent reviews of this subject, which has become an im-
portant science in itself. The book Atmospheric data analysis by Daley (1991) is
a comprehensive description of methods for atmospheric data analysis and assim-
ilation. Ghil and Malanotte-Rizzoli (1991) have written a rigorous discussion of
present data assimilation methods with special emphasis on sequential methods. Ta-
lagrand (1997) gives an elegant introductory overview of current methods of data
assimilation, and Zupanski and Kalnay (1999) also provide a short introduction to
the subject. The book Data assimilation in meteorology and oceanography: Theory
and practice (Ghil et al., editors, 1997) contains a wealth of important papers on
current methods for data assimilation. An earlier but still useful book is Dynamic
meteorology: Data assimilation methods (Bengtsson et al., editors, 1981). Thiebaux
and Pedder (1987) provided a description of spatial interpolation methods applied to
136

5.1 Introduction
137
meteorology. Several workshops on data assimilation have taken place at ECMWF,
and their proceedings are extremely useful.
In the early NWP experiments, Richardson (1922) and Charney et al. (1950)
performed hand interpolations of the available observations to a regular grid, and
these ﬁelds of initial conditions were then manually digitized, which was a very time
consumingprocedure.Theneedforanautomatic“objectiveanalysis”becamequickly
apparent (Charney, 1951), and interpolation methods ﬁtting observations to a regular
grid were soon developed. Panofsky (1949) developed the ﬁrst objective analysis
algorithm based on two-dimensional polynomial interpolation, a procedure that can
be considered “global” since the same function is used to ﬁt all the observations.
Gilchrist and Cressman (1954) developed a “local polynomial” interpolation
scheme for the geopotential height (Fig. 5.1.1). A quadratic polynomial in x and
y was deﬁned at each grid point:
z(x, y) = a00 + a10x + a01y + a20x2 + a11xy + a02y2
(5.1.1)
The six coefﬁcients were determined by minimizing the mean square difference
between the polynomial and observations close to the grid point (within a radius of
inﬂuence of the grid point):
min
ai j E = min
ai j
Kz

k = 1
pk
	
zo
k −z(xk, yk)

2 +
Kv

k = 1
qk
"
uo
k −ug(xk, yk)
2
+

vo
k −vg(xk, yk)
2#
(5.1.2)
i
k
rik
Figure 5.1.1: Schematic
of grid points (circles),
irregularly distributed
observations (squares), and
a radius of inﬂuence around
a grid point i marked with
a black circle. In 4DDA,
the grid-point analysis is a
combination of the forecast
at the grid point (ﬁrst
guess) and the observational
increments (observation
minus ﬁrst guess) computed
at the observational points k.
In certain analysis schemes,
like SCM, only observations
within the radius
of inﬂuence, indicated by
a circle, affect the analysis
at the black grid point.

138
5 Data assimilation
Here pk, qk are empirical weighting coefﬁcients, and ug, vg are the geostrophic wind
components computed from the gradient of the geopotential height z(x, y) at the
observation point k, and K is the total number of observations within the radius of
inﬂuence. Note that although the ﬁeld being analyzed is just the geopotential height,
the wind observations are useful as well because they provide additional information
about its gradient.
However, for operational primitive equation models, it is not enough to perform
spatial interpolation of observations into regular grids, because not enough data are
available to initialize current models. As pointed out in the introduction, the num-
ber of degrees of freedom in a modern NWP model is of the order of 107, whereas
the total number of conventional observations of the variables used in the mod-
els (e.g., from rawinsondes) is of the order of 104. There are many new types of
data currently available, including remotely sensed data such as satellite and radar
observations, but they do not measure directly the variables used in the models
(wind, temperature, moisture, and surface pressure). Moreover, their distribution in
space and time is very nonuniform (Fig. 1.4.1), with regions like North America
and Eurasia that are relatively data-rich, and others that are much more poorly
observed.
For this reason, it became clear rather early in the history of NWP that, in addition
to the observations, it was necessary to have a complete ﬁrst guess estimate of the
state of the atmosphere at all the grid points in order to generate the initial conditions
for the forecasts (Bergthorsson and D¨o¨os, 1955). The ﬁrst guess (also known as
background ﬁeld or prior information) should be our best estimate of the state of the
atmospherepriortotheuseoftheobservations.Initiallyclimatology,oracombination
of climatology and a short forecast were used as a ﬁrst guess (e.g., Gandin, 1963,
Bergthorsson and D¨o¨os, 1955). As forecasts became better, the use of short-range
forecasts as a ﬁrst guess was universally adopted in operational systems in what is
called an “analysis cycle” (Fig. 5.1.2).
The analysis cycle is an intermittent data assimilation system that continues to
be used in most global operational systems, which typically use a 6-h cycle per-
formed four times a day. The model forecast plays a very important role. Over
data-rich regions, the analysis is dominated by the information contained in the
observations. In data-poor regions, the forecast beneﬁts from the information up-
stream. For example, 6-h forecasts over the North Atlantic Ocean are very good,
even in the absence of satellite data, because of the information coming from
North America. The forecast is thus able to transport information from data-rich
to data-poor areas, and for this reason, data assimilation using a short-range fore-
cast as a ﬁrst guess has become known as four-dimensional data assimilation
(4DDA).
In Section 5.2 we describe empirical analysis schemes (SCM and nudging), and
Sections 5.3 et seq. are devoted to statistical interpolation schemes.

(a)
Global analysis (statistical
interpolation) and balancing
Global forecast model
Initial conditions
Observations (+/−3 h)
Background or
first guess
6-h forecast
(Operational forecasts)
(b)
Regional analysis (statistical
interpolation) and balancing
Initial conditions
Observations (+/−30 min)
Background
or first guess
1-h forecast
Boundary conditions
from global model
Regional forecast model
(Operational forecasts)
Figure 5.1.2: (a) Typical global 6-h analysis cycle performed at 00, 06, 12, and
18 UTC. The observations should be valid for the same time as the ﬁrst guess. In the
global analysis this has usually meant the rawinsondes are launched mostly at the
main observing times (00 and 12 UTC), and satellite data are lumped into windows
centered at the main observing times. The observations can be direct observations of
variables used by the model, or indirect observations of geophysical parameters, such
as radiances, that depend on the variables used in the model. (b) Typical regional
analysis cycle. The main difference with the global cycle is that boundary conditions
coming from global forecasts are an additional requirement for the regional forecasts.
