140
5 Data assimilation
5.2
Empirical analysis schemes
5.2.1
Successive corrections method (SCM)
The ﬁrst analysis method used in 4DDA was based on an empirical approach known
as the SCM, developed by Bergthorsson and Doos (1955) in Sweden and by Cressman
(1959) of the US Weather Service. In SCM the ﬁrst estimate of the gridded ﬁeld is
given by the background (or ﬁrst guess) ﬁeld:
f 0
i = f b
i
(5.2.1)
where f b
i is the background ﬁeld evaluated at the ith grid point, and f 0
i the corres-
ponding zeroth iteration estimate of the gridded ﬁeld (Fig. 5.1.1).
After this ﬁrst estimate, the following iterations are obtained by “successive cor-
rections”:
f n+1
i
= f n
i +
K n
i

k = 1
wn
ik
	
f O
k −f n
k

K n
i

k = 1
wn
ik + ε2
(5.2.2)
where f n
i is the nth iteration estimation at the grid point i, f O
k is the kth observation
surrounding the grid point i, f n
k is the value of the nth ﬁeld estimate evaluated at
the observation point k (obtained by interpolation from the surrounding grid points),
and ε2 is an estimate of the ratio of the observation error variance to the background
error variance. The weights wn
ik can be deﬁned in different ways. Cressman (1959)
deﬁned the weights in the SCM as
wn
ik = R2
n −r2
ik
R2n + r2
ik
for
r2
ik ≤R2
n
wn
ik = 0
for
r2
ik > R2
n



(5.2.3)
where r2
ik is the square of the distance between an observation point rk and a grid
point at ri.
The radius of inﬂuence Rn is allowed to vary with the iteration, and K n
i is the
number of observations within a distance Rn of the grid point i. For example, in the
1980s the Swedish operational system used R1 = 1500 km, R2 = 900 km for upper
air analyses, and R1 = 1500 km, R2 = 1200 km, R3 = 750 km, R4 = 300 km for
the surface pressure analysis. The reduction of the radius of inﬂuence results in a
ﬁeld that reﬂects the large scales after the ﬁrst iteration and converges towards the
smaller scales after the additional iterations.
In the Cressman SCM, the coefﬁcient ε2 is assumed to be zero. This results in a
“credulous”analysisthatmorefaithfullyreﬂectstheobservations,andforaverysmall
radius of inﬂuence the analysis converges to the observation values if the observations

5.2 Empirical analysis schemes
141
are located at the grid points. If the data are noisy (e.g., if an observation has gross
errors, or if it contains an unrepresentative sample of subgrid-scale variability), this
can lead to “bull’s eyes” (many isolines around an unrealistic grid-point value) in
the analysis. Including ε2 > 0 assumes that the observations have errors, and gives
some weight to the background ﬁeld.
Barnes (1964, 1978) developed another empirical version of the SCM that has
been widely used for analyses where there is no available background or ﬁrst guess
ﬁeld, such as the analysis of radar data or other small-scale observations. Since we
have no information on the background ﬁeld, its error variance can be considered to
be very large, so that ε2 = 0. The weights are given by wn
ik = e−r2
ik/2R2
n. The radii of
inﬂuence are changed by a constant factor at each iteration: R2
n+1 = γ R2
n. If γ = 1,
only the large scales are captured. For γ < 1 more details in the observations are
reproduced in the analysis as more iterations are performed.
Although the SCM method is empirical, it is simple and economical, and it pro-
vides reasonable analyses. Bratseth (1986) showed that if the weights are chosen
appropriately instead of using the empirical formulas presented above, the SCM can
be made to converge to a proper statistical interpolation (OI) (Section 5.3).
5.2.2
Nudging
Another empirical and fairly widely used method for data assimilation is Newtonian
relaxation or nudging (Hoke and Anthes, 1976, Kistler, 1974). This consists of adding
to the prognostic equations a term that nudges the solution towards the observations
(interpolated to the model grid). For example, for a primitive equation model, the
zonal velocity forecast equation is written as
∂u
∂t = −v · ∇u + f v −∂φ
∂x + uobs −u
τu
(5.2.4)
and similarly for the other equations.
The relaxation time scale, τ, is chosen based on empirical considerations and
may depend on the variable. If τ is very small, the solution converges towards the
observations too fast, and the dynamics do not have enough time to adjust. If τ is
too large, the errors in the model can grow too much before the nudging becomes
effective. Hoke and Anthes indicated that τ should be chosen so that the last term
is similar in magnitude to the less dominant terms. They used a very short time
scale, about 20 minutes, in their experiments. Stauffer and Seaman (1990) used
about one hour in experiments assimilating synoptic observations, and reported a
fair amount of success. Zou et al. (1992) made optimal parameter estimations of the
nudging time scale. Kaas et al. (1999) performed an interesting experiment, nudging
a model towards a 15-y reanalysis from the ECMWF, and by averaging the mean
forcing introduced by nudging, empirically determined corrections to reduce model
deﬁciencies.
