5.5 3D-Var, the physical space analysis scheme (PSAS)
171
5.5.1
Equivalence between the OI and 3D-Var
statistical problems
We now demonstrate the equivalence of the 3D-Var solution and the OI analysis
solution obtained in Section 5.4.1 (Lorenc, 1986). We have to show that the weight
matrix that multiplies the innovation {yo −H(xb)} = δyo in (5.5.10) is the same as
the weight matrix obtained with OI, i.e., that
W = (B−1 + HT R−1H)−1HT R−1 = (BHT )(R + HBHT )−1
(5.5.11)
This identity is a variant of the Sherman–Morrison–Woodbury formula (Golub and
Van Loan, 1996). If the variables that we are observing are the same as the model
variables, i.e., if H = HT = I, then it is rather straightforward to prove (5.5.11), using
the rules for the inverse and transpose of a matrix product. However, in general H is
rectangular, and noninvertible. The equality (5.5.11) can be proven2 by considering
the following block matrix equation:
,
R
H
HT −B−1
- ,
w
δxa
-
=
,
δyo
0
-
(5.5.12)
where w is a vector which will be discussed further in Section 5.5.2. We want to
derive from (5.5.12) an equation of the form δxa = Wδyo. Eliminating w from both
block rows in (5.5.12) we ﬁnd that δxa = (B−1 + HT R−1H)−1HT R−1δyo, the 3D-Var
version of the weight matrix. On the other hand, eliminating δxa from both block
rows, we obtain an equation for the vector w, w = (R + HBHT )−1δyo. From this,
substituting w in the second block row of (5.5.12), we obtain the OI version of the
weight matrix: δxa = BHT (HBHT + R)−1δyo. This demonstrates the formal equiv-
alence of the problems solved by 3D-Var and OI. Because the methods of solution
are different, however, their results are different, and most centers have adopted the
3D-Var approach.
Exercise 5.5.1: Prove (5.5.11), using the rules for the inverse and transpose of a
matrix product assuming H = 1.
5.5.2
Physical space analysis system (PSAS)
Da Silva et al. (1995) introduced another scheme related to 3D-Var and OI, in which
the minimization is performed in the (physical) space of the observations, rather than
in the model space as in the 3D-Var scheme (spectral variables in the NCEP scheme
(Parrish and Derber, 1992)). They solved the same OI/3D-Var equation (5.5.10),
2 I am very grateful to Jim Purser for suggesting this elegant proof of (5.5.11) and for pointing
out the relationship (5.5.17).

172
5 Data assimilation
written as in the OI approach,
δxa = (BHT )(R + HBHT )−1δyo
(5.5.13)
but separated it into two steps:
w = (R + HBHT )−1δyo
(5.5.14)
followed by
δxa = (BHT )w
(5.5.15)
The ﬁrst step is the most computer intensive, and is solved by minimization of a cost
function:
J(w) = 1
2wT (R + HBHT )w −wT [yo −H(xb)]
(5.5.16)
If the number of observations is much smaller than the number of degrees of freedom
in the model, this is a more efﬁcient method for achieving results similar to those of
3D-Var.
Exercise 5.5.1 indicates that the intermediate solution vector w is also given by
w = R−1(δyo −Hδxa) = R−1[yo −H(xa)]
(5.5.17)
i.e., it is the misﬁt of the observations to the analysis weighted by the inverse of the
observation covariance matrix.
5.5.3
Final comments on the relative advantages
of 3D-Var, PSAS and OI
Although the three statistical interpolation methods, 3D-Var, OI, and PSAS, have
been shown to formally solve the same problem, there are important differences in
the methods of solution. As indicated before, in practice OI requires the introduction
of a number of approximations, and local solution of the analysis, grid point by grid
point, or small volume by small volume (Lorenc, 1981). This in turn requires the use
of a “radius of inﬂuence” and selection of only the stations closest to the grid point
or volume being analyzed. The background error covariance matrix also has to be
locally approximated.
Despite their formal equivalence, 3D-Var and the closely related PSAS have sev-
eral important advantages with respect to OI, because the cost function (5.5.1) is
minimized using global minimization algorithms, and as a result it makes unneces-
sary many of the simplifying approximations required by OI (Parrish and Derber,
1992, Derber et al., 1991, Courtier et al., 1998, Rabier et al., 1998, Andersson et al.,
1998):

5.5 3D-Var, the physical space analysis scheme (PSAS)
173
(a) In 3D-Var (and PSAS) there is no data selection, all available data are used
simultaneously. This avoids jumpiness in the boundaries between regions that
have selected different observations.
(b) In OI the background error covariance has been crudely obtained assuming,
for example, separability of the correlation into products of horizontal and
vertical gaussian correlations, and that the background errors are in
geostrophic balance. The background error covariance matrix for 3D-Var,
although it may still require simplifying assumptions, can be deﬁned with a
more general, global approach, rather than the local approximations used in
OI. In particular, most centers have adopted the “NMC method” (Parrish and
Derber, 1992) for estimating the forecast error covariance:
B ≈αE{[x f (48 h) −x f (24 h)][x f (48 h) −x f (24 h)]T }
(5.5.18)
As indicated in (5.5.18), in the “NMC” (now NCEP) method, the structure of
the forecast or background error covariance is estimated as the average over
many (e.g., 50) differences between two short-range model forecasts
verifying at the same time. The magnitude of the covariance is then
appropriately scaled. In this approximation, rather than estimating the
structure of the forecast error covariance from differences with rawinsondes
(Thiebaux and Pedder, 1987, Hollingsworth and L¨onnberg, 1986), the
model–forecast differences themselves provide a multivariate global forecast
difference covariance. The forecast covariance (5.5.18) strictly speaking is
the covariance of the forecast differences and is only a proxy for the structure
of forecast errors. Nevertheless, it has been shown to produce better results
than previous estimates computed from forecast minus observation estimates.
An important reason for this improvement is that the rawinsonde network
does not have enough density to allow a proper estimate of the global
structures (Parrish and Derber, 1992, Rabier et al., 1998), whereas (5.5.18)
provides a global representation of the forecast error structures. In the NCEP
system, the analysis variables are based on the spectral model forecast
variables. This allows a major simpliﬁcation: the assumption of horizontal
homogeneity and isotropy of the error covariance imply that the spectral
model errors are uncorrelated, i.e., the background error covariance in
spectral space is diagonal. In the vertical, Parrish and Derber (1992) use an
empirical orthogonal function expansion of (5.5.18).
(c) The background error covariance B has a fundamental impact in determining
the characteristics of the OI analysis increment. Essentially, the analysis
increment can only occur within the subspace spanned by B.
This can be easily demonstrated if we assume that the background error covari-
ance is spanned by a single vector b, i.e., B = bbT . This assumes that the forecast

174
5 Data assimilation
error can take place only in the direction of b. Assume also for simplicity that H = I,
i.e., that the model variables are observed at all the model grid points, and that
R = α2I, i.e., that the observational errors are uncorrelated and equal. Then the so-
lution of the OI problem δxa = xa −xb = BHT [HBH + R]−1 [yo −H(xb)] can be
written exactly as δxa = bbT δyo/(bT b + α2).
Note that the analysis increment has the direction of b, and that its magnitude is
proportional to the projection of the observational increment upon the subspace of
the vector b (a similar formula with α2 = 0 was used by Kalnay and Toth, (1994)).
If
H ̸= I,
we
can
write
˜b = Hb.
Then
Hδx = HBHT [HBH + R]−1
× [yo −H(xb)], and from the previous formula we obtain
δxa = bbT HT [yo −H(xb)]
bT HT Hb + α2
(5.5.19)
again showing that the analysis increment takes place in the direction of b, with an
amplitude proportional to the projection of innovation onto the subspace of b.
Exercise 5.5.2: Prove (5.5.19) for a vector b of dimension 2.
If B = k
i=1 bi, spanning a subspace of dimension k < n, the dimension of
the model, then the 3D-Var cost function 2J(x) = (x −xb)T B−1(x −xb)+ [yo −
H(x)]T R−1[yo −H(x)] can be used to show again that the analysis increment has
to be within the k-dimensional subspace spanned by the vectors bi. This is because
outside this subspace, the inverse of the covariance matrix is inﬁnitely large, and
therefore increments not within the k-dimensional subspace are forbidden because
they would result in large increases of the value of the cost function.
(d) It is possible to add constraints to the cost function without increasing the
cost of the minimization. For example, Parrish and Derber (1992) included a
“penalty” term in the cost function (5.5.1) forcing simultaneously the analysis
increments to approximately satisfy the linear global balance equation. In OI,
the imposition of the geostrophic constraint on the increments ensured only
an approximate balance in the analysis. In practice it was found necessary to
follow the OI analysis with a nonlinear normal mode initialization
(Section 5.7). With the global balance equation added as a weak constraint to
the cost function, the NCEP global model spin up (indicated for example by
the change of precipitation over the ﬁrst 12 hours of integration) was reduced
by more than an order of magnitude compared with the results obtained with
OI. In other words, with the implementation of 3D-Var it became unnecessary
to perform a separate initialization step in the analysis cycle.

5.6 Advanced data assimilation methods
175
(e) It is also possible to incorporate important nonlinear relationships between
observed variables and model variables in the H operator in the minimization
of the cost function (5.5.1) by performing “inner” iterations with the
linearized H observation operator kept constant and “outer” iterations in
which it is updated. This is harder to do in the OI approach.
(f) The introduction of 3D-Var has allowed three-dimensional variational
assimilation of radiances (Derber and Wu, 1998). In this approach, there is no
attempt to perform retrievals and, instead, each satellite sensor is taken as an
independent observation with uncorrelated errors. As a result, for each
satellite observation spot, even if some channel measurements are rejected
because of cloud contamination, others may still be used. In addition, because
all the data are assimilated simultaneously, information from one channel at a
certain location can inﬂuence the use of satellite data at a different
geographical location. The quality control of the observations becomes easier
and more reliable when it is made in the space of the observations than in the
space of the retrievals.3
(g) It is also possible to include quality control of the observations within the
3D-Var analysis (Section 5.6).
(h) Cohn et al. (1998) have shown that the observation-space form of 3D-Var
(PSAS) offers opportunities, through the grouping of data, to improve the
preconditioning of the problem in an iterative solution.
5.6
Advanced data assimilation methods with evolving
forecast error covariance
In Section 5.4 we have discussed OI, which minimizes the expected analysis error
covariance, and its practical implementations, and in Section 5.5 the closely related
3D-Var and PSAS methods, solving essentially the same problem but minimizing
a cost function. In these methods, the forecast error covariance matrix is estimated
once and for all, as if the forecast errors were statistically stationary.
From Fig. 5.6.1 we can evaluate whether this is indeed a good approximation.
It shows the 6-h forecast errors in the western and eastern thirds of the USA from
3 Joiner and Da Silva (1998) pointed out that the use of retrievals from remotely sensed
observations is a viable option within the variational analysis approach, as long as the
innovation vector is computed consistently with the use of retrievals from radiances. If Dyo is
the (linearized) retrieval algorithm applied to satellite radiances to obtain, e.g., temperature and
moisture proﬁles, then the innovation vector should be computed consistently as Dyo −DFxb,
where F is the forward (linearized radiative transfer) algorithm that converts model variables
into model radiances. In other words, the forward observational operator in (5.5.13) is H = DF,
and the observational error covariance for the retrievals becomes E[(Dδyo)(Dδyo)T ] =
DE[δyoδyoT ]DT = DRDT instead of R, which is the observation error covariance when
radiances are directly assimilated. If this method is applied to OI, the weight matrix becomes
K = BFT BT (DFBFT DT + DRDT )−1.

176
5 Data assimilation
1958 f06 500 mb RMS Z–inc West US vs East US
27
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
FEB
MAR
APR
MAY
JUN
JUL
AUG
SEP
OCT
NOV
DEC
1958
West US = 9.28108
East US = 10.3295
Figure 5.6.1: Daily variation of the rms increment between the 6-h forecast and the
analysis over two data-rich regions in the USA, from the NCEP-NCAR reanalysis
(Kistler et al., 2001): (a) 1958; (b) 1996. The average error is indicated in the box.
the NCEP/NCAR reanalysis (Kistler et al., 2001) estimated from the difference be-
tween the forecast and the analysis or analysis increments. Since in these data-rich
regions the analysis is close to the truth, the analysis increment is a good estimate
of the forecast error. Figure 5.6.1(a) corresponds to 1958 and Fig. 5.6.1(b) is calcu-
lated for 1996. The NCEP/NCAR reanalysis used a 3D-Var data assimilation system
unchanged in time, so that the difference between the ﬁgures is due only to the
changes in the observing system. Over these four decades the improvements in the
observing system in the Northern Hemisphere show a positive impact on the 6-h
forecast errors of about 20%, with the average analysis increment reduced from
about 10 m to 8 m. Note that the NCEP/NCAR reanalysis used satellite temperature
retrievals, not direct assimilation of radiances, which would probably have resulted
in larger improvements. However, the most striking result apparent in the ﬁgure is
that the day-to-day variability in the forecast error (with a time scale of a few days)
is about as large as the average error, not just in 1958 but even in 1996. This ﬁgure
emphasizes the importance of the “errors of the day” (Kalnay et al., 1997), which

5.6 Advanced data assimilation methods
177
1996
f06 500 mb RMS Z–inc West US vs East US
27
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
FEB
MAR
APR
MAY
JUN
JUL
AUG
SEP
OCT
NOV
DEC
1996
West   US = 7.46983
East   US = 8.48114
Figure 5.6.1: (cont.)
in these areas are dominated presumably by baroclinic instabilities of synoptic time
scales, and which are ignored when the forecast error covariance is assumed to be
constant.
In this section we give a brief introduction to more advanced (and much costlier)
schemes that include, at least implicitly, the evolution of the forecast error covariance.
A number of papers in Ghil et al. (1997) provide more details about the theory and
practice of some of these methods. Ide et al. (1997) is a brief but extremely clear
overview.
5.6.1
Extended Kalman ﬁltering
As we discussed in Section 5.3 for the simple case of a scalar analysis, the Kalman
ﬁlter (KF) is formally very similar to OI, but with one major difference: the forecast
or background error covariance P f (ti) is advanced using the model itself, rather than
estimating it as a constant covariance matrix B.
Following the notation of Ide et al. (1997), let x f (ti) = Mi−1 [xa(ti−1)] represent
the (nonlinear) model forecast that advances from the previous analysis time ti−1

178
5 Data assimilation
to the current ti. The model is imperfect (in particular, it has been discretized, so
that subgrid processes are not included). Therefore, we assume that for the true
atmosphere
xt(ti) = Mi−1[xt(ti−1)] + η(ti−1)
(5.6.1)
where η is a noise process with zero mean and covariance matrix Qi−1 = E(ηi−1ηT
i−1)
(in other words, when starting from perfect initial conditions, the forecast error is
given by −ηi−1, where the negative sign is chosen for convenience). Although we are
assuming that the mean error is zero, in reality model errors have signiﬁcant biases
that should be taken into account. Dee and DaSilva (1998) showed how to estimate
and remove these model biases.
In the extended Kalman ﬁlter, the forecast error covariance is obtained linearizing
the model about the nonlinear trajectory of the model between ti−1 and ti, so that if
we introduce a perturbation in the initial conditions, the ﬁnal perturbation is given
by
x(ti) + δx(ti) = Mi−1 [x(ti−1) + δx(ti−1)]
= Mi−1 [x(ti−1)] + Li−1δx(ti−1) + O(|δx|2)
(5.6.2)
The linear tangent model Li−1 is a matrix that transforms an initial perturbation at
time ti−1 to the ﬁnal perturbation at time ti (Lorenz, 1965). The linear tangent model
and its transpose or adjoint model LT
i−1 will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 6,
which is devoted to predictability, and in Appendix B. We point out here that if there
are several steps in a time interval t0 −ti, the linear tangent model that advances a
perturbation from t0 to ti is given by the product of the linear tangent model matrices
that advance it over each step:
L(t0, ti) =
0
.
j=i−1
L(t j, t j+1) =
0
.
j=i−1
L j = Li−1Li−2 · · · L0
(5.6.3)
Therefore, the adjoint model (transpose of the linear tangent model) is given by
L(ti, t0)T =
i−1
.
j=0
L(t j+1, t j)T =
i−1
.
j=0
LT
j
(5.6.4)
Equation (5.6.4) shows that the adjoint model “advances” a perturbation backwards
in time, from the ﬁnal to the initial time. Adjoint models are discussed in more detail
in Chapter 6 and in Appendix B.
As we did in OI and 3D-Var, observations are assumed to have random errors with
zero mean and an observational error covariance matrix Ri = E(εo
i εoT
i ), where
yo
i = H(xt(ti)) + εo
i
(5.6.5)
and H is the forward or observation operator.

5.6 Advanced data assimilation methods
179
Note that the forecast error over a 6-h forecast depends on the initial (analysis)
error and on the errors introduced by the forecast model during that period:
ε f
i = Mi−1
	
xt
i−1

+ ηi −Mi−1
	
xa
i−1

= Mi−1
	
xa
i−1 + xt
i−1 −xa
i−1

+ηi −Mi−1
	
xa
i−1

≈Li−1εa
i−1 + ηi
(5.6.6)
where we have neglected higher order terms.
The analysis and forecast error covariances are deﬁned, as usual, from their cor-
responding errors at the appropriate time:
Pi = E
	
εiεT
i

(5.6.7)
From these equations we can deﬁne extended Kalman ﬁltering which consists of a
“forecast step” that advances the forecast and the forecast error covariance, followed
by an “analysis” or update step, a sequence analogous to OI. After the forecast step,
an optimal weight matrix or Kalman gain matrix is calculated as in OI, and this matrix
is used in the analysis step.
The forecast step is
x f (ti) = Mi−1[xa(ti−1)]
P f (ti) = Li−1Pa(ti−1)LT
i−1 + Q(ti−1)



(5.6.8)
The analysis step is written as in OI, with
xa(ti) = x f (ti) + Kidi
Pa(ti) = (I −KiHi)P f (ti)



(5.6.9)
where
di = yo
i −H[x f (ti)]
(5.6.10)
is the observational increment or innovation.
The formula for the Kalman gain or weight matrix in (5.6.10), computed after
completing the forecast step, is obtained by minimizing the analysis error covariance
Pa
i . It is given by the same formula derived for OI, but with the constant background
error covariance B replaced by the evolved forecast error covariance P f (ti):
Ki = P f (ti)HT
i [Ri + HiP f (ti)HT ]−1
(5.6.11)
The extended Kalman ﬁlter is the “gold standard” of data assimilation. Even if a
system starts with a poor initial guess of the state of the atmosphere, the extended
Kalman ﬁlter may go through an initial transient period of a week or so, after which
it should provide the best linear unbiased estimate of the state of the atmosphere and
its error covariance. However, if the system is very unstable, and the observations are
not frequent enough, it is possible for the linearization to become inaccurate, and the
extended Kalman ﬁlter may drift away from the true solution (Miller et al., 1994).
