5.7 Dynamical and physical balance in the initial conditions
185
where the second term accounts for the model errors. In principle this cost function
makes the problem equivalent to Kalman ﬁltering. However, the solution is made
feasible using the method of representers within the observational space (Bennett,
1992, Egbert and Bennett, 1994).
Formally, the representer method can be written as a four-dimensional OI
x(tN) = xb(tN) + W[yo −H(xb)]
where the weight matrix and the observational and background vectors in d(ti) =
[yo −H(xb)] are deﬁned not only in space but also in time (at the time of the obser-
vations). The details of the method of solution are described in Egbert et al. (1994),
Bennett et al. (1996), and Uboldi and Kamachi (2000). Uboldi and Kamachi (2000)
showed how it is applied to the nonlinear Burger equation, and how the “represen-
ters”, which are the a posteriori error covariance functions for each observation,
inﬂuence the solution beyond the time of observation.
5.7
Dynamical and physical balance
in the initial conditions
We saw in Chapter 1 that Richardson’s (1922) experiment resulted in a disastrous
estimation of the initial surface pressure tendency (a forecast of a change of
146 hPa in 6 h, whereas the actual pressure remained almost unchanged) be-
cause of noisy data and the presence of fast inertia-gravity waves in the solu-
tion of the primitive equations. If there are fast and slow waves in the solution
of a model, ωfast >> ωslow, and u = Uslowe−iωslowt + Ufaste−iωfastt, then ∂u/∂t =
−iωslowUslowe−iωslowt −iωfastUfaste−iωfastt. As shown schematically in Fig. 1.2.1 it is
clear that, unless the amplitude of the fast waves component is made very small, the
fast waves will dominate the initial tendency.
We saw in Section 2.5 that in the SWEs, the simplest example of primitive equa-
tions, there are two types of wave solutions: (a) steady or slowly evolving, quasi-
geostrophically balanced “weather” modes, satisfying ω ≈0, and (b) fast inertia-
gravity waves with a frequency dispersion relationship ω2 ≈f 2 + gD(k2 + l2),
where k,l are the horizontal wavenumbers, and D is the mean depth of the model. For
the external mode, with about 10 km equivalent depth, inertia-gravity waves travel at
a speed of about 300 m/s, and unless they are ﬁltered out of the initial conditions, they
can indeed produce a very noisy forecast. After a while, though, the inertia-gravity
waves subside as the solution evolves towards quasi-geostrophic balance (a process
known as geostrophic adjustment), so that, unless they interact nonlinearly with the
slower“weatherwaves”,theinertia-gravitywavesdonotnecessarilyruintheforecast.
In this section we ﬁrst consider the geostrophic adjustment process that takes place
within a linear SWE system. This also allows us to assess what types of observations
are most useful for NWP. We then consider the nonlinear case and describe the non-
linear normal mode initialization method, which was used for many years to reduce
