186
5 Data assimilation
the imbalance in the initial conditions. Finally we describe a more recently introduced
type of dynamical initialization, denoted digital ﬁltering, which is simple and very
effective. We should note that if the analysis is out of balance, all of the initial infor-
mation that projects on inertia-gravity waves will be lost, whether the inertia-gravity
waves are ﬁltered out during the model integration through geostrophic adjustment, or
through the other initialization methods. For this reason it is preferable to enforce bal-
ance within the analysis as done in 3D-Var, since this reduces the loss of information.
5.7.1
Geostrophic adjustment and the relative importance
of different observations
If the initial conditions of a model are not in quasi-geostrophic balance, the balanced
portion of the initial ﬁeld will project on the quasi-geostrophic mode, and the unbal-
ancedportionwillprojectontoinertia-gravitywaves.Thesewaveshavelargehorizon-
tal divergence and propagate horizontally, dispersing quite fast. Because of horizontal
dispersion, after a while the amplitude of the inertia-gravity waves becomes much
smaller, and the leftover ﬁelds remain in quasi-geostrophic balance. Rossby (1936,
1938) ﬁrst described this process of “geostrophic adjustment.” The time scale for
geostrophic adjustment is of the order of f −1 (about 12 h). Arakawa (1997) provided
an analytic solution of the linear geostrophic adjustment problem for the SWEs.
In Section 2.4 we showed that the potential vorticity is conserved for individual
parcels:
d
dt
∇2ψ + f

= 0
(5.7.1)
Consider small perturbations on a basic state of rest. The linearized SWE potential
vorticity is obtained assuming that the relative vorticity ∇2ψ is small compared with
the Coriolis parameter and that the total geopotential height  = gD + φ, where the
perturbations to the free surface are small compared to the mean depth of the ﬂuid.
In that case, the conservation of potential vorticity becomes
d
dt η = d
dt

f + ∇2ψ −f0
gD φ

= 0
(5.7.2)
Parcels will evolve conserving their initial potential vorticity η(0) = f + ∇2ψ −
( fo/gD)φ even as they undergo the geostrophic adjustment process. This important
conservation property allows us to assess how much of the initial mass and wind
increments will project on the slow modes, and be “remembered” by the model
after geostrophic adjustment, and how much information will be lost through inertia-
gravity waves. If we introduce a perturbation δψ(0), δφ(0) in the initial conditions
through data assimilation, the perturbation in potential vorticity will remain in the
solution even after geostrophic adjustment: δηg = δη(0). Recall that after geostrophic
adjustment, the winds become geostrophic, so that ψg = φg/f0.

5.7 Dynamical and physical balance in the initial conditions
187
Assume that within a univariate analysis, the introduction of observations results in
an analysis increment ﬁeld associated with either mass observations δφ(x, y) or wind
observations δψ(x, y). After about 12–24 h the initial unbalanced ﬁeld will disperse
away as inertia-gravity waves, and the remaining increments will be in geostrophic
balance:
δφ →δφg, δψ →δψgwith δψg = δφg/fo
(5.7.3)
Assume that the analysis increment ﬁeld was of the form δφ = Aei(kx+ly), with
k2 + l2 = n2 = (2π/L)2. From (5.7.2), the ﬁnal increment of potential vorticity after
geostrophicadjustmentisequaltotheinitialanalysisincrementδηg(x, y) = δη(x, y).
Consider the effect of introducing only mass observations (performing a univariate
analysis). They will result in an analysis increment δφ, and the potential vorticity
initial (and ﬁnal) increments are then
δη = −f0
gD δφ = ∇2δψg −f0
gD δφg = −n2δψg −f0
gD δφg
(5.7.4)
The impact of the mass observation after geostrophic adjustment is therefore
δφg =
1
n2R2 + 1δφ
(5.7.5)
where R =

gD/ f 2
0 is the Rossby radius of deformation, the natural quasi-
geostrophic horizontal scale given a rotation rate and mean depth. Equation (5.7.5)
indicates that the response depends strongly on whether the waves are short or long
compared with R. For long waves, for which n2R2 ≪1, the model “remembers” the
mass data: δφg ≈δφ, i.e., it retains it after geostrophic adjustment. For short waves,
for which n2R2 ≫1, on the other hand, the model “forgets” the mass information:
δφg ≈0.
The situation is reversed for a univariate analysis of only wind data, leading to an
analysis increment δψ. After geostrophic adjustment,
δψg =
n2R2
n2R2 + 1δψ
(5.7.6)
so that for long waves, n2R2 ≪1, the model “forgets” the wind data: δψg ≈0,
whereas wind information is retained in short waves: δψg ≈δψ.
Now we have to determine which waves are “short” and which “long”. In mid-
latitudes, with f0 ∼10−4, for the external or barotropic mode D ∼10 km, so that
short waves are those for which n2R2 ≫1 or L ≪

4π2gD/ f 2
0 ≈20000 km, i.e.,
all but planetary waves are very short. This implies that the model essentially will
ignore surface pressure data, which is the mass data corresponding to the external
mode, and it will adjust its surface pressure to the barotropic component of the wind.
For the ﬁrst internal mode D ∼1 km, and waves are “short” if shorter than about

188
5 Data assimilation
6000 km. In other words, most of the energy in the mid-latitude atmosphere is actually
in short waves. In the tropics, where f is an order of magnitude smaller, the statement
that “most waves are short” applies even more strongly. For this reason, winds tend to
be more effective in providing initial conditions for an NWP model than mass data,
but temperature data are more important for shallower vertical modes, for which the
wind will adjust to the temperature observations.
The “acceptance” of wind and/or mass data is enhanced by the use of multivariate
analysis schemes, because the geostrophic correlation assumed in the background
error covariance enforces an approximate geostrophic balance in the analysis incre-
ments. However, even with multivariate analysis, because nonlinearities do not allow
for a perfect balance, wind observations still have the strongest impact on the skill
of a forecast in modern data assimilation systems. The full impact of an observing
system depends on the extent to which they contribute to deﬁne the potential vorticity,
as discussed above, and on other factors:
(a)
Precision
Assume we observe winds and mass, and in a multivariate scheme we combine them
optimally, in which case their precisions (inverse of the error variances) are additive.
This allows a simple estimation of the relative contributions to the analysis precision
of mass and wind measurements. If we observe heights φ = f0ψmass with an error
δφob = gδzob, and winds v = k × ∇ψwind with an error |δvob|, they both contribute
to the streamfunction. If we combine them optimally, the analysis error precision
will be
1
|δψ|2 =
f 2
o
g2|δzob|2 +
n2
|δvob|2
(5.7.7)
suggesting that the wind ﬁeld contributes more accuracy to the analysis for short
waves or in the tropics. The higher accuracy of winds for short waves is a result
of the fact that they measure a gradient ﬁeld, and is independent of the geostrophic
adjustment argument.
(b)
Data coverage, both in the horizontal and in the vertical
Obviously, the denser an observing system is, the more it will contribute to the
accuracy of the analysis. This is true in the horizontal as well as in the vertical, so that
vertical proﬁles of winds, temperature, or moisture are found to be more useful than
single level observations. An observing system will also contribute more to the skill of
the forecasts in the absence of other observing systems. For example, in the Northern
Hemisphere, which has a relatively good network of rawinsondes, the contribution
of satellite data to the improvement of NWP forecasts is much lower than in the
Southern Hemisphere, where rawinsondes are much fewer.

5.7 Dynamical and physical balance in the initial conditions
189
(c)
Physical model adjustments and model spin-up
In the same way that mass and wind initial ﬁelds undergo a dynamical adjustment
towards geostrophic balance, other variables quickly evolve towards thermal and
hydrological balance within the model. For example, because of the low heat capacity
of the surface layer, surface air temperatures (at 2 m) adjust very rapidly towards
equilibrium with the sea or land surface temperatures. As a result, it is difﬁcult to
effectively use surface air temperature observations since the model will tend to
“forget” them (replace them by model adjusted values). Similarly, if the moisture
analysis proﬁles are wetter or drier than what the model hydrological equilibrium
would require (i.e., the model has a wet or dry bias), the analysis moisture proﬁles
are quickly replaced by model adjusted proﬁles. Therefore, a model with a dry
climatological bias will produce excessive rain during the analysis cycle, as the initial
conditions bring in higher observed moisture proﬁles every 6 h, and the model rains
out what it perceives as “excessive moisture”. This adjustment process, which is also
affected by other physical parameterizations such as surface ﬂuxes and radiation, is
known as the “spin-up” or “spin-down” of the model, depending on whether there is
an initial increase or decrease in the precipitation. The spin-up process is strongest
immediately after the analysis and takes between 12 and 36 h before reaching model
balance. It can be reduced by “physical initialization” or assimilation of precipitation,
in which temperature and moisture proﬁles are modiﬁed so that the model during the
analysis cycle is forced to produce precipitation similar to the observed precipitation
(e.g., Krishnamurti et al., 1988, Treadon, 1996, Falkovich et al., 2000).
Fig. 5.7.1 shows the results of a comparison of different 5-day forecasts performed
every 12 h for February 1998 using the 2000 operational NCEP data assimilation
system (courtesy of Michiko Masutani and Stephen Lord). The forecasts are based
on different data assimilation experiments, in which: (a) all available data was as-
similated (ALL); (b) the satellite radiances were not assimilated (No TOVS 1B);
(c) the rawinsonde temperatures were not assimilated (No RAOB Temp); and (d) the
rawinsondes winds were not assimilated (No RAOB Wind). The results illustrate
several conclusions, in agreement with the discussion above:
If every statistical assumption about errors was perfect, the ALL experiments
should have the best forecasts. This is generally but not always true.
In the Northern Hemisphere where the rawinsonde network is fairly
abundant, the forecasts from the assimilation without satellite data No TOVS
1B, are, on the average, slightly worse than the ALL data experiments.
Eliminating the rawinsonde winds from the data assimilation has a much
larger negative impact than eliminating the rawinsonde temperatures in the
Northern Hemisphere.
In the Southern Hemisphere, where there are relatively few rawinsondes, the
satellite radiances are the backbone of the information needed in the data

190
5 Data assimilation
Day 5 Z500 Anom Corr Verified vs. Control(All) analysis Top NH, Bot SH
ALL
No TOVS 1B
No RAOB Temp
No RAOB Wind
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
1FEB 
1993
3FEB
5FEB
7FEB
9FEB
11FEB
13FEB
15FEB
17FEB
19FEB
21FEB
23FEB
5FEB
7FEB
9FEB
11FEB
13FEB
15FEB
17FEB
19FEB
21FEB
23FEB
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
3FEB
1FEB
-------
Figure 5.7.1: Veriﬁcation (anomaly correlation) for the 5-day forecasts performed
every 12 h with the NCEP data assimilation system with different combinations of
data: crosses, all data; open circles, no TOVS radiances; open squares: no rawinsonde
winds; full circles, no rawinsonde temperatures. (Courtesy of M. Masutani.)
assimilation. Without satellite radiances, the forecasts in the Southern
Hemisphere substantially deteriorate.
We should also note that there is substantial day-to-day variability in the
5-day forecast skill. This can be attributed to the changes in atmospheric
predictability, i.e., on some days the atmosphere is simply easier to predict
than on others. This will be studied in detail in Chapter 6.
5.7.2
Normal modes initialization
Because atmospheric motion is nonlinear, a simple linear geostrophic balance as
discussed in the previous section is not enough to ensure balanced initial conditions.
An approach that has been widely used to improve the initial imbalance is that of

5.7 Dynamical and physical balance in the initial conditions
191
nonlinear normal modes initialization, introduced by Machenhauer (1977) and by
Baer and Tribbia (1977). As indicated by its name, it requires the determination of
the (linear) normal modes of a model as a ﬁrst step. Daley (1991), Temperton and
Williamson (1981), and others give a complete discussion about how this procedure
is carried out in a three-dimensional model. Here we only illustrate how it would be
applied to a simple SWE model on a periodic f-plane model. The SWEs are written
separating them into their linear terms (on the left-hand sides) and the nonlinear
terms (on the right-hand sides):
∂u
∂t −fv + ∂φ
∂x = Ru
∂v
∂t + fu + ∂φ
∂y = Rv
∂φ
∂t + gD
 ∂u
∂x + ∂v
∂y
!
= Rφ



(5.7.8)
For the SWEs the nonlinear terms Ru, Rv, Rφ are
Ru = −u ∂u
∂x −v ∂u
∂y
Rv = −u ∂v
∂x −v ∂v
∂y
Rφ = −u ∂φ
∂x −v ∂φ
∂y



(5.7.9)
Note that the left-hand sides contain linear terms about a basic state of rest.
The ﬁrst step is to determine the (linear) normal modes, and for this purpose we
ﬁnd the eigensolutions or normal modes of (5.7.8) setting Ru = Rv = Rφ = 0. In the
case of a doubly periodic domain the normal modes are simply of the form


Ukl
Vkl
Fkl

ei(kx+ly)e−iωt = Xkle−iωt
(5.7.10)
In a three-dimensional model there would be an additional functional dependence
on the vertical, which can be represented by a vertical wavenumber. If we plug
(5.7.10) into (5.7.8) with zero on the right-hand side, we obtain three solutions for
the frequency:
ωS = 0
(ωF)2 = f 2 + gD(k2 + l2)



(5.7.11)
where the subscripts S and F refer to the slow (quasi-geostrophic) and the fast (inertia-
gravity wave) modes. Because the equations are homogeneous, (U, V, F) are related
to each other and the amplitude of the normal mode is arbitrary. For the slow modes,
the relationship is UklS = −ilFklS/f, VklS = ikFklS/f (geostrophic balance). For

192
5 Data assimilation
the fast modes, a similar but more complicated relationship exists which, if f 2 ≪
gD(k2 + l2) reduces to
U±klF = ±
kF±klF

gD(k2 + l2)
V±klF = ±
lF±klF

gD(k2 + l2)
The normal modes in (5.7.10) can therefore be written as a set of slow (Ykl) and fast
(Zkl) modes:Xklm = (Ykl, Zkl) where the subscript m is S for slow modes and F for
fast modes. The normal modes Xklm constitute a complete orthonormal basis if we
normalize them by their total energy:

x

y
[gD(Uklm
2 + Vklm
2) + Fklm
2]dxdy = 1
(5.7.12)
Any time-dependent ﬁeld of winds and heights can be expanded in terms of the
normal modes:


u(x, y, t)
v(x, y, t)
φ(x, y, t)

=

k

l

m=S,F
aklm(t)


Ukl
Vkl
Fkl


m
ei(kx+ly)
(5.7.13)
where the (time-dependent) coefﬁcients can be determined from a back Fourier trans-
form of (5.7.13):
aklm(t) =

x

y
[gD(uUklm + vVklm) + φFklm]e−i(kx+ly)dydx
(5.7.14)
Now we return to the full nonlinear SWE (5.7.8), multiply the three equations by
gDUklme−i(kx+ly)e+iωklmt
gDVklme−i(kx+ly)e+iωklmt
Fklme−i(kx+ly)e+iωklmt



(5.7.15)
respectively, add them and integrate over the domain to obtain the nonlinear equations
for the amplitudes of the slow and fast modes:
daklS
dt
+ iωklSaklS = RklS
daklF
dt
+ iωklFaklF = RklF



(5.7.16)
Here we have separated slow and fast modes. Rklm(Y, Z) is the result of applying
this operation to the right-hand side nonlinear terms and depends on both the vector
Y of slow modes coefﬁcients and on the vector Z of fast modes coefﬁcients. Recall
(5.7.11) that for this simple geometry, ωklS = 0.
daklF
dt
+ iωklFaklF = 0
(5.7.17)
is the linear equation for the fast modes.

5.7 Dynamical and physical balance in the initial conditions
193
We can choose to perform a linear normal mode initialization by zeroing out the
initial amplitude of the fast modes: aklF(t) = aklF(0)e−iωklFt = 0 in (5.7.17). This
will make the linear time derivative of the fast modes equal to zero. But (5.7.16)
shows that this initialization, which is equivalent to a perfect geostrophic balance,
is not accurate enough for the realistic nonlinear case. The presence of nonlinear
forcing will generate fast oscillations even if the basic state is geostrophic. Therefore
Machenhauer (1977) suggested instead to zero out the time derivative of the fast
modes in the nonlinear equation for the fast modes in (5.7.16), whose right-hand side
depends on both slow and fast modes. Therefore, from
daFkl
dt
+ iωFklaFkl = RFkl(Y(0), Z(0))
(5.7.18)
we obtain the nonlinear normal mode initialization condition:
aFkl(0) = RFkl(Y(0), Z(0))
iωFkl
(5.7.19)
Since the coefﬁcient aklF(0) appears both in the left- and right-hand sides of (5.7.19)
in a component of the vector of fast coefﬁcients Z, Machenauer (1977) suggested
iterating equation (5.7.19) until convergence.
Nonlinear normal mode initialization (NLNMI) has been widely used in many op-
erational data assimilation systems, since it is quite effective in substantially reducing
the amplitude of the inertia-gravity waves from the initial conditions, much better
than a simple geostrophic balance. It requires the determination of the linear normal
modes of a model, but Temperton (1988) derived a formulation denoted “implicit
NLNMI” without this requirement.
NLNMI has some problems, however:
(a) In the tropics, diabatic heating plays a fundamental role, essentially balancing
the vertical advection of static stability. Therefore, diabatic forcing has to be
included in the nonlinear terms, and this requires estimating the heating from
short-term forecasts (Wergen, 1988).
(b) There is some arbitrariness in deﬁning which “fast” modes need to be
initialized. For example, inertia-gravity waves with high vertical
wavenumbers are quite slow (see the discussion in the previous subsection),
so that only the ﬁrst few vertical modes are usually initialized. On the other
hand, NLNMI eliminates the high-frequency but real atmospheric tides from
the solution, since they appear as fast modes. This requires a special handling
of these modes.
(c) NLNMI is only an approximation of the true slow evolution of the
atmosphere: if we apply NLNMI to a model that has been running for a day or
longer, ideally it should not modify it, since it has already reached slow modes
equilibrium. However, NLNMI will change the initial ﬁelds signiﬁcantly.
Ballish et al. (1992) developed a modiﬁcation of the procedure denoted incremen-
tal NLNMI, in which the initialization is applied to the analysis increments, rather

194
5 Data assimilation
than to the full analysis ﬁeld. This procedure is able to substantially solve the three
problems indicated above.
In recent years the use of NLNMI after the analysis step has become less popular
because of the development of three alternative approaches. The ﬁrst one is the use
of 3D-Var, which allows the introduction within the cost function of a term that
penalizes the lack of balance. Parrish and Derber (1992) included a penalty term
based on the global linear balance equation applied on the analysis increments. They
found that this, combined with the use of a more realistic global background error
covariance based on differences between 24- and 48-h forecasts verifying at the
same time, yielded an analysis that was well balanced. As a result, the NLNMI step
became unnecessary in the NCEP system. This is a major advantage of 3D-Var over
the standard OI procedure followed by NLNMI. It eliminates the artiﬁcial separation
of the analysis step, which produces ﬁelds that are close to the observations but out
of balance, and the initialization step, which produces ﬁelds that are balanced but
further away from the observations.
Another method that seems to achieve similar balanced results and minimize the
spin-up problems is the incremental analysis update (Bloom et al., 1996), in which
the analysis increment is added in small “drips” throughout the 6-h forecast rather
than once as a large change at the analysis time. Assume that there are n time steps
in the 6-h forecast. In the incremental analysis update the analysis increments are
computed at the analysis time. Then the forecast at the analysis time minus 3 h
is integrated for 6 h adding at each time step the analysis increment divided by
n, until the forecast reaches the analysis time plus 3 h. At that time a preliminary
3-h integration of the model without analysis increments is performed until the next
analysis time is reached, and the cycle is repeated. The overhead of this method is
only the additional preliminary integration of the model during the second half of
the interval between analysis times.
A third development is the introduction of digital ﬁlter initialization, a variation
of dynamic initialization that has proven to be very simple and efﬁcient.
5.7.3
Dynamic initialization using digital ﬁlters
Some numerical schemes, like the Euler-backwards or Matsuno scheme, damp high
frequencies, and this property has been used in order to reduce the accumulation of
high-frequency noise within an assimilation cycle. Assume we have an equation
du
dt = −iωu
(5.7.20)
The Matsuno scheme is a predictor–corrector type of scheme (see Table 3.2.1) where
˜u = un −iωtun
un+1 = un −iωt ˜u
%
(5.7.21)

5.7 Dynamical and physical balance in the initial conditions
195
so that un+1 = ρun, where the ampliﬁcation factor is ρ = (1 −ω2t2) −iωt.
Therefore
|ρ|2 = (1 −ω2t2 + ω4t4)
(5.7.22)
It is evident from (5.7.22) that as long as the CFL stability condition |ωmaxtC FL| ≤1
is satisﬁed, high frequencies are damped at every Matsuno time step. This has been
found to be reasonably satisfactory for avoiding excessive accumulation of noise in
the analysis cycle (e.g., Halem et al., 1982), but the damping is slow except for high
frequencies close to 1/t. Using a damping time scheme does not balance the initial
ﬁelds; rather the balance is achieved only after integrating the model for a while
(e.g., 6 h in the analysis cycle). Several dynamical initialization methods using for-
ward/backward integrations were suggested to balance the initial ﬁeld (e.g., Nitta and
Hovermale, 1969, Okamura, 1969). Grant (1975) suggested a more efﬁcient dynamic
initialization based on linear combinations of forward/backward integrations, with
combinations of time steps some of which are longer than allowed by the CFL condi-
tion. Dynamic initialization never became widely used, despite its simplicity, because
it is not efﬁcient, requiring many forward/backward iterations to substantially reduce
medium frequency waves.
Exercise 5.7.1: Show that the net damping at t = 0 after the application of a Matsuno
time step followed by another Matsuno time step integrating backwards in time
(changing the sign of t) is given by (5.7.22).
Exercise 5.7.2: Find the damping of the Okamura scheme: u+ = un(1 + iωt);
u−= u+(1 −iωt); un+1 = 2un −u−. The Okamura–Rivas scheme is the same
except that the time step cycles over three iterations: t = tC FL; 1.4tC FL;
2tC FL, resulting in an even faster damping (Grant, 1975).
The introduction of dynamic initialization based on digital ﬁltering by Lynch and
Huang (1992) and Lynch (1997) has changed this situation substantially, and es-
sentially eliminated the need for NLNMI. In a digital ﬁlter, the model is integrated
forward and backward in time between −tM and tM, as in regular dynamic initializa-
tion. The difference is that the model ﬁelds are used at every time step to compute a
weighted average valid at the initial time t = 0, and the weights are optimally chosen
in order to damp high frequencies, rather than simply using a damping time scheme.
The idea of a digital ﬁlter is to choose the ﬁltering weights in such a way that for
low frequencies ω ≪ωs the amplitude of the solution with that frequency remains
mostly unchanged, whereas for high frequencies ω ≥ωs the amplitude is substan-
tially reduced. Given a time step t and the corresponding threshold computational
frequency θs = ωSt, low frequencies are characterized by 0 ≤|θ| ≪θs, and the
high frequencies that we want to ﬁlter by θs ≤|θ| ≤π.

196
5 Data assimilation
One digital ﬁlter approach (Lynch, 1997) is based on a Dolph–Tchebychev ﬁlter,
which is close to optimal, using the properties of Tchebychev polynomials:
Tn(x) =

cos(n cos−1 x)
if |x| ≤1
cosh(n cosh−1 x)
if |x| > 1
(5.7.23)
from which T0(x) = 1 and T1(x) = x. The higher polynomials can be obtained from
the recurrence relationship
Tn(x) = 2xTn−1(x) −Tn−2(x)
n ≥2
(5.7.24)
The following function is ideal for such damping:
H(θ) = T2M[x0 cos(θ/2)]
T2M(x0)
(5.7.25)
where x0 = 1/ cos(θS/2), since for the low-frequency range, H(θ) falls from 1 to
r = 1/T2M(x0) as |θ| goes from 0 to θs, and for the high frequency range θS ≤|θ| ≤
π, H(θ) oscillates within ±r (e.g., see Fig. 5.7.2).
From the deﬁnition of the Tchebychev polynomials it can be shown that
H(θ) =
+M

n=−M
hneinθ
(5.7.26)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
theta=2pi*delta t/period for Dolph–Tchebychev filter
Damping of original amplitude
Matsuno forward step followed by backward step
Applied once
Applied 3 times
Dolph–Tchebychev M=3
Figure 5.7.2: Comparison of the damping of high frequencies using a
Dolph–Tchebychev ﬁlter with θs = π/3, M = 3, and a forward/backward Matsuno
dynamical initialization.

5.7 Dynamical and physical balance in the initial conditions
197
where the coefﬁcients are
hn =
1
2M + 1
,
1 + 2r
M

m=1
T2M
 
x0 cos θm
2
!
cos mθn
-
(5.7.27)
The solution of the model, integrated from −tM to tM, is weighted averaged:
u(0) =
M

n=−M
hnun
(5.7.28)
so that at the end of this procedure the amplitude of each frequency in u is modulated
by H(θ). The parameters are chosen in the following way: Choose a period τS such
that waves with periods shorter than this are to be ﬁltered. The cut-off frequency is
then given by θs = 2πt/τs. The time span of the integration Ts = 2tM = 2Mt
gives a ﬁlter of order N = 2M + 1.
In practice, Lynch (1997) recommended to ﬁrst perform a backward integra-
tion with just the dry adiabatic dynamics (since they are reversible), from t = 0 to
t = −TS. An application of the weighted average (5.7.28) gives a ﬁltered ﬁeld
centered at t = −TS/2. Then a forward integration from t = −TS/2 to t = +TS/2
using the full model with physics results in a ﬁeld centered at t = 0, ﬁltered for the
second time including ﬁltering of the effects of irreversible diabatic processes. In the
high resolution-limited area model, with a time step of half an hour, and a ﬁltering
period of 3 h, the time span is also half an hour, with N = 2M = 7. The double ﬁlter
gives a reduction in energy of the high frequencies of more than 99%.
Figure 5.7.2 shows the response of dynamic initialization for this case, using the
Dolph–Tchebychev ﬁlter with t = 30 min, θs = π/3 (ﬁltering periods shorter than
3 h) and M = 3. It compares this with the result of using one and three iterations of
the forward/backward Matsuno time step.
Another digital ﬁlter is based on the Lanczos ﬁlter, which is widely used to ﬁlter
out high frequencies from time series (Duchon, 1979, Lynch and Huang, 1992).
The ﬁlter is similar to the Dolph–Tchebychev one, but now the Lanczos weights in
(5.7.28) are given by
hn = sin(nθcritt)
πn
sin(nπ/M)
nπ/M
(5.7.29)
Fig. 5.7.3 compares the responses of the Dolph–Tchebychev and Lanczos ﬁlters re-
quiring the same number of time steps (6), since for the Lanczos ﬁlter the coefﬁcients
for n = 4 and 5 are zero. The response for the Lanczos ﬁlter with θcrit = π/4, M = 5
is competitive with the Dolph–Tchebychev ﬁlter.
In summary, initialization using digital ﬁltering is a very simple process that avoids
the determination of the model normal modes and the need of NLNMI. Most im-
portantly, it dampens the high-frequency solutions according to their actual model-
determined frequency rather than from an arbitrary separation into inertia-gravity
waves and quasi-geostrophic modes. It does not make any additional approximation

198
5 Data assimilation
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
theta=2pi*delta t/period
Low-pass filter response
Lanczos filter
theta crit=pi/3, M=4
Dolph–Tchebychev filter
theta s=pi/3, M =3
Lanczos filter
theta crit=pi/4, M=5
Figure 5.7.3: Comparison of the responses of the Dolph–Tchebychev ﬁlter, with
θs = π/3, M = 3, and the Lanczos ﬁlter, with θcrit = π/3, M = 4 and
θcrit = π/4, M = 5. All the choices require six time integrations and are therefore
computationally comparable.
and it can include the full diabatic and nonreversible effects to determine the classi-
ﬁcation of slow and fast modes.
Exercise 5.7.3: Is it better to achieve balance within 3D-Var or to apply a digital
ﬁlter afterwards?
5.8
Quality control of observations
The reported atmospheric observations used in data assimilation are not perfect; they
contain several kinds of errors, including instrumental errors and errors of human
origin. The reported observations may also contain “errors of representativeness”,
i.e., actually correct observations may reﬂect the presence of a subgrid-scale at-
mospheric phenomenon that cannot be resolved by the model or the analysis. The
representativeness error indicates the observation is not representative of the areally
averaged measurement required by the model grid. The instrumental and represen-
tativeness errors can be systematic or random. Systematic errors and biases should
be determined by calibration or other means such as time averages. Random errors
are generally assumed to be normally distributed.
In addition to randomly distributed errors, the reported observations may contain
errors that are so large that the observations have no useful information content and
should be tossed out. Frequently, these rough or gross errors are of human origin,
and take place during the computation or the transmission of the observation. There

5.8 Quality control of observations
199
are other sources of observation errors (wrong date, time or location, uncalibrated
instruments, etc.). The use of an observation with a rough error can cause a dispro-
portionally big error in the analysis, so there has been a tendency to use observations
conservatively (“when in doubt, throw it out”). In recent years, however, quality con-
trol systems have become more sophisticated and many observations that would have
been thrown out in the past are now corrected, resulting in an improvement in the
initial conditions, and hence in the forecasts. Newer quality control systems allow for
a continuous weighting of the observation suspected of having a gross error, rather
than a “yes or no” decision to toss it out.
Quality control is based on a comparison between observations and some kind
of expected value (which could be based on climatology, an average of nearby ob-
servations, or the ﬁrst guess). The difference between the expected value and the
reported observation is denoted the “residual”. If the residual is very large (measured
in standard deviations of the estimate), the observation may be considered to be erro-
neous. The more sophisticated the estimate of the expected value (i.e., the smaller its
expected standard deviation with respect to the true value), the more discriminating
the quality control algorithm will be, i.e., the better it will be able to distinguish be-
tween observations with large errors, which should not be given credence, and correct
observations reporting unusual states of the atmosphere, such as very low pressures
or unusually high winds reported within an area affected by a tropical cyclone. In
the latter case it is important to keep the observation in order to improve the initial
conditions of the forecast.
Earlier quality control systems were based on several checks performed in series
(one after another) before the analysis. For example DiMego et al. (1985) compared
each observation with a climatological distribution to see whether it was within a
reasonable range (“gross check”). If the reported value was outside a prescribed
range, or differed from the climatological mean by more than, for example, ﬁve
standard deviations, the observation was tossed out. If the observation survived this
test, it was then compared to the average of nearby observations, and again tossed
out if outside a reasonable range. This check (called a “buddy check”, comparing
the observations with their “buddies”) could also salvage an observation previously
tossed out even if it was quite different from the expected climatological value.
An analysis is, in principle, more accurate than either the ﬁrst guess or the ob-
servation. This led to the development of an “OI” quality control: each observation
is compared with a simple OI value that would be obtained at the observation lo-
cation using the ﬁrst guess (background) ﬁeld and nearby observations, but without
including the observation being checked (Lorenc, 1981, Woollen, 1991). When the
residual (difference between the observed and analyzed value) is larger than a certain
number of analysis error standard deviations, it is tossed out. The analysis is iterated
so some observations may be salvaged after ﬁrst being tossed out.
Gandin (1988) introduced the idea of complex quality control (where the word
“complex” means that it uses several tests simultaneously rather than in series).
The basic idea is to estimate several independent residuals and then apply a decision

200
5 Data assimilation
making algorithm based on the information provided by all the independent residuals,
rather than performing decisions either in a sequential order, or as a single OI quality
control check using all the information at once. Collins and Gandin (1990) and
Collins (1998) applied this approach to rawinsonde heights and temperatures with
great success. The power of this method lies in the fact that several independent
checks can support each other and reduce the level of uncertainty. Furthermore, if
the residuals are large and agree reasonably well with each other, they provide the
basis for a correction of the observation.
The independent residuals obtained from the different checks used at NCEP for
the complex quality control of rawinsondes temperature and heights are: (1) Incre-
mental check (the residual is the increment between the reported observation and
the 6-h forecast) (2) Horizontal check based on a simple OI horizontal analysis of
the increments, using one observation per quadrant, and only observations within
1000 km of the reported observation. The horizontal residual is the difference be-
tween the increment at the observation location and the horizontally interpolated
value. (3) Vertical check: the vertical residual is the difference between the observed
increment and the increment interpolated vertically from the nearest data points for
the same station, one above and one below. (4) Hydrostatic check, the most powerful
of the checks since it takes advantage of the redundancy between temperature and
height information reported in rawinsonde observations. The hydrostatic residual is
the difference between the values of the thickness of a layer between mandatory
level heights, calculated using the reported heights, and the thickness calculated in-
dependently from the reported virtual temperatures. (5) Baseline check computed by
making a hydrostatic computation downward, from the ﬁrst mandatory level above
the surface with complete heights and temperatures, to the reported surface pressure.
The baseline residual is the difference between the station elevation, given by the
report, and the hydrostatically determined height at the surface pressure. Another
possible check used at NCEP is based on a temporal interpolation of observations
at the same station 12 or 24 h before and after the observation time. This check is
particularly useful for isolated stations within a “reanalysis” mode. It is also possible
to perform a check of the stability of the lapse rate.
Collins and Gandin (1990) and Collins (1998) developed a sophisticated decision
making algorithm that makes generally conﬁdent decisions correcting computation
or communication errors of human origin. They assumed that human errors have a
simple structure: a single digit or a sign is wrong or missing. The following example
of such error detected at a single level in the heights is typical:
Example of CQC and the decision making algorithm correction of gross
errors (Collins and Gandin, 1998)
Reported 1000 hPa height: 8 m
Computed residuals:
Incremental residual: −72 m;
Vertical residual: −66 m;

5.8 Quality control of observations
201
Hydrostatic residual (using signiﬁcant levels): 60 m;
Hydrostatic (using only mandatory levels): 65 m;
Baseline residual: −58 m.
With this information, the decision making algorithm concluded that a simple
correction changing one digit (adding 60 m to make the observation 68 m instead of
the reported 8 m) could be conﬁdently made.
The NCEP global system has also an OI-based complex quality control for all
other data (winds, moisture, satellite retrievals) that makes the ﬁrst three checks
discussed above and rejects observations with large residuals but does not attempt
to make corrections, since the strong redundancy of the hydrostatic check is not
available for variables other than rawinsonde temperatures and heights (Woollen,
1991).
The effect of modern quality control systems is difﬁcult to gauge, but Kistler
et al. (2001) showed an impressive example of the positive impact from the mod-
ern approach compared with the quality control that was operational at NCEP in
the 1970s. They pointed out that in 1974 NMC (now NCEP) introduced a modern
observation formatting system (known as Ofﬁce Note 29, ON29), which later be-
came the basis of the ofﬁcial World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Binary
Universal Format Representation system for the encoding of observations. ON29 in-
cluded more information about the observation than previously used encoders. This
change in formatting required a complete overhaul of the NMC decoding system,
and errors must have been introduced during this complex reprogramming process.
The NMC operational forecast skill actually went down and it took a few years
before it recovered to the pre-1974 error levels (Kalnay et al., 1998). During the
production of the NCEP/NCAR reanalysis (Kalnay et al., 1996), both the com-
plex quality control for rawinsonde heights and temperatures and the OI quality
control for other observations were used to screen observations. The complex qual-
ity control found and corrected an unusually large number of rawinsondes errors
starting in 1974, and, presumably as a result of this correction and the OI qual-
ity control screening of the other information, the beneﬁt of using the more ad-
vanced formatting system ON29 became realized. In the reanalysis, the forecast
skill increased substantially in 1974, rather than deteriorating as in the operational
forecasts.
Another approach that has also become popular is variational quality control
performed within 3D-Var or 4D-Var, rather than before the analysis, like OI and
complex quality controls (Purser, 1984, Lorenc and Hammon, 1988, Ingleby and
Lorenc, 1993, Andersson and Jarvinen, 1999, Collins, 2001a,b). It has the advan-
tage that it is performed as part of the analysis itself, rather than as a preprocess-
ing step like OI quality control, but because it computes a single (iterative) resid-
ual for each observation, it is not able to correct observations like complex quality
control.

202
5 Data assimilation
The variational quality control approach is based on modifying the observational
component Jo of the variational cost function J = Jb + Jo to take into account the
possibility of gross errors. Note that in the variational analysis approach, the gradient
∇yo Jo of the cost function with respect to an observation yo determines how quickly
the analysis estimate x will shift towards that observation (Fig. 5.8.1(b)).
0
0. 1
0. 2
0. 3
0. 4
-10
-5
0
5
10
(y-H(x))/σ
Normal
Probability density function
(a)
With gross errors
0
2
4
6
8
10
-10
-5
0
5
10
(y-H(x))/σ
With gross errors
Cost function
(b)
Without gross errors
Figure 5.8.1: (a) Probability density function for an observation with a given scaled
residual, without gross errors (normal distributions) and with gross errors.
A = 0.05, d = 5. (b) Observational cost function derived from the logarithm of the
error distributions in (a). (c) Weight factor applied to the gradient of the cost function
for different values of the a priori probability of gross errors A and the width of the
ﬂat distribution.

5.8 Quality control of observations
203
(y-H(x))/σ
Weight
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-10
-5
0
5
10
A=0.05, d=1
A=0.01, d=5
A=0.05, d=10
A=0.05, d=5
(c)
Figure 5.8.1: (cont.)
Consider the cost function term for a single uncorrelated observation yo without
allowing for gross errors:
Jo
N = 1
2
 yo −H(x)
σo
2
with ∇Jo
N =
 yo −H(x)
σ 2o

(5.8.1)
where x is a close approximation of the true value (analysis). In variational quality
control one assumes that there is an a priori probability A of having a gross error, esti-
mated from past statistics. 1 −A is then the a priori probability of not having a gross
error, in which case the observation is assumed to have random errors with a Gaussian
distribution. Without gross errors (A = 0), the probability that an observation yo, if
H(x) is the true value, is given by the normal distribution is
p(yo) = N =
1
√
2πσo
e−J N
o
(5.8.2)
where (as discussed in Section 5.3) J N
o = −ln N + const. (Fig. 5.8.1(a), full line)
and the constant is chosen arbitrarily to make J N(0) = 0.
If there are gross errors with an a priori probability A (let’s say, 0.05), then the
probability of an observation yo (Fig. 5.8.1(a), bold dashes) is modiﬁed:
pQC(yo) = (1 −A)N + AF
(5.8.3)
where F is a ﬂat (uniform) distribution for the gross errors:
F =



1
2dσo
if |yo −H(x)| < dσo
0
otherwise
(5.8.4)

204
5 Data assimilation
Here d is the maximum number of standard deviations allowed for gross errors (e.g.,
d = 5). If |yo −H(x)| > dσo, it is assumed that the observation was so obviously
wrong that it was eliminated in a preliminary check against climatology or the back-
ground. The integral of F is therefore equal to 1.
We can then modify the contribution to the cost function made by the obser-
vation by including the probability of gross errors: J QC
o
= −ln pQC(yo) + const.
(Fig. 5.8.1(a), full line). Since the ﬂat probability distribution of gross errors does
not depend on the value yo, the modiﬁed gradient of the cost function is:
∇yo J QC
o
= ∇[−ln pQC(yo)] =
1 −A
pQC(yo) N∇J N
o
=
(1 −A)N
(1 −A)N + AF ∇J N
o = (1 −P) ∇J N
o
(5.8.5)
where
P =
AF
(1 −A)N + AF
(5.8.6)
is the a posteriori probability of having a gross error (after making the observation
yo). In other words, the gradient of the cost function including variational quality
control is the gradient without variational quality control multiplied by a weight
W QC =
(1 −A)N
(1 −A)N + AF
(5.8.7)
(the probability of NOT having a gross error), which is close to 1 for
|yo −H(x)|/σo < d and goes to zero for |yo −H(x)|/σo ≥d. Figure 5.8.1(c) shows
that the weights are not very sensitive to the choice of parameters. A small value for
the a priori probability of gross errors A will result in a steeper reduction of weights.
Because of the shape of the normal probability function, the weights are not too
sensitive to d unless the value chosen is rather small (e.g., d = 1 in the graph).
Because H(x) is assumed to be close to the truth, at ECMWF variational quality
control is not turned on (i.e., the weight multiplying the gradient during the mini-
mization is W = 1) during the ﬁrst 40 iterations of the 4D-Var algorithm, while the
solution starts to converge towards the analysis. It is then turned on (W = W QC) for
the last 30 iterations of the 4D-Var, thus giving less weight to observations that are
likely to contain gross errors (Andersson and Jarvinen, 1999).
