6
Atmospheric predictability and
ensemble forecasting
6.1
Introduction to atmospheric predictability
In his 1951 paper on NWP, Charney indicated that he expected that even as models
improved there would still be a limited range to skillful atmospheric predictions, but
he attributed this to inevitable model deﬁciencies and ﬁnite errors in the initial condi-
tions. Lorenz (1963a,b) discovered the fact that the atmosphere, like any dynamical
system with instabilities, has a ﬁnite limit of predictability (which he estimated to be
about two weeks) even if the model is perfect, and even if the initial conditions are
known almost perfectly. He did so by performing what is now denoted an “identical
twin” experiment: he compared two runs made with the same model but with initial
conditions that differed only very slightly. Just from round-off errors, he found that
after a few weeks the two solutions were as different from each other as two random
trajectories of the model.
Lorenz (1993) described how this fundamental discovery took place: His original
goal had been to show that statistical prediction could not match the accuracy at-
tainable with a nonlinear dynamical model, and therefore that NWP had a potential
for predictive skill beyond that attainable purely through statistical methods. He had
acquired a Royal-McBee LGP-30 computer, with a memory of 4K words and a speed
of 60 multiplications per second, which for the late 1950s was very powerful. He
developed and programmed in machine language a “low-order” atmospheric model
(i.e., a model whose evolution was described by only 12 variables) driven by external
heating and damped by dissipation. During 1959 he changed parameters in the model
for several months trying to ﬁnd a nonperiodic solution (since a periodic solution
would be perfectly predictable from past statistics, and that would have defeated his
205

206
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
purpose). He submitted a preliminary title, “The statistical prediction of solutions of
dynamical equations”, to the NWP conference that was going to take place during
1960 in Tokyo, gambling that he would indeed be able to ﬁnd, for the ﬁrst time in
history, a nonperiodic numerical solution. After making the external heating a func-
tion of both latitude and longitude, he ﬁnally found the nonperiodic behavior that
he was seeking. He rounded off and printed the evolution of the variables with three
signiﬁcant digits, which seemed sufﬁcient to deﬁne the state of the model with plenty
of accuracy. After running the model for several simulated years and satisfying him-
self that the solution had no periodicities, he decided to repeat part of an integration
in more detail. When he came back from a coffee break, Lorenz found that the new
solution was completely different from the original run. Before calling service for
the computer, he checked the results and found that at the beginning the new run did
coincide with the original printed numbers, but that after a few days the last digit
became different, and then the next one, and after about two months any resemblance
with the original integration disappeared (Lorenz, 1993):
The initial round-off errors were the culprits; they were steadily amplifying until
they dominated the solution. In today’s terminology, there was chaos. . . . It soon
struck me that, if the real atmosphere behaved like the simple model, long-range
forecasting would be impossible. . . . In due time I convinced myself that the
ampliﬁcation of small differences was the cause of the lack of periodicity. Later,
when I presented my results at the Tokyo meeting, I added a brief description of
the unexpected response of the equations to the round-off errors.
Lorenz (1963a,b) thus discovered the fundamental theorem of predictability: Un-
stable systems have a ﬁnite limit of predictability, and conversely, stable systems are
inﬁnitely predictable (since they are either stationary or periodic), as suggested by
the schematic Fig. 6.1.1.
In his 1972 talk“Predictability:doesthe ﬂapof abutterﬂy’s wings in Brazil set off a
tornado in Texas?” Lorenz further reviewed basic ideas on atmospheric predictability
(Lorenz, 1993):
. . . I am proposing that over the years minuscule disturbances neither increase
nor decrease the frequency of occurrence of various weather events such as
tornadoes; the most that they can do is to modify the sequence in which these
events occur. The question which really interests us is whether they can even do
this – whether, for example, two particular weather situations differing by as
little as the immediate inﬂuence of a single butterﬂy will generally after
sufﬁcient time evolve into two situations differing by as much as the presence of
a tornado. In more technical language, is the behavior of the atmosphere
unstable with respect to perturbations of small amplitude?1
1 Gleick (1987) pointed out that the concept of a “butterﬂy effect” existed in some form from
literary sources long before Lorenz’s work. There is a short story by Ray Bradbury which deals
with this nearly as well as Lorenz does, right down to the butterﬂy. In this story, A Sound of

6.1 Introduction to atmospheric predictability
207
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.1.1: Schematic
illustrating trajectories of:
(a) a dynamical system with
instabilities, which no
matter how close they
initially are, inevitably drift
apart, and (b) a stable
system with stationary or
periodic orbits: after a
possible transient stage, the
trajectories stay close to
each other, i.e., they become
inﬁnitely predictable.
The connection between this question and our ability to predict the weather is
evident. Since we do not know how many butterﬂies there are, nor whether they
are all located, let alone which ones are ﬂapping their wings at any instant, we
cannot, if the answer to our question is afﬁrmative, accurately predict the
occurrence of tornadoes at a sufﬁcient distant future time. More signiﬁcantly,
our general ability to detect systems as large as thunderstorms when they slip
between weather stations may impair our ability to predict the general weather
pattern even in the near future. . . .
. . . The evidence [that the answer to the question whether the atmosphere is
unstable is afﬁrmative] is overwhelming. The most signiﬁcant results are the
following:
1. Small errors in the coarser structure of the weather pattern – those features
which are readily resolved by conventional observing networks – tend to
double in about three days.2 As the errors become larger the growth rate
subsides. This limitation alone would allow us to extend the range of
acceptable prediction by three days every time we cut the observation error in
Thunder, some time-travelers go back to the prehistoric era and are very careful not to touch
anything lest they alter the future to which they wish to return. When they return to the present,
they ﬁnd everything altered (for the worse it seems to them). It turns out one of them had
accidentally stepped on a butterﬂy. ‘ “Not a little thing like that! Not a butterﬂy!” cried Eckels.
It fell to the ﬂoor, an exquisite thing, a small thing that could upset balances and knock down a
line of small dominoes and then big dominoes and then gigantic dominoes, all down the years
across Time. Eckels’ mind whirled. It couldn’t change things. Killing one butterﬂy couldn’t be
that important! could it?’. This story was ﬁrst published in 1952. (Courtesy of Bill Martin, pers.
comm. 1998.)
2 Current estimates are that small errors in synoptic (coarser) scales double even faster, in about
2 days (e.g., Simmons et al., 1995, Dalcher and Kalnay, 1987, Toth and Kalnay, 1993).

208
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
half, and would offer the hope of eventually making good forecasts several
weeks in advance.
2. Small errors in the ﬁner structure – e.g. the positions of individual clouds –
tend to grow much more rapidly, doubling in hours or less. This limitation
alone would not seriously reduce our hopes for extended-range forecasting,
since ordinarily we do not forecast the ﬁner structure at all.
3. Errors in the ﬁner structure, having attained appreciable size, tend to produce
errors in the coarser structure. This result, which is less ﬁrmly established
than the previous ones, implies that after a day or so there will be appreciable
errors in the coarser structure, which will thereafter grow just as if they had
been present initially. Cutting the observations in the ﬁner structure in half – a
formidable task – would extend the range of acceptable prediction of even the
coarser structure only by hours or less. The hopes for predicting two weeks or
more in advance are thus greatly diminished.
4. Certain special quantities such as weekly average temperatures and weekly
total rainfall may be predictable at a range at which entire weather patterns
are not.
Since the early days of Lorenz’s momentous discovery, which gave impetus to
the new science of chaos,3 additional progress has been made, but his ﬁndings have
not been changed in any fundamental way. In NWP, substantial progress has been
made through the realization that the chaotic behavior of the atmosphere requires
the replacement of single “deterministic” forecasts by “ensembles” of forecasts
with differences in the initial conditions and in the model characteristics that re-
alistically reﬂect the uncertainties in our knowledge of the atmosphere. This real-
ization led to the introduction of operational ensemble forecasting at both NCEP
and ECMWF in December 1992. It also led to work on extending the usefulness
of NWP forecasts through a systematic exploitation of the chaotic nature of the
atmosphere.
6.2
Brief review of fundamental concepts
about chaotic systems
Lorenz (1963a) introduced a three-variable model that is a prototypical example of
chaos theory. These equations were derived as a simpliﬁcation of Saltzman’s (1962)
nonperiodic model for convection. Like Lorenz’s (1962) original 12-variable model,
the three-variable model is a dissipative system. This is in contrast to Hamiltonian
3 It should be noted that Poincar´e (1897, see Alligood et al., 1997) had already discovered that
the planetary system is chaotic, i.e., that the orbits of the planets cannot be predicted well
beyond a certain number of (millions of) years. He showed this for the simplest three-body
problem of two stars with circular orbits moving on a plane around their center of mass, and a
third “asteroid” with negligible mass in comparison with the ﬁrst two, moving in the same
plane. He found that the motion of the third body was sensitively dependent on the initial
conditions, the hallmark of chaos (Alligood et al., 1997).

6.2 Brief review of fundamental concepts about chaotic systems
209
systems, which conserve total energy or some other similar property of the ﬂow. The
systemisnonlinear(itcontainsproductsofthedependentvariables)butautonomous
(the coefﬁcients are time-independent). Sparrow (1982) wrote a whole book on the
Lorenz three-variable model that provides a nice introduction to the subject of chaos,
bifurcations and strange attractors. Lorenz (1993) is a superbly clear introduction
to chaos with a very useful glossary of the nomenclature used in today’s literature.
Alligood et al. (1997) is also a very clear introduction to dynamical systems and
chaos. In this section we use bold type to introduce some of the words used in the
dynamical system vocabulary.
The Lorenz (1963a) equations are
dx
dt = σ(y −x)
dy
dt = rx −y −xz
dz
dt = xy −bz



(6.2.1)
The solution obtained by integrating the differential equations in time is called a
ﬂow. The parameters σ, b,r are kept constant within an integration, but they can
be changed to create a family of solutions of the dynamical system deﬁned by the
differential equations. The particular parameter values chosen by Lorenz (1963a),
σ = 10, b = 8/3, r = 28, result in chaotic solutions (sensitively dependent on the
initial conditions), and since this publication they have been widely used in many
papers. The solution of a time integration from a given initial condition deﬁnes
a trajectory or orbit in phase space. The coordinates of a point in phase space
are deﬁned by the simultaneous values of the independent variables of the model,
x(t), y(t), z(t). The dimension of the phase space is equal to the number of inde-
pendent variables (in this case three). The dimension of the subspace actually visited
by the solution after an initial transient period (i.e., the dimension of the attractor)
can be much smaller than the dimension of the phase space. A volume in phase space
can be deﬁned by a set of points in phase space such as a hypercube V = δxδyδz, a
hypersphere V = {δr; |δr| ≤ε}, etc.
The fact that the Lorenz system (6.2.1) is dissipative can be seen from the diver-
gence of the ﬂow:
∂˙x
∂x + ∂˙y
∂y + ∂˙z
∂z = −(σ + b + 1)
(6.2.2)
which shows that an original volume V contracts with time to V e−(σ+b+1)t. This
proves the existence of a bounded globally attracting set of zero volume (i.e., an
attractor of dimension smaller than n, the dimension of the phase space). A solu-
tion may start from a point away from the attracting set but it will eventually settle
on the attractor. This initial portion of the trajectory is known as a transient. The
attracting set (the set of points approached again and again by the trajectories after

210
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
the transients are over) is called the attractor of the system. The attractor can have
several components: stationary points (equilibrium or steady state solutions of the
dynamical equations), periodic orbits, and more complicated structures known as
strange attractors (which can also include periodic orbits). The different compo-
nents of the attractor have corresponding basins of attraction in the phase space,
which are all the initial conditions that will evolve to the same attractor. The fact
that any initial volume in phase space contracts to zero with time is a general prop-
erty of dissipative bounded systems, including atmospheric models with friction.
Hamiltonian systems, on the other hand, are volume-conserving.
If we change the parameters of a dynamical system (in this example σ, b,r)
and obtain families of solutions, we ﬁnd that there is a point at which the behavior
of the ﬂow changes abruptly. The point at which this sudden change in the charac-
teristics of the ﬂow occurs is called a bifurcation point. For example in Lorenz’s
equations the origin is a stable, stationary point for r < 1, as can be seen by investi-
gating the local stability at the origin. The local stability of a point can be studied
by linearizing the ﬂow about the point and computing the eigenvalues of the lin-
ear ﬂow. For r < 1 the stationary point is stable: all three eigenvalues are negative.
This means that all orbits near the origin tend to get closer to it. At r = 1 there is
a bifurcation, and for r > 1 two new additional stationary points C± are born, with
coordinates (x, y, z)± = (±√b(r −1),±√b(r −1),r −1). For r > 1 the origin be-
comes nonstable: one of the three eigenvalues becomes positive (while the other
two remain negative), indicating that the ﬂow diverges locally from the origin in one
direction. For 1 < r < 24.74. . . , C+ and C−are stable, and at r = 24.74. . . there
is another bifurcation so that above that critical value C+ and C−also become
unstable. As discussed by Lorenz (1993), a ubiquitous phenomenon is the occur-
rence of bifurcations of periodic motion leading to period doubling, and sequences
of period doubling bifurcations leading to chaotic behavior (see Sauer et al.,
1991).
A solution of a dynamical system can be deﬁned to be stable if it is bounded,
and if any other solution once sufﬁciently close to it remains close to it for all times.
This indicates that a bounded stable solution must be periodic (repeat itself exactly)
or at least almost periodic, since once the trajectory approaches a point in its past
history, the trajectories will remain close forever (Fig. 6.1.1(b)). A solution that is
not periodic or almost periodic is therefore unstable: two trajectories that start very
close will eventually diverge completely (Fig. 6.1.1(a)).
Thelong-termstabilityofadynamicalsystemofn-variablesischaracterizedbythe
Lyapunov exponents. Consider a point in a trajectory, and introduce a (hyper)sphere
of small perturbations about that point. If we apply the model to evolve each of those
perturbations, we ﬁnd that after a short time the sphere will be deformed into a
(hyper)ellipsoid. In an unstable system, at least one of the axes of the ellipsoid
will become larger with time, and once nonlinear effects start to be signiﬁcant the
ellipsoid will be deformed into a “banana” (Fig. 6.2.1). Consider the linear phase,

6.2 Brief review of fundamental concepts about chaotic systems
211
(a) Initial volume: a small
hypersphere
(c) Nonlinear phase: folding needs
to take place in order for the
solution to stay within the bounds
(d) Asymptotic evolution to a
strange attractor of zero volume
and fractal structure. All
predictability is lost
(b) Linear phase: a hyper
ellipsoid
Figure 6.2.1: Schematic of the evolution of a small spherical volume in phase space
in a bounded dissipative system. Initially (during the linear phase) the volume is
stretched into an ellipsoid while the volume decreases. The solution space is bounded,
and a bound is schematically indicated in the ﬁgure by the hypercube. The ellipsoid
continues to be stretched in the unstable directions, until (because the solution phase
space is bounded) it has to fold through nonlinear effects. This stretching and folding
continues again and again, evolving into an inﬁnitely foliated (fractal) structure. This
structure, of zero volume and fractal dimension, is called a “strange attractor.” The
attractor is the set of states whose vicinity the system will visit again and again (the
“climate” of the system). Note that in phases (a), (b), and (c), there is predictive
knowledge: we know where the original perturbations generally are. In (d), when the
original sphere has evolved into the attractor, all predictability is lost: we only know
that each original perturbation is within the climatology of possible solutions, but we
don’t know where, or even in which region of the attractor it may be.
during which the sphere evolves into an ellipsoid. We can maintain the linear phase for
an inﬁnitely long period by taking an inﬁnitely small initial sphere, or, alternatively,
by periodically scaling down the ellipsoid dimensions dividing all its dimensions by
the same scalar. Each axis j of the ellipsoid grows or decays over the long term by
amountsgivenbyeλ jt,wheretheλ jsaretheLyapunovexponentsorderedbysizeλ1 ≥
λ2 ≥. . . ≥λn. The total volume of the ellipsoid will evolve like V0e−(λ1+λ2+···λn)t.
Therefore, a Hamiltonian (volume-conserving) system is characterized by a sum

212
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
of Lyapunov exponents equal to zero, whereas for a dissipative system the sum is
negative.
Because the attractor of a dissipative system is bounded (the trajectories are en-
closed within some hyperbox), if the ﬁrst Lyapunov exponent is greater than zero, at
least one of the axes of the ellipsoid keeps getting longer with time. The ellipsoid will
eventually be distorted into a banana shape: it has to be folded in order to continue
ﬁtting into the box. The banana will be further stretched along the unstable axis and
then necessarily folded again and again onto itself in order to continue ﬁtting into the
box. Since the volume of the ellipsoid eventually goes to zero for a dissipative system,
the repeated stretching and folding of the ellipsoid of a chaotic system eventually
converges to a zero-volume attractor with an inﬁnitely foliated structure (a process
similar to the stretching and folding used to make “phyllo” dough!). This structure is
known as “strange attractor” (Ruelle, 1989). It has a fractal structure: a dimension
which in general is not an integer and is smaller than the original space dimension
n, estimated by Kaplan and Yorke (1979) to be
d = k + (λ1 + · · · + λk)/|λk+1|
(6.2.3)
where the sum of the ﬁrst k Lyapunov exponents is positive, and the sum of the ﬁrst
k + 1 exponents is negative. If the system is Hamiltonian, its invariant manifold has
the same dimension as the phase space.
In summary, a stable system has all Lyapunov exponents less than or equal to zero.
A chaotic system has at least one Lyapunov exponent greater than zero: if at least
λ1 > 0 chaotic behavior will take place because at least one axis of the ellipsoid
will be continuously stretched, leading to the separation of orbits originally started
closely along that axis. Note that a chaotic bounded ﬂow must also have a Lyapunov
exponent equal to zero, with the corresponding local Lyapunov vector parallel to an
orbit. This can be understood by considering two initial conditions such that the
second is equal to the ﬁrst after applying the model for one time step. The solutions
corresponding to these initial conditions will remain close together, since the second
orbit will always be the same as the ﬁrst orbit shifted by one time step, and on the
average, the distance between the solutions will remain constant. If we add a tiny
perturbation, though, the second solution will diverge from the ﬁrst one because there
is a positive Lyapunov exponent.
6.3
Tangent linear model, adjoint model, singular
vectors, and Lyapunov vectors
In 1965 Lorenz published another paper based on a low-order model that behaved
like the atmosphere. It was a quasi-geostrophic two-level model in a periodic chan-
nel, with a “Lorenz” vertical grid (velocity and temperature variables deﬁned at the
same two levels, see Section 3.3), and a spectral (Fourier) discretization in longitude
