6.3 Tangent linear and adjoint models, singular and Lyapunov vectors
213
and latitude. By keeping only two Fourier components in latitude and three in lon-
gitude, and choosing appropriate values for the model parameters, he was able to
ﬁnd a model able to reproduce baroclinic instability and nonlinear wave interactions
with just 28 variables. In this fundamental paper, Lorenz introduced for the ﬁrst time
(without using their current names) the concepts of the tangent linear model, adjoint
model, singular vectors, and Lyapunov vectors for the low-order atmospheric model,
and their consequences for ensemble forecasting. He also pointed out that the pre-
dictability of the model is not constant with time: it depends on the stability of the
evolving atmospheric ﬂow (the basic trajectory or reference state). In the following
introduction to these subjects we follow Lorenz (1965), Szunyogh et al. (1997) and
Pu et al. (1997b).
6.3.1
Tangent linear model and adjoint model
Consider a nonlinear model. Once it has been discretized in space using, for example,
ﬁnite differences or a spectral expansion leading to n independent variables (or
degrees of freedom), the model can be written as a set of n nonlinear coupled ordinary
differential equations:
dx
dt = F(x)
x =


x1
...
xn


F =


F1
...
Fn


(6.3.1)
This is the model in differential form. Once we choose a time-difference scheme
(e.g., Crank–Nicholson, see Table 3.2.1), it becomes a set of nonlinear-coupled dif-
ference equations. Typically, an atmospheric model consists of one such system of
difference equations which, for example, using a two-time level Crank–Nicholson
scheme would be of the form
xn+1 = xn + tF
xn + xn+1
2

(6.3.2)
A numerical solution of (6.3.1) starting from an initial time t0 can be readily
obtained by integrating the model numerically using (6.3.2) between t0 and a ﬁnal
time t (i.e., “running the model”). This gives us a nonlinear model solution that
depends only on the initial conditions:
x(t) = M[x(t0)]
(6.3.3)
where M is the time integration of the numerical scheme from the initial condition
to time t. A small perturbation y(t) can be added to the basic model integration x(t):
M[x(t0) + y(t0)] = M[x(t0)] + ∂M
∂x y(t0) + O[y(t0)2]
= x(t) + y(t) + O[y(t0)2]
(6.3.4)

214
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
At any given time, the linear evolution of the small perturbation y(t) will be given by
dy
dt = Jy
(6.3.5)
where J = ∂F/∂x is the Jacobian of F.
This system of linear ordinary differential equations is the tangent linear model
in differential form. Its solution between t0 and t can be obtained by integrat-
ing (6.3.5) in time using the same time difference scheme used in the nonlinear
model (6.3.3):
y(t) = L(t0, t)y(t0)
(6.3.6)
Here L(t0, t) = ∂M/∂x is an (n × n) matrix known as the resolvent or propagator
of the tangent linear model: it propagates an initial perturbation at time t0 into the
ﬁnal perturbation at time t. Because it is linearized over the ﬂow from t0 to t, L
depends on the basic trajectory x(t) (the solution of the nonlinear model), but it
does not depend on the perturbation y. (The original nonlinear model is autonomous
since F(x) depends on x(t) but not explicitly on time, but the linear tangent model is
nonautonomous). Lorenz (1965) introduced the concept of the tangent linear model
of an atmospheric model, but he actually obtained it directly from (6.3.4), neglecting
terms quadratic or higher order in the perturbation y:
M[x(t0)] + L(t0, t)y(t0) = x(t) + y(t) ≈M[x(t0) + y(t0)]
(6.3.7)
He did so by creating as initial perturbations a “sphere” of small perturbations of
size ε along the n unit basis vectors yi(t0) = εei and applying (6.3.7) to each of
these perturbations. With this choice of initial perturbations, subtracting (6.3.3) he
obtained the matrix that deﬁnes the tangent linear model:
L(t0, t)[εe1, . . . , εen] = εL(t0, t) = [y1(t), . . . , yn(t)]
(6.3.8)
The Euclidean norm of a vector is the inner product of the vector with itself:
∥y∥2 = yT y = ⟨y, y⟩
(6.3.9)
The Euclidean norm of y(t) is therefore related to the initial perturbation by
∥y(t)∥2 = (Ly(t0))T Ly(t0) = ⟨Ly(t0), Ly(t0)⟩= ⟨LT Ly(t0), y(t0)⟩
(6.3.10)
The adjoint of an operator K is deﬁned by the property ⟨x, Ky⟩≡⟨KT x, y⟩. In this
case of a model with real variables, the adjoint of the tangent linear model L(t0, t) is
simply the transpose of the tangent linear model.
Now assume that we separate the interval (t0, t) into two successive time intervals.
For example, if t0 < t1 < t,
L(t0, t) = L(t1, t)L(t0, t1)
(6.3.11)

6.3 Tangent linear and adjoint models, singular and Lyapunov vectors
215
Since the adjoint of the tangent linear model is the transpose of the TLM, the
property of the transpose of a product is also valid:
LT (t0, t) = LT (t0, t1)LT (t1, t)
(6.3.12)
Equation (6.3.11) shows that the tangent linear model can be cast as a product of
the tangent linear model matrices corresponding to short integrations, or even single
time steps. Equation (6.3.12) shows that the adjoint of the model can also be separated
into single time steps, but they are executed backwards in time, starting from the last
time step at t, and ending with the ﬁrst time step at t0. For low-order models the
tangent linear model and its adjoint can be constructed by repeated integrations of
the nonlinear model for small perturbations, as done by Lorenz (1965), equation (3.7),
and by Molteni and Palmer (1993) with a global quasi-geostrophic model.
For large NWP models this approach is too time consuming, and instead it is
customary to develop the linear tangent and adjoint codes from the nonlinear model
code following some rules discussed in Appendix B. An example of a FORTRAN
code for a nonlinear model, and the corresponding tangent linear model and adjoint
models are also given in Appendix B.
6.3.2
Singular vectors
Recall that for a given basic trajectory and an interval (t0, t1) the tangent linear model
is a matrix that when applied to a small initial perturbation y(t0) produces the ﬁnal
perturbation y(t1):
y(t1) = L(t0, t1)y(t0)
(6.3.13)
Singular value decomposition theory (e.g., Golub and Van Loan, 1996) indicates
that for any matrix L there exist two orthogonal matrices U, V such that
UTLV = S
(6.3.14)
where
S =


σ1
0 · · · 0
0
σ2 · · · 0
...
...
...
0
0 · · · σn


and
UUT = I
VVT = I
(6.3.15)
S is a diagonal matrix whose elements are the singular values of L.
If we left multiply (6.3.14) by U, we obtain
LV = US
i.e., L(v1, . . . , vn) = (σ1u1, . . . , σnun)
(6.3.16)

216
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
where vi are the columns of V and ui the columns of U. This implies that
Lvi = σiui
(6.3.17)
Equation (6.3.17) deﬁnes the vis as the right singular vectors of L, hereafter
referred to as initial singular vectors, since they are indeed valid at the beginning of
the optimization interval over which L is deﬁned.
We now right multiply (6.3.14) by VT and obtain:
UT L = SVT
(6.3.18)
Transposing (6.3.18), we obtain
LT U = VS
i.e.,
LT (u1, . . . , un) = (σ1v1, . . . , σnvn)
(6.3.19)
so that
LT ui = σivi
(6.3.20)
The uis are the left singular vectors of L and will be referred to as ﬁnal (or evolved)
singular vectors, since they correspond to the end of the interval of optimization.
From (6.3.17) and (6.3.20) we obtain
LT Lvi = σiLT ui = σ 2
i vi
(6.3.21)
Therefore the initial singular vectors can be obtained as the eigenvectors of LT L,
a normal matrix whose eigenvalues are the squares of the singular values. Since U, V
are orthogonal matrices, the vectors vi and ui that form them constitute orthonormal
bases, and any vector can be written in the following form:
y(t0) =
n

i=1
⟨y0, vi⟩vi
(6.3.22a)
y(t1) =
n

i=1
⟨y1, ui⟩ui
(6.3.22b)
where ⟨x, y⟩is the inner product of two vectors x, y. Therefore, using (6.3.22a) and
(6.3.17)
y(t1) = L(t0, t1)y(t0) =
n

i=1
⟨y0,vi⟩σiui
(6.3.23)
If we now take the inner product of (6.3.23) with ui we obtain
⟨y(t1), ui⟩= σi⟨y(t0), vi⟩
(6.3.24)
This indicates that by applying the tangent linear model L each initial vector vi
component will be stretched by an amount equal to the singular value σi(or contracted
if σi < 1), and the direction will be rotated to that of the evolved vector ui. Similarly

6.3 Tangent linear and adjoint models, singular and Lyapunov vectors
217
applying the adjoint of the tangent linear model, LT , each ﬁnal vector ui will be
stretchedbyanamountequaltothesingularvalue σi androtatedtotheinitialvectorvi.
Exercise 6.3.1: Use (6.3.20) and (6.3.22b) to show that ⟨y(t0), vi⟩= σi⟨y(t1), ui⟩.
If we consider all the perturbations y(t0) of size 1, from (6.3.24) we obtain that
for each of them
n

i=1
⟨y(t), ui⟩
σi
=
n

i=1
⟨y(t0), vi⟩= ∥y(t0)∥2 = 1
(6.3.25)
so that an initial sphere of radius 1 becomes a hyperellipsoid of semiaxes σi. The ﬁrst
initial singular vector v1 is also called an “optimal vector” since it gives the direction
in phase space (i.e., the shape in physical space) of the perturbation that will attain
maximum growth σ1 in the interval (t0, t1) (Fig. 6.3.1).
Note that applying L is the same as running the tangent linear model forward in
time, from t0 to t1. Applying LT is like running the adjoint model backwards, from
t1 to t0. From (6.3.21) we see that if we apply the adjoint model to a sphere of ﬁnal
perturbations of size 1 (expanded on the basis formed by the evolved or left singular
vectors), they also become stretched and rotated into a hyperellipsoid of semiaxes in
the directions of the vi with length σi (Fig. 6.3.2).
Therefore, if we apply LT L (i.e., run the tangent linear model forward in time,
and then the adjoint backwards in time, the ﬁrst initial singular vector will grow by a
factor σ 2
1 (see Fig. 6.3.3), and the other initial singular vectors will grow or decay by
their corresponding singular value squared σ 2
i . In other words, the (initial) singular
vectors vi are the eigenvectors of LT L with singular values σ 2
i . Conversely, if we
apply the adjoint model ﬁrst (integrate the adjoint model backwards from the ﬁnal
to the initial time), followed by the tangent linear model (integrate forward to the
ﬁnal time), the ﬁnal singular vectors ui will grow both backward and forward, by a
v1
v2
1u1
2u2
L
Figure 6.3.1: Schematic of
the application of the
tangent linear model to a
sphere of perturbations of
size 1 for a given interval
(t0, t1).
LT
2v2
1v1
u2
u2
Figure 6.3.2: Schematic of
the application of the
adjoint of the tangent linear
model to a sphere of
perturbations of size 1 at the
ﬁnal time.

218
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
L 
L  L 
T
v1
1u1
1
2 v1
Figure 6.3.3: Schematic of
the application of the
tangent linear model
forward in time followed by
the adjoint of the tangent
linear model to a sphere of
perturbations of size 1 at the
initial time.
u1
1v1
LT
LLT
1
2u1
Figure 6.3.4: Schematic of
the application of the
adjoint of the tangent linear
model backward in time
followed by the tangent
linear model forward to a
sphere of perturbations of
size 1 at the ﬁnal time.
total factor also equal to σ 2
i (Figure 6.3.4). In other words, the ﬁnal singular vectors
are the eigenvectors of LLT , and again they have eigenvalues equal to the square of
the singular values of L. Alternatively, once the initial singular vectors are obtained
using, for example, the Lanczos algorithm, the ﬁnal singular vectors can be derived
by integrating the tangent linear model ((6.3.17)).
If we apply LT L repeatedly over the same interval (t0, t), we obtain the leading
initial singular vector, or ﬁrst optimal vector. Additional leading singular vectors can
be obtained by a generalization of the power method (Lanczos algorithm, Golub and
Van Loan, 1996), which requires running the tangent linear model and its adjoint
about three times the number of singular vectors required. For example, to get the
leading 30 singular vectors optimized for t1 −t0 = 36 h, the ECMWF performed
100 iterations, equivalent to running the tangent linear model for about 300 days
(Molteni et al., 1996).
It is important to note that the adjoint model and the singular vectors are deﬁned
with respect to a given norm. So far we have used an Euclidean norm in which the
weight matrix that deﬁnes the inner product is the identity matrix:
∥y∥2 = yT y = ⟨y, y⟩
(6.3.26)
The leading (initial) singular vectors are the vectors of equal size (initial norm
equal to one ∥y(t0)∥2 = y(t0)T y(t0) = ⟨y(t0), y(t0)⟩= 1), that grow fastest during the

6.3 Tangent linear and adjoint models, singular and Lyapunov vectors
219
optimization period (t0, t1), i.e., the initial vectors that maximize the norm at the ﬁnal
time:
J(y(t0)) ≡∥y(t1)∥2 = [Ly(t0)]T Ly(t0) = ⟨LT Ly(t0), y(t0)⟩
(6.3.27)
If we deﬁne a norm using any other weight matrix W applied to y, then the
requirement that the initial perturbations be of equal size implies:
∥y(t0)∥2 = (Wy(t0))T Wy(t0) = y(t0)T WT Wy(t0) = 1
(6.3.28)
We can use a different norm to deﬁne the size of the perturbation to be maximized
at the ﬁnal time than the norm W used for the initial time (6.3.28). For example
the ﬁnal norm could be a projection operator P at the end of the interval. Then the
function that we want to maximize is, instead of (6.3.27):
J(y(t0)) = [PLy(t0)]T PLy(t0) = y(t0)T LT PT PLy(t0)
(6.3.29)
subject to the strong constraint (6.3.28).
From the calculus of variations, the maximum of (6.3.29) subject to the strong
constraint (6.3.28) can be obtained by the unconstrained maximum of another
function:
K(y(t0)) = J(y(t0)) + λ[1 −y(t0)T WT Wy(t0)]
= y(t0)T LT PT PLy(t0) + λ[1 −y(t0)T WT Wy(t0)]
(6.3.30)
where the λ are the Lagrange multipliers multiplying the square brackets (equal to
zero due to the constraint (6.3.28)).
The unconstrained minimization of K is obtained by computing its gradient with
respecttothecontrolvariabley(to)andmakingitequaltozero.FromRemark5.4.1(d),
we can compute this gradient as:
∇y(t0)K = LT PT PLy(t0) −λWT Wy(t0) = 0
(6.3.31)
It is convenient, given the constraint (6.3.28), to change variables:
Wy(t0) = ˆy(t0)
or
y(t0) = W−1ˆy(t0)
(6.3.32)
Then, (6.3.31) becomes
(W−1)T LT PT PLW−1ˆy(t0) = λˆy(t0)
(6.3.33)
subject to the constraint
ˆyT (t0)ˆy(t0) = 1
(6.3.34)
Therefore, the transformed vectors ˆy(t0) are the eigenvectors of the matrix
(W−1)T LT PT PLW−1 in (6.3.33), with eigenvalues equal to the Lagrange multi-
pliers λi. After the leading eigenvectors ˆy(t0) are obtained (using, for example, the
Lanczos algorithm), the variables are transformed back to y(t0) using (6.3.32). The

220
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
eigenvalues of this problem are the square of the singular values of the tangent linear
model: λi = σ 2
i .
This allows great generality (as well as arbitrariness4) in the choice of initial norm
and ﬁnal projection operator. Errico and Vukicevic (1992), showed that the singular
vectors are very sensitive to both the choice of norm and the length of the optimization
interval (the interval from t0 to t1). In another example, Palmer et al. (1998) tested
different weight matrices W deﬁning the initial norm. They used “streamfunction,”
“enstrophy,” “kinetic energy,” and “total energy” norms, which measured, as the
“initial size” the square of the perturbation streamfunction, vorticity, wind speed and
weighted temperature, wind and surface pressure, respectively. They found that the
use of different initial norms resulted in extremely different initial singular vectors,
and concluded that the total energy was the norm of choice for ensemble forecasting.
In 1995, ECMWF included in their ensemble system a projection operator P that
measures only the growth of perturbations north of 30◦N, i.e., a matrix that multiplies
variables that correspond to latitudes greater than or equal to 30◦N by the number 1,
and by 0 otherwise) (Buizza and Palmer, 1995). One could use any other pair of initial
W and ﬁnal P weights (norms) to answer the related question of forecast sensitivity.
An example of a forecast sensitivity problem is: “What is the optimal (minimum size)
initial perturbation (measured by the square of the change in surface pressure over
the states of Oklahoma and Texas) that produces the maximum ﬁnal change after a
1-day forecast (measured by the change in vorticity between surface and 500 hPa
over the eastern USA)?” ECMWF has been routinely carrying out experiments to
ﬁnd out “What is the change in the initial conditions from 3 days ago that would lead
to the best veriﬁcation of today’s analysis?” (see Errico (1997), Rabier et al. (1996),
Pu et al. (1997a,b) for more details).
6.3.3
Lyapunov vectors
As we saw in Section 6.2, if we start a set of perturbations on a sphere of very small
size, it will evolve into an ellipsoid. The growth of the axis of the hyperellipsoid after
a ﬁnite interval s is given by the singular values σi(t0 + s). The (global) Lyapunov
exponents describe the linear long-term growth of the hyperellipsoid:
λi = lim
s→∞
1
s ln[σi(t0 + s)]
(6.3.35)
4 Jon Ahlquist (2000, pers. communication) showed, given a linear operator L, a set of arbitrary
vectors xi, and a set of arbitrary nonnegative numbers σi arranged in decreasing order, how to
construct an inner product and a norm such that the σiand the xi are ith singular values and
singular vectors of L. He pointed out that “Because anything not in the null space can be a
singular vector, even the leading singular vector, one cannot assign a physical meaning to a
singular vector simply because it is a singular vector. Any physical meaning must come from an
additional aspect of the problem. Said in another way, nature evolves from initial conditions
without knowing which inner products and norms the user wants to use.”

6.3 Tangent linear and adjoint models, singular and Lyapunov vectors
221
In other words, the Lyapunov exponents describe the long-term average exponential
rate of stretching or contraction in the attractor. (We call the Lyapunov exponents
“global”todistinguishthemfromtheﬁnitetimeor“local”Lyapunovexponentswhich
are useful in predictability applications.) There are as many Lyapunov exponents as
the dimension of the model (number of independent variables or degrees of freedom).
If the model has at least one λigreater than zero, then the system can be called chaotic,
i.e., there is exponential separation of trajectories. In other words, there is at least one
direction of the ellipsoid that continues to be stretched, and therefore two trajectories
willdivergeintimeandeventuallybecomecompletelydifferent.Conversely,asystem
with all negative Lyapunov exponents is stable, and will remain predictable at all
times. The ﬁrst Lyapunov exponent can be estimated by running the tangent linear
model for a long time starting from any randomly chosen initial perturbation y(t0).
During a long integration the growth rate of any random perturbation will converge
to the ﬁrst Lyapunov exponent:
λ1 = lim
s→∞
1
s ln
∥y(t0 + s)∥
∥y(t0)∥

(6.3.36)
which is independent of the norm. In practice, the ﬁrst Lyapunov exponent is ob-
tained by running the tangent linear model for a long period from random initial
conditions, and renormalizing the perturbation vector periodically in order to avoid
computational overﬂow.
When we are dealing with atmospheric predictions, we are not really interested in
the global growth properties, which correspond to the atmosphere’s attractor (clima-
tology), i.e., relevant average properties over many decades. Instead, in predictability
problems we are interested in the growth rate of perturbations at a given time and
space: we need to know the local stability properties in space and time, which are
related to our ability to make skillful forecasts. We can deﬁne the leading local
Lyapunov vector (LLV) at a certain time t, as the vector towards which all random
perturbations y(t −s) started a long time s before t will converge (Fig. 6.3.5).
l1(t) = lim
s→∞L(t −s, t)y(t −s)
(6.3.37)
Once a perturbation has converged to the leading LLV l1(t), the leading local Lya-
punov exponent can be computed from the rate of change of its norm. In practice,
the local leading Lyapunov exponent, also known as ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent,
can be estimated over a ﬁnite period τ:
l1 ≈1
τ ln
∥l1(t + τ)∥
∥l1(t)∥

(6.3.38)
The argument of the logarithm is deﬁned as the ampliﬁcation rate A(t, τ).
TheﬁrstLLVisindependentofthedeﬁnitionofnorm,andrepresentsthedirection
in which maximum sustainable growth (or minimum decay) can occur in a system
without external forcing. In fact, after a ﬁnite transition period T takes place, every

222
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
Trajectory
Random initial
perturbations
Leading LLV
Figure 6.3.5: Schematic of how all perturbations will converge towards the leading
LLV.
initial perturbation will turn in the direction of the LLV at every point of the trajectory.
This also includes the ﬁnal singular vectors ui for a sufﬁciently long optimization
interval.
Trevisan and Legnani (1995) introduced the notion of the leading LLV. Additional
LLVs can be obtained by Gramm–Schmidt orthogonalization, and this would seem
to indicate that they are norm-dependent. However, Trevisan and Pancotti (1998)
showed that it is also possible, at least in theory, to deﬁne additional LLVs (denoted
characteristic vectors by Legras and Vautard, 1996) without the use of norms. The
LLVs are therefore a fundamental characteristic of dynamical systems. It should be
noted that regrettably, at this time, there is not a universally accepted nomenclature
for LLVs. Legras and Vautard (1996) call the LLVs “backward Lyapunov vectors”,
since they were started an inﬁnitely long time in the past. Unfortunately, this name
is extremely confusing, since they represent forward evolution rather than backward
evolution as this name would imply. The LLVs are also the ﬁnal singular vectors
optimized for an inﬁnitely long time, i.e., the eigenvectors (valid at time t) of L(t −
T, t)LT (t −T, t) for T →∞. Similarly, Legras and Vautard deﬁne as “forward
Lyapunov vectors” the initial singular vectors obtained from a very long backward
integration with the adjoint of the model, i.e., they are the eigenvectors (valid at
time t) of LT (t, t + T )L(t, t + T ) for very large T .
Legras and Vautard (1996) showed (as did Trevisan and Pancotti (1998)) that
a complete set of LLVs (which they denote characteristic Lyapunov vectors) can
be deﬁned from the intersection of the subspaces spanned by the “forward” and
“backward” Lyapunov vectors. The (characteristic) LLVs are therefore independent
of the norm, and grow in time with a rate given by the local Lyapunov exponents. As
such, they are a fundamental characteristic of dynamical systems.
Several authors have shown that the leading (ﬁrst few) LLVs of low-dimensional
dynamical systems span the attractor, i.e., they are parallel to the hypersurface in
phase space that the dynamical system visits again and again (“realistic solutions”).

6.3 Tangent linear and adjoint models, singular and Lyapunov vectors
223
Leading singular vectors, on the other hand, have very different properties. They can
grow much faster than the leading LLVs, but are initially off the attractor: they point
to areas in the phase space where solutions do not naturally occur (e.g., Legras and
Vautard, 1996, Trevisan and Legnani, 1995, Trevisan and Pancotti, 1998, Pires et al.,
1996), see also next section.
For ensemble forecasting, Ehrendorfer and Tribbia (1997) showed that if V is the
initial analysis error covariance (which unfortunately we don’t know and can only
estimate), then the initial singular vectors deﬁned with the norm W = V−1/2 evolve
into the eigenvectors of the evolved error covariance matrix. This implies that the
leading singular vectors, deﬁned using the initial error covariance, are optimal in
describing the forecast errors at the end of the optimization period. The initial error
covariance norm yields singular vectors quite different from those derived using the
energy norm. Barkmeijer et al. (1998) used the ECMWF estimated 3D-Var error
covariance as the initial norm (instead of the total energy norm) and obtained initial
perturbations with structures closer to the bred vectors (i.e., leading LLVs) used at
NCEP (see Section 6.5.1).
6.3.4
Simple examples of singular vectors and eigenvectors
In order to get a more intuitive feeling of the relationship between singular vectors
and Lyapunov vectors, we consider a simple linear model in two dimensions:
 x1(t + T )
x2(t + T )

= MT [x(t)] =
 2x1(t) + 3x2(t) + 7
0.5x2(t) −4

(6.3.39)
We compute the two-dimensional tangent linear model, constant in time:
L =


∂M1
∂x1
∂M1
∂x2
∂M2
∂x1
∂M2
∂x2

=

2
3
0
0.5

(6.3.40)
The propagation or evolution of any perturbation (difference between two solutions)
over a time interval (t, t + T) is given by
δx(t + T ) = Lδx(t)
(6.3.41)
Note that the translation terms in (6.3.39) do not affect the perturbations. The eigen-
vectors of L (which for this simple constant tangent linear model are also the
Lyapunov vectors) are proportional to
l1 =
 1
0

l2 =
−2
1


224
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
corresponding to the eigenvalues λ1 = 2, λ2 = 0.5, respectively, which in this case
are the two Lyapunov numbers (their logarithms are the Lyapunov exponents). If we
normalize them, so that they have unit length, the Lyapunov vectors are
l1 =
 1
0

l2 =
−0.89
0.45

(6.3.42)
The Lyapunov vectors are not orthogonal, they are separated by an angle of 153.4◦
(Fig. 6.3.6(a)). We will see that because they are not orthogonal it is possible to
ﬁnd linear combinations of the Lyapunov vectors that grow faster than the leading
Lyapunov vector. We will also see that the leading Lyapunov vector is the attractor
of the system, since repeated applications of L to any perturbation makes it evolve
towards l1.
t=0
v1
l2
l1
v2
t=T
u1=Lv1
0.5l2
2l1
u2=Lv2
t=2T
Lu1
Lu2
4l1
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.3.6: Schematic of the evolution of the two nonorthogonal Lyapunov vectors
(thin arrows l1 and l2), and the corresponding two initial singular vectors (thick
arrows v1(0)and v2(0)), optimized for the interval (0, T ), for the tangent linear model
L =
 2
3
0
0.5

with eigenvalues 2 and 0.5. (a) Time t = 0, showing the initial singular vectors v1(0)
and v2(0), as well as the Lyapunov vectors l1 and l2. (b) Time t = T, evolved singular
vectors, u1(T ) = Lv1(0), u2(T ) = Lv2(0) at the end of the optimization period; the
Lyapunov vectors have grown by factors of 2 and 0.5 respectively, whereas the
leading singular vector has grown by 3.63. The second evolved singular vector has
grown by 0.275, and is still orthogonal to the ﬁrst singular vector. (c) Time t = 2T .
Beyond the optimization period T , the evolved singular vectors u1(t + 2T ) =
Lu1(t + T ), u2(2T ) = Lu2(T ) are not orthogonal and they approach the leading
Lyapunov vector with similar growth rates.

6.3 Tangent linear and adjoint models, singular and Lyapunov vectors
225
Applying ﬁrst L and then its transpose LT we obtain the symmetric matrix
LT L =
 4
6
6
9.25

(6.3.43)
whose eigenvectors are the initial singular vectors, and whose eigenvalues are the
squares of the singular values. The initial singular vectors (eigenvectors of LT L) are
v1 =
 0.55
0.84

v2 =
 0.84
−0.55

(6.3.44)
with eigenvalues σ 2
1 = 13.17, σ 2
2 = 0.076. As indicated before, the singular values
of L are the square roots of the eigenvalues of LT L, i.e., σ1 = 3.63, σ2 = 0.275.
Note that this implies that during the optimization period (0, T ) the leading singular
vector grows almost twice as fast as the leading Lyapunov vector (3.63 vs. 2). The
angle that the leading initial singular vector has with respect to the leading Lyapunov
vector is 56.82◦, whereas the second initial singular vector is perpendicular to the
ﬁrst one (Fig.6.3.6(a)).
The ﬁnal or evolved SVs at the end of the optimization period (0, T ) are the eigen-
vectors of
LLT =
 13
1.5
1.5
0.25

(6.3.45)
and after normalization, they are
u1 =
 0.99
0.12

u2 =
 0.12
−0.99

(6.3.46)
Note again that the operators LT L and LLT are quite different, and the ﬁnal
singular vectors are different from the initial singular vectors, but they have the same
singular values σ 2
1 = 13.17, σ 2
2 = 0.076.
Alternatively, the evolved singular vectors at the end of the optimization period can
alsobeobtainedbyapplyingLtotheinitialsingularvectors,whichiscomputationally
inexpensive. In this case,
u1(T ) = Lv1(0) =
 3.6
0.42

u2(T ) = Lv2(0) =
 0.03
−0.27

which is the same as (6.3.46) but without normalization.
TheﬁnalleadingsingularvectorhasstronglyrotatedtowardstheleadingLyapunov
vector: at the end of the optimization period the angle between the leading singular
vector and the leading Lyapunov vector is only 6.6◦(Fig. 6.3.6(b)), and because the
singular vectors have been optimized for this period, the ﬁnal singular vectors are
still orthogonal.

226
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
To obtain the evolution of the singular vectors beyond the optimization period (0,
T ) we apply L again to the evolved singular vector valid at t = T and obtain
u1(t + 2T ) = Lu1(t + T ) =
 3.6
0.42

u2(2T ) = Lu2(T ) =
 0.03
−0.27

During the interval (T , 2T ) the leading singular vector grows by a factor of just 2.33,
which is not very different from the growth rate of the leading Lyapunov vector. At
the end of this second period (Fig. 6.3.6(c)) the angle with the leading Lyapunov
vector is only 1.41◦. The angle of the second evolved singular vector at time T , after
applying the linear tangent model L and the leading Lyapunov vector is also quite
small (10.24o), and because it was further away from the attractor, the second singular
vector (whose original, transient, singular value was 0.5), grows by a factor of 2.79.
This example shows how quickly all perturbations, including all singular vectors,
evolve towards the leading Lyapunov vector, which is the attractor of the system. It is
particularly noteworthy that during the optimization period (0, T ), the ﬁrst singular
vector grows very fast as it rotates towards the attractor, but once it gets close to the
leading Lyapunov vector, its growth returns to the normal leading Lyapunov vector’s
growth.
Let us now choose as the tangent linear model another matrix
L =
 2
30
0
0.5

with the same eigenvalues 2 and 0.5, i.e., with eigenvectors (Lyapunov vectors) that
still grow at a rate of 2/T and 0.5/T respectively. However, now the angle between
the ﬁrst and the second Lyapunov vector is 177◦, i.e. the Lyapunov vectors are almost
antiparallel. In this case, the ﬁrst singular vector grows by a factor of over 30 during
the optimization period, but beyond the optimization period it essentially continues
evolving like the leading Lyapunov vector.
These results do not depend on the fact that one Lyapunov vector grows and the
other decays. As a third example, we choose
L =
 2
3
0
1.5

with two Lyapunov vectors growing with rates 2/T and 1.5/T . The Lyapunov vectors
arealmostparallel,withanangleof170◦,andtheleadingsingularvectorgrowsduring
the optimization period by a factor of 3.83. Applying the tangent linear model again
to the evolved singular vectors we obtain that at time 2T the leading singular vector
has grown by a factor of 2.9 and its angle with respect to the leading Lyapunov
vector is 1◦. Because it is not decaying, the second Lyapunov vector is also part of
the attractor, but only those perturbations that are exactly parallel to it will remain
parallel, all others will move towards the ﬁrst Lyapunov vector.

6.4 Ensemble forecasting: early studies
227
These examples illustrate the fact that the fast growth of the singular vectors during
the optimization period depends on the lack of orthogonality between Lyapunov
vectors. A very fast “supergrowth” of singular vectors is associated with the presence
of almost parallel Lyapunov vectors, and it takes place when the initial singular
vector, which is not in the attractor, rotates back towards the attractor. At the end of
the optimization period, the leading singular vector tends to be much closer to the
attractor, more parallel to the leading Lyapunov vector. The second (trailing) singular
vector is also moving towards the leading Lyapunov vector.
Finally, we point out that this introductory discussion is appropriate for relatively
low-dimensional systems. For extremely high-dimensional systems like the atmo-
sphere, there may be multiple sets of Lyapunov exponents corresponding to different
types of instabilities. For example, as pointed out by Toth and Kalnay (1993), con-
vective instabilities have very fast growth but small amplitudes, whereas baroclinic
instabilities have slower growth but much larger amplitudes, and each of these can
lead to different types of Lyapunov vectors. If we are interested in the predictability
characteristics associated with baroclinic instabilities, then the analysis of growth
rates of inﬁnitesimally small Lyapunov vectors over inﬁnitely long times may not be
appropriate for the problem (Lorenz, 1996). In that case, it may be better to consider
the ﬁnite amplitude, ﬁnite time extension of Lyapunov vectors introduced by Toth
and Kalnay (1993, 1997) as bred vectors. Bred vectors are discussed in Section 6.5.1,
and their relationship to Lyapunov vectors in Kalnay et al. (2002).
6.4
Ensemble forecasting: early studies
We saw in previous sections that Lorenz (1963a,b,1965) showed that the forecast skill
of atmospheric models depends not only on the accuracy of the initial conditions and
on the realism of the model (as it was generally believed at the time), but also on the
instabilities of the ﬂow itself. He demonstrated that any nonlinear dynamical system
with instabilities, like the atmosphere, has a ﬁnite limit of predictability. The growth
of errors due to instabilities implies that the smallest imperfection in the forecast
model or the tiniest error in the initial conditions, will inevitably lead to a total loss of
skill in the weather forecasts after a ﬁnite forecast length. Lorenz estimated this limit
of weather predictability as about two weeks. With his simple model he also pointed
out that predictability is strongly dependent on the evolution of the atmosphere itself:
some days the forecasts can remain accurate for a week or longer, and on other days
the forecast skill may break down after only 3 days. This discovery made inevitable
the realization that NWP needs to account for the stochastic nature of the evolution
of the atmosphere (Fig. 6.4.1). As previously discussed, Lorenz (1965) studied the
error growth of a complete “ensemble” of perturbed forecasts, with the ensemble
size equal to the dimension of the phase space (one perturbation for each of the
28 model variables). In this paper he introduced for the ﬁrst time concepts related

228
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
Time
Deterministic
Stochastic
A
B
Figure 6.4.1: Schematic of ensemble prediction, with individual trajectories drawn
for forecasts starting from a representative set of perturbed initial conditions within a
circle representing the uncertainty of the initial conditions (ideally the analysis error
covariance) and ending within the range of possible solutions. For the shorter range,
the forecasts are close to each other, and they may be considered deterministic, but
beyond a certain time, the equally probable forecasts are so different that they must
be considered stochastic. The transition time is of the order of 2–3 days for the
prediction of large-scale ﬂow, but can be as short as a few hours for mesoscale
phenomena like the prediction of individual storms. The transition time is shorter for
strongly nonlinear parameters: even for large-scale ﬂow, precipitation forecasts show
signiﬁcant divergence faster than the 500-hPa ﬁelds. The forecasts may be clustered
into subsets A and B. (Adapted from Tracton and Kalnay, 1993.)
to singular vectors and LLVs discussed in the previous section. This was followed by
several early approaches to the problem of accounting for the variable predictability
of the atmosphere reviewed in this section.
6.4.1
Stochastic-dynamic forecasting
Historically, the ﬁrst forecasting method to explicitly acknowledge the uncertainty
of atmospheric model predictions was developed by Epstein (1969), who introduced
the idea of stochastic-dynamic forecasting. He derived a continuity equation for the
probabilitydensity ϕ(X; t) ofamodelsolution X ofadynamical model ˙X = G(X(t)),
where the model has dimension D:
∂ϕ
∂t + ∇D · ( ˙Xϕ) = 0
(6.4.1)
This equation indicates that in an ensemble of forecast solutions, “no member of
the ensemble may be created or destroyed”. An ensemble starting from an inﬁ-
nite number of perturbed integrations spanning the analysis uncertainty gives the
“true” probability distribution (with all its moments), but even for a simple low-order
model, the integration of (6.4.1) is far too expensive. Therefore Epstein introduced an
approximation to predict only the ﬁrst and second moments of the probability distri-
bution (expected means and covariances) rather than the full probability distribution.

6.4 Ensemble forecasting: early studies
229
Epstein assumed that the model equations are of the form
˙xi =

j,k
aijkx jxk −

j
bijx j + ci
(6.4.2)
The forecast equations for the expected ﬁrst and second moments are
˙µi = E(˙xi)
˙ρij = E(xi ˙x j + ˙xix j)



(6.4.3)
The covariances ρij are related to the second order moments by σi j = E[(xi −
µi)(x j −µ j)]. Substituting (6.4.2) into (6.4.3) gives rise to forecast equations
for ˙µ and ˙σ that contain triple moments (xix jxk). As done in turbulence mod-
els with a second order closure for the triple products (Chapter 4), Epstein in-
troduced a closure assumption for the third order moments around the mean
τijk = E[(xi −µi)(x j −µ j)(xk −µk)]. He assumed that #kla jklτikl + aiklτ jkl = 0,
which then gives a closed set of equations for the means and covariances:
˙µi =

jk
aijk(σjk + µ jµk) −

j
bijµ j + ci
˙σi j =

kl
a jkl(µkσil + µlσik) + aikl(µkσ jl + µlσ jk)
−

k
(bikσ jk+b jkσik)



(6.4.4)
Epstein tested these “approximate” stochastic equations for a Lorenz three-variable
model. The “true” probability distribution was computed from a Monte Carlo ensem-
ble of 500 members, and the comparison indicated good agreement, at least for several
simulated days. Note that in his case, the number of ensemble members was much
larger than the number of degrees of freedom of the model, a situation that would be
impossible to replicate with current models with millions of degrees of freedom. In
his paper, Epstein also introduced the idea of using stochastic-dynamic forecasting
in the analysis cycle, with the background forecast and error covariance provided
by stochastic-dynamic forecasts combined with observations that also contain errors
(cf. Sections 5.3–5.5).
Unfortunately, although the stochastic-dynamic forecasting method was intro-
duced as a shortcut to an “inﬁnite” Monte Carlo ensemble, in a model with N degrees
of freedom, it requires N(N + 1)/2 + N forecast equations, equivalent to making
about (N+ 3)/2 model forecasts. Although this was practical with a three-variable
model, it is completely unfeasible for a modern model, with millions of degrees of
freedom.
6.4.2
Monte Carlo forecasting
In 1974, Leith proposed the idea of performing ensemble forecasting with a limited
number m of ensemble members instead of the conventional single (deterministic)

230
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
control forecast. He also proposed performing an “optimal estimation” of the ver-
iﬁcation using linear regression on the dynamical forecasts, with optimal weights
determined from forecast error covariances (cf. Sections 5.3–5.5). Since forecasts
lose their skill at longer lead times, and individual forecasts eventually are further
away from the veriﬁcation than the climatology (cf. eqs. (6.4.5) and (6.4.6)), optimal
estimation of the veriﬁcation is equivalent to tempering (i.e., hedging the forecast
towards climatology).
He cast his analysis using, instead of model variables, their deviationu with respect
to climatology (also known as forecast anomalies). The true state of the atmosphere
is denoted u0, and ˆu then denotes an unbiased estimate of u0, whose expected value
(average over many forecasts, represented by the angle brackets) is equal to zero:
⟨ˆu⟩= 0.
We can compute the expected error covariance of a climatological forecast (i.e.,
a forecast of zero anomaly):
⟨(0 −u0)(0 −u0)T ⟩= ⟨u0uT
0 ⟩= U
(6.4.5)
A single (deterministic) forecast ˆu, on the other hand, has, on average, an error
covariance given by
⟨(ˆu −u0)(ˆu −u0)T ⟩= ⟨ˆuˆuT + u0uT
0 −ˆuuT
0 −u0 ˆuT ⟩−→
t→∞2U
(6.4.6)
This limit occurs because the last two terms in the second angle brackets go to zero
as the forecasts become decorrelated with the true atmosphere at long lead times,
and we assume that the model covariance is also unbiased. This indicates that for
long lead times an individual deterministic forecast has twice the error covariance
of a climatological forecast. Therefore, a “regressed” forecast, tempered towards
climatology, must be better than a single deterministic forecast (in a least square
error sense), with an error covariance that asymptotes to U, and not 2U.
A regressed forecast ˆu0 = ˆuA is obtained by linear regression, minimizing the
square of the regressed error εT ε = ⟨(u0 −ˆuA)T (u0 −ˆuA)⟩with respect to the ele-
ments of the matrix of constant regression coefﬁcients A. As we did in the derivation
of the optimal weight matrix for the observational increments in Section 5.4, we make
use of the linear regression formulas: if the linear prediction equation is ˆy = xA, then
the error is given by ε = y −xA. The matrix of the derivatives of the (scalar) squared
error εT ε with respect to each element of A is given by ∂εT ε/∂A = −2xT (y −xA) =
0, which gives the normal equation xT y = xT xA, or A = (xT x)−1(xT y). Applying
this to the regressed forecast we obtain ⟨ˆuT (u0 −ˆuA)⟩= 0, or
A = ⟨ˆuT ˆu⟩−1⟨ˆuT u0⟩
(6.4.7)
Estimating the required forecast statistics in (6.4.7) involves considerable work.
The size of the regression matrix is usually large compared to the size of the sample
available to estimate it, and in order to reduce the number of parameters to be

6.4 Ensemble forecasting: early studies
231
estimated additional approximations are needed (e.g., by parameterizing error
growth, Hoffman and Kalnay, 1983).
Now, instead of regression let’s consider an ensemble of m forecasts computed
from perturbations ri to the initial best estimate (analysis) ˆu. Ideally, the perturbations
should be chosen so that their outer product is a good estimate of the initial error co-
variance (i.e., the analysis error covariance ⟨rrT ⟩= Pa, as suggested in Fig. 6.4.1). In
practice, however, the analysis error covariance can only be approximately estimated
(e.g., Barkmeijer et al., 1998).
If u = (1/m)#m
i=1ui is the average of an ensemble of m forecasts, then its error
covariance evolves like
⟨(u −u0)(u −u0)T ⟩= ⟨uuT + u0uT
0 −uuT
0 −u0uT ⟩−→
t→∞

1 + 1
m

U
(6.4.8)
since the last two terms in the second angle brackets go to zero at long time leads,
and the ﬁrst one evolves like
⟨uuT ⟩= 1
m
m

i=1
ui
1
m
m

j=1
uT
j −→
t→∞
m
m2 U
(6.4.9)
Equation (6.4.8) shows that averaging a Monte Carlo ensemble of forecasts ap-
proximates the tempering of the forecasts towards climatology, without the need to
perform regression. It suggests that such tempering may be substantially achieved
with a relatively small number of ensemble members (compare (6.4.8) with (6.4.5)
and (6.4.6)). Leith (1974) used an analytical turbulence model to test this hypothe-
sis, and concluded that a Monte Carlo forecasting procedure represents a practical,
computable approximation to the stochastic-dynamic forecasts proposed by Epstein
(1969). He suggested that adequate accuracy would be obtained for the best estimate
of the forecast (i.e., the ensemble mean) with sample sizes as small as 8, but that
the estimation of forecast errors may require a larger number of ensemble mem-
bers. Monte Carlo forecasting is thus a feasible approach for ensemble forecasting,
requiring only a deﬁnition of the initial perturbations and m forecasts.
6.4.3
Lagged average forecasting
In 1983, Hoffman and Kalnay proposed lagged average forecasting (LAF) as an al-
ternative to Monte Carlo forecasting, in which the forecasts initialized at the current
initial time, t = 0, as well as at previous times, t = −τ, −2τ, . . . , −(N −1)τ are
combined to form an ensemble (see Fig. 6.4.2). In an operational set up, τ is typically
6, 12 or 24 hours, so that the forecasts are already available, and the perturbations
are generated automatically from the forecast errors. Since the ensemble comprises
forecasts of different “age”, Hoffman and Kalnay (1983) weighted them according
to their expected error, which they estimated by parameterizing the observed error

232
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
X
t
t f
0
t
tf
-3τ
0
-τ
-2τ
X
(b)
(a)
Figure 6.4.2: Schematic time evolutions of Monte Carlo forecasts (a) and lagged
average forecasts (b). The abscissa is forecast time t, and the ordinate is the value of
a forecast variable X. The crosses represent analyses obtained at time intervals τ, and
the dots, randomly perturbed initial conditions; tf is a particular forecast time. The
initial “perturbation” for the lagged average forecast is the previous forecasts’ error
at the initial time. (Adapted from Hoffman and Kalnay, 1983.)
covariance growth. They compared the lagged average forecasting and Monte Carlo
forecasting methods within a simulation system, using a primitive equations model
as “nature”, and a quasi-geostrophic model to perform the “forecasts”. In this way
they allowed for model errors, unlike the previous “identical twin” experiments
that assumed a perfect model. They “observed” the required variables and intro-
duced random “observation errors” every 6 hours and performed many ensemble
forecast experiments separated by 50 days of integration. They compared the re-
sults of single forecasts (ordinary dynamical forecasts), Monte Carlo forecasting,
lagged average forecasting and tempered ordinary dynamical forecasts, as well as
persistence-climatology forecast (the most skillful baseline forecast).
Hoffman and Kalnay looked at the error growth of individual forecasts (Fig. 6.4.3).
Note in this ﬁgure that the individual forecast errors grow slowly and then at a certain
timethereisarapiderrorgrowthuntilnonlinearsaturationtakesplace(onlytheperiod

6.4 Ensemble forecasting: early studies
233
1.41
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
D
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Forecast time (days)
Figure 6.4.3: Time evolution of D, the individual forecast errors scaled by the
climatological forecast error, plotted only during the period the forecast error crossed
D = 0.5. Also plotted are two measures of average forecast error. (Adapted from
Hoffman and Kalnay, 1983.)
of rapid growth is plotted). Note also that the forecast errors saturate around
√
2 of
the climatological variability, as indicated by (6.4.6).
In these simulated forecasts, like in real weather forecasts, the forecast skill ex-
hibits a lot of day-to-day variability. The rapid growth takes place at a time that varies
from a minimum of 5 days to a maximum of 20 days. Hoffman and Kalnay tested
the ability of the ensemble to predict the time at which the forecast error crossed
50% of the climatological standard deviation. They used as the predictor the spread
of the ensembles (standard deviation with respect to their mean). They found that
the lagged average forecasting ensemble average forecast was only slightly better
than the Monte Carlo forecasting, but the advantage of lagged average forecasting
in predicting forecast skill was much more apparent, with the correlation between
predicted and observed time of crossing the 50% level being 0.68 for Monte Carlo
forecasting and 0.79 for lagged average forecasting.
The advantages of lagged average forecasting over Monte Carlo forecasting are
probably due to the fact that lagged average forecasting perturbations in the initial
conditions were not randomly chosen errors like in Monte Carlo forecasting but
included dynamical inﬂuences and therefore contained “errors of the day”. This is

234
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
because the perturbations are generated from actual forecast errors and therefore they
are inﬂuenced by the evolution of the underlying background large-scale ﬂow.
Lagged average forecasting has been frequently used for experimental ensemble
forecasting, both for medium-range and climate prediction. However, the statistics
required to estimate the weights of the members of the lagged average forecasting
ensemble according to their “age” are very hard to obtain, so that except for the
study by Dalcher et al. (1988), all the lagged average forecasting members have
been generally given equal weight. The advantages of lagged average forecasting
are: (a) some of the forecasts are already available in operational centers; (b) it is
very simple to perform and does not require special generation of perturbations; and
(c) the perturbations contain “errors of the day” (Lyapunov vectors). Lagged average
forecasting has also major disadvantages: (a) a large LAF ensemble would have to
include excessively “old” forecasts; (b) without the use of optimal weights, the lagged
average forecasting ensemble average may be tainted by the older forecasts.
Ebisuzaki and Kalnay (1991) introduced a variant of lagged average forecasting
denoted scaled lagged average forecasting (SLAF) that reduces these two disad-
vantages. The perturbations are obtained by computing the forecast error of fore-
casts started at t = −jτ, j = 1, . . . , N −1, and multiplying these errors by ±1/j.
This assumes that the errors grow approximately linearly with time during the ﬁrst
2–3 days, and that the perturbations can be subtracted from and not just added to
the analysis. The advantages of scaled lagged average forecasting are: (a) the ini-
tial perturbations of the ensemble members are all of approximately the same size
(this can be enforced using a more sophisticated rescaling than linear growth), and
(b) their number is doubled with respect to lagged average forecasting, so that only
shorter-range forecasts are needed to create scaled lagged average forecasting. In
practice, it has been observed that pairs of initial perturbations with opposite sign,
as used in scaled lagged average forecasting, yield better ensemble forecasts, pre-
sumably because the Lyapunov vectors within the analysis errors can have either
sign, whereas lagged average forecasting tends to maintain a single sign in the error.
Experiments with the NCEP global model showed that scaled lagged average fore-
casting ensembles were better than lagged average forecasting ensembles (Ebisuzaki
and Kalnay, 1991). This method is also easier to implement in regional ensemble
forecasts, since it generates boundary condition perturbations consistent with the
interior perturbations (Hou et al., 2001).
6.5
Operational ensemble forecasting methods
Figure 6.5.1(a) shows the elements of a typical ensemble forecasting system: (1) the
control forecast (labeled C) starts from the analysis (denoted by a cross), i.e., from
the best estimate of the initial state of the atmosphere; (2) two perturbed ensemble
forecasts (labeled P+ and P−) with initial perturbations added and subtracted from

6.5 Operational ensemble forecasting methods
235
C
A
T
P−
P+
(a)
A
C
P−
P+
T
(b)
Figure 6.5.1:(a) Schematic of the components of a typical ensemble: (1) the control
forecast (labeled C) which starts from the analysis (denoted by a cross), which is the
best estimate of the true initial state of the atmosphere; (2) two perturbed ensemble
forecasts (labeled P+ and P−) with initial perturbations added and subtracted from
the control; (3) the ensemble average denoted A; and (4) the “true” evolution of the
atmosphere labeled T. This is a “good” ensemble since the “truth” appears as a
plausible member of the ensemble. Note that because of nonlinear saturation, the
error of the ensemble member initially further away from the truth (in this case P+)
tends to grow more slowly than the error of the member initially closer to the truth.
This results in a nonlinear ﬁltering of the errors: the average of the ensemble
members tends to be closer to the truth than the control forecast (Toth and Kalnay,
1997, also compare with Fig. 1.7.1). (b) Schematic of a “bad” ensemble in which the
forecast errors are dominated by system errors (such as model deﬁciencies). In this
case, the ensemble is not useful for forecasting, but it helps to identify the fact that
forecast errors are probably due to the presence of systematic errors, rather than to
the chaotic growth of errors in the initial conditions.

236
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
the control; (3) the ensemble average labeled A, and (4) the true evolution of the
atmosphere (not known in real time), labeled T. This is an example of a “good”
ensemble since the true evolution appears to be a plausible member of the ensemble.
Figure 6.5.1(b) shows an example of a “bad” ensemble, in which the forecast errors
are dominated by problems in the forecasting system (such as model deﬁciencies)
rather than the chaotic growth of initial errors. In this case, the true evolution is
quite different from the members of the ensemble, but the ensemble is still useful in
identifying the presence of a deﬁciency in the forecasting system, which, with a single
forecast, could not be distinguished from the growth of errors in the initial conditions.
Ensemble forecasting has essentially three basic goals. The ﬁrst is to improve the
forecast by ensemble averaging. The improvement is a result of the tendency of the
ensemble average to ﬁlter out the components of the forecast that are uncertain (where
the members of the ensemble differ from each other) and to retain those components
that show agreement among the members of the ensemble. The ﬁltering can take place
only during the nonlinear evolution of the perturbations: if the perturbations are added
to and subtracted from the analysis, the ensemble average forecast is equal to the
control while the perturbations remain linear. The improvement of the ensemble av-
erage with respect to the control, shown schematically in Fig 6.5.1(a), is noticeable in
Fig. 1.7.1 after a few days of forecasts with the NCEP global ensemble. The second
goal is to provide an indication of the reliability of the forecast: if the ensemble
forecasts are quite different from each other, it is clear that at least some of them are
wrong, whereas if there is good agreement among the forecasts, there is more reason
to be conﬁdent about the forecast (cf. e.g., Fig. 1.7.2(a) and (b)). The quantitative
relationship between the ensemble spread and the forecast error (or conversely, be-
tween the forecast agreement and the forecast skill) has yet to be ﬁrmly established,
but is now routinely taken into consideration by human forecasters. The third goal of
ensemble forecasting is to provide a quantitative basis for probabilistic forecasting.
In the example in Fig. 6.4.1, one could claim that the ensemble indicates a 40%
probability of cluster A and 60% for cluster B.
An ensemble forecasting system requires the deﬁnition of the initial amplitude
and the horizontal and vertical structure of the perturbations. Typically, the initial
amplitude is chosen to be close to the estimated analysis error. The amplitude of the
analysis uncertainty depends on the distribution of the observations. Its statistical
distribution can be estimated from the analysis error covariance (Chapter 5), which
depends on the accuracy of the statistical assumptions, or empirically, from the rms
differences between independent analysis cycles (Fig. 6.5.2).
Ensemble forecasting methods differ mostly in the way the initial perturbations are
generated, and can be classiﬁed into essentially two classes: those that have random
initial perturbations, and those where the perturbations depend on the dynamics of
the underlying ﬂow. In the ﬁrst class, which we can denote Monte Carlo forecasting,
the initial perturbations are chosen to be “realistic”, i.e., they have horizontal and
vertical structures statistically similar to forecast errors, and amplitudes compatible

6.5 Operational ensemble forecasting methods
237
60N
30N
E0
30S
60S
0
60E
120E
180
120W
60W
0
1.5
1.6
1.8
1.9
1.7
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.5
1
1
0.9
1.5
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.3
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.7
1.7
1
1.4
1.2
1.3
1.6
1.7
1.5
0
1.7
Figure 6.5.2: Estimation of the 500-hPa geopotential height analysis uncertainty
obtained from running two independent analysis cycles, computing their rms
difference, and using a ﬁlter to retain the planetary scales. The units are arbitrary.
Note the minima over and downstream of rawinsonde-rich land regions and the
maxima over the oceans (Courtesy I. Szunyogh, University of Maryland.)
with the estimated analysis uncertainty. In the Monte Carlo ensembles, the amplitudes
are realistic but the perturbations themselves are chosen randomly, without regard to
the “dynamics of the day”. For example, Errico and Baumhefner (1987) and Mullen
and Baumhefner (1994) developed a Monte Carlo method that results in realistic
perturbations compatible with the average estimated analysis error. However, by
construction, this type of Monte Carlo forecast does not include ﬁnite-size “growing
errors of the day” which are almost certainly present in the analysis. The experiments
of Hollingsworth (1980), Hoffman and Kalnay (1983), and Kalnay and Toth (1996)
suggest that random initial perturbations do not grow as fast as the real analysis
errors, even if they are in quasi-geostrophic balance. A second class of methods which
includes errors of the day has been developed, tested, and implemented at several
operational centers. The ﬁrst two methods of this class implemented operationally
are known as “breeding” and “singular vector” (or optimal perturbations) methods. In
contrast to Monte Carlo forecasting, they are characterized by including in the initial
perturbations growing errors that depend on the evolving underlying atmospheric
ﬂow. Two other methods in this class that are also very promising are based on
ensembles of data assimilations, and ensembles based on operational systems from
different centers, combining different models and data assimilations.
6.5.1
Breeding
Ensemble experiments performed at NCEP during 1991 showed that initial ensemble
perturbations based on lagged average forecasting, scaled lagged average forecasting

238
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
and on the forecast differences between forecasts verifying at the same initial time,
grew much faster than Monte Carlo perturbations with the same overall size and
statistical distribution (Kalnay and Toth, 1996). It was apparent that the differences
in the growth rate were due to the fact that the ﬁrst group included perturbations
that, by construction, “knew” about the evolving underlying dynamics. Toth and
Kalnay (1993, 1996, 1997) created a special operational cycle designed to “breed”
fast growing “errors of the day” (Fig. 6.5.3(a)). Given an evolving atmospheric ﬂow
(either a series of atmospheric analyses, or a long model run), a breeding cycle is
started by introducing a random initial perturbation (“random seed”) with a given
initial size (measured with any norm, such as the rms of the geopotential height or the
kinetic energy). It should be noted that the random seed is introduced only once. The
same nonlinear model is integrated from the control and from the perturbed initial
conditions.Fromthenon,atﬁxedtimeintervals(e.g.,every6hoursorevery24hours),
the control forecast is subtracted from the perturbed forecast. The difference is scaled
down so that it has the same amplitude (deﬁned using the same arbitrary norm) as
the initial perturbation, and then added to the corresponding new analysis or model
state. It was found that beyond an initial transient period of 3–4 days after random
perturbations were introduced, the perturbations generated in the breeding cycle
(denoted bred vectors), acquired a large growth rate, faster than the growth rate
for Monte Carlo forecasting or even scaled lagged average forecasting and forecast
differences.
Toth and Kalnay (1993, 1997) also found that (after the transient period of
3–4 days) the shape or structure of the perturbation bred vectors did not depend
on either the norm used for the rescaling or the length of the scaling period. The bred
vectors did depend on the initial random seed in the sense that regional bred vector
perturbations would have the same shape but different signs, and that in many areas
two or more “competing bred vectors” appeared in cycles originated from different
random seeds. The breeding method is a nonlinear generalization of the method used
to construct Lyapunov vectors (performing two nonlinear integrations and obtaining
the approximately linear perturbation from their difference). Since the bred vectors
are related to Lyapunov vectors localized in both space and time, it is not surpris-
ing that they share their lack of dependence on the norm or on the scaling period.
Toth and Kalnay (1993) have argued that breeding is similar to the analysis cycle. In
the analysis cycle (represented schematically in Fig. 6.5.3(b)) errors are evolved in
time through the forecast used as background, and they are only partially corrected
through the use of noisy data. Therefore, Toth and Kalnay argued that the analysis
errors should project strongly on bred vectors. Corazza et al. (2002) compared bred
vectors and background errors for a quasi-geostrophic model data assimilation sys-
tem developed by Morss et al. (2001) Plate 1 shows a typical comparison, depicting
that in fact there is a strong resemblance between the structure of the errors of the
forecast used as a ﬁrst guess and the bred vectors valid at the same time (Corazza et al.,
2002). Since the analysis errors are dominated by the background errors, especially

6.5 Operational ensemble forecasting methods
239
Time
Initial random
perturbation
Bred vectors ~
LLVs
Unperturbed control forecast
Forecast
values
(a)
Time
True atmosphere
Analysis and
forecasts
Observations with errors
Analysis
(b)
Figure 6.5.3:(a) Schematic of a breeding cycle run on an unperturbed (control)
model integration. The initial growth after introducing a random initial perturbation
is usually very small, but with time, the perturbation is more dominated by growing
errors. The initial transient with slow growth lasts about 3–5 days. The difference of
the complete perturbed (dashed line) and control (full line) forecasts is scaled back
periodically (e.g., every 6 or every 24 hours) to the initial amplitude. The rescaling is
done by dividing all the forecast differences by the same observed growth (typically
about 1.5/day for mid-latitudes). In operational NWP, the unperturbed model
integration is substituted by short-range control forecasts started from consecutive
analysis ﬁelds. The breeding cycle is a nonlinear, ﬁnite-time, ﬁnite-amplitude
generalization of the method used to obtain the leading Lyapunov vector. (Adapted
from Kalnay and Toth, 1996.) (b) Schematic of the 6-h analysis cycle. Indicated on
the vertical axis are differences between the true state of the atmosphere (or its
observational measurements, burdened with observational errors). The difference
between the forecast and the true atmosphere (or the observations) increases with
time in the 6-h forecast because of the presence of growing errors in the analysis.
(Adapted from Kalnay and Toth, 1996.)

240
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
Time
Perturbation
Bred vectors
Day n
Day n+1
Day n+2
16-day forecasts
x
x
x
Figure 6.5.4: Schematic of a self-breeding pair of ensemble forecasts used at NCEP.
Every day, the 1-day forecast from the negative perturbation is subtracted from the
1-day forecast from the positive perturbation. This difference is divided by 2, and
then scaled down (by dividing all variables by the 1-day growth), so that difference is
of the same size as the initial perturbation. The scaled difference is then added and
subtracted from the new analysis, generating the initial conditions for the new pair of
forecasts. This self-breeding is part of the extended ensemble forecast system, and
does not require computer resources to generate initial perturbations beyond running
the ensemble forecasts. (Adapted from Toth and Kalnay, 1997.)
when they are large, this resemblance indicates that the forecast and analysis errors
do indeed project strongly on the bred vectors.
Figure 6.5.4 shows a schematic of how breeding cycles are self-propagated from
the ensemble forecasts. The bred perturbations are deﬁned every day from the dif-
ference between the one-day positive and the negative perturbation forecasts divided
by 2, they are scaled down by their growth during that day, and added and subtracted
to the new analysis valid at the time. This provides the initial positive and negative
perturbations for the ensemble forecasts at no additional cost beyond that of com-
puting the ensemble forecasts. Separate breeding cycles differ only in the choice of
random initial perturbations (performed only once). It has been found empirically
that for the atmosphere the ﬁnite amplitude bred vectors do not converge to a single
“leading bred vector” (Kalnay et al., 2002).
Figures 6.5.5(a) and (b) show two out of ﬁve operational bred perturbations cor-
responding to 5 March 2000 at 00UTC. Figure 6.5.5(c) presents an estimate of the
effective local dimension of the subspace of the ﬁve perturbations using the bred vec-
tor dimension deﬁned in Patil et al. (2001).5 Only the areas where the local dimension
has collapsed from the original ﬁve independent directions (shapes or structure of the
5 The local bred vector dimension is obtained as ψ(σ1, . . . , σk) =
	
#k
i=1σi

2/#k
i=1σ 2
i , where σi
are the singular values corresponding to the k bred vectors within a region of about 106 m by
106 m, and it deﬁnes the effective local dimensionality. For example, if four out of ﬁve bred
vectors lie along one direction, and one lies along a second direction, the bred vector dimension
would be ψ(
√
4, 1, 0, 0, 0) = 1.8, less than 2 because one direction is more dominant than the
other in representing the original data (Patil et al., 2001).

6.5 Operational ensemble forecasting methods
241
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 6.5.5: Examples of bred vectors (500-hPa geopotential height ﬁeld
differences, without plotting the zero contour) from the NCEP operational ensemble
system valid at 5 March 2000: (a) bred vector 1; (b) bred vector 5. Note that over large
parts of the eastern Paciﬁc Ocean and western North America, the two perturbations
have shapes that are very similar but of opposite signs and/or different amplitudes. In
other areas the shape of the perturbations is quite different. (c) The bred-vector-local
dimension of the ﬁve perturbations subspace (Patil et al., 2001). Only dimensions
less than or equal to 3 are contoured with a contour interval 0.25. In these areas the
ﬁve independent bred vectors have aligned themselves into a locally low-dimensional
subspace with an effective dimension less than or equal to 3. (Courtesy of D. J. Patil.)
bred vectors) to three or less are contoured. Note that these are the areas where the
independently bred vectors aligned themselves into a smaller subspace. The collapse
of the perturbations into fewer dimensions is what one could expect if there are locally
growing dominant Lyapunov vectors expressing the regional dominant instability of
the underlying atmospheric ﬂow. These low-dimensional areas are organized into
horizontal and vertical structures and have a lifetime of 4–7 days, similar to those of
baroclinic developments (Patil et al., 2002).
The breeding ensemble forecasting system was introduced operationally in
December 1992 at NCEP, with two pairs of bred vectors (Tracton and Kalnay, 1993).

242
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
In 1994, seven pairs of self-breeding cycles replaced the original four perturbed
forecasts. In addition, a regional rescaling was introduced that allowed larger per-
turbation amplitudes over ocean than over land proportionally to the estimate of the
analysis uncertainty, Fig. 6.5.2 (Toth and Kalnay, 1997).
Toth and Kalnay (1993) found that when the initial amplitude was chosen to be
within the range of estimated analysis errors (i.e., between 1 m and 15 m for the 500-
hPa geopotential height) the bred vectors developed faster in strong baroclinic areas.
Their horizontal scale was that of short baroclinic waves, and their hemispherical
average growth rate was about 1.5/day (similar to the estimated growth of analysis
errors). However, if the initial amplitude was chosen to be much smaller than the es-
timated analysis errors (10 cm or less), then a different type of bred vector appeared,
associated with convective instabilities, which grew much faster than baroclinic insta-
bilities (at a rate of more than 5/day). The faster instabilities saturated at amplitudes
much smaller than the analysis error range (Fig. 6.5.6). Toth and Kalnay (1993)
suggested that the use of nonlinear perturbations in breeding has the advantage of
ﬁltering Lyapunov vectors associated with fast growing but energetically irrelevant
instabilities, like convection. This was conﬁrmed by Lorenz (1996), who performed
experiments with a low-order model containing large amplitude but slowly grow-
ing modes coupled with fast growing modes with very small amplitudes. Lorenz
found that the use of breeding using ﬁnite amplitudes yielded the Lyapunov vectors
of the large amplitude, slowly growing vectors, as desired, whereas for very small
Amplitude
(% of climate
variance)
1
10
100
1 hour
1 day 
1 week
Baroclinic modes
Convective modes
Analysis errors
Figure 6.5.6: Schematic of the time evolution of the rms amplitude of high-energy
baroclinic modes and low-energy convective modes. Note that although initially
growing much faster than the baroclinic modes, convective modes saturate at a
substantially lower level. These modes are therefore insigniﬁcant in the
analysis/ensemble perturbation problem, since the errors in the analysis (dashed
line) are much larger than the convective saturation level. (Adapted from Toth and
Kalnay, 1993.)

6.5 Operational ensemble forecasting methods
243
amplitudes the Lyapunov vectors of the fast system were recovered. In a complex
system like the atmosphere, with multiple-scale instabilities, using breeding may
thus be more appropriate than using Lyapunov vectors, which, in a model including
all atmospheric instabilities, would yield vectors associated with Brownian motion,
which are the fastest, though clearly irrelevant, instabilities present in the system
(Kalnay et al., 2002). The nonlinear saturation of irrelevant fast growing modes is
an advantage that suggests the use of breeding for other problems. For example, for
seasonal and interannual forecasting using a coupled ocean–atmosphere system, the
slower growing (but very large energy amplitude) coupled ENSO instabilities could
perhaps be captured, while eliminating through nonlinear saturation the irrelevant
details of weather perturbations (Cai et al., 2002).
Figure 1.7.2 shows two examples of one of the ways information on ensemble
forecastsarepresentedtotheusers,the“spaghettiplots”,orplotsshowingonecontour
line for each forecast. In one case, a 5-day forecast verifying on 15 November 1995,
the agreement in intensity and location of the contours indicated to the forecasters
that this was a very predictable snowstorm (see also the book cover). In the second
case, a 2.5-day forecast verifying on 21 October 1995, the ensemble members show
unusually strong divergence in the location of a winter storm, warning the human
forecasters that this situation is intrinsically unpredictable. Note that although the
ensemble forecasts show a wide divergence in the location of the storm, this is also
a case in which, in perturbation space, there is very low dimensionality, since the
perturbations align themselves along the same basic shape (the perturbations for the
winter storm are a one-parameter family so that the local dimension is about 1).
The second example shows the potential value of ensembles in a new area of
research: targeted observations. In cases like this in which the ensemble indicates a
region of large uncertainty in the short-term forecasts, it should be possible to ﬁnd
the area that originated this region of uncertainty in time to launch new observations
for the next analysis cycle, and thus decrease signiﬁcantly the forecast error. Finding
the area where the observations should be launched can be done through several
approaches. They are the adjoint sensitivity approach, the use of singular vectors
(Rabier et al., 1996, Langland et al., 1999, Pu et al., 1998, and others), the use of
the quasiinverse of the tangent linear model (Pu et al., 1998), and ensemble-based
singular value decomposition (Bishop and Toth, 1999). These methods were tested
during FASTEX (Jan–Feb 1997 in the Atlantic) and NORPEX (winter of 1997–1998
in the North Atlantic (Langland et al., 1999, Pu and Kalnay, 1999)). The experience in
the North Paciﬁc has been so successful that targeted observations are now performed
operationally over the Gulf of Alaska every winter (Szunyogh et al., 2000).
Plate 2 shows another example of how the massive amount of information con-
tained in the ensemble forecast can be conveyed to the forecasters. It shows a proba-
bilistic presentation of a 1-day and a 7-day forecast of precipitation above a threshold
of 5 mm in 24 h. The probabilities are simply computed as a percentage of the en-
semble members with accumulated precipitation at least as large as the indicated
