248
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
used in different analysis cycles. Through a careful combination of changes in major
parameterizations, it is possible to use the ensemble forecasts to isolate the impact
of particular parameterizations. As indicated by the results of Miller et al. (1994),
the introduction of uncertainty in the model should improve the efﬁciency of the
ensemble.
Hamill et al. (2000a) have shown in a quasi-geostrophic system that the multi-
ple data assimilation ensemble system performs better than the singular vector or
breeding approaches. The computational cost of creating the initial perturbations is
comparable to that of the singular vector approach, whereas in the breeding method
the perturbations are obtained as a by-product of the ensemble forecasts themselves
and are therefore cost-free.
6.5.4
Multisystem ensemble approach
The ensemble forecasting approach should replicate in the initial perturbations the
statistical uncertainty in the initial conditions: ideally, the initial perturbations should
be the leading eigenvectors of the analysis error covariance (Ehrendorfer and Tribbia,
1997). Moreover, it should also reﬂect model imperfections and our uncertainty about
model deﬁciencies. In the standard approaches discussed so far the uncertainty in the
initial conditions is introduced through perturbations added to the control analysis,
which is the best estimate of the initial conditions. As a result, the perturbed ensemble
forecasts are, on the average, somewhat less skillful than the control forecast (see,
e.g., Fig. 1.7.1). Similarly, when perturbations are introduced upon the control model
parameterizations (Buizza et al., 1999, Houtekamer et al., 1996), the model is made
slightly worse, since the control model has been tuned to best replicate the evolution
of the atmosphere.
A different approach that has become more popular recently is that of a multi-
system ensemble. It has long been known that an ensemble average of operational
global forecasts from different operational centers is far more skilful than the best
individual forecast (e.g., Kalnay and Ham, 1989, Fritsch et al., 2000, and references
therein). More recently, it has been shown that this is true also for shorter-range
ensembles of regional models (Hou et al., 2001), and that the use of multisystems can
therefore extend the utility of ensemble forecasting to the short-range. Krishnamurti
et al. (2000) have shown that if the multisystem ensemble includes correction of
the systematic errors by regression, the quality of the ensemble system is further
signiﬁcantly improved. Krishnamurti et al. (2000) call this multiple system approach
a “superensemble”.
The advantages of a multisystem ensemble are not surprising. Instead of adding
perturbations to the initial analysis, and introducing perturbations into the control
model parameterizations, the multisystem approach takes the best (control) initial
conditions and the best (control) model estimated at different operational centers
that run competitive state-of-the-art operational analyses and model forecasts. Thus
