6.6 Growth rate errors and the limit of predictability
249
the multisystem probably samples the true uncertainty in both the initial conditions
and the models better than any perturbation introduced a posteriori into a single
operational system. The statistical correction of systematic errors introduced by Kr-
ishnamurti et al. (2000) is an added beneﬁt of the method which can be considered an
ideal “poor person’s” approach to ensemble forecasting (Wobus and Kalnay, 1995).
6.6
Growth rate of errors and the limit of predictability
in mid-latitudes and in the tropics
Lorenz (1963a, 1982) suggested that the limit of deterministic predictability was
about 2 weeks. He obtained this empirical estimate from the doubling time of small
errors derived from identical-twin model experiments, and from the rate of separation
intimeofatmosphericanalogs(atmosphericstatesinitiallyverysimilartoeachother).
Two weeks continues to be a good estimate of the limit of predictability despite the
fact that different models provided different estimates (Charney et al., 1966). The
analog method cannot give a precise answer because it would take an exceedingly
long time to ﬁnd atmospheric analogs close enough to estimate the growth of small
errors (Van den Dool, 1994).
As indicated in the introduction to this chapter, the doubling time for small errors
in the mid-latitude synoptic (weather) scales, for which the dominant instability is
baroclinic, was estimated in the 1960s to be 3 days or longer. Modern models have
much more resolution and are less sluggish than the early primitive equation models.
Identical-twin experiments with these models and measurements of actual numerical
forecast error growth have lowered the estimate of the doubling time of small errors
from 3 days to about 2 days (Lorenz, 1982, Dalcher and Kalnay, 1987, Simmons
et al., 1995, Toth and Kalnay, 1993).
Lorenz (1982) suggested a simple way to parameterize the evolution of small
errors in a perfect model, in which the only source of errors is the unstable growth
of small errors in the initial conditions, using the logistic equation:
dε
dt = aε(1 −ε)
(6.6.1)
Here, ε represents the rms average forecast error scaled so that at long forecast leads
ε →1, i.e., it is the rms forecast error divided by the square root of twice the variance
of the atmosphere (cf. Section 6.4). Equation (6.6.1) indicates that very small errors
grow exponentially with a growth rate a. When they reach ﬁnite amplitude, the error
growth rate is lowered by the last factor on the right-hand side, which slows it down
until it saturates at ε ≈1. The solution of the logistic equation (6.6.1) is
ε(t) =
ε0eat
1 + ε0(eat −1)
(6.6.2)
where ε0 is the initial error.

250
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
Exercise 6.6.1: Derive eq (6.6.2) using separation of variables.
Figure 6.6.1 shows the solution for two values of the initial error, 10% and
1%, and an error growth rate a = 0.35/day, corresponding to a doubling time of
about 2 days. The analysis error in the 500-hPa geopotential heights in current
operational systems is of the order of 5–15 m, and the natural variability about
100 m, so that the current level of error in the initial conditions is ∼10% or less.
The upper limit for the best initial error achievable from data assimilation can be
reasonably estimated to be no less than 1%. This is because, as pointed out by
Lorenz, even if the observing system was essentially perfect at synoptic scales,
errors in much smaller, unresolved scales would grow very fast and through non-
linear interactions quickly introduce ﬁnite errors in the initial synoptic scales of the
model. The solution of the logistic equation for initial errors of 10% and 1% (Fig.
6.6.1) suggests that 2 weeks is indeed a reasonable estimate of the time at which the
forecast errors become so large that the ability to predict weather in mid-latitudes is
lost. The range between the two curves can be taken as a simple upper estimate of
how much forecasts could be improved by improving the initial conditions.
However, this is only an estimate of the average predictability in a perfect model.
The actual predictability is quite variable and depends on the “atmospheric instabil-
ities of the day”. The 2-week “limit”, which seemed huge during the 1960s when
2-day forecasts had little skill, is no longer large compared with what can be occa-
sionally attained with current models. For example, during a very predictable period
in December 1995, several numerical weather forecasts remained skillful for 15 days,
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
5
10
15
20
Relative error
Time (days)
Initial error=0.1
Initial error=0.01
Figure 6.6.1: Time evolution of the rms forecast error divided by the square root of
twice the climatological variance. It assumes that the forecast error growth satisﬁes
the logistic equation (6.6.1), and that the growth rate of small errors is about
0.35/day, corresponding to a doubling of small errors in 2 days. Analysis errors in the
initial conditions are estimated to be about 10% or less, but not smaller than 1%.

6.6 Growth rate errors and the limit of predictability
251
with a pattern correlation between the forecast and observed anomalies (known as
anomaly correlation) of more than 70% for the Northern Hemisphere extratropics
(Toth and Kalnay, 1996). There are also periods in which the atmospheric predictabil-
ity is much lower than average, as indicated by the fact that different operational
global forecasts tend to show large dips in the medium-range forecast skill on the
same days. Because of the day-to-day variability of atmospheric predictability, it is
important to use forecast ensembles. They provide a tool for estimating the day-to-
day variations in predictability and allow human forecasters to extend the range of
the forecasts provided to the public during periods of high predictability. Ensembles
based on multiple models have proven to be especially useful to the forecasters.
From (6.6.2) it is clear that the limit of predictability depends on the rate of error
growth, which is the inverse of the e-folding or exponential time scale. Generally
the time scales of instabilities are related to their spatial scales, so that small-scale
instabilities grow much faster than those with larger scales. For this reason short
synoptic waves are typically less predictable than longer waves (e.g., Dalcher and
Kalnay, 1987), and mesoscale phenomena, such as fronts, squall lines, mesoscale
convective systems and tornadoes, are intrinsically predictable for shorter time scales,
of the order of a day or less (e.g., Droegemeir, 1997). Convection is a typical example
of a short time scale phenomenon: cumulus clouds grow with an exponential time
scale of the order of 10 minutes or so. It is therefore impossible to predict the
precipitation associated with an individual thunderstorm for more than about an
hour. Nevertheless, if convective activity is organized or forced by the larger scales,
then convective precipitation can remain predictable much longer than individual
thunderstorms. For example, summer convective precipitation is notoriously difﬁcult
to predict. However, when summer mesoscale convection is forced by a synoptic scale
system, convection can be predicted to occur when and where forced by the larger
scales, and therefore becomes predictable well beyond its own short predictability
time scale. Similarly, mesoscale phenomena forced by the interaction of synoptic
scales with surface topography have a much longer predictability than when they are
not subjected to this organizing inﬂuence from the larger scales.
Two types of surprisingly regular progression of smaller scale phenomena have
been discovered. As indicated above, mesoscale summer convection in the USA,
when “unforced” by upward motion associated with synoptic-scale waves, is ex-
tremely difﬁcult to predict. However, an examination of the Doppler radar reﬂectiv-
ities has shown that the area of maximum convection has a tendency to propagate
eastward with considerable regularity, and with its intensity modulated by the diurnal
cycle. The individual maxima of this wave-like propagation can be traced on radar
reﬂectivities for 1–3 days (Carbone et al., 2000). This surprising discovery implies
that such unforced convective activity, in principle, should be predictable for a day
or two. Another example of regular propagation of convection is the Madden and
Julian (1971, 1972) oscillation (MJO). The MJO has a zonal wavenumber 1 with
maximum amplitude in the deep tropics, and it moves eastward around the Equator

252
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
with a period of 30–60 days. The MJO is not always present, but there are periods of
several months in which it is very prominent (Weickman et al., 1985). Although cur-
rent models are not yet able to reproduce well the intensity and speed of propagation
of the MJO, its regularity indicates that, in principle, there should be predictability
in the convective precipitation associated with the MJO that could be exploited by
dynamical or statistical methods for time scales of a month or longer.
Both of these are examples of small-scale convection organized into a regular,
longer lasting propagation. It may take many years before dynamical models are able
to fully reproduce the observed quasi-regular motion. In the mean time, a combination
of statistical and dynamical methods may be the best way to exploit this latent longer
time scale predictability.
So far we have mostly discussed the predictability of weather in mid-latitudes.
The dynamics of mid-latitudes is dominated by synoptic-scale baroclinic instabilities
(Holton, 1992), and the limit of deterministic weather predictability is a reﬂection of
their baroclinic instability rates of growth.
In the tropics, the situation is quite different. Baroclinic instability is generally neg-
ligibleinthetropics,andbarotropicandconvectiveinstabilities,andtheirinteractions,
are more dominant. Phenomena like easterly waves are a reﬂection of barotropic in-
stability, and are less intense than baroclinic instabilities. Easterly waves are strongly
modulated by convective precipitation, whereas in mid-latitudes, large-scale precip-
itation has a smaller effect on the evolution of the synoptic waves. Moreover, global
atmospheric models are less accurate in the tropics, because their ability to parameter-
ize realistically the subgrid scale processes such as convection, which are dominant
in the tropics, is not as good as the numerical representation of the resolved baroclinic
dynamics, which is dominant in the extratropics. In the tropics, the assumption of a
perfect model is therefore much less justiﬁed than in the extratropics.
Equation (6.6.1) describes reasonably well error growth in a perfect model (an
identical-twin experiment). The growth rates of random errors in an imperfect model
have been parameterized by Dalcher and Kalnay (1987) and Reynolds et al. (1994)
ﬁtting operational forecast errors with an extension of the logistic equation (6.6.1)
which includes growth of errors due not only to the presence of errors in the initial
conditions but also to model deﬁciencies:
dv
dt = (bv + s)(1 −v)
(6.6.3)
Here v is the variance of the random error (systematic or time averaged errors having
been separated beforehand), b is the growth rate for small error variances due to
instabilities (“internal” source) and s is an “external” source of random error variance
due to model deﬁciencies. The solution of (6.6.3) is given by
v(t) = 1 −1 + s
1 + µ
(6.6.4)

6.6 Growth rate errors and the limit of predictability
253
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
5
10
15
20
Scaled error variance
Days
Tropics
Midlatitudes
Figure 6.6.2: Parameterization of scaled forecast error variance in the presence of
model deﬁciencies with values of the growth rate due to model deﬁciencies s and to
instabilities b appropriate for mid-latitudes ( (b = 0.4, s = 0.05) and the tropics
(b = 0.1, s = 0.1). (From Reynolds et al., 1994.)
where
µ = v(0) + s/b
1 −v(0) e(b+s)t
Reynolds et al. (1994) found that (6.6.4) ﬁts observed errors fairly well, and estimated
that the internal error growth rate is given by about 0.4/day in mid-latitudes and
0.1/day in the tropics. The external growth rate due to model deﬁciencies was found
to be small, about 0.05/day in mid-latitudes, and considerably larger, about 0.1–
0.2/day, in the tropics (Fig. 6.6.2). Although these estimates, which were obtained
from ﬁtting observed error growth, are only valid to the extent that the error variance
growth for an imperfect model follows (6.6.3), they do reﬂect qualitatively the notion
that in the tropics the synoptic scales are less unstable than in the extratropics, because
of the absence of baroclinic instabilities. At the same time, the tropics are much harder
to model, because of the difﬁculties associated with parameterizations of cumulus
convection, which is much more inﬂuential in the tropics than in the extratropics.
These results suggest that if convection did not play such a dominant role in the
tropics, tropical weather forecasts would be skillful for longer periods than mid-
latitudes predictions. In reality, the dominant role of tropical convection and the
difﬁculties of its parameterization lead to the fact that currently tropical forecasts
maintain useful skill only for about 3–5 days, whereas in the extratropics forecasts
remain skillful on the average for 7 days or so.
