254
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
6.7
The role of the oceans and land in monthly, seasonal,
and interannual predictability
It is well known that there is considerable atmospheric variability not only in the
day-to-day weather but also in longer time scales, such as weekly, monthly, seasonal,
interannual, and even decadal averages. For example, the atmospheric circulation
averaged for January 1987 (an El Ni˜no year) was substantially different than that
of January 1989 (a La Ni˜na year). Similarly, July 1987, during El Ni˜no, was quite
different from July 1988, during La Ni˜na. In this case, it is clear that the differences
were strongly inﬂuenced by the ENSO, a much longer lasting phenomenon than
individual weather events. However, seasonal and interannual atmospheric variability
can also take place due to unpredictable weather “noise”, not just to longer-lasting
surface forcings such as ocean SST anomalies, soil moisture or snow cover anomalies.
The monthly or seasonally averaged atmospheric anomalies due to weather noise
(e.g., a monthly averaged cold and wet January in the eastern USA because of the
passage of two or three very strong cyclones) are unpredictable beyond the ﬁrst two
weeks because weather itself is not predictable. On the other hand, the variability due
to long-lasting surface anomalies, of which SST anomalies are the most important,
is predictable, if we can predict the SST anomaly. Potential predictability beyond the
limit of deterministic weather predictability can be deﬁned as the difference between
the total variance of the anomalies averaged over a month or a season, minus the
variance that can be attributed to weather noise (Madden, 1989). The predictability
associated with information within the initial conditions is sometimes referred to as
“predictability of the ﬁrst kind”, whereas that associated with information contained
in the slowly evolving boundary conditions is referred to as “predictability of the
second kind”.
In a paper based on global model simulations of the growth of perturbations in
the presence of SST anomalies, Charney and Shukla (1981) pointed out that the
tropics have a shorter limit of weather predictability than the extratropics due to the
factors discussed in the previous section. At the same time they found that the tropics
are much more responsive to the long-lasting ocean SST anomalies than the mid-
latitudes. As a result, the potential predictability for the tropics at long time scales
due to long-lasting ocean anomalies is much larger than that of the extratropics.
The conclusions of this fundamental paper have been conﬁrmed by many simulation
experiments and actual dynamical and statistical forecasts.
This led to the search for methods to exploit the potential predictability associated
with longer lasting lower boundary conditions, especially those associated with El
Ni˜no events. A major breakthrough occurred with the ﬁrst successful prediction of
El Ni˜no by Cane et al. (1986), with a simpliﬁed coupled ocean–atmosphere model
(Zebiak and Cane, 1987). ENSO is a complex interannual tropical oscillation due to
the unstable coupling of the ocean and the atmosphere that has a profound effect in
the global circulation even away from the tropics. As reviewed by Philander (1990),

6.7 The role of the oceans and land
255
Thermocline
WARMER
WATER
COLDER
WATER
American
continent
Equator
Indonesia
Australia
Warm
Cold
Convection
Walker circulation
SST=27 °C
(a)
Thermocline
WARMER
WATER
COLDER
WATER
American
continent
Equator
Indonesia
Australia
Anomalous Walker circulation
SST=27 °C
(b)
Warmer
Figure 6.7.1: Schematic of
the coupling of the ocean
and atmosphere in the
tropical Paciﬁc: (a) normal
conditions; (b) El Ni˜no
conditions.
there are several unstable coupled modes in the tropical Paciﬁc, which can explain
the different ways El Ni˜no (warm central and eastern Paciﬁc events) and La Ni˜na
(cold central and eastern Paciﬁc events) occur.
Fig. 6.7.1(a) shows a schematic of the interaction of the tropical Paciﬁc ocean and
atmosphere during “normal” years. On the average, the trade winds (easterlies) in
the tropics produce westward advection of warm temperatures, so that the SSTs are
much warmer in the tropical western Paciﬁc than in the eastern Paciﬁc. For the same
reason, the thermocline (an ocean layer of strong vertical gradients of temperature
that separates the warm upper ocean from the colder lower layers) is also much
deeper in the western Paciﬁc. In the eastern Paciﬁc the colder deeper layer below the
thermocline may even surface close to the American continent. The surface easterlies
also produce a cold equatorial tongue due to “Ekman pumping” at the Equator, where
the Coriolis force acting on westward currents creates a poleward acceleration in both
hemispheres, producing horizontal divergence and strong upwelling of cold water.
The strongest atmospheric convection takes place in the “warm pool” of water close to
the Indonesian region. This convection drives the east–west atmospheric circulation

256
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
known as the Walker circulation, after Sir Gilbert Walker, who discovered a strong
negative correlation between the sea level pressure in Darwin, Australia, and in Tahiti,
in the mid-Paciﬁc. He named this relationship the “Southern Oscillation” (Walker,
1928). Bjerknes (1969) discovered that El Ni˜no and the Southern Oscillation were
part of a single, coupled ocean–atmosphere phenomenon.
During an El Ni˜no (or warm event, Fig. 6.7.1(b)), a weakening of the easter-
lies (westerly anomaly) will result in an eastward advection of warm SST by the
eastward oceanic currents driven by the westerly atmospheric anomalies. The warm
waters propagate eastward and in turn produce atmospheric low-level convergence,
strengthening the warm anomaly depth and its eastward propagation. On other occa-
sions the opposite effect occurs: La Ni˜na (or cold event) takes place when the surface
easterlies are stronger than normal, and because of this the central equatorial Paciﬁc
is colder than normal (not shown). The equatorial region’s SST and surface winds, as
measured with TOGA (Tropical Ocean, Global Atmosphere) buoys deployed in the
equatorial Paciﬁc are shown in Plate 3 for normal, El Ni˜no and La Ni˜na conditions.
Both the actual ﬁelds and their anomalies are shown for each case, demonstrating
the complexity of the coupling.
AnexplanationofwhytheENSOepisodesalternatebetweenwarmandcoldevents
was offered by Schopf and Suarez (1988), Suarez and Schopf (1988), and by Battisti
and Hirst (1989), who independently suggested the “delayed oscillator” mechanism
for simple coupled models. In this mechanism, a westerly/warm anomaly in the
equatorial central Paciﬁc deepens because of the unstable coupling, and in the process
of adjustment the anomaly generates Rossby waves moving westward (Gill, 1980).
The Rossby waves elevate the thermocline in the western region. When they reach the
westernboundary oftheequatorialPaciﬁc,theRossby waves are reﬂectedas eastward
moving Kelvin waves, which also elevate the thermocline. When the Kelvin waves
reach the central Paciﬁc, they counteract the effect of the thermocline deepening by
the unstable coupling. When this delayed negative feedback becomes sufﬁciently
strong, it reverses the sign of the anomaly, and a cold (La Ni˜na) episode starts. The
process then starts again with the opposite sign.6
However, the observed ENSO episodes are much more complex, and are not well
represented by a simple model. There are different “ﬂavors” of El Ni˜no, with some
6 The delayed oscillator mechanism has been illustrated with the simple equation ˙T = T −T 3
−rT (t −d). Here T (t) would represent the SST anomaly in the central equatorial Paciﬁc, and
the left-hand side is its rate of change. The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side represents the
unstable coupling with the atmosphere. The second term represents damping effects due to
dissipation. The last term on the right-hand side represents the negative feedback of the
thermocline elevation, delayed by the time it takes the Rossby waves generated by the anomaly
T to reach the western boundary and return as Kelvin waves. This mechanism clearly dominates
the Zebiak and Cane (1987) model used for the ﬁrst successful ENSO forecasts (Cane et al.,
1986). Cai et al. (2002) performed breeding experiments and showed that the perturbations of
the forecasts grow fastest during the transitions between cold and warm episodes, and grow
slowly or decay during the maxima of the warm and cold episodes, as would be expected from
the linearized version of the delayed oscillator equation δ ˙T = (1 −3T 2)δT −rδT (t −d). This
suggests that the transitions between the ENSO episodes are the least predictable, at least for
the Zebiak–Cane model.

6.7 The role of the oceans and land
257
propagating the SST warm anomaly eastward, and others propagating it westward
(Philander, 1990). Much research is taking place to understand and model these
differences in the evolution of the coupled system better. Despite these difﬁculties, the
fact that there are coupled oscillations that have time scales of 3–7 years provides us
with the hope that the interannual variability of the tropical climate, dominated by the
interactions of the tropical ocean with the tropical atmosphere, could be predictable
for seasons through years. Moreover, numerical experiments and analysis of past
observations have indicated that the tropical anomalies, especially the anomalous
location of major centers of precipitation, have a profound inﬂuence on the extra-
tropical circulation (e.g., Horel and Wallace, 1981). A scientiﬁc program, TOGA
was created to study this problem. Wallace et al. (1998) reviewed the results of the
ﬁrst decade of the TOGA research.
The hope that long-time scale coupling could form the basis for seasonal to inter-
annual prediction has begun to become a reality. A number of “hindcast” experiments
using observed (not predicted) SST forcing of the global atmosphere have been made.
They are usually known as AMIP experiments, since this was the setup used in the
Atmospheric Models Intercomparison Project (Gates et al., 1999). In principle, they
should give an upper limit to the predictability associated with SST anomalies, since
the latter are “perfect”. However, it is possible that the fact that uncoupled atmo-
spheric runs using perfect SST do not include feedbacks from the atmosphere to the
ocean may actually reduce the optimality of such an approach, since the atmosphere
clearly has a profound effect on the oceans, especially in mid-latitudes (Pe˜na et al.,
2002).
The AMIP experiments show that, indeed, in most models the tropical SST anoma-
lies produce a reasonably realistic atmospheric response, especially during El Ni˜no
or La Ni˜na years. In the extratropics, the situation is more complicated. There are
regions, such as Europe, where there is generally little predictability due to ENSO,
and others, like the winter northern extratropical Paciﬁc and North America, where
the response is stronger, indicating signiﬁcant potential predictability (Shukla et al.,
2000). It should be noted that tropical ocean models, driven with observed surface
wind stress, also give fairly realistic oceanic El Ni˜no responses. The fact that both
the tropical atmosphere and the tropical ocean respond realistically to one-way ob-
served forcings (SST and wind stress, respectively), further corroborates that ENSO
oscillations are the result of coupled ocean–atmosphere modes, either unstable, or
marginally stable, forced by atmospheric stochastic noise due to the atmospheric
weather or perhaps the MJO.
Two coordinated experiments with ensembles of global general circulation mod-
els were carried out in the late 1990s: PROVOST in Europe and Dynamical Sea-
sonal Prediction (DSP) in the USA, both using “perfect” SSTs. Their results have
been presented in a number of papers (Shukla et al., 2000, Fischer and Navarra-
Giotto, 2000, Brankovic and Palmer, 2000). Kobayashi et al. (2000) present the
results obtained with similar experiments in Japan. Volume 126, No 567 of The

258
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society was dedicated to this topic
and also contains papers on statistical predictions. These papers, and the special
issue of the Journal of Geophysical Research (Volume 107, Issue C7, 1998) ded-
icated to the TOGA program contain a wealth of descriptions of the (late 1990s)
state-of-the-art understanding and ability to predict atmospheric anomalies beyond
2 weeks.
Several operational and research centers have started issuing seasonal to interan-
nual forecasts based on these ideas (Barnston et al., 1994, Ji et al., 1996, Latif et al.,
1994, 1998). At NCEP operational seasonal to interannual forecasts are based on
coupled model integrations to predict SST anomalies, followed by ensembles of at-
mospheric forecasts forced with the predicted SST anomalies in the tropical Paciﬁc,
and with statistical predictions of SST in other oceans. NCEP also uses statistical
prediction schemes (e.g., Van Den Dool, 1994). The ﬁnal “ofﬁcial forecast’ is sub-
jectively determined from both the dynamical and the statistical predictions. The
ECMWF predictions are computed with coupled global ocean–atmosphere models,
and run every week for 6 months. Several of these forecasts are available on the web
(http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/, http://www.ecmwf.int/services/seasonal/,
http://
iri.ldeo.columbia.edu/climate/forecasts/, http://grads.iges.org/nino/, and others).
In addition to the coupling of the atmosphere with the ocean, it is possible to have
extended regional predictability from the coupling of the land and the atmosphere.
The positive feedback within this coupling can be quite large (e.g., low precipita-
tion results in low soil moisture, and this anomaly, in turn, reduces evaporation and
precipitation during the spring and summer months). In subtropical regions associ-
ated with strong gradients in precipitation this mechanism can lead to long-lasting
anomalies as large or larger than those due to SST anomalies (Koster et al., 2000).
Because of this, it should be in principle possible to predict the long-lasting nature
of these anomalies for several months (e.g., Atlas et al., 1993, Hong and Kalnay,
2000).
6.8
Decadal variability and climate change
We conclude this chapter by pointing out that in addition to interannual variability,
there is also considerable climate variability in the decadal and longer time scales.
Climate variability may be due to either natural causes or to long-term changes that
can be attributed to anthropogenic sources of pollution or changes in the land surface.
The impact of mankind on our environment (usually referred to as “global warming”)
is quite complex. Among the clearest examples of human impacts are the observed
decreases of total ozone in Antarctic regions, and more recently in the Arctic regions,
and the increase of CO2 and other greenhouse gases to levels much higher than those
reached in the past. The changes and expected impacts on climate change in the next
decades have been reviewed by the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a

6.8 Decadal variability and climate change
259
body of experts from many countries, which has in 2001 issued its Third Assessment
Report (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2001).
Plate 4 shows the variations of the earth’s surface temperature over the last
140 years and over the last millennium. It is clear that there is climate variability
at many time scales, and that the variability observed before the Industrial Revolu-
tion that took place last century is of natural and not of anthropogenic origin. Among
the natural oscillations that would take place even in the absence of human forc-
ings on long time scales are the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), associated with
the Arctic Oscillation (AO), the Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO), the Antarctic
Oscillation, and the Atlantic Subtropical Dipole.
We have seen that the variability associated with El Ni˜no (ENSO) has a limit of
predictability of the order of a few years, because the oscillations are the result of the
chaotic dynamics of the coupled ocean–atmosphere with time scales of several years.
Because of the long oceanic time scales associated with slow transports, it is possible
that long-term coupling with the oceans may dominate decadal variability in, for
example, the NAO. If this is true, then the NAO may be somewhat predictable, and
(a) Natural
(b) Anthropogenic
(c) All forcings
Temperature anomalies (°C)
Temperature anomalies (°C)
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5
−1.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5
−1.0
model
observations
Temperature anomalies (°C)
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5
−1.0
model
observations
1850
1900
1950
2000
Year
1850
1900
1950
2000
Year
model
observations
1850
1900
1950
2000
Year
Figure 6.8.1: Simulation of the evolution of the annual global mean surface
temperature and comparison with observations for different external forcings.
The gray represents the range of four different runs with the same model. (a) Only
natural forcings (solar variations and volcanic activity), (b) only anthropogenic
forcings (greenhouse gases and an estimate of sulfate aerosols), (c) both.
(From Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2001.)

260
6 Atmospheric predictability and ensemble forecasting
itspredictionwilldependonthespeciﬁcationoftheinitialconditionsoftheocean,and
the ability of the models to reproduce the relevant physical mechanisms that dominate
its coupled evolution. Rapid climate changes associated with transitions into ice ages
may be completely unpredictable since they may be the result of unpredictable small
changes, such as volcanic activity, resulting in major climate shifts.
Climate change of human origin is also predictable, but in a different sense than
ENSO variability, which depends on the initial conditions of the coupled ocean–
atmosphere. Anthropogenic climate change depends on an “external” forcing, such
as the increase in greenhouse gases, rather than on the internal chaotic dynamics and
the initial conditions. When the external forcing is known, the forced response of the
climate change can be “predicted” fairly well with present-day models. Figure 6.8.1
shows the response of the global surface temperature to natural forcings (solar vari-
ations and volcanic activity), anthropogenic forcings (greenhouse gases and sulfate
aerosols) and to both natural and anthropogenic forcings. It shows that some climate
models are able to reproduce quite well the large-scale response to volcanic eruptions,
and that the addition of greenhouse gas forcings results in fairly good agreement with
observations. The fact that different climate models reproduce the global scale of the
impact of increased greenhouse gases in a similar way suggests that their effects are
to some extent predictable if we can predict the human forcing and its feedbacks on
the environmental system. The impacts of climate change on regional scales are much
harder to reproduce, because of the local inﬂuence of chaotic weather and climate
dynamics. This is an area of research beyond the range of the subjects covered by
this chapter.
