Appendix A
The early history of NWP
Notes written from memory by Anders Persson (ECMWF) on 16 September 1999.
The reader is encouraged to read P. D. Thompson’s paper “Charney and the Revival
of Numerical Weather Prediction”, reproduced, together with Charney’s letters to
Thompson in Lindzen et al., (1990).
History of NWP
In late 1945 Vladimir Zworykin, the “Father of Television”, who worked at RCA,
joined with John von Neumann, the “Father of the Computer”, to suggest the use
of the computer in meteorology. Zworykin’s interest was in weather modiﬁcation,
and von Neumann’s was in ﬂuid dynamics. They also had the dream of connecting
the TV and the computer into something we today know as a PC or Workstation.
Their dream came partially true in Sweden in around 1955 when for the ﬁrst time a
forecast map that was made directly and automatically without any human interven-
tion was produced on a screen (oscilloscope) (see Bergthorsson and D¨o¨os, (1955),
Bergthorsson et al., (1955), also the Rossby Memorial Volume).
In early 1946 von Neumann contacted Rossby’s group. They told von Neumann
why a zonally averaged dynamical model would not work, and instead suggested
a barotropic model which had been manually tested by Victor Starr in his 1941
book on weather forecasting for a 72-h forecast at 700 hPa. Von Neumann was not
satisﬁed with the simple barotropic approach and in speeches in the spring of 1946
presented more ambitious plans. Von Neumann and Zworykin also appeared at the
annual meeting of the AMS (see Bulletin of AMS (1946)).
261

262
Appendix A
In the summer of 1946 the Princeton meeting took place. Few if any had any idea
of what should be done. Not even the normally optimistic Rossby could see a solution
to the problem. A working group was set up with Albert Cahn and Phil Thompson,
with Hans Panofsky and Bernhard Haurwitz acting as advisors. By the autumn of
1946, there was still no clear idea of what to do. Cahn left meteorology to become a
successful real estate agent in California, leaving Phil Thompson in despair. It was
at this crucial state that Jule Charney moved to Chicago (on his way to Norway).
Charney had attended the Princeton meeting, where he had offered some obscure
ideas about having the whole atmosphere represented by a few singular levels.
In early 1947, Charney, now in Oslo, wrote to Phil Thompson that he indeed
saw light at the end of the tunnel taking a completely new approach. It is important
to realize that the practical (political/psychological) impact of L. F. Richardson’s
1922 book was essentially to convince the meteorological community that NWP
was impossible. This was further supported by the experience Phil Thompson and
others had while trying to make use of Jack Bjerknes “tendency equation” (which
was as much in vogue then as potential vorticity is today!).
For the 1948–50 events, I refer to the well-known literature.
Why Sweden?
The ﬁrst real-time, operational NWP was run in Sweden in September 1954 (to 72 h
at 500 hPa), half a year before the USA.
Two reasons:
(1) For a short period in 1954 the Swedes were in possession of the world’s most
powerful computer, BESK. In 1950 they had already constructed a more basic
one, BARK. One must again realize the thinking at that time: even among the
most radical, it was felt that having just one computer in Sweden for the
coming 20–30 years was sufﬁcient. Even in the USA they thought that four or
ﬁve computers would be more than enough for the foreseeable future. The
“explosion” only came in 1955 when IBM launched their ﬁrst machine.
(2) Rossby moved to Sweden and wanted to repeat the ENIAC success of 1950
in his homeland. In this endeavor he was supported by: (a) the Swedish
Airforce and other national institutions (but not the Meteorological Service!);
(b) young enthusiastic scientists who worked at or visited his institutions,
both Swedish and foreign; (c) the US Air Force and Woods Hole.
(See articles by Wiin-Nielsen in Tellus, 1991, and Bolin in Tellus, 1999).
The Swedish project was hampered or complicated by an internal political conﬂict.
In 1954 a new Director of SMHI (the Swedish Meteorological Ofﬁce) was to be
