Appendix C
Post-processing of numerical model output
to obtain station weather forecasts
If the numerical model forecasts are skillful, the forecast variables should be strongly
related to the weather parameters of interest to the “person in the street” and for other
important applications. These include precipitation (amount and type), surface wind,
and surface temperature, visibility, cloud amount and type, etc. However, the model
output variables are not optimal direct estimates of local weather forecasts. This is
because models have biases, the bottom surface of the models is not a good represen-
tation of the actual orography, and models may not represent well the effect of local
forcings important for local weather forecasts. In addition, models do not forecast
some required parameters, such as visibility and probability of thunderstorms.
In order to optimize the use of numerical weather forecasts as guidance for human
forecasters, it has been customary to use statistical methods to “post-process” the
model forecasts and adapt them to produce local forecasts. In this appendix we
discuss three of the methods that have been used for this purpose.
C.1
Model Output Statistics1 (MOS)
This method, when applied under ideal circumstances, is the gold standard of NWP
model output post-processing (Glahn and Lowry, 1972, Carter et al., 1989). MOS
is essentially multiple linear regression, where the predictors hnj are model forecast
variables(e.g.,temperature,humidity,orwindatanygridpoint,eithernearthesurface
1 I am grateful to J. Paul Dallavalle of the National Weather Service for information about MOS
and Perfect Prog. The NWS homepage for statistical guidance is in http://www.nws.noaa.gov/
tdl/synop/index.html
276

Post-processing of numerical model output
277
or in the upper levels), and may also include other astronomical or geographical
parameters (such as latitude, longitude and time of the year) valid at time tn. The
predictors could also include past observations. The predictand yn is a station weather
observation (e.g., maximum temperature or wind speed) valid at the same time as
the forecast. Here, as in any statistical regression, the quality of the results improves
with the quality and length of the training data set used to determine the regression
coefﬁcients b j.
The dependent data set used for determining the regression coefﬁcients is
yn = y(tn)
n = 1, . . . , N
hnj = h j(tn)
n = 1, . . . , N; j = 1, . . . , J
%
(C.1.1)
where we consider one predictand yn as a function of time tn and J predictors hnj.
The linear regression (forecast) equation is
ˆyn = b0 +
J

j=1
b jhnj =
J

j=0
b jhnj
(C.1.2)
where for convenience the predictors associated with the constant term b0 are deﬁned
as hn0 ≡1. In linear regression the coefﬁcients b j are determined by minimizing the
sum of squares of the forecast errors over the training period (e.g., Wilks, 1995). The
sum of squared errors is given by:
SSE =
N

n=1
(yn −ˆyn)2 =
N

n=1
e2
n
(C.1.3)
Taking the derivatives with respect to the coefﬁcients b j and setting them to zero we
obtain:
∂SSE
∂b j
= 0 =
N

n=1
(yn −
J

l=0
blhnl)hnj
j = 0, 1, . . . , J
(C.1.4)
or
N

n=1
,
hT
jnyn −hT
jn
J

l=0
hnlbl
-
= 0
j = 0, . . . , J
(C.1.5)
where hT
jn = hnj. Equations (C.1.5) are the “normal” equations for multiple linear re-
gression that determine the linear regression coefﬁcients b j, j = 0, . . . , J. In matrix
form, they can be written as
HT Hb = HT y
or
b =
	
HT H

−1 HT y
(C.1.6)

278
Appendix C
where
H =


1
h11
. . .
h1J
1
h21
. . .
h2J
...
...
hnj
...
1
hN1
. . .
hNJ


b =


b0
b1
...
bJ


y =


y1
y2
...
yN


(C.1.7)
are, respectively, the dependent sample predictor matrix (model output variables,
geographical and astronomical parameters, etc.), the vector of regression coefﬁcients,
and the vector of predictands in the dependent sample.
⌢y = Hb, e = y −Hb are the
linear predictions and the prediction error, respectively, in the dependent sample. The
dependent estimate of the error variance of the prediction is s2
e = SSE/(N −J −1)
since the number of degrees of freedom is N −J −1. This indicates that one should
avoid overﬁtting the dependent sample by ensuring that N >> J. For independent
data, the expected error can be considerably larger than the dependent estimate s2
e
because of the uncertainties in estimating the coefﬁcients b j. The best way to estimate
the skill of MOS (or any statistical prediction) that can be expected when applied
to independent data is to perform cross-validation. This can be done by reserving a
portion (such as 10%) of the dependent data, deriving the regression coefﬁcients from
the other 90%, and then applying it to the unused 10%. The process can be repeated
10 times with different subsets of the dependent data to increase the conﬁdence of
the cross-validation, but this also increases the computational cost.
It is clear that for a MOS system to perform optimally, several conditions must be
fulﬁlled:
(a) The training period should be as long as possible (at least several years).
(b) The model-based forecasting system should be kept unchanged to the
maximum extent possible during the training period.
(c) After training, the MOS system should be applied to future model forecasts
that also use the same unchanged model system.
These conditions, while favorable for the MOS performance, are not favorable for
the continued improvement of the NWP model, since they require “frozen” models.
The main advantage of MOS is that if the conditions stated above are satisﬁed, it
achieves the best possible linear prediction. Another advantage is that it naturally
takes into account the fact that forecast skill decreases with the forecast length, since
the training sample will include, for instance, the information that a 1-day model
prediction is on the average considerably more skillful than a 3-day prediction. The
main disadvantage of MOS is that it is not easily adapted to an operational situation
in which the model and data assimilation systems are frequently upgraded.
Typically, MOS equations have 10–20 predictors chosen by forward screening
(Wilks, 1995). In the US NWS, the same MOS equations are computed for a few
(4–10) relatively homogeneous regions in order to increase the size of the develop-
mental database. In order to stratify the data into few but relatively homogeneous

Post-processing of numerical model output
279
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Mean absolute error (°F)
70–71
74–75
78–79
82–83
86–87
90–91
94–95
98–99
Cool season (Oct–Mar)
24-h MOS
24-h LCL
48-h MOS
48-h LCL
Figure C.1.1: Evolution of
the mean absolute error
of the MOS guidance and of
the local ofﬁcial NWS
forecasts (LCL) averaged
over the USA. (Courtesy of
J. Paul Dallavalle and
Valery Dagostaro from the
US NWS.)
time periods, separate MOS equations are developed for the cool season (October–
March) and the warm season (April–September). As shown in Table C.3.1, MOS can
reduce very substantially the errors in the NWP model forecasts, especially at short
lead times. At long lead times, the forecast skill is lost, so that the MOS forecast
becomes a climatological forecast and the MOS forecast error variance asymptotes
to the climatology error. The error variance of an individual NWP forecast, on the
other hand, asymptotes to twice the climatological error variance, plus the square of
the model bias (see Section 6.5).
Figure C.1.1 shows the evolution of the error in predicting the maximum temper-
ature by the statistical guidance (MOS) and by the local human forecasters (LCL).
The human forecasters skill in the 2-day forecast is now as good as the one-day
forecast was in the 1970s. The human forecasters bring added value i.e., make better
forecasts than the MOS statistical guidance, which in turn is considerably better than
the direct NWP model output. Nevertheless, the long-term improvements are driven
mostly by the improvements in the NWP model and data assimilation systems, as
discussed in Chapter 1.
In summary, the forecast statistical guidance (and in particular MOS) adds value
to the direct NWP model output by objectively interpreting model output to remove
systematic biases and quantifying uncertainty, predicting parameters that the model
does not predict, and producing site-speciﬁc forecasts. It assists forecasters provid-
ing a ﬁrst guess for the expected local conditions, and allows convenient access to
information on local model and climatology conditions.
C.2
Perfect Prog
Perfect Prog is an approach similar to MOS, except that the regression equations are
derived using as predictors, observations or analyses (rather than forecasts) valid at

280
Appendix C
the prediction time, as if the forecasts were perfect. If station observations are used
as predictors in the dependent sample, it is not possible to use the same variable
for a predictor as for the predictand (e.g., Boston’s observed maximum surface tem-
perature could not be used as predictor for the maximum temperature in Boston).
However, if model analyses are used as “perfect” forecasts, one can use like variables
as predictors. For obvious reasons, Perfect Prog has not been much used except for
very short forecasts. Perhaps it would be possible now to use the long homogeneous
reanalyses that have been completed (Kistler et al., 2001, Kalnay et al., 1996, Gibson
et al., 1997) to derive very long and robust Perfect Prog statistics between model
output and station data. After the regression between the reanalysis and station data
is completed, the prediction of surface parameters could be done in two steps. In
the ﬁrst step, multiple regression would be used to predict the reanalysis ﬁeld from
model forecasts, which should be easier to achieve than predicting the station data
directly, since a few parameters would be enough to represent the model bias and the
decay of skill with time. In the second step, the Perfect Prog equations would be used
to translate the predicted analysis into station weather parameters. In this approach,
the disadvantage of Perfect Prog of not including the effective loss of skill associated
with longer forecast lengths would be handled in the ﬁrst step discussed above. This
approach has yet to be thoroughly explored.
C.3
Adaptive regression based on a simple Kalman
ﬁlter approach2
Adaptive regression based on Kalman ﬁltering has also been widely used as a post-
processor. In MOS and in other statistical prediction methods such as nonlinear
regression or neural networks, the regression coefﬁcients are computed from the
dependent sample, and are not changed as new observations are collected until a
new set of MOS equations are derived every 5 or 10 years. Because the regression
coefﬁcients are constant, the order of the observations is irrelevant in MOS, so that
older data have as much inﬂuence as the newest observations used to derive the
coefﬁcients.
In adaptive regression, the Kalman ﬁlter equations (Section 5.6) are applied in
a simple, sequential formulation to the multiple regression coefﬁcients bk = b(tk),
whose values are updated every time step, rather than keeping them constant as in
(C.1.2):
ˆyk =
J

j=0
b j(tk)hkj =
2
1
hk1
. . .
hk J
3


b0
b1
. . .
bJ


k
= hT
k bk
(C.3.1)
2 I am very grateful to Joaquim Ballabrera for insightful comments and suggestions that
improved this section.

Post-processing of numerical model output
281
If we compare this equation with those in Chapter 5, we see that it has the form of a
forecast of observations, y f
k = Hkbk, so that we can use the Kalman ﬁlter formulation
with an “observation operator” H = hT
k , a row vector in (C.1.7) corresponding to
the time tk. Recall that Kalman ﬁltering consists of two steps (see (5.6.8)–(5.6.11)).
In the ﬁrst step, starting from the analysis at time tk−1, we forecast the values of the
model variables (in this case the coefﬁcients bk) and their error covariance at time
tk. In the second step, the Kalman weight matrix is derived, and, after obtaining the
observations at time tk, the model variables and error covariance are updated, giving
the analysis at time tk. In adaptive regression, the “forecast” or ﬁrst guess of the
regression coefﬁcients at tk is simply that they are the same as the (analysis) coefﬁ-
cients at tk−1, and their error covariance is the same as that estimated in the previous
time step, plus an additional error introduced by this “regression forecast model”:
b f
k = ba
k−1
P f
k = Pa
k−1 + Qk−1
%
(C.3.2)
Here Qk = qkqT
k is the “regression model” error covariance (a matrix of tunable
coefﬁcients that is diagonal if we assume that the errors of the different coefﬁcients
are not correlated).
The Kalman gain or weight vector for adaptive regression is given by
kk = P f
k hk
	
hT
k P f
k hk + rk

−1
(C.3.3)
Note that for a single predictand, the forecast error covariance hT
k P f
k hk and the
observational error covariance Rk = rk are both scalars, and computing the Kalman
gain matrix does not require a matrix inversion.
At time tk the observed forecast error or innovation ek = yo
k −hT
k b f
k is used to
update the regression coefﬁcients:
ba
k = b f
k + kk
	
yo
k −hT
k b f
k

Pa
k =
	
I −kkhT
k

P f
k
%
(C.3.4)
In summary, the adaptive regression algorithm based on Kalman ﬁltering can be
written as:
y f
k = hT
k ba
k−1
P f
k = Pa
k−1 + Qk−1
ek = yo
k −y f
k
wk = hT
k P f
k hk + rk
kk = P f
k hkw−1
k
ba
k = ba
k−1 + kkek
Pa
k = P f
k −kkwkkT
k



(C.3.5)

282
Appendix C
Table C.3.1. rms error in the forecast of the surface temperature at 00Z averaged
for eight US stations. In dependent regression and Kalman ﬁltering, the only
predictor used was the direct model prediction of the temperature interpolated to
the station. The MOS prediction has more than ten predictors and several years of
training.
NWP (Aviation model)
Dependent Regression
Adaptive Regression
MOS
5.36 K
2.67 K
3.07 K
2.29 K
where wk is a temporary scalar deﬁned for convenience. The two tuning parameters
in the algorithm are rk, the observational error covariance (a scalar), and Qk, the
“regression model” error covariance (a diagonal matrix with one coefﬁcient for the
variance of each predictor if the errors are uncorrelated). Unlike regression, MOS, or
neural networks, adaptive regression is sequential, and gives more weight to recent
data than to older observations. The larger Qk, the faster older data will be forgotten.
It also allows for observational errors rk. This method can be generalized to several
predictands, in which case the observation error covariance matrix may also include
observational error correlations.
Table C.3.1 compares a simple Kalman ﬁltering applied to the 24-h surface tem-
perature forecasts for July and August 1997 at 00Z, averaged for eight different US
stations, using as a single predictor the global model output for surface temperature
interpolated to each individual station. It was found that after only a few days of
spin-up, starting with a climatological ﬁrst guess, and with minimal tuning, the adap-
tive regression algorithm was able to reach a fairly steady error level substantially
better than the numerical model error, and not much higher than regression on the
dependent sample. Not surprisingly, MOS, using many more predictors and several
years of training, provides an even better forecast than this simple AR.
In summary, Kalman ﬁltering provides a simple algorithm for adaptive regression.
It requires little training so that it is able to adapt rather quickly to changes in the
model, and to long-lasting weather regimes. It is particularly good in correcting model
biases. However, in general it is not as good as regression based on long dependent
samples.
