Preface
Over the past ﬁfteen years we have taught many courses on Quantitative Risk Management
(QRM) to students, academics, ﬁnancial practitioners and actuaries based on the textbook
Quantitative Risk Management: Concepts, Techniques and Tools (McNeil, Frey and Embrechts;
2005, 2015). Henceforth we refer to this book as the QRM textbook and use the abbreviated
citations MFE (2005) and MFE (2015) for the two editions.
We have used the QRM textbook to deliver lecture courses to students at our own academic
institutions including ETH Zurich, Heriot-Watt University, the University of Leipzig, the
Vienna University of Economics and Business (WU), the University of Washington (UW), the
National University of Singapore (NUS) and the University of Waterloo. We are also aware
that many colleagues have used the QRM textbook to teach courses at universities around the
world.
The QRM textbook has also formed the basis for numerous intensive training courses,
workshops and summer schools which have been delivered to ﬁnancial practitioners and
actuaries. In particular, it has been used as part of the CERA (Chartered Enterprise Risk
Actuary) education programme of the European Actuarial Academy (EAA).
Throughout this time, we have been conscious that the QRM textbook has lacked a formal
exercise collection to assist instructors and to provide students with the opportunity to test,
consolidate and extend their knowledge. The QRM Exercise Book aims to ﬁll this gap. It
contains a comprehensive selection of the exercises that we have amassed during our own
teaching experience, as well as a few exercises donated by colleagues.
The structure of the exercise book follows Chapters 1–11 of MFE (2015). Within chapters,
exercises are typically grouped into three categories: review, basic and advanced questions.
Review questions are designed to help readers to test their understanding of the concepts
presented in the corresponding chapter of MFE (2015). As such, the solutions are usually
found in MFE (2015) or involve at most simple calculations based on material in MFE (2015).
Basic questions are designed to test and enhance the understanding of the technical material.
Typical examples might require students to calculate speciﬁc examples based on general
techniques or might ask for simple proofs and minor extensions of results in MFE (2015). Taken
together, review and basic questions are intended to be at the level of examination questions
and should not require particularly long answers. Advanced exercises are either more lengthy,
more diﬃcult or take the reader somewhat beyond the textbook material.
Occasionally, a programming exercise is included. We recommend that these are tackled
using the open source R language and environment for statistical computing. To facilitate the
solution of programming exercises we provide references to publicly available R datasets and
packages in the questions.
In view of the more qualitative and discursive nature of Chapter 1 of the QRM textbook,
5

Preface
the exercises and solutions are structured in a slightly diﬀerent way. Case study and discussion
questions take the place of basic and advanced questions respectively. Case study questions
invite students to research a number of well-known company failures, market crashes and
natural catastrophes and consider their causes and/or their ﬁnancial and economic implications.
Discussion questions are more open-ended questions that address, for example, current trends
and controversies in risk management.
The primary resource for solving these exercises is MFE (2015) although the exercise book
also contains references to other books and papers that take the reader further in certain areas.
An updated book of solutions to the exercises and a set of R scripts solving the programming
exercises are available on the QRM Tutorial website qrmtutorial.org. For instructors there
are some additional resources on the website including slides and extensive demonstration
scripts in R.
We are grateful to Paul Embrechts who initiated the QRM project during his time as Professor
of Insurance Mathematics at ETH Zurich. We have all beneﬁted from his inspiration and
mentoring over the years. We would also like to thank the Forschungsinstitut für Mathematik
(FIM) at ETH Zurich for its ﬁnancial support during multiple visits by the authors. Thanks are
also due to several doctoral and postdoctoral teaching assistants in Zurich who helped develop
the stock of examples and exercises for teaching QRM, including Valeria Bignozzi, Bikramjit
Das, Catherine Donnelly, Edgars Jakobsons, Georg Mainik and Johanna G. Nešlehová, as well
as to colleagues, friends and students around the world who have contributed exercises and
solutions, in particular, Andrew Cairns and Jialing Han.
6
