1 Risk in Perspective
Review
Exercise 1.1 (Types of ﬁnancial risk)
Give deﬁnitions and examples for each of the following types of risk in the ﬁnancial context:
a) market risk,
b) credit risk,
c) operational risk,
d) model risk, and
e) systemic risk.
Exercise 1.2 (Financial crisis of 2007–9)
Give an outline of the ﬁnancial crisis of 2007–9 describing the main events and reasons for the
crisis.
Exercise 1.3 (Bank run)
Explain what is meant by a bank run and give examples from history.
Exercise 1.4 (Regulatory frameworks)
a) Explain how the three-pillar concept works in the Basel and Solvency II regulatory frame-
works.
b) Compare and contrast the main features of the Basel and Solvency II frameworks.
Exercise 1.5 (Procyclicality)
Explain the meaning of procyclicality, particularly when used in relation to regulatory capital
requirements.
Exercise 1.6 (Basel III)
Summarize the main changes to the Basel framework that are adopted in Basel III and explain
how these address shortcomings of the previous Basel II Accord.
Exercise 1.7 (Capital adequacy, leverage and liquidity coverage ratios)
Explain the essential diﬀerences between capital adequacy ratios, leverage ratios and liquidity
coverage ratios as applied in the Basel III accord.
9

1 Risk in Perspective
Case Studies
Exercise 1.8 (Major failures)
Select from the following list of well-known failures of ﬁnancial risk management. In each case,
summarize what happened and identify the risks that the company or organisation failed to
manage.
a) Barings Bank
b) Metallgesellschaft (MG)
c) Sumitomo
d) Société Générale
e) Orange County
f) Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM)
g) American International Group (AIG)
h) Amaranth Advisors
Exercise 1.9 (Market crashes)
Investigate what happened during the following well-known market crashes and describe any
changes that have resulted from these events, or any lessons that risk managers should draw.
a) The Wall Street Crash of 1929.
b) The ‘Black Monday’ event of 19 October 1987.
c) The ‘Flash Crash’ of 6 May 2010.
Exercise 1.10 (Natural catastrophes)
Research the following natural catastrophes and describe their economic, ﬁnancial and insurance
consequences.
a) The Kobe Earthquake (1995).
b) Hurricane Katrina (2005).
c) The Thailand Floods (2011).
Discussion
Exercise 1.11 (Risk and uncertainty)
Attempt to formulate your own succinct deﬁnition of risk. What distinguishes risk from
uncertainty in your opinion?
Exercise 1.12 (The Q in QRM)
Discuss whether quantitative methodology should play a larger or a more reduced role in risk
management systems in the future.
Exercise 1.13 (Trends in ﬁnancial regulation)
What are the current trends in ﬁnancial regulation? In particular:
10

Discussion
a) Has risk regulation become too complex?
b) Is there evidence of a movement away from internal models back to simpler standardized
approaches?
Exercise 1.14 (Regulation and credit provision)
An often-heard criticism of Basel III by banking practitioners is that “increased regulation
strangles credit provision”. Discuss the arguments for and against this proposition.
Exercise 1.15 (Shadow banking and insurance)
a) What is meant by the shadow banking industry?
b) Is there also a shadow insurance industry?
11

