 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
45
 
Covered interest parity lost: understanding the 
cross-currency basis1 
Covered interest parity verges on a physical law in international finance. And yet it has been 
systematically violated since the Great Financial Crisis. Especially puzzling have been the 
violations since 2014, even once banks had strengthened their balance sheets and regained easy 
access to funding. We offer a framework to think about these violations, stressing the combination 
of hedging demand and tighter limits to arbitrage, which in turn reflect a tighter management of 
risks and bank balance sheet constraints. We find empirical support for this framework both 
across currencies and over time. 
JEL classification: F31, G15, G2. 
Covered interest parity (CIP) is the closest thing to a physical law in international 
finance. It holds that the interest rate differential between two currencies in the cash 
money markets should equal the differential between the forward and spot exchange 
rates. Otherwise, arbitrageurs could make a seemingly riskless profit. For example, if 
the dollar is cheaper in terms of yen in the forward market than stipulated by CIP, 
then anyone able to borrow dollars at prevailing cash market rates could profit by 
entering an FX swap – selling dollars for yen at the spot rate today and repurchasing 
them cheaply at the forward rate at a future date. 
Yet since the onset of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), CIP has failed to hold. This 
is visible in the persistence of a cross-currency basis since 2007. The cross-currency 
basis indicates the amount by which the interest paid to borrow one currency by 
swapping it against another differs from the cost of directly borrowing this currency 
in the cash market. Thus, a non-zero cross-currency basis indicates a violation of CIP. 
Since 2007, the basis for lending US dollars against most currencies, notably the euro 
and yen, has been negative: borrowing dollars through the FX swap market became 
more expensive than direct funding in the dollar cash market. For some currencies, 
 
1  
The authors thank José María Vidal Pastor as well as Kristina Bektyakova, Branimir Gruić and Swapan 
Pradhan for research assistance; and Morten Bech, Matthew Boge, Wenxin Du, Teppei Nagano, 
Fabiola Ravazzolo and Jean-François Rigaudy for helpful discussions. We have also benefited from 
conversations with representatives of major dealer banks as well as supranational and agency debt 
issuers. In addition, we thank Benjamin Cohen, Dietrich Domanski, Torsten Ehlers, Cathérine Koch, 
Andreas Schrimpf, Hyun Song Shin, Konstantinos Tsatsaronis and Jens Ulrich for helpful comments. 
The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Bank for International 
Settlements. 
Claudio Borio
claudio.borio@bis.org
Robert McCauley
robert.mccauley@bis.org
Patrick McGuire
patrick.mcguire@bis.org
Vladyslav Sushko
vladyslav.sushko@bis.org

 
 
46 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
such as the Australian dollar, it has been positive (Graph 1, left-hand and centre 
panels). 
Initially, the violations of CIP were seen as a reflection of strains in global 
interbank markets. Specifically, heightened concerns about counterparty risk and 
constrained bank access to wholesale dollar funding inhibited arbitrage during the 
GFC, and again during the subsequent euro area sovereign debt crisis. But, puzzlingly, 
the violations have persisted even after these strains dissipated. The basis has 
widened since 2014, for both short- and long-term borrowing, despite fading 
concerns about bank credit quality and recovery in wholesale dollar funding 
markets.2  Why has arbitrage not reduced the basis to zero? 
In this special feature, we argue that the answer to this puzzle lies in the 
combination of the evolving demand for FX hedges and new constraints on arbitrage 
activity. The former explains why the basis opens up, and the latter why it does not 
close. A growing demand for dollar hedges on the part of banks, institutional 
investors and issuers of non-US dollar bonds has put pressure on the basis. At the 
same time, limits to arbitrage (in the sense discussed by Shleifer and Vishny (1997), 
among others) have become more binding. These reflect lower balance sheet capacity 
because of tighter management of the risks involved and the associated balance 
sheet constraints. Empirically, we find that proxies for the volume of hedging demand, 
together with proxies for balance sheet costs, help explain CIP violations, both across 
currencies and over time. If the factors we identify are the right ones, CIP deviations 
look to be here to stay even in non-crisis times, as long as the demand for currency 
hedges is sufficiently high and imbalanced across currencies.3 
 
2  
Also, unlike in earlier US dollar funding stress episodes (Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011, 2012)), banks 
have drawn very little on central bank swap lines: https://apps.newyorkfed.org/markets/autorates/ 
fxswaps-search-result-page. 
3  
Sushko et al (2016) treat these issues from a more technical perspective and provide broader 
econometric results. 
Cross-currency basis against the US dollar, interbank credit risk and market risk1 
Graph 1
Three-month basis 
 Three-year basis 
 Libor-OIS spreads and the VIX 
Basis points  
Basis points  
Percentage points 
Percentage points
 
 
 
1  The vertical lines indicate 15 September 2008 (Lehman Brothers file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection) and 26 October 2011 (euro area 
authorities agree on debt relief for Greece, leveraging of the European Financial Stability Facility and the recapitalisation of banks).    2  Chicago 
Board Options Exchange S&P 500 implied volatility index; standard deviation, in percentage points per annum. 
Sources: Bloomberg; authors’ calculations. 
–210
–140
–70
0
70
06
08
10
12
14
16
USD/AUD
USD/EUR
–120
–80
–40
0
40
06
08
10
12
14
16
USD/JPY
–1
0
1
2
3
0
20
40
60
80
06
08
10
12
14
16
US
Libor-OIS spread (lhs):
EA
VIX2
Rhs:

 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
47
 
The rest of this feature is organised as follows. The first section lays out the 
framework for our analysis. The second and third sections examine, respectively, the 
variation of the basis across currencies and over time in the yen/dollar basis. The 
conclusion highlights some implications and outstanding questions. 
A framework 
The basic mechanics behind CIP are fairly simple. Interest rates in the cash market 
and the spot exchange rate can be taken as given – these markets are much larger 
than those for FX derivatives. Hence, it is primarily shifts in the demand for FX swaps 
or currency swaps that drive forward exchange rates away from CIP and result in a 
non-zero basis (Box A). Any such deviations should, in principle, immediately trigger 
arbitrage transactions, bringing the basis back to zero. The reason is that, in an ideal 
world, CIP arbitrage is treated as riskless. By construction, FX swaps do not entail an 
open currency position. In addition, it is assumed that the credit, counterparty, market 
and liquidity risks involved are negligible. Unimpaired access to cash and derivatives 
markets then allows arbitrageurs to close the basis. 
In recent years, the textbook CIP arbitrage framework has been challenged in 
two ways. Initially, the focus was on the constraints on arbitrage arising from the 
banks’ counterparty credit risk concerns and the wholesale US dollar funding strains 
that surfaced during crisis episodes. These episodes included the Japanese banking 
crisis (the “Japan premium”, Hanajiri (1999)); the onset of the GFC in 2007–08 (eg Baba 
et al (2008), Baba and Packer (2009), Coffey et al (2009), Mancini-Griffoli and Ranaldo 
(2012), Levich (2012)); and the euro area sovereign debt crisis in 2011–12 (McCauley 
and McGuire (2014), Ivashina et al (2015)). 
Since 2014, attention has shifted to other factors and constraints. Most studies 
have invoked some notion of capital constraints of CIP arbitrageurs in the face of FX 
swap funding demand from banks (Iida et al (2016)), from foreign currency bond 
issuers (Liao (2016)) or from broader saving and investment imbalances (Du et al 
(2016)).4  Similarly, Shin (2016) attributes the persistent deviations from the CIP to a 
systemic risk factor linked to the US dollar’s role as the global funding currency.5  
Drawing on our more technical work (Sushko et al (2016)), the framework we 
propose in this study has two features. First, it focuses on one key source of pressure 
on the basis, namely net foreign currency hedging demand that is largely insensitive 
to the size of the basis. Second, similarly to other studies, it also assumes the presence 
of limits to arbitrage linked to the costs involved in deploying balance sheets, in turn 
reflecting tighter management of capital and funding risks. This can create a balance 
sheet constraint on CIP arbitrage that becomes more binding as the size of the 
aggregate FX hedging positions grows. 
Our framework gives rise to two hypotheses. First, in the cross section, the size 
and sign of the basis across currencies should be related to the net hedging position 
 
 
4  
He et al (2015) take the currency basis as given, to study the effects of FX swap market dislocations 
on the ability of non-US banks to supply US dollar loans when US monetary conditions tighten. 
5  
Transaction costs also appeared to play a temporary role for some currencies in the aftermath of the 
Swiss National Bank’s abandonment of the currency peg (Pinnington and Shamloo (2016)). 

 
 
48 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
 
Box A 
CIP, FX swaps, cross-currency swaps and the factors that move the basis 
CIP is a textbook no-arbitrage condition according to which interest rates on two otherwise identical assets in two 
different currencies should be equal once the foreign currency risk is hedged: 
ܨ
ܵ= 1 + ݎ
1 + ݎ∗ 
where S is the spot exchange rate in units of US dollar per foreign currency, F is the corresponding forward exchange 
rate, r is the US dollar interest rate, and r* is the foreign currency interest rate. In practice, the relationship between F 
and S is read off market transactions in FX instruments, notably FX swaps and cross-currency swaps. 
In an FX swap, one party borrows one currency from, and simultaneously lends another currency to, a second 
party (see also Baba et al (2008)). The borrowed amounts are exchanged at the spot rate, S, and then repaid at the 
pre-agreed forward rate, F, at maturity. The implicit rate of return in an FX swap is determined by the difference 
between F and S, and the contract is typically quoted in forward points (F – S). If the party lending a currency via FX 
swaps makes a higher or lower return than implied by the interest rate differential in the two currencies, then CIP fails 
to hold. Typically, the US dollar has tended to command a premium in FX swaps. In this case, rearranging the CIP 
equation yields the following relationship between (F – S), r and r*: 
ܨ−ܵ> ܵ൬1 + ݎ
1 + ݎ∗−1൰ 
A positive (“wide”) value of (F – S), above, indicates that a party lending US dollars sells the foreign currency 
forward at a higher dollar price than warranted by the interest differential. Equivalently, a party borrowing US dollars 
via an FX swap – say, to hedge its US dollar asset – is effectively paying a higher interest rate on the swapped dollars 
than is paid in the cash market. 
A cross-currency swap is a longer-term instrument, typically above one year, in which the two parties also 
simultaneously borrow and lend an equivalent amount of funds in two different currencies. At maturity, the borrowed 
amounts are exchanged back at the initial spot rate, S, but during the life of the swap the counterparties also 
periodically exchange interest payments. In a cross-currency basis swap, the reference rates are the respective Libor 
rates plus the basis, b. Again, if the forward points (F – S) are greater than warranted by CIP, then, assuming a one-
period maturity, the basis, b, will effectively be the amount by which the interest rate on one of the legs has to be 
adjusted so that the parity with the pricing of FX swaps holds: 
ܨ−ܵ= ܵ൬1 + ݎ+ ܾ
1 + ݎ∗൰−ܵ 
In the above example, the FX swap implied US dollar rate, ܨܵ
ൗ(1 + ݎ∗), exceeds actual US dollar Libor, 1 + ݎ, if 
the party borrowing US dollars in a cross-currency swap pays the basis, b, on top of US dollar Libor. Thus, failure of 
CIP has implications for the relative cost of funding in the cash and swap markets. Whenever CIP fails, one party ends 
up paying the currency basis on top of the cash market rates to borrow the corresponding currency, while the other 
counterparty in effect receives an equivalent discount when borrowing the other currency. 
A number of factors can cause CIP to fail. For example, market liquidity in the underlying instruments may 
evaporate, so that the difference between bid and ask prices for forward and spot transactions is non-trivial. For 
simplicity, let us assume that r* is sufficiently small, so that 1 + ݎ∗≈1. Denoting by ܵ௔ the spot ask rate and by ܨ௕ the 
forward bid rate, CIP deviations due to a drop in market liquidity will be given by: 
ܾ≡ܨ−ܵ
ܵ
−(ݎ−ݎ∗) = ܨ
ܵ−ܨ௕
ܵ௔
 
CIP can also fail because of credit risks in the underlying investments. If CIP arbitrage is conducted by global banks 
borrowing and lending in the respective Libor markets, then a rise in counterparty credit risks in the interbank markets, 
typically captured using Libor-OIS spreads, could result in CIP deviations. Similarly, if banks or asset managers engage 
in CIP arbitrage using government bonds in the two currencies, then deviations might result from differences in 
sovereign credit risks, typically measured using sovereign CDS spreads. 

 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
49
 
 
vis-à-vis the US dollar. Second, over time, the evolution of the basis should depend 
on that of net dollar hedging needs. Let us first consider each of the two components 
of the framework – FX hedging demand and constraints on arbitrage – in more detail. 
Demand for currency hedges: why the basis opens up 
Hedging of open FX positions is the main proximate driver of the demand for FX 
swaps. We focus on three sources of hedging demand that are rather insensitive to 
the size of the basis, and, hence, exert sustained pressure on it even when it is non-
zero: demand from banks, institutional investors and non-financial firms. 
A first, structural source of demand for foreign currency hedges arises from 
banks’ business models. For a long time, banks have been the main players running 
currency mismatches on their balance sheets (managed mainly via swaps). Banking 
systems may be structurally short or long in specific currencies, given their core 
deposit base. A shortfall in foreign currency funding can then be managed by cash 
borrowing in money and bond markets. The remaining gaps between banks’ assets 
More generally, suppose r and r* are the respective risk-free rates and rp is the risk premium for the underlying 
investment over the duration of the swap. Then CIP deviations measured using risk-free rates will be given by: 
ܾ≡ܨ−ܵ
ܵ
−(ݎ−ݎ∗) = ݎ݌ 
Even if risk premia in the underlying transaction are low, CIP deviations can arise if the demand to hedge one of 
the currencies is large. Then, even small risk premia can have big effects when scaled by the large size of the balance 
sheet exposures needed to meet the hedgers’ demand. For example, Sushko et al (2016) show that CIP deviation can 
be proportional to the hedging demand multiplied by the per-dollar balance sheet costs of FX derivatives exposures: 
ܾ≡ܨ−ܵ
ܵ
−(ݎ−ݎ∗) ∝ݎ݌× ܨܺ ܪ݁݀݃݅݊݃ ܦ݁݉ܽ݊݀ 
In each of the above examples, the price that is actually set in FX derivatives is that of the forward leg of the 
swap, F. As shown, CIP arbitrageurs will pass on their balance sheet costs of taking the other side of FX hedging 
demand via FX swaps as wider forward points, (F – S), than warranted by CIP. The per-dollar balance sheet costs 
themselves are represented by rp in this example. Since markets have to clear, the aggregate position of CIP 
arbitrageurs when the US dollar is at a premium in FX swaps will be equal to the aggregate net position of currency 
hedgers. The latter will be paying the forward points, (F – S), to hedge their US dollar assets. 
What are some of the real-world counterparts to rp in non-crisis times? In aggregate, rp will reflect any costs that 
banks or other participants assign to deploying their balance sheet in CIP arbitrage, which in turn will reflect their risk 
management practices. For individual players, these practices may even include absolute credit limits that would set 
a maximum for the underlying exposures to the underlying instruments and counterparties. Even without strict limits, 
the funding cost of the capital allocated to the arbitrage activity, notably to the (current and potential future) 
derivatives exposures involved, will prevent the basis from closing when it opens up owing to changes in hedging 
demand. 
The specific constraints, and hence the instruments involved, will also depend on the players acting as 
arbitrageurs. For instance, for highly rated supranational and quasi-government agencies, which can arbitrage the 
long-term basis thanks to their top credit rating by issuing bonds in US dollars at attractive rates and then swapping 
them out, rp is more closely related to the costs of placing bonds in different currencies. For hedge funds, which rely 
on collateralised markets to fund CIP arbitrage, the price and availability of repo market funding will play a significant 
role. 

 
 
50 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
and liabilities in a given currency would be closed using currency derivatives such as 
FX swaps.6 
The second source of demand arises from the strategic hedging decisions of 
institutional investors, such as insurance companies and pension funds. Institutional 
 
6  
For example, in the second half of 2015, temporary pressure on non-US banks’ dollar funding 
emerged as US money market funds (MMFs) divested from their unsecured obligations. This reflected 
adjustment to US MMF regulatory reform set to take effect in October 2016. Still, at least in 
aggregate, non-US banks retained $5.5 trillion in deposits offshore and at their US branches in the 
last three quarters of 2015, which rose to $5.7 trillion in Q1 2016, according to BIS and Federal Reserve 
flow of funds data. 
Box B 
Reverse yankee issuance in the euro and the EUR/USD basis 
Corporate credit spreads in the euro bond market have fallen relative to those in the US dollar bond market, largely 
driven by ECB bond purchase programmes (Graph B, left-hand and centre panels). In response, US firms have found 
it more cost-effective to issue in euros, through so-called reverse yankee bonds, and then swap the proceeds into US 
dollars (right-hand panel). The hedging of currency risk by US firms issuing in the euro increases demand for cross-
currency swaps. Hence, the widening of corporate asset swap spread differentials and the surge in euro issuance since 
2014 have coincided with a marked widening of the currency basis (centre panel). 
For example, consider a BBB-rated US telecoms firm whose bonds yield 100 basis points over the interest rate 
swap rate in dollars, but only 50 basis points in euros. If CIP held, the firm would save 50 basis points by issuing in 
euros and swapping back to dollars. In fact, the firm would have an incentive to do that for all its new debt. One can 
then see the widening of the basis as tending to reconcile the different spreads in the two markets. 
According to data from Thompson Reuters, the majority of reverse yankee issuance has been long-term, with an 
average maturity of about 10 years and with 15- and 20-year tenors also commonplace. Issuance at shorter maturities 
is rare, because, from the perspective of the US non-financial issuer, the all-in issuance costs (ie taking the currency 
swap into account) of short-term euro-denominated debt are still greater than issuing short-term US dollar debt, 
owing to the wider currency basis relative to the corporate asset swap spread differential at the short end. 
Corporate credit spreads, reverse yankee issuance and the EUR/USD basis 
Graph B
Corporate asset swap spread 
 Spread differential and the basis 
 US non-financial firms’ EUR debt 
issuance 
Basis points 
 
Basis points
USD bn
 
 
Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch; Bloomberg; BIS debt securities statistics; authors’ calculations. 
 
0
125
250
375
06
08
10
12
14
16
United States (US)
Euro area (EA)
–75
0
75
150
06
08
10
12
14
16
US minus EA
Corp spread gap: 
EUR/USD
5-year currency basis:
–12
0
12
24
06
08
10
12
14
16

 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
51
 
investors use swaps to strategically hedge foreign currency investments. In recent 
years, the term and credit spread compression on the back of unconventional 
monetary policies in major jurisdictions has boosted these cross-currency investment 
and funding flows.7  These investors’ hedge ratios tend to be quite insensitive to 
hedging costs and to move slowly over time.8  Thus, anything that induces these 
investors to increase or reduce their foreign currency investments tends to put 
pressure on the basis. 
The third source of demand arises from non-financial firms’ debt issuance across 
currencies as they seek to borrow opportunistically in markets where credit spreads 
are narrower. Under normal market conditions and for most currencies, this may not 
be an important factor. But it can become quite relevant when credit spreads differ 
systematically, for example when they are compressed by central bank large-scale 
asset purchases. Recently, for instance, many US firms needing dollars have been 
issuing in euros to take advantage of very attractive spreads in that currency and have 
then swapped the proceeds into dollars (Box B). This allows them to use the dollars 
for their business purposes while avoiding a currency mismatch in euros. Essentially, 
through the swap market, they borrow dollars and lend euros. 
Other factors could also put pressure on the basis, but we exclude them from 
our analysis because of data limitations. Firms’ hedging of trade receivables or 
subsidiary cash flows are one case in point. Another could be speculative FX positions, 
which can rely on forwards and swaps (eg yen carry trades). We posit, therefore, that 
the sources of pressure we identify are sufficient to capture the key relationships.9  At 
the more fundamental level, monetary (Box C) and financial conditions, as well as 
institutional differences across the respective jurisdictions, largely determine the 
extent of foreign currency funding and investment flows in the first place. 
Limits to arbitrage: why the basis does not close 
Structural changes in how market participants have been pricing market, credit, 
counterparty and liquidity risks post-crisis have tightened limits to arbitrage. Balance 
sheet space is rented, not free.10  Specifically, as a result of tighter management of 
risks and related balance sheet constraints, arbitrage now incurs a cost per unit of 
balance sheet. This cost is passed on to the pricing of FX swaps, introducing a 
premium (or discount, depending on the currency) in response to imbalances in the 
swap market. One result is that the currency spot-forward relationship goes out of 
line with CIP (Box A). 
 
7  
Domanski et al (2015) document increasing investment in long-term foreign currency bonds by the 
German insurance sector seeking to extend asset duration so as to match the rising duration of its 
liabilities as yields in the euro area fell to very low levels. 
8  
The FX-hedged investment has a payoff that resembles the return of leveraged investors in the target 
bond market: in the case of bonds, this is equal to the excess of the bond yield over the short-term 
financing cost (“the carry”), plus or minus a price gain or loss on the bond. 
9  
This would be so if the other sources of FX hedging demand co-move positively with those we 
identify. The exclusion of speculative demand may actually make it harder for us to find a relationship 
with hedging demand, as speculation may lead to offsetting pressure on the basis. For instance, easy 
monetary policy could boost FX-hedged investments in search of higher returns, but it could also 
encourage carry trades. Those carry trades could push down the forward rate even as hedging 
demand pushed it up. 
10  
For a conceptual discussion, see Duffie (2016). 

 
 
52 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
Arbitrage can be both costly and risky. Typically, it requires the arbitrageur to 
enlarge its balance sheet, incur credit risk in both borrowing and investing, and 
possibly face mark-to-market and liquidity risk (given the need to transfer collateral 
or take paper gains or losses) in the valuation of the positions. 
While these risks and costs exist all the time, participants have been managing 
them more actively post-crisis. Before the GFC, these risks were not fully priced in the 
relevant markets and, partly as a result, dealer banks had raised their leverage to 
dangerous levels (Shin (2010)). The crisis brought them to light. Since then, pressure 
from shareholders, creditors and prudential authorities has reinforced and hard-wired 
participants’ awareness. As a result, leverage has declined and there has been less 
willingness to deploy the balance sheet for activities that make heavy demands on it, 
such as arbitraging the basis. 
Changes in regulation have reinforced market pressures for a tighter 
management of balance sheet risks. For example, changes related to credit value 
adjustments have sought to incentivise dealers to price the counterparty risk in their 
derivatives portfolios more accurately. Similarly, potential future exposure adjustment 
charges in both Basel III and US leverage ratios require market participants to hold 
capital in proportion to their derivatives and other exposures.11 
The bottom line is clear. These tighter limits on arbitrage make it harder to 
narrow the basis whenever it opens up as a result of pressures that reflect underlying 
order imbalances. In particular, even in the absence of bank funding strains like those 
seen during the GFC, a sufficiently high net demand for currency hedges could result 
in persistent deviations from CIP. 
The currency basis in the cross section 
Can our framework help explain how the sign and, possibly, the size of the basis vary 
across currencies? We test this by juxtaposing quantitative indicators for the various 
players’ hedging demands and the basis.12  In evaluating the results, it should be 
borne in mind that the sample is necessarily limited, as we have to restrict it to freely 
tradable currencies in jurisdictions with no capital controls, with a highly rated 
sovereign and for which data are available. 
Quantitative indicators of hedging demand 
Assembling estimates of hedging demand runs into two types of limitation. 
The first is conceptual. Some financial institutions play the dual role of putting 
pressure on the basis and arbitraging it. For instance, banks’ business models may 
lead them to fund themselves through swaps in order to hedge their balance sheet 
mismatches, even as they act as arbitrageurs. This means that proxies for their swap 
positions conflate their two roles. However, and despite such ambiguity, our results 
suggest that the balance sheet hedging motive dominates. 
 
11  
This need not result from individual pricing decisions. For instance, internal credit limits may constrain 
individual balance sheets and, in aggregate, be reflected in a larger basis. 
12  
Our findings also hold if price indicators are used; see Sushko et al (2016). 

 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
53
 
The second relates to data availability. No statistics fully cover the hedging 
demand for a given currency; tough choices and approximations are needed. Hence, 
we focus on the three main sets of players – banks, institutional investors and non-
financial firms – and even there we have to make a number of assumptions. 
For banks, our benchmark measure is their “funding gap” in the US dollar.13  The 
funding gap, derived from the BIS international banking statistics, is an estimate of 
banks’ demand for hedging through the FX swap market (McGuire and von Peter 
(2009, 2012), Fender and McGuire (2010)). Specifically, for banks headquartered in a 
particular country (eg Japan or Australia), we measure the difference between their 
consolidated global on-balance sheet assets and liabilities in a particular foreign 
currency. Assuming that banks hedge their currency risk, the resulting gap indicates 
the size of their off-balance sheet position in a given currency, which will largely be 
managed by FX swaps.14 
For institutional investors, we rely on central banks for estimates of Australian, 
euro area and Swedish institutions’ hedged foreign assets; and on industry sources 
for Japanese life insurers’ holdings and hedge ratios.15  We neglect US investors’ 
positions. This is not likely to be a problem, however, since US investors have more 
opportunity to diversify without buying foreign currency assets, given the size of the 
global dollar financial markets.16 
For non-financial firms, we consider bonds outstanding issued by corporations 
headquartered outside the country, drawing on BIS international debt securities 
statistics. For instance, we take euro issues by US firms to fund their dollar operations, 
and exclude issues by banks to avoid double-counting.17  We do not include dollar 
issuance by non-US firms because, given the predominance of the US dollar as an 
invoicing currency, many such firms do not hedge dollar debt (eg Borio (2016)).18 
Graph 2 shows indicators of hedging demand from the various sectors for four 
jurisdictions for which we were able to obtain better data: Australia, the euro area, 
Japan and Sweden. A positive value for a bar indicates net borrowing of US dollars 
 
 
13  
Except in the case of Sweden, where we also look at the euro (see below). 
14  
Partly owing to data limitations, we do not include US banks’ corresponding positions. US-
headquartered banks’ estimated net long positons in the key currencies we are considering are 
relatively small compared with non-US banks’ net long dollar positions. As a result, the bulk of our 
analysis can safely focus on the latter. 
15  
This means that, except for the euro area, we cannot single out US dollar holdings, so that our 
estimate is an upper bound for the institutions covered. 
16  
Three quarters of US investors’ holdings of foreign bonds were dollar-denominated at the end of 
2014 (US Treasury et al (2016)). In general, hedge ratios for foreign equity holdings are low and well 
below those for bonds, so that they are less of an issue (although those of Japanese shares are often 
hedged). Hilander (2014, p 13) reports a 20% hedge ratio on foreign shares in Sweden. 
17  
We could also include domestic currency issuance by foreign firms from outside the United States, 
which may hedge into the US dollar (given its extensive international use), or hedge back into eg the 
Australian dollar or Canadian dollar through the US dollar. So, our figure should best be regarded as 
a lower bound. At the same time, not all issuance need be hedged: some firms may prefer to incur 
currency risk in an attempt to lower their funding costs further. 
18  
Moreover, given that credit spreads favour one currency over another, incentives to issue and put 
pressure on the basis are bound to be one-sided. In the case of the dollar/euro pair, for instance, 
where spreads have favoured issuance in euros, euro area issuers in dollars have typically been top-
rated European supranationals and agencies, which can afford to issue in USD thanks to their top-
notch creditworthiness. These institutions in effect operate as arbitrageurs, actively harvesting the 
basis (see also below). They do the same in the Australian dollar market. 

 
 
54 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
Box C 
CIP deviations and monetary policy announcements 
Monetary policy can boost hedging demand through both price and quantity effects. By lowering the yield curve and, 
in particular, by compressing the term premium and credit spreads, easing encourages investors to seek return and 
duration in foreign currency bonds and foreign issuers to sell bonds in the corresponding currency to obtain cheaper 
funding. Large-scale asset purchases strengthen these effects by withdrawing securities from the market. And so does 
the adoption of negative interest rates, which can result in negative yields stretching out to long maturities. 
Much of the widening of the USD basis since 2014 has coincided with monetary policy easing announcements 
by the Bank of Japan (BoJ) and the ECB. Indeed, the widening began in earnest with the ECB’s ramping-up of easing 
measures, including the 5 June 2014 announcement of negative rates (Graph C, left-hand panel). The announcement 
of ECB government bond buying (quantitative easing, QE) on 22 January 2015 also had a significant impact on the 
USD/JPY basis, owing perhaps to expected policy contagion or more technical factors (eg French banks’ role as 
JPY/USD arbitrageurs). Similarly, the BoJ’s Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) announcements as well 
as its move to negative policy rates saw the USD/JPY basis widen. In fact, the short-term announcement effects were 
even starker for the BoJ (Graph C, right-hand panel). 
One possible explanation for the responsiveness of the basis to monetary policy announcements is that the swap 
dealers that provide currency hedges expect the outflows from the euro or the yen to increase when the ECB or the 
BoJ eases policy. This includes the flows hedged for currency risk, which push up the demand for FX swaps or cross-
currency swaps. Hence, the swap dealers set higher prices for currency hedges, which results in wider CIP deviations. 
Conversely, when the ECB or the BoJ surprises with less easing than anticipated, dealers revise downwards the 
expected hedging demand coming their way, lower their prices and, hence, help narrow the basis. This happened on 
3 December 2015 (green vertical line, left-hand panel): the announced ECB stimulus was lower than what market 
participants had expected in the run-up to the Federal Reserve’s first rate hike. Such expectations had been firming 
during the previous month following the upbeat US jobs data release in November (orange vertical line). After the 
ECB announcement, market participants revised down their expected volumes of cross-currency flows out of the euro 
area. 
Monetary policy announcements and one-year currency basis 
In basis points 
Graph C
One-year currency basis 
 One-year basis around selected announcements  
 
The solid vertical lines in the left-hand panel correspond to the following ECB monetary policy announcements: 8 May 2014, 5 June 2014,
22 August 2014 (Jackson Hole), 22 January 2015 and 21 January 2016. The green vertical line corresponds to the (“disappointing”) 3 December 
2015 ECB announcement. The orange vertical line indicates the 6 November 2015 US job report. The dashed vertical lines in the left-hand 
panel correspond to the following Bank of Japan monetary policy announcements: 4 April 2013, 31 October 2014, 29 January 2016 plus the 
16 September 2015 (S&P) Japan downgrade. The same dates are used to calculate the basis reaction around the announcement dates. 
Sources: Bloomberg; BIS calculations. 
  See Borio and Zabai (2016) for a survey of unconventional monetary policy measures that documents and discusses these effects. On the 
relationship of central bank deposit rate changes and the currency basis, see Bräuning and Ivashina (2016, Table IX). 
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
2013
2014
2015
2016
USD/EUR basis
USD/JPY basis
–20
–18
–16
–14
–12
–44
–42
–40
–38
–36
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
days
Average USD/EUR basis (lhs)
Average USD/JPY basis (rhs)

 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
55
 
against local currency via swaps (positive net FX hedging demand vis-à-vis the US 
dollar) for the corresponding sector, while a negative value shows net dollar lending. 
The figures are scaled by GDP. 
The graph reveals clear differences across countries and sectors. Especially 
noteworthy is the position of the banking sector relative to that of institutional 
investors. Where banks have a surplus of domestic currency deposits relative to 
domestic currency loans, they use the FX swap market to borrow dollars to hedge 
their dollar lending. In doing so, they compete with domestic institutional investors 
that use swaps to hedge their dollar investments. As a result, banks add to the 
aggregate hedging demand and hence to the size of the potential imbalance. This is 
the case in Japan, where they have used domestic yen deposits to fund their 
expansion abroad, mainly in dollars, by making heavy use of swaps. By contrast, in 
Australia and Sweden the banking sector provides a natural counterpart to 
institutional investors’ hedging needs. That is, given the large domestic currency 
mortgage book relative to the domestic deposit base, banks rely on the FX swap 
market for funding. This offsets institutional investors’ hedging demand. 
The hedging needs of US corporate bond issuers, which add to those of domestic 
institutional investors, are in general quite small compared with those of other 
sectors. The main exception is the recent experience in the euro area, where US non-
financial firms’ issuance in euros has surged since 2014. This reverse yankee issuance 
reflects the fact that euro-denominated corporate credit spreads have fallen 
significantly relative to those in dollars, largely because of ECB bond purchase 
programmes (Boxes B and C). 
The sign of the basis aligns quite well with these indicators. Where banks 
compete with institutional investors to borrow dollars through the swap market, as in 
Japan, the currency basis is negative, ie dollar borrowing via the FX swap market is in 
higher demand and hence more costly than in the cash market. The same is true in 
the euro area, where non-financial firms’ demand for dollar borrowing via FX swaps 
Currency hedging by banks, institutional investors and non-financial corporates 
As a percentage of 2015 GDP 
Graph 2
Australia 
 Japan 
 Sweden 
 Euro area4 
 
 
 
 
1  Foreign currency securities holdings of institutional investors (eg pension funds and insurance companies) multiplied by the respective 
currency hedge ratios; for the euro area, US dollar debt securities holding only, assuming 100% currency hedge ratios.    2  Each jurisdiction’s 
BIS reporting banks’ consolidated net US dollar assets.    3  Each jurisdiction’s BIS reporting banks’ consolidated net euro assets.    4  2015 
quarterly average.    5  Local currency debt outstanding issued by US non-financial corporations. 
Sources: Hilander (2014); Rush et al (2013); ECB; Eurosystem Working Group on Securities Statistics; The Life Insurance Association of Japan;
Barclays; BIS international banking statistics and debt securities statistics; authors’ calculations. 
–20
–10
0
10
20
Institutional investors1
–20
–10
0
10
20
Banks, in US dollars2
–20
–10
0
10
20
Banks, in euros3
–5.0
–2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Non-financial corporates5

 
 
56 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
looms large. By contrast, in Australia, where banks offset institutional demand for 
hedges by lending dollars in the swap market, the currency basis is positive. 
In the case of Sweden, the dollar basis is negative, even though banks are in the 
same position as those in Australia in that currency. However, the euro/krona basis is 
positive. This reflects the fact that the FX swap euro market, rather than the dollar 
market, is the marginal funding source for excess krona lending (darker colour bars), 
since swapping out of euros is more expensive than out of dollars. Accordingly, the 
picture in Sweden resembles that in Australia once the right currency pair is chosen.19 
Focusing exclusively on the position of the banking sector in US dollars (or euros 
for Sweden) confirms the previous finding. In a sample of eight economies (now 
including also Canada, Norway, Switzerland and the United Kingdom), the banks’ 
position is consistent with the sign of the basis (Graph 3). This also suggests that, in 
our sample, when banks are in the opposite position to institutional investors, their 
hedging needs are typically larger, so that they end up being the swing factor. Note 
also that Australian and Swedish banks’ position is indeed exceptional: banks typically 
add to resident institutional investors’ hedging needs, rather than offsetting them. In 
the case of the euro area, the fit improves significantly when we add euro-
denominated bonds issued by US non-financial firms (reverse yankees). This addition 
raises our measure of currency hedging demand in the EUR/USD pair from less than 
$28 billion to as much as $250 billion (the EA dot moves to the left in Graph 3). 
 
19  
Hilander (2014, Table 5) shows that, in addition to Swedish banks, foreign banks too provide currency 
hedges to Swedish investors, balancing them against the hedges provided to non-Swedish holders 
of Swedish bonds. 
Currency hedging demand and three-year basis  
Banks’ consolidated net USD liabilities (plus EUR reverse yankee liabilities) 
Graph 3
AU = Australia; CA = Canada; CH = Switzerland; EA = euro area; GB = United Kingdom; JP = Japan; NO = Norway;
SE = Sweden. 
For Sweden, net euro liabilities (horizontal axis) and the SEK/EUR basis (vertical axis). 
Sources: Bloomberg; BIS international banking statistics and debt securities statistics; authors’ calculations. 
EA
AU
JP
CH
GB
CA
NO
EA
SE
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
–0.75
–0.50
–0.25
0.00
0.25
Banks’ net USD liabilities (2015 average, USD trn)
Currency basis (2015 average, bp)

 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
57
 
The currency basis in the time series: the yen/dollar case 
We next test our hypothesis by examining the time series of the yen/dollar basis. This 
has been the most extreme and persistent non-zero basis among the major 
currencies, with banks and institutional investors both bidding for hedges. Moreover, 
it is the currency pair for which better data on the evolution of institutional investors’ 
hedging needs are available. Before turning to the evidence, a few facts can help set 
the context. 
Demand for currency hedges and the basis 
Our measure of the aggregate US dollar hedging needs of Japanese banks, 
institutional investors and US non-financial firms (samurai bond issuers) has increased 
considerably since the crisis: from $0.9 trillion in 2009 to over $1.2 trillion in 2015 
(Graph 4, left-hand panel). 
The banking sector has been the main driver, with its estimated dollar funding 
gap growing from around $0.6 trillion to $0.9 trillion. During this period, banks 
needed dollars to finance their overseas loan expansion and to hedge their own 
 
Sources of currency hedging demand and the JPY/USD basis 
Graph 4
FX hedging demand by sector 
 FX hedging demand and the basis 
 FX hedging demand and the basis 
(Jan 2008–Dec 2015) 
USD trn  
USD trn 
Basis points  
 
 
 
1  Difference between gross US dollar assets and liabilities of Japanese banks; quarterly data linear-interpolated to monthly 
frequency.    2  Japan life insurance companies’ currency-hedged US dollar bond holdings estimated by multiplying the stock of the insurance 
companies’ FX bond holdings by their time-varying currency hedge ratios; monthly frequency. 
Sources: Bank of Japan; Japanese Ministry of Finance; The Life Insurance Association of Japan; Barclays FICC Research; Bloomberg; BIS 
international banking statistics and debt securities statistics; authors’ calculations. 
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
05
07
09
11
13
15
USD cross-currency funding:
JP banks’ net USD claims1
JP life ins cos’ FX hedged bonds2
US corporates’ JPY bonds
Total net USD positioning
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
–100
–75
–50
–25
0
06
08
10
12
14
16
Total net USD positioning (lhs)
Three-year basis (rhs)
–100
–75
–50
–25
0
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
Total net USD positioning, USD trn
Three-year basis, bp

 
 
58 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
foreign bond holdings.20  Since 2015, Japanese banks have also relied more on FX 
swaps for USD funding due to the lower availability of wholesale USD funding, 
because of US MMFs’ disinvestment from foreign banks’ certificates of deposit and 
time deposits in anticipation of upcoming US MMF reform. Japanese banks have been 
especially affected, as they have been the largest foreign bank issuers of unsecured 
paper in US money markets; approximately two thirds of their $600 billion of liabilities 
in New York is unsecured funding (Pozsar and Smith (2016)).21 
Thus, Japanese banks’ reliance on swaps to fund their foreign assets has reduced 
their capacity to serve as counterparties to non-bank hedgers in cross-currency 
markets and to arbitrage the basis. In particular, Japanese life insurers’ search for yield 
overseas has led them to increase FX-hedged investments in US dollar-denominated 
bonds (with average hedge ratios of 60–70%).22  Issuance of samurai bonds has not 
played a significant role, owing to the thin corporate bond market in Japan. 
Confirming our hypothesis, after a clear break during the GFC, a remarkably close 
relationship emerged between variations in our measure of hedging demand and the 
basis (Graph 4, centre and right-hand panels). This is shown using the three-year 
basis, but the picture would be similar for other maturities. Pre-crisis, the basis was 
very small and stable, regardless of hedging volumes; post-crisis, it has tracked them 
remarkably closely. In particular, an increase in hedging demand has coincided with 
a widening of the basis further into negative territory. 
Tighter limits to arbitrage and the basis 
The sudden break in the basis during the GFC points to the emergence of the limits 
to arbitrage discussed above. But is it possible to find more direct evidence of these 
new balance sheet constraints? Some developments are consistent with them. 
First, as the GFC raised awareness of counterparty risk, many market participants 
switched from unsecured to secured funding sources, notably repo markets. Reliance 
on the repo market constrains the arbitrageurs’ flexibility, since the borrower cannot 
obtain funds without having the underlying security to pledge as collateral. Since 
mid-2014, the Bank of Japan’s move to increase government bond purchases (making 
them more scarce as collateral), even as the Federal Reserve stopped its net 
purchases, has made dollar repo funding more expensive relative to yen repo funding. 
As a result, arbitraging the yen/dollar basis has become more expensive, and the basis 
 
20  
The figures for Japanese banks’ net US dollar positions, which are derived from the BIS international 
banking statistics, include both these banks’ own dollar positions and those managed on behalf of 
their clients (in trust accounts). As a result, the figures overstate the former. It is not known how much 
of trust account positions is hedged. However, for the analysis that follows, it is the dynamics of the 
series rather than the absolute amount that is important. As long as the share of the dollars held on 
behalf of clients in the total net dollar position of Japanese banks and their hedge ratios are relatively 
stable, then the inclusion of these positions should not bias our results. 
21  
Assets under management have been migrating from prime US institutional MMFs to government 
MMFs due to the reform to be phased in in October 2016. By August 2016, prime MMFs had lost 
more than $360 billion in assets, according to Fitch. Non-US banks, in particular, had lost substantial 
amounts of MMF funding, inducing them to seek other sources of US dollars, including through FX 
swaps. 
22  
We obtained the time-varying hedge ratios of Japan’s life insurance companies by courtesy of 
Barclays FICC Research team; see Barclays (2015). In contrast to those of life insurance companies, 
the hedge ratios for Japan’s pension funds (dominated by the unhedged Government Pension 
Investment Fund) are low, and therefore ought not to affect the basis. 

 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
59
 
has widened even when financial market volatility (the VIX) has remained within 
normal ranges (Graph 5, left-hand panel). 
Second, since 2014 the basis has started to exhibit quarter-end spikes, along with 
repo rates, indicating that arbitrage has become harder (Graph 5, right-hand panel). 
This has coincided with the greater importance attached to quarter-end reporting 
and regulatory ratios following regulatory reforms. 
Third, the riskiness of claims on the Japanese official sector may also have played 
a significant role. Banks’ exposures to the Japanese official sector are already sizeable 
relative to their equity. As the basis widened, BIS reporting banks, especially big US, 
French and UK banks, increased their claims on the Japanese official sector from 
about $200 billion in Q4 2014 to $323 billion at the end of 2015, no doubt in part 
reflecting their arbitrage activities (Graph 6, left-hand panel). At the end of the period, 
their exposure to the Japanese official sector, including both the central bank and the 
government, represented 10–19% of their equity. The widening of the yen/dollar 
basis following Standard & Poor’s downgrade of Japan in 2015 highlights the role of 
internal limits on these exposures as a factor constraining arbitrage (see also Box C). 
Finally, in less direct ways, developments in related markets can impede arbitrage 
activities. Markets for interest rate swaps are one such example. Top-rated European 
supranationals and agencies have relied on their funding cost advantage to arbitrage 
the basis by issuing bonds in US dollars and swapping the proceeds back into euros, 
thus collecting the currency basis (Box A and Du et al (2016)). This activity is reflected 
in the rising share of US dollar bond liabilities of major euro area supranational 
agencies compared with their home currency (ie euro) bond liabilities (Graph 6, right-
hand panel). However, such “issuance arbitrage” slowed when the interest rate swap 
rate fell below the US Treasury yield in Q3 2015. Since such supranationals have to 
issue at rates above US Treasury yields, this inversion of US dollar interest rate swap 
JPY/USD basis and US–Japan repo spreads 
Graph 5
The basis and the US–JP repo spread differential 
 The basis and quarter-end jumps in the repo spreads3 
Basis points 
 
Basis points 
Basis points
 
 
1  For the United States, repo rate minus federal funds rate; for Japan, repo rate minus call rate.    2  Chicago Board Options Exchange S&P 500 
implied volatility index; standard deviation, in percentage points per annum.    3  Repo spreads and currency basis calculated using the 
respective OIS rates. 
Sources: Bloomberg; authors’ calculations. 
–140
–70
0
70
–70
–35
0
35
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
1-month basis 
Lhs:
1-month repo spread differential,
US minus JP (basis points)1
VIX (percentage points)2
Rhs:
–40
–20
0
20
–400
–200
0
200
2014
2015
2016
1-week repo spread differential, US minus JP (lhs)
1-week basis (rhs)

 
 
60 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
spreads sharply increased their costs of placing a 7- to 10-year bond in US dollars 
and swapping it into euros.23 
Regression results 
We next test for the presence of a link between hedging demand and the basis as 
well as the role of arbitrage constraints econometrically. Specifically, we add our 
quantitative indicator of aggregate hedging demand to standard specifications of the 
basis.24  Our results provide evidence for such a link. 
The standard specification for the three-month basis – the tenor on which most 
of the empirical work has focused – is shown in the first row of Table 1. The size of 
the basis is considered to be a function of counterparty risk (Libor-OIS spread), 
funding liquidity (repo spreads) and market liquidity (currency market bid-ask 
spreads). This is in the spirit of, for instance, Mancini-Griffoli and Ranaldo (2012) and 
Pinnington and Shamloo (2016). The specification performs reasonably well: the 
coefficients of the explanatory variables are all economically and statistically 
significant. 
Once we add the quantitative indicator of hedging demand, the performance 
clearly improves (Table 1, second row). The indicator is added on its own and 
interacted with the Libor-OIS spread, as derived formally in Sushko et al (2016). In 
particular, the interaction of money market strains and hedging demand pressures 
 
23  
At the end of 2013, major euro area supranationals had $660 billion equivalent in euro bonds 
outstanding, but only $355 billion in dollar bonds. In the following six quarters, they issued  
$192 billion in dollar bonds and only $178 billion in euro bonds, pointing to a shift of over $10 billion 
per quarter from euro to dollar. 
24  
For a much more extensive analysis, see Sushko et al (2016). 
CIP arbitrage by banks in USD/JPY and by supranational bond issuers in USD/EUR 
Graph 6
Foreign bank claims on the Japanese official sector1 and 
JPY/USD basis 
 European supranationals’2 cumulative issuance in euros 
and US dollars and EUR/USD basis 
Basis points 
USD bn  
Basis points 
USD bn
 
1  Non-Japanese banks’ consolidated claims on an ultimate risk basis, including yen claims booked in Japan, on the official sector, which
includes the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Japan. There was a series break in Q1 2009, when two US securities firms started to report 
as bank holding companies.    2  European supranational and agency issuers include CADES, the EIB, Eurofima, the KfW and OKB. 
Sources: Bloomberg; European Investment Bank (EIB); BIS international banking statistics and debt securities statistics; BIS calculations. 
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
200
250
300
350
400
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
3-month USD/JPY basis (lhs)
Foreign bank claims on Japanese official sector (rhs)
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
75
150
225
300
2014
2015
2016
3-year USD/EUR basis
Lhs:
Euros
Bond issuance denominated in (rhs):
US dollars

 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
61
 
(column (c), in bold) matters and money market strains alone (column (a)) now no 
longer exert a significant impact. The coefficient on the interaction term suggests that 
a 1% rise in the Libor-OIS spread combined with 1% higher demand for forward 
hedges is associated with a 45 basis point wider basis. This result indicates that higher 
demand for hedges works together with the market dislocations identified in previous 
research to drive the basis. 
Furthermore, for the two-year basis swap, the pressure of hedging demand has 
a direct (linear) effect on the basis (Table 1, third row, in bold), while the interaction 
term is no longer significant (fourth row). In particular, the estimated coefficient of –
0.913 indicates that 1% higher demand for currency hedges translates into roughly a 
1 basis point wider basis. This points to the cost of long-term cross-currency swaps 
being a more direct barometer of the imbalances in cross-currency flows hedged for 
currency risk, whereas the cost of short-term FX swaps is much more sensitive to risk 
premia and bank funding strains, particularly during crisis episodes (Graph 1). 
Overall, the econometric evidence indicates that, while generally ignored, 
hedging demand played a role even before the widening of the basis from 2014, when 
market tensions were subdued. No doubt, heightened counterparty risks did 
influence the basis in 2008–09 and again in 2011–12. But the demand for dollar 
hedging has been at work throughout.25  And it has continued to play a significant 
role since. 
Conclusions 
We have argued that the puzzling systematic and persistent violation of CIP since the 
GFC reflects the combination of FX hedging demand and limits to arbitrage arising 
from lower balance sheet capacity, in turn due to tighter management of risks and 
 
25  
See Sushko et al (2016) for broader results, including panel evidence that extends the key results 
beyond the yen/dollar basis using exclusively the banks’ position, for which consistent data are 
available. 
Regression analysis of the JPY/USD basis, December 2007–December 2015 
Table 1 
Dependent 
variable 
Libor-OIS 
(a) 
Demand 
(b) 
Interaction 
(c) = (a) x (b)
Repo spread 
difference (d) 
FX bid-ask 
(e) 
Constant 
Obser-
vations 
R2 
Three-
month 
–113.62*** 
 
 
–29.30* 
2.16*** 
–19.42*** 
72 
0.679
(27.00) 
 
 
(17.10) 
(0.74) 
(2.54) 
 
Three-
month  
0.06 
–1.53 
–44.48*** 
–44.70*** 
2.07*** 
–15.49*** 
67 
0.794
(33.90) 
(1.16) 
(13.3) 
(13.60) 
(0.52) 
(2.3) 
 
Two-year 
–16.23*** 
–0.91** 
 
–26.11*** 
–0.17 
–0.25 
67 
0.506
 
(4.30) 
(0.39) 
 
(6.00) 
(0.23) 
(0.76) 
 
Two-year 
–10.02 
–0.88** 
–2.42 
–26.67*** 
–0.14 
–0.14 
67 
0.509
 
(13.10) 
(0.38) 
(4.80) 
(5.98) 
(0.23) 
(0.81) 
 
Robust standard errors in parentheses; ***/**/* denotes significance at the 1/5/10% level. Unit root test (ADF) rejects the null in levels for 
three-month, which is regressed in levels; unit root test fails to reject null in levels for two-year, which is regressed in first differences. AR(1) 
not significant. 
Source: Sushko et al (2016). 

 
 
62 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
associated balance sheet constraints. This explanation suggests that, even at the 
height of market tensions, hedging demand played an important, but 
underappreciated, role. We use BIS banking and debt securities statistics in 
combination with national data to construct estimates of currency hedging demand 
for select major currencies against the US dollar. We find that quantity-based 
indicators of hedging demand track the variation in the basis both across currencies 
at a given point in time and, in the case of the dollar/yen basis, over time. 
Importantly, our analysis has been largely confined to the proximate 
determinants of the basis, as we have not looked much into the factors driving 
currency hedging demand in the first place. We have mainly limited ourselves to 
documenting the possible importance of extraordinary monetary accommodation by 
the Bank of Japan and the ECB in widening the basis around policy announcements. 
 
 

 
 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016 
63
 
References 
Baba, N and F Packer (2009): “From turmoil to crisis: dislocations in the FX swap 
market before and after the failure of Lehman Brothers”, Journal of International 
Money and Finance, vol 28, no 8, pp 1350–74. 
Baba, N, F Packer and T Nagano (2008): “The spillover of money market turbulence 
to FX swap and cross-currency swap markets”, BIS Quarterly Review, March,  
pp 73–86. 
Barclays (2015): “Asia-Pacific cross-currency basis: widening pressure, from Japan to 
Asia”, 1 December. 
Borio, C (2016): “More pluralism, more stability?”, speech at the Seventh High-level 
SNB-IMF Conference on the International Monetary System, Zurich, 10 May. 
Borio, C and A Zabai (2016): “Unconventional monetary policies: a re-appraisal”, BIS 
Working Papers, no 570, July. 
Bräuning, F and V Ivashina (2016): “Monetary policy and global banking”, June, 
mimeo. 
Cetorelli, N and L Goldberg (2011): “Global banks and international shock 
transmission: evidence from the crisis”, IMF Economic Review, vol 59, no 1, pp 41–76. 
——— (2012): “Follow the money: quantifying domestic effects of foreign bank 
shocks in the Great Recession”, American Economic Review, vol 102, no 3, pp 213–18. 
Coffey, N, W Hrung and A Sarkar (2009): “Capital constraints, counterparty risk, and 
deviations from covered interest parity”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff 
Reports, no 393. 
Domanski, D, H S Shin and V Sushko (2015): “The hunt for duration: not waving but 
drowning?”, BIS Working Papers, no 519, October. 
Du, W, A Tepper and A Verdelhan (2016): “Covered interest rate parity deviations in 
the post-crisis world”, May, available at SSRN 2768207 2768207, SSRN. 
Duffie, D (2016): “Why are big banks offering less liquidity to bond markets?”, Forbes, 
11 March. 
Fender, I and P McGuire (2010): “Bank structure, funding risk and the transmission of 
shocks across countries: concepts and measurement”, BIS Quarterly Review, 
September, pp 63–79. 
Hanajiri, T (1999): “Three Japan premiums in autumn 1997 and autumn 1998 – why 
did premiums differ between markets?”, Bank of Japan Financial Markets Department 
Working Paper Series, no 99-E-1. 
He, D, E Wong, A Tsang and K Ho (2015): “Asynchronous monetary policies and 
international dollar credit”, Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research, Working 
Papers, no 19-2015, September. 
Hilander, E (2014): “Short-term funding in foreign currency by major Swedish banks 
and their use of the short-term currency swap market”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic 
Review, no 1, pp 1–23. 
Iida, T, T Kimura and N Sudo (2016): “An upsurge in a CIP deviation during the non-
crisis period and the role of divergence in monetary policy”, Bank of Japan Working 
Paper Series, no 16-E-14, August. 

 
 
64 
BIS Quarterly Review, September 2016
 
Ivashina, V, D Scharfstein and J Stein (2015): “Dollar funding and the lending behavior 
of global banks”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol 130, no 3, pp 1241–81. 
Levich, R (2012): “FX counterparty risk and trading activity in currency forward and 
future markets”, Review of Financial Economics, 21, pp 102–10. 
Liao, G (2016): “Credit migration and covered interest parity”, Harvard University, 
mimeo. 
Mancini Griffoli, T and A Ranaldo (2012): “Limits to arbitrage during the crisis: finding 
liquidity constraints and covered interest parity”, Working Papers on Finance, no 1212, 
University of St Gallen School of Finance. 
McCauley, R and P McGuire (2014): “Non-US banks’ claims on the Federal Reserve”, 
BIS Quarterly Review, March, pp 89–97. 
McGuire, P and G von Peter (2009): “The US dollar shortage in global banking”, BIS 
Quarterly Review, March, pp 47–63. 
——— (2012): “The US dollar shortage in global banking and the international policy 
response”, International Finance, June. 
Pinnington, J and M Shamloo (2016): “Limits to arbitrage and deviations from covered 
interest rate parity”, Bank of Canada, Staff Discussion Papers, 16-4. 
Pozsar, Z and S Smith (2016): “Japanese banks, LIBOR and the FX swap lines”, Credit 
Suisse Fixed Income Research, Global Money Notes #7, August. 
Rush, A, D Sadeghian and M Wright (2013): “Foreign currency exposure and hedging 
in Australia”, Reserve Bank of Australia, Bulletin, December, pp 49–57. 
Shin, H S (2010): Risk and liquidity, Oxford University Press. 
——— (2016): “Global liquidity and procyclicality”, speech at the World Bank 
conference on The state of economics, the state of the world, Washington DC, 8 June. 
Shleifer, A and R Vishny (1997): “The limits of arbitrage”, Journal of Finance, vol 52,  
no 1, pp 35–55. 
Sushko, V, C Borio, R McCauley and P McGuire (2016): “Failure of covered interest 
parity: FX hedging demand and costly balance sheets”, BIS Working Papers, 
forthcoming. 
US Treasury, Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System (2016): US portfolio holdings of foreign securities as of December 31, 
2014, January. 
