CHAPTER 4
The Variance Premium
In finance, everything that is agreeable is unsound and everything that is
sound is disagreeable.
—Winston Churchill
The variance premium (also known as the volatility premium) is the tendency
for implied volatility to be higher than subsequently realized volatility.
This is not a recent phenomenon. In his 1906 book The Put and Call, Leonard
Higgins writes how traders on the London Stock Exchange first determine a
statistical fair value for options, then “add to the ‘average value’ of the put
and call an amount which will give a fair margin of profit.” That is, a variance
premium was added.
The variance premium exists in equity indices, the VIX, bonds, commodities,
currencies, and many stocks. It is probably the most important factor to be
aware of when trading options. Even traders who are not trying to directly
monetize the effect need to know of it and understand it. It is the tide that long
option positions need to overcome to be profitable. Even traders who only use
options to trade directionally need to take this into account. Even if
directional predictions are correct, it is very hard to make money if one is
consistently paying too much for options (see Chapters Six and Seven for
more discussion of this point).
This effect can be monetized in many ways. The size and persistence of the
variance premium is so strong that the precise details of a strategy often aren't
very important. Practically any strategy that sells implied volatility has a
significant head start on being profitable if the premium is there.
In this chapter we will discuss the characteristics of the variance premium in
various products; look at the relationships among the variance premium,
correlation, and skewness; and give some possible reasons for the existence of
the effect.
Aside: The Implied Variance Premium
The variance premium refers to the difference between implied volatility,
which can be defined by either BSM implied volatilities or variance swaps,
and subsequent realized volatility. There is a related phenomenon that occurs
entirely in the implied space. Being short VIX futures is generally a profitable
strategy (although not a wildly successful one). Figure 4.1 shows the results
of always being short the VIX front month future from June 2015 to October
2019.
The VIX itself doesn't decay in the same way (refer to Figure 4.2). This is
really a term-structure effect in the futures.
FIGURE 4.1 Profit from selling 1 front-month VIX future.
FIGURE 4.2 The VIX index from June 2015 to October 2019.
According to the rational expectations hypothesis, the VIX futures curve
should be an unbiased predictor of where the VIX index will be on the
expiration date. The narrowing of the basis as time approaches the expiration
date should be more dependent on the cash index moving toward the future's
price.
The theory of rational expectations has been tested on many different
commodity futures and it is generally a poor description of price movements.
Futures tend to move toward the cash. Alternatively, the cash VIX is a better
predictor of future VIX levels than the futures are.
It is probably not surprising that this also occurs in the VIX. VIX futures are
unusual. Generally, futures are priced by first assuming that they are
forwards, then constructing an arbitrage-free portfolio of the underlying and
the future. However, the VIX index cannot be traded so this method is not
useful for pricing VIX futures. Given that VIX futures are not constrained by
tight, no-arbitrage bounds, there is even more room for inefficiencies.
On its own this doesn't mean short positions have to be profitable. But the
VIX term structure is usually in contango (from the time VIX futures were
listed in 2006 to the start of 2019, the term structure has been in contango
81% of the time). This means that the futures are above the cash and tend to
decline toward it. The best discussion of this effect is in Simon and
Campasano (2014). Selling a future only when the previous day's prices were
in contango considerably improves this strategy. Figure 4.3 shows the results
of being short the VIX front-month future from June 2015 to October 2019,
when the term structure is in contango.
FIGURE 4.3 Profit from selling 1 front-month VIX future when the term
structure is in contango.
Variance Premium in Equity Indices
Figure 4.4 shows the VIX and the subsequent 30-day realized volatility of the
S&P 500 from 1990 to the end of 2018.
On average the VIX was four volatility points higher than the realized
volatility and the premium is positive 85% of the time. Figure 4.5 shows the
premium in volatility points. Figure 4.6 shows the distribution of the daily
premia and Table 4.1 gives the summary statistics.
FIGURE 
4.4 
The 
VIX 
and 
the 
subsequent 
30-day 
realized 
S&P 
500
volatility.
FIGURE 
4.5 
The 
S&P 
500 
variance 
premium 
(VIX 
minus 
realized
volatility).
FIGURE 4.6 The S&P 500 variance premium distribution.
TABLE 4.1 Summary Statistics for the S&P 500 Variance Premium
Mean
4.08
Standard
deviation
5.96
Skewness
−2.33
Maximum

31.21
Minimum
−53.3
4
Median
4.63
90th percentile
9.62
10th percentile
−1.45
The Dow Jones 30, NASDAQ 100, and Russell 2000 indices have similar
variance premia. The summary statistics for these are given in Table 4.2.
TABLE 4.2 Summary Statistics for the Dow Jones, NASDAQ 100, and
Russell 2000 Variance Premia
Index
Dow Jones (from
1998)
NASDAQ 100 (from
2001)
Russell 2000
(from 2004)
Mean
3.50
3.41
3.24
Standard
deviation
6.18
6.99
6.58
Skewness
−2.03
−2.02
−2.72
Maximum
28.90
26.48
27.28
Minimum
−49.42
−53.79
−46.08
Median
4.22
3.91
4.05
90th percentile
9.46
10.37
9.10
10th percentile
−2.60
−3.11
−2.81
The variance premium varies considerably with the market volatility. Table
4.3 shows the variance premium statistics for the five VIX quintiles. Here, as
in Figure 4.6, the premium is expressed in volatility points.
So, broadly speaking, the typical size of the variance premium (measured by
either mean or median) increases with volatility levels. The variability of the
variance premium also increases with volatility. When trading the variance
premiums with options, a mid-level VIX is probably the best environment.
Low-volatility regimes give lower returns as a percentage of margin and
require more frequent hedging due to the higher gamma. High-volatility
regimes have good average returns but a bad risk profile.
TABLE 4.3 Summary Statistics for the VIX Sorted by Quintiles
VIX
<13.0
2
13.02
<VIX<15.8
9
15.89
<VIX<19.4
2
19.42
<VIX<24.1
5
VIX
>24.1
5
Mean
2.61
3.37
4.35
4.19
5.87
Standard
deviation
3.54
3.60
4.58
6.53
9.06
Skewness
−2.36
−1.67
−2.23
−2.21
−2.46
Maximum
8.33
10.17
13.84
14.82

31.21
VIX
<13.0
2
13.02
<VIX<15.8
9
15.89
<VIX<19.4
2
19.42
<VIX<24.1
5
VIX
>24.1
5
Minimum
−17.5
4
−16.84
−27.95
−37.66
−53.3
4
Median
3.25
4.05
5.25
5.44
7.23
90th percentile
5.16
7.21
8.73
10.45

13.81
10th percentile
−0.81
−0.80
−0.74
−3.15
−2.80
There is also more direct evidence of the premium. Short positions in delta-
neutral equity index option positions (straddles, strangles, butterflies, and
condors) have been profitable, as have short positions in variance swaps.
Sharpe ratios vary between 0.4 and 1.0 depending on details of the
implementation. The effect has been studied in many countries and time
periods (see, for example, Driessen and Maenhout, 2006; Londono, 2011).
The CBOE publishes two separate short option volatility indices: CNDR and
BFLY. CNDR tracks the performance of a strategy that sells a 1-month SPX
iron condor (short the 20-delta strangle and long the 5-delta strangle). BFLY
tracks a short iron butterfly. The hypothetical performance of these strategies
is shown in Figures 4.7 and 4.8.
It is worth discussing why neither of these indices has been particularly
successful since 2008.
The variance premium was virtually the same before the end of 2008 (median
of 4.63 points) and since (median of 4.61). However, the median VIX level
dropped from 18.3 to 16.3, and after the chaos of 2009, the median VIX
dropped further to only 15.4. The lower volatility level gives options higher
gamma, which drastically increases the effects of path dependency and drift.
The second reason is the effect of skew. Although lower ATM volatility
usually means all other options will also trade at lower volatilities, the relative
implied volatility of teeny puts tends to increase. So as volatility decreased,
the prices of the 5-delta puts increased relative to the premium from selling
the options closer to the ATM. This effect is illustrated by the CBOE SKEW
index having an average value of 116.2 in the earlier period and 125.7
afterwards. These strategies were paying more for their put hedges. And these
teeny puts are always the most options with the highest variance premium.
Unless buying them for a hedge they are the ultimate sucker bets. Refer to
Hodges et al. (2003) for a study of this fact.
FIGURE 4.7 Performance of the CNDR index.
FIGURE 4.8 Performance of the BFLY index.
So, although the variance premium is a strong and consistent phenomenon,
attention needs to be paid to the capture strategy. This will be discussed
further in Chapter Six.
The Implied Skewness Premium
A large part of the index variance premium is due to the OTM (out-of-the-
money) puts being overpriced. Intuitively this should be the case, because
much of the value of a variance swap is driven by the value of the OTM puts.
And it is well known that index put options are overpriced (see, for example,
Bondarenko, 2003).
The implied volatility curve predicts very high negative skewness in realized
returns. Although many pricing models can reproduce such a curve, their
parameters are not consistent with the absence of substantial negative
skewness in stock index returns. To misquote Samuelson, option markets
predict nine out of the past five market corrections. Also, the predictions are
reactive, with the implied skew being steepest after crashes.
Kozhan et al. (2011) examined the profitability of selling skew swaps. The
skew swap is a model-free skewness contract whose payoff is equal to the
difference between realized skew and implied skew. As with variance swaps,
the skew swap can be replicated from a portfolio of vanilla options. Using this
contract enables the researchers to investigate the risk premium implicit in
implied skew without having to worry about the misspecification of any
specific option pricing model.
They show that for S&P 500 options (from 1996 to 2009) about half of the
excess return from selling out-of-the-money puts is due to the correlation
between returns and volatility: the realized skewness.
The Implied Correlation Premium
Selling index volatility and buying component volatility is a short correlation
position. All the index components dropping is the same as correlations
rising. Short correlation is also short implied volatility.
This strategy has Sharpe ratios comparable to selling index variance swaps.
Although the returns are lower, the variance is also considerably reduced
(Driessen et al., 2009). Dispersion trading suffers during market turmoil when
the correlations increase, that is, the same periods when selling index variance
suffers.
Commodities
The variance premium probably exists in commodities. Prokopczuk and
Simen (2014) used option prices to construct synthetic variance swaps and
found significantly negative variance risk premia in nearly all commodity
markets. They examined 21 commodity markets between 1989 and 2011 and
found that 18 of the commodities had statistically significant returns to short
variance swaps. Table 4.4 summarizes the results for the 60-day swaps (a
premium of 10% would mean the 60-day implied variance was 10% above
the 60-day realized variance).
The correlation of variance premia for commodities in the same sector was
positive but small. And the correlation across sectors was also small enough
to make harvesting the premium in commodities a good diversifier. The
correlations are shown in Tables 4.5 and 4.6.
TABLE 
4.4 The 
Size 
and 
Significance 
of 
the Variance 
Premium 
in
Commodity Options
Commodit
y
Variance Premium
(%)
T-
Score
Crude oil
3.4
6
Heating oil
3
7
Natural gas
10.2
9
Corn
2.3
8
Cotton
−0.6
−11
Beans
0.8
2
Bean meal
0
0
Bean oil
1
4
Sugar
2.6
6
Wheat
0.7
3
Hogs
1.2
3
Cattle
1
11
Commodit
y
Variance Premium
(%)
T-
Score
Copper
2.4
4
Gold
1
4
Silver
0.2
1
Cocoa
3
8
Coffee
1.7
1
Oats
6.2
8
OJ
2.3
3
Rice
3
8
Lumber
3.5
10
Trading options on commodities requires some fundamental knowledge. An
equity option trader can trade any equity, often without even knowing more
than the ticker symbol. This is largely because the movement of equities is
almost random and the effect of any real fundamental knowledge is small
(indices are even more ignorance driven: the best situation for a statistically
driven trader). But people actually know things about commodities. There are
different crops, pipeline bottlenecks, storage squeezes, and weather effects.
There is no guarantee that a good wheat trader can become a good corn trader.
Different things affect different commodities.
TABLE 
4.5 
The 
Correlation 
of 
the 
Variance 
Premium 
Within
Commodity Sectors
Sector
Correlation of 60-day
VP
Energy
33.4%
Grains
24.2%
Livestoc
k
31.4%
Metals
30.1%
Tropicals
5.7%
Wood
N/A
TABLE 
4.6 
The 
Correlation 
of 
the 
Variance 
Premium 
Between
Commodity Sectors
Energy Grains
Livestoc
k
Metals
S&P
500
T-
bonds
Tropical
s
Woo
d
Energy

100% 

Grains

9.0%

100% 

Livestoc
k
13.2% 14.9% 100% 
Metals
22.1% 14.5% 6.5%

100% 

S&P 500 26.5% 2.0% 16.4% 30.7%

100% 

T-bonds
20.2% 16.0% 5.3% 23.1% 39.3%
100% 

Tropical
s
8.9% 24.7% 11.3% 11.6% 5.9% 0.3%

100% 
Wood
7.3% 0.9% 7.8% 3.9% 9.5% 6.5% 11.7%
100
%
We can see this in the variance premia measured by Prokopczuk and Simen
(2104). Traders who have fundamental insight might know why the corn
premium is so much greater than that of wheat and why the premium in silver
options is so different from that in gold options.
Bonds
Choi et. al (2017) looked at bond options from 1990 to 2012. They found that
1-month variance swaps on US 5-year notes, 10-year bonds, and 30-year
bonds are overpriced by about 20% (18.7% for the 5-year, 27.6% for the 10-
year, and 21.2% for the 30-year). The Sharpe ratio for a strategy that sells all
these swaps is about 2. Selling 1-month ATM straddles was also profitable,
although less so.
Most bond uncertainty (and hence most of the variance premium) is clustered
around the release of macroeconomic data. Jones et al. (1998) showed that
from 1979 to 1995 about 90% of excess returns to Treasury bonds accrued on
days with either an employment or PPI announcement. Interestingly,
Andersson et al. (2009) showed that German government bonds reacted far
more strongly to US data releases than German ones. German unemployment
releases had almost no effect at all, leading them to conclude that the number
was widely leaked.
The VIX
There is also a variance premium in VIX options. Hogan (2011) used VIX
options to construct synthetic VIX variance swaps and showed that these had
a premium to the realized variance of the VIX futures that was similar in size
to the premium in equity indices. Kaeck (2017) found similar results using
data from 2006 to 2014.
Currencies
Lo and Zhang (2005) found direct evidence of a variance premium in OTC
currency options. They found that a strategy of selling straddles was
profitable for options on USD versus GBP, YEN, CHF, and the euro for terms
between 1 month and 1 year. They also found that the variance premium
increased as options got closer to expiration.
Londono and Zhou (2017) reported significant positive variance premia for
variance swaps on USD/GBP, USD/Yen, and USD/euro at 1-, 3-, and 6-month
durations. However, the variance premia for some currencies, notably NZD
and AUD, was large and negative. As the antipodean currencies are generally
seen as “safe havens,” this suggests some linkage between the priced variance
risk and real-world political and macroeconomic risk perceptions.
Equities
The results of selling options on equities are not clear-cut. First, because we
know that implied correlation accounts for a portion of the index variance
premium, we would expect the returns to selling stock volatility to be lower
than selling index volatility. This is true. Also, as with commodities, there are
specific fundamental factors that affect the variance premia in stock options.
This is examined in more depth in Chapter Five.
TABLE 4.7 The Average Return to a Short 1-Month Variance Swap for
Stock Options in Different Industries
Industry
Average
Return
T-
statistic
Utilities
31.25%
10.39
Nondurable consumer
goods
17.71%
7.89
Other
9.83%
3.71
Durable consumer goods
8.56%
3.36
Energy
8.56%
3.55
Manufacturing
8.05%
3.29
Retail
4.68%
1.93
Health care
3.27%
1.39
Telecommunications
−1.40%
−0.48
Technology
−7.66%
−2.97
Di Pietro and Vainberg (2006) show how size and book-to-market firm
characteristics are linked to the expensiveness of equity options. They find
that options on small stocks are more expensive than options on large stocks
and that options on value stocks are more expensive than options on growth
stocks.
This was partially corroborated by Vilkov (2008). He did not find a robust
size effect but found that value stocks had more of a variance premium than
growth stocks. He also found that illiquid stock had high variance premia
(this won't be practically useful because these stocks will also have illiquid
options). He also looked at the variance premia of various industry sectors (as
defined by French). These results are shown in Table 4.7.
Anyone thinking of trading a portfolio of equity options should probably
study the interrelationships among these various factor exposures. I'm not
aware of any published work on this.
Reasons for the Variance Premium
There are many reasons for the existence of the variance premium. This
means it is likely to persist, because it is doubtful that all of these reasons
would disappear at the same time, even if they all vary across different market
and economic regimes.
Insurance
The most compelling reason for a variance premium is that people are willing
to pay for insurance. The most obvious insurance buyers are those who are
long stocks and buy puts for downside protection. This demand is a major
driver of the implied skew and the resulting skew premium. However, there
are also investors who will buy calls to insure against missing out on large
rallies. Obviously, for every option buyer there is also a seller, but the
customer demand sets the price. Hedgers are prepared to pay for insurance.
The sellers take on the risk and also demand an extra premium. The variance
premium is reflective of a risk premium, but it is also a mispriced risk
premium.
Jump Risk
If underlying prices were continuous, options could be perfectly replicated.
This would make their existence redundant. However, underlying prices can
jump and options give protection against these jumps in a way that a dynamic
hedging scheme cannot, making them more attractive to buyers (hedgers or
speculators). The non-redundancy of options can be seen as both a cause and
consequence of the variance premium.
Trading Restrictions
Many retail traders have restrictions placed on them by their brokers. It is
common for them to be forbidden from selling naked options. This means that
an entire class of speculators can only be long volatility, thus driving the
variance premium higher.
Market-Maker Inventory Risk
Contrary to popular belief, bookies do not try to completely balance their risk.
They often speculate on a team to win. Similarly, option market-makers
usually have speculative views on the markets and use the income from
market-making operations to smooth the losses from these positions. There
are far fewer market-makers now than there were 10 years ago. Increasing
automation means fewer people are needed. On the floor, a trader could cover
two or three stocks but now it is routine for a single trader to trade hundreds
of stocks. But the overall profits to the community are still enormous. Spreads
have narrowed, but this has been compensated for by increasing volumes. As
long as a market-maker can stay in business, she will eventually be
successful.
The best trading opportunities for liquidity providers are in times of turmoil.
Spreads widen. Volume soars. Customers are not as price sensitive as usual.
So, it is imperative that market-makers can trade aggressively in these
situations. And this can only happen if they aren't stuck with a loss from the
move. Ideally, they will have a nice profit and can trade freely and with no
restrictions. This means that they are almost always long teeny options. A
standard risk-management heuristic for market-makers is always to be net
long options. They are aware that options are overpriced, but they need them
as insurance. Not inventory insurance: business insurance.
Path Dependency of Returns
Grosshans and Zeisberger (2018) show that investors also care about exactly
how their returns are realized. They performed surveys that asked people to
imagine that they had six stocks. Three made 10% and three lost 10%. But
each of the three had different paths: up-down, a linear path, or down-up.
These are shown stylistically in Figures 4.9 and 4.10.
FIGURE 4.9 The three different positive return paths.
FIGURE 4.10 The three different negative return paths.
For both winners and losers, the participants were happiest when prices first
declined and then rose. People were even slightly disappointed when stocks
rose and then fell but were still winners! People are happiest when they feel
that they have recovered from adversity, snatching victory from the jaws of
defeat.
Although this is only survey data it gives another plausible reason for the
variance premium.
Think about a $100 stock and the $100 strike call and put. Assuming no
interest rates and a volatility of 30%, both the 1-month call and put will each
be worth $3.43. One trader sells the put, and another buys the call. Consider
what happens if the stock jumps from $100 to $106.86 right before expiration.
Each trader makes $3.43 at expiry, but the P/L evolves slightly differently
over time for the buyer and seller. These return paths are shown in Figures
4.11 and 4.12.
The largest PL difference is $5.09 on the day before the jump.
The long option maintains the ability to “snatch victory from the jaws of
defeat.” People prefer this, so options will tend to be overpriced, hence the
variance premium.
This is really a gamma effect. The short put steadily collects theta, but the
long call wins because of gamma. Redemption comes from the possibility of
extreme price moves due to high gamma. This explains why the variance
premium is greatest for short-dated options and also why it tends to be higher
when volatility is low.
FIGURE 4.11 The P/L for a short put, with a stock jump at expiration.
FIGURE 4.12 The P/L for a long call, with a stock jump at expiration,
The Problem of the Peso Problem
It is possible that options are actually not overpriced. Perhaps volatility and
the skew are fairly priced, and the apparent variance premium is due to the
fact that the events option buyers are insuring against haven't occurred in our
sample period but will at some point in the future.
It is hard to see how an argument based on “just you wait” can ever be
refuted. We certainly know that in the history we have, implied volatility has
been overpriced. It is possible that someday an event will occur that is so
large that all option-selling profits will be eradicated. It also seems unlikely.
As with all trading decisions, we can either assume history will be an accurate
guide to the future or it won't. “This time is different” is an appealing idea
because it means we don't have to do any studying of how things have
behaved in the past, but it is rarely true.
Conclusion
Implied volatility tends to be an upward-biased estimator of the future
realized volatility. This is the most important empirical fact to a volatility
trader. The effect applies to most underlying situations and has existed for as
long as we have data to look at. There are a large number of economic,
distributional, and psychological reasons for the variance premium. Although
it could be diminished by the emergence of more institutions trying to capture
it, I doubt that it will ever disappear completely.
Summary
Historically it has been profitable to be short options. There are
persuasive arguments that suggest that this will continue.
Floor trader sayings: “If in doubt, hands out” and “Whenever an option
trades good market-makers will know if they want to buy or sell at that
price, and if they are unsure they should sell.”
...
CHAPTER 5
Finding Trades with Positive Expected
Value
In Volatility Trading I wrote, “There is no attempt here to give a list of
trading rules. Sorry, but markets constantly evolve, and rules rapidly
become obsolete. What do not become obsolete are general principles.
These are what I attempt to provide. This approach isn't as easy to digest as
a list of magic rules, but I do not claim markets are easy to beat, either.”
This is still true.
But I am going to give a list of edges. Edges aren't rules. And the difference
is important. A rule is a defined way to monetize an edge, whereas the edge
is an observed phenomenon that could potentially be profited from in many
ways. Edges can persist.
Aside: Crowding
There is a common perception that crowded trades will have diminishing
performance. Whether this is always true is unclear, and it was addressed in
the context of factor investing by Baltas (2019).
First, it is unclear what exactly is meant by crowded. Sometimes it is taken
to mean the size of a particular subindustry (e.g., high-frequency trading
firms), who are then exposed to the effects of a broad unwinding (such as
the “quant meltdown” of August 2007 or the volatility ETN problems of
February 2018). It can also relate to market capacity. Generally, the idea
encapsulates a number of situations in which the unintentional coordinated
actions of traders create feedback effects.
Exactly how these feedback events unfold depends on the dynamics of the
specific strategy. Baltas classifies strategies into either convergence or
divergence strategies. Convergence strategies, such as value investing, have
a natural target price. This creates a stabilizing effect. Crowding will help
the realization of profits in convergence strategies.
Divergence strategies, such as trend-following, have no anchoring price.
The more these assets go up, the more are bought. This creates a
destabilizing feedback effect. In the short term this will help profits, but it
will eventually lead to a bubble and a subsequent crash.
Baltas postulated that crowdedness could be quantified by looking for
increases in co-movements of assets beyond their beta (an idea first stated
by Cahan and Luo, 2013). For example, if all value stocks started more
strongly moving together, this would be an indicator of a crowding increase
in this factor.
Baltas tested his convergence/divergence idea by using global equities data
from September 2004 to May 2018, the constituents of the S&P GSCI
Commodity Index from January 1999 to May 2018, and 26 currency pairs
from January 2000 to May 2018. For the stocks, he studied the value, size,
momentum, quality (return on assets), and low beta factors. For
commodities he looked at momentum. And for currencies he examined
momentum and value (defined by purchasing power parity). His thesis
about how crowding affects various strategies was broadly confirmed. In
the presence of a natural target, crowding stabilized markets. If there was no
natural target value, crowding was a destabilizing factor.
An important caveat to these results is that the presence of leverage can be
overwhelming regardless of the specific trade dynamics. For example,
LTCM employed an ostensibly mean-reverting strategy, trading the spread
between off-the-run and on-the-run treasuries. They employed huge
leverage, and so did their prime brokers who copied the trade. When the
spread widened, traders were forced to deleverage. This pushed the spread
further against them creating a destabilizing feedback loop. What should
have been a stable trade was turned into an unstable one by excess leverage.
An example of products being caught in a destabilizing feedback loop were
the VIX ETN's in February 2018.
On Friday, February 2, the S&P 500 dropped 2.1% and the VIX rallied
28.5% from 13.47 to 17.31. This was a large move: at the time it was the
34th largest in history. But Monday, February 5, was truly exceptional. The
S&P 500 dropped 4.2%, but the VIX rallied 115.6%. This was the largest
VIX move ever and nearly twice the previous record of 64% (and in that
case the move was only from 11.15 to 18.31). As the VIX was only
implying a daily move of about 1% the S&P 500 return was a genuinely
large event. However, the response of the VIX was well out of line with an
underling move of that size. A linear regression model linking the S&P 500
returns to the VIX returns predicted that a 4.2% drop in the equity index
would correspond to a 12.8% move in the VIX. The actual VIX increase
was nine times the expected amount.
On the next day the VIX had its largest range ever, with a low of 22.42 and
a high of 50.3 (the 70th highest value recorded).
I've seen nonpublic results for volatility fund returns in these few days
ranging from up 25% to down 95%. And some of the losers were large
funds. One operation with assets close to a billion dollars lost 89%. The
median was a loss of about 30%. Some of these volatility funds lost money
by being short index options but the option space losses appear to have been
relatively benign compared to those experienced in the VIX ETNs.
The first volatility ETN was VXX, which was listed in 2009. It was
designed to match the returns of a (hypothetical) 30-day VIX future. In
2010, XIV was launched with the stated aim of delivering the returns of a
short position in the 30-day VIX future. These, and the other similar
products that followed, proved immensely popular. First, they gave
investors who were unable to trade futures a way to speculate on implied
volatility. Second, their returns were relatively predictable. This is due to
the contango effect in the VIX futures. To maintain a 30-day notional
exposure, the manager of VXX must sell front month futures and buy
second month futures. As about 80% of the time the second future trades at
a premium to the first, this means that the VXX rebalancing process usually
must sell low and buy high. Conversely XIV benefits from this effect. As a
result, since its launch until the end of 2017, VXX had decayed from a split-
adjusted price of 107090 to 27.92. XIV had increased from 9.56 to 134.44.
Short volatility products had become more popular in 2016 and 2017
because the realized volatility of the S&P 500 index was very low and the
contango decay was very high. Open interest increased enormously and
resulted in crowding in these products prior to the crash in February 2018.
In VXX alone, short interest increased nearly 1300% from the end of 2013
to the end of 2017.
It is obvious that a 100% rally in the VIX 30-day future would drive XIV to
zero; however, conditions for termination (named acceleration in the
prospectus) didn't even require this. From the prospectus,
“…an Acceleration Event includes any event that adversely affects our
ability to hedge or our rights in connection with the ETNs, including, but
not limited to, if the Intraday Indicative Value is equal to or less than
20% of the prior day's Closing Indicative Value.”
In this eventuality,
“… you will receive a cash payment in an amount (the ‘Accelerated
Redemption Amount’) equal to the Closing Indicative Value on the
Accelerated Valuation Date.”
It is important to stress that XIV is an ETN, not an ETF. An ETF owns the
stocks, bonds, or commodities that make up the portfolio, whereas the ETN
is merely a note that pays the return on the portfolio. Whether and how the
issuers hedge their obligations is up to them. This means that there is no
direct way to create an arbitrage between the ETN and its fair value. This
led to severe dislocation between the fair value of XIV and its price on
Monday afternoon. By the close, the one-month future had risen by 45%,
yet XIV had only dropped by 15%. Directly after the stock market close the
VIX futures spiked to an increase of 100% on the day, which triggered the
acceleration event in XIV.
This after-hours jump was not due to any nefarious manipulation. Around
the close, ETNs rebalance their exposures to the VIX. So, on this day, short
VIX ETNs needed to buy futures to reduce their exposure and long VIX
ETNs needed to buy VIX to increase exposure. This severe buying pressure
created a large imbalance and drove the price higher. Even if the actual
product issuers were hedged with swaps, the counterparties to those
agreements would have needed to hedge.
Lessons
It is never good to be so leveraged that you are forced to exit a trade.
ETNs are more dangerous than ETFs.
It is dangerous to be in a strategy or product that has to make trades
and has no discretion in doing so.
It is even more dangerous when other people know what you need to
do and can push the market against you.
“The day you say you have to do something, you're screwed. Because
you are going to make a bad deal.”
—Billy Beane, general manager of the Oakland As from Moneyball
by Michael Lewis
Trading Strategies
I assign each edge a rating on a scale of one to three with three being the
best. This is a subjective score based on the amount of empirical and
theoretical support, the longevity of the effect, and the volatility of the
associated trade results. I also suggest ways to implement each effect. These
are also subjective.
Confidence Level Three
These strategies are based on effects that have been well documented over
either many markets or time periods. They also have convincing theoretical
bases. These can form the majority of a trader's strategy portfolio.
Implied Volatility Term Structure as a Predictor 
It is well known that
the term structure of commodity futures is a predictor of future returns (see,
for example, Erb and Harvey, 2006; Gorton and Rouwenhorst, 2006;
Gorton et al., 2013). When a commodity has a term structure in contango
(long-dated futures more expensive than short-dated futures), it is profitable
to short the futures. And when futures are in backwardation (long-dated
futures cheaper than short-dated futures), it is profitable to buy futures.
Essentially, the cash price is a better predictor of futures prices than the
futures are. The way convergence happens at expiration is that the futures
move toward the cash price. This is not what is predicted by the rational
expectations hypothesis. Rational expectations say that the futures prices
are unbiased predictors of the future value of the cash price. If this was true,
the basis would have no predictive power.
The effect also exists for VIX futures. Simon and Campasano (2014)
present evidence that the futures can be predicted by looking at the basis.
That is, if the futures are trading over the index, VIX, the futures will tend
to fall, and if the futures are trading below the index, they will tend to rise
(see Chapter Four).
The VIX term structure is usually in contango at low VIX levels and in
backwardation when the VIX is high. This means the term-structure
anomaly is often in conflict with the mean reversion of the VIX. Mean
reversion would encourage you to buy futures at low VIX levels even in the
presence of contango. However, it seems that the term structure is usually a
stronger predictor of futures' returns. The exception would be when the VIX
is at very high levels.
This is probably why the term-structure effect fails to apply to the cross-
section of equity option returns. Vasquez (2017) found that long straddle
portfolios with high contango in the volatility term structure outperformed
straddle portfolios with low contango or backwardation. My guess is that
this is because the entire universe of stocks contained enough examples of
extreme cases for mean reversion to dominate.
This effect has existed in commodity futures for at least as long as we have
had data to look at. This points to it being a mispriced risk premium.
Keynes's (1930) theory of normal backwardation says that producers hold
short futures positions to hedge against price drops. They are prepared to
pay a premium for this insurance. However, you can also argue exactly the
opposite side: consumers take long futures positions in order to hedge
against unexpected future price rises. So, they should pay an insurance
premium. The debate continues.
Trading Strategy
Sell VIX futures or index options when the term structure is in contango.
Buy VIX futures or index options when the term structure is in
backwardation.
Options and Fundamental Factors
It is now well accepted that certain factors predict future stock returns. This
is the idea behind “smart beta.” Value stocks outperform growth stocks.
Small-cap stocks outperform large-cap stocks. Low-beta stocks outperform
high-beta stocks. High-momentum stocks outperform low-momentum
stocks. High-quality stocks outperform low-quality stocks.
Factor investing is not a new idea. Academic studies began with the
development of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) by Treynor (1962),
Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and Mossin (1966), which suggested that
individual stock returns were driven by the broad market. Expanding this
idea, the arbitrage pricing theory (APT) of Ross (1976) modeled stock
returns as driven by many different factors. Unfortunately, the model did
not say what these factors were, but nonetheless APT gave a solid
theoretical underpinning to the idea of factor investing. Once a theoretical
basis was established its implications could be tested and explored. This led
to academics discovering a number of different investing factors or
“anomalies” (so named because they didn't fit into the world of CAPM).
What is less well known is that similar fundamental factors also predict
volatility returns. The number of studies that relate factors to volatility is
much smaller than the literature on smart beta stock returns and
unfortunately researchers haven't studied exactly the same factors as each
other.
I did a study constructing option trading strategies based on P/E (the price-
to-earnings ratio or the current stock price divided by the previous year's
earnings per share), P/B (the price-to-book ratio or the current stock price
divided by the previous year's balance sheet assets), RoA (the return on
assets), RoE (the return on equity or the return on assets after all liabilities
have been settled), market capitalization (the dollar value of the company's
outstanding shares), D/E (the debt-to-equity ratio), and P/CF (the ratio of
the stock price to the previous year's cash flow per share).
The universe of stocks considered was the S&P 100 after excluding
financial companies. Naive application of accounting metrics can give a
misleading picture of financial companies because their business is based
on providing loans. So, their “assets” are actually liabilities, which makes
things confusing. The time period we looked at was from the start of 2000
through to the end of 2012. On the Friday of each week I ranked all the
stocks according to the valuation metrics and then formed an option
portfolio based on this ranking by selling straddles on the top quartile of
stocks and buying straddles on the bottom quartile. Specifically, we traded
at the money straddles in the second monthly expiry. Each trade is done in a
notional size of $10,000. For example, on a $100 stock we would trade one
straddle (each straddle controls 100 shares and each share is worth $100).
Correspondingly, we would trade two straddles on a $50 stock. Under
standard strategy-based margin this sizing choice gives a margin of roughly
$100,000. Portfolio margins would be considerably smaller. This portfolio
is held for a week, then the process is repeated.
P/E Straddle Trading Results
Long options on low P/E stocks and short options on high P/E stocks
Average weekly PL: $294
Best week: $21,111
Worst week: −$8,111
Sharpe ratio: 1.03
P/B Straddle Trading Results
Long options on high P/B stocks and short options on low P/B stocks
Average weekly PL: $48
Best week: $12,094
Worst week: −$7,246
Sharpe ratio: 0.24
Market Capitalization Trading Results
Long options on high-cap stocks and short options on low-cap stocks
Average weekly PL: $355
Best week: $15,532
Worst week: −$23,077
Sharpe ratio: 1.17
P/CF Straddle Trading Results
Long options on low P/CF stocks and short options on high P/CF
stocks
Average weekly PL: $198
Best week: $22,235
Worst week: −$13,637
Sharpe ratio: 0.71
D/E Straddle Trading Results
Long options on high D/E stocks and short options on low D/E stocks
Average weekly PL: $338
Best week: $25,382
Worst week: −$5,292
Sharpe ratio: 1.16
RoE Straddle Trading Results
Long options on high-RoE stocks and short options on low-RoE stocks
Average weekly PL: $361
Best week: $16,922
Worst week: −$19,102
Sharpe ratio: 1.20
RoA Straddle Trading Results
Long options on high-RoA stocks and short options on low-RoA
stocks
Average weekly PL: $220
Best week: $16,539
Worst week: −$21,702
Sharpe ratio: 0.72
The results of the P/B strategy are disappointing, but the others are good.
The results can be summarized simply. Try to be long volatility (or options)
in stocks with these characteristics:
Low P/E
Low P/CF
High market cap
High RoE
High RoA
High D/E
These are classic indicators of “value” stocks apart from the high debt-to-
equity ratio. This is a strange anomaly. High debt to equity (or high
leverage) implies a higher risk of bankruptcy. This would clearly be a high-
volatility event for the stock. However, these are all large companies that
have presumably a very low chance of going bankrupt. Also, high leverage
could imply that the bond market sees value in the company. Disentangling
this conundrum would involve further work. Does the effect hold in smaller
companies? Does it matter how the leverage reached current levels? It could
well be that high leverage resulting from a declining stock price is very
different from high leverage from new bond issuance. Does the
creditworthiness of the debt matter more than the absolute size of the debt?
We can combine our findings to construct a portfolio of options that is long
“value” volatility and short “growth” volatility. To do this we first create a
combined ranking consisting of one-sixth the P/E ranking plus one-sixth the
P/CF ranking and so on. This portfolio has these results:
Portfolio Straddle Trading Results
Average weekly PL: $476
Best week: $18,963
Worst week: −$9,429
Sharpe ratio: 1.44
A similar study was done by Cao et al. (2015). They studied delta-hedged
option returns for US equity options from 1996 to 2012. They found that
long volatility positions profits increase with size, momentum, and
company profitability and decrease with cash holding, analyst forecast
dispersion, and new issuance. These option returns are independent of any
associated underlying predictability.
Their study showed the profitability of portfolios sorted into deciles. The
long-short 10/90 portfolios had monthly returns of the order of 3% to 5%.
(As usual this was calculated on the notional value of the positions. This
makes sense for long positions but not for short positions, where a risk-
based margin number would be a more appropriate denominator.) Sharpe
ratios were between 0.6 and 2.0.
There is a lot more work that could be done along these lines and this
research raises a lot of questions. For example, how independent are these
various measures of value when applied to option trading? Are these results
independent of the results from time series analysis? How do these results
change across industry groups?
As always, the phenomena are more important than the particular
implementation. The best way to trade this is probably to build a factor
portfolio instead of doing single factor sorts. Alternatively, the fundamental
factors could be used to directly forecast volatility. Trading options based
on smart beta is still a new and unexplored idea, but it is probably a more
promising avenue than trying to improve time series–based forecasts.
Generally speaking, there are two views as to why factor returns exist: risk
and investor behavior. The risk school of thought says that the return is
simply reward for bearing some sort of risk. For instance, the equity market
premium is a result of the greater uncertainty associated with owning stocks
as opposed to bonds. This explanation fits well with mainstream economic
theory but sometimes it is a little hard to figure out what exact risk is being
compensated for. As an example of this, volatility is usually associated with
risk, but historically low volatility stocks have outperformed high-volatility
stocks. The behavioral explanation contends that investors systematically
make decisions that cause these anomalies. Again, these arguments seem
more persuasive in some cases than in others. Momentum, for example, has
plausible behavioral roots but in other cases trying to identify a
psychological reason for a factor seems like merely searching for a tidy
explanation, rather than doing real science and following the data. These
explanations are summarized in Table 5.1.
Whether stock smart beta is inefficiency due to behavioral biases or risk
premia is still being debated. And even if that dispute is resolved, the
corresponding volatility effect will probably still be argued over. However,
applying factor analysis to options trading is where I will be spending most
of my future research efforts. It is a very new field so the risk and
uncertainty is high, but I'm sure it is better to deal with this than to try to
scratch another tiny improvement from a time-series method.
TABLE 5.1 Postulated Risk and Behavioral Reasons for the Smart Beta
Factors
Factor
Risk Explanation
Behavioral Explanation
Size
Smaller firms are less able to
weather bad periods and have
less diversified businesses.
Smaller firms are generally
poorly covered by analysts,
which leads to investor
uncertainty.
Value
Cheap stocks tend to be those
of the companies that perform
worst in periods when the
overall economy is suffering.
Investors pay too much
attention to recent stock
performance and overly fear
distressed situations.
Momentu
m
Momentum can lead to bubbles
and crashes.
Underreaction: new
information is not
incorporated into prices
instantaneously.
Quality
It is harder for a high-quality
company to improve. It may
High-quality firms may be
“too good to be true.”
Factor
Risk Explanation
Behavioral Explanation
only have downside.
Post-Earnings Announcement Drift (PEAD)
Post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD) is the tendency for a stock to
continue to move in the direction caused by an earnings surprise. The first
study of this effect was by Beaver (1968), who showed that prices react to
the information content in earnings reports. Ball and Brown (1968) found
evidence that stock returns continue to drift in the same direction as
unexpected earnings. That is, stock prices tend to increase (decrease) after
earnings announcements with positive (negative) earnings surprises. This
wasn't greatly shocking. What was unexpected was that the outperformance
didn't happen abruptly but accumulated over three months. The stock prices
did incorporate the news but did so slowly. In fact, the prices reacted so
slowly that the effect was tradable. This effect is inconsistent with the
concept of efficient markets, where the information contained in an
earnings report should be quickly incorporated in prices, but even one of the
inventors of EMH acknowledges the existence of the anomaly (Fama,
1998).
He wrote in the abstract, “Most long-term return anomalies tend to
disappear with reasonable changes in technique” or when “alternative
approaches are used to measure them” (p. 288), but concluded, “Which
anomalies are above suspicion? The post-earnings announcement…has
survived robustness checks, including extension to more recent data.” He
has also written that PEAD is the only anomaly that is “above suspicion”
(p. 304).
Early research focused on the change in year-over-year earnings. But in the
1980s the consensus of analyst forecasts became available. This enabled the
magnitude of the earnings surprise to be defined as the percentage
difference between the reported EPS and the consensus forecast. Sorting
stocks on the basis of this surprise gave the same result. Further, it seems
that the effect of the earnings report isn't limited to the headline EPS
number. The momentum created by the earnings report is a follow-through
of the initial price move based on the entire report, rather than being due to
any single accounting number.
Bernard and Thomas (1989, 1990) show that the drift is robust to risk
adjustments, cannot be attributed to market frictions, and is not due to
model misspecification, standard risk factors, or flaws in research design.
These conclusions have been verified in many subsequent studies. PEAD
seems more likely to be an inefficiency than a risk premium.
There is some evidence that it is most pronounced in firms that report after
their direct competitors and have earnings that outperform those firms by a
surprising amount (Lee, 2017).
The effect is remarkably robust. Long-short stock portfolios based on the
size of the surprises have been shown to return 9% to 27% annually,
depending on the sorting method (deciles, quartiles, etc.), the definition of
surprise, and whether returns are raw or adjusted with respect to sector,
beta, size, value, and momentum.
Many studies (for example, Foster et al., 1984; Bernard and Thomas, 1989;
Watts, 1978) have shown that the anomalous drift occurs over a period of
months. Almost all of the drift occurs within 9 months for small firms and
within 6 months for large firms. And a disproportionate amount of the
return occurs within 5 days of the earnings announcement (13% for small
companies, 18% for medium companies, and 20% for large companies).
Unfortunately, what is not clear is why this anomaly exists.
A number of behavioral explanations have been proposed. If the effect is
predominantly caused by psychological biases, that would point to PEAD
being an inefficiency rather than a risk premium. Some research (for
example, Daniel et al., 1998) suggests that investor overconfidence causes
investors to be anchored to the pre-earnings price and incorporate the new
information only slowly.
Another possibility is that investors don't have the time and resources to
process the new information quickly. DellaVigna and Pollet (2009)
postulate that this effect is even more pronounced on Fridays when investor
attention is at its lowest. Although this seems like a reach or a post-hoc
justification of data mining, a long-short portfolio of stocks announcing on
Friday did outperform a portfolio based on stocks that announced on other
days (9.76% over the subsequent 75 trading days versus 5.14%). Hirshleifer
et al. (2009) also reason that information processing capacity is a reason for
the anomaly. They show that a hedged portfolio constructed from stocks
that announce on days with few other releases underperform a portfolio of
stocks that announce on busy days (2.81% quarterly compared to 5.37%).
Bartov et al. (2000) show that firms with high institutional ownership have
lower PEAD. They suggest that this is because these supposedly more
sophisticated investors are faster to absorb the new information. Similarly,
Taylor (2011) shows that the anomaly is largest for stocks where retail
traders trade against the direction of the initial price spike. Further, he also
finds a positive correlation between PEAD size and transaction costs, which
presumably are proportionally a lower deterrent to larger investors due to
their more sophisticated execution methods and access to a wider range of
liquidity sources.
There are also explanations that ascribe PEAD to a risk factor. For this to be
true firms with positive (negative) earnings surprises must become riskier
(less risky) after the release. It is well accepted in classical finance that
stocks with higher returns are riskier, and if we are looking for a rational
expectation explanation we need to accept this as true. The harder thing to
explain is why stocks become riskier immediately after the earnings report
is published. Despite attempts to do this (Bernard and Thomas, 1989) no
convincing supporting evidence has been discovered.
In summary, the available evidence suggests that PEAD is an inefficiency,
albeit a very persistent one.
Trading Strategy
Because implied volatility tends to be comparatively cheap after earnings
releases (although this isn't enough to profit from delta-neutral volatility
strategies; see Chung and Lewis, 2017), this is an effect that can be traded
from the long side. For stocks with positive earnings surprises, being long a
short-dated 40 delta/10 delta call spread is usually a cheap way to leverage
PEAD. For bearish positions a 50 delta/20 delta put spread achieves the
same effect while also selling one of the most expensive parts of the
implied volatility curve.
An alternative approach is to sell a covered call or put. Although the
variance premium being collected won't be significant, this method is
guaranteed to profit if any drift occurs at all.
Confidence Level Two
These strategies are not as promising as those of level three. They may be
lacking in empirical evidence or theoretical justification. Or they could
provide more limited opportunities in some way. Nonetheless, a trader can
be reasonably confident when using these strategies.
Trading Equity Options over Earnings
Announcements
The front-expiration implied volatility will almost always rise significantly
in the weeks before a company's earnings release. After the release the
implied volatility will collapse. This effect has been known since at least
1979 (Patell and Wolfson, 1979).
Buying options before the release is profitable (Chung and Lewis, 2017).
And even in cases when the options do not increase in price, the rise in
implied volatility gives a very cheap long position where the vega profits
negate most of the time decay.
I conducted a test of this effect in Sinclair (2013). Using data for 73 large
cap stocks from Q1 2005 to Q3 2010, a strategy of buying front expiration,
ATM straddles 10 trading days before the earnings release had these results:
Forty-three percent of trades were profitable.
Win size/loss size was 1.70.
Results were skewed positively (skewness of 5.4) and fat-tailed
(excess kurtosis of 76.6).
Putting a $10,000 notional size bet on each trade led to the cumulative P/L
curve of Figure 5.1.
FIGURE 5.1 Results of the long straddle strategy.
A far more comprehensive study was completed by Gao et al. (2017). They
bought delta-neutral straddles three days before the earnings announcement.
In the period 1996 through 2013, selling a day before the release gave a
return of 1.9%, selling on the release day returned 2.60%, and holding for a
day after earnings had a return of 1.98%. (All of these returns were
calculated using mid-market prices.) These time periods are not entirely
independent. Some companies on the earnings date report before the open
and some after the close. So the second group includes both pre- and post-
report companies. Notably, holding the straddle for a full day after earnings
had a lower return than selling on the release date. This indicates that the
return on the straddle is negative after earnings are announced.
The authors don't present a separate study for the post-earnings period. But
using my smaller sample, I directly tested a short volatility strategy. As
close as possible before earnings, sell the front straddle and hope that the
collapse in implied volatility compensates for the movement of the
underlying.
The results are as follows:
Sixty-four percent of trades were profitable.
Win size/loss size was 0.69.
Results were skewed negatively (skewness of negative 5.4) and fat-
tailed (excess kurtosis of 12.2).
FIGURE 5.2 Results of the short straddle strategy.
Putting a $10,000 notional size bet on each trade led to the P/L curve of
Figure 5.2.
There haven't been many published studies of this effect and the sample
size of my study is very small, so it is dangerous to draw any conclusions
about the profitability of subcategories of stocks. However, it seems that
there is a small tendency for this strategy to fare poorly with high PE
stocks. Studies have shown that such growth and value stocks do react to
earnings differently and this effect might be related (He et al., 2010).
However, the difference is so weak it can probably be ignored.
There was no significant relationship was between profitability of the
option strategies and industry or company size. However, there is a link
between the dispersion of analyst estimates (defined as high estimate–low
estimate)/average estimate) and profitability. Trading the effect on stocks
with high dispersion is more profitable. High dispersion literally means that
the analysts disagree about the unreleased earnings, a situation of
uncertainty. The profitability of option trades with edge, either from the
long or short side, is generally tied to uncertainty.
Other signifiers of uncertainty are with higher historical volatilities, larger
historical earnings surprises, and more volatile earnings surprises. The
strategies also perform better in these cases. Gao et al. (2017) also found
that the strategy was more profitable in stocks that were covered by fewer
analysts.
There are likely two reasons for this. High uncertainty leads to a greater
increase in implied volatility, so we will be selling the options at a good
price. But we also benefit from the uncertainty in the actual move of the
stock price that happens due to the release. Stocks move when news comes
out. News is something contrary to expectations. Uncertainty implies no
coherent expectations. There can be no “surprise” if no one agrees on what
to expect.
The fact that pre-earnings long straddles are profitable makes it unlikely
that this effect is due to a risk premium. Gao et al. (2017) postulate that one
reason for the underestimation of uncertainty is the difficulty of extracting a
signal from sparse, noisy past information. This seems plausible.
Separating the effect into the pre-earnings implied volatility increase and
the post-earnings implied volatility collapse and stock price adjustment
makes finding possible explanations easier. The pre-earnings situation
seems to be driven by similar factors to PEAD. That is, investors can
process the information only from previous earnings results slowly and
inefficiently. This is consistent with the link to analyst coverage and
estimate dispersion. However, unlike the case of PEAD, there have been no
further studies to test this idea. The profitability of the post-earnings
straddle sales could be due to ambiguity aversion. But, again, this has not
been independently verified or studied.
The short side of this strategy hasn't done well recently (2016–2018). I
think this is probably a temporary, variance-driven period of poor
performance. Usually, selling options before situations of uncertainty is a
good trade. I still think that is the case here. As any casino knows,
sometimes the customers have to win. Otherwise they won't come back.
Trading Strategy
On the long side, buy the shortest-dated straddles that span the earnings
date. Or, if the smile is relatively flat, strangles are a higher risk/higher
reward play.
On the short side, sell the shortest-dated straddles that span the earnings
date. After the earnings release, either buy the straddle back (generally
preferable if the trade is a winner), or, if the stock has a big move, hedge the
losing leg as 100 delta. Over-hedging one side of the trade usually works
due to PEAD, and the short-dated options not giving the stock enough time
to reverse. Stocks in which the earnings number is outside of the most
extreme estimates are most likely to not reverse.
The Overnight Effect
The index variance premium is realized overnight. Muravyev and Ni (2018)
wrote a paper that studies this. Although it is very well known that returns
to index options are negative (about −0.7% a day in terms of actual
premium decay for the S&P), it turns out that all of this comes from
overnight decay. Specifically, delta-hedged option returns are −1%
overnight, and intraday returns are positive at 0.3% per day. The anomaly
holds for options of all maturities and moneyness and also equity options.
This can be partially explained by the fact that overnight returns are less
volatile than intraday returns (since 2000 the S&P has had an annualized
volatility of 10.4% overnight and 15.9% during the day). The effect is also
consistent with the variance premium being a mispriced risk premium. The
risk is much higher during the untraded (or illiquid) hours. We get paid for
taking the risk of having a bet that we can't get out of or hedge if it goes
against us.
Trading Strategy
Being short options overnight and flattening during the day is impractical
due to transaction costs. Instead the best way to profit from this is to sell
very short-term options that include as many overnight periods as possible.
For example, instead of selling daily options on the morning of expiration,
sell them the night before.
FOMC and Volatility
The most important news for an equity is the earnings release. The
equivalent for the broad market is the monetary policy decision of the
Federal Reserve Open Market Committee (FOMC). And, just as company
earnings releases lead to predictable pre-event price drift and post-event
volatility collapse, analogous phenomena occur in the broad market around
the FOMC announcements.
In “When No News Is Good News—The Decrease in Investor Fear after
FOMC Announcements” Fernandez-Perez et al. (2017) show that the VIX
and VIX-Futures drop significantly after the announcements of the meeting.
From their abstract, “We find that the VIX and the VIX futures start to
decline immediately after the FOMC announcement, and this decline
persists for about 45 minutes after the announcement. The VIX declines by
about 3% on announcement days, whereas the nearest term VIX futures
contract declines about 1.4% around the announcement.”
Similar results have been obtained by others. Nikkinen and Sahlström
(2004) showed that the VIX index declined after FOMC announcements,
CPI and PPI releases, and the Non-farm Payroll report. Chen and Clements
(2007) and Vähämaa and Äijö (2011) replicated the results for the VIX.
Gospodinov and Jamali (2012) found both implied and realized volatility
dropped after the release and any initial market reaction. Fuss et al. (2011)
showed that German equity implied volatility decreased after the release of
GDP, CPI, and PPI data, and Shaikh and Padhi (2013) confirmed the effect
in the Indian market.
The stock earning's related volatility collapse has to be played with options.
Implied volatility will reliably collapse following the news release, but this
will generally be partially offset by an increase in realized volatility.
Trading the FOMC-related implied volatility collapse with VIX futures
avoids this problem. We can trade an implied effect with an implied
contract and have no realized volatility exposure.
Why does implied volatility collapse? Ederington and Lee (1996) argued
that the release of prescheduled news can be viewed as the resolution of
uncertainty, and an announcement reduces the degree of future uncertainty,
and hence implied volatility, left in the market.
This effect can be combined with a directional anomaly. Equity market
returns have been about 30 times larger on announcement days than on
normal days. Surprisingly most of these excess returns occur before the
announcement (Lucca and Moench, 2011). Stocks tend to rally strongly in
the day and a half before the announcement.
It is difficult to think of a convincing risk-based reason for these returns.
Although investors holding stocks over the announcement period are
exposed to jump risk, the excess return occurs mainly before the
announcement. So, it is possible to sell the stocks before the news and earn
the return without taking this risk. Further, realized volatility is lower than
usual before the release. Market risk is actually lower than normal in the
period when the excess returns are generated.
It seems more likely that this is a market-wide version of the pre-earnings
drift seen in individual equities. As in that case, investors buy stocks
because of an attention-grabbing event (see Barber and Odean, 2008;
Lamont and Frazzini, 2007).
Trading Strategy
Buy S&P 500 futures two days before the FOMC release. Sell these before
the announcement and at the same time sell VIX futures. Cover the short
VIX futures 45 minutes after the announcement.
The Weekend Effect
Equity options decay more than expected over weekends. The variance
premium is probably the most important effect in option trading. On
average options are overpriced. But the premium doesn't accrue
consistently: some periods are better than others. In particular, options lose
more value over weekends than over other equivalent time periods.
Market-makers have been arguing about this for a long time. One group
said it was smart to sell options to “collect theta.” The other side said that
idea was stupid because an edge could only exist when one side had an
information disadvantage. Everyone had a calendar, so why would there be
an edge purely due to the passing of time? The market would price the risk
of holding options over the weekend correctly.
The “smarter” traders were in the second group. They were wrong. The
options market does not correctly price weekend decay. It is profitable to
sell options over the weekend.
Christopher Jones and Joshua Shemesh studied this issue (2017). They
looked at the returns of long option portfolios on US equities from 1996 to
2007 and found the average return over the weekend was negative (0.62%)
while the returns for all other days were slightly positive (0.18% a day).
Having established that weekend returns are significantly lower than those
of other days, the authors went on to study other holidays, including long
weekends. Their hypothesis was the effect was directly related to non-
trading, which would imply lower returns would also be associated with
other holidays, and the effect would be stronger over long weekends. This
all seems to be true: returns on equity options are negative whenever the
market is closed. It seems the effect exists because market-makers are not
correctly adjusting the implied volatilities on Fridays to account for the
upcoming weekend.
This effect is significant. There is no general edge in selling many stock
options (unlike index options, when being short is normally the way to
lean), so this is a totally new effect, rather than a matter of just timing an
entry. Also, the effect was consistent across years and was robust with
respect to exactly how the portfolios were constructed.
It seems likely that the same effect exists with index, bond, and commodity
options, but this is untested.
Trading Strategy
On a Friday, sell the options that expire the next Monday. In general, time
any short-volatility strategies to include as many non-trading periods as
possible.
Volatility of Volatility Risk Premia
Options on products with high volatility of volatility tend to be overpriced.
This is true both in the cross-section—options on stocks with high volatility
of volatility are overpriced relative to options on stocks with low volatility
of volatility—and in the time series—the VIX tends to decline (rise) after
very high (low) values of the VVIX index.
The first empirical study of this effect was done by Ruan (2017). Using data
on US equity options from 1996 to 2016, he found that ranking stocks by
the volatility of their implied ATM volatility showed that there was a strong
and consistent negative relationship between delta-neutral long option
positions and volatility of volatility.
A similar study was independently carried out by Cao et al. (2018), who
also studied US equity options. Again, using data from 1996 to 2016, they
found that the delta-hedged returns of long option positions decreased in
uncertainty of volatility. This was true whether they used implied volatility,
time series volatility from daily returns (specifically EGARCH), or high-
frequency volatility. Their results were robust with respect to idiosyncratic
volatility, jumps, term structure, the implied–realized spread, liquidity,
analyst coverage, and the Fama-French factors. They also showed that the
effect was largely driven by volatility of positive volatility moves, and that
volatility of negative volatility moves had a negligible effect.
These studies leave little room to interpret this effect as anything other than
a separate volatility of volatility premium. Ruan (2017) just states,
“Investors indeed dislike uncertainty about volatility of individual stocks,
so that they are willing to pay a high premium to hold options with high
VOV [sic],” with no supporting argument. Cao et al. (2018) speculates that
market-makers were charging a higher premium for options with high
uncertainty of volatility, because those were more difficult to hedge. This
might be a partial reason, but it doesn't take into account the time-series
result that shows high volatility of volatility predicts a fall in subsequent
implied volatility. This effect is independent of hedging issues.
The relationship between high VVIX (the model-free implied volatility
derived from VIX options) and subsequent lower VIX levels is very strong.
Using VVIX data from 2007 through 2018, I calculated the rolling 1-year
90th percentile of VVIX. Going forward, if the VVIX crossed above this
level, I “sold” the VIX and “held” until VVIX reached its rolling 1-year
median. This produced 31 hypothetical trades. The total “profit” was 108
points. Twenty-seven trades were winners. “Buying” the 10th percentile
was also “profitable,” making 62 points over 35 trades, 26 of which were
winners. Clearly this particular idea cannot be implemented because the
VIX is not a traded product, but I've included it to show that extreme VVIX
is a strong predictor of the VIX (however, if we traded VIX futures, the idea
is still profitable). No optimization was attempted. The idea also works if
we use different look-back periods or moving averages instead of medians.
This effect has been studied (far more rigorously) by others. Huang et al.
(2018) showed that volatility of volatility significantly and negatively
predicts delta-hedged long option payoffs. Park (2015) showed that high
levels of VVIX raised the prices of S&P 500 puts and VIX calls and
lowered their subsequent returns over the next three to four weeks (a similar
time period to the average holding period in my simple test). He speculates
that the effect is caused by either “risk premiums for a time-varying crash
risk factor or uncertainty premiums for a time-varying uncertain belief in
volatility.” Both of these are plausible but at this point there is no
independent evidence for these causes.
Trading Strategy
When VVIX reaches extremely high (low) levels either sell (buy) VIX
futures or sell (buy), and dynamically hedge, S&P 500 straddles.
Confidence Level One
The confidence-level-three strategies should form the core of a trading
operation. But the ideas that I think are true but only give a confidence
rating of one are also important. Trades based on market inefficiencies will
be most profitable when the evidence for them is still underwhelming.
Many inefficiencies will not survive long enough to reach my level three.
So, although I wouldn't allocate a great deal of my portfolio to these ideas,
they can still be very profitable.
They also offer a way to deal with the desire to gamble. Many traders
overtrade and need to always be involved in the market. Instead of denying
this tendency, it is better to accept it and learn to accommodate this need by
tinkering with small trades that still have expected edge. Level-one trades
are perfect for this. This is like the idea of a “cheat meal” when dieting.
Instead of trying to religiously stick to a diet it is better to accept that
temptation exists and schedule regular times when you can eat garbage.
Dieting increases cravings (Massey and Hill, 2012). There is solid
psychological research that shows that dieters who include cheats do better
than those who don't (do Vale et al., 2016). I expect that active traders are
tempted to over-trade and that cheating helps them as well.
Remember that cheats, whether in dieting or in trading, need to be kept
small. If every meal is a cheat meal, you aren't on a diet. You will just get
fat. And if every trade is a speculative one, you aren't a disciplined trader.
You will just lose money.
Earnings-Induced Reversals
Earnings-induced reversals are the tendency of stocks that have drifted a lot
before their earnings announcement to reverse the pre-announcement drift
when the news breaks. This effect was first studied by So and Wang (2014).
Using US equity data from 1996 through 2011, they created a trading
strategy that shorted stocks with high market–adjusted returns in the period
from four days before earnings through two days before earnings and went
long those stocks with the worst pre-earnings market adjusted returns. (This
seemingly odd time period was so that they could trade on the close of the
day before earnings without using the trade price when choosing the
portfolio. Obviously, a trader using intra-day data could use a different time
period without “cheating.”) Liquidating the portfolio on the close after
earnings they found this portfolio made 145 bps compared to the 22 bps
earned by a similarly constructed portfolio during non-earnings periods.
A similar study was done by Jansen and Nikiforov (2016). Simply fading
stocks with large percentage moves in the week before earnings would have
averaged 1.3% over 2-day periods.
Jansen and Nikiforov (2016) speculate that the effect is due to investor
overreaction in the pre-earnings period. Individual investors fear that they
are missing information and trade in the direction of price changes, fueling
the trend. After the announcement, the fear of being ignorant of information
goes away and the pre-earning return is seen as excessive. This might be
true. A similar effect is seen in sports gambling, when “steam chasers” bet
on teams that have shortening odds on the suspicion that smart money is
driving the price changes. But much more would need to be done before I
am confident that this is an inefficiency. Currently the statistics are
inarguable, but the reasons for them are close to a mystery.
Trading Strategy
I'm more confident in the collapse of implied volatility when earnings are
released than I am of this reversal effect. So, when I trade both of these
effects together I sell a straddle but shade the delta if I want to also bet on
the reversal.
Pre-Earnings Announcement Drift
Pre-earnings announcement drift is the tendency of stocks to move in the
direction of any earnings-related abnormal returns experienced by stocks in
the same industry that reported earlier. This effect was first studied by
Ramnath (2002), who investigated how information from the very first
earnings announcer within each industry (the 30 industries identified by
Fama and French, 1997) affects the prices of later announcers. He found
that the earnings information for the earliest announcing firm within an
industry predicts both the earnings surprise and the returns of other firms
within the industry.
This effect was later confirmed by Easton et al. (2010), who used not just
the first reporter in each industry but also the effect of all the earlier
announcing peers.
The drift begins as the results from the early announcers are reported and
continues up until the later announcing stock releases its earnings. The
effect is above the industry beta, which measures the normal relationship
between returns. If earlier reporting stocks all rally, we would expect later
reporting stocks to also rally just due to industry exposure. Pre-
announcement drift is a separate effect.
Pre-earnings anomalies have not been studied nearly as much as post-
earnings anomalies, so the evidence is comparatively weak, and it is not
clear what causes the drift. As with PEAD, the pre-earnings move is
plausibly due to underreaction to new information: here the earnings of the
related companies. It could be that investor overconfidence causes them to
be anchored to the pre-earnings price and incorporate the new information
only slowly. A lot more study would be needed before we could be
confident in this explanation. But there is no obvious risk factor that could
explain the drift, so I would say, tentatively, that this is a market
inefficiency.
Trading Strategy
As we also expect implied volatility to increase in the time leading to the
earnings release, any long volatility directional strategy would be
appropriate. For example, if we expect a rally, we could buy a call or call
spread. My preference is for a 50 delta/20 delta, 1-month call spread. But
tastes vary.
Conclusion
The idea that trading edges disappear as soon as they become public is an
oversimplification. Markets vary in their ability to absorb new volume. A
published edge will persist longer in the S&P 500 than in soybeans. Further,
crowding affects different strategies in different ways. And risk premia will
survive longer than inefficiencies.
But unless noted, the edges listed in this chapter have been robust until now.
It is quite possible that their size will diminish and even disappear but we
have a fairly basic choice: go with the effect that has worked in the past and
hope it continues or choose to do the thing that would have lost money in
the past. Your choice.
Summary
It is worthwhile to search SSRN periodically to find new trading ideas.
Many volatility trading edges involve selling options in situations of
uncertainty. This can be viewed as an extra, situational variance
premium.
Because of the variance premium, long-volatility strategies are
unlikely to have as much edge as those that involve selling options.
...