
Contents
Prologue
Chapter 1: Elective Affinities
Chapter 2: Dog Years
Chapter 3: A Sort of Life
Chapter 4: A Sentimental Education
Chapter 5: The Mandarins
Chapter 6: Knowledge of the Higher Worlds
Chapter 7: In the Penal Colony
Chapter 8: Stop-Time
Chapter 9: Transformer
Chapter 10: Easy Travel to Other Planets
Chapter 11: Force of Circumstance
Chapter 12: A Severed Head
Chapter 13: Civilization and Its Discontents
Chapter 14: Laughter in The Dark
Chapter 15: The Snows of Yesteryear
Chapter 16: The Great Pretender
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Index
...
More Praise for My Life as a Quant
“An honest account of the experience of going from an environment of
Nobel Prize winners and pure thought to one of money, money, money.
Derman gives us unique insight into the motivations of academia, the
pressure to cast off worldly success in favor of matters more cerebral,
then the mixed feelings during his descent into a world where the bottom
line is P&L, and finally his success at bringing his own style of science
into investment banking.”
—Paul Wilmottt, mathematician, author, and fund manager
“A fascinating personal account of one man’s journey through several of
the leading institutions of our time. Written by perhaps the leading
practitioner 
of 
his 
generation, 
this 
insightful 
narrative 
explores 
the
disparate cultures of physics, finance, and their powerful fusion known as
phynance. 
This 
book 
is 
a 
must-read 
for 
aspiring 
quants, 
financial
historians, and armchair sociologists interested in the machinations of
both academia and industry.”
—Peter Carr, Head of Quantitative Research, Bloomberg, and Director,
Masters in Math Finance, NYU
...
...
Copyright © 2004 by Emanuel Derman. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either
the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-
646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher
for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011,
fax 201-748-6008.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author
have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness
of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties
of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be
created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The
advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your
situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither
the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services, or technical
support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the United
States at 800-762-2974, outside the United States at 317-572-3993 or fax
317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some
content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
For more information about Wiley products, visit our Web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Derman, Emanuel.
My life as a quant : reflections on physics and finance / Emanuel Derman.
p. cm.
Includes biographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-471-39420-4 (cloth)
ISBN 978-0-470-19273-3 (paper)
1. Derman, Emanuel 2. Investment advisors—Biography. 3. Physicists—
Biography. 4. Options (Finance) 5. Quantum theory. 6. Mathematical
physics. I. Title.
HG4621.D47 2004
332.6’092—dc22
2004007664
...
To the Memory of My Parents
...
Ambition is a state of permanent dissatisfaction with the present.
...
Prologue
The Two Cultures
Physics and finance
What quants do
The Black-Scholes model
Quants and traders
Pure thought and beautiful mathematics can divine the laws of physics
Can they do the same for finance?
MODELING THE WORLD
If mathematics is the Queen of Sciences, as the great mathematician Karl
Friedrich Gauss christened it in the nineteenth century, then physics is king.
From the mid-seventeenth century to the end of the nineteenth, Newton’s
Law of Gravitation, his three Laws of Motion, and his differential calculus
described with apparent perfection the mechanical motion of objects in our
world and the solar system.
In 1864, two hundred years after Newton, the Scottish physicist James
Clerk Maxwell formulated the compact and elegant differential equations
that described with similarly astounding precision the propagation of light,
X-rays, and radio waves. Maxwell’s equations showed that electricity and
magnetism, formerly separate phenomena, were part of the same unified
electromagnetic field.
We cannot simply look at the world around us and deduce Newton’s Laws
or Maxwell’s equations. Data on its own does not speak. These equations
were triumphs of the mind, abstracted from the world in some miraculous
confluence of hard thinking and deep intuition. Their success confirmed
that pure thought and beautiful mathematics have the power to discover the
most profound laws of the universe.
At the start of the twentieth century, the pace accelerated. Einstein,
pondering the conflicts between the Newtonian and Maxwellian views of
the 
world, 
proposed 
his 
Theory 
of 
Special 
Relativity 
that 
amended
Newton’s mechanics and made them consistent with Maxwell’s equations.
Fifteen years later Einstein trumped Newton again with his proposal of the
General Theory; it corrected the Law of Gravitation and described gravity
as a large-scale wave in space and time. At almost the same time, Bohr,
Schrödinger, and Heisenberg, with help from the ever-prodigious Einstein,
developed the quantum mechanical theory of the small-scale behavior of
molecules, atoms, and subatomic particles.
It was Einstein who perfected this mental approach to discovering the
laws 
of 
the 
universe. 
His 
method 
wasn’t 
based 
on 
observation 
or
empiricism; he tried to perceive and then enunciate the very principles that
constrained the way things should work. In a 1918 speech on the principles
of research given in honor of Max Planck, the discoverer of the quantum,
Einstein captured the magus-like appeal of trying to see through a glass,
darkly, when he said: “There is no logical path to these laws; only intuition,
resting on a sympathetic understanding of experience, can reach them.”
What is the purpose behind the search for scientific laws, in any field?
Clearly, it’s divination—foretelling the future, and controlling it. Most of
the modern technologies we enjoy, rely on, detest, or fear—cell phones,
electric power grids, CAT scans, and nuclear weapons, for example—have
been 
developed 
by 
using 
the 
basic 
principles 
of 
quantum 
mechanics,
electromagnetic theory, and relativity, all of which were discovered by
cerebration. The classic tools of twentieth-century divination have indeed
been those of physics. More recently, physicists have begun to employ the
same tools in finance.
For the past twenty years, throughout Wall Street and the City of London, in
most major and many minor financial institutions, small groups of ex-
physicists and applied mathematicians have tried to apply their skills to
securities 
markets. 
Formerly 
called 
“rocket 
scientists” 
by 
those 
who
mistakenly thought that rocketry was the most advanced branch of science,
they are now commonly called “quants.”
Quants and their cohorts practice “financial engineering”—an awkward
neologism coined to describe the jumble of activities that would better be
termed quantitative finance. The subject is an interdisciplinary mix of
physics-inspired models, mathematical techniques, and computer science,
all aimed at the valuation of financial securities. The best quantitative
finance brings real insight into the relation between value and uncertainty,
and it approaches the quality of real science; the worst is a pseudoscientific
hodgepodge of complex mathematics used with obscure justification.
Until recently, financial engineering wasn’t really a subject at all—when I
entered the field in 1985, it didn’t have a name and was something one
learned on the job at an investment bank. Now you can get a master’s
degree in the subject at scores of institutions—the Courant Institute at New
York 
University, 
the 
University 
of 
Michigan 
at 
Ann 
Arbor, 
and 
the
University of Oregon in Eugene, to name a few. Since July 2003 I have
been 
a 
professor 
of 
the 
subject 
at 
Columbia 
University. 
Engineering
schools, 
statistics 
and 
mathematics 
departments, 
and 
business 
schools
organize 
these 
one- 
to 
two-year 
programs; 
they 
promise 
to 
transform
students, in exchange for about $30,000 per year, into employable financial
engineers. So popular are these degrees that some universities run several
similar programs in distinct departments.
Nowadays, managers on Wall Street receive daily calls and emailed
résumés 
from 
PhDs 
seeking 
jobs 
in 
finance. 
Physics 
journals 
publish
increasing numbers of papers on financial economics. And increasingly,
physicists and mathematicians working on the quantitative side of banking
have been joined by PhDs and faculty members from finance departments
and business schools. Two of the best graduate finance departments in the
country, the Sloan School at MIT and the Haas School of the University of
California at Berkeley, have each lost several of their best young finance
faculty to the banking and trading worlds.
Part of the reason for the influx of physicists to other fields was the 1970s
collapse of their traditional job market: academia. Thirty years earlier
during World War II, the invention of radar and the construction of the
atomic bomb confirmed the usefulness of physics to postwar governments.
Shocked by the successful voyage of Sputnik, the Departments of Defense
and Energy began to fund pure research more copiously, and physicists
seeking grants to do such research weren’t above playing up the spin-off
benefits of their work. Physics departments in the 1960s grew and academic
posts multiplied. Inspired by the subject and supported by scholarships, a
wave of ardent graduate students entered the field.
The good times didn’t last. By the end of the Vietnam War a deteriorating
economy and a public revulsion with science in the service of war put a
large dent in research funds. During the 1970s and 1980s, many theoretical
physicists who had once hoped to devote their lives to fundamental research
were forced to become migratory laborers if they wanted to remain in
academia, taking temporary short-term positions in universities and national
laboratories wherever they became available. Many of us eventually gave
up the struggle to find even a low-paying semipermanent academic job and
turned to other areas. We sought physics-related jobs in a variety of fields—
in energy research or telecommunications, for example. Former colleagues
of mine began to work on alternate power sources at the Solar Energy
Research Institute in Golden, Colorado, or on the mathematics of oil
retrieval at Schlumberger in Ridgefield, Connecticut. Others helped develop
advanced switching systems at AT&T’s Bell Laboratories in New Jersey.
Coincidentally, some of the same forces that compelled physicists to
move out of academia made Wall Street begin to embrace them. The Arab
oil embargo of 1973 caused fuel prices to soar and interest rates to climb;
soon the fear of inflation propelled gold prices above $800 an ounce.
Suddenly, financial markets seemed to become more volatile. Bonds, a
traditionally conservative investment, were suddenly seen as much riskier
than anyone had imagined. The old rules of thumb no longer applied.
Understanding the motion of interest rates and stock prices became more
important 
than 
ever 
for 
financial 
institutions. 
Risk 
management 
and
hedging were the new imperative and, in the face of so much freshly
perceived risk, complex new financial products that provided protection
from change proliferated.
How could one describe and understand the movement of prices? Physics
has always been concerned with dynamics, the way things change with
time. It was the tried-and-true exemplar of successful theories and models.
And 
physicists 
and 
engineers 
were 
jacks-of-all-trades, 
simultaneously
skilled mathematicians, modelers, and computer programmers who prided
themselves on their ability to adapt to new fields and put their knowledge
into practice. Wall Street began to beckon to them. In the 1980s, so many
physicists flocked to investment banks that one head-hunter I know referred
to them as “POWs”—physicists on Wall Street.
THE MOST SUCCESSFUL
THEORY
What is it that physicists do on Wall Street? Mostly, they build models to
determine the value of securities. Buried in investment banks, at hedge
funds, or at financial software companies such as Bloomberg or SunGard,
they tinker with old models and develop new ones. And by far the most
famous and ubiquitous model in the entire financial world is the Black-
Scholes options pricing model. Steve Ross, a famous financial economist,
options theorist, and now a chaired professor at MIT, wrote in the Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics that “. . . options pricing theory is the most
successful theory not only in finance, but in all of economics.”
The Black-Scholes model allows us to determine the fair value of a stock
option. Stocks are commonplace securities, bought and sold daily, but a call
option on a stock is much more arcane. If you own a one-year call option on
IBM, for example, you have the right to buy one share of IBM one year
from today at a predetermined price: say, $100. The value of the option on
that future date when it expires will depend on the prevailing value of a
share of IBM. If, for example, a share sells for $105 on that day, the option
will be worth exactly $5; if a share sells for less than $100, the option will
be worth nothing. In a sense, the option is a bet that the stock price will rise.
An option is a special case of a more general derivative security, a
contract whose value is derived from the value of some other simpler
underlying security on which it “rests.” A derivative security’s payoff at
expiration is specified in a contract via a mathematical formula that relates
the payoff to the future value of the underlying security. The formula can be
simple, as is the case with the stock option just described, whose payoff is
the amount by which the final stock price exceeds the value of $100, or it
can be extremely complicated, with a payoff that depends on the prices of
several underlying securities through detailed mathematical expressions.
During the past twenty years derivative securities have become widely used
in the trading of currencies, commodities, bonds, stocks, mortagages, credit,
and power.
Derivatives are more intricate than unvarnished stocks or bonds. Then
why do they exist? Because derivatives allow clients such as investment
banks, money managers, corporations, investors, and speculators to tailor
and fine-tune the risk they want to assume or avoid. An investor who
simply buys a share of IBM takes on all the risk of owning it; its value
waxes and wanes in direct proportion to IBM’s share price. In contrast, an
IBM call option provides potentially unlimited gain (as the share price rises
above $100) but only limited loss (you lose nothing but the cost of the
option as the stock price drops below $100). This asymmetry between
upside gain and downside loss is the defining characteristic of derivatives.
You can buy or sell options retail on specialized options exchanges, or
you can trade them with wholesalers, that is, the dealers. Options dealers
“make markets” in options; they accomodate clients by buying options from
those who want to sell them and selling options to those who want to
acquire them. How, then, do dealers handle the risk they are forced to
assume?
Dealers are analogous to insurance companies, who are also in the
business of managing risk. Just as Allstate must allow for the possibility
that your house will burn down after they sell you an insurance contract, so
an options dealer must take a chance of a rise in IBM’s stock price when he
or she sells you a call option on IBM. Neither Allstate nor the options
dealer wants to go broke if the insured-against scenario comes to pass.
Because neither Allstate nor the dealer can foretell the future, they both
charge a premium for taking on the risks that their clients want to avoid.
Allstate’s risk strategy is to charge each client a premium such that the
total sum they receive exceeds the estimated claims they will be obliged to
pay for future conflagrations. An option dealer’s risk strategy is different. In
an ideal world, he or she would simply offset the risk that IBM’s price will
rise by buying an IBM option similar to the one he or she sold, from
someone else and at a cheaper price, thereby making a profit. Unfortunately,
this is rarely possible. So instead, the dealer manufactures a similar option.
This is where the Black-Scholes model enters the picture.
The 
Black-Scholes 
model 
tells 
us, 
almost 
miraculously, 
how 
to
manufacture an option out of the underlying stock and provides an estimate
of how much it costs us to do so. According to Black and Scholes, making
options is a lot like making fruit salad, and stock is a little like fruit.
Suppose you want to sell a simple fruit salad of apples and oranges. What
should you charge for a one-pound can? Rationally, you should look at the
market price of the raw fruit and the cost of canning and distribution, and
then figure out the total cost of manufacturing the hybrid mixture from its
simpler ingredients.
In 1973, Black and Scholes showed that you can manufacture an IBM
option by mixing together some shares of IBM stock and cash, much as you
can create the fruit salad by mixing together apples and oranges. Of course,
options synthesis is somewhat more complex than making fruit salad,
otherwise someone would have discovered it earlier. Whereas a fruit salad’s
proportions stay fixed over time (50 percent oranges and 50 percent apples,
for example), an option’s proportions must continually change. Options
require constant adjustments to the amount of stock and cash in the mixture
as the stock price changes. In fruit salad terms, you might start with 50
percent apples and 50 percent oranges, and then, as apples increase in price,
move to 40 percent apples and 60 percent oranges; a similar decrease in the
price of apples might dictate a move to 70 percent apples and 30 percent
oranges. In a sense, you are always trying to keep the price of the mixture
constant as the ingredients’ prices change and time passes. The exact recipe
you need to follow is generated by the Black-Scholes equation. Its solution,
the Black-Scholes formula, tells you the cost of following the recipe. Before
Black and Scholes, no one even guessed that you could manufacture an
option out of simpler ingredients, and so there was no way to figure out its
fair price.
This discovery revolutionized modern finance. With their insight, Black
and Scholes made formerly gourmet options into standard fare. Dealers
could 
now 
manufacture 
and 
sell 
options 
on 
all 
sorts 
of 
underlying
securities, creating the precise riskiness clients wanted without taking on
the risk themselves. It was as though, in a thirsty world filled with hydrogen
and oxygen, someone had finally figured out how to synthesize H
2
O.
Dealers use the Black-Scholes model to manufacture (or synthesize, or
financially engineer) the options they sell to their clients. They construct the
option from shares of raw stock they buy in the market. Conversely, they
can deconstruct an option someone sells to them by converting it back into
shares of raw stock that they then sell to the market. In this way, dealers
mitigate their risk. (Since the Black-Scholes model is only a model, and
since no model in finance is 100 percent correct, it is impossible for them to
entirely cancel their risk.) Dealers charge a fee (the option premium) for
this construction and deconstruction, just as chefs at fancy restaurants
charge you not only for the raw ingredients but also for the recipes and
skills they use, or as couturiers bill you for the materials and talents they
employ in creating haute couture dresses.
LIFE AS A QUANT
The history of quants on Wall Street is the history of the ways in which
practitioners and academics have refined and extended the Black-Scholes
model. The last thirty years have seen it applied not just to stock options but
to options on just about anything you can think of, from Treasury bonds and
foreign exchange to the weather. Behind all these extensions is the same
original insight: It is possible to tailor securities with the precise risk
desired out of a mix of simpler ingredients using a recipe that specifies how
to continually readjust their proportions. The readjustment depends on the
exact way in which the ingredients’ prices move.
Because bond prices don’t move exactly like stock prices, the recipe for a
bond option must differ from that of the classic Black-Scholes model. But
this is a subtlety—when a new product is first created, a crude Black-
Scholes-like 
model 
often 
suffices. 
Then, 
an 
arms 
race 
begins. 
As
competitive pressures increase and spreads tighten, quants at different firms
refine and extend their first pass at the model, adding new and more
accurate descriptions of the motion of the ingredients and obtaining better
recipes for the salad. Extending the model demands a grasp of financial
theory, mathematics, and computing, and quants work at the intersection of
these three disciplines.
The life of a practitioner quant in a trading business is quite different from
that of a physicist. When, after years of physics research, I first came to
work on Wall Street at the end of 1985, my new boss asked me to take a
second pass at a problematic Black-Scholes-like model for bond options
that he had built a year earlier. I started out slowly and carefully, working
like a physicist; I read the relevant papers, learned the theory, diagnosed the
problem, and began to rewrite the computer program that made the model
work. After several weeks he became impatient with my lack of progress.
“You know,” he said a little sharply as he took me aside, “in this job you
really need to know only four things: addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division—and most of the time you can get by without division!”
I took his point. Of course, the model used more advanced mathematics
than arithmetic. Yet his insight was correct. The majority of options dealers
make their living by manufacturing the products their clients need as
efficiently as they can—that is, by providing service for a fee. For them, a
simple, easy-to-understand model is more useful than a better, complicated
one. Too much preoccupation with details that you cannot get right can be a
hindrance when you have a large profit margin and you want to complete as
many 
deals 
as 
possible. 
And 
often, 
it’s 
hard 
to 
define 
exactly 
what
constitutes a “better” model—controlled experiments in markets are rare.
Though I did ultimately improve the model, the traders benefited most from
the friendly user interface I programmed into it. This simple ergonomic
change had a far greater impact on their business than the removal of minor
inconsistencies; now they could handle many more client requests for
business.
Although options theory originated in the world of stocks, it is exploited
more widely in the fixed-income universe. Stocks (at least at first glance)
lack mathematical detail—if you own a share of stock you are guaranteed
nothing; all you really know is that its price may go up or down. In contrast,
fixed-income securities such as bonds are ornate mechanisms that promise
to spin off future periodic payments of interest and a final return of
principal. This specification of detail makes fixed income a much more
numerate 
business 
than 
equities, 
and 
one 
much 
more 
amenable 
to
mathematical analysis. Every fixed-income security—bonds, mortgages,
convertible bonds, and swaps, to name only a few—has a value that it
depends on, and is therefore conveniently viewed as a derivative of the
market’s underlying interest rates. Interest-rate derivatives are naturally
attractive products for corporations who, as part of their normal business,
must borrow money by issuing bonds whose value changes when interest or
exchange rates fluctuate. It is much more challenging to create realistic
models of the movement of interest rates, which change in more complex
ways than stock prices; interest-rate modeling has thus been the mother of
invention in the theory of derivatives for the past twenty years. It is an area
in which quants are ubiquitous.
In contrast, quants have been a rarer presence in the equity world. There,
most investors are concerned with which stock to buy, a problem on which
the advanced mathematics of derivatives can shed little light. Fixed income
and equities have fundamentally different foci. When you walk around a
frenetic fixed-income trading floor, you hear people shouting out numbers
—yields and spreads—over the hoot-and-holler; on a busy equities floor,
you mostly hear people shouting company names. Fixed-income trading
requires a better grasp of technology and quantitative methods than equities
trading. A trader friend of mine summed it up succinctly when, after I
commented to him that the fixed-income traders I knew seemed smarter
than 
the 
equity 
traders, 
he 
replied 
that 
“that’s 
because 
there’s 
no
competitive edge to being smart in the equities business.”
I don’t mean to suggest that all quants work on the Black-Scholes model.
Increasingly, some of them work on statistical arbitrage, the attempt to seek
order and predictability in the patterns of past stock price movements and
then exploit them—that is, to divine the future from the past. Hedge funds,
private pools of capital that seek out subtle price discrepancies in odd and
unexplored corners of markets, have become major employers of quants
during the past five years, and continue to hire them to do “stat-arb.”
Risk management is also in mode, and for good reason. A decade ago, in
1994, a sudden unexpected rise in global interest rates caused severe losses
on many proprietary bond trading desks whose bets turned sour. This led
banks to enlarge their previously rudimentary risk management efforts, and
caused regulators of the securities industry to focus on risk limitation. Many
quants now work within each investment bank’s centralized-risk group,
whose job it is to 
aggregate all 
the firm’s positions and so 
estimate
quantitatively the current risk and probable future losses. But probabilities
are necessarily extracted from past events; they provide notoriously poor
estimates of the likelihood of future catastrophes. Market crashes are not
randomly 
occurring 
lightning 
bolts; 
they 
are 
the 
consequence 
of 
the
madness of crowds who are busy avoiding the last mania as they participate
in what will turn out to be the current one. Despite the losses of 1994, many
firms again lost vast sums on their speculations during the worldwide
withdrawal of credit following Russia’s 1998 bond default. More and more,
therefore, the market for quants is in risk monitoring and management.
THINKERS VERSUS DOERS
I didn’t fully realize that the word quant had negative overtones until I
leafed through a dictionary of finance terms several years ago and saw the
entry “quant—often pejorative.” Often is right. When I first came to work
at Goldman, Sachs and Co. in 1985, I instantly noticed the shame involved
in being numerate. Sometimes, talking in a crowded elevator to another
quant, you might start to say something about the “duration” or “convexity”
of a bond. These are relatively low-tech bond-math terms that describe the
sensitivity of a bond’s price to changes in interest rates. If the colleague you
were talking to had been at the firm a little longer than you, then he—most
quants are male—would shift uncomfortably and try to change the subject.
“Futures dropped more than a handle today!” he might say, imitating the
confident vernacular of a genuine bond trader. Soon, you began to realize, it
was bad taste for two consenting adults to talk math or UNIX or C in the
company of traders, salespeople, and bankers. People around you averted
their gaze. There was something terminally awful about being outed.
Even in the mid-1990s geeks were fair game. One afternoon a colleague
and I were standing on either side of one of the narrow aisles between the
banks of trading desks on the floor when one of the chief traders walked
between us, his head momentarily between ours. At that instant he winced,
clutched his head with both hands as though in excruciating pain, and
exclaimed, “Aaarrggh-hhh! The force field! It’s too intense! Let me out of
the way!” In the same vein, I lost count of the number of times some junior
traders heading for lunch entered the elevator to see a group of quants
standing there and then reflexively uttered some variant of “Uh-oh! Isn’t
there some rule against all of you getting in the elevator at once?”
Traders 
and 
quants 
are 
genuinely 
different 
species. 
Traders 
pride
themselves 
on 
being 
tough 
and 
forthright 
while 
quants 
are 
more
circumspect and reticent. These differences in personality are reflections of
deeper cultural preferences. Traders are paid to act. All day long they watch
screens, 
assimilate 
economic 
information, 
page 
frantically 
through
spreadsheets, 
run 
programs 
written 
by 
quants, 
enter 
trades, 
talk 
to
salespeople and brokers, and punch keys. It’s hard to have an extended
conversation with a trader during the business day; it takes an hour of
standing around to have five minutes of punctuated repartee. Part of what
traders do has a video game quality. In consequence, they learn to be
opinionated, visceral, fast-thinking, and decisive, though not always right.
They thrive on interruption.
Quants do not. Like academics trained in research, they prefer to do one
thing from beginning to end, deeply and well. This is a luxury that is
difficult to enjoy in the multitasking world of business, where you have to
do many things simultaneously. When I moved to Wall Street, the hardest
attitude adjustment for me was to learn to carry out multiple assignments in
parallel, to interrupt one urgent and still incomplete task with another more
pressing one, to complete that, and then pop the stack.
Traders 
and 
quants 
think 
differently, 
too. 
Good 
traders 
must 
be
perpetually aware of the threat of change and what it will do to the value of
their 
positions. 
Stock 
options 
in 
particular, 
because 
of 
their 
intrinsic
asymmetry, magnify stock price changes and therefore suffer or benefit
dramatically from even small moves. Quants think less about future change
and more about current value. According to financial theory, at any instant
the so-called fair value of a security is an average over the range of all its
possible future values. Fair value and change are therefore two sides of the
same coin; the more ways in which a security can lose value from a future
market move, the less it should rationally be worth today, and hence the
mantra: more risk, more return. This difference between the quant’s view of
value as an average versus the trader’s need to worry about any change
makes this kind of professional cross-communication difficult.
Tour de France cyclists don’t need to know how to solve Newton’s Laws
in order to bank around a curve. Indeed, thinking too much about physics
while cycling may prove a hindrance. Similarly, options traders need not be
expert quants; they can leave the details of the recipe for manufacturing
options to others as long as they have the patience to thoroughly understand
how to use it and when to trust it, for no model is perfect. One trader I know
used to say, “You can’t give a person a Black-Scholes calculator and turn
him into a trader,” and this is true; it takes study, understanding, intuition,
and a grasp of the limits of the model in order to trade wisely. You cannot
just follow formulas, no matter how precise they appear to be.
A good quant must be a mixture, too—part trader, part salesperson, part
programmer, and part mathematician. Many quants would like to cross over
to become traders, but they face the formidable obstacles of scholarly
backgrounds, introspective personalities, and hybrid skills.
One of the theories about what makes an animal nonkosher is that it
transcends categories. In the book of Genesis, the creation categorizes
animals by both their species and location, referring to “birds of the sky”
and “fish of the sea.” Occupying both categories is what makes some
animals nonkosher. Shrimp, for example, live in the sea but aren’t fish and
don’t swim. Ostriches are birds, but do not fly in the sky. Both are
nonkosher. Similarly, cloth made from a mixture of linen (a plant) and wool
(an animal product) is also proscribed. Those who were brought up keeping
kosher can feel nauseated at the thought of eating category-violating food.
Quants are the nonkosher category violators of Wall Street, half-breed
players 
who 
make 
pure 
traders 
or 
undiluted 
information 
technology
managers uncomfortable. Quants are amateurs with no clear professional
role model. While traders and programmers in investment banks have
distinct ladders to climb and clearly marked rungs to ascend, the quant
professional ladder is short and often ends in midair.
Nevertheless, in the twenty-first century, as universities have initiated
financial engineering programs and financial institutions have embraced
risk management, being a quant has slowly become a more legitimate
profession. The overheated tech-stock market of the late 1990s cast a warm,
reflected glow on geeks of all types, as did the droves of hedge funds trying
to use mathematical models to squeeze dollars out of subtleties. The guts to
lose a lot of money carries its own aura. D.E. Shaw & Co., a New York
trading house that was rumored to be making substantial profits doing
“black box” computerized statistical arbitrage before their billion-dollar
losses in 1998, and Long Term Capital Management, the quant-driven
Connecticut hedge fund that ultimately needed a multibillion-dollar bailout,
have both contributed to this more glamorous view of quantization. And
indeed, many of the Long Term Capital protagonists are back in business
again at new firms. The capacity to wreak destruction with your models
provides the ultimate respectability.
THE SACRED AND PROFANE
There is an almost religious quality to the pursuit of physics that stems from
its transcendent qualities. How does a planet know that it must obey
Newton’s Laws, or an electron perceive that it must move according to the
principles 
of 
quantum 
electrodynamics? 
Do 
tiny 
internal 
homunculi
program internal nanocomputers to spit out the electron’s next position? It’s
hard 
not 
to 
have 
a 
sense 
of 
wonder 
when 
you 
see 
that 
principles,
imagination, and a little mathematics—in a word, the mind—can divine the
behavior of the universe. Short of genuine enlightenment, nothing but art
comes closer to God.
When I was a graduate student at Columbia in the 1970s, physics was the
great attractor for the aspiring scientists of the world. Bearing witness to
this was the large box of documents kept near the entrance to the physics
department library. We referred to it as the “crank file.”The box contained
the unsolicited typewritten letters, manuscripts, and appeals that poured
steadily into the mailbox of the department’s chairman. Eccentric though
the documents were, they made fascinating reading. There were eager
speculations on the nature of space and time, elaborately detailed papers
refuting relativity and quantum mechanics, grandiose claims to have unified
them, 
and 
farfetched 
meditations 
that 
combined 
physics 
with 
more
metaphysical topics. I remember one note that tried to deduce the existence
of God from the approximate equality of the solid angles subtended by the
sun and the moon when observed from the earth, a remarkable circumstance
without which there would be no solar eclipses.
None of these papers had much chance of getting past a journal referee.
Few of the writers had much hope of even getting into graduate school.
They may not have wanted to. The letters were mostly a cri de cæur from
isolated and solitary physicist manqués all over the world.
Most of my classmates laughed at the naiveté of the letter writers, but as I
skimmed through the crank file I found it hard to feel superior. Instead,
peering into the box of manuscripts, I always saw my pale reflection. Out
there, beyond academia and industry, were people like us, similarly in thrall
to the same sense of mystery and power that lay behind the attempt to
understand and master the universe with only imagination and symbols.
They were cranks, those letter writers, but they were also genuine amateurs,
lovers of the field interested in wisdom and magic rather than money.
There are amateurs in the financial modeling world, too, but they often
come in more mercenary flavors, and why not? Because I used to run a
group called Quantitative Strategies at Goldman Sachs for many years, after
a 
while 
almost 
any 
letter 
from 
the 
outside 
world 
addressed 
to 
the
“Quantitative Something-or-Other” at Goldman found its way to me. Once
every few months I received a note from someone isolated and far away
who thought he or she had made some great breakthrough in financial
theory. Often, they would explain, it was a breakthrough whose exact
details they were unwilling to divulge without being given a contract
promising them a share of the future profits they were certain its use would
guarantee. I sympathized with them. They, too, believed in the power of
imagination.
Theoretical physicists are accustomed to the success of mathematics in
formulating the laws of the universe and elaborating their consequences.
The universe does indeed seem to run like some splendid Swiss clockwork:
We can predict the orbits of planets and the frequency of light emitted by
atoms to eight or ten decimal places. But when a physicist first pages
through a graduate economics or finance textbook, he or she begins to feel
aghast. The mathematics of economics is so much more formal than the
mathematics of physics textbooks—much of it reads like Euclid or set
theory, replete with axioms, theorems, and lemmas. You would think that all
this formality would produce precision. And yet, compared with physics,
economics has so little explanatory or predictive power. Everything looks
suspect; questions abound.
When physicists pursue the laws of the universe, it seems selfless. But
watching quants pursue sacred laws for the profane production of profit, I
sometimes find myself thinking disturbingly of worshippers at a black
mass. What does it signify to use the methods of physics and the language
of mathematics to model the economic world? Is it justifiable to treat the
economy and its markets as a complex machine? How can traders put their
faith in this stuff? Isn’t value determined by people? And how can people
be described by equations and predetermined rules? Isn’t this endeavor the
misguided consequence of some sort of physics envy, an inappropriate
attempt to model messy human systems with the wrong paradigm? Is social
science, as the economic historian Robert Skidelsky once observed, merely
a compendium of flawed thinking disguised as scientific understanding? If
mathematics is the Queen of Sciences, is quantitative finance a science at
all? And finally, are quants scientists or cranks?
This book is an account of my experiences as a scientist, quant, and, on
occasion, a fellow traveler of cranks.
...
Chapter 1
Elective Affinities
The attractions of science
The glory days of particle physics
Driven by ambitious dreams to Columbia
Legendary physicists and budding wunderkinder
Talent versus character, plans versus luck
I expected New York to glitter. Instead, when I arrived on that hot August
afternoon 
in 
1966, 
the 
city 
was 
grimy 
and 
littered, 
disappointingly
unmodern. I was jet-lagged and weary, and the sweaty cab ride from
Kennedy airport to upper Manhattan tilted me towards depression. The
cramped Formica-filled rooms in International House, a graduate student
dormitory established by the Rockefeller Foundation on the far reaches of
New York’s Upper West Side, bore little resemblance to the spacious-
looking illustrations in the brochure they had sent to me in South Africa.
The sickly green-and-white walls in the corridors and the guards at the back
entrance added to the prison sensibility. It took several months before habit
obscured all of this ugliness. “I. House,” as we all called it, was actually a
very good place for foreigners.
A few hours after stepping off the airplane, I descended into a state of
acute 
loneliness. 
It 
must 
have 
had 
something 
to 
do 
with 
the 
sudden
perception of distance and time; I had been away from home many times
before, but never this far, and never for so undetermined a period. For
weeks, verging on months, I walked around with a lump in my throat that
threatened to overwhelm me. This welling-up sensation took a long time to
pass, and when it finally did, I missed the painful intensity that the sadness
and longing had brought to my existence. A few years later I read Young
Törless 
by 
Robert 
Musil, 
and 
recognized 
the 
adolescent 
protagonist’s
piercing and yet delectable unhappiness. The echoes of that first loneliness
never totally faded away. Ever since, whenever I’ve had to start out in a
new city alone, I feel again the resonances of those desolate days, at least
for a short time.
I spoke to almost no one during those first few weeks in I. House, which
was virtually empty in the quiet lull before classes began. Ever cautious, I
had arrived three weeks early, compulsively planning to settle down and get
acclimated before starting my PhD program in physics. Instead, I felt
isolated from everyone I had ever known. It is almost impossible today to
be as cut off from any place in the world as I was from Cape Town during
that first year in New York. There were almost no telephones in I. House—
one extension in a badly soundproofed booth in the corridor served a floor
of fifty people. Phone calls to South Africa were expensive and had to be
booked in advance through an operator. I never called home; instead, I
wrote letters to family and friends several times a week. Finally, mercifully,
my first semester at graduate school started.
A blind but avid desire for success in physics spurred me to leave Cape
Town; simple chance brought me to Columbia. I had entered the University
of Cape Town four years earlier at the age of 16. We were educated in the
British style: You had to choose your major area—science, arts, medicine,
or commerce—before you began your studies. I chose the natural sciences.
In my freshman year I took four separate year-long courses in Physics, Pure
Maths, Applied Maths, and Chemistry. There was not much choice of
subtopics; you studied everything they chose to teach and then received a
grade based on the grand final exam at the end of each year. By my final
year I had decided on a joint major in Applied Maths and Theoretical
Physics. Foolishly, the school had permitted me to study only theoretical
physics from my second undergraduate year onwards, and so I emerged
with no experimental skills. It was a premature specialization that no good
American university would have tolerated.
In late 1965 I suddenly noticed that the more ambitious students in my
class were planning to apply to graduate schools abroad. Serendipitously, I
stumbled on a path to the United States through a bad case of acne. By
coincidence, 
my 
sister, 
a 
clinical 
psychologist, 
had 
helped 
my
dermatologist’s young nephew successfully overcome “poor concentration”
ten years earlier. The dermatologist took a benevolent interest in me, and
encouraged me to apply to study physics abroad. I took his advice without
really understanding what I was embarking on, and began to apply for
scholarships to programs in the United Kingdom and the United States. The
Cape Town physics department was insularly lukewarm about the benefits
of study abroad, but I did not let them dissuade me.
If not for the acne, I might have remained in South Africa. Ever since,
I’ve liked to believe that the course of my life, the old friends I parted from
and the new friends I made, my marriage and my children, were the
consequence of a random case of acne.
1
Particle 
physics 
is 
the 
study 
of 
the 
smallest 
and 
most 
fundamental
constituents of matter. Even in Cape Town, 5,000 miles from Europe and
civilization, we knew that we were in the glory days of the field. As the
1960s passed, each year brought yet another triumph. At accelerators
around the world, experimentalists clashed ultrahigh-speed protons against
each other like cymbals and discovered a multiplicity of new particles
emerging from the collision. Richard P. Feynman once said that doing
elementary particle physics is a lot like banging two fine Swiss watches
against each other and trying to figure out their workings by examining the
debris. That was the challenge.
The proliferation of new particles made it difficult to know which were
elementary and which were compound. The mystery was a recapitulation of
the 
great 
puzzle 
of 
nineteenth-century 
chemistry, 
when 
the 
similar
proliferation of new substances provoked the quest to understand chemical
structure. That pursuit had culminated in Mendeleyev’s construction of the
periodic table, which arranged all the elements in an understandable order
based on their chemical qualities. Empty spots in the table corresponded to
as-yet-undiscovered elements whose qualities, associated with their place in
the table, suggested how to find them. Now, in the twentieth century, the
race was on to find an analogous table for the qualities of so-called
elementary particles. So many new ones were being discovered in cosmic
rays or man-made colliders that some serious physicists (from California, of
course) began to propound holistic sorts of models in which no particle was
more elementary than any other and any particle could be considered a
composite of all the rest.
In Cape Town in the summer of 1964, we heard popular lectures about the
work of physicists Murray Gell-Mann and Yuval Ne’eman, both modern-
day Mendeleyevs, who each invented their own periodic table of particles.
Some of the subtables in their system contained eight distinct particles.
Gell-Mann dubbed his model the Eightfold Way, a sophisticated and hip
allusion to the eight Buddhist principles of living. By looking at the
properties of the unpopulated gaps in their table, Gell-Mann and Ne’eman
had predicted the observable properties of a very strange new particle called
the Omega Minus. Shortly thereafter, exactly as forecast, the particle was
created in a collision in the particle accelerator at Brookhaven National
Laboratories on Long Island. It was recognized by the characteristic trail it
left in a giant bubble chamber, a signature whose properties matched the
exact predictions of the Eightfold Way. It seemed you could apprehend the
universe with thought.
I 
became 
deeply 
attracted 
to 
particle 
physics 
and 
general 
relativity,
subjects that dealt with the ultimate nature of matter, space and time; a life
spent studying these topics would be a life devoted to the transcendental.
Like many of my physics friends, I began to develop an almost religious
passion for fundamental physics. But beneath my passion was an even
greater 
desire 
for 
fame 
and 
immortality. 
I 
dreamed 
of 
being 
another
Einstein. I wanted to spend my life focusing on the discovery of truths that
would live forever. Sometimes, I felt arrogantly superior to people who
were headed for more mundane professions.
My mother encouraged me to devote myself to academic pursuits. My
father, though he was more naturally scholarly than my mother, might
nevertheless have been happier if I had gone into business with him. I
myself would have laughed quite disbelievingly, at age 16, 21, or 34, if
someone had told me that I would be working at an investment bank at age
40.
At registration on the first day of my first semester at Columbia, my
assigned course advisor was Professor Henry Foley, himself a near-famous
physicist who had been part of a classic 1940s experiment that verified
Feynman’s Nobel Prize-winning theory of electrons. Foley, a charmingly
cynical man, quizzed me briefly about my knowledge of atomic physics and
discovered how little I had learned in Cape Town about the details of the
spin-orbit interactions of electrons. Then he commanded me to register for
G4015, the introductory Columbia graduate course in atomic physics and
quantum mechanics.
2
Most physics majors at American schools had taken
the equivalent subject in their junior or senior year of college, so here I was
starting off a year or more behind the rest of the pack. It was a disheartening
setback, the beginning of three long, tedious, and unexpected years of
coursework and examinations at a time when I had expected to soon
embark on original research.
Foley was right, though—I didn’t know enough. In Cape Town in the
early 1960s we had learned a shallow rudimentary version of modern
physics and quantum mechanics. The physics professors there, for the most
part, seemed uncomfortable with everything that had developed after 1930.
Their attitude—that you were lucky if you ever got to really understand
quantum mechanics—stayed with me a long time. Physics in the United
States 
was 
much 
more 
professional, 
hard-nosed, 
and 
businesslike.
Columbia’s physics department, I saw over and over again, didn’t think of
modern physics as something esoterically advanced and difficult, to be
revealed to you only when you crossed some threshold and finally became
an initiate. They expected you simply to plunge right in.
The one subject I had learned really well as an undergraduate was
Applied Mathematics, a slower-moving subject easier to keep abreast of in
distant, isolated South Africa. In Cape Town, the closed-book, year-end
exams were fashioned after the famous Cambridge Tripos examination on
which 
many 
of 
the 
British-educated 
faculty 
had 
been 
reared. 
Rapid,
practical 
problem 
solving 
as 
well 
as 
memorization 
were 
heavily
emphasized. Everything was done thoroughly. In each successive year we
were taught progressively more advanced versions of classical mechanics
and electromagnetic theory. I can still recite some of the indefinite integrals
and Fourier transforms we had to learn by heart in order to take the final
exams.
3
The physics department I entered at Columbia in 1966 was legendary. The
first 
thing 
that 
struck 
me 
was 
their 
direct 
connection 
to 
so 
many
groundbreaking episodes of twentieth-century physics. The recipient of the
first PhD degree ever awarded by the department, at the start of the century,
had been R. A. Millikan. Later he received the Nobel Prize for his precise
measurements of the invisible electron’s charge by ingeniously measuring
the deflection of tiny oil drops carrying an unseen electron or two’s worth
of static electricity.
When I arrived, I. I. Rabi, the grand old man of physics in the United
States after Oppenheimer’s death, was nearing the end of his reign over the
Columbia department. He had received the Nobel Prize in 1944 for finding
a method of measuring the magnetic properties of nuclei. Rabi was the
intellectual father of a whole generation of American physicists, a respected
government advisor, and one of the creators of the Brookhaven National
Laboratory, where Gell-Mann and Ne’eman’s Omega Minus particle was
finally discovered. Now near retirement and seemingly garrulous, he struck
me as more comic than genius. But I was young and a little arrogant then,
and I had no conception of his wisdom and influence. Recently, I saw his
old quote that “If you decide you don’t have to get A’s, you can learn an
enormous amount in college.”
The late Enrico Fermi, a 1938 Nobel Prize winner, was regarded as the
spiritual father of the Columbia physics department. His black-and-white
three-quarter profile photograph graced the seminar room on the eighth
floor of the Pupin Physics Building; he had been on the faculty there during
World War II and the Manhattan Project. Fermi was the experimentalist
who had created the first self-sustaining nuclear reaction at the University
of Chicago, a step on the way to the bombs that leveled Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. Amazingly, he was also the theorist who, in the 1930s, had
predicted the existence of the neutrino, a massless and chargeless particle
that interacted so weakly with ordinary matter that it wasn’t detected until
some twenty years later. He was one of the last physicists to make major
contributions to both theory and experiment, an eclectic Goethe of the field.
Columbia 
had 
also 
been 
the 
wartime 
home 
of 
the 
beautiful 
Maria
Goeppert-Mayer, 
who 
later 
received 
the 
1963 
Nobel 
Prize 
for 
her
theoretical proposal that the nucleus of an atom, like the atom itself,
consisted 
of 
shells 
of 
orbiting 
particles. 
Because 
of 
Columbia’s
antinepotism 
laws—her 
husband 
Joseph 
Mayer 
was 
a 
professor 
of
chemistry—she had been only a member of the research staff of the
university, and not a full faculty member.
Closer to the present, Columbia had been at the center of the postwar
development of relativistic quantum electrodynamics (QED), the fabulously
accurate theory of how electrons emit and absorb light that I would soon
struggle to learn. Atoms and the electrons inside them are so small that
physicists can only indirectly examine their structure. You cannot actually
“see” the inside of an atom; instead, in much the same way that doctors
used to tap a patient’s chest and listen to the quality of the sound emitted in
order to figure out the state of the patient’s insides, so physicists must poke
at an atom and then diagnose the character of its internal electrons from the
light 
they 
emit. 
Until 
the 
late 
1940s, 
QED 
was 
riven 
by 
such 
deep
mathematical 
and 
conceptual 
inconsistencies 
that, 
in 
many 
cases,
calculations of the frequencies of emitted light led to literally infinite
results.
In the late 1940s, Feynman and Julian Schwinger in the United States
(and, unknown to them, Shin-Ichiro Tomonaga in Japan), in a tour de force
of insight and mathematical prowess, showed how to mend the theory of
QED. They were then able to predict correctly minuscule and previously
unsuspected corrections to the wavelengths of the light emitted by the
internal electrons as they jumped from one orbit in the atom to another.
Willis Lamb and Polykarp Kusch, both at Columbia in the late 1940s, had
carefully and accurately measured a variety of these almost infinitesimal
corrections, 
and 
they 
found 
perfect 
agreement 
with 
Feynman 
and
Schwinger. Lamb and Kusch each received a Nobel Prize, as did Feynman,
Schwinger, and Tomonaga a while later.
It didn’t take me long to learn that not all Nobel Prizes are equal. In 1968,
when 
I 
was 
the 
teaching 
assistant 
for 
Kusch’s 
junior-level 
course 
on
electromagnetic theory, I met with him regularly. Soon I began to notice
that people in Pupin treated him as though his Prize was somehow worthy
of less respect than those of the other faculty members. A few years later he
left for the University of Texas.
Also 
at 
Columbia, 
but 
not 
yet 
Nobelists 
at 
that 
time, 
were 
Leon
Lederman, Jack Steinberger, and Mel Schwartz, all of them renowned even
then for a host of elegant experiments and discoveries. In 1988 they
received their Nobel Prize for having shown, almost thirty years earlier, that
there were not one, but two different types of the neutrino that Fermi had
proposed. (The discovery of a third type of neutrino in 2000 was less
astonishing and definitely not Nobel-worthy.)
Finally, fiercely brightest among all the stars in the Columbia firmament
was Tsung-Dao Lee, the embodiment and perhaps even the cause of all the
good and bad qualities of the department. He had won his Nobel Prize in
1957, at the age of 31, for theoretical investigations that led to the startling
discovery of the so-called nonconservation of parity. Lee and his fellow
Prize-winner C. N. Yang had intrepidly suggested that nature’s laws were
not symmetric with respect to the seemingly arbitrary human definitions of
“left” and “right.” It was an almost unbelievable hypothesis, but they
proposed experiments to test it. In less than a year they were proved correct.
When I arrived at Columbia only eight years later, the consequences of this
discovery were still working their way through the framework of physics.
“T. D.,” as everyone called him, was Pupin’s version of the Pope and the
Last Emperor of China rolled into one. He was a holy terror, self-centered
and intense. About ten years ago I saw a photograph of him in the literary
magazine Grand Street, taken as part of a series of photographs of scientists
writing on blackboards. One was of Feynman, lively and jovial, lecturing
on 
QED. 
Another 
featured 
Mitchell 
Feigenbaum 
of 
the 
Rockefeller
University, examining his doubling equations that revealed the hidden order
behind 
apparently 
chaotic 
phenomena. 
Most 
of 
the 
physicists 
looked
prosaic, even Gell-Mann himself. But T. D.’s photo was different. Taken in
the 1950s, it showed his fervent young face glowing with light as he spoke,
for all the world looking like Moses descending from Sinai. T. D. set the
tone at Columbia. His presence could inspire, but it could consume, too.
The faculty were not the only extraordinary beings at Columbia. Many of
the students seemed to be wunderkinder, too. My graduate classes, even the
advanced ones, always contained a smattering of precocious smart-aleck
American undergraduates. I was envious and wary of them. Some, sporting
crewcuts and narrow-shouldered dark suits with ties, were relics of the
Fifties; 
others 
had 
lank, 
long, 
hair 
and 
dressed 
in 
faded 
jeans 
and
sweatshirts. But whatever they wore, they all raised their hands in class to
ask questions whose answers they already knew.
I was awed by these people who knew more than they had been taught. In
South Africa I had mastered only a limited number of skills really well, and
that knowledge lasted a lifetime. There, I had waited obediently year after
year to get to the level at which “they” would begin to teach “me” the
things I was able to handle. It had never occurred to me that I could learn
what I wanted when I chose. In America, I was alarmed to see students who
set about learning things on their own. I’m still embarrassed to admit to
myself that I almost never studied anything I wasn’t officially taught. I
recall one major exception. In my fourth year of college I spent many
months studying unified field theories of gravitation and electromagnetism
for my honors’ thesis. My independent investigation of the extension of
Einstein’s theory of gravitation exhilarated me, but this autonomy was an
exception.
In 1966 and during subsequent years, I dreamed ambitious dreams about
success on the scale of T. D. Lee. By this unrealistic measure, few of the
wunderkinder fulfilled the full magnitude of their intimidating promise.
One became a think-tank military analyst whom I was pleased to recognize
on television during the Gulf War following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Another completed a PhD in physics, moved to medical school, began a
residency 
in 
psychiatry, 
and 
finally 
became 
a 
well-known 
neural-net
theorist. A third, after winning the prize for the best physics undergraduate
at 
Columbia, 
struggled 
with 
manic 
depression. 
Determined 
to 
keep
studying, he would keep a running daily log on his canary-yellow legal
notepad of the exact number of minutes he had spent actually working at
full concentration. Each time he paused or took a break, he stopped the
clock and he wrote down the number of minutes he had worked since the
last interruption. At the end of the day he computed the total. Compulsive
myself, I was sympathetic to his counting; I knew how few were the hours
in 
the 
day 
one 
actually 
works 
seriously 
and 
undistractedly, 
and 
was
momentarily tempted to start my own time sheet.
I learned one lesson from the fates of both the professors and students I
met at Columbia: In the end, character and chance counted at least as much
as talent. Luck, combined with what my mother called sitzfleisch, the
capacity to persevere, played an overwhelming role.
First in Cape Town and then in New York, I had been steadily learning what
kind of physics suited me.
Like most physicists, I was a reductionist: I believed that you can explain
complex things by reducing them to their constituents. Biology depends on
chemistry; chemistry is merely the physics of molecules and atoms; atoms
are made out of electrons and nuclei; nuclei contain protons and neutrons,
and protons and neutrons seem to be made of quarks. What are the ultimate
subnuclear particles at the putative root of this hierarchy, and what are the
laws that determine their behavior? These questions are the domain of
particle physics.
Particle physicists are snobs who think that their field is the source of the
most fundamental 
knowledge, 
and take some mischievous pleasure in
denigrating other messier or more complex areas of physics. Gell-Mann, the
codiscoverer of the Eightfold Way and the discoverer of quarks, succinctly
summarized 
the 
latent 
prejudice 
of 
most 
particle 
physicists 
about 
the
superiority of their enterprise when he famously referred to solid state
physics, the apparently more mundane study of bulk matter and its variety
of forms, as “squalid state physics.”
Nowadays, not everyone agrees with Gell-Mann’s clever bon mot. Over
the 
last 
twenty 
years 
physicists 
have 
discovered 
a 
deep 
commonality
between large-scale bulk matter and small-scale particle physics. Much of
what is new and interesting in both fields seems to emerge from what is
called their “many-body” nature: Both bulk matter and tiny particles can
each be viewed as resembling a medium, each made out of a very large
number 
of 
similar 
constituents. 
When 
many 
similar 
constituents 
are
clumped together, their collective behavior can display completely new and
unexpected characteristics. A drop of water can suddenly freeze and turn
solid in a way that no single water molecule can. A ripple of excitement or
a hush of expectation can sweep over a crowd but not over a single
individual. In the words of another Nobel Prize-Winner, P.W. Anderson,
“More is Different!” He, and many other “squalid-state” physicists believe
that there is no single grand reductionist Theory of Everything.
It is unlikely one will ever know who is right, but, like most aspiring
physicists 
of 
the 
postwar 
period, 
I 
was 
immensely 
attracted 
by 
the
reductionist point of view. I wanted to be the ultimate reductionist, a
particle physicist.
Technically, 
I 
still 
had 
to 
choose 
between 
being 
a 
theorist 
or 
an
experimentalist, but for me, this wasn’t much of a choice. The essence of
theoretical physics is the attempt to look at the universe, and then mentally
apprehend its structure. If you are right, you emulate Newton and Einstein:
You find one of the Ten Commandments. You write down a simple set of
laws that, plucked from nowhere, miraculously describes and predicts how
God’s world works. This was the struggle to which I aspired. Anything else
would have been a compromise that I was not prepared to make.
Even within theoretical particle physics there are further refinements.
Pure theory is the search for abstract laws, for a formulation of the divine
commandments that rule the world. But, for every Moses descending from
the mountain with a valid new law, there are countless well-intentioned
prophets whose proposed laws turn out to be wrong. So how does one tell
when a theory is right?
Beauty, even mathematical beauty, is not enough. Physicists must test a
new theory by elaborating the ways in which it manifests itself in the world.
Physicists who do so-called phenomenology work out the detailed and
observable consequences of a theory, providing the practical link between
principles and experiment, between mind and matter. Phenomenologists
elaborate the theory; they create heuristic approximations to engineer the
theory into a pragmatic tool; they propose experiments to validate or refute
a 
theory, 
using 
the 
theory 
itself 
to 
compute 
the 
expected 
results.
Phenomenologists deal a little more with the ripples on the surface and a
little less with the laws beneath it.
Though I wanted to do pure theory, I ultimately ended up spending much
of my life in physics as a phenomenologist. Over the long run, this stood
me in very good stead. When I moved to Wall Street, I found quantitative
finance to resemble phenomenology much more than it resembled pure
theory. Quantitative finance is concerned with the techniques that people
use to value financial contracts and, given the fluctuations of the human
psyche, it is a pragmatic study of surfaces rather than a principled study of
depths. Physics, in contrast, is concerned with God’s canons, which seem to
be more easily captured in the simple broad statements that characterize
profound physical laws.
I had a passion for the content of physics, but I was also possessed by a
hungry ambition for its earthly rewards. Both passion and hunger persisted
over the years, despite the inevitable disappointments. Ten years later, as a
postdoctoral researcher at Oxford in 1976, I experienced a minor epiphany
about ambition’s degradation. At age 16 or 17, I had wanted to be another
Einstein; at 21, I would have been happy to be another Feynman; at 24, a
future T. D. Lee would have sufficed. By 1976, sharing an office with other
postdoctoral researchers at Oxford, I realized that I had reached the point
where I merely envied the postdoc in the office next door because he had
been invited to give a seminar in France. In much the same way, by a
process options theorists call time decay, financial stock options lose their
potential as they approach their own expiration.
Notes
1
The dermatologist’s poorly concentrating nephew was Jonathan Dorfan.
A few years later he, too, came to graduate school in the United States,
where he is now head of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, one of
the few great global laboratories for experimental particle physics.
2
You may think me pedantic to list the actual course number. But even
now, more than thirty years later, each prosaic course number still
conjures up a vivid subworld of a certain year, a particular classroom, a
specific professor, a sliding chalkboard, and a noisily clanking steam
radiator, together with the exciting sensation of being on the threshold of
mastering some new and arcane alchemical subject.
3

During 
my 
last 
few 
years 
at 
Goldman, 
Sachs, 
I 
interviewed
undergraduates applying for jobs in investment banking, and I was often
surprised at how little of their coursework some of them recalled, how
little a sense they had of the essence of their field. I met juniors majoring
in statistics who couldn’t define standard deviation and students who had
taken several courses in electromagnetic theory but couldn’t remember
Maxwell’s equations. What I had learned I had learned well. Theirs
sometimes seemed a wasted education.
...
Chapter 2
Dog Years
Life as a graduate student
Wonderful lectures
T. D. Lee, the brightest star in the firmament
Seven lean years
Getting out of graduate school only half-alive
If you didn’t mind wasting the best years of your youth, graduate student
life at Columbia was paradise. Once you got over the first two hurdles—
passing the PhD qualifying exams and obtaining a research advisor—no
one seemed to give a damn about what happened to you. Being a graduate
student was not a bad sinecure. The university just kept funneling you a
small but livable stipend and hoped you stayed out of their way. I spent
seven biblically-lean years in the physics department. One friend spent ten.
We both got out alive.
Some didn’t. It wasn’t long before we had all heard the legend about the
graduate student who had shot his PhD advisor. Several years ago I read a
New York Times article about two graduate students who committed suicide
while studying in the Harvard laboratory of Nobel Prize-winner Professor
E. J. Corey. In a subsequent letter to the Sunday New York Times magazine
of December 20, 1998, Linda Logdberg of Upper Nyack, New York, wrote
in to comment on life as graduate student:
. . . Perhaps even more now than then, graduate education is an
extended adolescence during which highly intelligent young people see
their world shrink to fit the dimensions of their advisor’s laboratory. . . .
With 
their 
identities 
bound 
to 
the 
outcome 
of 
the 
thesis 
project,
graduate 
students 
are 
socialized 
to 
view 
other 
options 
(teaching,
industry, 
even 
changing 
to 
another 
type 
of 
work 
altogether) 
with
contempt. Wanting a decent wage and meaningful work that occupies,
say, only 50 hours per week are considered signs of selling out.
It’s an accurate description. We went into science for the love of it and
thought nothing else was half as good. Some failed the PhD qualifying
exam and left at the end of one year. Others passed the exam and then gave
up before getting a thesis advisor. Many threw in the towel mid-thesis. The
remainder struggled through and went on to a life of itinerant postdoctoral
research. Few of us had an easy time. Ms. Logdberg is especially accurate
in acknowledging the undeclared self-hatred we felt in looking down on
those of our friends who, like failed novitiates in a nunnery, shamefacedly
transferred their efforts to less ambitious endeavors. “Shame is Pride’s
cloke,” I read in Blake’s Proverbs of Hell;I understood exactly what he
meant. But that was later.
The first year at Columbia consisted of four courses per semester followed
by “the quals,” the general PhD qualifying examination one had to pass in
order to be allowed to continue with the doctoral program. To be a theorist,
you also had to pass a special theory section on the quals. Without this
formal admittance, no advisor would take you on.
I knew little modern physics so that, even if I were to pass the quals and
be admitted to the rarified world of theory, I would have to spend another
two years taking a host of preparatory courses. If I had gone to graduate
school in Cambridge, England, where there was less required coursework, I
might have finished my PhD in three or four years. Now I would have to
wait that long before even beginning research! I had taken one step forward,
but now faced two disappointing steps back.
Given that I wanted to be a theorist, there was little choice. Without the
proper education, it is impossible to do theoretical research. I half-envied
my budding experimentalist friends who were able to contribute something
useful 
as 
soon 
as 
they 
started 
their 
apprenticeship—they 
could 
build
particle detectors, write computer programs, and analyze data. Despite their
worm’s eye view, they had something constructively rewarding to tackle.
We theorists seemed to be dishearteningly useless and alone.
Years later, when I moved to Wall Street, I especially liked the ways in
which one could be usefully busy in quantitative finance. There was always
a program to write, a trading interface to design, a calculation to do. It was
nice to be able to contribute without having to be extraordinary.
Meanwhile, as I settled down into New York in 1966, life gradually
improved. Every morning I rose to WNEW AM’s Klavan and Finch, who
pretended to be the men in the traffic helicopter that WNEW did not
possess; one of them read printed traffic reports over the rotor noise
simulated by the other. I still meet people who recall their endless pitches
for “Dennison’s, a men’s clothier, Route 22, Union, New Jersey, open 10
A.M. to 5 the next morning. Money talks, nobody walks!” The Route 22 I
imagined as I heard this was some exotic Kerouac cross-country highway,
with a touch of the tawdry charm of Nabokov’s Lolita motels. In 1980,
when I finally decided to leave physics, I found myself driving down the
same Route 22 en route to my interview at Bell Laboratories in Murray
Hill, New Jersey. It didn’t totally disappoint.
I liked New York’s Upper West Side, its almost Caribbean atmosphere
and vibrant street life. Manhattan was a marvelous place in which to be
lonely. You could walk all the way down Broadway from Columbia to
Times Square, watching people, stopping for a solitary coffee at soon-to-be-
extinct Automats or Hopperesque Chock-Full-of-Nuts diners, and never feel
isolated. Hope lurked on every block. The Puerto Ricans around I. House
sat on the steps of their brownstones until late on hot summer nights. My
friend and fellow student Eté Szüts, a 1956 refugee from Hungary, taught
me the ropes. After an evening of doing homework problems, we would
walk down to 123rd Street and Broadway for a midnight slice of pizza
made by a small dapper Italian man in a white apron and T-shirt who
combed his elegant grey hair while he looked at himself admiringly in the
mirror as his enormously fat wife observed him resentfully from a thin
metal folding chair that somehow supported her. The jukebox, I remember,
played “There’s a Kind of Hush (All Over The World).”
Some aspects of life in New York took getting used to. I was surprised by
the easy and familiar kidding around between whites, blacks, and Asians in
I. House. Twenty-one years of seeing blacks regarded as the invisible
backdrop to white life in South Africa had left its mark on me, which only
then began to fade.
I was also struck by the discrepancy in styles of cursing. I had never
actually heard the word “motherfucker” uttered until a few weeks after I
arrived in Manhattan, when two ten-year-old boys imperturbably called
each other just that on the 104 bus that ran up and down Broadway. Heard
for the first time, it sounded shockingly literal.
Finally, I was impressed by the exceptional independence of American
graduate 
students. 
At 
the 
University 
of 
Cape 
Town, 
textbooks 
were
regarded as auxiliary material. We took careful lecture notes and studied
them thoroughly, and that was usually enough. In my second week at
Columbia, I was shocked to discover that one assigned homework problem
was totally unrelated to any material covered in class. Thinking that the
professor had erred, I walked down the I. House corridor to query Eté, who
told me that the relevant material could be found in the last section of the
second chapter of our textbook. I was momentarily dismayed at the notion
that someone might set problems on topics that were never discussed in
class. From then on, I focused as much on textbook reading as I did on
note-taking.
At Columbia, the classes I liked best were taught by people who gave you a
feel for what it was like to discover something new, as well as a sense of
how it had been done.
In my first year, I took a course in advanced electromagnetic theory from
Richard 
Friedberg, 
a 
dishevelled-looking 
wunderkind 
who, 
as 
an
undergraduate, we heard, had cracked a famous unsolved problem in logic
and number theory. The method he used to solve it is still called Friedberg
numbering. Now a young professor, he was one of a stable of young
whizkids who had studied under T. D. Lee and then joined the department
as faculty.
Friedberg was unkempt, distracted, and pale. He often closed his eyes for
long periods in class as he tried to concentrate. Eté delighted in telling me
that Friedberg was a true genius. In keeping with his persona, he quickly
put his own stamp on the course he taught. Instead of taking the standard
didactic approach to electricity and magnetism, Friedberg plunged us into
thrilling intellectual history. We were each told to buy a Dover reprint of the
Dutch physicist Lorentz’s early-twentieth-century classic The Theory of
Electrons. The book, based on Lorentz’s lectures at Columbia in 1906, was
an account of his heroic pre-Einsteinian intellectual struggles to resolve the
contradictions between the laws of Newton and the laws of Maxwell on
which all of physics was then based.
Maxwell’s late-nineteenth-century theory of electromagnetism described
the propagation of light waves through a stationary material fluid, the ether,
that supposedly filled all of space. Newton’s seventeenth-century laws of
mechanics described the motion of all matter, and hence the motion of the
ether itself. Step by painful step, Lorentz explained how to combine the two
theories so as to predict how light would propagate in moving fluids or how
it would change its appearance to moving observers. There were paradoxes
in Lorentz’s stitched-together theory that he could eliminate only by making
modifications to the assumed structure of matter itself. He deduced that
moving objects would have to contract in size as they moved through the
ether. These painstaking conclusions brought him closer and closer to the
formulas of Einstein’s 1905 theory of special relativity, but without the
insight about space and time to match it.
Lorentz’s theories were relegated to the footnotes of history, and he never
fully 
grasped 
Einstein’s 
radical 
insights. 
Friedberg’s 
lectures 
brought
Lorentz’s struggles to life; they gave me an immense appreciation for how
Einstein’s cerebral and yet intuitive analysis eliminated or sidestepped the
confusion that came before. Ever since, I have been curious about how
breakthroughs occur. No discovery, in physics or finance, is as obvious as it
seems to the people who read the textbooks written even a few years later.
It amazed me that, using Einstein’s formalism, I could so easily solve
problems about the motion of light in moving fluids that had once been too
complex for anyone to tackle. Somehow, Einstein had transformed almost
inconceivable mysteries into mere formalism and rules. Now, after a little
education, any first-year graduate student could, like an organ-grinder
making music, calculate the correct answers to questions that couldn’t have
been posed a few decades earlier. I became ever more constantly aware of
the gap between creator and disciple. Everything looks simple once you
have been taught it. However, it is only when you have struggled amidst the
chaos of the sensible world on your own that you can understand how
difficult it is to impose or discern an order that eventually, in retrospect,
looks deceptively obvious.
I still have a copy of my 1967 blue examination book for Friedberg’s
course, filled with my handwritten essay on Lorentz’s attempts to explain
the propagation of light through the ether. Once every few years I like to
take a look at the complimentary comment Friedberg wrote in the margin,
saying that my answer had gone beyond the question asked, but that it dealt
“with the required points as well as the superfluous material in a completely
clear and intelligent way, correct in every detail.”
The best single lecture I have ever attended was a seminar by Mark Kaç
given at Columbia sometime in the early 1970s. Kaç, a Polish-born expert
in probability theory, is well known to both physicists and finance theorists
for 
the 
eponymous 
Feynman-Kaç 
method 
of 
solving 
the 
differential
equations that occur both in quantum mechanics and in options theory. His
seminar had the catchy title “Can you hear the shape of a drum?” In it he
described the conditions under which an imaginary blind listener, endowed
with a perfect ear capable of hearing all the frequencies of the sound waves
emitted from a drum, would be able to mathematically determine the shape
of the drum itself. This problem is part of the more general field of inverse
scattering; years later at Goldman Sachs, Iraj Kani and I used a similar
approach to show how an imaginary options market observer who, having
recorded the prices of all options on a stock, could then mathematically
determine the shape of the surface that described all future stock volatilities.
What was so impressive about Kaç’s presentation was his painstaking
explanation of how he used his intuition to find his way out of the blind
alleys he drifted into as he searched for a solution. He was also amusing. He
recounted that in Amsterdam the same talk had mistakenly been advertised
on campus with the title “Can you hear the shape of a dream?” and had
consequently drawn a large and very different late-1960s audience. It
reminded me of a similar story at Columbia about the curious crowd of
medical students who showed up for an astrophysics seminar on stellar
structure entitled “White Dwarfs and Red Giants.”
To be one of T. D. Lee’s graduate students was everyone’s dream. The
1950s and ’60s were the dawn of the age of symmetry in particle physics.
Lee’s 
theories 
and 
Columbia’s 
experimenters—Lederman, 
Schwartz,
Steinberger, and the one female professor in the department, Chien-Shiung
Wu, whom everyone referred to as Madame Wu—were at the center of the
search for symmetry and the discovery of its subtle violations.
Symmetry is the pattern that tells you how to generate one part of an
object from another. It condenses information. Saying that a human face is
symmetrical is another way of telling you that you do not need to draw both
sides of it; instead, you can generate the left side from the right. Said
differently, a truly symmetric human face is indistinguishable from its
mirror image, which flips the left and right sides.
Before Lee and Yang, every physicist believed it to be obvious beyond
question that the forces of nature are reflection-invariant, so that the mirror
image of every natural event is itself an equally probable natural event. This
assumed property of nature was called the law of parity conservation,
because of the equality or parity between the mirror image and the actual
event itself.
Physicists are familiar with four forces, the strong, the electromagnetic,
the weak, and the gravitational force. The strong force binds together the
protons and neutrons that make up the nucleus at the center of every atom.
The electromagnetic force causes the electrons in atoms to orbit their
nucleus and emit light. The weak force is responsible for “beta decay,” the
radioactive disintegration of nuclei by electron emission. Gravity, the oldest
and most familiar force, governs the motions of falling apples, the earth and
the moon, the planets, stars, and galaxies.
In the 1950s physicists knew that the strong and electromagnetic forces
conserved 
parity. 
They 
unquestionably 
assumed 
that 
the 
weak 
force
conserved parity, too. It seemed inconceivable that it shouldn’t. No one
could imagine that looking at nature in a mirror might yield a world that
couldn’t exist.
Then, two strange new and unstable particles, the tau and the theta, were
discovered in cosmic rays. In most respects the two particles seemed almost
identical; they had the same mass and electric charge, but they decayed
differently. What could make two almost indistinguishable particles decay
into two different final states? That was the famous tau-theta puzzle of the
1950s.
In 1956 Lee and his collaborator Chen-Ning Yang pointed out that the
two particles might in fact be one and the same particle, which then, subject
to the weak force, decayed in two different ways, but that this could only
happen if the weak force responsible for its decay was not reflection-
invariant. It was a preposterous suggestion that Lee and Yang took seriously
and systematically. They analyzed all previous experiments that had studied
the weak force in atoms and nuclei and found that, contrary to everyone’s
unquestioned belief, no previous experiment had ever truly tested the
assumed symmetry between an event and its reflection. With further study,
Lee and Yang suggested specific experiments to check for parity violation
in nuclear weak decays.
Most 
physicists 
were 
skeptical. 
How, 
they 
wondered, 
could 
any 
of
nature’s laws not be symmetric under reflection? But within a few months,
by 
early 
1957, 
Madame 
Wu 
and 
her 
collaborators 
carried 
out 
the
experiment Lee and Yang proposed, and showed that they were vindicated.
Lee and Yang received their Nobel Prize that same year.
Lee and Yang’s discovery that Nature was slightly asymmetric sparked a
revolution. Slowly but inexorably, further experiments in the 1950s and
1960s revealed further subtle asymmetries of the weak interaction. T. D.
was at the center of these investigations.
At Columbia and far beyond, T. D. was renowned and celebrated. At the
weekly research seminars I attended on the eighth floor of Pupin, every
speaker felt compelled to focus on him; as they spoke, their eyes fixated
only on him, and he let no statement he did not fully agree with pass him
by. No matter who lectured at the seminar, T. D. concentrated intensely on
their argument, and interrupted at the first instant something was not
satisfactory. At times he broke in on the initial sentence of the talk, refusing
to 
let 
a 
speaker 
proceed 
until 
the 
point 
was 
clarified. 
Sometimes
clarification never came; I once witnessed the humiliation of a visiting
postdoc who was forced to defend the first sentence he uttered for the entire
hour and a half allowed for his seminar. No one dared restrain T. D.
With his Moses-by-Michelangelo persona, beams of light emerging from
his forehead, T. D. radiated an intense purity. At first I imagined that his
rigorous questioning was the by product of a pure search for knowledge and
truth. Later I began to detect a latent glee with which he savaged the
imperfections in other people’s talks. He enjoyed disorienting them. The
only person I ever saw shake loose of his dogged grasp was the late Bram
Pais, a small but feisty Dutch-born professor at Rockefeller University, who
was able to half-playfully, half-ironically kid T. D. into loosening his jaws.
Brilliance seemed paramount in the Columbia physics department. T. D.
was willing to supervise only the stellar wunderkinder who often went on to
become inordinately young Columbia physics professors. The department
developed an incestuous air; the pressure of his presence on his students-
turned-faculty, like sons in their father’s house, must have been fierce. Over
time they seemed to gravitate towards research problems a little removed
from the mainstream, as though searching for clear air to breathe. Unlike
Rabi or Schwinger, who took on many more students and generated schools
of disciples who propagated out into the world, T.D. never gave birth to
anyone of his caliber.
Over time I noticed a darker side to Lee and Yang’s genius. At an
American Physical Society meeting I attended in the late 1960s, I observed
that 
although 
they 
were 
both 
on 
the 
same 
panel, 
they 
avoided
acknowledging each other’s presence. In class at Columbia, I noticed that T.
D.’s recounting of the insights central to their jointly published discoveries
seemed to focus on his own feats. Finally, someone told me what most
people in the field knew, that Lee and Yang had stopped working together
several years earlier, and now no longer spoke to each other. Years later,
after I left physics, I saw a copy of an angry reminiscence that T. D. had
circulated in response to a published reminiscence of Yang’s. It contained
his vengeful version of how he and Yang had argued and then separated,
and described how Yang had wept in his office.
I have no idea on whose side justice lay. I focus on T. D. here only
because he was most visible to me, because he had made such enviable
discoveries, 
and 
because 
he 
had 
such 
a 
powerful 
influence 
on 
the
atmosphere we inhaled in Pupin Hall. It was disappointing to learn that
even the Nobel Prize and almost eternal fame were not enough to overcome
vanity and competition.
History takes strange turns. To Columbia students in the 1960s, Lee
seemed to have the inside track in what we foolishly thought of as his race
with Yang; I say “foolishly” because both of them had done outstanding
work we could never realistically hope to emulate. Then in the 1970s,
Yang’s reputation accelerated. Two decades earlier, in what is now a classic
paper, he had observed that Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism was the
consequence 
of 
a 
subtle 
but 
powerful 
symmetry 
called 
local 
gauge
invariance. Going out on a limb, Yang extended this symmetry to the strong
and weak forces, too. The idea lay fallow for a decade or more. Then,
suddenly, it provided the foundation for both the Glashow-Weinberg-Salam
unified theory of weak and electromagnetic interactions and Gell-Mann’s
quantum 
chromodynamics 
theory 
of 
strong 
forces. 
Recently, 
some
practicing physicists with an interest in finance have even begun to apply
the same principle to the “trading force” between market participants that
determines financial values. On this matter the jury has not even been
assembled.
For current physics students, Lee and Yang are a part of history. For those
of us who witnessed them, it was hard to resist the unfair urge to rank. The
truth is that any one of us would be happy to have written just one the
several remarkable papers they authored or coauthored. Yet when fellow
Columbia physics students from those days meet up, they still argue about
whether Lee or Yang was a better physicist, discussing the ancient epic feats
of bygone heroes the way that the animals in the final chapter of The Wind
in the Willows reminisce about the fabled exploits of Mr. Toad and his
friends.
I worked studiously throughout that first American academic year of 1966–
67 and then, after a short trip home to South Africa, began my preparations
for the September PhD qualifying exams.
The 
quals 
were 
extremely 
broad. 
They 
aimed 
to 
test 
one’s 
general
understanding 
of 
all 
of 
physics—classical 
mechanics, 
electromagnetic
theory, optics, thermodynamics, solid-state, atomic and nuclear physics, and
quantum 
mechanics—and 
probed 
your 
ability 
to 
explain 
all 
sorts 
of
observed 
phenomena. 
One 
question, 
set 
by 
the 
constantly 
inventive
Friedberg, described the denizens of a planet in a distant galaxy who
recorded the risings, settings, and eclipses of their several suns and moons,
and then demanded that you deduce their orbits from Kepler’s seventeenth-
century laws of planetary motion. For a brief but heady period after I
finished studying, I felt that I had a good grasp of the whole of physics and
would be able to come up with a reasoned answer to any question about the
universe tossed at me.
I also took the theory section of the exam, in which an essay question
asked for a description of some independent theoretical work. I wrote about
the unified field theories of electromagnetism and gravitation that I had
studied for my senior thesis two years earlier in Cape Town. I had been
particularly attracted to a paper by Theodor Kaluza and Oskar Klein, two
European physicists of the 1920s. Their paper had postulated that the
universe we lived in was five- rather than four-dimensional, but that the
extent of the fifth dimension was so small that we were unaware of it. They
had then shown that if Einstein’s general theory of relativity held in this
larger five-dimensional world, with one dimension unobserved, we would
experience the 
theory’s 
forces as those of ordinary (four-dimensional)
electromagnetic 
theory 
and 
gravitation. 
It 
was 
a 
platonically 
beautiful
theory that seemed quaintly irrelevant to the pragmatic particle-hunting
theorists and experimentalists at Columbia in the 1960s, but its day was to
come again later in the 1980s and 1990s when string theories of particles
and their interactions became fashionable.
I passed my qualifying exams easily and well enough to be admitted to
the privileged class of people who were “allowed to do theoretical physics”
at Columbia. But there was a caveat—I was required to complete two extra
years of coursework before beginning my research. I was in for a long haul.
Although it was premature, I soon began to strategize about seeking a
PhD advisor who would take me on as a student. I quickly but regretfully
discarded any idea of working for T. D. Even the thought of approaching
him was too daunting; he accepted only one exceptional student every few
years.
Then I hit on the idea of working for Gerald Feinberg, the earliest of T.
D.’s wunderkinder. Feinberg was a tall, skinny, stiff-looking man with a
flattop haircut that always reminded me of someone I had once seen in an
Archie comic book. Every day he wore a very small conservative bow tie
and a belt whose gold buckle proclaimed “GF.” The whole effect was very
Fifties.
Feinberg was renowned as one of the earliest people to propose that the
muon particle, to all initial appearances simply a sort of heavy electron,
carried a special sort of quantum-mechanical flavor, a sort of “mu-ness”
that differentiated it from the electron. He had attended the Bronx High
School of Science, where he had been a classmate and friend of both
Glashow and Weinberg, the physicists who later won the Nobel Prize for
their unification of weak and electromagnetic interactions. Perhaps in order
to avoid competing on T. D.’s turf, he had drifted out of the center field of
particle physics and was then developing his own esoteric theories of
hypothetical faster-than-light particles that he named tachyons. Physicists
usually conjecture the existence of new particles in order to make a flawed
or incomplete theory consistent, but Feinberg seemed to have had no really
good reason for suggesting the existence of tachyons. Gell-Mann had once
wittily suggested that Nature operated on the Totalitarian Principle that
states, “Everything not forbidden is compulsory.” So, perhaps, Feinberg’s
logic wasn’t as frivolous as it seemed. In any event, it was a risky wager; if
tachyons were found it would be staggering, but if they were not, nothing
would change and no one would care. Anyone can speculate.
I wanted to be Feinberg’s student, but I didn’t know how to go about it.
Since it was premature for formal arrangements and since I was naturally
reticent and shy, I simply began to greet him very politely whenever our
paths crossed.
Graduate school was a small community. In corridors and elevators and
on campus, I was soon running into Feinberg several times a day, always
giving him a polite hello and a nice smile. He would reciprocate similarly
with a sort of nervous curling of the lips. As time passed, this limbo of
flirtatious foreplay continued unabated. I could never find the courage to
broach the question of being his student; I suppose I must have hoped it
would just happen wordlessly. Every time I saw him I smiled; every time I
smiled he bared his lips back at me with greater awkwardness. Our facial
manipulations bore increasingly less resemblance to anything like a real
smile; each of our reciprocated gestures was a caricature, a Greek theatrical
mask signaling friendliness. One day, on about the fifth intersection of our
paths on that particular day, I could stand it no longer. I saw him heading
towards me down one of the long dark, old-fashioned, Pupin corridors, and
immediately turned towards the nearest stairwell and went up one floor to
avoid him. Having succeeded at this once, I was compelled to do it
repeatedly. Soon I was moving upstairs or downstairs to another floor as
soon as I saw him approaching, like the protagonist in some ghastly version
of the video game Lode Runner.
My courtship of Feinberg, now badly out of control, ended abruptly one
discomforting morning when we both entered the same elevator and rode up
eight floors without looking at each other, pretending to be absorbed in
reading the elevator inspection certificate. The end was a great relief.
I watched Feinberg from a distance afterwards. At the weekly coffee hour
in Pupin, I noticed his vaguely Strangelovian bent for carrying logic to
extremes, a weakness I later came to associate with many graduates of the
University of Chicago business school. He had created an organization
called the Prometheus Project, which aimed to plan for humanity’s future. I
observed long discussions between Feinberg and Milton Friedman’s son
David, then a physics postdoc at Columbia, about the application of hard-
nosed rationality to society. I once heard Feinberg suggest that many of
Manhattan’s 1970s social problems could be solved by forbidding anyone
who earned less than, say, $10,000 per year to live there. It had not occurred
to him, apparently, that this excluded many of the people who worked at the
university. Several years later we heard that he intended to be cryogenically
frozen when he died, in anticipation of being reheated and resuscitated at a
later time when whatever would cause his death would be curable. Sadly, he
died of cancer in 1992. I recently found hundreds of Internet references to
both Feinberg and the New York Cryonics Society, lamenting the fact that
despite his advocacy of the Society, he ultimately left no instructions for his
own bodily preservation.
Late in 1968, still searching for a thesis advisor, I ran into one last
temptation to avoid becoming a particle theorist. My American cousin in
Manhattan introduced me to Robert Herman, his old City College student
friend from the 1930s. Herman, a physicist, had abandoned academia for
family 
reasons 
and 
was 
now 
working 
at 
General 
Motors, 
analyzing
vehicular traffic flow. Academic particle physicists looked down on this
kind of applied physics as pedestrian work, so to speak, but Herman had
done outstanding fundamental research before that. In the 1940s he had
coauthored the first paper to suggest that the Big Bang that created our
universe would have filled all of space with microwave radiation. Arno
Penzias and Robert Wilson at Bell Laboratories later fortuitously detected
this background radiation and won the Nobel Prize. Then in the 1950s,
Herman and Robert Hofstadter, another City College friend of my cousin’s,
became the first physicists to probe the internal structure of the proton by
shooting fast electrons at it and then watching them bounce off. If the
proton were a hard, small object—like a miniature billiard ball—one would
expect to see the electron occasionally recoil at a very large angle to the line
of fire; if, however, the proton were spongy, there would be very few sharp
collisions. Surprisingly, Hofstadter and Herman observed very few dramatic
recoils; they concluded that the proton was a cotton-candy sphere with a
soft interior rather than the small, hard, elementary object everyone had
imagined. Hofstadter alone won the Nobel Prize for this work. My cousin
claimed that Herman was deprived of his share of the Prize because of the
selection committee’s prejudice against scientists outside academia.
When we spoke, Herman suggested that I work in applied physics and
sent me some papers on traffic flow he had written, but I was still a stranger
to compromise and I declined. Coincidentally, though, my future PhD thesis
would turn out to be closely related to the Hofstadter-Herman electron-
proton scattering experiment.
I spent my second and third years at Columbia taking the myriad of
required courses, all the while continuing my quest for a particle physics
thesis advisor. Finally, in early 1969 I reached an agreement to work for
Norman 
Christ. 
He 
was 
the 
most 
recent 
in 
the 
long 
line 
of 
T. 
D.’s
wunderkinder, a polite and enthusiastically perky young man who was just
about my age, but who had received his PhD under T. D.’s tutelage in
record time two years earlier, before I had even arrived at Columbia. After
two years as a postdoc at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, he
had returned to Columbia as a tenured associate professor. In terms of a
career, he seemed to have everything one could hope for. It must have been
a heavy burden, however, to carry the weight of so many expectations of
precociousness. 
I 
was 
relieved, 
many 
years 
later, 
to 
hear 
him
uncharacteristically comment that a physicist spends about half of his or her
time 
enthralled 
and 
the 
other 
half 
in 
depression, 
an 
observation 
that
corresponded closely to my own experience.
I was Norman’s first PhD student and, perhaps because he had been a
student so recently himself, our relations were stilted. During the four years
I worked for him he never succeeded in finding a comfortable mode of
addressing me. I suppose that the difficulty arose from the tension between
the parity of our ages and the disparity of our relative positions. He could
not bring himself to simply call me “Emanuel” and so he eventually
resorted to addressing me as “Mr. Derman,” uttered between invisible quote
marks in a manner intended to imply ironic jocosity. I, in turn, could never
manage to call him “Norman.” It was only with my father- and mother-in-
law that I ever again experienced a similar sort of naming difficulty: The
first names they told me to use seemed to connote too much familiarity,
“Dr.” and “Mrs.” seemed too formal, and the Slovak analogs of “Mom” and
“Dad” that my wife used were too unnatural. In the end, with them though
not with Norman, first names prevailed.
In the fall of 1968, I moved out of I. House to share an apartment with a
friend on Amsterdam Avenue and 120th Street, just across the street from
where I now teach financial engineering. With most of my foreign friends
from the previous two years back in their home countries, I spent much
time alone. One evening I experienced my first mugging at the hands of a
group of teenagers, with two more muggings to follow over the next few
years. But, on the plus side, sometime in the spring of 1969, I noticed a new
and exotic foreign female student in the physics department library. Since
women in physics were rare, a new arrival attracted everyone’s attention.
Though I hadn’t yet contrived to meet her, I watched from a distance her
laughter-filled gesticulating conversations with some of the other graduate
students. Then, one Saturday evening, I saw her at a fellow student’s party
on 119th Street. I approached her and learned that her name was Eva. She
had left Czechoslovakia for a summer job in Germany during the Prague
Spring of 1968 and, after the Russian invasion, had not returned. Her
English was charmingly limited; I felt sad to see the skimpy physics lecture
notes she had jotted down in Slovak during physics classes that were
delivered 
in 
English. 
When 
I 
walked 
her 
home 
from 
the 
party 
we
discovered that we both lived in the same apartment building on 120th
Street. Soon we were spending much of our time together.
I spent the summer of 1969 at a particle physics summer school at
Brookhaven National Laboratories in Upton, Long Island. Most weekends I
headed 
back 
into 
the 
city 
to 
see 
Eva; 
sometimes 
she 
came 
out 
to
Brookhaven to visit me. We went swimming in the rough surf off Smith
Point, in Atlantic Ocean waves of a size I hadn’t seen since I had left Cape
Town. But mostly the summer weeks dragged by slowly and yet unquietly
on dreary Long Island, until finally, at summer’s end, I went home to Cape
Town to visit my family.
I was restless there, too. Three years had passed since I had left, and one
day, 
confused 
about 
my 
future 
on 
all 
fronts, 
I 
visited 
an 
Afrikaner
psychiatrist named Jannie Louw at the recommendation of my elder sister.
He listened to my account of distant loneliness and uncertainty, and then
half-pleased and half-displeased me by avoiding specific advice and instead
suggesting a philosophical approach to my suffering. I went to see him once
more, and when I left, he recommended that I read two books: Victor
Frankl’s Man’s Search for Meaning and Rudolf Steiner’s Knowledge of the
Higher Worlds. I found some solace in Frankl, but never bothered with
Steiner until years later.
One person who made a strong impression on me during that Brookhaven
summer 
was 
Mike 
Green, 
a 
graduate 
student 
in 
particle 
physics 
at
Cambridge. Mike was far ahead of me academically, already working on
research for his thesis. Everything went enviably faster in British graduate
schools. In subsequent years I ran into him regularly at summer research
institutes in Aspen and Stanford, and at university seminars at Oxford and
Cambridge. Always, he was single-mindedly working away on his beloved
string 
theory, 
a 
model 
that 
treats 
elementary 
particles 
as 
tiny, 
one-
dimensional, rubber-band-like, vibrating strings that wiggle and move at
relativistic 
speeds. 
I 
always 
admired 
Mike’s 
tenacity, 
his 
capacity 
for
banging away at the same problem for years until it yielded. Fifteen years
later, when I had already left physics, Mike became famous for proving that
string theories could be mathematically consistent only if the universe had
either 10 or 26 dimensions. Uncharacteristically, I didn’t feel the smallest
pinch of envy or competition at his deserved success. Like the Kaluza-Klein
theories I had studied as an undergraduate, Mike’s model of particles was
viable only in a large-dimensioned universe, which could be mapped to our
apparently four-dimensional universe only if its extent in each of those
extra dimensions was so small as to be unobservable. String theory is so
arcane that physicists sometimes describe it as “a little bit of twenty-first–
century physics that accidentally fell into the twentieth century.”
The physics department was home to more passionate clashes. Several
professors, among them Leon Lederman, Malvin Ruderman, and Richard
Garwin, worked part-time for the Jason Division of the Institute for Defense
Analysis, a group of elite scientists from elite universities who studied
defense-related problems. Norman Christ, my young PhD advisor, was a
member, too. During the height of the Vietnam protests, Columbia antiwar
student 
groups 
picketed 
these 
professors 
at 
their 
homes 
and 
in 
their
seminars. Though the contents of the Jason reports were presumably secret,
the antiwar activists circulated their titles. I recall one, “Interdiction of
Trucks by Night,” which we assumed to be about methods of bombing the
Ho Chi Minh trail. One fall we heard that antiwar protesters had picketed
Ruderman’s home in his suburban neighborhood on the eve of Yom Kippur,
pointing out the conflict they perceived between observing the Jewish day
of 
atonement 
and 
writing 
military-related 
advisory 
papers. 
I 
recall
Ruderman responding with great and somewhat disingenuous indignation at
the invasion of his personal life. I was most impressed by Richard Garwin.
Whereas 
most 
of 
the 
other 
professors 
tried 
to 
dodge 
the 
moral
responsibilities 
of 
their 
military-related 
activities 
with 
a 
mixture 
of
righteous outrage, wry charm, and vague ramblings about working from
within the system, Garwin simply asserted that there was a role for force in
the world, and that he believed in what he was doing.
Jason still exists, though a March 23, 2002, New York Times article
reported that the Pentagon has withdrawn its budgetary support. Jason, the
article jokingly noted, is rumored to be an acronym for Junior Achiever,
Somewhat Older Now—English for ex-wunderkind, I guess.
In late 1969 I finally began my PhD thesis. Just at that time, the particle
physics 
world 
I 
was 
entering 
was 
agog 
over 
two 
momentous 
new
developments. First, experimentalists were discovering the earliest hints of
the actual existence of quarks, and second, theorists were beginning to
understand 
the 
origin 
of 
the 
subtle 
similarity 
between 
the 
weak 
and
electromagnetic forces.
Gell-Mann’s version of the Eightfold Way had predicted that the proton,
the neutron, and all the other thus-far observed strongly interacting particles
could in principle be made out of three smaller subparticles called quarks.
Quarks, if they existed, had to be almost unbelievably peculiar; they had to
carry a fractional electric charge of either one-third or two-thirds the charge
of the proton, but no one had ever seen a particle of fractional charge.
Although 
the 
Eightfold 
Way 
implied 
their 
existence, 
physicists 
were
reluctant to take them seriously. Instead, avoiding the reality behind their
mathematics, they had come to think of quarks as mathematically consistent
but fictitious components that could never be observed. It was as though the
only coins you had ever seen in circulation were nickels, dimes, and
quarters, and you had concluded that somewhere there had to be a one-cent
coin.
If a proton really contained three hard little quarks deep inside it, one
should be able to “see” them experimentally by shooting a fast electron at a
proton and observing it recoil sharply when it struck a quark head-on. The
method is a little like looking for bits of eggshell in a sponge cake—once in
a while, as you chew, you hear a sharp crack as your teeth hit a fragment of
shell.
Robert Hofstadter, my cousin’s City College friend of the 1930s, had
observed no such sharp recoils, and everyone had concluded that the proton
was pure sponge and no eggshell. Hofstadter’s experiments, however, were
limited. He had kept an eye only on the so-called elastic collisions, those in
which the target proton remained intact as it recoiled like a struck billiard
ball. Now, in the late 1960s, a later generation of physicists at the Stanford
Linear 
Accelerator 
Center 
(SLAC) 
began 
to 
watch 
so-called 
inelastic
electron-proton collisions in which the proton disintegrated rather than
recoiled after being struck. Amazingly, in these collisions, many of the
electrons did in fact recoil sharply, as though they had struck something
very hard and small. Somewhere deep inside there truly were bits of
eggshell.
Feynman, from his base at Caltech in Pasadena, had developed a simple
phenomenological picture of the proton as a closed bag of hard little quark-
like constituents which he called its “partons.” In Feynman’s picture, the
energetic electrons that scattered off the protons at SLAC provided a
metaphorical X-ray view of the partons inside the proton, much as an
ordinary X-ray or a CAT scan uses high-frequency radiation to provide a
view of our internal organs. Using the information from the SLAC X-ray of
the partons, one could calculate many other properties of the proton itself.
More and more, we began to believe that protons, long thought of as
unsplittable, might be composite—they might contain quarks. But this was
not all that excited us; we were also increasingly becoming aware of the
similarity between the weak and electromagnetic forces. Since the 1930s,
physicists had been aware of an intriguing analogy between Maxwell’s
1873 theory of electricity and magnetism and Fermi’s 1934 theory of the
weak force. However, no one had yet been able to extend this analogy into a
consistent theory of the two forces. Then, in the 1960s, Glashow, Weinberg,
and Salam, all working independently, accomplished this unification by
creating what is now called the “standard model.” They based their theory
on Yang’s symmetry principle of local gauge invariance.
The standard model related nature’s forces to each other much like
Mendeleyev’s periodic table had connected the diverse chemical elements.
Mendeleyev had detected a hint of order in the properties of elements and
then deduced the existence of other as yet-undiscovered elements necessary
to complete the pattern. Similarly, Glashow, Weinberg, and Salam had
detected a pattern in both the weak and electromagnetic forces, and then
deduced 
the 
existence 
of 
other 
previously 
undiscovered 
weak 
forces
necessary to complete their picture. The sum total of all these forces
comprised the standard model. It was an ambitious but compelling theory;
when it was verified, its creators won the Nobel Prize. Much of theoretical
particle physics works in this way: You hear a few isolated bars of a
beautiful song and try to figure out the whole piece by generalizing the
pattern in the fragments.
My thesis work over the next three years employed both the theory of
quarks and the Weinberg-Salam standard model which predicted new weak
forces between electrons and quarks. One of these new forces, the so-called
weak 
neutral current, 
would 
cause 
a 
small 
violation 
of 
parity 
in 
the
collisions of electrons and quarks. If protons were bags of quarks, one
should also be able to observe a small violation of parity in electron-proton
collisions. The effect would be small and subtle, for the most part masked
by the much stronger electromagnetic force between electrons and quarks.
In my thesis I proposed a new test of the standard model. In particular I
suggested that experimentalists at SLAC try to observe the effects of the
standard model’s parity-violating weak force in the inelastic collisions of
electrons with protons. In order to estimate the size of the signal, I made use
of many of the skills I had gained during the past few years. I employed Lee
and Yang’s framework for analyzing parity violation and I used Feynman’s
parton-model description of the proton as a bag of quarks. In this way I
calculated how much of a parity-violating asymmetry would be seen if the
standard model were indeed correct.
I began my research in 1970. Slowly, I read the multitude of papers that
explained 
how 
to 
use 
the 
parton 
model, 
repeating 
their 
published
calculations on my own and checking that I could reproduce their results.
Step by step, I learned the mechanics of the model and how to use it. Then I
began my own work.
My first task was to carry out the long mathematical calculations that
predicted the distribution of electrons recoiling after a collision with a
quark. I did each calculation using “Feynman diagrams,” the cartoon-like
representation invented by Feynman to systematize the ways in which
particles interacted during collisions. I drew all the possible diagrams that
could occur in a theory, and then, using Feynman’s rules, translated each
picture into a mathematical formula and evaluated it. The calculations,
carried out with pen and paper, took up tens of pages. I repeated each
calculation 
at 
least 
twice 
to 
check 
for 
consistency. 
When 
successive
calculations didn’t match, I searched each one for errors and eliminated
them until I found agreement. Today, however, much of the repetitive
algebraic 
manipulation 
would 
be 
done 
with 
symbolic 
mathematical
programs like Mathematica™.
Feynman’s diagrams and rules were a sort of bookkeeping-by-picture
process that miraculously captured all the details of the standard model in a
series of diagrams; they allowed people less talented than Feynman to
perform the most complex calculations carefully and correctly. Many of the
great advances in physics are like this; they codify and make routine what
was formerly almost impossible to think about. Whenever I have a new
problem to work on—in physics or options theory—the first major struggle
is to gain some intuition about how to proceed; the second struggle is to
transform this intuition into something more formulaic, a set of rules
anyone can follow, rules that no longer require the original insight itself. In
this way, one person’s breakthrough becomes everybody’s possession.
After several months I completed the calculations for electrons scattering
off quarks. But in the real world electrons scatter off protons—that is, bags
of quarks. My next task was therefore to calculate what happened when an
electron hit a bag. I embarked on extensive numerical computations using
old-fashioned, punched card programs that I submitted to the university
computer center to run overnight on their IBM mainframe. It was tedious:
In those days we had no interactive terminals or PCs; one typographical
mistake in punching the cards could lose you a full day’s work.
It was then that I learned never to trust any new formula I had derived
without 
thoroughly 
cross-checking 
it 
for 
consistency 
from 
all 
angles.
Usually, anything new and complex is an extension of some older, simpler,
and more familiar calculation. The first check is therefore to switch off the
complexity and verify that you obtain the familiar results. I found it so easy
to make mistakes in my calculations that I began to wonder about the safety
of flying—how could engineers possibly trust their calculations when they
designed airplanes, where life and death rather than theories and reputations
were at stake?
It took me seven years in graduate school to get my PhD, an astonishing ten
percent of a lifetime. There were three preparatory years of coursework, one
subsequent warm-up year in the area of my research, and two more years of
my actual thesis research. Finally, I spent a half-year writing the thesis,
composing a paper for publication, and preparing for my thesis defense. A
small number of my friends got out of Columbia in five years, but many
took eight or nine.
Sometimes we tried to save others from our fate. In the early 1970s Doug
Hofstadter came by our office in Pupin. He was still unknown, a PhD
student in physics at Eugene, Oregon, and not yet the famous author of
Gödel, Escher, Bach. It took some time before I realized that he was the son
of my cousin’s friend Robert Hofstadter of electron-proton scattering fame.
Doug was contemplating a switch to Columbia from the University of
Oregon where he was in graduate school. Though it felt deliciously like
biting the hand that fed us, we tried to warn him away from Pupin.
Most of us grew to hate our stay in the physics department. We spent the
better part of our twenties shuttered there. For the most part we were
ignored, 
receiving 
little 
attention 
from 
the 
people 
to 
whom 
we 
were
apprenticed. My friend Chang-Li Yiu spent more than six months working
on a thesis problem without conversing with his advisor, only to discover
that his advisor had solved the same problem a few months earlier. Then he
had 
to 
begin 
again. 
Though 
I 
was 
better 
off—Norman 
Christ 
was
responsible and I met with him weekly—I often thought I might never
complete my degree. You could coast from year to year, receiving your
Department of Energy research grant, while no one seemed to care when or
whether you finished, or what you would do afterwards.
In defiance, I struggled to look unbeaten during the final few years. I
remember walking hand-in-hand with my wife down Broadway and passing
a crowd of Columbia professors strolling up Broadway on the way back
from lunch at the Moon Palace. As our paths crossed, I tried hard to look
nonchalantly happy and carefree, talking animatedly, pretending to myself
and to the professors passing by that they had no effect on the other parts of
my life.
But of course they did. One summer in the early seventies, during the
student protests against the American invasion of Cambodia, Eva and I
went camping in the Catskills mountains with Chang-Li and his wife. After
several days in a tent, cut off from any news, we went to meet my in-laws
who were vacationing in a nearby hotel. As we arrived, my father-in-law
somberly announced to us that a small bomb had exploded in one of the
physics department’s bathrooms. Without a moment’s hesitation Chang-Li
and I leapt in the air for joy, whooping and cheering. My in-laws looked at
us in bewilderment, and I suddenly realized how far beyond the elastic limit
we had been stretched.
I had waited four years to begin my thesis work, but once I knew enough to
get going, I progressed steadily. Halfway through the research I gave a
seminar 
on 
some 
of 
my 
early 
results 
to 
T. 
D. 
and 
the 
rest 
of 
the
departmental faculty. In early 1972 I finally published my first paper, in
which I used Feynman’s parton model to try to explain the results of a
recent 
Columbia 
experiment 
carried 
out 
by 
Leon 
Lederman 
and
collaborators. My calculation was simply a warm-up exercise for the thesis
work to come, but its publication and the sight of my name in print after so
many 
years 
of 
waiting 
exhilarated 
me 
briefly. 
I 
completed 
my 
thesis
research by late 1972 and, at long last, in the spring of 1973, formally
defended my work in front of a committee consisting of T. D. himself,
Christ, and Lederman. I answered their questions and then I was done.
My thesis, Tests for a Weak Neutral Current in l 
±
+ N → l 
±
+ Anything,
was published in 1973 in the Physical Review. It was a competent piece of
work that analyzed how the then-unverified standard model of weak and
electromagnetic 
forces 
would 
uniquely 
manifest 
itself 
through 
parity
violation in electron-proton scattering. In 1978, a collaboration led by
Charles Prescott and Richard Taylor at SLAC published the results of an
elegant and careful experiment that confirmed a level of parity violation
consistent 
with 
the 
standard 
model. 
A 
recent 
book 
on 
the 
history 
of
twentieth-century 
particle 
physics
1

refers 
to 
the 
audience’s 
prolonged
applause after Prescott’s first presentation of their experimental results as
“the long elegiac salute given to the end of an age.” Their experiment put
the final stamp of approval on the standard model of Glashow, Weinberg,
and Salam. I was pleased to note that my 1973 paper was one of the first
papers they referenced.
Despite the amount of time it took to finish my thesis, I have no real
regrets; in a way, I am proud of the struggle. What I learned in those years
—perseverance as much as mathematics—has stood me in good stead on
Wall Street as well as in academia. When trying to discover something new
in any field, one has to spend many years thinking, making false starts,
wandering down blind alleys and stumbling into ditches, only to emerge
again and keep going. For this, a PhD is a good, if painful, training.
Years later on Wall Street I was horrified to notice quant résumés listing
the nonexistent degree A.B.D. That, I soon discovered, was a common
business-world acronym for “All But Dissertation,” a way of describing
those who had tried to obtain a PhD but left academia before they had
completed their dissertation. Since a PhD is by definition a research degree,
the main achievement of which is the completion of a piece of original
research described in a dissertation, I looked at A.B.D. as a kind of
“Wayne’s World” PhD (not!). I resented the way it devalued the innovation
and effort involved in doing research.
I then began the search for a postdoctoral position, a two-year, low-paying
research appointment that was the standard first step towards an academic
career in science. I mailed out scores of letters with my curriculum vitae to
physicists whose names I knew. I gave research seminars at any of the
schools that invited me. But academic jobs were scarce—the universities
were filled to the brim with young, tenured faculty hired during the past
decade; I might well have to wait for a generation of physicists to die.
As in most endeavors, it helps to have someone pulling for you. At
Goldman Sachs, people like to say that you need a “rabbi” to become a
partner, and the Columbia physics department was definitely short on
rabbis. In the end, because my work was topical and I was lucky, I received
a 
two-year 
postdoctoral 
position 
at 
the 
University 
of 
Pennsylvania 
in
Philadelphia, set to commence in September 1973.
I did not attend Columbia’s May graduation, held outdoors on the giant
plaza in front of Low Library where only a few years earlier I had watched
New York City policemen chase students with truncheons during the nights
of the 1968 student occupation. None of my graduate school friends seemed
to bother with the ceremony either.
I spent one month that summer in Erice, a beautiful town high above
Trapani in western Sicily, where I attended the annual Ettore Majorana
particle physics summer school. Up on the mountain I had a tantalizing
glimpse of the life of successful physicists on the conference circuit, who
visited exotic places each summer. I sat with some of them in the town
plaza, smoking cigarettes and sipping Italian aperitifs. One morning I had a
hot shave at the local barber shop, where I lay tilted back in a heavy leather
chair while the barber sharpened his razor on a strop. Years later I met
corporate lawyers and Wall Street salesmen who touted the fringe benefits
of 
their 
jobs—first-class 
flights, 
expensive 
meals, 
and 
fancy 
hotels. 
I
silently scorned their focus on the material benefits of work. In physics, I
thought, the life itself was the benefit; talking about physics to interesting
people in interesting places was the main dish, not the cutlery.
In Erice I observed with slight envy another attendee, Frank Wilczek. He
had just graduated from Princeton and was already the coauthor of a famous
paper in field theory. Yet a large part of me was exhausted with physics and
the seven-year struggle to shine. I consoled myself with a few sentences
Einstein wrote in his autobiographical notes, composed at the age of 67,
about the aftereffects of his final examinations: “This coercion had such a
deterring effect [upon me] that, after I had passed the final examination, I
found the consideration of any scientific problems distasteful to me for an
entire year.”
Notes
1
Crease, R. P., and C. C. Mann, The Second Creation, Rutgers University
Press, Revised Edition (1996).
...
Chapter 3
A Sort of Life
The priesthood of itinerant postdocs
Research isn’t easy
Almost perishing, then publishing
The delirious thrill of collaboration and discovery
On Labor Day of 1973 I hired a friend of a friend who ran a small part-time
moving business to transport me and my belongings to Philadelphia. In
order to gain respect and imply responsibility, I had told my landlord that I
was “Dr. Derman,” feeling only a slight twinge of guilt at exploiting my
title and trying to pass for a “real” doctor. Our mover, who drove my wife
and me down the turnpike from New York, told us that he routinely rolled
back the odometer on the van he rented before returning it to Hertz, a
common 
1960s-style 
view 
of 
the 
legitimacy 
of 
stealing 
from 
large
impersonal companies.
At 
the 
end 
of 
that 
weekend 
I 
began 
trying 
to 
settle 
into 
solitary
Philadelphia while Eva returned to our familiar Columbia graduate-student
apartment overlooking Tom’s Restaurant at Broadway and 112th Street, a
location later made famous beyond the Columbia community by Suzanne
Vega and the television show “Seinfeld.” Eva still had several years to go
on 
her 
PhD 
in 
molecular 
biology. 
I 
had 
hoped 
she 
could 
move 
to
Philadelphia with me, but it was impossible for her to change schools and
PhD advisors. She had only recently switched from physics to biology, and
as a condition of entry into the biology PhD program, she had needed to
promise that she would complete her doctorate in the department. In
making the move to biology she had asked for a recommendation from
Madame Wu, who herself lived in Morningside Heights near Columbia, 50
miles 
apart 
from 
her 
physicist 
husband 
at 
Brookhaven 
National
Laboratories. Madame Wu had met with Eva and lectured her on the need
for sacrifice, making it plain that, since they knew she was married to me
and that I would graduate before her, she would not be admitted to the
biology doctoral program unless she gave her word that she would stay on
there when I graduated. In an era when no one had yet invented the notion
of political correctness, it was quite permissible for faculty to gauge a
woman’s seriousness before admitting her to graduate school. A few years
later, when I went to work in industry, we heard stories of interviewers in
business who asked women whether they would have an abortion if they
unintentionally 
became 
pregnant 
and 
thought 
that 
childbearing 
would
interfere with their work.
For the next two years Eva and I saw each other only on weekends and
during parts of the summer. The tension of living like this was to be a
perennial feature of my future years in academia.
I had imagined postdoctoral life as a sort of priesthood, the blissful
apotheosis of a life dedicated to knowledge. In top-notch universities, a
postdoc in theoretical physics had no mundane obligations—no teaching,
no administration, no fixed hours. What remained was transcendental. You
were hired for your research talent. All you had to do was find something
conceptually worthwhile that interested you and then work on it. All that
mattered was what you achieved. It was simple, but the stakes were high.
No one I knew thought much about getting rich or about what they would
earn. Everyone hoped to achieve something numinously great and was
willing to work an entire lifetime at it. We looked down on professors who
ceased “doing physics” once they achieved tenure. As we got older, we took
solace in the stories of people who made great discoveries after the age of
thirty. 
It 
was 
very 
different 
from 
Wall 
Street, 
where 
I 
heard 
twenty-
something traders talk about “their number,” the amount of money they
figured they needed to be able to quit, certain that they would never have to
work again.
Reality, of course, was different. I was friendless at Penn, surrounded by
married nine-to-fivers, a sharp change from the casual gregariousness of the
graduate-student life that I had grown accustomed to. Philadelphia was
disagreeably unsafe and deserted compared to Morningside Heights. I was a
married person unaccompanied by his spouse, a little too old and attached
for the company of single graduate students and a little too young and
uncoupled for the domesticity of the married faculty. I had little social life
and spent most of my time alone.
Postdoc life was an atavism, a relic of a time long past. Postdoctoral
research positions had been created to provide a brief interlude between
being a graduate student and becoming a professor. But Americans’ post-
Sputnik view of science as the moral equivalent of war had produced a
bubble of young scientists that, now tenured, occupied all the available
faculty positions; they would not retire in less than thirty years. Faculty
need students, and so aspiring physicists continued to enter the head of the
PhD pipeline, but when they emerged at the tail, there was almost nowhere
to go. Postdoc positions temporarily filled the void. They lasted about two
years and paid little. They worked well for universities, though, for they got
to sample a new bunch of young research physicists each year, and could
pick an exceptional one for the rare faculty position that became available.
It was less pleasant for the average postdoc. You started each two-year
position in the fall with a one-year grace period, during which time you
tried to begin, complete, and publish some interesting research, so that by
the fall of the second year you could apply for another postdoc position in
another 
lab 
or 
department 
somewhere 
else 
in 
the 
world. 
Mitchell
Feigenbaum, famous for his contributions to chaos theory, described it
aptly: “These two-year positions made serious work almost impossible.
After one year you had to start worrying about where you could go next.” If
you were unlucky enough to have only a one-year postdoc position, which
was not uncommon, then you had no respite; you had to start applying for
your next job as soon as you began the current one. The only way out—
other than abandoning academic physics entirely—was to write a paper so
acclaimed that you would be offered one of the few faculty positions
available.
Some of my PhD friends, passionate and desperate enough to stay in
physics even if they were paid nothing, became “freebies,” people who had
found no job anywhere and then asked for and received a desk and
rudimentary research facilities with no pay at a top-ranked institution. Their
aim was to get into a stimulating environment, make good contacts, and
then do a piece of work that would get them a paying job. One friend went
so far as to turn down a paid postdoc job at a secondtier institution in order
to become a freebie at Harvard, where he then pulled off some research that
landed him a subsequent paid position at a first-rate place, SLAC.
At the University of Pennsylvania, now without a PhD advisor, I had to
take my own road, and so I began to look for something new to work on. I
had 
spent 
most 
my 
graduate 
student 
years 
working 
on 
high-energy
phenomenology, comparing other people’s theories with other people’s
experiments. It was useful and interesting, but not as visionary as the
physics I had imagined doing. Trying to be ambitious, I began to study the
so-called Lee model, an idealized and therefore analytically soluble theory
of particle interactions that was the subject of an early paper by T. D.
himself. I hoped that it would form the basis for a deeper understanding of
quark forces. I spent most of my first semester at Penn trying vainly to
master the field. But I found it difficult to concentrate; I was restless from
the lack of friends, tense from the strains of a geographically divided
marital life, and tired from all the back-and-forth driving—I would go to
New York on Friday nights and return to Philadelphia early on Monday
mornings. Some weekends I was just too weary to make the trip and
remained alone in Philadelphia, killing time and feeling half-resentful.
My first semester passed without much significant progress. The tenured
professor 
who 
had 
hired 
me 
had 
his 
own 
problems, 
and 
provided
ambivalent encouragement. He seemed disspirited by the competitiveness
of physics. Once, inviting me over to his home for dinner, he spoke about
how “we” had to resign ourselves to not having achieved something great.
His wife quickly pointed out to him that it was still premature to include me
in that “we.”
I felt time racing by. The same professor tried to guide me into working
on a problem in his area, the algebra of weak and electromagnetic currents,
but it was so far from my interests that it became almost repellent to me.
What was the point of being in physics if you could not pick your own
problems? By May 1974, at the close of my first academic year, I was
heading for trouble. In three months I would have to start my next job
search, and I had not published a paper; worse, I was not even involved in
anything that could conceivably lead to a publication. I developed a visceral
understanding of the meaning of “publish or perish,” and made darkly
foreboding comments to my friends and acquaintances about where I was
headed.
Life wasn’t all bad, though. Three good things did happen that year, all
extracurricular. I spent many evening hours in my Philadelphia bedroom
learning to juggle three tennis balls. I started running more seriously than I
had 
before, tagging on to a cadre of dedicated graduate-student 
long
distance runners who trained every day at noon on the university’s famous
Tartan track, site of the Penn Relays. I remembered when Roger Bannister
broke the four-minute mile, and now, temperamentally overenthusiastic to
the point of stupidity, I ran a single mile against my stopwatch as fast as I
could, several times a week, determined to remain ignorant of the benefits
of warming up or running longer distances more slowly. Every few weeks I
stopped to let my shin splints heal, and it took me several more years to
acquire the patience to train rather than simply run as quickly as I could.
Finally, 
I 
learned 
to 
play 
the 
recorder 
in 
a 
small 
group 
at 
a 
West
Philadelphia arts center, enjoying my capacity to make even low-grade
music in harmony with others.
My first academic year of employment passed, and Eva and I spent a
month together in the summer of 1974 at the Aspen Center for Physics,
where I was awed by the casual proximity of so many famous physicists.
Aspen was popular; research space and apartments were in such short
supply that some of the senior physicists had bought houses there in which
they could spend the entire summer. The junior postdocs were allotted only
a few weeks. We hiked in the mountains once or twice a week and swam at
the Hotel Jerome pool where the women all seemed to have crocheted their
own bikini tops—tops that they removed as soon as they sat by the pool.
Each day I tried systematically to learn more about the theoretical structure
of 
the 
increasingly 
topical 
Yang-Mills 
gauge 
theories 
of 
weak 
and
electromagnetic interactions. I carefully worked my way through New
Yorker 
writer 
and 
physicist 
Jeremy 
Bernstein’s 
pedagogic 
introductory
article in the Reviews of Modern Physics and, since he was an Aspen
regular, I sometimes wandered over to ask him questions. Working, hiking,
talking physics, listening to music at the Aspen Music Center, playing
volleyball to let off steam—this was what academic physics was supposed
to be like, but my enjoyment was tempered by my year without publication,
which made me feel that regular summers in Aspen and the partaking of its
pleasures would not be part of my destiny.
June passed quickly, and in July I traveled to Cape Town. My mother, like
Stephen 
Hawking, 
had 
been 
ill 
with 
amyotrophic 
lateral 
sclerosis 
for
several years, and each year I went home to see her. But while Hawking
miraculously seemed to stabilize, my mother went steadily downhill in the
1970s, growing worse each year, first losing the ability to move her arms,
her hands, and then her legs, until she finally began to have difficulty
holding her head up or swallowing. It was a perpetual mystery to her that no
one knew how to cure her ailment. In August I returned to New York for
one month, continuing to read about gauge theories in our apartment or in
the Columbia library while Eva continued her thesis work. As an academic,
you could work (or not work) wherever you liked. It was freedom, but now,
with one year as a postdoc gone and the future looming, it sometimes felt
like the freedom to fail.
In September 1974 I returned to dreary Philadelphia, where I could no
longer avoid pondering whether to try to seek another postdoctoral position
for the fall of 1975, I had no new accomplishments to report on my résumé,
something which was going to make job applications difficult. I began to
think seriously of ceasing to “do physics,”
1
and to steel myself for the
shame it involved. It seemed like my time had come. Then suddenly
something good happened: A really interesting physics puzzle came along,
and the techniques necessary to resolve it were closely related to those I had
used in my PhD thesis.
Al Mann, one of the senior experimentalists at Penn, had been part of an
international collaboration to scatter high-energy, muon-type neutrinos off
protons at the CERN
2
particle accelerator in Geneva. Mann’s experiment
was very similar to the deep inelastic electron-proton scattering I had
analyzed for my thesis, the difference being that he fired neutrinos rather
than electrons at the proton target. According to what was then known
about weak interactions, one expected the incoming neutrino to turn into a
single negatively charged muon
3
when it collided with the proton. The
proton would in turn then shatter into a debris consisting of many other
protonlike particles, as illustrated in Figure 3.1(a). This was not exactly
what 
happened, 
however. 
Searching 
through 
their 
data, 
Al 
and 
his
collaborators discovered a number of so-called dimuon events in which
there were two muons, one negatively and one positively charged, among
the final products of the collision. These were just the sort of “Swiss watch”
collisions that Feynman had described, in which experimental anomalies
could lead to the discovery of new particles or the new forces that produce
them.
Figure 3.1 Neutrino-proton collisions. (a) A normal collision that produces
a single negatively charged muon. (b) A hypothetical collision that
produces a neutral heavy lepton, which in turn decays into two muons and a
muon neutrino. (c) A hypothetical collision that produces a single
negatively charged muon plus a charmed quark, which in turn decays into a
positively charged muon, a neutrino, and a strange quark.
The puzzle was the cause of the two muons. There were (at least) two
possible explanations, each involving the production of a hypothetical new
particle. The first hypothesis was that the incoming neutrino had turned into
a new neutral heavy lepton,
4
which then, because of the weak force,
decayed into the two muons observed by Mann and his collaborators. This
is illustrated in Figure 3.1(b). The second hypothesis was that the incoming
neutrino had, as is normal, turned into the one negatively charged muon, but
that among the proton debris was a new so-called charmed quark that was
required 
to 
exist 
in 
the 
standard 
theory 
of 
weak 
and 
electromagnetic
interactions, and that this charmed quark then decayed via the weak force to
produce a second positively charged muon, as illustrated in Figure 3.1(c).
Which of these new particles—the hypothetical neutral heavy lepton or
the hypothetical charmed quark—was the progenitor of the dimuons? The
test would lie in the distribution of their speeds. The relative speeds of the
positively and negatively charged muons would depend on whether the
heavy lepton or the charmed quark had been their parent. In the former
case, both muons arose from the decay of the heavy lepton and, because
both had a similar origin, they tended to emerge with similar speeds; in the
latter, the positively charged muon arose from the decay of a charmed quark
and would have a very different speed. Much as each brand of water gun
produces its own characteristic spray of water, so the different particles,
when they decay, produce their own characteristic dimuon distribution.
Together with my colleagues Lay Nam Chang and John Ng, I began to
investigate the properties of the dimuon distribution that resulted from
heavy lepton production in order to compare it with the muon speeds
reported by Mann and his collaborators. It was a classic phenomenology
problem, the comparison of theory and experiment, closely related to my
thesis work, and so I knew how to calculate the distributions of the final
speeds and angles of muons. Lay Nam, John, and I checked each other’s
analytical calculations, and I wrote the computer program to evaluate the
distribution of the muons. Suddenly I was involved again, and it was simply
thrilling to be working on something new and relevant in close proximity to
the experimentalists. I entered a period of great mental stimulation which
resuscitated me. Spontaneously, I began to rise early in the morning; as
soon as I awoke I rushed into work to calculate and program. I participated
in long, intoxicatingly buoyant arguments and discussions on blackboards,
where Lay Nam, John, and I took turns scribbling and talking, one of us
seizing the chalk from the other. Rivalries and self-doubt disappeared as we
pushed forward, working keenly late into the night.
The exact nature of the hypothetical weak force responsible for the decay
of the putative heavy lepton was not known—it had to be conjectured, and
there were a variety of forms it could reasonably take. Lay Nam, John, and I
calculated the relative speeds of the muons for a wide (but not exhaustive)
range of forces. We showed that for all the cases we considered, the
predicted disparity between the speeds of the positive and negative muon,
when both were produced by the decay of a heavy lepton, was much
smaller 
than 
the 
disparity 
observed 
by 
Mann 
and 
his 
collaborators.
Therefore, we claimed, it was highly unlikely that the dimuon events
signaled the production of a new heavy neutral lepton.
We circulated our work as a “preprint,” a mimeographed prepublication
report sent out to other physicists in the field, and it drew a gratifying spurt
of attention. Now, almost down to the wire, I had completed a piece of
research that would get me my next postdoc position, just as my two-year
stint at Penn trailed off into its last few months. I sent out my letters of
application and, late in the spring of 1975, in the nick of time, I received
postdoctoral offers from the University of Wisconsin at Madison and from
Oxford University in England. Eva, who still needed one more year in New
York to complete her PhD was obliged to stay at Columbia. If I was going
to spend one more year on my own, I preferred European Oxford rather
than 
ur-American 
Madison. 
I 
had 
had 
enough 
of 
empty-streeted
Philadelphia.
The work we did on heavy leptons was topical and timely, but not quite
thorough enough. Though we had shown that it was unlikely that a heavy
lepton had produced the dimuons, we had not proved it truly impossible—
we had not calculated the asymmetry for every possible form of the
hypothetical weak force that caused its decay. A few months later, Bram
Pais (one of the few Columbia seminar speakers I had seen stand up to T. D.
Lee) and his long-time collaborator, Sam Treiman of Princeton, entered the
scene. Both of them old hands at analyzing weak interactions, they derived
a very general upper bound to the asymmetry between the speeds of the
positive and negative muons produced in the decay of a heavy lepton, no
matter what the form of its still unknown weak force. They showed that the
maximum value of the asymmetry under any circumstances was smaller
than the one observed by Mann and his collaborators, and so truly excluded
heavy leptons as a source of the dimuons. What we had shown to be
unlikely Pais and Treiman had then demonstrated to be impossible. More
experienced and professional than Lay Nam, John, and me, they received
the lion’s share of the credit, but we got a little, too; it was more than
enough to get me that second postdoc offer from Oxford.
I was through with Philadelphia, although I had survived and eventually
prospered. I spent one month that summer in Cape Town visiting my
mother, and another month at a theoretical physics summer institute at
SLAC, where I renewed my acquaintance with Doug Hofstadter, now living
at home with his family. He invited me to their house on campus, where I
finally met his father Robert and his electron-scattering colleague Robert
Herman, the two ex-City College physicists my cousin had told me so much
about during my first years in New York.
As I prepared to leave for England, once again invigorated by physics but
now slightly fearful of moving to a new country on my own until Eva could
eventually join me, I looked back at my nine years in America.
Physics was filled with so many extraordinary talents, old gods from the
past as well as budding stars preparing to dominate the future. In those first
few years, I saw and sometimes met many of them.
At Columbia, I had taken classes in statistical mechanics from T. D. Lee. I
had listened to his many seminars and discussed my thesis with him. I had
taught problem sessions in electromagnetic theory for Polykarp Kusch,
watching him on campus in his late fifties as he bent over stiffly to play
with his small son from a second marriage. I had drunk coffee and eaten
cookies at countless departmental coffee hours in the company of Leon
Lederman, 
Jack 
Steinberger, 
and 
Jim 
Cronin, 
all 
future 
Nobel 
Prize–
winners then on the Columbia faculty. I had given lectures on my thesis
work to theorists and experimentalists and had been questioned by many of
them. 
I 
had 
heard 
colloquia 
delivered 
by 
the 
legendary 
Dirac 
and
Heisenberg. 
I 
had 
heard 
Feynman, 
too, 
an 
enormously 
charismatic
performer who spoke like a Brooklyn-born taxi driver, so much more
casually charming than the Columbia faculty, and yet so aware of the charm
he radiated. One Friday I listened to Edward Teller, the notorious cocreator
of the hydrogen bomb and destroyer of Oppenheimer’s reputation, as he
lectured 
in the 
Columbia 
theatre while 
a crowd of antiwar protesters
picketed him with posters and then silently walked out as he spoke. Later
we flocked to watch a seminar on Uri Geller, the Israeli spoon bender,
presented by two scientists from the Stanford Research Institute who were
investigating his psychic skills. They were invited, of course, by Gary
Feinberg.
At Penn, the physics department starred Bob Schrieffer, who had just won
the Nobel Prize for his role in developing the theory of super-conductivity.
His white gull-wing Mercedes, reportedly bought with Nobel Prize money,
lent a glamorous touch to the physics parking lot, as did the glimpses of his
elegant, Scandinavian-looking wife. In 1976 our department hosted the
international 
Neutrino 
Conference 
in 
the 
Amish 
countryside 
of
Pennsylvania, and I again heard Feynman lecture. Later I summoned the
courage to join a conversation of his in the bathroom. Seminar speakers
came to Penn from all over the country. One fall Victor Weisskopf, a hero
from the early days of quantum theory and one of the leaders of the
Manhattan Project, came down for a visit from MIT. Another week brought
a 
seminar 
by 
Steven 
Weinberg, 
whose 
standard 
theory 
of 
weak 
and
electromagnetic interactions was just beginning to be vindicated. Among
the pile of résumés that flowed into the department from postdocs in search
of jobs, I remember one from Alan Guth, then a relatively run-of-the-mill
applicant but soon to become the inventor of the theory of the inflationary
universe.
I was beginning to become very aware of my limitations. There were
people you met in physics who were simply off any scale you could
imagine. When I read classic papers by Einstein or Feynman, I realized that
though I could understand and utilize their framework, I could never have
created it. My wife, having left physics for biology, knew something about
both areas, and said that even the smartest biologists didn’t leave you
feeling that they were out of your league. Physics was different.
I have a friend who liked to point out the obviousness of various great
discoveries in physics and finance. The obviousness is a delusion. Many
things seem clear only once they have been taught to you in a historical
context, with all the prejudices, confusion, and competing theories omitted.
Every iota of discovery, in finance or theoretical physics, comes at the cost
of long immersion, hard labor, and struggle. “Improvement makes straight
roads, but the crooked roads without improvement are the roads of genius,”
wrote the English Romantic poet William Blake. Most of us in physics were
lucky to be improvers, and knew we could never negotiate the crooked
roads at all, though we had occasional glimpses, during sudden epiphanies
in our work, of what it might feel like to stumble onto one.
Although 
I 
now 
sensed 
my 
limitations, 
I 
was 
nevertheless 
happily
astonished at the recent reversal of my fortune. Only a few months earlier I
had been morose and ready to quit; now, with one successful bit of work
behind me, I was again thrilled by the hunt and longed to figure out some
puzzle no one had solved before. Ever since, through ups and downs, I have
tried to remember that no matter how low you get, about work or life, you
can take some solace from the fact that the future is unpredictable. Even in
the midst of misery, unexpectedly good things can happen without warning.
Notes
1
My physicist friends and I spoke of what we did as “doing physics.” My
wife’s molecular biology colleagues, strangely, never spoke of “doing
biology,” but rather of “doing science,” a broader name for what seemed
to me an equally narrow field.
2
The European Center for Nuclear Research.
3
A sort of electron, with the same charge but about 200 times the mass.
4
An even heavier sort of electron, but neutral, that is, carrying no charge.
There was no good reason why one should not exist, and so, according to
Gell-Mann’s totalitarian principle, it had to be there.
...
Chapter 4
A Sentimental Education
Oxford’s civilized charms
One physics paper leads to another
English idiosyncrasies
The anthroposophists
From October 1975 to August 1977, I spent my days happily doing physics
at Oxford. Once again, I arrived there alone; my wife arrived seven months
later to begin her first postdoc. Once again, predictably, I found it difficult
to be alone in a strange city, just as I had during my first few solitary weeks
in New York nine years earlier; the same intense feelings recurred.
It didn’t help that social life at Oxford revolved around the autonomous
and distinct colleges that comprised the university, and I didn’t belong to
one. I had been hired directly by the Department of Theoretical Physics,
which was housed in two old, single-family brownstones that had been
joined together. The Anglo-Irish novelist Joyce Cary had lived in one of
them before he died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, my mother’s disease.
While faculty colleagues went off to eat lunch or dinner with port and
walnuts at their exclusive High Table at the head of the college dining hall
and to then smoke their postprandial cigars, and while graduate students
joked together at their much lower tables in the same dining halls, my
uncollegial postdoc friends and I (Indians, Pakistanis, Cypriots, Australians,
and a few Americans) sought out one of the few Indian restaurants in the
nongown section of the city.
I felt naively proud to be at Oxford. Coming from Anglophile South
Africa, I saw Oxford as the epitome of academic life. And doing physics
when I got there was suddenly much easier; I had struggled through the
valley of the shadow in my first year at Penn, but now I knew how to find
suitable problems on which to work. I had learned how to complete a piece
of research or, failing that, how to at least salvage something publishable
and interesting. I learned to let one piece of work flow into the next. I
finally knew how to treat research a little more like a business.
At Oxford I continued working on the theory of dimuon production.
Heavy neutral leptons were dead, as my colleagues and I had suggested and
as Pais and Treiman had proved. The dimuon events could instead signal
the production and subsequent decay of a short-lived charmed quark, an
equally interesting possibility. I set about calculating the distribution of
dimuons that would correspond to the decay of newly produced charmed
quarks. It was useful work, professionally done. I did more theoretical
calculations, 
wrote 
more 
FORTRAN 
programs 
to 
compute 
dimuon
distributions, documented the work, circulated the preprints I wrote to other
physics 
departments, 
and 
published 
the 
papers. 
I 
still 
remember 
the
excitement of working late into the night, hurrying to debug programs and
then submit them to the computer center. I recall best the unspoiled joy of
spontaneously waking early, tired but driven, and then rushing off to work
because I wanted to go to work and couldn’t sleep any more. I was excited
to see what came next.
Meanwhile, back in Philadelphia, Lay Nam and John continued on their
related but independent work. We had no email or ten-cent-per-minute
telephone calls to link us. Collaboration across the Atlantic was cost-
prohibitive and communication was viscous in those pre-Internet days. Not
only did we think it unrealistic to telephone to discuss research, but even
airmail 
postage 
and 
xeroxing 
were 
expensive. 
The 
Department 
of
Theoretical Physics at Oxford, itself on a limited budget, restricted each of
its postdocs to 40 free photocopies a month. After that we paid for copies of
articles we wanted. Computation was more difficult, too. There were no
PCs and no Matlab™ or Mathematica™ programs. I used to crosscheck my
Monte 
Carlo 
computer 
programs, 
written 
in 
FORTRAN 
66, 
by
programming similar but simpler calculations for special cases on the latest
Hewlett-Packard 25 programmable pocket calculator I had bought before I
left New York.
I 
spent 
that 
whole 
year 
working 
on 
the 
phenomenology 
of 
charm
production. It was a good life. I felt adult because I was earning a living, yet
I was often fancy-free in the way that I imagined a life spent on acquiring
knowledge should be. Eva finally arrived in early 1976 and we settled into
the habits of Oxford. We saw exhibitions and art performances at the
Oxford Museum of Modern Art, and took in old movies at the bitterly
freezing Penultimate Picture Palace in working-class Cowley. Once I saw
Iris Murdoch at a College garden party. Eva and I went for long walks on
Port Meadow next to Jericho, where we lived, and drove to the Vale of the
White Horse and the Cotswolds, where the skies could become menacingly
grey in just a few minutes. We watched touring boats wait patiently for
locks to slowly fill and empty in the nearby canals of the Thames. We took
picnics with graduate students in punts on the Cherwell River in the late
afternoon. The northern summer evenings were so long that I could first
have supper and then still have time to go for a late barefoot run on the
trimmed grass cricket fields and tennis courts that tiled the University Parks
next to the Department of Theoretical Physics. I was invited to give
seminars in Cambridge, London, and Paris. I attended another neutrino
conference in Aachen, Germany, where at midsummer the western sky still
continued to glow slightly as the eastern sky began to lighten. We drove
down to London to visit friends on weekends; we went to Crete on
vacation. It was idyllic.
I made one tactical mistake in my research. Though I had been hired by
Chris Llewellyn Smith, a well-known theorist who later became the head of
CERN, I worked alone most of the time that first year. When I completed
my study of charmed quark production and decay, and was ready to write it
up for publication, I thought I sensed a small unspoken expectation on
Chris’s part that we should write the paper jointly. Like the little red hen, I
felt that I had done the work, and so I should publish it. In retrospect, I was
wrong. He had hired me and I had benefited from his advice; there would
have been nothing seriously amiss in working together on a joint paper.
More to the point, it would have been good for my career. Chris was a much
better known (and a better) physicist than I was, and with his name on the
paper, it would have been more widely read and perhaps would have led to
further collaboration. But my pride stood in the way. Later that year, when
another 
physicist 
carried 
out 
a 
similar 
analysis 
and 
received 
broader
attention, Chris pointed out to me that I would have been better off if I had
written the article with him. He was right. Years later, working on financial
models at Goldman Sachs, I became much less compulsive about such strict
authorial cost accounting.
The world of theoretical particle physics in the 1970s was filled with
antediluvian inefficiencies and oddities. Authors circulated their work as
“preprints” 
before 
they 
published 
them 
in 
refereed 
physics 
journals.
Preprints, which had started out as informal research notes to be circulated
among colleagues, had become institutionalized; physicists all over the
world sent their preprints to anyone they thought might be interested or
influential. They also sent a copy to the library at SLAC, which then
compiled a fortnightly list of newly received preprints to its subscribers,
who could then request a copy from the original author. The Oxford
department of physics was relatively poor.
1
When I or anyone else wrote a
new paper, Oxford shipped the preprints by surface mail. As a result,
physicists in the United States first received new work four to six weeks
after it came out, a significant delay if competitors were working on similar
problems. Correspondingly, most physics departments in the United States
sent their preprints by surface mail; this doubled the delay. The playing
field was thus decisively tilted against small or foreign institutions—their
lower budgets meant that they were the last to receive written word of new
work. On one occasion, eager to communicate my results and assure my
future, I paid to xerox, collate, and airmail 60 copies of a preprint at my
own expense. Nowadays, all new research is posted on the Web, itself an
invention of physicists at CERN, and can be downloaded at virtually no
cost by anyone.
Oxford was proudly old-fashioned. One student I knew carefully peeled
his dessert banana and then ate it as though it were a sausage, delicately
pinning it down on the plate with his fork while he cut off slices with his
knife. I met a fiercely Anglophile Canadian who began to smoke pipes and
wear tweed jackets and cavalry twill trousers with handsomely heavy hand-
sewn English shoes, all actually ideal (I had to admit) for walking on the
muddy footpaths in the mild but perpetually damp climate. Within six
months his adopted British accent became indistinguishable from the real
thing. Another friend, a Junior Fellow at his College, took me for dinner at
High Table. All the dons were overwhelmingly courteous, leaning over to
chat with me whenever my friend, the most junior Fellow, was obliged to
leave the table in order to pass around the port and walnuts.
While some of the colleges were exorbitantly rich and had Fellows who
lived really well, the academic departments in the university were less well
off. I shared a crowded office in the Department of Theoretical Physics on
South 
Parks 
Road 
with 
Don 
Sinclair, 
a 
gruffly 
likeable 
but 
difficult
Australian who was an early developer of lattice-gauge theories of strong
interactions. He worked late into the night, using his vast array of colored
felt-tip pens to cover his desk with foot-high reams of paper filled with
lattice computation diagrams that looked like Tinkertoy models. Because
the university provided no heating on winter evenings when the temperature
dropped rapidly in the thinly insulated house that contained our office, Don
stubbornly turned up the heat to maximum during the day in a futile attempt
to 
amass 
warmth 
for 
the 
evening. 
Our 
office 
became 
virtually
uninhabitable, a smelly sauna by day and too cold to hold a pencil without
gloves at night, with only a brief transition between the two. Once, when he
was 
having 
a 
hard 
time 
with 
a 
woman, 
he 
became 
much 
more
communicative and commented to me, sadly but accurately, that he was one
of those people who became much nicer when they had troubles.
I found the English naturally xenophobic. In America it had been a slight
advantage to be South African; foreigners were welcome and considered
interesting. In England, you were just another inferior colonial. Eva’s
Slovak 
friend 
Zuza, 
who 
like 
her 
had 
left 
Czechoslovakia 
when 
the
Russians invaded, had attended Oxford and now taught at a nearby high
school. One day, speaking about an English colleague, she commented:
“You know, he’s really awfully clever, and should be headmaster, but he’ll
never manage it because his wife is Swedish.” This seemed to require no
explanation. I felt similarly discomfited about being Jewish. A graduate
student friend asked why we gave our son, Joshua, born at the end of our
stay in Oxford, “such a Jewish name.” In response I vainly cited Joshua
Nkomo as part of my African heritage. Another student told me how
“Jewish” the computer center was about the amount of time they gave you
on its machines. One day, my banana-slicing friend informed me that his
department 
would 
soon 
be 
hosting 
“some 
Jews 
from 
the 
Weizmann
Institute;” he was clearly quite confused about the difference between Jews
and Israelis. None of these people was trying to be offensive but, after a
year of this, I found myself unthinkingly hesitant to say anything that would
reveal my roots.
Many of the foreigners I knew had similar experiences. Savas, a Cypriot
friend who had lived in England since the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, had a
specially restricted British passport that would expire if he spent more than
three 
years out of 
the country. Soon I realized 
that 
any bias 
against
foreigners seemed vaguely plausible. When an Indian postdoc friend bought
a slightly battered secondhand car and parked it on South Parks Road near
the Clarendon Labs, I teased him by leaving him a note in which I
purported to be the head of the department; I informed him that the shabby
appearance of his car diminished the dignity of the grounds, and asked him
to therefore refrain from parking it so close to the laboratory. He took this in
dead earnest and ran off to speak to the head of the department before I
could catch him.
The university itself was stuffily bureaucratic, and when you angered
them they resorted to reporting you to your superiors. After two years in
Oxford and just two months before I was to return to New York, the chief
medical officer sent me a letter demanding that I be X-rayed to exclude the
possibility of tuberculosis. I wrote back to point out that if they were
seriously concerned about my putative tuberculosis, they should have X-
rayed me when I first arrived. He forwarded my response to the head of the
physics department, adding the following handwritten annotation: “Dear
Prof. ——, What charming people you have in your department!” I was
astonished that the professor himself then took the trouble to rebuke me.
Some experiences left lasting impressions. At one of my wife’s department
parties I was introduced to a Swedish woman who turned out to be the
daughter of the late Oskar Klein, the codiscoverer of the Kaluza-Klein
theories I had studied as an undergraduate in South Africa. Klein was also
the master builder of some of the pillars of particle theory, the eponymous
Klein-Gordon equation that described spinless quantum particles and the
Klein-Nishina formula for Compton (photon-electron) scattering.
Another visiting postdoc, Predrag Cvitanovic, lingered in my mind for
years afterwards as someone who seemed to do exactly what he liked, and
liked what he did. He was a darkly handsome Croatian who had left
Yugoslavia for the United States when he was a teenager. Predrag always
spoke as though he had lived a life of enviable independence, free of other
people’s conventions. He went cycling around the United Kingdom, danced
in Oxford night clubs, and acted in a production of Blake’s “Songs of
Innocence and Experience” that I watched at the University Parks one
evening. 
He 
wore 
tobacco-colored 
Adidas 
sneakers 
and 
blue 
denim
farmer’s dungarees over a checked shirt. When his mother visited him
briefly, he spoke about her as though she were just another of his fun-loving
acquaintances. I was always a little awed by his apparent self-sufficiency. I
recall suffering his scorn once at a very-Oxford garden party. I had uttered
some sentence that contained the phrases “my wife” and “my car,” and
Predrag issued a loud denunciation of people in the world who went around
talking about “my this and my that.” I accepted his display of extreme
independence at face value, never asking about the difficulties that must
have led to it. James Gleick, in his book Chaos: Making a New Science,
mentions that at precisely the time I knew him, Predrag was working on an
aspect 
of 
chaos 
theory 
that 
was 
critical 
to 
Mitchell 
Feigenbaum’s
subsequent breakthrough in the field. Gleick writes that Predrag was so
captivated by the field that he chose to work on it without telling anyone
that he was doing so, even though he had been hired to do particle theory.
Particle physicists, the ultimate reductionists, might well have looked down
on 
chaos 
theory, 
a 
field 
that 
ostensibly 
had 
nothing 
to 
do 
with 
the
fundamental nature of matter and could have been invented fifty years
earlier. When our son Joshua was born in 1977, shortly before we left
Oxford for New York, Predrag brought over a bottle of wine to celebrate,
and that was the last time I saw him at any length. I ran into him once more
in 1984, shortly after the birth of our daughter Sonya, when I was pushing
her in a stroller near the Great Lawn in Central Park. I always remembered
him as someone who seemed to be captain of his fate.
Sometime in 1976 Chris Llewellyn Smith brought Stephen Wolfram to
the department. A precocious Eton high school student of about sixteen,
Stephen was already writing his own research preprints on particle physics.
Those early papers were unexceptional, but the mere fact that he could
produce them at his tender age justifiably intimidated the Oxford graduate
students. I, luckily, was too old to be seriously threatened; he belonged to
another generation. Stephen attended Oxford and eventually became the
head of Wolfram Research and the creator of Mathematica™, a system for
doing symbolic mathematics on a computer that has become widely used by
physicists, mathematicians, and quants.
One afternoon I saw an advertisement in the Oxford papers for the
Anthroposophical Society, an organization of devotees of the late German
guru Rudolf Steiner, whose books had been recommended to me by Dr.
Louw in Cape Town eight years earlier. I had taken a glance or two at them
over the years and had been left cold. During a lonely day in my first few
months at Oxford I walked into the little Steiner bookstore and picked up
his Knowledge of the Higher Worlds. That night in bed I started to read it,
and was astounded and exhilarated to experience in the first few sentences
the clear and authoritative pronunciations on the complexity and confusion
of 
life. 
I 
never 
became 
more 
than 
a 
dabbler 
in 
the 
field, 
but 
the
anthroposophists’ books left a strong and uplifting impression on me,
despite their turgid, Germanically flavored English.
The anthroposophists didn’t reject the scientific approach approach to
knowledge, but they rejected the naive and arrogant materialism espoused
by so many scientists. Instead, as I understood it, they advocated the
reliance on careful external and internal scientific observation in the style
of Goethe. I liked the fact that Steiner referred to the soul as directly as
other people referred to material objects. He attributed a primacy to one’s
inner perceptions, regarding the interior world to be just as much a part of
reality as the exterior. I was pleased, a few years later, to read Bruno
Bettelheim’s Freud and Man’s Soul, in which he pointed out that Freud’s
original German texts had used simple, direct terms to describe the psyche
(the Greek word for soul). According to Bettelheim, it was James Strachey,
Freud’s English translator, who had replaced Freud’s resonant and easily
accessible Ich, Es, and Über-Ich, the German for “I,”“It,” and “Above-I”,
with the faux-medical, Latinized id, ego, and superego. It was also Strachey
who, referring to slips of the tongue, replaced the German “Fehlleistung”
with the pseudoscientific parapraxis.
My interest in the late Steiner intensified following the publicity he and
his disciple Owen Barfield received when Saul Bellow—then a Steiner
devotee, too—won the 1976 Nobel Prize for literature. The narrator in his
novel Humboldt’s Gift studies Steinerian meditation in Chicago, and Bellow
alluded to Steiner and Barfield in several articles and interviews. I went on
to read Barfield’s History in English Words, an enthralling account of his
theory of the development of human consciousness as extracted from the
parallel development of English vocabulary.
Steiner’s views were descended from even stranger turn-of-the-century
mystics, Madame Blavatsky and the Theosophists, and perhaps Gurdjieff,
too. He combined German romanticism with Eastern mysticism. He had
theories about everything—from childhood, education and teaching the
mentally retarded to art and organic gardening, and I liked whatever I was
able to understand. Mostly, whenever I tried to tell my friends about him, I
was met with scorn. Over the years, however, I discovered that other people
I admired had been influenced by Steiner and his school, in particular
several early twentieth-century painters, among them Vassily Kandinsky,
Arshile Gorky, and Arthur Dove, who drew on his lectures and sketches of
the higher worlds. While at an exhibition in a Soho New York gallery in the
late 1990s, I saw large photographs of the colored-chalk illustrations Steiner
had scrawled on a blackboard during his philosophical lectures. Later,
visiting 
clients 
of 
Goldman’s 
in 
Madrid, 
I 
dropped 
into 
the 
Thyssen
Museum, 
where 
I 
stumbled 
across 
several 
Dove 
paintings 
whose
resemblance to those illustrations was immediately apparent. In The Hague,
too, after a Euro-next options conference, I saw early Mondrian paintings of
lilies that were influenced by Steiner’s attempts to portray the spiritual
essence of living beings. More recently, I reread Gleick’s book on chaos
and was intrigued by his description of the influence of Goethe, Steiner, and
Schwenk 
(another 
Steinerian 
artist 
and 
observer) 
on 
the 
early 
chaos
investigators Feigenbaum and Libchard. All of them, as he told it, were
proponents 
of 
the 
same 
ideal: 
Careful 
independent 
observation 
and 
a
reliance on all of one’s own senses.
A year passed and I spent most of the summer of 1976 at the theoretical
physics institute at SLAC, returning to the United States in order to keep
my green card valid. Then, in my last year at Oxford, I began to work on
more fundamental theoretical topics with Tim Jones, a fellow postdoc. We
developed a theory that tried to explain the near similarity of the electron
and the heavier muon by postulating that Nature imposed an additional
permutation symmetry between the two particles. Our model was a simple
extension of the now popular standard model of weak and electromagnetic
interactions that, in addition, linked the electron to the muon. Over the next
few years I continued working on this class of models, extending the
permutation symmetry to include the newly observed tau lepton, an even
more massive sibling of the electron and muon. If our model was right, it
predicted that the muon, the tau lepton, and the b quark should all decay in
peculiar and previously unobserved ways.
Just as beauty in art and music often emerges from the tension of creating
something new within the limitations of an accepted framework, so it is that
many of the deep truths of theoretical physics emerge from the attempt to
describe 
Nature’s 
laws 
within 
the 
confines 
of 
very 
general 
guiding
principles. If one is lucky as well as clever, the principles will rule out
everything except the one true theory. The extensions to the standard theory
Tim and I worked on were not particularly profound, yet it was exciting to
be guessing at the existence of new symmetries and new particles—and to
dream of being right. I felt a hint of the potentially deeper joy that came
from trying to divine God’s laws, which was quite different from the
everyday happiness that came from the workmanlike comparison of other
peoples’ 
theories 
against 
other 
peoples’ 
experiments. 
I 
also 
sensed,
however, the potential of a much greater disappointment: One was most
likely to be wrong.
Thinking back, I am reminded of reading about Feynman’s excitement at
being one of several physicists to first guess the correct form of the parity-
violating 
weak 
interaction 
initially 
observed 
by 
Madame 
Wu 
and 
her
collaborators in 1957. Feynman’s more technical and singular work on the
renormalizability of quantum electrodynamics in the late forties was a tour
de force that created the formalism used by physicists for years afterwards.
Yet he was apparently more excited by his joint discovery of the true form
of the parity-violating weak interaction, because, for a brief period before
he communicated his results, he felt he knew something about the nature of
the universe that no one else did. This was the attraction of working on new
theories.
2
Then, in the autumn of 1976, with one year at Oxford over and one year
remaining, it was time to begin searching for my next position. Though the
department told me I could stay on a third year, it was clear to both Eva and
me that Oxford was only a temporary stopping point. A few weeks later at a
conference at the Rutherford Laboratories near Oxford, I was introduced to
Bram Pais, a professor at the Rockefeller University in New York. He knew
of my work on dimuons, which he and Treiman had so clearly trumped. I
knew interesting things about him, too. I recalled that years earlier, during
an invited seminar at Columbia, I had seen him casually and charmingly
deflect an intellectual attack by T. D. Lee. Chris Llewellyn Smith had told
me that Pais had been in hiding during World War II in Holland, much like
Anne Frank. Finally, I had coincidentally read bits of his doctoral thesis. As
a student at Columbia ten years earlier, I had been required to demonstrate
translation proficiency in two foreign languages used by scientists. Even as
long ago as 1967 that was an already archaic requirement, a relic of the
prewar era when many original physics papers were still written in German,
French, or Russian. Since I had studied Afrikaans, itself a sort of kitchen
Dutch, at school in South Africa, I decided to demonstrate my proficiency
at Dutch translation. Searching through the Columbia physics library for
Dutch papers to practice on, I stumbled across Pais’s PhD thesis on Finsler
spaces in differential geometry; he had written it in Dutch before he
emigrated to the United States in the late 1940s. I recalled it well, not only
because I had studied Finsler spaces in South Africa when I worked on
unified field theories, but also because he had dedicated his thesis “Aan
Mammie en Pappie” (To Mommy and Daddy). Speaking with him in
Oxford, I found it difficult to reconcile this childlike dedication with his
aggressively 
urbane 
persona, 
part 
New 
York 
street 
smarts 
and 
part
European suavity. Nevertheless, with a job at stake, I tried to be charming,
too, and told him I had seen both his thesis and the reference to his parents.
A few months later, I sent off a hopeful application for my next postdoc
to Pais at Rockefeller. I thought a position there would be perfect for my
wife and me: Our first child was on the way, we thought of New York as
home, and there were plenty of academic opportunities for Eva in New
York. But I could not count on a job where I wanted one, and so I applied to
many other schools. Then I waited.
A high school friend in the corporate world passed through Oxford that
spring and asked me pointedly where I would be in the fall. I said I was still
waiting to hear who would offer me a job. “You mean you really might
have 
no 
work 
at 
all?” 
he 
asked, 
demanding 
of 
me 
a 
degree 
of
uncomfortable explicitness that made me doubt his benevolent intent. My
nonacademic friends could not understand the code we postdocs lived by. I
once proudly told a South African friend that an article of mine had been
accepted in Physical Review Letters, one of the most prestigious journals in
the physics community. He asked me how much they paid me to publish
there. I was embarrassed to explain that it worked the other way: My
physics department had to pay the American Physical Society several
hundred dollars in page charges to see the paper into print. This was beyond
his understanding; he thought I was indulging in vanity publishing.
I was lucky that year. In the spring of 1977 I received a letter offering me
a two-year position at the Weizmann Institute in Israel. It was tempting, but
I wanted to go back to the States. A few weeks later, to my relief, a postdoc
offer from Rockefeller arrived and, since Eva could get work there too, I
immediately accepted. I was safe for a couple of years.
The 
summer 
of 
1977 
was 
England’s 
hottest 
for 
many 
years—each
weekend the pubs ran out of ice. We spent the long clear days punting,
picnicking, and working, until our son Joshua was born on August 1.
Because he was born abroad, Joshua was British, and was obliged to endure
an extended interview about his political beliefs and jail record at the
American Embassy in London a week later. I answered for him and he was
given his own green card. It had been a good two years, and a week later we
returned to New York, confident and happy.
Notes
1
Back in academic life after years on Wall Street, I now sometimes feel I
have been spoiled by the resources available at investment banks in the
1990s, where offices were plush, the costs of research journals were
unquestioned, the latest color printers abounded and you simply called
System Administration when you had a computer problem.
2
In the end, the fairly pedestrian theory Tim and I developed was not
right. But an ex-physicist I hired at Goldman, who had searched the
academic citation databases to see with whom he was coming to work,
told me that there are still occasional contemporary references in the
literature to the papers I wrote then.
...
Chapter 5
The Mandarins
Research and parenthood on New York’s Upper East Side
A good life, but ... the tensions of twin careers
The Rockefeller University was a little pocket of privilege. Its faculty and
postdocs lived on their academic salaries in elegant subsidized apartments
near Sutton Place on New York’s Upper East Side. Rockefeller was not so
much a university as it was a large research organization. Established in
1901 as a medical research institute, it evolved in the boom years of
American research funding into a luxuriously equipped and accredited
university that awarded only graduate degrees. In the expansion of the
1960s, 
Rockefeller 
hired 
not 
only 
biologists 
but 
also 
mathematicians,
logicians, philosophers, psychologists, linguists, and physicists. Then, in the
late 1970s, as the good times receded, they slowly rolled the odometer back
until they once again focused predominantly on biomedical work.
It was gratifying to tell people you worked at Rockefeller; it had a sort of
elitist ring because of the famous biologists and logicians who had worked
there. At Rockefeller in 1944, Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty discovered
that genes were made of DNA. The famous analytical philosopher Saul
Kripke worked there in the early 1960s. In the elevator of the Tower
Building where I worked, I used to see Mark Kaç, the stocky, red-faced,
bald, 
and 
charmingly 
accented 
Polish-Jewish 
mathematician 
whose
masterly lecture on drum shapes I had heard as a student at Columbia. At
that 
time 
I 
knew 
little 
about 
the 
Feynman-Kaç 
theorem 
that 
linked
Feynman’s view of quantum mechanical evolution to the solution of the
partial differential equations of quantum mechanics, statistical physics, and
options 
theory. 
Years 
later 
I 
read 
Kaç’s 
short, 
fascinating 
intellectual
autobiography; I discovered how much work he had done on defining the
nature of randomness. On the wall outside his office he had pinned a large
American 
Mathematical 
Society 
photo-poster 
of 
the 
attractively 
regal-
looking 
Polish 
mathematician 
Sonya 
Kovalevskaya. 
When 
I 
once
commented on it, he told me in his heavily accented English that she was
“certainly the best looking mathematician of either sex.”
Rockefeller seemed luxurious and aristocratic, an enclave of gardens,
auditoriums, high-rises, and labs peopled by intellectuals devoted to the
pursuit of knowledge. No teaching, no courses, no undergraduates—just
research. You felt like a philosopher-king in the middle of grimy 1970s
Manhattan. We lived in a university-owned high rise on York Ave., near
New York Hospital and only one block from my office and Eva’s lab. I had
a private office larger than any I have had before or since, with at long last
more than enough bookshelves, all wood-paneled and adjustable. My office
and our apartment both looked out on the East River, a heliport and the
FDR Drive. Looking through the windows at any time of the day or night,
one saw helicopters bearing presidential candidates or trauma victims while
cars snaked up and down the Drive and large boats cruised along the river.
If you narrowed your field of vision just enough to see only the traffic, it
resembled nothing so much as a 1950s comic strip about life in the city of
the future that my father used to read to me as a child.
In homage to Oxbridge, Rockefeller had no traditional departments of
study. Instead, individual professors ran their “labs.” There were several
senior professors of theoretical particle physics. Pais, a tiny man and the
most renowned professor, had hired me into his lab; his former collaborator
Mirza Abdul Baqi Bég, a burly Pakistani with a Pancho Villa mustache who
always cited the famous German-Jewish physicist Rudolf Peierls as his
mentor, ran another lab. In a much more low-stakes version of the Lee–
Yang quarrel, Pais was rumored to be at war with Bég, and we heard reports
of prolonged shouting matches. We also heard that Pais had made a bitter
enemy of Murray Gell-Mann, his 1950s collaborator, who, according to
George Johnson’s biography of Gell-Mann, always referred to Pais as “the
evil dwarf.” After what I had seen of Lee and Yang, I was not overly
surprised by these feuds.
How hard and how long you appeared to work at Rockefeller was
irrelevant; what counted was what you accomplished (and, perhaps, the
aura you radiated of how much you might accomplish). I went in to work in
the late morning and sometimes worked late into the evening, and spent
much time with Josh at both ends of the day.
I was happy at Rockefeller. Josh would wake very early and I would take
him out for long walks in his stroller through East Side neighborhoods,
stopping 
for 
early 
morning 
bagels 
or 
Egg 
McMuffins. 
We 
had 
long
conversations; I was always tired, but it was immensely satisfying. I was
ecstatic 
about 
child 
rearing, 
open 
to 
all 
sorts 
of 
only 
half-plausible
Steinerian theories 
of education. Steiner advocated 
talking to children
above their level of understanding, since, he argued, every word you said to
them when they first entered the world was above their level, and yet they
learned to understand. I did this naturally. What counted in the end was the
time spent with Josh. Watching him through his first two or three years, I
developed a great appreciation for the mystery of life and the strange
abstractness of time. He learned and remembered locations in space, the
names of objects, even adjectives and adverbs, without visible effort and
much more easily than locations in time (yesterday, tomorrow) or states of
color (red, green). Long after he could make sophisticated statements (“I’m
mad at myself!” he once exclaimed when he broke a toy), he would still
confuse yesterday with tomorrow and red with green. I began to half-
believe the theory that time and color were not as self-evident as they seem,
but rather inventions or discoveries made at some earlier point in human
history, like the discovery of farming, and then internalized and transmitted
to us through the generations. Perhaps, when a child remarks that both a
leaf and a sweater are green, he or she is isolating some immensely abstract
quality 
of 
two 
vastly 
different 
objects 
that 
was 
once 
beyond 
human
comprehension.
One of the more interesting Rockefeller physics faculty members was
Heinz Pagels, the author of The Cosmic Code, a popular book on quantum
mechanics. Heinz was the first person I ever saw combine a business suit
with white Adidas Country sneakers. He was charming and easy to like,
with a penchant for trying to impress people by referring to his rich social
life outside of physics. He was a humorously compulsive name dropper. He
could not simply remark “I had dinner with McNamara last night in
Aspen;” he felt obliged to add “. . . you know, Johnson’s Secretary of
Defense.” He was preternaturally attuned to conversational trends, with an
uncanny knack for anticipating the future trajectory of someone else’s
sentence, especially someone politically more powerful. Speaking with
Pais, Heinz could quickly complete a remark that Pais had just begun, first
grabbing hold of Pais’s train of thought in mid-sentence by echoing it softly,
and then, growing louder and bolder and swifter, taking ownership of the
sentence and running it to its conclusion as though it had been entirely his
idea. I liked talking to him. Sadly, he fell and died a few years later while
hiking in the mountains near Aspen where he and his family spent most
summers.
Heinz was friendly with Jeremy Bernstein, the physicist and New Yorker
writer whom I admired because he, too, seemed to be living a more rounded
life than most physicists I knew. Bernstein had written a paper or two with
Feinberg and T. D. Lee, and I had once been amazed to see T. D. harass him
during colloquium at Columbia. Bernstein had been writing books and New
Yorker articles on physics for the general public since the 1960s, starting
with a profile of Lee and Yang after they won the Nobel Prize. He wrote
honestly and clearly, trying hard to demystify the subtleties; as a result, I
think, his books never sold as well as those of the more sensational
popularizers of quantum mechanics and cosmology.
One of the great pleasures of academic life was that, after you had
fulfilled your teaching duties—and there were none at Rockefeller!—your
time and space belonged to you alone. I could work when and where I
liked; I could decide to take an afternoon off to run six miles in the park or
to see an exhibition at a museum, and then work that evening. Heinz and I
went to see Close Encounters of the Third Kind the weekday afternoon it
opened. Such small freedoms, together with the long vacations spent doing
physics in interesting places, gave one the sensation of being nonmonetarily
rich, and compensated for the low noncorporate salaries. My office was
sacred territory; no one walked in after knocking unless I shouted “Come
in!” If I locked the door from the inside, wanting to concentrate or be alone,
people behaved as though I were not there. I thought that this kind of
privacy was a right, but it was a privilege, much rarer than I realized. I was
naively shocked, a few years later at Bell Labs, to apprehend that both my
time and my office belonged to AT&T, and could be invaded at any moment
without apology or warning knock from my boss, my colleagues, or the
mail deliverer. Wall Street, of course, would lay claim to even more of my
personal space and time. Soon this academic freedom would end for me.
But in the meanwhile I did physics, joined the New York Road Runners
Club, ran along the East River Drive and around Central Park, and played
with Joshua mornings and evenings. It was a good life.
As 
my 
two 
years 
at 
Rockefeller 
rushed 
by, 
I 
grew 
increasingly
uncomfortably with Pais and sensed his disapproval. Perhaps he disliked
my relative lack of talent, or my lack of deference on subjects outside of
physics, something that he may have perceived as disrespect. I admitted to
myself that Pais was a much better physicist than I was, but I could not
make 
myself 
unquestioningly 
play 
second 
fiddle 
in 
conversations 
on
novels, movies, or world affairs. I felt obliged to behave as though my
opinions had as much right to be heard as anyone else’s, and it probably
was not a good idea. At the end of my first year at Rockefeller, Pais’s
secretary 
began 
putting 
job 
advertisements 
for 
other 
schools’ 
postdoc
positions in my pigeonhole in the departmental office, and I knew I was not
going to get a third year in his lab.
Eva, Josh, and I spent one month that summer at the Aspen Center for
Physics. Then, in September 1978, I took Pais’s hints to heart and started to
evaluate my situation. I was 33 years old and halfway through my third
postdoc; where was this peregrination going to end? I concluded I either
had to find a position as an assistant professor with a good chance of tenure,
or else get out of physics.
One day in 1978 I suddenly found myself flirting with the idea of going to
medical school and becoming a genuine doctor. My thoughts went pretty
much as follows: Physics is a harsh meritocracy. Most of the merit is
concentrated in a small number of legendary figures at the top. If you aren’t
Feynman, you’re no one. A competent, but not brilliant, research physicist
had little to feel good about; who needs what you provide? You could try to
get 
one 
of 
the 
rare 
full-time 
teaching 
positions 
in 
a 
small 
college
somewhere, but you had to like teaching more than I did to do it that many
hours a week. So, though it was good to think that I was dedicating my life
to what I thought of as transcendental pursuits, it had begun to feel
insufficient. In medicine, in contrast, I imagined that I could so some
palpable good merely by being competent.
I was not the only person who thought this way. Several medical schools
had recently begun to accept applicants with PhDs in the natural sciences
but no premed degree into their program. The University of Miami at Coral
Gables would transform you from a PhD to an MD in two years, summers
included, but in order to apply you need to have passed the Graduate
Record Exam (GRE). Now I had never taken the GRE; it was not even
administered in South Africa when I applied to Columbia in 1966. I
closeted myself in my don’t-come-in-without-knocking Rockefeller office,
telling no one what I was doing, and spent a week or two taking practice
GRE exams. I refreshed my undergraduate physics knowledge, learning the
values of natural constants and atomic physics energy levels by heart. I
revisited all the topics that I had not studied since my first year in graduate
school. Finally, after a sleepless night because Josh was ill and feverish, I
took the general and physics sections of the exam one entire Saturday on
the Columbia campus; I did well. Coral Gables sent one of their graduates,
an intern at Sloan Kettering near Rockefeller, to interview me, and I was
accepted.
I couldn’t do it—I simply lacked the courage to continue down this path. I
would have had to move to Florida for two years, and Eva, whose parents
lived in New York and whose career as a biologist seemed to have more
promise than mine as a physicist, had no reason to disrupt her work by
relocating to Florida. Though I paid the registration fee to keep my place in
the program, I knew I would probably renege. Indeed, a few weeks later,
pleading family difficulties, I called Coral Gables to back out. I would have
had a very different life had I become a practicing physician, and I still
envy people whose work does visible good.
During my last year at Rockefeller, I applied only for “real” physics jobs,
those tenure-track assistant professorships at schools that took research
seriously, 
or 
the 
few 
longer-term 
postdoc 
jobs 
that 
promised 
some
semblance of stability. I spent much of the winter traveling around the
country giving seminars at whichever department or national laboratory
would consider me seriously enough to invite me, and eventually landed
two assistant professorships. The first was at Illinois Institute of Technology
in Chicago, attractive mostly because of its proximity to Fermilab, which
had a giant high-energy particle accelerator and an excellent theory group,
too. The second was at the University of Colorado at Boulder, a good
school with a physics department of reasonable quality that had received
over one hundred applications for their one job in theoretical particle
physics. I interviewed there in December 1978 and then waited. After
several months, I heard I was third on their list. As time went by, first the
female postdoc at the top of their list obtained a better offer elsewhere; then
the second choice, a male postdoc with a wife in academia who had already
obtained a permanent position on the East Coast, declined in order to stay
near his family. The next offer came to me.
I liked Boulder much more than Chicago—I had the chance of a good
position in a beautiful town. Eva, however, had no immediate possibility of
her own long-term job there, and it made little sense for her to accompany
me there without one. So, knowing that I would likely go to Boulder on my
own that fall, I shut my eyes and accepted their offer. Though it wasn’t ideal
for her, Eva agreed to investigate academic opportunities in the Boulder
area. I hoped that some way or other she would soon find a reasonably
permanent position there or in one of the nearby Denver research hospitals.
This was the start of several difficult years. Despite Eva’s own career
demands, a part of me expected her to move to Boulder, and I was resentful
that she did not. In the meanwhile, the State of Colorado declared a faculty
hiring freeze, so that no permanent positions for her could materialize soon.
I had moved to new jobs in new cities and countries on my own with
regularity the past six years, but this time I would be leaving behind not
only a wife, but a son, too. I had been as much a part of his upbringing as
anyone over the past two years. At times I proposed that I should take Josh
with me to Boulder. Eva and I fought and scrambled. In July the three of us
left for a week-long vacation to Abaco, a small and isolated out-island in
the Bahamas. On our second day there, returning from an uncomfortable
trip on a rented motor boat to a nearby island, I found messages instructing
me to call both my home in South Africa and Eva’s parents in New York.
For years I had always left a vacation phone number with my family in
South Africa in case of emergency, so I knew immediately the significance
of the call: My mother had just died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ten
years after she first became ill. Isolated on Abaco, we had to charter a small
plane to fly from Palm Beach and then take us to the mainland. From there
we quickly returned to New York, and I flew off to Cape Town for the
funeral.
At the end of that summer I packed up my office at Rockefeller. On the
Friday at the start of the long Labor Day weekend, I flew out to begin my
work in Boulder. Eva was going to stay on at her postdoc job at Rockefeller
while she tried to find a faculty position in Colorado.
I had explained to Joshua that I had to leave for a while, but that I would
phone and write. In retrospect, I am not sure why I thought I “had to”; I left
because I felt compelled to continue doing physics. With the precocity of a
two-year old who had spent much of his first two years talking to adults,
Josh seemed to understand. Eva brought him down to the taxicab to say
goodbye to me as I left for Kennedy. As I got into the taxi, I saw him in
Eva’s arms; he leaned towards me and shouted urgently “Daddy, don’t go!”
On the flight I drew a picture of myself on the back of an airplane postcard
to send to him, and as soon as I landed in Denver I called him. I felt bitter at
having left and resentful about my situation.
...
Chapter 6
Knowledge of the Higher Worlds
A two-city family
New age meditations
Karma
Goodbye to physics
In 1979 Boulder’s downtown consisted of a pedestrian mall about six
blocks long and a couple of blocks wide, lined with hip clothing and hiking
stores and natural-food cafes. The summer weather was hot but dry; unlike
humid New York, you could feel the cool of the shade as soon as you
stepped into it. Winter was crisp. The canyons twisting out of the town and
into the foothills of the Rockies beckoned weekend hikers, and Frank
Shorter’s store was a mecca for long-distance runners. (It was Mecca
without 
the 
mosque—there 
was 
no 
Tartan 
running 
track 
anywhere 
in
Boulder, although there were many nice runs along the outskirts of the
town.) I had a clean white office in the Gamow physics building, and lived
a short downhill walk across the campus in a low-rise, dark, dingily wood-
paneled and linoleum-floored apartment in faculty housing. It was dated
and dusty, but perfectly okay.
Boulder was also home to the Naropa Institute, the trendy center for
Tibetan Buddhism in America headed by Chogyam Trungpa, Rinpoche,
whose final appellation signified something like the Venerable One. In the
summers, Alan Ginsberg ran their Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied
Poetics. In parallel, the back streets of the town were filled with a ragtag
bunch of small cults and their gurus; I particularly remember seeing the
recruiting center of the Guru Maharaj Ji, the smug-looking, twelve-year-old
Perfect Master who wore a Rolex. Mo Siegel had created Red Zinger and
founded the Celestial Seasonings Tea Company in Boulder; it was one of
the local legends of commercially successful hippiedom, eventually bought
by Hain for about $380 million in March 2000. The campus bulletin boards
and the local newspapers were filled with personals for neighborhood
masseurs, self-help, the Alexander method, and all sorts of other hope-
granting institutions of self-improvement. I had to admit I liked it.
Before moving to Boulder I had received a Department of Energy Young
Investigator Award in High Energy Physics Research. As a result, I had no
courses to teach that year, only some undergraduate problem sessions to
tutor. I was used to rising late, but Boulder ran on an early schedule. Many
restaurants opened only for breakfast and lunch, shutting down completely
by early afternoon, something I had never seen in New York. Every
Tuesday morning I had to start teaching at 8 A.M., one identical problem
session after another for about four hours. It shocked my unworldly system.
A late riser until then, I never succeeded in going to bed early the night
before, and I more or less wearily wasted the Wednesday of every week,
trying to get back to my normal working schedule.
The rest of the time I came into my office each day and tried to work on
various extensions of one of my models. But I was separated from family
and friends and miserable about having left Josh behind, so I worked with a
heavy heart. No one in the department spoke to me much during the day.
The graduate students were busy with their own lives, and the faculty
members, mostly married, worked hard from early in the day and then went
home. As time went by, I hit an impasse in the problem I was working on,
and there were no colleagues with similar enough interests off whom I
could bounce ideas. For months, every new attempt I made to circumvent
the sticking point failed; I needed hope most of all. If, early on a given day,
I had a sudden idea for a strategy that might solve my problem, I would quit
work immediately and go home. In this way I postponed disappointment for
one more day. I preferred to do nothing for a little while, and then go to bed
savoring the little dollop of optimism that my new strategy would work the
following day. Usually, my joy lasted only a few hours; each new method
failed pretty quickly.
When I had first arrived in New York, I appreciated the city’s street life
and diners as an antidote to loneliness. There were always people you could
watch coming towards you as you drifted in the ambient currents of people
along Broadway until all hours of the night: animated Spanish speakers,
bums, people cursing furiously to themselves. Boulder wasn’t quite as
lively, but the outdoor mall I discovered on my first night there was filled
with students and locals and not yet lined with the upscale chain stores that
came 
later. 
Instead, 
the 
mall 
had 
a 
small-scale, 
local-commerce 
aura.
Hippies with backpacks and sleeping bags slept outdoors in the small park.
Every block of the mall teemed with crowds centered around amateur
magicians, folk singers, guitarists, belly dancers, jugglers and acrobats, all
performing till 10 or 11 P.M. I went there almost every evening, strolling up
its length and down again ceaselessly, always alone, stopping for a snack,
eyeing the people and watching the shows. Much of the time, I liked
standing in the crowd around a hip-looking, mustachioed, good-humored,
short, dark guy who juggled, ate fire, swallowed swords, and often used the
word mojo. He never failed to cheer me up. Saturdays and Sundays, after a
run 
or 
a 
movie, 
I 
always 
returned 
there. 
Eventually, 
I 
began 
to 
be
embarrassed 
about 
being 
seen, 
over 
and 
over 
again, 
by 
the 
same
storekeepers, waiters, and waitresses. I was always solitary, always reading
a book. I had no alternative.
During the week I spoke little to anyone in the department. From Monday
through Wednesday or Thursday, I was able to do some physics. Then, as
Friday 
approached, 
I 
grew 
dread-filled, 
apprehensive 
about 
another
weekend with my own company; my capacity to work tailed off as I began
to scan the local papers and make obsessive plans for what I would do in
each segment of the day: pancakes at the communal center table at The
Good Earth, then a run, a little work, a walk on the mall, a foreign movie in
the evening.
My solitary personal life amplified the lonely activities of a theoretical
physicist and an academic. You were always banging your head against a
wall, trying to quell the need for company in order to keep studying or
calculating. I hated the solitude and envied people whose daily work
involved dealing with other people. Years later, I found daily life as a quant
to be richer and less isolated than life as an accademic. On any given day
you might speak to other quants, read theory, interact with traders, write
software, speak with clients, give talks and explain difficult concepts to
smart but relatively innumerate traders. Until I experienced it, I wouldn’t
have believed that an investment bank could be more collegial than a
college.
Shortly after I arrived in Boulder I went to the Buddhist center. Once I had
become fond of Steiner’s Knowledge of the Higher Worlds, I kept the book
around as a talisman, reading bits of it but only occasionally doing some of
the spiritual exercises it recommended. I had never managed to be really
rigorous about it, and grew to understand that you needed a community and
a 
school 
to 
keep 
you 
conscientious. 
Now 
I 
decided 
to 
attend 
a 
few
introductory lectures on Tibetan Buddhism given at the Dharmadhattu.
The classes were given by followers of the Rinpoche who were not hip at
all, but rather businesslike and regular-looking; part of their spiel was that
their practice was consistent with living in the world rather than retreating
from it. As far as I understood it, the meditation required sitting cross-
legged and then simply watching your thoughts as they bubbled up, as
though you were dispassionately watching someone else in a movie. You
paid unsentimental attention to your own fantasies, obsessions, worries,
desires, passions, and disappointments with the detachment of hearing
someone else’s problems. I liked it, but it was very difficult to do: In no
time at all you could suddenly find yourself worrying and strategizing
rather than watching. If you caught yourself getting involved, you weren’t
supposed to grieve or fight it, but simply recognize that distraction itself as
just another distraction to be observed. I started attending the Dharmadhattu
to meditate on some Sunday mornings, sitting for as long as I could. Their
regular 
session 
was 
three 
hours; 
someone 
walked 
silently 
around 
the
flamboyantly 
decorated 
Tibetan-style 
room, 
wordlessly 
correcting 
an
occasional case of bad posture; once an hour a gong rang, and everyone
followed the leader in walking silently around the room for a few minutes,
easing cramped muscles. I never looked at my watch; time was on someone
else’s hands.
The teachers warned you that sometimes, while meditating, you might see
strange visions or experience eerily supernatural sensations. Should that
happen, you were not to pay undue attention or to regard the vision as a
sign of spiritual progress. Instead, you were supposed to acknowledge these
as natural occurrences, similar to the other thoughts or feelings bubbling out
of your mind. Sometimes, indeed, the walls of the room seemed to shimmer
and glow for me, and I couldn’t resist feeling naively pleased and vain,
despite my teachers’ warnings.
At one of the introductory lectures I heard a man in the front of the room
ask a question that reminded me of my Steiner dabblings. His name was
Roy Hershey and he, like me, was relatively new to Boulder. My instincts
were correct; he had trained as a landscape gardener in Europe with the
Anthroposophists who, like Steiner himself, thought of plants as the living
hair on a living earth. I liked Roy and we had occasional dinners together.
Thin and lively and, unlike my physicist colleagues, not career-oriented, he
ate 
more 
slowly 
than 
anyone 
I 
have 
ever 
seen. 
He 
took 
his 
time,
unperturbed by hurried waiters and unapologetic about it; Roy could easily
spend an hour over a plate of pasta. Sometimes he harangued me about the
spiritual benefits of buying and preparing one’s own meals rather than
eating out, but most evenings I still succumbed to the temptation to eat in a
restaurant while reading a book rather than go home alone. One evening I
invited Roy over and cooked pork chops with orange sauce out of Pierre
Franey’s Sixty-Minute Gourmet; then we sat on my carpet and meditated
for half an hour. Roy claimed to meditate every day in his room in the
house he shared with a crowd of people. I envied his free time; he had no
job for most of the time I knew him.
Boulder 
had 
many 
spiritual 
groups 
“doing 
the 
work” 
together. 
Roy
attended one that met once a week, run by Francesca, a quietly tough
woman in her early thirties. She charged about ten or fifteen dollars per
person for the weekly group meeting in her house that Roy invited me to
attend, and I went along, despite my skepticism.
Before allowing me to join, Francesca required that I first have a private
consultation with her. On the appointed afternoon I left my office and went
to her house. I answered her questions and remember telling her about my
difficulties with living so far from my wife and child; I also told her about
my resentments. Then I started attending her meetings.
The group consisted of a range of people, from college kids to dropouts to
one middle-aged married man, each obviously there because of some
personal difficulties. Francesca had little money. She was nice-looking, but
had an unsettlingly bright yellow skin that, she said, was the consequence
of a diet rich in homemade carrot juice. At her meetings, she spoke about
attitudes to life, read to us from self-help books, elicited discussion, and
ended the evening by playing relaxation tapes. It was corny, but not
complete 
nonsense. 
In 
the 
matter 
of 
being 
happy, 
I 
could 
see, 
both
sophisticated and unsophisticated people need the same simple help. It was
humbling to be given what looked like trashy paperback self-help books
(The Mystic Path to Cosmic Power was the title of one, I recall), and see
through the clichéd style to the biblically simple truths of some of the
statements inside. Francesca worked hard at people. There was something
confrontational and unfair about the way she operated, bringing up private
facts she knew about you in front of everyone at the meeting, forcing you to
publicly confront unpleasant problems and your own contribution to them. I
wondered 
whether 
she 
enjoyed 
provoking 
these 
embarrassments, 
or
whether she did it because she thought it was good for you. It reminded me
of a verse in Blake’s Auguries of Innocence: “A truth that’s told with bad
intent beats all the lies you can invent.” Occasionally, an evening would end
with someone feeling really bad about something she had said, and she
would offer to stay up all night with the person involved and talk it through.
We knew little about Francesca’s personal life. Sometime in the spring of
1980 she left Boulder, to follow some man or perhaps to get married,
according to Roy, and then the meetings ceased. I had an uncomfortable
lunch with her at a vegetarian restaurant shortly before she left. As usual,
she was positive but hurtful. “What’s it like being a physicist?” she asked. I
started to bemoan the difficulty of being ambitious, the smart people in the
field, the struggle, the political battles, the need to move, the weariness.
“No, not your complaints, tell me about the good things, the positive parts!”
she insisted. It was sensible. I never saw her again.
The academic year that started in September 1979 sped by rapidly. In late
October Eva’s mother took a week off work to help us and brought Joshua
to visit me. He was two years and two months old, and I was immensely
grateful 
to 
her 
for 
visiting 
with 
him. 
Always 
foolishly 
scared 
of
disappointing Josh, I was quick to explain to him that this was only a
temporary visit, and that he would have to leave in a week. As usual he
seemed to understand everything. We spent a week visiting playgrounds
and the almost fabulous Grand Rabbit toy store, where, on his last day in
Boulder, I bought a Lone Ranger figure; I gave it to him as a gift and
distraction just before he and his grandmother left me and boarded the
plane. Then I was alone again. Eva’s mother called me from New York
when they arrived, knowing that I would be upset at their departure.
At Thanksgiving I went back to New York for the long weekend. As soon
as I arrived I anxiously explained to Josh that in three days I would soon
depart again. Our babysitter Helga, who looked after Joshua all day long,
told me that sometimes, as she wheeled him through the streets in his
stroller, he would point to some stranger who must have resembled me and
ask her “Is that my Daddy?” I had no knowledge of his inner mental states,
but I hurt to think that they might encompass a world in which I could live
in his neighborhood and yet not visit him.
At Christmas I returned to New York for a tense winter semester break. In
January I flew back to Boulder. Having to take care of Joshua on her own,
Eva developed back trouble and had to spend a week in the hospital, prone.
On weekends in Boulder I read Spinoza, taking some comfort from his
rigorous and unsentimental look at the logic of life’s unhappinesses. In May
1980 I returned to New York for the summer. As I began planning for the
course I would teach in the fall, I also began to consider that I might not
return there.
I 
spent 
the 
summer 
working 
in 
an 
office 
kindly 
provided 
by 
the
Rockefeller University, in whose postdoc apartment Eva, Josh, and I still
lived. I considered applying for physics assistant professorships in the New
York area, but there were too few of them and I was exhausted at the
thought of more comprehensive job searches. As midsummer approached, I
realized that I had no intention of going back to Boulder to live another year
like the one I had just endured.
Karma is the mechanical expiation of sin, according to Tolstoy, and at that
time I thought I understood its meaning. The universe wanted you to
renounce vanity, ambition, and pride, and embrace God. To do it voluntarily
would be best. But if you didn’t, then karma, the everyday workings of the
universe, would slowly and mechanically grind away at your vanities,
flaying off your skin of pride and self-importance, like potatoes in an
automated peeler, until you submitted.
What was I to do instead? The oil crisis and commodity inflation of the late
1970s and early 1980s had pushed interest rates up and had driven down the
value of the Treasury and corporate bonds that had long been a staple of
investment portfolios. The world of fixed-income investors longed for the
old days of price-stable products. Investment banks responded with the
financial-products boom of the late 1980s—Treasury bond futures, bond
options, CMOs, swaps, and swaptions, whose increasing mathematical
complexities 
ultimately 
led 
to 
good 
employment 
opportunities 
for
physicists in finance. If I had left Boulder and physics in 1984, Wall Street
would have beckoned clearly.
But in 1980, the early days of the energy crisis, the sirens that sang to
weary physicists as they sailed from postdoc position to postdoc position
were the energy and communications companies: Exxon Labs in Newark,
Schlumberger 
in 
Ridgefield, 
Connecticut, 
the 
Solar 
Energy 
Research
Institute (SERI) in Golden, Colorado, and Bell Laboratories at locations
throughout New Jersey. They were the Wall Streets of the 1980 physics
community.
The smallest deformation of my life in pure physics would have been a
job in applied physics, at SERI or Exxon or Schlumberger, working on the
physics of oil extraction or solar energy heating. But I was disappointed and
ashamed to leave physics, and arrogantly snobbish about its subfields. “If I
can’t do pure physics,” I thought to myself, “I’ll be damned if I do applied!”
If they expelled me from the monastery, I didn’t intend to worship God in
the world. I would rather quit religion forever.
Looking back, I was quite clearly wrong (although in the end fate took
care of me anyway). Everything is interesting when you examine it closely
enough to be able to reconcile its quality and its quantity; every field is
fascinating when you have sufficient familiarity with its nuances and begin
to try to bridge the gap between its form and its implementation. Applied
physics can provide an assortment of tasks, a mix of long-range and short-
term problems, a chance to instruct and entertain—in short, a refreshing
alternation between the obsessive world of solitary research and the lively
world of dealing with people.
“You can do what you want, but you cannot want what you want,” wrote
Schopenhauer in his Essays and Aphorisms, which I had started reading.
This was true, I thought. I could no longer want to do physics, much as I
would 
have 
liked 
to. 
In 
the 
struggle 
with 
myself, 
I 
got 
to 
savor
Schopenhauer’s hard, cynical view of the universe and its driving forces, all
phrased and condensed so beautifully that it read like poetry. I never forgot
it. His crystal analysis and elegant style far transcended Steiner’s clumsy
pronouncements of the truth given without explanation, but they gave a
much colder comfort.
In entering physics almost twenty years earlier and now in leaving it, I
was 
not 
alone; 
I 
was 
in 
part 
a 
follower 
of 
fashion 
and 
a 
slave 
of
circumstance. Despite my sensation of free will, I had been part of the
largest-ever graduating physics class at Cape Town in 1965 and the largest-
ever entering physics class at Columbia in 1966. Similarly now, I was part
of the tidal efflux. Several people I had known as students or postdocs in
physics had already left the field and were now working at Bell Labs.
Furthermore, a molecular biologist acquaintance of Eva’s, Lucy Shapiro,
had a husband, Harley McAdams, who worked at Bell Laboratories in
Murray Hill, New Jersey. Lucy suggested to Eva that I interview with him.
Reluctantly, I went out to spend a day there in the summer. I gave a half-
hour talk on an introduction to gauge theories and the research I had done,
trying hard to be qualitative and entertaining, and soon I had an offer from
them. 
According 
to 
my 
future 
friend 
Mark 
Koenigsberg, 
an 
applied
mathematician from MIT who was already working there but had been
away the day I interviewed, they liked me a lot. Mark had a penchant for
scientific metaphors and used to tease and flatter me for years afterwards
that 
since 
my 
interview 
they 
rated 
everyone 
else 
they 
questioned 
in
milliDermans.
After thinking about their offer, I decided to go back and learn more. So,
in the late summer of 1980 I again drove down the New Jersey turnpike and
turned west on the Route 22. Harley was a Department Head at Murray Hill
in the Business Analysis Systems Center, a group of genuine ex-rocket
scientists 
and 
engineers 
who 
had 
converted 
themselves 
into 
business
analysts in order to extend their careers when the space program funding at
Bell Labs had died out. He had broad interests and liked working there; it
gave you the chance, Harley told me, to delve into all sorts of things you
could 
never 
have 
studied 
otherwise. 
Personally, 
I 
wasn’t 
sure 
I 
was
interested in learning for the sake of learning; I was still ambitious for
achievement.
Though 
they 
offered 
me 
much 
more 
money 
than 
the 
University 
of
Colorado, I still yearned for physics, and asked Harley if I could work three
days per week, pro rata, and continue to do physics at Rockefeller the
remaining 
two 
days. 
He 
declined, 
sensibly 
explaining 
that 
it 
was 
an
arrangement that wouldn’t really work for them. In the end, I accepted the
job with the deepest misgivings and guilt. I was committing treason.
When I told a South African physicist friend that I was going to work for
AT&T’s Bell Laboratories, he uncharitably reminded me that eleven years
earlier, at the annual Washington, D.C., meeting of the American Physical
Society in 1969, we had marched to protest the antiballistic missile system
being built by AT&T. Now, he pointed out, I was going to work for them.
I wrote a letter to the chairman of the physics department in Boulder to
apologize for my decision not to return. A few weeks later, at the very end
of summer, Eva, Joshua, and I flew out to Boulder to pack up all my
belongings. Eva, perhaps fearful that I would hold her responsible for my
situation, spoke to the senior professor in the particle theory group, who
encouraged me to change my mind and stay on. But I was too far gone, and
could no longer even imagine preparing to teach particle physics that fall.
We took a brief, tense holiday in Steamboat Springs, where we watched a
real rodeo to Joshua’s great delight, and then returned to New York. I took
Josh to visit my family in Cape Town in October, and returned to start work
at the Labs at the start of November.
...
Chapter 7
In the Penal Colony
The world of industry—working for money rather than love
The Business Analysis Systems Center at Bell Labs
A small part of a giant hierarchy
Creating software is beautiful
Every morning I had to be at my desk at 9:00 A.M. Now, after seventeen
years on Wall Street, this sounds comfortably late; it seemed remarkably
early then. I woke up around 7 A.M., if Josh hadn’t woken me earlier. I ate
breakfast, skimmed the New York Times, took my car out of the garage
beneath our Rockefeller University apartment building, drove crosstown to
the Lincoln Tunnel, shot down the New Jersey Turnpike, turned west on
Route 24 at Newark, and headed for Murray Hill. It was a reverse commute,
and took about an hour. Coming back, even against the evening traffic,
required anywhere between one and two hours. The first morning, uncertain
of how long it would take to drive there, I arrived early and stopped at the
local McDonald’s for an Egg McMuffin, feeling romantically proletarian in
a Hopperish sort of way.
I had never commuted to work before. I had always worked at what I
wanted to work at. Now, I was like almost everyone else, doing what my
boss wanted me to do, for money. This was the real world.
For the first few weeks, as I drove down the turnpike, I nursed my sad
thoughts like a late-night whisky, taking small slow sips, trying to savor the
taste of my plight, seeking some perspective. At first, I attempted to treat
the entire commute as a meditative exercise. Then, after a few weeks, I
gave that up entirely and instead listened to news and music. What I liked
most was talk radio, then still in its infancy in 1980s New York. My favorite
driving station was WBAI, 1960s-style alternative radio that teemed with
opinionated underdog people who spoke for an hour about anything that
bothered them. I listened to Mike Feder, an Upper West sider who, once a
week, in Spalding Gray-style monologues, spoke ceaselessly and amusingly
about the more harrowing episodes in his life, and also about his occasional
epiphanic moments of happiness. Years later he worked at the Shakespeare
and Co. bookstore on West 81st and Broadway, now long since squeezed to
death by superstores and the Internet. I listened to Margot Adler talk about
women’s 
issues, 
and 
about 
her 
life 
as 
a 
Wiccan 
before 
it 
became
fashionable. A gay guy ran an hour of sentimental show music where I first
heard Karen Akers sing German-style cabaret. Sometimes, I listened to
classic 
novels 
as 
“Books 
on 
Tape.” 
But 
talk 
shows 
suited 
me 
best,
particularly talk by unhappy, oppressed people. I also enjoyed self-help
shows, especially Toni Grant on WABC in the late afternoon when I drove
home, who, with her beautifully enunciated liquid American accent, told
callers with problems to begin by taking “baby steps.” Those five years at
Bell Labs were the only period during which I ever listened to the radio for
longer than a few minutes.
People who had always worked to make a living told me that Bell Labs
was an ivory tower. To me, it was working for money. I had earned about
$18,000 dollars at Boulder. I started at $42,000 at the Labs, moving up to
$49,000 within half a year. But it felt like much less in New York, and the
extra pay did little to relieve my loss of direction in the world, though I
tried to pretend otherwise.
Ever worried and compulsive, I took AT&T’s manifold rules much more
seriously than they did. I was supposed to be there each morning by 9 A.M.
One day a faulty gas pump caused my car to falter en route, and I could see
I was going to be at least ten or fifteen minutes late. Panicked, I stopped at a
public phone near the highway at 8:45 A.M. and called my boss’s secretary
to warn her of my delayed arrival. When I got there only half an hour later,
she scathingly told me I was insane to think anyone cared. But I had been
paid to pipe, so I felt I must play every note of the tune they called. I
resented this so pathologically that I paid more attention to the letter than
the spirit of their rules. Once, I needed a morning off to go to Joshua’s
nursery school and tried to explain it to Harley. He was kind enough to tell
me that he didn’t even want to know about this sort of stuff. But I was too
literal and immature to take advantage of these sensible freedoms. Years
later, after I left, I realized that I could have done whatever I liked there,
and for a very long time too, before anyone would even have noticed. My
friend Mark Koenigsberg, shortly before he left for Salomon Brothers in
late 1986, spent a good part of his time studying books on options theory,
trying to find a closed-form solution for the value of the American put. I
doubt anyone fully knew what he was doing. While it would have been a
great discovery, it would have brought no direct commercial value to the
Business Analysis Systems Center. But then, what would have?
The Business Analysis Systems Center. Or was it the Business Systems
Analysis Center? I truly cannot remember. It consisted of about a hundred
people in Building 5, all of us ex-scientists of various kinds, now thinly
retreaded 
to 
provide 
internal 
consultation 
on 
various 
AT&T 
business
problems that might be amenable to mathematics. We were ruled over by
our director, Jim Downs, a former applied mathematician in his late forties
who had by some latter-day miracle of loaves and fish come to lead this
fiefdom.
Everyone was disproportionately fearful of Downs. He seemed to regard
social intercourse as a competitive Olympic event, perfecting his own jiu-
jitsu style of conversation that aimed to quickly unbalance his opponent. He
accomplished this by making aggressively oracular and cryptic statements
on 
whatever 
topic 
was 
under 
discussion. 
To 
my 
chagrin, 
his 
senior
employees evangelized about his mysterious wisdom. I recently heard
Roger Lowenstein, a reporter for the Wall Street Journal and author of
When Genius Failed, comment that John Meriwether “never played unless
he had an edge.” Downs believed he had an edge everywhere. He had to
dominate every exchange. Any fact you knew, any interest you had, was a
glove 
slap 
that 
required 
him 
to 
retaliate 
and 
outduel 
you. 
If 
Mark
Koenigsberg made a remark about solving a boundary-value problem in
heat conduction, Downs responded with a Southern drawl about something
clever (but unrelated) he claimed to have done with Fourier analysis twenty
years earlier. When he saw a group of us preparing to depart on a lunchtime
long-distance run, he joined us at once, despite having just completed his
lunch. He pushed ahead at a furious pace, determined to subdue every
young or empty-stomached one of us, until he faded out with cramps. I felt
uncomfortable around him and kept my distance, but once, when we got
involved in a pretentious conversation about meditation as a route to
achieving selflessness and humility, he more or less insisted that he was
more humble than the rest of us. The irony in this argument almost escaped
me, and certainly ran far ahead of him. I suppose that all he really suffered
from was an exaggerated form of the insecure competitiveness that afflicts
many scientists and academics, but it made him a disquieting manager.
My 
assigned 
supervisor 
was 
Ron 
Sherman, 
one 
of 
four 
supervisors
beneath Department Head Harley. Ron was a rotundly genial PhD in
Engineering who had coauthored an important Lab study on EMP (Electro-
Magnetic Pulse), the sudden surge of Faraday electrical currents and heat
that would occur in the wires of the national telephone network as a result
of the intense magnetic fields induced by nuclear explosions. A nuclear
attack might therefore melt and destroy the network, even if it left people
unharmed. Ron was one of the gentler people in our center, good-humored
and kind despite an earlier family tragedy that left him a single parent of
two young sons, one of whom was already writing well-received plays. Ron
seemed to me to lead an enviably charmed life at the Labs, setting his own
arrival and departure schedule imperturbably. He had broad interests, and
year by year accumulated more degrees: first a PhD in Engineering, then an
Executive MBA, and finally, I think, a law degree. Clerical and secretarial
help were sparse at the Labs, and Ron seemed to take some small amount of
glee in occasionally giving me long documents to xerox for everyone in our
group, late in the day when I was preparing to leave. Sometimes he asked
me 
to 
take 
minutes 
at 
group 
meetings, 
complimenting 
me 
on 
my
handwriting; sad to say, it succeeded in making me feel simultaneously
important and infantile.
Ron and I were but two nodes in a very large hierarchy that contained not
only the whole Labs, but also AT&T, Western Electric, and God-knows-
what-else that belonged to the Bell System in those predivestiture days.
There were roughly four MTS (Members of Technical Staff, like me) under
each supervisor; there were four or five supervisors (like Ron) under each
department head like Harley, and four Harleys under each Jim Downs.
From 
there 
the 
tree 
branched 
upwards 
to 
higher 
and 
higher 
levels,
eventually 
encompassing 
the 
whole 
company. 
If 
they 
extended 
the
organization by only four more levels, I used to think, they could employ
every adult in the United States.
Every new employee grew to be instinctively aware of these reporting
levels. When you first joined the organization, someone quickly explained
to you that the Bell Labs level structure was shifted up by half a level from
the more or less parallel structure at AT&T, and that, therefore, we lowly
MTS at the bottom of the Labs totem pole were actually almost supervisors
on the AT&T scale! Often, in the five years I spent there, I heard someone
proudly say “I just came back from a four-level meeting!” I never found out
whether this meant that the meeting was important enough to have been
graced by the presence of someone from exalted Level 4, or whether it
meant that the meeting was so diverse that there had been people from four
different levels there simultaneously. Levels with low numbers were more
auspicious, and you trembled at their mysterious splendor. Jim Downs used
to say that you could never comprehend the activities of someone more than
one level above you; the activities of someone two levels higher were
destined to be forever a mystery, unless you got promoted. It sounded very
Kafkaesque. What especially impressed me about Wall Street in general and
Goldman Sachs in particular, when I came to work there five years later,
was the absence of reverential fear. At Goldman, at that time, it was
relatively easy to approach important (and wealthy) people if the business
seemed to require it. As an example, I spoke to Bob Rubin a couple of times
in my first years at Goldman, when he was head of Fixed Income.
The 
Bell 
System 
was 
a 
massive 
bureaucracy 
of 
about 
one 
million
workers, linesmen to lawyers. It had its own enormous encyclopedia of
rules and regulations. I once watched one of my supervisors search through
the book of appropriate practice to find out what to do about my call to New
York City jury duty. Like the army, Bell stripped you of all external
trappings of merit, status or honor, and then imposed its own—Supervisor,
Department Head, Director, and so on. Somehow, one understood that
business 
cards 
could 
carry 
no 
external 
academic 
credentials; 
Andy
Salthouse, an ex-physicist and passionate amateur astronomer and asteroid
hunter who joined the Labs a little before me, explained that this was
necessary in order to avoid the tension that might otherwise occurs when an
MTS with a PhD reported to a supervisor with only a master’s degree.
1
In physical space, the Business Analysis Systems Center was located in
prefabricated barracks at the upper edge of the prestigious Murray Hill
campus, the most interesting and academic part of the Labs. In logical
space, we were part of Area 90, Network Systems. Area 10, the lowest
number, was the crown jewel, a pure research center where first-rate
scientists and engineers carried out advanced research without the burden of
having to seek government funding. As a regulated monopoly in those
precompetitive days, AT&T could charge its consumers whatever it needed
to pay the bills.
Area 10 was absolutely world-class in computer science and physics.
Brian Kernighan, Dennis Ritchie, and their coworkers had invented the now
legendary C programming language and the UNIX operating system there,
and then built the entire suite of programming utilities that carried nerdily
cute names like awk, ed, sed, finger, lex, and yacc. Area 10 had played a
large role in evangelizing the dual view of programs as both tools and text,
written not only to control electronic machines but also to to be understood
and manipulated by people. At the labs people were proud of programming
and viewed it as an art. In physics and engineering the Labs was an
experimental and theoretical powerhouse, producing research in electronics
and 
information 
theory 
that 
made 
possible 
many 
of 
the 
subsequent
advances in communications. Bardeen, Brattain, and Shockley had invented
the transistor there in 1947, and Claude Shannon published his landmark
paper “A Mathematical Theory of Communication” in the Bell System
Technical Journal in 1948. There were fundamental discoveries made, too–
Penzias 
and 
Wilson 
won 
the 
Nobel 
Prize 
for 
discovering 
the 
cosmic
radiation left behind by the Big Bang, as predicted by Robert Herman. Even
during 
the 
period 
I 
worked 
there, 
Horst 
Stormer, 
now 
at 
Columbia
University, did the research on the quantum Hall effect that recently won
him a share of the Nobel Prize. Near the end of my stay there, in 1984,
Feynman came to give a talk on the theory of quantum computing, a
technology then just emerging into infancy. The economics research group
in 
Area 
10, 
later 
disbanded, 
was 
also 
renowned; 
Robert 
Merton 
had
published his definitive paper “Theory of Rational Option Pricing” in the
1973 Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science.
I envied anyone and everyone in Area 10 their apparent freedom, and
rued my self-perceived lack thereof. For several years I commuted in a
shared minivan from Manhattan to Murray Hill and back, and met a number
of other Members of Technical Staff who, like me, worked in the applied
areas of the Labs. I noticed that engineers who had come to the Labs
straight from graduate school became rapidly accustomed to the corporate
bureaucracy and pettiness; they had known nothing better. But those of us
who had previously been independent scientists always chafed at the civil
service atmosphere, and many of us ultimately left.
Bill Toy, with whom I collaborated a few years later at Goldman, had
been a particle experimentalist whose PhD advisor, Jerome Friedman, later
won the Nobel Prize for discovering the quark structure in the deep-
inelastic electron-nucleus scattering experiments that had stimulated my
PhD thesis work. Bill had also worked at the Labs prior to coming to
Goldman and had experienced similar frustrations to mine. Our trouble was
that we wanted to get things done. The Labs could be fun if you were the
kind of person who was simply happy to tinker away with expensive up-to-
date equipment, but we didn’t function that way. I wanted the satisfaction
that comes from creating something. But in Building 5, so many of the
projects I worked on ended in a confused impasse. You did some work; you
wrote some internal document; Harley told Jim Downs about it; he then
pronounced it a failure or a success for some cryptically inarticulate reason
you couldn’t understand. We were forbidden from publishing it because it
was proprietary; yet often, no one inside the company had any real use for
it. 
I 
was 
increasingly 
sympathetic 
to 
whomever 
coined 
the 
slogan
“information wants to be free.”
I detested the cult of manageriality at the Labs. I was thirty-five years old
when I arrived there, and very quickly realized that you got no respect in
Area 90 unless you were a manager. In my previous life in physics, talent
and skill were everything—you felt sorry for people who ceased creating in
order to become administrators. But at the Labs, talent seemed to be a
commodity, fodder for managers to buy and redistribute. Supervisors were
actually 
forbidden 
from 
doing 
“technical 
work” 
on 
the 
grounds 
that
competing with their employees in this way was demoralizing. Instead,
managers became experts at intracorporate maneuvering. They seemed to
have forsaken their abilities for an incestuous familiarity with the system
which was valuable only in that organization, at that time.
I felt old at the Labs. My colleagues treated all forty-year old MTS as
over the hill. Against my best intentions, I began to look at them and myself
in the same way. I could not imagine living like that for the next twenty
years. When I eventually went to work at Goldman, I was relieved and
exhilarated to discover that the firm appreciated solid skill and talent.
Traders, salespeople, programmers, options experts—they all worked with
their own hands and made a very good living.
It was also at the Labs that I first witnessed political correctness. It was
only 1981, but once a year we were compelled to attend a day-long, off-site,
group therapy-style meeting run by external consultants. There, we were
trained in color and gender sensitivity. We played group games in which
you had to declare in public what kind of animal you identified with, and
why. (The otherwise meek woman who became my supervisor a year later
said she identified with lions, because it was the females in the pride who
killed.) We listened to music and described the feelings it evoked. We acted
out skits representing hypothetical crises in the workplace. In one episode,
for example, we were told that a crowd of male and female MTS had gone
for lunch to a nearby offsite restaurant, without their supervisor. While
there, one of the male MTS told a dirty joke. A woman MTS felt demeaned.
Should she have (a) kept quiet, (b) confronted the male, or (c) spilled the
beans to her supervisor on their return to the Labs? I don’t recall the correct
answer.
You were supposed to bare your soul about your prejudices in these
extracurricular sessions in front of your colleagues and supervisors, and
then return to work with them again the next day. The apparent justification
for this invasion of privacy was that your personality and prejudices could
affect the quality of your work and were therefore a legitimate corporate
concern. I detested this conflation of the personal and the corporate. Just
because I worked for them didn’t mean I had to discuss my internal hang-
ups in public one day a year. Nor did I especially want to hear about theirs.
At the tail end of the dot-com bubble, twenty years later, I was dismayed
that for a brief period even Goldman Sachs ran rife with consultants
successfully 
peddling 
their 
quackishly 
trendy 
prescriptions 
for 
team
building.
Meanwhile, in Building 5, conformity of ambition ran wild. Several of the
women there, ex-scientists like the rest of us, were avidly reading Dress for
Success and following its precepts. They began wearing mannish suits with
padded shoulders and silk neckties. One female MTS warned me never to
wear a brown suit, speaking with an earnestness so great that I have never
been able to buy a brown suit since, for fear that she really knew something
significant. One day, nevertheless, she cried in my office while telling me
about her personal problems. No one seemed to know whether to be
businesslike or empathetic. At some time in the middle of my stay there,
Bell Labs itself was rent apart by the breakup of the Bell System and the
divestiture of the Baby Bells. I remained with AT&T, while some of my
colleagues were sent off to Bellcore, the newly formed telecommunications
laboratory of the Bell Telephone Companies.
The inefficiencies and irritations of working at the Labs could fill a book,
but the stupidity that most illustrates the picayune nature of the bureaucracy
was the command, from somewhere above, sometime in 1984, to enter our
overtime hours (at work or at home) onto the time cards we filled out each
week, even though there was no pay for overtime at all. This was simply an
inducement to suck up to your management by lying to them about how
much 
work 
you 
did 
above 
and 
beyond 
the 
call 
of 
duty. 
It 
was 
an
irrationality worthy of the “Dilbert” cartoon, whose creator Scott Adams,
unsurprisingly, spent several of his working years at Pacific Bell.
But there were some good points to life there, too. The Center was filled
with ex-physicists and mathematicians, part of the late-1970s zeitgeist that
caused scientists to stream out of academic life and into corporations. Many
of them were particle physicists I had known before. I grew friendly with
Mark Koenigsberg, who loved puzzles of any kind. He was absent the day I
first came to interview, but soon after I started work we bonded over a
mutual dislike of many of the same things. Six months after I left the Labs
for Goldman, he followed me out the door to Salomon Brothers. Mark and I
became friendly with Larry Kegeles, a physicist about my age whom I had
met a few years earlier when he was a PhD student in general relativity at
the 
University 
of 
Pennsylvania. 
Steve 
Blaha, 
another 
former 
particle
physicist I had met at various conferences over the previous seven years,
had come to work in the Center, too, giving up his academic post at
Williams College. He too left the Labs a few years later to become a
software consultant and author in the Boston area.
Mark, Larry, and I banded together. Once I dragged them to the Ethical
Culture Society in New York to listen to a talk by Chogyam Trungpa
himself. Larry, like me, had an affinity for the offbeat, and he became
interested 
in 
Reichian 
analysis. 
Years 
before, 
I 
had 
seen 
Dusan
Makeveyev’s funny movie about Reich, W.R.: Mysteries of the Organism,
and enjoyed its Slavic sensibility and clever equation of sexual and political
repression. Now I read Myron Sharaf’s Fury on Earth, a biography of
Reich’s strange brave life.
Life at the Labs was lax, and we went out to eat long lunches at low-
quality Jersey restaurants on Route 22. When we occasionally took visiting
interviewees out to dinner, the rendezvous of choice was L’Affaire, whose
pretentiously sophisticated name told you everything about the people who
ran it, the food they provided, and the people who took us there. Once,
sitting in my car in the parking lot outside Building 5 during a prolonged
downpour after a long lunch off premises, Mark, Larry, and I pondered the
famous two-condom combinatorial problem that spread through the Center:
Two (heterosexual) couples decide to have group sex with each other in
all possible male-female combinations. They have only two condoms,
and everyone is scared of catching some venereal disease. How can
they manage four couplings with only two condoms? The first man puts
on two condoms, one over the other, and then sleeps with the first
woman. Only the outer surface of the outer condom and the inner
surface of the inner one has had contact with any potentially infectious
surface. The man removes the outer condom and sleeps with the second
woman. The second man then dons the removed outer condom whose
inner surface has until now had no contact with anyone’s skin, and
sleeps with the first woman, whose only contact has thus far been with
the outside of the same condom. Finally, the second man dons the
second condom over the one he is already wearing, and sleeps with the
second woman, who again only experiences a condom she has already
touched.
It was impossible to resist the temptation to generalize to N couples.
Larry was a serious marathoner, and he and I went running together
several 
times 
a 
week 
at 
lunchtime, 
part 
of 
a 
small 
crowd 
of 
avidly
compulsive runners at the Labs. We would walk down to the small shower
room that belonged to the Building and Grounds staff, change, warm up on
the grass, run for 30 to 45 minutes, warm down, stretch, shower and
change, and then eat lunch in the cafeteria. It took close to two hours, and
put a sizeable dent in the workday, especially if you worked nine to five,
but no one seemed to care. I have never before or since been that fit or that
fast.
We held an occasional educational seminar in our group and once, early
in 1981, Larry gave a talk on the Black-Scholes theory, which I had never
heard of up to that point. I became briefly fascinated by the fact that options
payoffs 
involved 
the 
algebra 
and 
calculus 
of 
Heaviside 
(indicator)
functions, which I had used in particle physics; later I came across an early
paper 
by 
Mark 
Garman 
of 
Berkeley, 
who 
exploited 
these 
same
relationships. But options theory was largely irrelevant to what we did at
the Labs, and my temporary interest quickly faded. I understood nothing
about hedging or risk-neutrality, and I paid no attention to the stock market.
Several years later, Larry, Mark, and I were sent to a two-week MIT
executive summer session on finance, taught by Stuart Myers from his
textbook with Brealey. We lived in a campus dorm and luxuriated in our
freedom from corporate life, running on the MIT track in the late afternoons
and eating in Cambridge in the evenings. Myers’s course focused on the
Capital 
Asset 
Pricing 
Model, 
and 
I 
was 
captivated 
by 
the 
apparent
similarity between financial theory and thermodynamics. I saw a perhaps-
too-facile correspondence between heat and money, temperature and risk,
and entropy and the Sharpe ratio, but have never since figured out how to
exploit it. The course was brief and intense and required more work than we
put into it. One of the lecturers was Terry Marsh, now a Professor at
Berkeley and a founding partner of the financial software firm Quantal. At
that time he was just beginning to make his reputation, and I was always
happy to run into him years later at professional finance meetings or when I
gave a seminar at the Haas business school at Berkeley.
I viewed AT&T as a job, and a disappointing one at that, but Larry had a
strong spiritual streak, and believed that we were all playing a part in
improving 
human 
communication. 
I 
thought 
that 
laughable 
then, 
but
perhaps on some level he was right. Nevertheless, he, Mark and I—all
stifled—were gone within five years.
What I did like above all else at the Labs was the beauty of creating
software. Ignorant people called it “coding,” as though there was something
mechanical about it, the mere uncomprehending translation from one set of
symbols to another. People who liked it unabashedly called themselves
“programmers.” Whatever you called it, I discovered that programming was
one of the purest activities; it was truly architecture with words. By some
strange 
unanimity 
of 
opposites, 
both 
my 
scientist 
and 
business-world
friends were condescending about programming—they thought it inferior to
doing physics or making money. But I fell in love with it.
When you program well, you are trying to design a machine to perform a
task. You design with a man-made programming language—FORTRAN,
Lisp, C++ or Java, for example. Programming is not that different from
instructing a friend to perform a task for you. The big difference is that the
computer is much more literal than any friend, and so every detail of the
task must be specified as though the computer knows nothing about the
world.
Until I arrived at the Labs in 1980, I had never realized how elegant and
challenging programming could be. I had never used a computer terminal.
During my student and postdoc years, all my programs had aimed merely to
obtain the numerical values of complicated mathematical formulae, over
and over again; I thought of the computer as a glorified adding machine.
My only exception had been at the University of Cape Town, in 1965, when
I used punched cards to enter a vocabulary into the machine and then
created randomly generated short poems. I had always thought of that effort
as a childish lark.
But 
at 
AT&T 
in 
1980, 
the 
whole 
firm 
was 
embracing 
C, 
the
simultaneously graceful and yet practical language invented by Dennis
Ritchie about ten years earlier at Murray Hill. He had devised C to be a
high-level 
tool 
with 
which 
to 
write 
portable 
versions 
of 
UNIX, 
the
operating system also invented there by Ken Thompson and Ritchie.
2
Now,
everything from telephone switching systems to word-processing software
was being written in C, on UNIX, all with amazing style. Eventually, even
physicists, who are generally interested only in the number of digits after a
decimal point, began to forsake ugly utilitarian FORTRAN for poetically
stylish C. Programming was in the late stages of a revolution about which I
was just beginning to learn.
The 
revolution’s 
credo 
demanded 
that 
programs 
be 
humanly
comprehensible texts of information. This had not always been the case;
because programs had to be stored in expensive and limited computer
memory, programmers had traditionally concentrated on making them as
concise as possible. They bragged about writing “tight” code that was terse,
condensed, and cryptic, even confusing. It was OK as long as it ran fast, the
thinking went; style was almost irrelevant and content was king. Programs
were therefore error-prone as well as hard for humans to understand and
modify—implicitly, 
they 
were 
written 
for 
the 
computers 
that 
would
mechanically execute their commands. Hard to create, programs tended to
have surprisingly long subsequent lifetimes during which they required
expensive maintenance, modification, and enhancement. This was the set of
circumstances that caused the anxiety behind Y2K.
What are you doing when you program? You are trying to use a language
to specify an imagined world and its details as accurately as possible. You
are trying to create this world on a machine that can understand and execute
only simple commands. You do this solely by writing precise instructions,
often 
many 
hundreds 
of 
thousands 
of 
lines 
long. 
Your 
sequence 
of
instructions must be executed without ambiguity, by an uncomprehending
automaton, the computer, and yet, in parallel, must be read, comprehended,
remembered and modified by you and other programmers. Just as poetry
strives to resolve the tension between form and meaning, so programming
must resolve the conflict between intelligibility and concision. In this
endeavor, the language you employ is critically important.
At the Labs, one regarded code-writing itself as a task in need of tools.
They encouraged programmers to view each specific program they tackled
as an instance of a class of more generally useful programs, and then to use
the computer to create that class. They devised programs to write part or all
of their programs. The UNIX community at the Labs had created, out of
love rather than duty, a suite of editorial and analytical tools to help write,
examine, 
and 
modify 
their 
programs. 
Thompson 
and 
Ritchie’s 
UNIX
programming environment used the computer not merely as the automaton
to execute the program, but, just as importantly, as the tool to create it. The
computer was not just the hammer, but also the forge with which to create
the next-generation hammer.
Bell Labs Members of Technical Staff didn’t just churn out programs;
instead, they thought about the subtasks (reading input, solving equations,
formatting output, for example) that the program needed to do. Then, they
wrote little, special-purpose programming languages that could be used to
generate these subunits of the larger program. Finally, they used these little
languages to create the entire program itself. They were always generalizing
from tasks to tools.
Because AT&T was a regulated utility, forbidden from making a profit by
selling software in competition with IBM and Digital, the Labs distributed
these tools freely to universities. This dissemination produced an entire
generation of programmers who thought of programming not as a chore, but
as a literary endeavor with the computer as medium. How lucid, elegant and
structured your program looked was as important as how efficiently it ran.
Kernighan and Plauger wrote a famous and influential book in the 1970s
called The Elements of Programming Style, its title a homage to Strunk and
White’s classic monograph on writing well, The Elements of Style. They
were 
part 
of 
a 
movement 
that 
perceived 
programming 
and 
code
development as art.
This 
culture 
was 
already 
widespread 
when 
I 
arrived 
at 
the 
Business
Analysis Systems Center. All new employees learned UNIX and its Bourne-
shell scripting language, as well as C for programming, the S language for
statistics, and the line-formatting text editor ed. I remember the excitement
of learning to use Bill Joy’s visual text editor vi shortly after it was released.
To their credit, the Center organized a sequence of master’s-equivalent
courses on computer science, taught mostly by professors from Columbia
University in New York City. I learned software design and algorithms from
John Kender, a mild-mannered, low-key expert on vision software; we
learned 
database 
theory 
from 
David 
Shaw, 
who 
later 
founded 
the
investment boutique D. E. Shaw & Co., as well as the first free email
service, Juno. At D. E. Shaw, David employed Jeff Bezos, who later left to
found Amazon.com.
David was already a free-wheeling entrepreneur. He had run a software
company while studying computer science at Stanford; when I met him he
still radiated a sloppy academic demeanor that didn’t completely jibe with
his business-oriented self-assurance. He was an early incarnation of the now
ubiquitous capitalist academic. In his back trousers pocket he carried his
appointments in a small leather DayTimer that had conformed to the shape
of his body. The book had been manufactured in Pennsylvania and was very
American middle manager, with its one-month spiral-bound inserts with
space 
for 
lists 
of 
Appointments 
and 
Things 
To 
Do. 
It 
looked 
very
unprofessorally businesslike, an early precursor of soon-to-arrive European
Filofaxes and, a decade later, American Palm Pilots.
David clearly thought big. In those days he was planning what he called
“NonVon,” 
a 
parallel-processing 
computer 
comprised 
of 
many 
small
processors and memory units. It was to be the antithesis of the standard
computer with one large central processor, a design that had prevailed since
John 
von 
Neumann 
and 
the 
ENIAC 
computer 
of 
the 
1940s. 
David’s
confidence inspired fear and envy. John Kender complained half-jokingly to
me that while he and the other assistant professors in the tenure race at
Columbia were trying to get modest government grants to do their work,
David was always talking about ambitious proposals on a much larger scale,
with plans for NonVon eventually to require a staff of tens to hundreds.
John thought he and his colleagues had no chance of tenure in comparison
with David’s broad vision and unquestioning self-confidence that bordered
on braggadocio.
John was right about David’s capacious weltanschaung, but wrong about
his exact path to glory. David left Columbia soon afterwards and went to
work in Nunzio Tartaglia’s fabled group at Morgan Stanley, doing pairs
trading.
3
When that effort eventually ended, he created D. E. Shaw & Co.
His 
new 
firm 
touted 
itself 
as 
specializing 
in 
the 
interaction 
between
technology and finance, nurturing their reputation as secretive builders of
high-powered computer systems used to seek out trading opportunities.
Fortune 
magazine 
in 
1996 
referred 
to 
it 
as 
“the 
most 
intriguing 
and
mysterious force on Wall Street today.” I knew hiring managers on Wall
Street who interviewed anyone from D. E. Shaw, if only to find out what
went on in its obscure depths. But most Shaw employees you interviewed
didn’t know much about how things worked there. In 1997, when I was
invited to introduce David as the luncheon speaker at a conference, I said
that “. . . you could think of D. E. Shaw & Co. as the Batcave, with David
as Batman, watching the world, himself visible only through a glass,
darkly.” But building a riskless money machine, especially on a large scale,
is not that easy. There are not that many riskless profits to be harvested in
the world. Eventually the struggle to make the same return on larger
amounts of capital makes ever-riskier strategies tempting. In 1998 D. E.
Shaw & Co., in partnership with the Bank of America, reportedly lost close
to a billion dollars on the same sorts of strategies that decapitated Long
Term Capital Management and took appreciable pounds of flesh out of
many other hedge funds and investment banks.
Meanwhile, in 1981, I attended the computer science courses offered by the
Labs 
and 
learned 
the 
practical 
art 
of 
programming. 
I 
was 
especially
entranced by language design and compiler writing, and spent most of my
time creating specific little languages that allowed users to solve specialized
problems.
In 
high-level 
languages 
like 
Java, 
C, 
or 
even 
ancient 
and 
despised
FORTRAN, 
you 
can 
easily 
write 
brief, 
sophisticated 
commands 
that
instruct the computer to carry out complex operations. You can program in
a style that corresponds rather closely to the way an educated person thinks
or talks about mathematics. But a computer’s central processing unit, the
primitive 
brain 
that 
actually 
performs 
the 
logical 
and 
mathematical
operations, is an idiot savant that has been engineered to “understand” and
respond only to simple babytalk. It is as though you want to tell a small
child who grasps only baby talk (but has a very good memory for long
sequences of it) to take the dog for a walk. You cannot just say “Take the
dog for a walk!”This assumes too much knowledge of the world. Instead,
you 
must 
translate 
that 
high-level, 
big-picture 
command 
into 
a
corresponding list of very elementary sequential actions, each describable
in baby talk. You must say something like:
Fetch the dog;
find the leash;
tie the leash to the dog’s collar;
hold the leash tightly;
open the front door;
follow the dog for five minutes;
if the dog steps off the sidewalk, pull him back using the leash;
. . .
return to the front door;
enter through the door;
unleash the dog.
If 
you 
design 
a 
high-level 
language 
that 
allows 
its 
users 
to 
issue
sophisticated commands such as “Walk the dog,” you must provide a
compiler that translates these commands into the baby talk machine code
that 
the 
central 
processing 
unit 
can 
follow. 
Clearly, 
one 
mistake 
in
translation, or just a little lack of specificity, and the dog and child will
never return!
When John Backus and his team at IBM invented FORTRAN as a
“FORmula TRANslation” language in the late 1950s, they wanted to allow
programmers 
to 
manipulate 
complex 
mathematical 
formulas. 
Their
compiler had to automatically translate any FORTRAN command into a
sequence of the baby talk machine code that the simple logical computer
circuits could follow. The compiler had to not only translate reasonable
commands into baby talk; it also had to refuse to translate unreasonable or
nonsensical ones. It had to to shout “Foul!” if you asked it to compile the
command 
“Dog 
the! 
for 
take 
walk.” 
In 
brief, 
it 
had 
to 
comprehend
grammar.
Grammar is the set of rules that legitimate sentences must satisfy. Adults
recognize grammar intuitively, without thinking, but computers must follow
rules. Backus developed a mathematical formalism for describing and
parsing grammars that facilitated the task of language translation. It worked
well for simple programming grammars that are less complex and subtle
than those expressing natural languages. Backus’s formalism, called BNF
for 
Backus 
Normal 
Form, 
provided 
a 
methodology 
for 
creating
grammatically 
consistent 
computer 
languages, 
and 
paralleled 
similar
discoveries by Noam Chomsky on generative grammars. Working with this
formalism, 
I 
learned 
how 
to 
design 
small 
grammatically 
consistent
computer languages.
BNF helped you to define the grammar of your computer language. It
allowed you to create a compiler that would parse sentences in your
language and accept only the grammatically correct ones. This was half the
battle. The other half was to write the part of the compiler that translated
each grammatically correct sentence into baby talk. This was painstakingly
tedious and difficult; a mistake in translation is potentially fatal in a
program that people rely on to do mathematics or control spacecraft.
The UNIX operating system was a breathtakingly liberating environment
for program writers. It contained two of the most beautiful tools I had ever
seen: 
they were called lex and yacc, 
and 
they 
allowed 
me 
to 
create
compilers 
almost 
effortlessly. 
Lex 
was 
an 
abbreviation 
for 
“lexical
analyzer.” 
Yacc 
stood 
for 
“Yet 
Another 
Compiler-Compiler,” 
and 
was
another of the cute acronyms that characterized many UNIX tools. You
could use lex to create a subprogram that would recognize all the words in
your language. You could use yacc to create another subprogram that would
parse and recognize legitimate sentences, and then take the actions you
deemed appropriate. Lex and yacc were “non-procedural” programs—you
weren’t required to write all the details of lexical analysis and parsing;
instead, you simply told them what grammar you wanted to recognize, and
they wrote a program to do it, using algorithms for matching patterns that
went back to the computer pioneers Alan Turing and Stephen Kleene. With
lex and yacc as aids, I learned to create my own computer languages.
A little like Feynman diagrams, which allowed workaday physicists to
compute unthinkingly the detailed quantum mechanical probabilities that
had formerly demanded the genius of Schwinger or Feynman, these parsing
tools allowed regular programmers to prosaically create languages that
would previously have required magnificent exertions.
I used to always equate computation with numerical evaluation. Now,
having been exposed to the linguistic aspects of computing, I regretted I had
not recognized them before. I fantasized about escaping the Business
Analysis Systems Center to become a true research computer scientist in
Area 10, and made an attempt to transfer. But I had neither the credentials
nor the background, so it was quite impossible.
Nevertheless, for most of my five years at the Labs, I worked on building
compilers. I spent several years designing and implementing a language I
named 
HEQS, 
a 
“Hierarchical 
EQuation 
Solver,” 
an 
equation-solving
language for businesspeople who knew enough to specify the equations
they wanted to solve but lacked either the mathematical ability or the time
to solve them. The name had the obligatory UNIX cuteness, but it was also
a homonym of “hex,” which succinctly reflected my secretly morbid view
of life in Building 5.
Like lex or yacc, HEQS was a nonprocedural language—users could state
what they wanted done (“Solve these equations!”) without having to specify
a procedure for accomplishing it. (FORTRAN and C, in contrast, are
procedural 
languages 
that 
demand 
that 
the 
programmer 
specify, 
in
excruciating detail, how to execute a task.) In its final incarnation, you
could give HEQS a collection of thousands of algebraic equations (linear,
nonlinear or simultaneous) and have it solve them or tell you why some
error you had made in specifying the equations made a solution impossible.
HEQS also provided tools for analyzing the set of equations; users could
examine the relation between input and output, and understand the chain by
which altering one variable’s value affected other variables. In essence, it
allowed 
business 
users 
at 
AT&T 
to 
spend 
their 
time 
specifying 
the
relationships in their business or accounting model without worrying about
how to solve it.
Six or seven years later, after the widespread advent of PCs, spreadsheets
like Visicalc and Lotus provided tools for doing the same thing. Until then,
various 
businesspeople 
at 
AT&T 
headquarters 
used 
HEQS 
for 
model
solving, and programmers in our center employed it as an equation-solving
engine in many of the applications we built. I was pleased to keep one foot
in the research world by describing it in an issue of the AT&T Technical
Journal.
4
I developed HEQS on my own, delving into lex and yacc to design the
language and build its compiler. Once users had entered the equations they
wanted to solve, my program regrouped them into sequences of smaller sets
of simultaneous equations, ordered so that the output from the solution of
one set provided the input you needed to solve the next. Stimulated by the
courses on computer science I had taken at the Labs, I realized that I could
represent each variable in the set of equations by a node in a directed graph,
and that reordering the equations was equivalent to decomposing the graph
into its strongly connected components. I was naively proud to be doing
real math.
There were helpful resources wherever I turned. I found that Chris Van
Wyk, an MTS in Computer Science in Area 10, had written a set of UNIX
tools for solving simultaneous equations. He had started this project while
working on his PhD thesis at Stanford under Donald Knuth, the famous
author of the four-volume The Art of Computer Programming and the
inventor of TeX, a widely used language for mathematical typesetting and
word processing that has become standard among scientists. Steve Blaha,
my particle-physicist friend at the Labs, told me that Knuth had been his
college roommate. As we worked together I was impressed by Chris’s
professional programming skills; I was an amateur, living by my wits, while
Chris was the real thing, a researcher working in his area of expertise. I felt
doomed to remain a mere dilettante.
HEQS was a good idea, and soon, as people in the Center started using it
for solving larger sets of equations, it needed a more skillful and efficient
implementation than I could provide. My version of HEQS allowed users
only single numbers (scalars) and one-dimensional vectors to represent
financial time series. A colleague, Ed Sheppard, was assigned to work with
me, and we planned to rewrite the system to incorporate multidimensional
array variables in order to represent more general financial time series.
While I was away on a two-week beach vacation at Fire Island with my
family, Ed suddenly threw himself into redesigning and then rewriting the
entire system—without giving me advance notice. I returned to a fait
accompli, a completely new, enhanced, and almost unrecognizable APL-
flavored version of the language. Ed’s version now incorporated vastly
complex dynamically linked data structures, whose details I knew I would
not live long enough to master. Ed had also cleverly modified HEQS so
that, once you had used it interactively to develop and solve a financial
model, you could then use it generate a C program that would solve your
equations many times faster.
Programming came naturally to Ed in a way it never would to me, and his
proficiency daunted me. Sometime in late 1984 he left to join Asymetrix, a
Seattle-based company founded by Paul Allen. For the remainder of my
stay at the Labs, I was a victim of our success: I often had to spend days at a
time diving into his code to fix the residual bugs that showed up in
algorithms I had never written and never fully understood.
It was around this time, seeing Ed write and design code, that I realized
how many physicists misperceived the nature of jobs and careers in the
nonacademic world. Physicists tended to think they were so smart that, once
they descended to a job in the “outside world,” their talent would allow
them to work in a 9-to-5 mode and still outperform their colleagues. But, in
any nonacademic job, there are people for whom that particular work is not
a compromise but a passion and dedication, taken seriously. They, rather
than the smart but coasting physicists, set the standards of excellence.
HEQS ended happily for me. Chris Van Wyk and I eventually wrote an
article on HEQS that appeared in the software journal Programming:
Practice and Experience in 1984. I was overjoyed to publish again rather
than perish, to be “doing science.” Even now, I get a small kick out of
seeing occasional references to that paper on the Web, though most of them
undoubtedly 
occur 
because 
Chris 
continues 
to 
work 
in 
the 
field 
of
nonprocedural languages. I was pleased to discover recently that Lucent,
the descendant of Bell Labs, still offers HEQS for sale at $89.00 on its
website at https://www.lucentssg.com/heqs.html. In this era of Mathematica
and Excel, however, I cannot imagine who buys it.
I learned almost nothing about business or finance in the Business Analysis
Systems 
Center 
between 
1980 
and 
1985. 
In 
contrast, 
the 
software
engineering skills I learned there stood me in good stead, and formed the
basis for much of the fixed-income financial modeling infrastructure I later
built at Goldman Sachs in 1987.
Despite the excellent education, I always felt subservient and demeaned
at the Labs. Only a month after starting work there I took Joshua, barely
three years old, to play on the lawns at Rockefeller University where we
still lived. He loved to take off his shoes and run barefoot through the grass.
While he did so, I sat there ruminating about what I was doing. Suddenly,
he came over, looked at me, and asked: “Daddy, why you sad?” I knew
even then that my daily reverse commute to the Labs would be merely
temporary. I just didn’t know how I would find a way to end it.
Notes
1
On Wall Street until the late 1990s, PhDs s rarely listed their degrees on
their 
business 
cards, 
because 
to 
do 
so 
would 
have 
outed 
them
immediately as nonbusiness people. For the same reason, it took a long
time before quants and programmers routinely put their email addresses
on their business cards. A rise in the prestige of PhD degrees occurred
slowly but steadily between 1996 and 1999 as dot-coms prospered.
2
Writing operating systems in a high-level language like C was a new
idea. Operating systems used to be written from scratch, arduously, in the
idiosyncratic, 
low-level, 
hard-to-read, 
and 
primitive 
assembler 
or
machine code that came native on each new machine. By using standard
C 
rather than each machine’s particular 
machine 
code to write the
operating system, you could quickly create a version of UNIX and all its
tools to run any newly manufactured computer, simply, by first getting C
itself to run on that machine.
3
Pairs trading is the search for statistically significant oscillatory patterns
in the spread between pairs of similar stocks. If you believe you have
detected such a phenomenon, you short the expensive stock and buy the
cheap one when the spread is large, and then reverse the trade when/if the
spread narrows. Since Tartaglia’s renowned but temporary successes at
Morgan Stanley, trading houses, hedge funds, and the scientists they
employ have regularly and hopefully attempted to build model-driven,
so-called “statistical arbitrage” money machines of this type.
4
At this time I also began attending various computer science research
seminars and conferences, where I was always struck by the difference in
quality between computer science research and physics research. In
physics, 
seminar 
speakers 
described 
completed 
achievements. 
In
computer science, however, the majority of the talks were about plans for
systems, sketches of new languages, and unimplemented ideas. The
hurdle for declaring accomplishment seemed much lower.
...
Chapter 8
Stop-Time
Wall Street beckons
Interviewing at investment banks
Leaving the Labs
How to get out of the Labs? That was my daily obsession for five years.
Meanwhile, always the complainer, I came home every day and droned on
indignantly about my plight, burdening anyone willing to listen to my own
Passover Seder, the story of how I came to leave the land of academic milk
and honey and live under Pharoah in the land of the Business Analysis
Systems Center. I recounted the heavy labors that were inflicted upon me
and strategized about how to get free. Every day was Paradise Lost and In
Search of a Lost Time. I know I drove my wife half crazy.
When 
I 
took 
three-year-old 
Josh 
to 
the 
Center’s 
Christmas 
party, 
I
worried that he would give me away—I had spent so many evenings at
home disparagingly describing my frustration with bosses and coworkers
within his earshot that I feared he would recognize someone’s name when I
introduced them and repeat one of my remarks. Before driving out to
Murray Hill that morning, I cautioned him not to repeat anything I had said
about anyone. Of course, he didn’t.
At that party, Mark Koenigsberg told me about a date who had taken him
to see a movie he hated intensely. We knew that our tastes in movies were
diametric, and the more he described the plot, the more I was certain I
would like it. As soon as the party was over, I drove back to New York and
went to see the film—Louis Malle’s My Dinner With André, with André
Gregory and Wallace Shawn. The self-indulgent dinner conversation about
the contrast between a mystical search for fulfillment and the mundane
pleasures and disappointments of everyday life resonated deeply in me. It
reminded me of the sense of possibility about the future I had once
experienced when I had first wanted to be a physicist; it also reminded me
of the potentialities for happiness that I had sensed while meditating at the
Dharmadhattu in Boulder. On that December afternoon, My Dinner With
André imbued me with a such a vast sense of hope and salvation that I felt
uplifted. Its aftereffects dissipated astonishingly slowly, trickling out of me
for about a week. Two months later, wondering if its salutary effects had
been merely a fluke, I went to see the movie once again, and once again felt
better, though this time only for several days. Malle, Gregory, and Shawn
depicted the middle ground between hope and despair so well; a few years
ago I saw their Vanya on Forty-Second Street and felt similarly moved, at
the first viewing and the second.
I was naive and felt demeaned by the “moneyness” that underpinned
everything 
we 
were 
supposed 
to 
work 
on 
at 
the 
Labs. 
Despite 
the
vicissitudes of life in physics, I had worked out of love, and now I was
working for money. Though Bell Labs was ranked as one of the top 100
places to work in America in 1985, it was at the top of my own selfish list
of the worst places I’d worked at. My karmic destiny, I suppose, was to
have my vain illusions about life and work painfully sandpapered off me as
I brushed against the rough surface of the world. Later, when that process
was complete, I would be able to enjoy life at Goldman, Sachs and Co. Had
I come to work at Goldman straight out of graduate school, I might well
have hated it for its intensely pecuniary focus just as much as I hated the
Labs.
Meanwhile, I obsessed about changing my life. There were a variety of
excellent programmers who worked in a software research group within the
Business Analysis Systems Center. Dave Korn worked a few offices down
from me, busy creating the now ubiquitous UNIX Korn shell; Emden
Gansner 
and 
Jonathan 
Shopiro 
were 
both 
enthusiastic 
contributors 
to
object-oriented 
programming 
in 
general 
and 
to 
Stroustrup’s 
C++
environment in particular. I tried to transfer into their group, but Downs
insisted that it was narrow-minded of me to think that I had to be located
with them to do interesting work. Perhaps it was just as well. Though I was
envious of Emden’s calm, undistracted ways, I was quite incapable of
emulating his temperament. He never asked for help with debugging, but
read whatever manuals were necessary and then patiently dug deeper,
struggling for as long as it took to solve the problem. I simply ran for help
at the first panicky opportunity.
Even when my managers graciously allowed me to telecommute from
home one day a week, I chafed at my shackles. I yearned for academic life
and considered retracing my steps, exploring how to become a long-term
physics postdoc again with Baqi Bég at Rockefeller or Norman Christ at
Columbia.
Then, in late 1983, Wall Street began to beckon.
The first hints of my life-to-be began with occasional calls from head-
hunters in New York City. Soon, we all knew their legendary names—Jory
Marino, Rick Wastrom of Smith Hanley, Rita Raz of Analytics, Steve
Markman of Pencom, to name just a few of those who preyed on Bell Labs.
Many of them are still active now, still advertising in the Sunday New York
Times or on the Internet. Out of the blue, someone you had never heard of
would cold-call you at work and ask if you wanted a job that paid $150,000
—a huge amount in those days for an ex-physicist making less than $50K—
and then command you, urgently, to come to his or her office immediately,
before it was too late. These recruiters might flatter you by saying they had
heard of you; in fact some acquaintance at the Labs had simply given them
your name, or they had found it in a Bell Labs internal directory wheedled
from some disgruntled employee. A few times, at their behest, I would
leave work early and drive back into Manhattan to meet one of them,
putting on my rarely worn navy blazer and 1960s knitted tie in a poor effort
to simulate business attire. I owned no suits. Headhunters could keep you
waiting for hours, like God as the Puerto Rican janitor in Bruce Jay
Friedman’s Steambath I saw on PBS around that time. Many headhunters
were imperious, high-handed and low-mannered, and none of us knew
enough to doubt their implicit claim that they held the keys to the kingdom.
I had several mostly unpleasant interviews at Wall Street firms in late
1983. I knew nothing about options theory and regarded myself as a
software person. In those days, information technology on Wall Street was a
land of mainframers who were educated in COBOL or FORTRAN or MIS
and you needed only one eye to be king. At the Labs I had learned to design
and maintain programs with a sophistication beyond that of most of the
renegade scientists and coders on the Street. On interviews, because of my
experience with HEQS, I advertised myself as someone who could design a
computer language to match the Street’s modeling needs.
One of my first interviews was with Zach Cobrinik, now an ex-Goldman
partner and then a very boyish member of the Goldman Sachs Quantitative
Strategies group that I headed seven years later. At that time the group was
run by David Weinberger, who shortly thereafter left for O’Connor in
Chicago. Zach seemed most interested in finding a systems administrator
for their VAX, a task of little interest to me, and so I declined to continue
the process.
Some months later, another headhunter sent me to Salomon Brothers
about a position whose nature was never explained. I spent no more than
ten minutes naively informing my interviewer about the benefits I could
bring 
them 
by 
solving 
financial 
models 
with 
simultaneous 
algebraic
equations using HEQS. Then, in the middle of our conversation he was
interrupted by a colleague; he suddenly stood up, apologized curtly, and left
for something that he said had urgently arisen, promising to resume our
discussion at some future time. Neither he nor the head-hunter ever called
again. Despite repeated attempts, I could never get through to the woman in
Personnel who arranged the interview; she was always unavailable. For a
long time I thought they were simply very busy; finally I realized that this
was their way of brushing me off. I never understood why it wouldn’t have
been easier to tell me that they simply weren’t interested.
Then, in late 1983, when Eva was pregnant with our daughter Sonya, a
headhunter I knew arranged an interview for me in Stan Diller’s Financial
Strategies Group (FSG) in the Fixed Income Division at Goldman Sachs.
There I met Ravi Dattatreya, a former PhD engineer from Bell Labs who
had himself migrated to the Street a short while earlier.
Stan’s group addressed a new need for quantitative modeling at Goldman.
By tradition a gentlemanly equity house that concentrated on IPOs and
stock trading for large institutional clients, Goldman had recently begun to
step onto Salomon’s turf, the hurly-burly and plebeian world of bonds and
mortgages. Stock trading was a simple, gutsy, risk-taking business that
required little intellectual or technical capital. Bonds were more complex;
they involved numbers, arithmetic, algebra, even calculus. As my trader
friend said, there’s no competitive edge to being smart in equities.
The trick in the stock market was to estimate the right price for a share of
stock in one of several thousand different companies. The bond market
comprised 
fewer 
securities, 
but 
each 
security 
was 
more 
complex,
sometimes bewilderingly so. The 900-pound gorilla in the market was the
American Government, the source of liquid, ever-flowing Treasury bills,
notes, 
and 
bonds 
that 
sprang 
from 
the 
government’s 
need 
to 
borrow.
Government bonds were characterized by a wide choice of maturities and
coupons and, since they were backed by the full faith and credit of the
United States, they would never default. Foreign governments issued bonds,
too, some of them more prone to default than others. Corporate bonds were
even riskier; a company might run out of cash and then be unable to make
their promised payments. Some bonds could be “called”—the corporation
had the option to end its obligation to keep paying a high rate of interest on
its loan after interest rates had dropped by prematurely repaying the amount
they had borrowed. Mortgages sold by homeowners were among the most
horrifically elaborate bonds; they too could be suddenly called (that is,
prepaid) by homeowners who had either sold their houses and no longer
needed the principal they had borrowed, or who had discovered that they
could now get cheaper financing as interest rates dropped.
All this complexity made it difficult to decide where value lay, and thus
opened the door to mathematically adept modelers on the Street. The Fixed
Income division at Salomon relied for their mathematical analysis on Marty
Liebowitz’s renowned, large, and enviably experienced Bond Portfolio
Analysis (BPA) group. Goldman was slowly realizing that they needed
something similar. FSG and its leader, Stan Diller, a former Columbia
University PhD in Economics and one of the earliest academics to cross
over to the Street, was their solution.
The problem on everyone’s mind was the sudden increase in the volatility
of 
interest 
rates. 
Before 
the 
1980s, 
investors 
used 
to 
apportion 
their
investments 
between 
stocks 
and 
bonds 
in 
a 
fairly 
static 
sort 
of 
way.
Traditionally, they viewed the bond portion as safe and the stock stake as
risky. Then, in the late 1970s, about the time I was teaching physics at
Boulder, American interest rates rocketed and gold and oil prices soared.
Bonds, previously perceived as nonvolatile, became risky. While everyone
knew that stock investors might have to stomach a 40 percent drop in a bear
market, few investors had imagined something similar could happen to
Treasury bonds. The trading desks at investment banks, which naturally
carried large inventories of bonds with which to supply their customers, saw
their portfolios abruptly decline in value. As the intrinsic riskiness of fixed-
income securities became manifest, a new approach to managing interest-
rate risk began to diffuse through the industry. Desks wanted to hedge their
varied and complex bond portfolios with large offsetting trades in cheap
liquid bond futures. Hedging and risk management became the new thing,
crucial 
both 
for 
wholesalers 
like 
Goldman 
Sachs 
and 
for 
institutional
investors, too.
In the universe of equities, arithmetic was enough to do business; you
didn’t have to worry about even the simplest algebra until you got involved
with options. In fixed-income land, by contrast, investors measured a
bond’s value by its yield, the average percentage return you would earn
over its lifetime if you bought it at its current market price and received all
future 
payments 
of 
interest 
and 
principal. 
As 
soon 
as 
you 
began 
to
contemplate the relation between a bond price and its yield, the storm
clouds of algebra, sequences, series, and, finally, calculus loomed blackly in
the appendices at the backs of textbooks. A stock is only a stock, but even
the simplest bond is a derivative security whose value depends on interest
rates.
Therefore, suddenly, bond traders in the early 1980s needed analytic and
mathematical skills to understand a portfolio of hundreds or thousands of
bonds and its characteristics. They also required computing power; paper
and pencil, a book of yield tables, even a hand-held calculator, were too
slow and inflexible to amalgamate all the angles. Only on a computer could
you estimate the value, sensitivity, and risk of many different securities in
real time.
You couldn’t buy commercial risk-management systems in the late 1970s.
Do-it-yourself tools like spreadsheets were not yet ubiquitous. Most of the
programmers in information technology couldn’t handle bond mathematics,
and most of the traders on the desk were unable to program. A trading desk
had 
to 
turn 
to 
some 
jack-of-all-trades 
who 
could 
build 
their 
risk
management tools, from the 
low-level 
databases through the 
financial
valuation models to the high-level user interface.
The jack-of-all-trades in that era was unlikely to be an MBA or a PhD in
Finance—even if they knew enough quantitative finance, most of them
looked down with disdain on programming and mathematics as cheap,
geeky skills they could pay other people to do for them. Mathematicians,
too, tended to avoid programming, preferring analysis to computation.
Computer scientists, though they knew discrete mathematics and Boolean
algebra, were often uncomfortable with continuous-time mathematics.
PhDs in physics or engineering fit the jack-of-all-trades bill pretty well.
First, the mathematics of finance closely resembles the mathematics of
physics. Furthermore, physicists don’t grow up wearing white gloves; they
have no scruples about tackling tasks beneath their so-called dignity. They
do their own math and programming; the willingness to do so is an essential
part of graduate student and postdoc subculture.
This 
was 
probably 
why 
Stan’s 
Financial 
Strategies 
Group 
consisted
mostly of former physicists, applied mathematicians, and engineers, many
with PhDs. All of Stan’s hires came from a culture in which you did your
own 
dirty 
work—you 
developed 
your 
own 
theory, 
did 
your 
own
mathematics, and then wrote your own programs. It was a hiring model I
tended to repeat a few years later, when I staffed the groups I led, not out of
principle but rather because of a natural affinity for that intellectual style.
When I first started interviewing on the Street, Stan was among the most
famous practitioner-quants. An article in Forbes about him in the early
1980s was titled “Diller’s Dillies,” a patronizingly flattering reference to the
awkward, foreign quant-nerds the reporter met. Stan had a reputation for
hiring foreigners; I had heard some people imply that he liked inarticulate
technophiles so that he could manage their work and present their results,
but I think that was unfair. Most quants, then and now, came from abroad
because immigrants often see the quickest path to success in hands-on
work. It’s the next generation that prefers management and business school.
Stan wrote occasional lengthy research reports on his group’s work,
original and creative papers phrased in a distinctively unorthodox and
inbred style.
1
They were insightful and intuitive, but hard to classify and
always a touch off-center: too technical for early-1980s Wall Street, not
quite rigorous enough for real finance academics—and insufficiently hard-
sell for a sales piece. As a consequence Stan gained less influence than he
deserved. But his work on the options embedded in mortgage portfolios was
prescient, foreshadowing the more formal and rigorous work of the growing
number of finance academics already entering the field.
When I met them, Diller and Co. were already pulling together a team
skilled in finance, mathematics, and programming, and they wanted me to
join them. I think it was my software skills that appealed to them as much
as my talents in physics. Stan was a true pioneer in embedding financial
models in portfolio trading systems, and a good decade ahead of his time in
understanding the importance of professional software engineering in this
endeavor. Later, after leaving Goldman Sachs in 1985, he built AutoBond,
an early mortgage portfolio valuation system at Bear Stearns. Today he runs
Polypaths, 
a 
company 
that 
produces 
fixed-income 
portfolio 
analysis
software.
Nowadays, the cosmos of trading systems is very different. PCs are
ubiquitous, spreadsheets are easy to use, and risk management software is
increasingly available from tens of companies selling everything from
building blocks to turnkey systems. Nevertheless, the largest banks still
build their own software in order to book, value, and hedge the latest
products as soon as they come to market. Even today, though, risk systems
are balkanized, each one focusing on one or two product classes at most.
There is still room out there for a system or language which can handle all
the 
classes 
of 
securities—mortgages, 
swaptions, 
currencies, 
equities,
metals, energy derivatives, and so on—that a large firm trades.
I returned to Goldman for another inspection with no idea what to look for.
An article in the New York Times about switching jobs suggested asking
your potential employer what you would be doing ten years in the future. At
the end of my second visit there I sat down again with Stan. He explained to
me that Wall Street was one of the few places you could eventually make
$150,000 
a 
year 
without 
running 
your 
own 
small 
business 
like 
an
accountant or a doctor.
“If I come here,” I said, “What will I be doing ten years from now?” Stan
became instantaneously irate.
“In ten years,” he proclaimed, “You’ll be doing whatever the hell you’ll
be doing now, only making more money! I don’t want to be jerked around
by someone coming in here and thinking about doing something different!”
I 
couldn’t 
comprehend 
then 
what 
infuriated 
him. 
Ten 
years 
later, 
I
understood his frustration. After a few years on the job, quants in banking
often grow envious of the better-paid traders and salespeople who sit in the
driver’s seat. He must have thought that I was applying to his Financial
Strategies Group with the devious plan to insinuate myself into trading. The
last thing Stan needed was a new employee who wanted to tunnel out of the
quantitative group into the business area before even beginning his work.
Ten years later I found myself on Stan’s side. Similarly but with more
restraint, I deplored the ambitious maneuverers I often interviewed who
tried to use the Quantitative Strategies Group I ran as a conduit into trading.
“I’m willing to program for a while in order to pay my dues,” was their
standard refrain, and it put an end to all interest on my part. I was
sympathetic to their aspirations, but I had my own responsibilities and
needed people eager to do the hard detailed analytical work. This meant
programming, too.
Nowadays, transitions are easier and many PhD’s do succeed at getting
positions directly on the “business side,” especially in smaller banks and
hedge funds. But then as now, quants who yearn to move to the business
side often begin to scorn their former academic skills. Stan must have well
understood this self-loathing, this need to become someone else, though he
certainly never seemed to want to be a trader himself. The Forbes reporter
asked him what academic degree he had. “A PhD,” Stan retorted, “But
don’t tell the people I work for—they’ll knock a half million off my pay!”
I agonized over Stan’s offer during a skiing vacation with Eva—pregnant
with our daughter Sonya—and Josh in frigid New Hampshire in late 1983.
Always the obsessive, weighing every alternative, I called everyone in the
world 
who 
knew 
someone 
who 
had 
worked 
at 
Goldman. 
I 
pondered
repetitively. Still, I couldn’t make up my mind.
Through my friend Don Weingarten at IBM I tracked down a scientist
from Watson Labs who had worked for Stan for one year, developing an in-
house computer language for manipulating financial time series. The people
I had met at Goldman told me he had found Wall Street intolerable after a
life in research.
“What was it like there?” I asked him.
“Don’t go,” he said tartly, trying to give me a feel for the environment,
“Unless you’re willing to be yelled at all day for something you didn’t do.”
Those few words settled it. I knew I would not accept the job. I needed to
suffer a little more before I was ready to move.
I 
slogged 
through 
another 
year 
at 
the 
Business 
Analysis 
center,
collaborating on a more advanced version of HEQS. Then, a year later, I
resumed the job search with a few more interviews. Once, I visited Jeff
Borror’s IT group at First Boston and, on the day of the 1985 hurricane
scare in New York, they offered me about the same money as I had made at
Bell Labs. I declined. Another time, a headhunter sent me to a small
midtown medical software company. When I showed up in my AT&T
business uniform—the navy blazer, gray flannel pants, white shirt, and
knitted tie—the door to the office suite was opened by a bunch of barefoot,
twenty-something guys in shorts and T-shirts. They gave me a written test
on C programming; I recall being asked to write a routine to merge two
files, and also to disentangle a sequence of intentionally confusing nested
#define C macros. I wasn’t interested in working there.
By 
mid-1985 
I 
was 
ready. 
I 
called 
the 
headhunting 
firm 
that 
had
originally introduced me to Ravi Dattatreya and Goldman and said I was
now interested in the job I had turned down eighteen months earlier. I got
little 
response—the 
headhunter 
seemed 
to 
have 
lost 
his 
touch 
with
personnel at Goldman, and was unable to get me an interview. Time passed.
I grew impatient and one day I called Ravi in FSG directly. He remembered
me and brought me in, and after a full day there I was once again offered a
job to work on software. During the year-and-a-half that had passed, Stan
had unfortunately left Goldman for Bear Stearns. This time I didn’t agonize
too much and accepted the job.
In November 1985 I left the Labs for Goldman. At my farewell party
Larry and Mark gave warm speeches. My closest friends there, they were
both secretly on their way out, too. Larry, like me close to 40 years old, was
enviably in the midst of deciding that, after having been a physicist and an
AT&T business analyst, he would rather be a medical doctor, and was
taking biology courses in the evenings and preparing for the MCAT. A year
or two later he was at Mt. Sinai Medical School, and is now a psychiatrist at
Columbia doing brain research using positron emission tomography, a true
combination of physics and medicine. Mark, less than a year later, took a
job working for Bob Kopprasch, head of options research in the Salomon
Brothers BPA group.
During the party, my first and most sympatisch supervisor, Ron, took me
aside for a chat. He told me that I already knew more about computers than
I would ever need to know on Wall Street. It seemed self-evident then, but
the world was changing fast. When I got there, Wall St. was indeed
backward, 
mainframed 
and 
undistributed. 
My 
Labs 
training 
in 
UNIX
software development would keep me a little ahead of run-of-the-mill IT
day laborers on Wall Street for only four or five years.
Notes
1
Years later, I noticed that he was almost always the only author on his
reports, 
thanking 
the 
people 
that 
worked 
for 
him 
in 
the
acknowledgements, but never including them on the author byline. After
my experiences in physics, I never again worried too much about sharing
credit with collaborators. It almost never did you harm.
...
Chapter 9
Transformer
The Financial Strategies Group at Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Learning options theory
Becoming a quant
Interacting with traders
A new cast of characters
Is that still the same cold you had when you started here?” a woman in the
crowded elevator asked brusquely as she peered down her dry nose at my
wet one some time in January 1986.
The first day for new hires at Goldman is always a Monday, and mine had
been December 2, 1985. That morning I attended orientation, listened to a
brief description of the firm, chose my health and life insurance plans, got
ID’d and fingerprinted, and, finally, used my free lunch voucher to eat in
the cafeteria. Goldman had a mere 5,000 employees back then, and there
was still an intimate feel to the place.
I had left Bell Labs in late November, with only a few days to decompress
between jobs. The next day the weather turned suddenly chilly. On Friday,
November 29, I went for a run on Riverside Drive, wondering how I was
going to keep fit when I could no longer exercise at lunch-time. By Sunday
morning I was coughing and feverish. Too embarrassed to postpone my first
day at work, I went in for orientation.
For the next few months I simply couldn’t get enough rest to recover. Our
family had been stressed the prior two years: My father-in-law had died
suddenly in early 1984, my father in 1985, and now, only a few months
later, my mother-in-law was in the final stages of pancreatic cancer. While
Eva tended to her mother and tried to still do some laboratory research, I
looked after Sonya on evenings and weekends, bearing the brunt of a
typical two-year-old’s appreciable will. Nights consisted of short bursts of
sleep interrupted by multiple bottle fillings and subsequent diaper changes.
We were all weary and upset.
Six weeks later, the dreaded early-morning phone call came from an
unexpectedly different source. My sister’s husband in South Africa had
suddenly died. The call about Eva’s mother came several weeks later.
Over several weeks my “flu” transformed itself into a semipermanent
cough and runny nose that prevented me from sleeping. One chilly winter’s
Friday night I drove Joshua and Sonya to spend the weekend with some
friends in East Hampton so that Eva could have uninterrupted time with her
mother. By 10 P.M. on Sunday night I was at the end of my tether. What I
needed most was some rest and sleep. I abandoned our apartment at
midnight, left a message at work that I was sick, and checked into the
Empire Hotel at Lincoln Center. Then, I swallowed a Valium to ensure that
I would sleep, and spent the next day and a half in bed. Miraculously, that
minuscule amount of rest did the trick. My nose stopped dripping, my
perpetual cough deliquesced, and by Wednesday morning I was back at
work and more or less normal, at least as far as my physical health was
concerned.
Despite my illness, I had been learning a vast amount rapidly. My
supervisor, Ravi Dattatreya, had a combative sharp-edged personality, and
he liked to take pointy little verbal jabs at people, feigning to see how they
would respond. But he was an excellent mentor: He had deep intuition
about 
financial 
theory, 
and 
he 
understood 
how 
the 
trading 
and 
sales
businesses worked.
When I arrived at Goldman’s Financial Strategies Group I had thought I
was going to work on the software engineering aspects of bond trading. But
in 1985 the over-the-counter bond options business was burgeoning, and
Ravi managed their needs. Within a few days of my arrival he introduced
me to the bond options desk and assigned me to work on its valuation
models. One Friday he gave me a copy of the famous Cox-Ross-Rubinstein
paper on the binomial options model and told me to read it over the
weekend. It was an immensely lucky opportunity; I got to work on an
interesting and very relevant unsolved business problem which eventually
made my reputation, and, just as importantly, I developed a relationship
with traders who had a genuine and practical interest in theories and
models.
The bond options desk was run by Peter Freund, a thirtyish lawyer-
turned-options 
trader. 
Peter 
had 
a 
deep 
and 
serviceable 
grasp 
of 
the
subtleties of options theory, but was busy much of the time writing business
memos to Bob Rubin, then the head of the Fixed Income Division and soon
to 
become 
cohead 
of 
Goldman 
itself, 
before 
eventually 
moving 
to
Washington as Clinton’s Secretary of the Treasury. I enjoyed talking to
Peter, who sometimes placed his outstretched hand on my shoulder as we
spoke, resting the full weight of his arm there for a few minutes. It was my
first experience of the tactile side of being an employee. At Bell Labs
supervisors didn’t touch you much; at Goldman senior people tended to
squeeze your arm or shoulder in a paternal and yet patronizing sort of way,
even if they were much younger than you.
The most striking and voluble member of Peter’s group was David
Garbasz, a former graduate student in geology who had become a trader of
bond options. He befriended me late that December at the annual Christmas
party thrown by the Fixed Income Division at the South Street Seaport. It
was a fabulously raucous party, given during the heyday of Wall Street
ostentation. Giant shrimp and bite-size chunks of steak lay heaped on
tables; we danced to a rock band composed of a bunch of traders; it was
quite unlike the child-friendly, brownies-on-paper-plates affairs at Bell Labs
to which I was accustomed. David took me under his wing and, on that
freezing December night, though I was still half sick, he dragged me to
accompany him on the walk home. We strode several miles from the
Seaport north through the Lower East Side, able to see our breath in the
midnight darkness, until I eventually found a cab to take me the rest of the
way home. David was hot-headed and lively, attractively impetuous and
passionately sharp-tongued and cynical, always writing letters to Bob Rubin
in which he reportedly threatened to leave for greener pastures because of
some dissatisfaction or other. I was a novice, and he took it on himself to
teach me the ropes. We had many lunches together at the Fledermaus, the
“in” place on South Street for the traders.
Another member of Peter’s team was Jacob Goldfield, a young, scruffily
unshaven, lanky Harvard law graduate who never even bothered to take the
Law Boards, but immediately joined Goldman as a trader. David took Jacob
under his wing, too, and we got along well; Jacob had studied physics as an
undergraduate, and was a hands-on programmer who wrote many of his
own 
trading 
tools. 
A 
very 
smart 
kid, 
Jacob 
soon 
radiated 
a 
quietly
impressive mystique, and colleagues began to defer to him. He held his
cards close to chest, absorbing information from everyone while emitting
none himself, the embodiment of a perfect trading temperament. Unlike the
1980s 
masters-of-the-universe-style 
traders, 
Jacob 
never 
used 
foul
language.
Everyone knew that Jacob was a protégé of Bob Rubin and had his ear. It
was clear he was on a fast track.
The problem Ravi had given me in my first week at Goldman was rooted in
the economics of the early 1980s. Goldman was on the “sell side”: We sold
securities 
to 
the 
money 
managers, 
insurance 
companies, 
pension, 
and
mutual funds that comprised the “buy side.” Many of these buy-side firms
bought bonds issued by corporations, municipalities, or governments, and
in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when interest rates were high, they could
earn a pretty good rate of return. As interest rates in the mid-1980s slid
steadily downwards from the inflationary peak of the Carter era, bonds paid
lower interest, and these funds could no longer earn the high yields of the
past few years. In an attempt to pump up their declining returns, many
funds began to generate revenue by the periodic selling of short-dated call
options against the specific bonds they held. There was substantial money
to be made supplying these calls, and so, in early 1986, the Treasury bond
options business at Goldman accelerated.
Loosely speaking, a call option on a bond is a contractual bet between
two parties that the bond price will end up above a prespecified strike price
on some definite future expiration date. The buyer of the option pays the
seller a premium, the cost of the call option. At expiration, if the bond price
is above the strike price, so that the buyer has won the bet, he exercises his
option to receive the payoff. The payoff of the call option is the difference
between the market price of the bond at expiration and the strike price.
Effectively, the seller of the call option has to deliver the bond to the owner
of the call option in exchange for a payment equal to the strike price, even
though it is worth more. The bottom line is that the owner of the call option
receives any upside the bond brings over and above the strike price, but
suffers none of the downside.
The buy-side 
funds sold call 
options to Goldman to generate extra
income. A mutual fund owning a $100 Treasury bond could sell a one-year
call option on that bond, struck at $100, for about $2, thus boosting their
yield. As long as the $100 bond itself didn’t appreciate, this $2 was pure
gravy. But with options, every reward has a corresponding punishment.
Suppose interest rates were to fall and the bond price were to rise to $106 a
year later. In this case, Goldman would exercise its call option and force the
fund to accept a price of only $100 for the $106 bond, leaving the fund with
a gain of $2 from the option premium offset by a $6 loss on the bond—a net
loss of $4. In essence, the fund was taking a bet against interest rates
declining.
Goldman’s role was that of custom tailor. The funds could have sold
listed interest-rate options and bond futures contracts, available on the
Chicago 
exchanges, 
to 
make 
their 
bets. 
But 
these 
listed 
instruments
provided only a limited number of standardized strikes and expirations, too
constrained to match the particular strikes and expirations of the bonds
actually owned by a fund. To accommodate them, Goldman bought over-
the-counter (OTC) call options from each fund, each option a privately
negotiated contract written on the specific bonds held by that fund. The
options contacts were chosen to expire close to the dates on which the funds
had to report their quarterly earnings. If interest rates did not decline and
the funds won their bet, they kept the premium and enhanced their reported
return.
The enterprise of selling bond options, like many early-stage businesses,
was particularly profitable. A trading desk could charge clients an extra fee
for an option that was custom-tailored to fit a fund’s exact needs. The bond
options desk at Goldman offset the risk of the tailored option they had sold
by buying a bundle of cheaper listed options and futures that approximately
matched its payoff. There was some risk involved in hedging tailored
options with listed ones; the mismatch in strikes and expirations made the
hedge approximate rather than exact. You could think of the fee as our
desk’s compensation for being willing to accept and manage this risk.
To hedge one option with another, firms like Goldman needed a model that
told you each option’s value and its sensitivity to changes in interest rates.
The renowned Black-Scholes model for stock options, which Ravi had told
me to learn, did not strictly apply to bond options. Stocks are relatively
simple; they guarantee no future dividend payments and have no natural
termination date, so their future prices are unconstrained. Treasury bonds
are much more intricate: Because they promise to repay their principal
when 
they 
mature, 
their 
price 
on 
that 
date 
is 
constrained 
to 
be 
par.
Furthermore, since all Treasury bonds can be decomposed into a sum of
more 
primitive 
zero-coupon 
bonds 
of 
varying 
maturities, 
they 
are 
all
interrelated.
My new boss Ravi had heuristically modified the Black-Scholes stock
option model to make it work, at least approximately, for short-dated
Treasury bond options. He had written a computer program to implement it,
and the bond options desk now priced and hedged their options by means of
it. As they got more experienced at using it, Peter Freund’s desk discovered
that Ravi’s model was fine for short-term options but questionable for
longer-term ones; it suffered from a variety of theoretical inconsistencies
stemming from its inadequate modeling of the long-term behavior of bond
prices. It was an ingenious first cut, quickly created to catapult the desk into
doing business, but now both the model and its computer interface needed
work. A few days after I arrived, Ravi directed me to extend the model and
the program. It was a feet-first introduction to working with traders, and
much of what I know about the need to be pragmatic and business-oriented
as a quant I learned in those first few months working with Ravi and the
desk.
From the desk’s point of view, the greatest hindrance to exploiting the
model for business was not the theory, but rather the lack of a graphical user
interface. Each time a salesperson needed to value an option for a potential
trade with a client, he or she had to type in, on one line after another, the
bond’s current price, maturity, and coupon as well as the option’s expiration
and strike; then the salesperson had to enter the current short-term interest
rate and the bond’s assumed future yield volatility. One more tap on the
return key and the program computed the model’s theoretical price and told
you how to hedge it with the underlying Treasury bond. If you wanted to
compute the option value for a variety of volatilities, expirations or strikes,
you had to repeat the same sequence, entering items and hitting return keys
all over again.
Setting up a trade could take several days—a typical client might get a
quote from Goldman, hang up, call another dealer to get their price, ponder
a while, and then call us back the next day to continue the discussion. At
that point someone on our desk would have to start running our model again
by reentering all the terms of the deal. This slowed down the interaction
with clients, and was far too viscous for a growing business.
The software engineering was deficient, too. Ravi’s program had been
written in FORTRAN, but the scientific and financial worlds were rapidly
moving towards C, which provided much better tools for collaborative
software development. Ravi instructed me to learn options theory, rewrite
the model in C, and construct a friendlier front end. It was a perfect
assignment since it immediately exposed me to theory, implementation, and
interaction with the business. I spent the next few days making a rapid first
pass through the theory of stock options as described in the original Cox-
Ross-Rubinstein binomial paper. Then, I studied the FORTRAN version of
Ravi’s bond option model and set about rewriting it in C on FSG’s VAX
computer.
Within a few weeks I was learning on many fronts and adjusting to new
social and computing environments. When I ran into hurdles, Ravi grew
impatient and irritable. One day, only three weeks or so after I had arrived,
he suggested that, since I was taking longer than he had expected, he should
perhaps give the work to someone else to do. Upon returning home that
evening I took some perverse pleasure in reporting my first taste of Wall
Street brutality to Eva, and got some shocked sympathy. I wanted to show
her that, with my passage from the civil groves of physics to the harsh
engine rooms of capitalism, I had now entered a world in which people ten
or more years younger than me found it necessary to crack the whip when I
didn’t trot fast enough. But in truth, it wasn’t that bad—Wall Street has
been always meritocratically discourteous. It never seemed to me that great
an indignity. In the nineteen years that have elapsed since then, I have been
ordered about by young traders, had my back patted and my upper arm
encouragingly squeezed in elevators by newly minted partners, and, once,
been pushed across the trading floor and cursed in full view of everyone
there by an angry and foul-mouthed saleswoman. There is a general lack of
respect for age in all of this that makes you disregard your own age, and I
like it.
I 
soon 
finished 
programming 
the 
model 
and 
began 
to 
think 
about
attaching a friendly front end to it. In those pre-Macintosh/pre-Windows
days, 
windowing 
packages 
were 
a 
rarity. 
Brought 
up 
on 
the 
UNIX
philosophy, I began building my own generic toolkit for data entry and
display. I hurriedly force-marched myself through the manual for the UNIX
“curses” library that allowed you to flexibly read and write 80-character-by-
24-line screens of text, and designed an interface. In a month or so I had
created Bosco, a new calculator named after an affectionate abbreviation for
my son Joshua.
Though the new model was better, it was my new user interface that had
the biggest impact. It made negotiating with clients easy. All the model’s
input and output were visible on one screen, with one field for each item of
data to be entered (the bond coupon, maturity, and so on), and one field for
each answer the model provided (the option price, its hedge ratio, and so
on). There were also fields for storing information about the client and the
trade. To run the model and obtain an option price, you simply hit the
“Calculate!” key. To change an input field value, you moved the cursor to
the relevant field, entered the data, and hit “Calculate!”again. This saved
countless keystrokes compared to the command-line interface that drove the
previous FORTRAN version. Best of all, at any instant you could save all
the details of a potential trade to a computer file for future retrieval. If you
used the calculator to value an option during a preliminary conversation
with a client, you could store all the information in the file and then resume
the discussion the next day exactly where you had left off.
Though primitive by today’s standards, this was astonishingly better than
what the desk had used before, and the traders and salespeople were
overjoyed. By creating and saving the most common types of option trades
as templates in files at the start of each day, they could respond rapidly to
clients, accommodating many more requests much more efficiently. Ever
since, it’s been impossible for me to overlook the difference that a simple
and well-designed piece of software can make to a business. Despite the
genuine glories of quantitative modeling, quant groups often have the most
dramatic effect by improving the ergonomics of trading and sales.
When I became head of the Quantitative Strategies Group in the Equities
Division a few years later, I always tried to recreate for anyone new in the
group my first fortuitous experience with a trading desk. I set them a
problem whose solution was useful to traders, and which required both
theoretical analysis and software implementation. In that way, I hoped, they
would develop a relationship with their end users in the trading division,
learn the jargon and style of the business, and combine both theory and
practicality.
Like many organizations, Goldman’s Financial Strategies Group into which
Ravi inducted me that December was rife with politics. Stan Diller, who
had left Goldman shortly before I arrived, had reportedly often kidded that
his was the only second-rate mind on Wall Street. To replace him and grow
the business, the partners in charge of the Fixed Income Division had
brought in two finance professors from the midwest. One was tall and lean,
fast-talking and confident; the other was much shorter and spoke slowly.
Their arrival didn’t displace Stan on the mind-ranking charts.
The new structure they imposed was very different from what I had seen
of Diller’s. Diller appeared to have led FSG autocratically, but with a vision
of 
trading 
as 
science. 
He 
had 
accentuated 
a 
quantitative 
approach 
to
financial research, with an emphasis on software development and trading
systems. 
He 
had 
sought 
out 
PhDs—engineers, 
physicists, 
computer
scientists, and mathematicians—most of whom arrived ignorant of finance
and then learned theory and business on the job. He sought people who
could simultaneously do finance, math, and computer science, and had an
interdisciplinary view of the world to which I’m still partial.
The new hegemony placed more emphasis on management. They had
been given carte blanche to grow and they went on a hiring spree that
rapidly grew the Strategies group from fifteen or twenty ex-scientists to
about a hundred people, many of them professional managers who claimed
they knew how to “talk to traders.” They certainly knew enough to realize
that they were on to a good thing and wisely made the most of it while it
lasted. Over time, the modeling and programming groups became inverted
pyramids: one or two technically skilled people at the bottom, who could
write programs or build models, supporting a larger number of human
conduits above them who passed the results up to the trading desk and then
passed the subsequent responses back down again. Having a PhD and being
good at research or being able to program well was not an advantage in this
structure.
David Garbasz, with his usual accurate eye and sharp tongue, took to
calling the two new heads of FSG Mutt and Jeff, and sarcastically referred
to the organization they now headed as the “Financial Tragedies Group.” In
1986 Goldman was still getting used to managing quants.
Despite the politics, I loved Goldman and FSG, and made many new
friends among the programmers and quants. Most of them were much
younger than me—it was my second career and their first. Working away in
my undistinguished cubicle—for the first year I had no seat in an office—I
did occasionally feel incongruous. One day, as I mindlessly whistled a
Beatles song to myself while I programmed my bond option model, I heard
the 23-year old kid in the next cube turn around and exclaim astonishedly,
“How do you know that?” In fact, though, age didn’t matter that much if
you had ability, and the turbulence in financial markets since then—the
crashes of 1987 and 1989, the collapse of Long Term Capital Management
and Russia’s default in 1998—has made the appearance of maturity an
advantage.
Among 
the 
new 
people 
I 
met 
was 
Roscoe, 
the 
amiable, 
cheerily
disillusioned leader of a group of good-humored programmer malcontents
who occupied the cubicles on what he called Dissident Row. Everyone on
Dissident Row ate lunch early and then took a constitutional up to the
Brooklyn Bridge and back again. Roscoe’s real name was William Dumas
and he was rumored to be related to Alexandre Dumas, père. He had little
respect for the new regime in FSG, and referred caustically to one of the
new MIS managers who circulated ancient corporate memos on good
programming style from his previous employer as the “Master of the Do-
Loop.” 
Roscoe 
had 
a 
minor 
genius 
for 
creating 
inventively 
allusive
nicknames for new people in FSG. His method was Cockney rhyming, an
associative slang in which, for example, the number five is referred to as
“Lady” because Lady is short for Lady Godiva, and Godiva rhymes with
“fiver,” the colloquial term for the old British 5-pound note (as in “Can you
lend 
me 
a 
fiver?”). 
In 
this 
spirit 
he 
dubbed 
a 
newly 
hired 
Pakistani
programmer “Mander,” because his true name was Salah, reminiscent of
Salamander. He christened me “E-man,” which I liked, because it was
almost identical to the shortened version of “Emanuel” that my family and
friends in South Africa had always called me since childhood, and, like
Roscoe’s other christenings, it stuck with me for the rest of my time at
Goldman. After the 1994 fixed-income market slump, Roscoe left Goldman
to work for Iris, a financial software company in San Francisco run by an
old friend of mine, ex-Wells Fargo quant Jeremy Evnine.
Another new hire at Goldman was a fellow South African, Jonathan Berk,
who had come to work at Goldman as an analyst with an undergraduate
degree. He was wildly fired up about finance and markets and I soon got
my 
first 
glimpse 
of 
capitalist 
thinking. 
Shortly 
after 
I 
arrived, 
the
Challenger space shuttle exploded, and Jonathan, young and naive and
enthusiastic, rushed off to call his Goldman stockbroker to buy puts on
Morton Thiokol, hoping to profit from a drop in the price of the company
that designed the leaky seals in the booster. Witnessing his quick response
to the shuttle disaster, I thought Jonathan was destined for the business
world, but I was wrong. Stimulated by financial theory, he left Goldman a
few years later to get a PhD in finance and is now a professor at Berkeley. I
met him again 15 years later, in November 2000, at a meeting of the
sponsors of the new Berkeley degree in financial engineering, where I
represented Goldman. Fervent as ever, he told me that in 1986 he had
expected finance to become the theoretical physics of the twenty-first
century. We laughed a little at the mismatch between fantasy and reality.
Jonathan traveled from business to academia. Others at Goldman took the
reverse route. Another South African colleague in FSG was Ron Dembo, an
academic and expert at optimization whom Mutt and Jeff had brought in as
a consultant to help structure bond portfolios. Ron flew down from Toronto
to New York for three days a week, staying in an apartment provided for
him by Goldman, and in turn hired several other academics. For many of us
it was our first glimpse of the perquisites of life with an expense account,
and we marveled at it. Ron had an entrepreneurial streak and understood the
value of systems and software for managing portfolio risk. He left Goldman
in 1987, and shortly thereafter founded Algorithmics, a now prominent
company that produces risk-management software.
I also began a long association with Bill Toy, who was already working
for Fischer Black in the Equities Division when I arrived. Bill and I had
both come to Goldman from physics by way of Bell Labs, and we had the
same mutual scorn for the Bell environment and its bureaucracy. Fischer,
whom I met only briefly in my first few weeks at Goldman, was in charge
of the small Quantitative Strategies group in the Equities Division that built
models and trading software for the equities business.
Another immensely talented programmer in FSG was Dave Griswold,
who had been hired into Financial Strategies from Grumman Aircraft on
Long Island only a few months before me. In his late twenties and armed
with a BS in Computer Science from Rensselaer Polytechnic, Dave loved
software in general and object-oriented programming, a methodology then
beginning to penetrate the commercial world, in particular. Perhaps because
there are several famous Griswolds in academic computer science, as well
as the character Chevy Chase plays in “National Lampoon’s Vacation”
series, Dave liked to refer to himself as “Griswlod.” It was sophomoric, but
it grew on you.
Dave was less a Wall Streeter and more a genuine computer science
aficionado at heart. In classic UNIX style, he liked to first build the tools he
needed for any new job. He always thought big. Asked to write a new
program, he would ambitiously decide that it should be capable of running
on any hardware and under any operating system. In order to achieve that,
he had to shield his program from the details of a particular machine by
creating his own version of all the infrastructure his program needed. Dave
therefore 
created 
his 
own 
portable 
version 
of 
most 
of 
the 
facilities
(windows, menus, files, databases, and so on) that DOS or UNIX provided.
I have seen many smart programmers indulge themselves by attempting
to create everything ab initio; most of them who try fall into bottomless pits
from which they never emerge, ceaselessly spiraling inwards in their effort
to recreate portable versions of everything you could normally take for
granted and get for free. What distinguished Dave from the ordinary
stubborn people who wanted to build their own hammers, saws, and levels
before starting to build the house was that he knew where to stop; he would
finish building just the tools he needed and then use them to create the
system itself.
David was a great fan of elegant and consistent computer languages. He
loved Lisp and adored Smalltalk, one of the many Xerox PARC inventions
that inspired the Macintosh environment. He was a devotee of Objective C,
a Smalltalk-flavored C dialect that was an integral part of the operating
system for Steve Jobs’s Next computer before he returned to Apple. A few
years later Dave wrote his own object-oriented language, which he called
GoldC, for internal use at Goldman. In the long run, his interests would take
him back to the software world.
Only three months after I arrived, Ravi departed to run Prudential-Bache’s
fixed income strategies group a few blocks away on Water Street. Several
of Diller’s senior strategists in FSG had already left, and now more of them
continued out the door. Dennis Adler left for Dillon Reed and eventually
ended 
up 
at 
Salomon 
Brothers, 
both 
firms 
that 
no 
longer 
exist 
as
independent entities as a result of the enormous consolidation in financial
services over the past fifteen years. Diller called me once to invite me to
join him at Bear Stearns, but, disturbed though I was by Ravi’s abrupt
departure, it was much too soon for me to leave a place where I had just
arrived. Instead, I put my head down and concentrated on work.
The bond options traders who were using Bosco began asking for many
enhancements, 
and 
so, 
sometime 
in 
mid-1986, 
they 
authorized 
Dave
Griswold and me to build them a more advanced trading system. I would
provide the analytical and computational subroutines which Dave would
embed in his infrastructure. For several months we all fiercely debated
which computing platform to use. I was vehemently in favor of UNIX, the
richest development environment, and the one I knew best. Bill Toy, who
claimed great experience with the UNIX file system from the Labs, thought
it was unreliable. Dave, predictably idiosyncratic and uncorporate, wanted
to use Symbolics Lisp machines, then the cutting-edge computers for
artificial intelligence. He envisaged that their massive amount of RAM
would store the entire trading system in memory rather than on disk.
(Massive 
is 
highly 
relative. 
The 
64 
Mb 
RAM 
of 
yesteryear’s 
shared
Symbolics machine is puny compared with the now modest 640 Mb on the
personal Apple laptop that I use today.) Eventually we built the system on
Sun workstations running UNIX.
Thus passed my first few happy months in the financial industry. At Bell
Labs, from the day I had arrived, I had felt like someone past his prime.
Now, at Goldman, despite the forty years behind me, I felt renewed. In the
evenings I rode the subway home along Broadway to the Upper West Side
and pored over textbooks by Cox and Rubinstein or Jarrow and Rudd,
excited to be learning stochastic calculus and using my head again. One
evening, someone from my old vanpool to the Labs got into the same
subway car as me on Fourteenth Street. Seeing me engrossed in symbols,
scribbling proofs on my lap on the shaky train, he laughed good-naturedly
but incredulously at me for sitting there and doing mathematics on the
subway—that was what you were meant to leave behind when you joined
the business world!
But I remember thinking quite the opposite: What an enormous relief it
was to be in a place where people actually wanted you to spend your time
on what you liked! I told my vanpool friend that I could easily imagine
doing this sort of work for another ten or fifteen years.
...
Chapter 10
Easy Travel to Other Planets
The history of options theory
Meeting and working with Fischer Black
The Black-Derman-Toy model
Wall Street had never been a place for academics. Yet, from the day I got to
Goldman in late 1985, I kept hearing people talk with awe about Fischer
Black, codiscoverer of the Black-Scholes equation for options pricing and
the head of Goldman’s Quantitative Strategies group. I saw him once at a
meeting in the first few months after I arrived, but never spoke to him until
the traders on the bond options desk arranged for us to meet.
Some traders are scornful of models; others will rely on them blindly. Our
bond options traders knew that you need to layer visceral trading smarts
over and above a consistent options pricing model. They understood they
needed something beyond Ravi’s original model, and so they approached
Fischer about taking the next step. Since I had earned some credit for
having diagnosed and then eliminated one small but glaring inconsistency
in Ravi’s model soon after I arrived, they therefore suggested that I join
Fischer in an effort to build a better model.
Before I went up to his office on the twenty-ninth floor to meet him, to
show him what I had done so far, and, implicitly, to see if he would have me
work with him, I read a little more on the history of options theory.
Until the early 1970s, no one knew how to estimate the value of options in a
convincing way. A call option that paid off when the stock price rose
seemed much like a bet on a horse: The more optimistic you were about the
stock’s future prospects, the more you should be willing to pay for it. Each
person set his own fair price.
Then, 
in 
1973, 
Fischer 
Black 
and 
Myron 
Scholes 
published 
their
eponymous Black-Scholes equation for the value of an option. That same
year, Robert Merton 
provided 
a more rigorous and 
insightful 
way 
of
understanding 
the 
argument 
behind 
their 
equation. 
Eventually, 
his
formalism came to supplant theirs, and became the standard. Merton and
Scholes won the 1997 Nobel Prize in Economics for their work, but Fischer,
who was certainly their equal, died in 1995. Had he been fortunate enough
to have lived a couple of years longer, he would surely have been a
corecipient of the Prize.
I 
used 
to 
find 
it 
almost 
impossible 
to 
understand 
why 
the 
Nobel
committee didn’t award the Prize for options theory before Fischer died.
Everyone in the finance community knew that it was only a matter of time
before Black, Scholes, and Merton would receive the award, and it had also
been common knowledge for several years that Black was mortally ill with
throat 
cancer. 
I’ve 
heard 
speculations 
that 
the 
Nobel 
committee 
was
reluctant to give the award to someone who worked in the business world,
especially 
in 
the 
profitable 
and 
untheoretical 
business 
of 
investment
banking.
Fischer, who had a PhD in Applied Mathematics from Harvard, had been
a management consultant at Arthur D. Little and Co. when he developed the
Black-Scholes model. One did not think of management consulting as the
locus of groundbreaking theorists, but Fischer was always proud of his
practical 
and 
unorthodox 
background. 
Once 
his 
contributions 
were
recognized, he became a professor of finance at Chicago and then at MIT,
finally leaving academia for Goldman Sachs in 1984. Though Merton and
Scholes had each kept at least one foot in the academic world, both of them
had worked as consultants or employees of Salomon Brothers at various
times, and in 1994, became partners and attractors of capital at Long Term
Capital Management, the leveraged hedge fund run by John Meriwether and
his ex-Salomon “arb group.” I noticed that the 1997 Nobel Prize citation
referred only to the university affiliations of Merton and Scholes, and not to
their corporate connection—perhaps the Nobel committee really did have
an aversion to the business world. Though the Nobel Prize sounds as though
it is awarded by the gods, committees are merely groups of people with
their own preferences.
Throughout his life, Fischer was genuinely in love with the idea of
equilibrium, and he invented the Black-Scholes equation in the late 1960s
by 
applying 
the 
condition 
of 
equilibrium 
to 
markets 
themselves.
Equilibrium 
is 
a 
common 
and 
very 
powerful 
concept 
in 
physics; 
in
equilibrium, the numerical values we observe for quantities of interest in a
stable system are the values that cause two opposing forces to cancel
exactly. 
For 
example, 
the 
temperature 
of 
a 
body 
stops 
rising 
at 
that
equilibrium temperature at which the heat flowing into the body is canceled
by 
the 
heat 
flowing 
out. 
Fischer 
believed 
that 
market 
prices 
were
determined by similar cancelations.
Fischer first obtained the Black-Scholes equation by demanding that an
option on stock and the stock itself be in equilibrium with each other, in the
sense that their respective prices should each provide investors with the
same expected return per unit of risk they carried. An investor would then
be 
impartial 
between 
buying 
the 
stock 
and 
buying 
the 
option. 
This
condition, written down mathematically, was the Black-Scholes equation; it
determined the value of the option. It took several years more before Black
and Scholes provided the eventual solution to the equation.
Merton, working in parallel, went deeper. He showed that there was a
recipe for synthesizing a stock option out of a mixture of shares of stock
and cash, a mixture whose proportions must be readjusted continuously by
exchanging some shares of stock for cash, or vice versa. An investor who
bought the initial mixture and then carried out the readjustment recipe
would end up with precisely the same payout as the stock option, and so the
option’s value should be exactly the cost of purchasing the initial mixture.
The recipe for synthesizing an option was called dynamic replication—
replication because you were reproducing the option, dynamic because you
had to keep changing the mixture in order to do it. Replicating an option
was like riding a toboggan with your eyes closed down its serpentine track
—you needed a recipe for which way to bank at each point in time. Black-
Scholes gave you that recipe. Merton justified it.
That 
you 
could 
dynamically 
replicate 
an 
option 
was 
an 
almost
confounding result. Until Black, Scholes, and Merton, came along, no one
imagined that you could create an option out of simpler securities. Now an
option was seen to be merely a subtle mixture of simpler securities, stock
and cash, in constantly changing but known proportions.
Merton relied on a mathematical formalism called stochastic calculus, the
study of the rate of change of randomly varying quantities such as the price
of a stock or the position of a dust particle in a room. At graduate school in
the 1960s, 1970s, and throughout my subsequent life as a postdoc, I had
never 
heard 
of 
stochastic 
calculus. 
Nowadays, 
its 
methods 
are
commonplace to all quants and graduate students in finance; every ex-
physicist looking for a job on Wall Street begins by studying the subject.
Black and Scholes’s 1973 paper, in which they presented both their own
and Merton’s derivation of the equation, was sufficiently arcane that it took
several years to get it published. Indeed, it was repeatedly rejected until
Merton Miller at the University of Chicago interceded on their behalf.
The two simultaneous but complementary derivations of the theory of
options pricing in the early 1970s, Black and Scholes’s and Merton’s,
reminded me of the complementary derivations of renormalizable quantum
electrodynamics by Feynman and Schwinger in the late 1940s. Feynman
and Schwinger each used drastically different approaches to reach similar
results, their respective formalisms so dissimilar that no one understood
their equivalence until it was demonstrated by Freeman Dyson. Thereafter,
Feynman’s more intuitive approach became the standard. Black and Scholes
and Merton also utilized different approaches; over the long run Merton’s
more 
formal 
and 
powerful 
methods 
became 
the 
standard, 
and 
were
eventually used by Fischer himself.
From the moment it appeared in print, the Black-Scholes-Merton theory
was embraced, not only by academics but by options dealers. Before the
advent of the model, a dealer who sold a call option to a client had to take
the other side of the trade; the dealer then bore the risk, if the stock price
went up, of having to pay the client out of pocket. After the model’s dawn,
a dealer could use its recipe to roll his or her own option out of stock and
cash, and estimate the cost of doing so. The dealer could then sell the
homemade option to the client, ideally being left with no risk at all.
Options 
dealers 
soon 
began 
to 
use 
the 
Black-Scholes 
model 
to
manufacture options out of raw stock and then sell them. Dealers charged a
fee for this manufacture, just like any other value-added reseller.
On Wall Street, quants, traders, and salespeople make daily use of the
stock 
options 
model 
and 
its 
extensions. 
During 
the 
past 
thirty 
years,
academics in business schools, mathematicians in math departments, and
quants in investment banks and hedge funds have applied similar methods
to produce models for options on bonds, options on interest rates, options
on credit ratings, options on energy, and even options on volatility itself.
Though the simple and profound idea of Black, Scholes, and Merton has
remained 
unchanged, 
the 
mathematics 
has 
become 
more 
elaborate,
complex, and daunting.
Black and Scholes’s original model assumed almost platonically simple
markets. They allowed for the uncertainty of future stock price movements,
but ignored other more detailed complexities. However, their model proved
to be extensible and robust—one could augment it to take account of the
imperfections of actual trading. The model accommodated these and other
refinements 
while 
leaving 
the 
basic 
strategy 
substantially 
unchanged.
Options theory is one of the great triumphs of economics, conceptually
simple and pragmatically useful despite its complex mathematics. If only
the rest of economics had similar efficacy!
I knocked on the door of Fischer’s office and entered. Inside, it was quiet
and low-lit, a location for work rather than meetings. At Goldman an office
was a token of seniority, a very expensive pocket of personal real estate.
Many of the fancily furnished offices on the equity floor were largely
uninhabited, filled with tombstones of past deals executed by the traders
and salespeople who had no time for office work. Fischer’s office was much
less glamorous; it was dominated by a large Nike poster of a long road
disappearing into the distance and, below it, the caption: “The race is not
always to the swift, but to those who keep on running.”
Brought to Goldman Sachs from MIT by Bob Rubin in 1984, Fischer was
one of the first finance academics to head for Wall Street; he became a
Goldman partner in 1986. Unlike other professors in the industry who
maintained their umbilical links to the safe haven of academia, Fischer
embraced the business world wholeheartedly. Now I was about to meet him.
After a brief introduction, I began to show him Bosco, the bond options
model and its graphical user interface I had built for the options desk.
Fischer, like everyone else in the less numerate Equities Division, used a
PC running DOS, but I had developed my software on the more advanced
VAX we all used in Fixed Income. I logged on to the VAX through a VT-
100 terminal emulator on Fischer’s PC. Almost as soon as my program
started running the VAX itself crashed, and we were left looking at the
frozen screen image of my calculator. I couldn’t run the program, I couldn’t
toggle or change the values of any of the fields—we could only observe
them carefully on the monitor. I offered to come back later when the VAX
was up again, but Fischer was quite unperturbed. He spent the next hour
carefully examining the screen I had built, commenting on its layout.
Those were the days of limited computer-screen real estate: I had 24 lines
of 80 characters to work with, and all of the approximately twenty-five
input and output fields used in Bosco had to fit in that space. Fischer
meticulously inspected each field, making reasonable but almost picayune
comments about some of their labels. Because of the lack of space, I had
had to abbreviate most labels, and had half-jokingly contracted the variable
named bond duration to the inelegant durn, which he particularly disliked.
Later in the conversation—because I was unschooled in finance and had
been in the field only a few months—I periodically referred to “an option
on a future contract” and each time Fischer quickly corrected me by
brusquely interjecting “futures contract.”
I was surprised at his willingness to spend so much time on the mere
interface to Ravi’s model, when he hadn’t yet seen the calculator work or
listened to my explanation of how I had modified it. When I returned to my
fixed-income colleagues later that day, my feelings a little bruised by his
criticisms, I scoffed at his attitude. But I soon discovered that Fischer was
always a stickler for precision, and clear expression was an invariant
devotion of his. Over the years, I became a convert and tried as hard as I
could, in anything I subsequently wrote, to be as clear and didactic as
possible.
During the weeks after he first examined my frozen Bosco computer
screen, I learned much more about Fischer’s computer prejudices. Some of
them were quite reactionary. He disapproved of “mice” and other computer
pointing devices. He thought keyboards were the ideal means of data entry;
he insisted that anything one could do with a mouse could be done better
with macro redefinitions of particular keys on the keyboard. Finally, he
disliked graphics, and claimed that unadorned tables of numbers were more
evocative and revealing. There was no persuading him on these issues; they
were a part of his near-magnificent obsession about presentation style.
There were other quirks, harmless but irritating. He demanded strict
standards on the display of numbers, intensely objecting to any printout that
included more digits after the decimal point than was warranted by the
accuracy of the calculation. Now everyone agrees that it is objectionable to
report a measurement of room temperature as 73.1457° F—the implied
precision is false—but Fischer logically extended his disapproval to the
display of any excess zeros at the end of a decimal number, a feature he
dubbed “trailing zeros.” If a bond had a yield of 12 percent, he wanted it
printed as a confident “12%” rather than as a tentative “12.00%” which
would have suggested that it was only accurate to two decimal places. If
Fischer did not find the display satisfactory, you could spend too much time
talking to him about style and never progress to the content.
Eventually, therefore, everyone who worked with Fischer for even a little
while wrote their own version of a subroutine that stripped all the trailing
zeros off a number before displaying it. Bill Toy and I used to joke that you
could identify Fischer’s collaborators by searching their hard disks for a
subroutine called removeTrailingZeros( ).
Sometimes Fischer took this a little too far. One day a few months later I
made use of an options calculator built by someone in his group. It required
that you enter the stock’s dividend yield, and so I entered the number “0” in
the field. For a brief subliminal instant I saw the numeral zero I had entered
fluoresce onto the screen, and then vanish, leaving an empty field. Thinking
I had made a typing mistake, I entered the zero again. Again, miragelike,
the ghostly zero flickered and deliquesced. Then I realized what was
happening. The programmer had blindly followed Fischer’s dictum to
remove all trailing zeros, and since the number “0” was all zeros, it
removed the entire number, leaving the impression that nothing had been
entered. The program had no respect for the philosophical distinction
between nothing and zero.
Just as on the first day I visited him, Fischer was always quiet and calm,
always in visible equilibrium. He never seemed to allow his work life to
become an exercise in the exhausting multitasking (and the macho pride in
coping with it) that quickly became a way of life for people at investment
banks. Most often, when you went to visit him, you would find him reading,
or on the telephone, or sitting with his back to the door, his PC keyboard on
his lap and his chair swiveled 180 degrees to face the PC on the bureau by
the window behind his chair, entering notes into Thinktank, a late-1980s
organizer program he used constantly.
Fischer filed all his memos and notes in Thinktank; Beverly Bell, his
editor at Goldman, said that he accumulated over 20 million bytes of text in
it, from addresses and phone numbers to thoughts and ideas. People I knew
in 
his 
group 
claimed 
that 
he 
conducted 
a 
continuing 
and 
eager
correspondence with the Thinktank designers in order to suggest additions
or modifications he wanted to see.
Fischer 
was 
precise 
and 
organized, 
quite 
punctilious. 
Every 
day 
he
ordered the same ascetically healthy meal delivered to his desk. He liked to
wear a Casio information-storing watch, which prompted some of his
employee-admirers to do likewise. In his office giving audience, if you said
something 
he 
found 
useful, 
he 
wrote 
it 
down 
with 
his 
fine-pointed
mechanical pencil on a fresh sheet of his ruled white pad, and then tore it
off and inserted it into a new manila folder which he labeled and then
placed in one of his file drawers. In an article published after his death,
Beverly described the 6,000 files he left behind, now archived at MIT.
Fischer was unashamed of his nerdish enthusiasm for technology, in
contrast to most of Wall Street in the 1980s, where important managers
prided themselves on their ignorance of computers. Some managers I knew
eschewed not only computers, but even desks in their offices, preferring a
large conference table to signify their major role as decision makers.
When I began to work with Fischer, I thought he had some strange tastes.
You couldn’t easily guess his attitude to one question by knowing his
opinion about another, though what he said was always thoughtful and
sensible. But over subsequent years I learned that he was a rarity, one of
those people you only occasionally meet, someone whose character is a
coherent whole even though its parts seem uncorrelated. At bottom, he
simply liked to think through everything for himself. This didn’t make him
a great rebel, but rather an outsider whose work had vast impact on the
world of insiders. It was impressive to watch.
Back in FSG after meeting Fischer, I continued studying the classic Black-
Scholes model for stock options and the way in which Ravi had modified it
for use on the bond options desk.
Options have value because future stock prices are uncertain, and the
further out into the future you go, the more uncertain they become. A great
deal of options theory is concerned with the modeling of future uncertainty.
Figure 10.1 illustrates in a simplified way how Black and Scholes pictured
the uncertainty of a stock’s future price. As time passes, the region in which
the future stock price is likely to lie progressively widens. A stock worth
$100 today could be worth anything between zero and a very large number
thirty years from now. (If you bought internet stocks in the late 1990s, you
understand this all too well.)
Figure 10.1 The distribution of possible future prices over 30 years for a
stock whose price is $100 today. The more time passes, the greater the
uncertainty in the future price. The darker the shading, the more likely the
price will be in that region.
Bonds are different. While no one knows the future price of a stock, a
$100 initial investment in a thirty-year Treasury bond is guaranteed to pay
you back exactly $100 when the bond matures. The shaded region in Figure
10.2 illustrates the approximate range of a bond’s future price: It widens as
we move away from the known bond price of $100 today, and then
converges towards the certain value of $100 thirty years from now.
Figure 10.2 The distribution of possible future prices for a bond whose
price is $100 today. After thirty years, the bond must again be worth exactly
$100. The darker the shading, the more likely the price will be in that
region.
The straightforward but simplistic way to value bond options in 1985 was
to use the Black-Scholes model as is, thereby implicitly assuming that bond
prices followed the distribution of Figure 10.1 rather than Figure 10.2. For
short-term options expiring within a year or two, it didn’t matter much. You
can see that, for the first year, the distribution of bond prices closely
resembles the distribution of stock prices. Consequently, the Black-Scholes
model is not a bad approximation for short-term (one-year) bond options.
But for longer-term options, the bond and stock distributions are vastly
different. For long-term bond options, a different model is needed.
Various academics had attempted to alter some of the assumptions about
the future evolution of stock prices in the Black-Scholes model so as to
make it better mimic the bond price distribution of Figure 10.2. In a similar
spirit, but with greater practicality since he was part of a business, Ravi had
invented 
the 
then-current 
Goldman 
bond 
options 
model 
by 
cleverly
modeling the future behavior of bond yields rather than bond prices. A
bond’s yield is the average annual percentage return you will earn if you
buy it at its current price and then hold it to maturity while collecting all the
coupons and the final repayment of principal. Ravi simply assumed that a
bond’s yield rather than its price obeyed the ever-widening Black-Scholes
distribution of Figure 10.1. In that case, as time passes and the bond gets
very close to its maturity, the future value of its yield, no matter how high
or low it ranges, becomes irrelevant to the bond price; too little time is left
until maturity for the yield to have an effect. Therefore, although the
distribution of bond yields in Ravi’s option model grew limitlessly high or
low as time passed and resembled Figure 10.1, the bond prices computed
from these yields looked much like those of Figure 10.2.
Ravi’s model did a reasonable job of capturing the future behavior of a
bond’s price. It also matched the intuition of the traders, who were already
used to thinking about bonds in terms of their yields, and so took naturally
to thinking about the range or volatility of yields. The same good idea often
occurs to several people simultaneously, and versions of the model soon
popped up independently at other Wall Street firms. When I came to work
at Salomon Brothers a few years later, I found they had a similar scheme.
But there were deeper, subtler problems with the model that arose from its
origin in the Black-Scholes framework. Just as the Black-Scholes model
treats each stock as an independent variable, so Ravi’s model treated each
bond as independent. Doing so led to a host of conceptual inconsistencies.
For, while there is nothing obviously wrong in imagining that the future
prices of a share of IBM and a share of AT&T can vary independently, it is
inconsistent to model the future prices of, say, a five-year bond and a three-
year bond as varying independently. If you do, things fall apart.
Bonds are connected to each other. The future behaviors of a five-year
bond and a three-year bond are not independent, but overlapping: Two years
from now, the five-year bond will be a three-year bond, so you cannot
model one bond’s future without implicitly modeling another. In fact, it is
impossible to model one bond without modeling all of them.
A five-year bond and a three-year bond have other commonalities, too.
You can think of a five-year Treasury bond that pays interest every six
months as a collection of ten zero-coupon bonds with maturities spread six
months apart over the next five years. Similarly, a three-year Treasury bond
is 
a 
collection 
of 
six 
zero-coupon 
bonds 
respectively 
maturing 
every
successive six months over the next three years. Decomposed in this way,
the bonds’ ingredients are shared: Both contain the first six zero-coupon
bonds. Therefore, in modeling the three-year bond, you are also implicitly
modeling parts of the five-year bond.
In essence, Ravi’s model allowed impermissible violations of the law of
one 
price 
that 
lies 
beneath 
all 
rational 
financial 
modeling. 
This 
law
demands that any two securities with the same final payouts must have the
same current value. Now, there is a combination of short-term options on
long-term bonds that has exactly the same payout as a short-term bond, and
therefore, the combination of options should have the same theoretical
value as the short-term bond, despite their formally different names. But
Ravi modeled long-term bonds independently of short-term ones, and so the
model had no way of enforcing this equivalence.
Every hard look at Ravi’s model led to the same insight: It is impossible
to model bonds piecemeal, one bond at a time. You must build a model of
the future evolution of all bonds, that is, of the yield curve itself. This was
our aim.
I had left Fischer’s office a little chastened by his sharp remarks about the
names of the fields on my calculator, but in a few days he let me know that
I could join him and Bill Toy in their effort to create a new bond options
model. It was a singular opportunity that had a large and beneficial effect on
my life.
That spring of 1986 I attended my first options conference, an annual
event organized by Howard Baker, Menachem Brenner, and Dan Galai at
the Amex. I was one of about a hundred participating quants, traders and
academics, all of us actively involved in the field at a time when options
meetings were still a rarity, before the conference-for-profit organizations
like Risk magazine began to dominate the market and eventually put the
Amex options conference out of business. I recall several presentations on
new models for valuing bond options, one in particular by Rick Bookstaber,
then at Morgan Stanley. You could sense a rising urgency, almost a race, to
solve the problem. Fischer told Bill and me that Bob Merton was working
on the same problem as a consultant for another investment bank.
The Goldman contingent at the conference had more than an academic
interest—our traders were making daily markets in long-expiration options
on long-dated bonds, precisely the domain where the contradictions in
Ravi’s model were most severe. The traders were aware of their need for a
better model, and as such were at the forefront of the impetus to replace it.
We knew that we had to model the future behavior of all Treasury bonds,
that is, the evolution of the entire yield curve. How to set about it was
neither obvious nor easy. A stock price is a single number, and when you
model its evolution, you project only one number into an uncertain future.
In contrast, the yield curve is a continuum, a string or rubber band whose
every 
point, 
at 
any 
instant, 
represents 
the 
yield 
of 
a 
bond 
with
corresponding maturity. As time passes and bond prices change, the yield
curve moves, as illustrated in Figure 10.3. To evolve the entire yield curve
forward in time is a much more difficult task: Just as you cannot move the
different points on a string completely independently of each other, because
the string must stay connected, so bonds close to each other must stay
connected, too.
Figure 10.3 Yield curves can vary during the day.
How, then, to project bond prices into the future? Fischer, Bill, and I were
pragmatists. We were building a model for traders, and we wanted it to be
simple, consistent, and reasonably realistic. Simple meant that only one
random factor drove all changes. Consistent meant that it had to value all
bonds in agreement with their current market prices; if it produced the
wrong bond prices, it was pointless to use it to value options on those
bonds. Finally, realistic meant that the model’s future yield curves should
move through ranges similar to those experienced by actual yield curves.
When 
physicists 
build 
models, 
they 
often 
first 
resort 
to 
a 
toy
representation of the world in which space and time are discrete and exist
only at points on a lattice—it makes picturing the mathematics much easier.
We built our model in the same vein. We imagined a world in which the
shortest investment you could make lasted exactly one year, and was
represented by the one-year Treasury bill interest rate. Longer-term rates
would then be a reflection of the market’s perception of the probable range
of future short-term (that is, one-year) rates.
In this spirit, we built a simple model of future one-year rates that
resembled a discrete version of the stock price distributions of Figure 10.1.
The initial one-year rate, as shown in Figure 10.4, was known from the
current yield curve. As you looked further out into the future, rates could
range over progressively wider values.
Figure 10.4 The Black-Derman-Toy model focuses on the distribution of
future short-term rates. Here, each dot corresponds to a particular value of
the future one-year rate. The more time passes, the greater the uncertainty
of future rates.
In order to complete our model, we now had to determine the range of
future one-year rates at every year in the future. In our model, the key
principle 
was 
to 
think 
of 
longer-term 
bonds 
as 
being 
generated 
by
successive investments in short-term bonds. From this point of view, two
years of interest is obtained by two successive one-year investments, the
first at a known rate, the second at an uncertain one. The market’s price for
a two-year bond today depends on its view of the distribution of future one-
year rates. You can calculate the logical value of the current two-year bond
yield, from the current one-year yield and the distribution of one-year rates
one year hence. Similarly, you can calculate the volatility or uncertainty of
the current two-year yield from the volatility of the distribution of one-year
rates one year hence. Alternatively, working backwards, since the current
two-year yield and its volatility is known from the market, you can deduce
the distribution of one-year rates one-year hence, as shown in Figure 10.5.
Figure 10.5 How the distribution of future one-year rates is deduced from
the current yield curve in the Black-Derman-Toy model. The two-year yield
to maturity fixes the distribution of one-year rates after one year, the three-
year yield to maturity fixes the distribution of one-year rates after two
years, and so on.
In the same way, the value of the current three-year yield can be found
from the current one-year rate, the known distribution of one-year rates one
year hence (already deduced from the current two-year yield) and the
distribution of one-year rates two years hence. But, since the value of the
current three-year yield is known, you can use it to deduce the distribution
of one-year rates two years hence. Continuing in this way, you can use the
current yield curve at any instant to pin down the range of all future one-
year rates, as illustrated in Figure 10.5.
This was the essence of our model. When Bill and I programmed it, it
seemed 
to 
work—we 
could 
extract 
the 
market’s 
expectation 
of 
the
distributions of future one-year rates from the current yield curve and its
volatility. There was nothing holy about the one-year time steps we started
with. Once the model worked, we used monthly, weekly, or sometimes even
daily steps on a lattice, determining the market’s view of the distribution of
future short-term rates at any instant from the current yield curve. A typical
lattice (or tree, as we called it, because of the way an initial interest rate
forked out into progressively wider branches) had hundreds or thousands of
equally spaced short periods, as illustrated in Figure 10.6.
Figure 10.6 A schematic illustration of a multiperiod short-rate tree in the
Black-Derman-Toy model with equal periods extending for many years.
We had aimed to make our model simple and consistent, and it was—we
could match all current bond prices with one tree. We could then use the
same calibrated tree to value any security whose payouts in the future had a
known dependence on interest rates by averaging those payouts over the
distribution. In particular, we could value the payout of an option of any
expiration on a bond of any maturity.
It was particularly attractive that our new model satisfied the law of one
price. Our tree functioned as a computational engine that produced the
current value of a security by averaging its future payouts; you put future
payouts onto the end of the tree, cranked the handle that averaged and then
discounted them over the interest rate distribution, and ended up with the
current price. The engine didn’t care what name you gave to the security
that produced the payout—bond, option, call it what you like. As long as
the future payouts were identical, the engine produced the same price.
By late 1986, less than a year after I came to Goldman, we had most of the
model implemented and running at reasonable speed. Now we began trying
it out on actual options traded by the desk, cataloging the ways in which its
prices differed from those of Ravi’s model. Our traders’ intuition had been
honed 
on 
the 
old 
model, 
and 
they 
were 
sensibly 
conservative 
about
switching—it 
is 
never 
wise 
to 
start 
using 
something 
new 
until 
you
understand how well it glues on to what you used before. You need a feel
for a model before you can begin to rely on it. Therefore, some of the sales
assistants in Financial Strategies began to test it, and slowly convinced
themselves that it satisfied the law of one price, something that was
theoretically obvious to us but not yet practically clear to them.
I was tremendously excited by 
what we had done. 
Still 
at heart a
physicist, and still philosophically naive about financial modeling, I half-
thought of what we had built as a grand unified theory of interest rates, and
imagined we could use it to value every interest rate-sensitive security in
the universe.
Fischer, however, disliked this view of our model. More practical and
much more experienced, he knew that there were financial forces that lay
outside our model; it seemed perfectly possible to him that the model might
be good (if it was good at all) for one sector—simple options on Treasury
bonds, for example—but not for callable bonds, caps, or a host of other
optionlike fixed-income instruments. He called what we had created an “as
if” model, by which he meant that we were assuming that the world of bond
market investors behaved as if only short rates mattered.
Despite 
my 
desire 
to 
have 
done 
something 
grand, 
I, 
too, 
began 
to
recognize our model for what it was: a simple phenomenological model in
the sense that physicists use the adjective, a useful but limited toy that we
should take tentatively but seriously, trying to see how far we could push it.
We had assumed that markets care only about a single factor, the short-term
interest rate, and that all longer-term rates simply reflect the market’s
opinion of future short-term rates and their volatilities. Was that strictly
true? Of course not! The world is indescribably more complex. But what we
had was a good starting point from which to capture some of the rational
linkages between long- and short-term rates. Our model may not have been
the real world, but it was a possible real world, one of many, and that made
its prices interesting.
Fischer wanted the paper we were writing to be clear, accurate and yet not
overly mathematical. Over the next year I wrote multiple drafts which he
read and then returned with comments, and with the help of his editor
Beverly, the paper grew progressively shorter. In my previous life as a
physicist I had been a somewhat careless writer with little patience for
revision. That year of draft writing taught me the importance and pleasure
of formulating concepts qualitatively but precisely, and from then on I was
willing to struggle over small things to communicate them clearly.
Our paper, A One-Factor Model of Interest Rates and Its Application to
Treasury Bond Options, eventually appeared in the Financial Analysts
Journal in 1990, almost four years after we had developed it. To my
pleasure and surprise, it was widely adopted and rapidly became known by
the acronym for our names, BDT. It was a pity we hadn’t published earlier,
but Fischer was a perfectionist, reluctant to release it until he was truly
satisfied.
We weren’t the only builders of consistent models of the yield curve. At
Salomon 
Brothers, 
my 
friend 
Mark 
Koenigsberg 
and 
his 
boss, 
Bob
Kopprasch, who later came to head up Financial Strategies at Goldman, had
also built a fairly simple model of interest rates, though it wasn’t quite as
general as ours. Oldrich Vasiçek, always a pioneer, had published the first
Black-Scholes-style model of interest rates a good ten years earlier, in 1977;
Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross had published a more complex but related model
in 
1985. 
There 
were 
others, 
too. 
So 
why 
was 
our 
model 
so 
widely
embraced?
I can think of three reasons. First, we were practitioners and therefore
knew what a trading desk needed. While Vasiçek and the Cox-Ingersoll-
Ross team had been focused on the general problem of modeling yield
curves, we aimed squarely at bond options just when that market was
expanding.
Second, our model was easily accessible to practitioners. It was written in
a down-to-earth style using the language of binomial trees, a poor man’s
description of volatility that everyone on Wall Street could grasp. What we
described was so close to an algorithm that anyone who took the effort
could 
implement 
our 
model 
as 
a 
computer 
program. 
Most 
other
contemporary models demanded a stronger grasp of stochastic calculus to
understand them and a separate effort at numerical analysis to turn them
into 
a 
useful 
computer 
program; 
in 
our 
model, 
the 
medium 
was 
the
message: The description and the implementation were almost one.
Finally, unlike most prior models that produced analytical formulas that
didn’t match the shape of actual yield curves, ours could be calibrated to
almost any curve, and therefore was ready for the trading world. Indeed, the
description of the calibration was a critical part of our paper.
In subsequent years, hosts of new yield-curve models appeared, each
known by their authors’ acronym, and ingenious academics and quants keep
finding new and perhaps more realistic ones. You can now pick from BK
(Black and Karasinski), HW (Hull and White), and HJM (Heath, Jarrow,
and Morton) or its extension BGM (Brace, Gatarek, and Musiela). The
process continues, though which model to employ is still a matter of taste
and compromise. Selecting a model becomes a question of finding one that
is rich enough to represent most of the risks your product faces, efficient
enough to run on a computer in a tolerable amount of time, and simple
enough so that programming it is not too complex and burdensome a task.
BDT was simple and consistent, but, like any model, it was not entirely
realistic, and its limitations became increasingly apparent over the years. At
bottom, it had only a single factor of uncertainty, the future distribution of
short-term rates, and so all rates, both short and long, tended to move
together, preserving the curve’s initial shape a little too well. Therefore,
though the model was good for valuing options on bonds, it was not well
suited to valuing options on more arcane properties of the yield curve, such
as its slope or curvature.
Still, the model’s simplicity made it an easy entry point into the art of
yield-curve modeling for both practitioners and academics, and it left its
mark. It continues to be used even after superior but more complex models
have arrived on the scene.
Building the model had been tremendously absorbing, just like the old days
in physics. For most of each day I had banged my head single-mindedly
against the same problem, thinking about the trees, writing the computer
program that embodied it, searching for ways to speed it up, speaking with
Fischer 
and 
Bill, 
examining 
the 
computer’s 
results, 
making 
further
modifications. 
Sometimes 
I 
had 
difficulty 
sleeping, 
waking 
up
spontaneously in the middle of the night, unable to return to bed until I had
tried out a new scheme.
Unlike me, Fischer was patient. He took an efficient-market attitude
towards building models: Each day you looked at what you knew and
decided what was the best way to proceed next. On at least two occasions
he thought we could do better if we stopped everything and started again
from scratch. It was a trait I admired, but I didn’t have the stomach for it.
Bill and I were new to the field and eager to have our first contribution
complete and disseminated.
The first time Fischer wanted to begin all over again was when we
learned how to introduce the mean reversion of interest rates into our
model, 
an 
insight 
that, 
not 
untypically, 
came 
from 
an 
accidental
observation. Until then we had always run the model with equal time
periods in the tree. In order to speed up the program, I experimented with
varying the period length in the tree, letting it start out small in the present
and then grow large in the future. In this way I aimed to make our valuation
engine take a detailed look at distributions in the present but only a coarse
look at their behavior in the far distant and uncertain future.
When I tried to calibrate these unequally spaced trees to the current yield
curve, I ran into trouble. It often became mysteriously impossible to find
any distribution of future short-term rates that were consistent with the yield
curve. The mystery disappeared when we drew the trees and examined their
topology. Figure 10.7a shows a tree with equal-length periods. We could
now see that the increasing period lengths of Figure 10.7b caused the tree to
grow visibly wider over time, reflecting a tendency for interest rates to
move away from their mean, a runaway behavior that doesn’t mesh too well
with 
reality. 
This 
was 
what 
caused 
the 
difficulties 
with 
calibration.
Similarly, 
if 
we 
decreased 
the 
future 
period 
lengths 
as 
shown 
in
Figure10.7c, we observed that short-term rates reverted to the mean and the
tree 
tended 
to 
grow 
ever 
narrower 
with 
time. 
This 
narrowing 
tree
incorporated a restoring force that stabilized interest rates, akin to what
happens in real markets when governments and central banks intervene to
stabilize economies.
Figure 10.7 BDT short-rate trees with constant volatility but varying
periods.
When Fischer realized that a tree with decreasing periods could describe
mean reversion, he wanted us to drop our equal-period version and begin all
over again. Bill Toy and I were more anxious to complete what we had
started, 
and 
eventually 
we 
prevailed. 
The 
trees 
with 
variable 
periods
eventually became part of the Black-Karasinski model.
Fischer was the first to notice the link between period length and mean
reversion by examining the topology of the trees, and it made me aware of
his intuitive powers. Looking at the tree, he could see the dynamics that its
shape implied. It was only much later, after completing our paper, that we
worked 
out 
the 
description 
of 
our 
model 
in 
the 
elegant 
language 
of
stochastic calculus, the way it is now described in textbooks.
On a second occasion, sometime during early 1987, Fischer became
entranced by the idea of adding a second stochastic factor to our model. The
idea was sensible; our original model had simplistically assumed the entire
yield curve was driven by short-term rates, and we were tempted to make
the model truer to life by allowing longer-term rates to vary independently
of the short-term rate. Adding a second factor in our framework meant
working with two-dimensional trees. We played around with calibrating
such trees to the yield curve. But trees with two or more dimensions are not
only harder to visualize or draw, as you can see from Figure 10.8, but also
appreciably more difficult to handle in a computer program, and I was again
relieved when we postponed this elaboration in favor of completing the
delivery of our simpler model to the trading desk.
Figure 10.8 A two-dimensional tree of future interest rates.
Several years later, Fischer, Iraj Kani, and I began investigating a two-
dimensional version of the BDT model, but we never completed the work.
It takes only a good idea and a few people to develop a model, but it takes
many more people to turn the model into a usable tool. For that you need a
graphical user interface, a database that contains the details of traded
products you own, and current market data for calibration.
But 
even 
collecting 
data 
isn’t 
as 
simple 
as 
it 
seems—models 
are
everywhere. What one thinks of as “market data” are often prices filtered
through another model or calculation. Yields are extracted from collections
of bond prices. Volatility is calculated from historical returns. Each year, as
markets mature, products become more liquid and traders calibrate their
quotes to greater numbers of related securities, sometimes so many that
their prices must be obtained via electronic price feeds. All of this involves
software. Sooner or later everyone who creates a useful model gets exposed
to the truth that building a trading and risk management system around the
model is a huge and often overwhelming software project that requires
many more programmers than quants. Models, critical though they are, are
only a small part of the story.
Back in 1986 when we developed our yield curve model, traders were
quite willing to enter a yield curve into the system manually, and I was
perfectly capable of building most of the system and user interface around
the model myself. I delivered it to the traders on the bond options desk and
they began testing it immediately.
As they began to use our model I ran into my first taste of battle with
“middlemen,” the people appointed to intermediate between the producers
and users of models. Middlemen—usually one per desk—sat with the
traders and got to know their business well.
Middlemen serve a useful task. It’s not easy for a quant to understand the
finance, build the model, do the math, write the program, and still have the
time to work closely with the trading desk. Traders, always rushed, need a
middleman to coordinate their requirements, to make them agree on their
most 
urgent 
needs. 
Since 
traders 
and 
quants 
speak 
slightly 
different
languages, it’s good to have someone who can understand both sides’
dialects and serve as the designated mediator.
Unfortunately, the middlemen on the corporate and Treasury desks at that
time preferred that the model creators remain invisible; one of them who
used our model to generate prices for traders wouldn’t even admit to doing
so. Since you are paid in proportion to the perception of your benefit to the
business, this was not good.
There wasn’t much I could do about being front-run, but I decided to at
least confirm my suspicions. A few days later I went back to the source
code of my program and temporarily added a few lines that ensured that,
when you tried to use it, you got a pop-up window saying “Model Under
Repair.” Within a few hours I started to get calls from the middlemen
asking what had happened to the model they had not admitted that they
were using.
Ever since, I have been wary of people who stand between model creators
and end users. Quants everywhere have firsthand experience of being
bypassed by more technically challenged people who extract information
from you and then pass it on to other people at meetings you’re not invited
to. For a long time afterwards, whenever I wrote programs for traders, I
used to include a swatch of code that kept a log of who used my program,
and when. I encouraged people in my group to do the same. That way I had
documented proof of our utility, even though I couldn’t put a dollar value
on it. In 1994, when the investment banking industry was forced to lay off
people and Goldman went through difficult times, I sent a copy of the log to
my bosses, showing how many tens of thousands of times some of our
Quantitative Strategies group’s programs had been used. No one in our
group was laid off that year, and that bit of information may have helped a
little.
I met with Fischer regularly over the next eight years, though we never
again worked as closely as we did when we developed BDT. He was the
most remarkable person I met at Goldman.
His most noticeable quality was his stubborn and meticulous devotion to
clarity and simplicity. In writing and speaking, he put weight on both
content and style. When we wrote the first draft of our paper on a one-factor
model of interest rates, Fischer wanted no equations in it, and I had to
struggle long and hard to satisfy his standards: He wanted accuracy and
honesty 
without 
the 
technical 
details, 
which 
meant 
that 
you 
had 
to
understand the model viscerally, and then explain that understanding. I
think it was the clarity of the mechanics of our model that made it so
popular and widely used.
Because he liked clarity, and perhaps because his training was not in
economics, Fischer avoided excessive formalization. His papers were the
antithesis of the unnecessarily rigorous lemma-filled research papers of
financial economics journals. He tried to write as he spoke, in a terse but
good-natured 
conversational 
style, 
using 
clear 
but 
casual, 
unadorned
English. There was a touch of jerkiness to his prose because it lacked the
technically superfluous conjunctions—and, but, thus, and therefore—that
people commonly use to link the flow of sentences in scientific articles.
Fischer expected clarity and directness from others, too. Though he was
generous with his time and didn’t care about rank, you had to prepare for an
audience with him. If it was evident that you hadn’t thought carefully about
your question, you quickly discovered that he wasn’t going to do the
thinking for you. And, if you didn’t grasp his answer and repeated your
question, he would simply repeat his answer.
A very direct man, he was uncomfortable with small talk. When he had
nothing 
to 
say, 
he 
said 
nothing; 
this 
could 
be 
disconcerting 
on 
the
telephone, where he often simply kept silent for a minute or two without
terminating the conversation. Sometimes, this led you to babble in an
attempt to fill the silence, until Fischer simply said an abrupt goodbye and
hung up.
He once told me that one of the things that limited his influence was the
fact that he always told people the truth, even if they didn’t want to hear it,
a characteristic I can vouch for myself. When he grew skeptical of some of
the information technology managers in his division at Goldman in the
early 1990s, he purposefully met with them all and then made a frank list of
who was good and who was bad, and handed it over to his bosses. He
laughed sheepishly but half-proudly when he conceded that he had been
naive to think that he would gain anything from this.
Among Goldman partners he struck me as always a bit of an outsider. In
the era before the firm went public, a “class” of partners was appointed
once every two years, and each of them then advanced by being allowed to
buy progressively larger shares of the company. Fischer once said to me
that he was proud of possessing fewer shares than anyone else in his class
of 1986.
This 
directness 
and 
informality 
characterized 
his 
research, 
too. 
His
approach seemed to me to consist of unafraid hard thinking, intuition, and
no great reliance on advanced mathematics. This was inspiring to lesser
mortals. He attacked problems directly, with whatever skills he had at his
command, 
and 
often 
they 
worked. 
He 
gave 
you 
the 
sense 
(perhaps
misguided) that you could discover deep truths with whatever skills you
had, too, if you were willing to think hard. He was guided by his great
economic intuition; though his mathematical skills were unexceptional, his
instinct was strong, and he was tenacious in trying to attain insight before
resorting to mathematics.
In modeling he had a taste for the concrete: He liked to describe the
financial 
world 
with 
variables 
that 
represented 
observable 
phenomena
rather than hidden statistical or econometric factors. He thought practical
usefulness and accuracy were more important than elegance, despite the
unquestionable elegance that lends so much appeal to the Black-Scholes-
Merton framework he founded. He had a strong pragmatic streak; he was at
least as much a practitioner as an academic, willing to devote time and
attention to software, trading systems, and user interfaces. He thought that
these were just as important as the models themselves.
Fischer preferred reality to elegance in modeling. In one of his last
published papers, Equilibrium Exchanges, he succinctly stated his attitude
in the last part of his introduction. “In the end,” he wrote, “this entire article
amounts to a series of conjectures about the nature of equilibrium, if one
exists. I have been unable to provide an exhaustive and precise analysis of
the implications of my assumptions, but I would rather guess about what
follows from more-relevant assumptions than derive precise conclusions
from less-relevant assumptions.”
Clearly, though style was important to him, content was paramount.
Between 1990 and 1995, when he worked first in Goldman Sachs Asset
Management and then in Fixed Income Research, I invited him to come and
listen to the occasional seminar speaker we had visit the Quantitative
Strategies group I ran. I noticed that he didn’t attend if the seminars were on
new or improved numerical solutions to problems that were already soluble;
it’s not that he was uninterested in numerical solutions, but rather that he
was more interested in financial economics. Similarly, he didn’t get carried
away by the need to find analytical solutions to equations; he was just as
happy to use numerical methods when fast computers were available.
Fischer 
also 
had 
a 
good 
grasp 
of 
the 
overwhelming 
importance 
of
computing in making effective use of models. People have often asked why
we publicized our research on the BDT model in 1990, given that we
worked at a profit-making investment bank. In fact, when we published it,
traders at Goldman had already been using it for several years. But more
importantly, Fischer distinguished between releasing models (which he
thought legitimate) and releasing a computer implementation or trading
system that incorporates the model, which he thought should be sold.
The truth is that models are rarely an unambiguous source of profits.
What counts as much or more is the trading system and the discipline it
imposes, the operational errors it disallows and the intuition that traders
gain from being able to experiment with a model.
Fischer had his own way of thinking about markets. He was deeply inspired
by the so-called “general equilibrium” approach of the capital asset pricing
model, the idea that prices and markets equilibrate when the expected return
per unit of risk is the same for all securities. This belief was the source of
much of his intuition, and was the method he first used to derive the Black-
Scholes differential equation. In late July of 1995, shortly before his death,
in response to a question I sent him about these matters, he emailed me: “I
view all our work on fixed-income models as resulting from the application
of the capital asset pricing model to fixed-income markets.”
I had a touching glimpse of his love for this approach a few years before
he died when, together with a few of my colleagues, I tried to assess the
effect of transactions costs and hedging frequency on our trading desk’s
options 
prices. 
We 
built 
a 
Monte 
Carlo 
simulation 
program 
that
dynamically replicated each option as the stock price changed, adding the
assumed transactions costs as each rebalancing of the hedging portfolio
took place. In the long run we intended to use the program to see how much
this caused options prices to deviate from the Platonic Black-Scholes value;
in this way we could estimate the actual cost of our hedging strategy rather
than accept the value of the idealized value embodied in the Black-Scholes
model.
Whenever you write a program to do something new, you should first
make sure that it does the old things correctly. In testing the program
written by one of my colleagues, we first ran it assuming that there were no
transactions costs and that you could hedge continuously, in order to ensure
that we obtained the exact Black-Scholes replication price. Of course, you
cannot really hedge continuously in a computer simulation, so we rehedged
very often, several times a day. To our amazement, we discovered that even
for 10,000 rehedgings on a one-year option—that is, for more than thirty
rebalancings in a day—we still couldn’t obtain the exact Black-Scholes
value. There was always a residual discrepancy. This seemed wrong, so I
wrote my own version of the program and found the same small but
significant discrepancy. This was very puzzling; it suggested that the Black-
Scholes formula was less applicable to the conditions of actual markets than
we had expected.
I was perturbed enough to want to speak to Fischer about this, and went
over to his office in another building on Goldman’s growing campus. When
I explain what I had found, he briefly became quite excited at the apparent
inability of Merton’s replication method to produce the exact Black-Scholes
value, and said something like, “You know, I always thought there was
something wrong with the replication method.”
Sad to say, I discovered a little later that both my simulation program and
my colleague’s contained small but different errors, which, once corrected,
confirmed that the replication method rapidly converged to the exact Black-
Scholes 
value! 
In 
his 
heart, 
though, 
Fischer 
mistrusted 
the 
Merton
derivation and preferred his original proof.
Fischer’s independent thinking led him to unorthodox but well-thought-out
ideas, many of which sounded obvious once he articulated them. He voiced
some of them in speeches, and others in a collection of brief, pointed notes
that he circulated informally at Goldman in the early 1990s.
In one short essay he struck at the foundation of financial economics,
writing that “certain economic quantities are so hard to estimate that I call
them ‘unobservables.’ ” One unobservable, he pointed out, is expected
return, the amount by which people expect to profit when buying a security.
So 
much 
of 
finance, 
from 
Markowitz 
on, 
deals 
with 
this 
quantity
unquestioningly. Yet, wrote Fischer, “Our estimates of expected return are
so poor they are almost laughable.”
In another essay entitled Managing Traders, he argued that a trader
should be judged on the rationale behind his or her methods and rewarded
only if it is sound, irrespective of whether or not he or she profited in the
most recent period. “It’s crucial to judge the stories they trade on,” he wrote
about traders. “Stories can be wrong, but I’m uncomfortable trading without
one . . . Looking only or primarily at their profit and loss statements is a
recipe 
for 
disaster.” 
He 
wanted 
to 
reward 
intelligence 
and 
long-term
thinking rather than the short-term vagaries of markets.
In his speech on being named the Financial Engineer of the Year by the
International Association of Financial Engineers (IAFE) in 1994, Fischer
said that he had always preferred applied research to academic. University
professors, he claimed, should be paid and hired for their teaching, not their
research; he believed that their desire to teach well would then lead them to
do good research.
When he became terminally ill, he neither hid it nor announced it, but
informed the necessary people, and spoke about it in a detached, objective
way that I found admirable. I never heard him complain.
He had a massive operation, and was full of genuine praise for the
surgeon, who he said was “a genius”; it made me briefly envious of people
who help others rather than work on theories. After the operation, he had a
temporary 
recovery, 
and 
worked 
again, 
assiduously. 
For 
a 
while 
we
sometimes 
spoke 
on 
the 
telephone 
about 
building 
models 
of 
options
valuation that included jumps in the underlying index.
He was always frank if you asked about his health, but never volunteered
any information if you didn’t. Later, when one could sense from occasional
remarks and rumors that his condition had worsened, I summoned the
courage to ask how he was doing. He said simply that things looked “pretty
iffy right now.”
When he finally stopped coming to work, he communicated with anyone
who wrote to him via email. I liked to keep in contact, and would send him
comments or short bits of news from work. If my emails were insubstantial,
consisting of small talk or complaints, then, true to his style, he seldom
replied. But if you wrote to him about some genuine issue in finance, you
received a prompt answer. I asked him once if these email questions were
bothering him, and he immediately replied to say no, and then stressed in a
postscript that he liked to receive these questions.
At his memorial service in Cambridge, I heard a moving speech by Jack
Treynor, former editor of the Financial Analysts Journal and, in many
respects, Fischer’s mentor, who concluded by saying that as regards death,
“Fischer wasn’t afraid at all.” This is the way I saw it, too. He rarely
seemed to delude himself about the way the world really worked.
Whenever 
I 
think 
of 
Fischer 
I 
think 
of 
him 
as 
a 
consummately
unsentimental realist. Once, when I was about to travel to Vienna to speak
at a conference at which Robert Merton would be present, I called Fischer
(already ill but more than a year before his death) and left him a voicemail
asking the appropriate way to refer to “the model”—should I call it “Black-
Scholes” 
or 
“Black-Scholes-Merton?” 
Fischer 
replied 
with 
a 
message
saying it was OK to call it the Black-Scholes-Merton model, because it was
Merton who had come up with the replication argument for valuing an
option. Then he added, quite imperturbably, that “that’s the part that many
people think is the most important.”
On a professional and personal level, Fischer always seemed more free of
artifice than anyone I knew, though this sometimes made him difficult to
deal with. He didn’t soft-pedal in giving you his opinion of work you had
done or actions you had taken, but just told you what he thought. He had a
strong sense of what was important, and he always took the long view, in
corporate politics as well as in research. For that reason, he was the perfect
person to call when you needed a clear view about an issue. In the midst of
corporate politics, he told you to concentrate on quality even if people
around you sometimes didn’t appreciate it. He kept your eye on the goal,
which was to help the business in the best way you could, to try to keep
breaking new ground. He didn’t sympathize with holding on to turf; instead,
he always encouraged the search for new opportunities.
Fischer’s last paper, written but not fully completed while he was dying,
was submitted to the Financial Analysts Journal. He called the paper
Interest Rates as Options, and cleverly pointed out that short-term interest
rates themselves resemble call options, a consequence on which he then
elaborated.
In a footnote to the article, the managing editor of the journal explained
the circumstances behind the paper’s publication:
Fischer Black submitted this paper on May 1, 1995. His submission
letter stated: “I would like to publish this, though I may not be around
to make any changes the referee may suggest. If I’m not, and if it seems
roughly acceptable, could you publish it as is with a note explaining the
circumstances?” Fischer received a revise and resubmit letter on May
22 with a detailed referee’s report. He worked on the paper during the
summer and started to think about how to address the comments of the
referee. He died on August 31 without completing the revision.
...
Chapter 11
Force of Circumstance
Manners and mores on Wall Street
The further adventures of some acquaintances
Volatility is infectious
No one stays happy on Wall Street for long. The people who work there
don’t usually think of it as an avocation, like physics or medicine. Instead,
most investment bankers want to get rich as fast as they can and then retire.
And 
so, 
as 
Heraclitus 
wrote, 
all 
things 
happen 
because 
of 
strife 
and
necessity.
At Goldman, in the pre-IPO days, the route to getting really rich was to
become a partner and acquire a stake in the profits of the firm. Those who
succeeded in gaining a partnership tended to last another decade or so and
then retire, some voluntarily, some forcibly. Many partners were gone by
their late thirties.
To join the partnership, or even to be considered for it, you had to have
made a clear contribution to the profits of the firm. As a result, the vast
majority of partners came out of sales, trading, and investment banking,
where the money you made for the firm could be unambiguously counted.
Almost no partners came from information technology or research, whose
contributions, while substantial, did not carry a clear dollar value. Even
Fischer, though he appeared to be an exception to this rule, had reportedly
made millions of dollars for the firm by taking careful account of a
mathematical subtlety in the definition of certain futures contracts of which
most traders were unaware.
In troubled FSG, everyone seemed to know that whoever ran us properly
might get the ultimate Goldman reward, a partnership and all that it
guaranteed. The self-assured young kid in the cube next to me was certain
that 
Mutt 
or 
Jeff 
would 
make 
it. 
“There 
are 
about 
7,000 
people 
at
Goldman,” he intoned. “And there are 70 partners. That’s one partner per
100 people. There are over 100 people in FSG, and they’re in charge.
Therefore, one of them will be a partner.”
It didn’t work out that way. Instead there followed a succession of new
FSG rulers and corulers who entered and exited like lovers in a French
farce. It would take more than a few tries to fix it, but Goldman eventually
got it right.
First came Bob Kopprasch from the Salomon Brothers Bond Portfolio
Analysis (BPA) group, where he had run the options research team in which
my friend Mark Koenigsberg now worked. Kopprasch’s team had written
reports containing some of the best research on fixed-income derivatives in
the 
1980s, 
high 
quality, 
well-written 
pieces 
that 
straddled 
and 
almost
dissolved 
the 
border 
between 
academia 
and 
practice. 
It 
was 
their
publications you turned to if you wanted to understand how to value swaps
and swaptions before the necessary methodology appeared in textbooks.
John Meriwether’s arb group at Salomon cherry-picked some of their best
people 
from 
Kopprasch’s 
team, 
men 
like 
Victor 
Haghani 
and 
Greg
Hawkins, 
who 
later 
moved 
with 
Meriwether 
to 
Long 
Term 
Capital
Management (LTCM). When I ran Goldman’s Quantitative Strategies a few
years later, I always regarded the work done by Kopprasch’s group as a
model for what I tried to achieve. Nowadays, quantitative groups on the
Street devote much less effort to these kinds of publications.
For a while, Kopprasch tried to manage us in an uneasy triumvirate with
Mutt and Jeff. It must have been difficult. Soon Mutt made a graceful exit
to the less quantitative world of asset management. Then Jeff left for a large
Savings & Loan that, like many others, had benefited from the FSLIC
guarantee on their deposits to become a speculative investor in securitized
pools of home-owner mortgages. Then, only a few months into his reign,
Kopprasch seemed to tire of the politics and went upstairs to work with the
futures salespeople. Eventually he left Goldman to join an investment firm
started by Lew Ranieri, former head of mortgages at Salomon Brothers and
one of the creators of the market for mortgage-backed securities.
Then things turned around. In 1987 Bob Rubin appointed Ed Markiewicz
to manage FSG. Ed was a down-to-earth, longtime Goldman accountant,
about 
forty 
years 
old, 
who 
was 
said 
to 
be 
Bob’s 
consigliere, 
his
troubleshooter in difficult situations. Ed knew little about models, software,
or options trading, but he could distinguish flim from flam, a skill in short
supply. He spent his first few months as boss of FSG questioning everyone.
“What do you think of so-and-so?” he would say to you behind closed
doors. Slowly he figured out who had useful skills and who was merely
along for the ride. A semblance of order returned; the overpaid consultants
left; the professional administrators were trimmed. Presuming that I was
one of the good guys, Ed moved me from a cube into an office and put me
in charge of creating a fixed-income software group. Our mission was to
replace our antiquated FORTRAN financial library with something we
eventually 
called 
GS-ONE, 
an 
object-oriented 
unified 
framework 
for
constructing Goldman Sachs fixed-income trading systems.
By early 1988 Ed had restored order. It was reassuring to see that excess
had its limits, and impressive that he accomplished the turnaround so
efficiently, because in truth he understood so little about what people in
FSG really did. But he did understand instinctively when people were
feeding him a line. Temporarily triumphant, he seemed to us to have a good
chance of becoming the partner who would now reign over FSG. Over the
next year he seemed to bloom; he became more confident, working out at
the Health and Racquet Club some lunch times and spending time on the
trading floor with Jacob Goldfield, whose influence kept growing.
New partners were picked every second November at Goldman, and
people who were in the running had some idea of their odds. After the final
deliberations, on the morning when their names were about to be made
public, the head of the firm called up each new partner to congratulate him.
Candidates 
in 
the 
running 
hovered 
around 
their 
desk 
from 
early 
that
morning, waiting for the call or its absence. I was no longer working at
Goldman the day they announced the partners of 1988, but friends told me
that when the call didn’t come, Ed left the office for the remainder of the
day. A few months later he left FSG, and went on to troubleshoot other
problem areas of the firm.
David Garbasz, who took me under his wing when I first came to Goldman,
had his share of subsequent strife, too.
Trained as a scientist but now a Goldman trader, he was always willing to
debate options markets and their theory. It was stimulating to walk upstairs
to the bond options desk and hang out with the aggressively humorous
traders around him. One day a group of us were chatting on the trading
floor, kidding around about the rash of teenage suicides who had apparently
hung themselves in toilets or attics. According to the newspapers, these
boys were the victims of autoerotic asphyxia, a search for the extreme
pleasure that purportedly accompanies a reduction in oxygen supply to the
brain at the time of orgasm. When someone in the group questioned the
authenticity of the phenomenon, David pointed casually over towards one
of the tallest new recruits on the desk and said “Of course it’s true. Why do
you think he’s so tall?”
Like many people on the Street, David wanted faster advancement and
more control. Once every few weeks, he would reportedly talk to Rubin.
Less than a year after I came to Goldman, he resigned and went to work as
a senior options trader at O’Connor, the renowned and very savvy options
trading firm in Chicago.
David was ambitious and volatile, though not, by Wall Street standards,
extraordinarily 
so. 
A 
year 
or 
so 
after 
joining 
O’Connor, 
he 
departed
together with two software engineers he had met there to start a company to
produce fixed-income risk management software. They based themselves in
Chicago and called their firm RMS, an evocative name that I greatly
admired.
1
David’s 
plan 
to 
build 
a 
commercial 
fixed-income 
risk 
management
system was an inspired one, several years ahead of its time. Although many
trading firms and investment banks, including Goldman, wrote their own
risk-management software, at that time no one had yet marketed that type of
product commercially. Stan Diller at Bear Stearns was pushing in that
direction; as head of FAST, their fixed-income research group, he was
building a system called AutoBond, which was intended to first be used by
the trading desks and then, once polished and debugged, to be sold to
clients. He was pursuing every quant’s dream: to convert his work for the
desk into something that would generate measurable dollars and cents for
the firm, thereby eliminating the gap between the luftmensch PhDs and the
revenue-generating “real” businesspeople.
David and his partners hired programmers in Chicago, where rents and
salaries were low compared to New York. There they embarked on the
creation of an elegant bond-and-options-risk system, object-oriented and
written in C++ to run on Sun UNIX workstations. Most investment banks’
financial 
software 
had 
always 
been 
behind 
the 
times, 
but 
RMS 
was
strikingly modern: It had an up-to-date graphical user interface with drag-
and-drop features, graphs, and icons. Several years would pass before other
small 
companies, 
among 
them 
Renaissance, 
CATS, 
Infinity, 
and
Algorithmics, began to build similarly stylish systems. Consolidation has
been swift in this business, too, and only Algorithmics now survives as an
independent company.
Then things accelerated. David returned to New York and took a position
as a trader at E. F. Hutton, where, I heard, he had negotiated a golden
parachute in the event of a change of ownership. I think he intended to use
RMS as the provider of his trading software at Hutton. It was the perfect
confluence; he would be paid for trading, and RMS would have immediate
users to test and improve their software.
Within a year, E. F. Hutton, damaged by a check-kiting scandal, was
acquired 
by 
Shearson 
(another 
famous 
company 
whose 
name 
finally
disappeared after mergers with Lehman Brothers and American Express).
As a result of the restructuring, David pulled the ripcord. With the cash he
received, he continued to fund RMS’s development in Chicago throughout
1988. He told me they were close to making a sizable sale of their system to
Shearson’s trading desk.
David was excited about all these possibilities, and was spending lots of
time in New York drumming up clients. I invited him over for a Rosh
Hashanah dinner. He was tightly wound; he kept everyone entertained,
working the table after dinner like a comedian in a club, sliding from chair
to chair to engage different people, telling everyone about how well things
were going.
Each year the Securities Industry Association has its annual meeting in
New York with many exhibits devoted to financial software and hardware.
RMS took a booth there in 1988 and displayed their risk system. It was
beautiful: You could alter a yield curve by dragging at it with a computer
mouse, and then see the subsequent effect of the change in interest rates on
your bond or options portfolio.
Then came Euripidean disasters. Sometime in late 1989 we heard that
O’Connor & Co. had obtained a preliminary injunction to stop David from
selling the RMS system. We heard that O’Connor claimed that RMS had
used O’Connor’s trade secrets. David told me that he was fighting them in
court. He said that they imagined that the well-known duration hedging
techniques he provided in RMS were proprietary to them, whereas they
were widely used on the Street—industry practice, in fact.
One summer weekend that year he and Ted Dengler, an exoceanographer
friend of David’s who had also become an options trader at Goldman,
visited us in a house that we rented for the season on Fire Island. As we
threw frisbees on a deserted stretch of beach, talking while keeping a
watchful eye on my daughter Sonya, I remember David telling me that he
had gone to see the movie Tucker: The Man and His Dream, directed by
Francis Ford Coppola. It was the true story of how an inventor in the late
1940s tried to take on Detroit by building a much better car, and how
Detroit then both copied and crushed him.
The expensive legal battle and the injunction put an end to RMS. In 1995,
after giving a talk at a conference, I was approached by someone I knew
who had worked at O’Connor during the RMS episode. When I asked if he
had known David, he told me that O’Connor had been intent on shutting
down David’s enterprise. With their deep pockets, he said “they had guys
spending all their time running diff on RMS’s files and the O’Connor code.”
(Diff is one of the great suite of UNIX tools that make a programmer’s life
easier. It compares two different files of text and finds any common strings
of words in them, a simpler version of current bio-informatics programs
that search for common strings of DNA in the mouse and human genome.) I
have 
no 
idea 
whether 
there 
were 
in 
fact 
commonalities, 
but 
even
independent people coding the same well-known algorithm might end up
writing vaguely similar chunks of code.
O’Connor eventually disappeared, too, absorbed into Swiss Bank, which
itself subsequently merged with UBS. Starting in 1990 David disappeared
into some alternate nonfinancial New York; none of his old friends saw him
anymore. Someone reported that he’d become a gourmet cook. I called him
once and left a message, but was unable to track him down. I never resented
it; I understood from my own experience the embarrassment of leaving a
field. Ted told me that he ran into David in Central Park one afternoon in
the mid-1990s, and exchanged a few words with him.
One Sunday morning in the early summer of 1998 I went for a run on
Riverside Drive. The road was filled to overflowing with the annual AIDS
march. Returning to my apartment, I walked past the crowds watching
marchers on the corner of Eighty-Third Street. Suddenly I heard a vaguely
familiar voice behind me, and turned to look. On the corner were a man and
a woman with whom I briefly exchanged glances, and their child of four or
five. A moment later I realized it was David, and I watched as he turned
around and headed back down Eighty-Third Street towards Broadway with
what I presumed were his wife and child.
Then, in October 2000 I was named the Sungard IAFE Financial Engineer
of the Year, and gave a speech at the annual dinner in which I thanked
several people, including David. The speech later appeared on the IAFE
website, and a friend of David’s, “googling” him in early 2002, found my
reference. Suddenly, after more than twelve years of silence, David called.
Now a successful entrepreneur and investor, he was passionately interested
in mathematics education, and was working to persuade Israel, his native
country, to adopt a more rigorous school mathematics curriculum. He
wanted me to get involved. We met once or twice subsequently, and he was
the David of old, confident and energetic. He and his wife and two children
lived in New York and spent weekends on their farm in upstate New York.
He seemed to have every-one’s idea of a good life.
Peter Freund, though he was head of the burgeoning bond options business,
also did not stay very long at Goldman. About eighteen months after I
arrived, he left for Bankers Trust to start up their credit derivatives business,
and is now commonly regarded as one of the founders of that industry.
Dave Griswold, who had used my models to build the new options
trading system for Peter’s group at Goldman, followed him to Bankers as a
software consultant. There he created yet another object-oriented language
he called Seymour, 
a 
pun 
on 
C++. 
Later, 
Dave 
started 
several 
small
companies in succession, most of them focused around his love of computer
languages 
in 
general 
and 
Smalltalk 
in 
particular. 
The 
last 
of 
these
companies, Animorphic, used its Smalltalk expertise to produce a very fast
Java 
interpreter, 
and 
was 
acquired 
by 
Sun 
Microsystems 
in 
1997,
presumably leaving Dave independent enough to continue to follow his true
interests.
Like so many of the firms on the Street in the mid-1980s, when I began,
Bankers Trust no longer exists as an independent entity. It became unviable
in the mid-1990s after its involvement in the derivatives scandals of Orange
County and Procter and Gamble, and was acquired by Deutsche Bank.
Jacob Goldfield, the wunderkind on the bond options desk when I arrived,
was the only one of Peter’s traders at that time who went on become a
Goldman partner, and he did so quite rapidly.
Jacob had a precocious trading-genius aura that was augmented by his
conspicuous idiosyncracies. While almost everyone new to Wall Street in
those days wore suits and carried briefcases, he arrived each day lugging his
belongings in a Jansport backpack. His face stubbled and impassively pale,
he traversed the trading floor and rode the elevators up and down 85 Broad
Street in stockinged feet, a silent character in a Munch painting. I still run
into people nowadays who visited Goldman in the late 1980s and, though
they don’t recall his name, ask me about the trader who wore no shoes.
Jacob was very good at saying very little, an excellent quality in a trader.
He had an intimidating email style, radically terse—no “Dear” or “Hi” at
the beginning, no “Thanks” at the end, no punctuation, grammar or capital
letters, no unnecessary segues or conventional lead-ins or fadeouts—just
one cryptic sentence or query encapsulated entirely in the subject heading
of the email, with no subsequent body. It was instant messaging ahead of its
time, I suppose. “What do u think about xxxx?” the subject of an email
might say. I would reply in a carefully thought out paragraph and then
receive a three-letter message with “Thx” in the subject. I always ended up
feeling like an uninhibited babbler.
One day in 1986 or 1987, Jacob called down from the trading floor to my
office in FSG to ask me to check out a young man who had been introduced
to Goldman through a friend of Bob Rubin’s wife. I went up to Rubin’s
office on Goldman’s executive floor. The interviewee was a young Israeli,
aged 19 or 20, who told me that he had completed high school at fourteen
and proceeded straight to medical school. Several years later, he said, he
had decided to abandon medicine and study physics at the Sorbonne. Now
he had come to New York. Bob Rubin had asked Jacob to speak to the
young man, and Jacob passed him on to me.
When I asked him why he was interested in working at Goldman, he
replied that people had told him that because he was so smart, he should
“go into options.” This didn’t impress me; I have always been skeptical
about intellect in search of problems. We spoke for a half hour or so, and
several things about his story seemed curiously illogical. Medicine seemed
an unlikely choice for someone accomplished enough to finish high school
at fourteen; I found it hard to imagine a fifteen-year-old with the aplomb to
dissect cadavers and perform gynecological exams. And why go all the way
from Israel to the Sorbonne to study physics?
I began to quiz him about physics and found that his knowledge was
semipopular. When I asked him what he had read, he mentioned Capra’s
The Tao of Physics, an entertaining and fashionable mystico-physical book
about quantum mechanics and Buddhism. Though he knew a little about the
definition of an option, he knew nothing about the theory of how to value
them. I pointed out these inconsistencies to Jacob, and said I wouldn’t hire
him.
A few months later, sitting at my desk, I picked up the ringing phone to
hear Jacob, again calling from Bob Rubin’s office. In his usual give-no-
information style, he queried me: “Tell me, do you remember that young
Israeli guy you interviewed? What did we conclude at the time?” The
reverberating tone indicated that my voice was coming out at the other end
on speakerphone.
I answered carefully.
“I thought there was something fishy about him,” I said.“He seemed to
know too little about the things he was supposed to be good at. For
someone who was supposed to have studied physics, he didn’t have much
depth. Why do you ask?”
“He was arrested a few days ago in Ace Greenberg’s office at Bear
Stearns—entering under false pretenses,” replied Jacob, only slightly more
loquacious than usual. I think he wanted Bob Rubin to hear what a good
call he and I had previously made.
After Peter Freund left Goldman, Jacob soon became head of the bond
options desk, and then, a few years later, one of the youngest Goldman
partners ever, eventually running the entire swaps desk. He left the firm in
2000 to pursue his own investments, and recently became Chief Investment
Officer for Soros Fund Management.
Observing all this mobility had its effect on me, too. By 1988, after only
two and a half years in FSG, I had grown weary of the constant instability. I
had worked for four heads of FSG in less than two years, and a fifth one,
Markiewicz’s replacement, was clearly looming.
I had also began to feel that my lack of a formal economics background
would count against me. After completing my work on BDT and GS-ONE I
began to think about new projects. When I told Ed Markiewicz that I would
like to work on a better model for valuing the delivery option embedded in
Treasury bond futures contracts, he said I should check with the “brains
trust” on whether that was reasonable.
The 
brains 
trust 
was 
Jacob’s 
apt 
name 
for 
Bob 
Litterman, 
José
Scheinkman, and Larry Weiss, three very smart PhDs in economics who
were also in FSG. Jacob, now making lots of money for the firm, had begun
to refer to them by that name, and Ed, who admired Jacob, used it, too.
Though Bob, Larry, and José deserved their reputation, I was uncomfortable
with further intellectual constraints.
Finally, there was the question of pay, always forefront in everyone’s
mind. In those days at Goldman, the value of your annual bonus was
communicated to you just before Thanksgiving, and then paid in mid-
December. The archaic payroll system was unable to cut a check for more
than $100,000 dollars. If, on that December day when Goldman delivered
the actual bonus payment to you, your year-end bonus was, say, $1,000,000,
then you received ten checks, each one sealed in its own envelope, the
whole bundle neatly stacked and secured by a rubber band. Bonuses were
all paid on the same day, and someone senior went around the floor handing
out the check bundles to each employee. Thus, although bonus amounts
were private and company heads encouraged you to keep them that way,
you 
could 
guess 
the 
order 
of 
magnitude 
of 
someone’s 
bonus 
by 
the
thickness of their deck of checks. Even a minibundle of two checks was
instantaneously distinguishable from one. Some traders received a fat stack
and some of them flaunted it. One well-paid young trader had a habit of
taking his bundle and silently riffling through it, meticulously counting the
envelopes one at a time in full view of his colleagues. Nowadays, the
payroll system has no check-size limit, or, more honestly, no limit my bonus
was ever able to cross.
Goldman was wisely conservative and pay grew slowly. As long as you
kept working at the same firm, your future bonus was determined by your
past. The raise you got in a good year, or the cut in a bad one, was quoted as
a percentage of what you made the previous year, which had the effect of
damping a raise and cushioning a decline in your compensation. It wasn’t
easy to move to a new level. Some people who worked for me have
detested this smoothing, arguing heatedly you should be paid “what you’re
worth” each year. Personally, I didn’t dislike it that much. In research, who
knows exactly how to put a number on your contribution?
More than pay, I cared about doing something interesting; had someone
offered to make me the Goldman Sachs partner in charge of Information
Technology for the back office, I would have refused. Nevertheless, in early
1988, 
even 
I 
started 
to 
become 
dissatisfied 
about 
my 
compensation
prospects in FSG.
I took to on-and-off commiseration with Bill Toy, also an ex-physicist and
my collaborator on BDT. Bill, who had arrived on Wall Street a year or so
before me, was already in the far reaches of “disgruntledom.” Somehow, he
had 
internalized 
the 
trading-and-sales 
view 
of 
quants 
as 
unworldly
luftmenschen, and had by now acquired a disdain for the stigma of having a
PhD that bordered on self-hatred. Though he wanted to be one of “them”—
the front-office real “businesspeople”—to them, however, he was still just a
quant.
Once a week we had lunch with Ramine Rouhani, who had been working
with Fischer on the theory of portfolio insurance, the trading strategy that
later played a part in the 1987 stock market crash. We would eat cheap
lunches at the long-since-shut Italian Alps on William Street, where I
slowly became slightly depressed and even more corrupted by listening to
the two of them feverishly and incessantly talking about their dissatisfaction
with their role. Ramine and Bill were intent on becoming a part of “the
business,” and were always planning routes of escape to parts of Goldman
that were closer to “the business.”
“I’ve got to get out of here,” Bill would say repeatedly, shaking his head
slowly from side to side and wiping his brow with the back of his right
hand. Over the years, Bill and I would continue to commiserate, and on
occasional bad days I, too, would repeat the mantra “I’ve got to get out of
here.” Whenever I did, Bill would say to me scornfully, “You’ll never have
the guts to leave!”
Ramine left Goldman within a year and now runs fixed income trading at
the New York branch of the French bank CDC IXIS. Bill soldiered on at
Goldman; he became a true expert at the legal, regulatory, and financial-
engineering aspects of structured equity derivative products, and coedited a
book on the subject. Finally, no doubt after many additional lunches similar
to the ones we shared back then, he joined Ramine at CDC in 1999.
Part of me, of course, liked being a dissident. Recently I experienced a burst
of recognition while reading the autobiography of Erwin Chargaff, the
Vienna-born discoverer of the eponymous base-pairing Chargaff rules that
led to Watson and Crick’s discovery of the double helical structure of DNA.
Chargaff, 
who 
disliked 
the 
imaginative, 
shot-in-the-dark, 
theoretical-
physics-like style that characterized Watson and Crick’s approach to model
building, grew bitter at being asked why he had not made the discovery
implied by his rules. In his autobiography he wrote: “Most people are wise
and applaud the inevitable; but I, inexplicably, love to be on the losing
side.”
By this route I came to the point where, in 1988, I began to interview for
positions at other investment banks. It wasn’t hard to get out of Goldman’s
office unobserved during the day. I had been advised that if you left your
jacket at your desk no one would even realize you were gone, and it was
true. Soon a headhunter introduced me to the fixed income group at J. P.
Morgan 
(now 
J. 
P. 
Morgan 
Chase) 
just 
a 
block 
or 
two 
away, 
and 
I
periodically walked over there for a series of protracted interviews with
banking people who were waiting for the end of the Glass-Steagall era so
they could enter the investment banking business whole-heartedly. It was
somewhat disheartening: Most of my interviewers were more interested in
asking me what it was like to work at Goldman than they were in assessing
my credentials, and nothing came of it in the end.
Another headhunter sent me to Shearson, where I was offered a position
in charge of a small group supporting bond futures trading under Stan
Jonas. At that time Goldman still had a simple hierarchy of titles consisting
of 
Analyst, 
Associate, 
Vice 
President, 
and 
Partner. 
I 
found 
it 
almost
impossible to comprehend the seniority that went with the VP title offered
me by Shearson; their bureaucracy seemed to be deeper and closer to that of
Bell Labs. A friend there explained to me that there were divisional VPs
and firmwide VPs, and that it was better to be a firmwide VP than a
divisional one.
2
I liked Stan a great deal and was impressed with his grasp
of theory and practice, but I was still not quite ready to leave Goldman.
Then, 
early 
in 
1988, 
David 
Garbasz, 
by 
now 
in 
charge 
of 
RMS,
introduced me to Tom Klaffky, the head of the BPA group at Salomon
Brothers. Although Salomon had a fearsome reputation as a place with a
coarse and brutal culture, they were without a doubt the best fixed-income
trading firm in the world, and BPA was the premier quant group on the
Street. I was definitely interested in working there.
At David’s suggestion, I sent Klaffky my résumé. Then, a few days later,
I walked the 100 yards from 85 Broad Street to One New York Plaza to
meet him. His claim to fame at Salomon was his participation in the
creation of zero-coupon Treasury Strips out of Treasury bonds. Now in
charge of BPA under Marty Liebowitz, Tom’s empire consisted of several
subgroups. Among these was Bob Kopprasch’s former options research
group, now run by Janet Showers, and Mike Waldmann’s mortgage research
group.
I proceeded to meet with Tom on several occasions in the middle of 1988,
and each time he displayed a burst of fitful interest in having me join
Salomon, but then nothing much would happen. Whenever things slowed
down, David Garbasz would encourage me to push forward, and I would
write 
Tom 
another 
letter 
outlining 
my 
thoughts 
about 
how 
I 
could
contribute to Salomon Brothers. Then I would surreptitiously walk across
the street to drop my letter off at One New York Plaza.
The physical delivery was tricky. My friend Mark Koenigsberg worked
for Janet Showers, and I was always wary of bumping into him in the lobby
of One New York. I didn’t want him to know I was interviewing there. One
lunchtime, walking over to deliver a note to Klaffky on the Forty-Third
floor of One New York, I met Mark coming out of the ground-floor elevator
I was about to enter. Flustered, I told him I was there to get a haircut at the
barber in the basement, and he promptly escorted me down there to show
me where it was. I had to improvise quite fast to avoid getting an unwanted
trim.
Against my nature, I was slowly becoming a little more daring in dealing
with this unfamiliar, nonacademic and money-centered world. I told Tom
(in 
writing, 
not 
in 
conversation—that 
would 
have 
required 
a 
greater
quantity of chutzpah than I possessed) what level of pay it would take to
make me move firms. That I was able to do so impresses me, for inside I
still heard my mother’s unarticulated but clearly communicated sentiment
that one worked for love and interest, and that it was crass to talk about pay.
When Klaffky asked me how much money I was making at Goldman, I
exaggerated a little. As a result, I approximately doubled my annual pay
when I moved to Salomon a few months later. In those days, I’m afraid, it
was common to lie about your salary and bonus. In some sense, we
regarded a question about past pay as an invasion of privacy that didn’t
deserve an honest answer. Many of the people I knew in fact interpreted it
as equivalent to a question about how much money you’d like to earn at
your next job. Nowadays, firms hire companies to conduct background
checks on new employees before they begin work, and you cannot hire
anyone whose résumé differs in the smallest way from the ascertainable
facts.
Klaffky 
seemed 
uncertain 
where 
to 
place 
me 
inside 
Salomon, 
and
eventually arranged for me to have lunch with John Meriwether’s team, the
famed 
arb 
group 
that 
later 
became 
the 
core 
of 
Long 
Term 
Capital
Management. It must have been my collaboration with Fischer that made
them agree to see me, and I worried that I knew a lot less than they thought.
Garbasz, like many traders a fluent bluffer, tried briefly to coach me about
pari-mutuel betting, a topic he claimed was of interest to members of the
arb group. I shudder a little when I think of the day I finally went over to
have lunch with them in one of the catered dining rooms high up in One
New York Plaza.
I don’t remember exactly who was at the lunch. I recall about eight men,
some subset of Larry Hilibrand, John Meriwether, Victor Haghani, Bill
Krasker, Greg Hawkins, and a few of their more junior team members. I
was a comparative novice; in toto, I had had just over two years of
experience on the Street. The work I had done with Fischer and Bill Toy
was inventive and useful, and was later to become a market standard.
Nevertheless, most of my knowledge was theoretical. In contrast, the
members of Meriwether’s group were more savvy than anyone I had ever
seen. They understood both theory and practice.
My lunchtime interviewers were unfailingly polite. I recall their asking
me some general questions about my work with Fischer; sensibly, they tried
to determine to what extent I had truly been his intellectual collaborator. It
was hard to answer; no one I’ve known in finance has displayed Fischer’s
determination to approach any problem without preconceptions and to think
it through for himself. They posed me a technical question about the
relative value of an Asian option and a European option, and I gave what I
later learned was the wrong answer. They nodded at my reply but didn’t
correct me. A few days later Klaffky told me that they didn’t want to hire
me for their group, but thought that I would be a reasonable hire for
someone else.
One morning in 1999, more than a decade later, I participated in a
conference call with some of the same people. I was at Goldman Sachs and
they were at the now collapsed LTCM, being overseen by the consortium of
investment 
banks 
who 
bailed 
them 
out. 
Together 
with 
my 
colleagues
Kresimir 
Demeterfi, 
Mike 
Kamal, 
and 
Joe 
Zou 
in 
the 
Quantitative
Strategies group at Goldman, I had written an expository paper on volatility
swaps, a new over-the-counter instrument that allowed retail clients to trade
volatility itself as an asset. LTCM was interested in buying volatility swaps
in order to offset the volatility risk in some of the still open positions that
had contributed to its demise.
That morning its overseer from Goldman had a few of the LTCM partners
telephone us to discuss the subtleties of swap valuation. The questions they
asked us in that brief conversation showed an immediate understanding of
theoretical subtleties that was far more insightful and sophisticated than any
questions we had been asked by the Goldman traders we knew. It was a
shock 
to 
realize 
that 
people 
whose 
great 
experience 
and 
knowledge
straddled both the quantitative and the trading worlds had, despite their
sophistication, brought themselves into such a catastrophic state.
With no position available for me in the arb group, Klaffky turned to his
own area, BPA, and introduced me to his head of mortgage research, Mike
Waldman, who needed someone to lead a new Adjustable Rate Mortgage
(ARM) group he was forming. Within a few weeks I had an offer to work
for Mike.
I had one brief moment of foreboding when I met with Klaffky to discuss
my offer and he asked if he could answer any questions for me.
“I’ve heard that people at Salomon are much tougher and more hard-
nosed than people at Goldman,” I said. “Is that true?”
“That’s not quite right,” he said to me. “I think Salomon’s a bit like a
shark, in a way. You know, sharks have to keep swimming, keep moving all
the time, or else they die. That’s more or less what Salomon’s like.”
I thought it merely odd that he would try to allay my fears by comparing
his firm to a shark. I ignored the analogy as well as the advice of many
acquaintances, headhunters, and former Salomon employees, who warned
me that Mike could be a difficult boss. When I was being courted he was
congenial. Always cautious, I agonized through the summer of 1988 and
then decided to take the job.
Early in the fall I told Ed Markiewicz I was going to leave Goldman for
Salomon. He spoke with Fischer and Jacob, and, when I told him how much
money I was being guaranteed, did not come back with a counter-offer.
Though I was happy about my soon-to-increase pay, I was just a little
disappointed that they didn’t try to lure me back.
On my last day at Goldman, when I had completed my exit interview and
given up my ID card so that my next exit from the front door of 85 Broad
would be my last, I received a call from Scott Pinkus, Goldman’s head of
Mortgage Research. Scott tried to persuade me stay on at the firm and work
on applying the BDT model to asset-liability management. But he played
up the software side of the work, and I felt that he, too, viewed me more as
a physicist-turned-programmer than a financial modeler. In any event, it
was too late for me to reverse my course. I took a short vacation in the
Caribbean, and a few weeks later started work at Salomon Brothers.
Notes
1
RMS is a common mnemonic for both Risk Management System and
Root Mean Square. Volatility—a crucial measure of risk that is defined as
the square root of the mean of the squares of the stock’s daily returns, or
“root mean square” in common statistical parlance. Root mean square is
also suggestive of Brownian motion, the process by which a randomly
moving stock price diffuses from its initial value in such a way that the
average price change is proportional to the square root of the elapsed
time.
2
A few years later a lady who cut my hair asked for my title at work.
When I said I was a Vice President at Goldman Sachs, she congratulated
me on having only one person above me. She didn’t understand that I
was one of probably 3,000 VPs.
...
Chapter 12
A Severed Head
A troubled year at Salomon Brothers
Modeling mortgages
Salomon’s skill at quantitative marketing
Mercifully laid off
Throughout the next year I was falling in the dark. Each day I could sense
the ground rushing up to meet me, like a bad plane-crash dream that ends in
a 
startled 
awakening. 
That 
year 
at 
Salomon, 
from 
October 
1988 
to
Thanksgiving 1989, was the worst I ever experienced, and much of what
happened to me was as much my fault as theirs. Most of the time I simply
felt incompetent. I kept thinking that perhaps I would eventually adjust. I
didn’t, though I learned a lot.
Mike Waldman, my new boss in Mortgage Research, had quit graduate
school to move to Wall Street in the 1970s, very early in the quant game. I
soon found out that though he had a quick sharp businesslike mind, he had a
brusque manner and some strange habits to go with it. Early every Monday,
right after I dropped Sonya at her nursery school, I would rush to our early
morning mortgage group meeting where Mike led a discussion of the status
of all our modeling projects. We all brought our own breakfast, and as the
meeting started, Mike would devote several minutes to scratching out a
circular moatlike groove in each half of his sliced bagel, throwing away the
doughy detritus and leaving behind a scooped-out half bagel crust into
which you could then put butter or jam. It was very disconcerting. I was
enviously impressed one morning when someone else in the group got the
nerve to ask him “Does it taste better that way?”
I was Mike’s lieutenant in charge of research on adjustable rate mortgages
(ARMs, for short), something I knew little about when I arrived. I had
never had any formal education in mortgage markets; flung into the middle
of this, and supposedly supervising people who knew more about it than I
did, I began to read the Salomon Brothers research papers on the topic.
The American mortgage market, I learned, was gigantic, comparable to
that of Treasury bonds. At the individual level, savings banks all over the
country lend money to homeowners who need to finance their housing
purchase. In exchange, homeowners contract to repay the loan over 15 or
30 years in equal monthly installments of interest and principal. ARMS are
mortgages with an adjustable rate of interest that, every six months, for
example, floats up or down in approximate synchrony with short-term
Treasury 
interest 
rates 
according 
to 
some 
specified 
formula.
Correspondingly, every six months, the homeowner’s monthly mortgage
payment changes, too.
ARMs have all sorts of additional wrinkles. They start out the first year
with a “teaser,” an unusually low and tempting interest rate. Then, over
time, as the rate adjusts, there is a cap on how high it can float and a floor
on how low it can sink. Finally, although a mortgage may have a nominal
life of 15 or 30 years, a homeowner can choose to terminate the loan early
by prepaying the unpaid balance—a smart thing to do if interest rates have
fallen so low that a totally new mortgage with a lower interest rate is
preferable.
Banks who lend to homeowners own the mortgage, the claim to the
homeowner’s 
future 
monthly 
repayments. 
Periodically, 
the 
banks 
turn
around and sell the mortgages they have acquired to GNMA, FNMA, and
FHLMC, 
government 
agencies 
that 
act 
as 
financial 
intermediaries 
by
pooling together vast quantities of similar but not identical mortgages into
more standardized securities. They then resell these pools to large investors
—mutual funds, pension funds, insurance companies, hedge funds, and the
like—in 
search 
of 
interest-bearing 
investments. 
This 
process 
of 
asset
acquisition, 
pooling, 
standardization, 
and 
subsequent 
sale 
provides 
a
liquidity that frees the savings banks to make more loans. As a result, the
percentage of residents who own their own homes is greater in the United
States than anywhere else in the world.
Mortgages are messy, though it takes only a little careful high-school
math to work out the monthly mortgage payment that will draw the loan
down to zero over 15 years. But that’s just the start. Everything about an
adjustable 
rate 
mortgage 
pool—the 
interest 
payments, 
the 
principal
repayments, and so on—varies with the future level of interest rates, so an
ARM is really a complex option whose payments are contingent on interest
rates.
To estimate what a mortgage pool is worth, you have to rely on a model
of future interest rates, something like the BDT model I had worked on, in
fact. 
You 
then 
simulate 
the 
pool’s 
future 
cash 
flows, 
averaging 
over
thousands of interest-rate scenarios generated by the model. You want to
represent the future evolution of long- and short-term interest rates as
realistically as possible, and then, for each future scenario, compute the
adjustment in the floating ARM interest rate that a homeowner will pay
each month. You also want to try to estimate from past experience what
percentage of homeowners will prepay their mortgage as a consequence of
the change in rates on each scenario, since this prepayment alters the cash
flows, too. The output of this Monte Carlo simulation model is the current
value of the mortgage pool.
Mortgage valuation models involve a witch’s brew of assumptions about
yield curve movements and how homeowners respond to them, none of
them well-tested. Even the ZIP code of the homeowners who owned the
houses that were financed by the mortgages in a pool is important—some
localities, 
based 
on 
their 
socioeconomic 
classification, 
had 
a 
greater
tendency to prepay than others—and I had heard of investors who actually
went to check out the neighborhoods for themselves. Compared to the rigor
and predictability of physics or even the simple elegance of the Black-
Scholes formalism, mortgage valuation is ugly. I once remarked on this to
Steve Ross whose investment company, Roll & Ross Asset Management,
specialized 
in 
mortgages. 
“Whenever 
I 
see 
something 
complex 
and
confusing in the investment area,” he retorted, “I see the scope for getting a
little extra benefit out of being smart.”
It’s 
a 
good 
answer, 
and 
probably 
true, 
but 
I 
still 
find 
mortgages
unattractive. Black-Scholes is clean and simple, like the theory of the
hydrogen atom. Modeling mortgages is involved and approximate, more
like trying to explain the structure of the energy levels in the uranium
isotope U
238
. I prefer clean problems. Still, mortgages were what I had
signed on to deal with.
Salomon was a tough place. The first thing I noticed when I started work
was that everyone came late for meetings. The most senior people arrived
last, each of them popping their heads into the door to see if everyone else
was there and then quickly leaving again if they weren’t. The junior people
took advantage of this chronic lateness to be late themselves. Everyone was
so determined to not have his or her own time wasted that they collectively
wasted everyone else’s. This would not have happened at Goldman.
The level of fear that permeated Salomon was more evident, too. Friends
of mine who wanted to leave the firm were semiparanoid that their bosses
would discover that they were interviewing elsewhere and then fire them
before they left. I never heard anyone at Goldman speak this way; despite
the 
natural 
tension 
between 
employer 
and 
employee, 
most 
Goldman
workers never imagined that exercising their right to look at other jobs
would naturally lead to being fired.
There were other signs of Salomon’s take-no-prisoners culture. In the
1980s, the BPA group had written a series of renowned reports for clients
on valuing swaps and other recently invented derivatives contracts. Each
report’s distinctive light brown cover bore the names of its authors printed
in a darker brown. Then, over the years, as one or more of the original
authors left the firm for other banks or trading houses, BPA would reprint
the report, having removed the departed authors’ names. Eventually there
were old but popular reports still being distributed that apparently had no
author at all. This Orwellian rewriting of history struck me as particularly
petty and ineffective, an affront to the notion of research.
At Goldman the enemies were competing firms; at Salomon the enemies
were 
competing 
colleagues. 
Shortly 
before 
they 
were 
acquired 
by
Citigroup, I met with an old friend still working there and asked him what
had caused a well-known acquaintance of ours to have been laid off by the
firm. “Oh him,” my friend said, “It turned out he couldn’t even code a
Black-Scholes model!” Now, the Black-Scholes model is so fundamental
and 
ubiquitous 
that 
I 
had 
little 
doubt 
that 
this 
was 
false. 
But, 
more
interestingly, 
I 
asked, 
how 
did 
anyone 
actually 
know 
that 
our 
friend
couldn’t code the model? Who had put him to the test?
Everyone in the Salomon quant group, I was told, had to recreate their
own computer code for even the simplest things that other people could
already do, because no one who had created something independently was
willing to share it. This was in diametric contrast to the situation at
Goldman, where, because this kind of backstabbing was frowned upon,
software was shared. At Goldman it would have taken longer to find out
that someone couldn’t do something as straightforward as code a simple
model.
The most impenetrable barrier was the wall between Meriwether’s group
and everyone else. Occasionally I would catch distant glimpses of the arb
group. Meriwether, Haghani, Hawkins, Krasker and their colleagues sat
together in the center of the trading floor, a world apart from everyone else,
a little Persian carpet marking the center of their privileged domain, an
exalted clique of happy people who awed everyone and knew it. They had
their own inviolably secret models, their own inaccessible data, their own
computer systems and system administrators, all exclusively theirs. They
also had access, if they wanted it, to the best models and minds in BPA, via
a one-way street that ran only in their direction. They were an elite force, a
Republican guard who could do whatever they wanted, and everyone half-
envied, 
half-resented 
them 
for 
it. 
They 
had 
it 
all—knowledge,
independence, prestige, and lots of money.
I attributed many of these cultural divergences between Salomon and
Goldman to the structural differences between a public company and a
private partnership. Goldman, then still private, functioned more smoothly
because it was run by partners seeded uniformly throughout the firm. They
were the daily overseers who didn’t possess a liquid stock to sell, and so
their long-term profit depended on the firm remaining intact. As a result,
any excessive egotism was eventually squelched, sooner rather than later,
because someone in control, despite his or her desire to win that particular
battle, realized that it was harmful to the firm. Goldman people always told
you that Goldman people were nicer, worked better together, were less
political. Though this was not entirely true, the constant talking about it
helped make it a self-fulfilling prophecy. No matter how self-interested the
partners were, their long-term interests were tied up in the entire company,
not just in their little piece of it.
In the words of a famous Goldman ex-partner, Gus Levy, Goldman was
long-term greedy rather than short-term greedy. At Salomon, I thought, it
was every man for himself and God against them all.
The key responsibility of my research group was to support the ARMs
dealers, who, unlike the arb group, were more interested in earning a spread
by servicing clients than in carrying out genuine proprietary trading. We
helped them by writing short quantitative marketing reports that provided
generally truthful ammunition for use by the salespeople. When the desk
acquired some new pool of mortgages, we ran our models on them and tried
to explain where their value lay.
There was a range of different models and corresponding metrics that you
could use to gauge the value of a pool. The simplest measure was the total
profit that the pool would yield to a purchaser over its lifetime, assuming
interest rates in the future remained unchanged. The most complex, which
used interest-rate simulation models of the BDT type I had helped develop
at Goldman, was Salomon’s option-adjusted spread model that reported the
spread over Treasury bonds the pool would generate, on average, over all
future interest-rate scenarios.
We ran daily reports on the desk’s inventory using both these models.
Different 
clients 
preferred 
different 
metrics, 
depending 
on 
their
sophistication and on the accounting rules and regulations to which they
were 
subject. 
We 
also 
did 
some 
longer-term, 
client-focused 
research,
developing improved statistical models for homeowner prepayments or
programs for valuing the more exotic ARM-based structures that were
growing in popularity.
The traders on the desk used the option-adjusted spread model to decide
how much to bid for newly available ARM pools. The calculation was
arduous. Each pool consisted of a variety of mortgages with a range of
coupons and a spectrum of servicing fees, and the option-adjusted spread
was calculated by averaging over thousands of future scenarios, each one
involving a month-by-month simulation of interest rates over hundreds of
months. Because the number and size of the monthly payments received
from the pool varied in a complex path-dependent way with changes in
interest rates, in 1989, on even the fastest computers, it took vast amounts
time to perform the calculations that led to the model’s recommended bid.
What made all of this complex work so unpleasant was the extreme
urgency of the demands from the desk coupled with the archaic nature of
the computer models we used. Often, we had less than thirty minutes to
prepare a bid for a pool. The outdated and unfriendly FORTRAN program
used to calculate the option-adjusted spread had been written many years
earlier. In order to value the pool, the program needed the parameters that
described its constituents: how many subgroups of mortgages it contained,
each subgroup’s coupon and maturity, the caps and floors on the interest
rate, and so on. You had to type these numbers into a file in a prespecified
order with exactly the right number of blank spaces between each number.
Then the program ran on a powerful supercomputer bought solely for this
purpose.
On a typical day, the starting gun fired when the desk received a page-
long fax from a savings-and-loan with the pool’s parameters. We then had a
half-hour to type the parameters into the input file and submit it to the
supercomputer, which in ideal circumstances took about ten minutes to
complete its calculations. So, every ten minutes impatient traders would call
from the desk for the answer.
Unfortunately, the program was totally unforgiving about input: If there
were just one blank character too many or too few, the program silently
hiccupped, and then went into an infinite loop, pointlessly churning away
on misread data without ever producing an answer. As a result, for the first
ten or fifteen minutes you would sit there nervously waiting for the program
to terminate and an answer to appear on the screen, all the while wondering
whether the supercomputer was simply running a little slowly that day, or
whether you had mistyped the number of blanks and were now in purgatory.
If fifteen minutes elapsed without an answer, you could assume you had
made a mistake; you then killed the program and started over. It was
agonizing.
This schedule of pool valuations dominated our life. Someone always had
to be on duty, preferably someone who could type very fast. It was
maddening to stand by and watch the one slow typist in our group chicken-
peck her way across the keyboard when there was a rush to bid. If you left
your desk for a while, you had to tell the secretary where you could be
reached. No one thought of taking more than a one-week vacation. When I
did take two weeks in the summer of 1989, I could sense Mike’s displeasure
at my lack of professionalism.
Once a week there was an early-morning meeting of S, T, and R, as the
hollowly upbeat sales manager liked to refer to sales, trading, and research,
linking their names together in an effort to give equal status to research.
Occasionally 
I 
had 
to 
deliver 
a 
brief 
two-minute 
presentation 
to 
the
salespeople on the attractive characteristics of some new ARMs pool we
had acquired. The first time I did this I was still shaky and insecure about
the peculiarities of mortgages, and a consultant was brought in to prep me
on how to talk from a script without seeming to look at it. His trick was to
use very large type, so you could invisibly scan ahead and memorize one
phrase at a time with a quick glance down, all the while maintaining
apparent eye contact with your audience. The rehearsals and videotaping
were demeaning, but it was an illustration of their totally professional
approach.
What impressed me most about Salomon was precisely the professional
way they used quantitative research to generate business. I thought of
financial research as a scientific endeavor, and I loved it with an amateur’s
passion. At Salomon, they were businessmen: They used financial modeling
as a marketing tool, and they tackled it like merchandisers. They were
experts at using models as yardsticks to measure and then rank different
securities by value, and they were proficient at then using those rankings to
push securities to clients.
I wasn’t good at marketing and I disliked it, but I learned a lot that year. I
also grew to see the logic of using models as sales tools. The truth is that
there are so many different securities in the world, so many varieties of
stocks, bonds, options, and even bonds with embedded optionality, that it’s
very difficult for anyone to know which security in a class provides the best
value. A model can provide you with a conceptual basis for thinking about
value; it can project a scattered universe of bond prices onto a one-
dimensional line that orders them by value.
I came to see that creating a successful financial model is not just a battle
for finding the truth, but also a battle for the hearts and minds of the people
who use it. The right model and the right concept, when they make thinking
about value easier, can stick and take over the world. A firm whose clients
start to rely on the results that its model generates can dominate the market.
This is what happened with Salomon’s concept of option-adjusted spread—
a short while after they invented it, every other firm on the Street was
writing their own version of the model to do the same analysis, because
clients demanded it.
Salomon people, who had been in the quantitative business much longer
than Goldman, thought about research in this way instinctively. As soon as I
arrived, I noticed that their salespeople and quants were prodigiously agile
at using quick, back-of-the-envelope methods to compare bonds in terms of
yield to maturity or option-adjusted spread. All new hires, not only traders
and 
salespeople 
but 
even 
quants, 
went 
through 
a 
several-month-long
training program. I say “even quants” with real admiration, because at
Goldman, in those days, it was considered a luxurious waste of resources to
send quants to a training program. Salomon’s fixed-income program was
exceptional. It was taught by traders, salespeople, and quants who together
covered market conventions as well as quantitative concepts and the use of
quantitative tools. There were regular exams, and the trainees became
expert at bond math. Everyone had studied Homer and Leibowitz’s classic
Inside the Yield Curve; they emerged from the program with a visceral feel
for yields, forward rates, and durations.
To my admiration, it was clear that someone at Salomon had once
understood 
the advantages of 
a firmwide, uniform interface to 
all 
its
models. The sales tools and models that everyone in the firm used in 1989
ran on an outmoded and clunky Quotron terminal, an infrastructure that had
been 
built 
in 
the 
1970s 
under 
the 
farsighted 
leadership 
of 
Michael
Bloomberg. Awkward though it was, everyone at Salomon had learned how
to use the Quotron proficiently to access internal and external information,
in much the way that people used Web browsers a decade or more later. In
1989 Bloomberg was no longer at Salomon but already the head of his
burgeoning information and modeling-tool empire, and his Bloomberg
terminal for clients was by that time far in advance of the Quotron. A few
years later I was pleased to see that the BDT model, too, was available
through his terminals.
Throughout 1989 my problems worsened. In truth, I was still a bit of an
amateur who didn’t know as much about the world of sales as most of the
comparably senior people around me. My friends Mark Koenigsberg and
Armand Tatevossian still tease me about a stupid answer I gave to a
question about the term structure of volatility that Mike squeezed out of me
at a BPA meeting. I can only plead guilty. It didn’t help that Mark would
joke publicly about how much money he imagined I had been guaranteed to
join BPA.
Month 
after 
month 
I 
clenched 
my 
teeth 
and 
tried 
to 
stick 
it 
out.
Sometimes I imagined that with enough time I would eventually manage to
become one of them. Most of the time, however, I longed to leave, but since
my employment contract guaranteed my bonus for 1988 and my total
compensation for all of 1989, I was reluctant to give that up, and so I
struggled on.
Working for Mike was no pleasure, though, even for someone with fewer
faults than I had. He seemed to have to control everything. Sometime in
early 1990 Phelim Boyle, a well-known pioneer of quantitative finance and
a professor at the University of Waterloo in Canada, invited me to speak at
an academic conference on the BDT model, which had just been published.
Mike refused to allow me to attend and to talk about my previously
published work, even on my own time. When I asked why, he smiled and
said that we shouldn’t help the competition. Like many bosses on Wall
Street, he thought he owned the people who worked for him. I suppose I
believed that, too. I turned down the invitation.
I wasn’t the only unhappy person in the mortgage group. In the end, I
noticed that those who had previously enjoyed some semblance of an
independent life, in business or academia, could not long tolerate Mike’s
need to stifle them. Most of the senior people who joined during that year
were gone a year later. Some, like me, had to leave because they were too
different from Mike; others I knew, like Ravi Mattu who had moved to
Salomon from Citibank, had to leave because they too closely resembled
Mike in their skill sets and felt suffocated. Only fresh young recruits who
had been imperceptibly eased into servitude before they knew any other
kind of life could tolerate the incessant control. Finally, a few years later, I
heard that Mike himself had to leave.
My personal end came fast. In late 1989, in a bad market, Salomon began
to lay off staff. Layoffs are always more convenient for a firm than firings;
it is easier to let someone go because of adverse economic conditions than
because of some inadequacy that might be challenged in court. Firms do not
publicize the names of the people laid off, but this is how it works: First,
you hear the general rumor that layoffs are about to occur. Then you begin
to hear mention of one or two people who have suddenly disappeared from
work. Finally, you notice that some of the people you normally interact with
are beginning to avoid you. Later, you realize that they knew in advance.
The sad truth is that when you know that friends or colleagues are about to
be laid off and you can do nothing about it, you avoid them, too.
One day, walking together down the stairwell between floors, Mike
encouraged me to explain really thoroughly to the young man working for
me exactly how far I had progressed with my regression model of ARMs
prepayment rates. “Got to keep bringing the younger generation up to
speed!” he smirked unconvincingly, as he tried to make sure nothing would
be lost when I was gone. I understood subliminally that I was going to be
let go, but I couldn’t quite absorb it. I continued to think of sticking it out
until I found a better job, but I didn’t really look for one.
Then, one afternoon, early in the Thanksgiving week of 1989, I received a
call at my desk from Mike, who asked me to descend a few floors to see
him in an office downstairs. I felt my heart sink into my stomach. I quickly
called Eva, telling her I thought that “it” was about to happen. She told me
in the nicest way not to worry about it. Then I left my office and went
downstairs.
When I knocked on the door of the unfamiliar office to which I had been
summoned, Mike opened it. Inside were Tom Klaffky, who had hired me,
Marty Leibowitz who ran all of BPA, and someone from Human Resources
or the legal department to ensure that everything was done properly. I sat
down and, in words I no longer recall, they told me that I was being laid off,
but that I would continue to be paid (at a lower rate, sans bonus) for a few
more months. They told me to debrief the people working for me about the
state of my projects and then to leave the building.
When you’re told to leave, you feel as though you’ve done something
shameful and you simply slink out. I spent a short time with the young man
who worked for me, who had obviously been told what was coming, and
then, without a farewell to anyone, set off to meet my wife and daughter
Sonya at a pediatrician’s appointment, glad to have a distraction. Finally, it
was just about over.
We celebrated Thanksgiving with friends in upstate New York a few days
later; then, on the last Sunday of the holiday weekend, I drove downtown to
my office at Salomon at 7 A.M., when it was certain that no one would be
there to see me, to pack my books into boxes for shipping. A few days later
I received confused calls from Mark and Armand, who had no idea why I
was no longer at work.
Ultimately, it wasn’t that bad. I like to imagine there was a kind of karma
working its way with me: If I hadn’t left FSG for Salomon, if I hadn’t
suffered the humiliations of the inadequacy I felt at Salomon that year, I
would never eventually have come back to a position at Goldman that
suited my skills and personality so much better.
I never saw Mike Waldman again, though for about a year I often had
fantasies of what I would say if we met on the street. But, about six years
later I was invited to give a speech about Fischer Black on the occasion of
his posthumous induction into the Fixed Income Analysts Society Hall of
Fame. At the award luncheon I found myself seated at the table of honor
adjacent to Marty Leibowitz, by then the Chief Investment Officer at the
TIAA-CREF, 
Teachers 
Insurance 
and 
Annuity 
Association-College
Retirement Equities Fund. As Waldman’s boss’s boss at Salomon, he had
delivered my sentence on that November day in 1989. This time he was
cordial and complimentary, and neither of us mentioned the circumstances
in which we had last spoken to each other.
...
Chapter 13
Civilization and Its Discontents
Goldman as home
Heading the Quantitative Strategies Group
Equity derivatives
The Nikkei puts and exotic options
Nothing beats working closely with traders
Financial engineering becomes a real field
Out on the street in December 1989, I grew slightly panicked. I visited
headhunters, went on job interviews and called most of the people I knew.
Several possibilities emerged, none compelling. I had no desire to fall into
the wrong position; I had seen too many people move from one one-year
job to another, making money but spoiling their reputation.
Through all these mental peregrinations I thought of Fischer as my lender
of last resort. Holding no grudge against me for having left Goldman, he
brought me in to interview with the Quantitative Strategies (QS) group he
led in the Equities Division. There I reacquainted myself with Jeff Wecker,
who was in charge of the trading systems being built in the group, and Bill
Toy. I also met Bob Granovsky, a yellow-bearded, perpetually perplexed-
looking equity options trader whom everyone called “Granny”; he had been
there trading options for as long as anyone could remember. Then Fischer
offered me a job.
I had been the head of a group in FSG and at Salomon, but QS was a
small, flat organization with no managerial slot for me. Nevertheless, I
thought the position would suit my abilities—at bottom, I liked doing
research. I did worry a little about pay—Bill Toy, now departing the quant
world to realize his dream of moving to the business side, warned me that
compensation in equities was lower than it was in fixed income. I queried
Fischer who brushed this aside. Without further anxiety, in mid-December I
accepted my destiny and agreed to return to Goldman and begin working
for Fischer on January 22, 1990.
It didn’t go as planned. A few days before I was to start, Fischer
unexpectedly called me at home to say that he was leaving the Equities
Division for Goldman Sachs Asset Management (GSAM), and that he had
recommended 
that 
Jeff 
Wecker 
and 
I 
jointly 
comanage 
QS. 
Shortly
thereafter, the heads of the Equities Division sent out a Memo To All that
announced Fischer’s move and our ascension to his former role. Nowhere
did the memo mention that I was not currently an employee of Goldman
Sachs. In subsequent years I learned that there’s nothing the firm likes more
than the appearance of a smooth transition.
For Fischer, GSAM may not have been the best place, and I suspect they
twisted his arm to move him there. Coinventor of the world’s most famous
and useful financial model, he was more of a thinker than the manager or
salesman that GSAM needed. Though his attitude to change was invariably
positive and though he had only praise for the firm, I felt that they had not
completely figured out how to use him to their greatest advantage.
For me, though, this was a lucky stroke and the beginning of several years
of the most absorbing work I had ever had, a time of almost drunk delight,
tempered though it was by battle with my peers (and bosses) far on the
ringing plains of lower Manhattan. I was immensely happy to return to
Goldman Sachs, and lucky, too. By Wall Street standards it was a civilized
place. During bad times in bad organizations, I had sometimes childishly
wished for retribution, willing to be hurt myself as long as it hurt my
employers, too. I never felt that way about Goldman. It was the only place I
never secretly hoped would crash and burn.
Jeff thought it wonderful that he and I had an opportunity to step into
Fischer’s shoes, and predicted that we would be Goldman Sachs partners in
a few years. Older, less upbeat and more battered by history, I was dubious
about our prospects. Still, I set about acclimating to my new home after so
many years as a fixed-income person.
In 1990, Equities was the most old-fashioned division at Goldman. Its
workers radiated a genteel white-collar, white-shoe pedigree, and they
looked down on the rough-and-tumble nouveau riche world of the Fixed
Income bond traders, who in their turn thought themselves a little classier
than 
J.Aron, 
the 
commodities 
and 
currencies 
business 
Goldman 
had
acquired in the 1970s. That year I met a woman from Aron who didn’t have
the obvious Harvard/Wharton aristocratic pedigree typical of so many
Goldman employees, and she unashamedly told me that she would never
have been at Goldman had she not been a part of J. Aron when they were
acquired. Aron had a scrappy make-do culture, and by 2004 their people
were running most of the trading divisions in the firm, including equities.
The QS group Jeff and I inherited was a hodgepodge mix of about four
employees and five long-term consultants who together occupied a messy
warren of shared offices and cubicles in a corner of Equities on the twenty-
ninth floor of 85 Broad Street. I liked the augury of my new phone number,
902-0129, whose last four digits I superstitiously interpreted to indicate that
I was Number One on Twenty-Nine.
We were ideally located about forty feet away from the derivatives
trading 
desk, 
distant 
enough 
so 
you 
could 
concentrate 
quietly 
when
necessary, but sufficiently close to feel part of the same team. You could
stroll over and talk to traders about the market at the end of the day without
seeming too pointed. This proximity to the trading desk lasted only six
months; after that, as both QS and the derivatives business expanded, we
moved a few floors away and lost our sense of community. From then on it
became much harder to acquire the skill of communicating with traders, one
of the more difficult tasks facing a new quant.
Our offices were crowded and littered; piles of documents blocked the
corridors 
between 
the 
cubicles, 
and 
the 
disorganization 
made 
a 
bad
impression on clients who occasionally visited the sales and trading floor.
Periodically one of the heads of Equities would walk by and threaten
reprisals if order were not restored. The worst culprit was Bill Toy, whose
desk 
and 
office 
floor 
was 
stacked 
one 
to 
two 
feet 
high 
with 
every
squirreled-away piece of paper he had ever read or written on—he was
unable to part with anything. When Bill used to complain about wanting to
make more money, Jeff would tell him that the easiest way to get a $50,000
raise was to clean up his desk, and I think it was true.
The only traditional financial modeler in Fischer’s ex-group was Piotr
Karasinski, then still busy writing the paper on the Black-Karasinski yield-
curve model. Most of the other members were talented hardware and
software consultants who had been hired and managed by Jeff to focus on
electronic stock-trading software. Long before most people, Fischer had
foreseen the application of information technology to trading; in 1971 he
had 
written 
an 
influential 
paper 
entitled 
Toward 
a 
Fully 
Automated
Exchange. 
Now, 
together 
with 
Jeff, 
he 
was 
nudging 
the 
firm 
in 
that
direction. It was prescient work, but a little early; if he had lived another ten
years to witness the growth of computerized exchanges he would have had
a riper laboratory in which to test his ideas.
The hardware focus of the QS consultants permeated our surroundings.
Shelves piled high with old computer parts ran along the walls of the long,
narrow, dark office I inhabited, reminding me of the garbage dump of
broken robot parts that C-3PO used to repair himself in the movie Star
Wars. I remember the look of suppressed puzzlement on John Hull’s face
when he visited me there that year and found that people he thought of as
quants were spending so much time and energy on technology. In truth,
though, that was what the business needed. I had seen over and over again
during the past few years that a model only gains its power when embedded
in a useable trading system.
The QS consultants were paid by the hour and many of them worked the
shifted 
day 
of 
computer 
geeks, 
starting 
late 
in 
the 
morning 
and
programming away spacily with CD players on their desk and headphones
on their ears. This was an unfamiliar and unprofessional look in 1990,
especially on a floor that clients visited, and we tried to bring a more
superficially businesslike look to the group. It wasn’t easy. One consultant
who left his CD player inside his unlocked desk drawer overnight found it
gone one morning. He spent the first half of that day speaking to Security in
an attempt to find it, and the second half arguing that we should reimburse
him for the stolen player. It was with great difficulty that I refrained from
pointing out that he had spent the last eight hours looking for the CD player,
and that his hourly rate for that time had already exceeded the cost of it.
The Equities floor I now worked on had a character very different from
the Fixed Income atmosphere I knew so well. In 1990, Equities had not yet
lost its aura of a small, exclusive, old-world club. Partners had their daily
lunch brought to them on a large silver tray delivered by a gracious, white-
coated food server, each plate covered by its own elegant warming dome.
There were luxuries for less important people, too. Employees on the
trading floor received free food during the day; when you arrived in the
morning, a gentleman dropped by to pick up your food order on which you
could select anything you liked from a collection of local restaurant menus.
The point was to keep you at your desk while the markets were open and
clients were calling.
Almost everyone ordered monumentally large helpings of lunch, drinks,
and snacks. It was simply hard to resist. Sitting surrounded by individual
plastic containers of fresh carrots, celery sticks, strawberries, quartered
kiwis and sliced peaches, nibbling the day away, you saw that someone else
had ordered a container of cherries and thought “What a good idea. I’ll do
that tomorrow.”At 11:30 A.M. the hot food started to arrive—swordfish,
steak, potatoes, rice, asparagus, whatever you wanted. To help wash it
down, our food server Neil delivered six-packs of Evian or Perrier, the
smallest round lot. Some people actually left for home in the late afternoon
with doggy bags of food and mineral water.
I 
disliked 
the 
free-food 
perk. 
By 
noon, 
I 
had 
grown 
bloated 
from
consuming a day’s worth of food in only a few hours, and I was genuinely
relieved at the loss of that privilege when QS was moved off the trading
floor in mid-1990. It was easier to simply pay for what you really wanted.
Later, after the fixed-income market’s losses of late 1994, everyone on the
trading floor had their food privileges revoked, and from then on traders,
salespeople and their assistants had to go to the cafeteria or a local takeout
place and buy their own food. There was an elegant VP lounge at the top of
85 Broad Street, where vice presidents could reserve sit-down formal
lunches at tables bedecked with white tablecloths, waited on, for some
mysterious reason, by uniformed, German-accented, middle-aged women
who reminded one vaguely of Rosa Klebb. The restaurant was shut down in
1994, too, and it was high time; it harkened back to an age when being a
vice president was something rare and significant. Ten years later during the
dot-com boom of 2000, when casual clothing ruled, free snacks made a
temporary comeback and every day each floor received Snapples, bottled
water, and very fancy, presliced, Harry-and-David-style fruit. This, too,
disappeared when the technology IPO market collapsed. You could see Wall
Street’s behavior—its manic depressive, feast-or-famine style of hiring and
firing, expanding and contracting, large raises followed by large cuts—all
mirrored in the waxing and waning of the food supply.
My boss was Dexter Earle, a partner at Goldman and a salesperson. This
was the time in my life when I began quite unselfconsciously to refer to the
person I worked for as “my boss.” My wife didn’t like to hear me use the
phrase; she was still in academic life and thought it a dysphemism, but I had
learned over the years to regard it as merely realistic. Dexter’s expertise
was in portfolio rebalancing, so he didn’t know that much about options and
volatility, 
but 
he 
was 
willing 
to 
joke 
about 
his 
ignorance, 
smiling
charmingly as though it didn’t matter when, at group dinners, people
occasionally roasted him by handing out blank books entitled Dexter Earle
on Derivatives. With the confidence of graciousness, polish, silk ties, and
matching suspenders, he outlasted by many years the more knowledgable
but abrasive comanagers the firm brought in to assist him in running the
equity derivatives business. Dexter was terrific with clients—we all used to
laugh at the story of how, when Dexter was asked by a client about
Goldman’s approach to AI (artificial intelligence software), he parried by
replying that “we are going to take a global approach and go slow.” But
what 
impressed 
me 
most 
was 
his 
ability 
to 
tell 
when 
someone 
was
misleading him about topics he didn’t understand. When we listened to the
occasional confident-sounding information technology fact-spinners whom
I knew to be half-charlatan, the heads of trading usually bought their stories
of expertise, but Dexter, a salesman himself, could identify the hollowness
beneath the surface.
Dexter’s secretary was a pleasantly stern woman with a penchant for odd,
homeopathic remedies. The first time I went to speak to her, she made me
stand impatiently at her desk for five or ten minutes while she unhurriedly
filled out various administrative forms. As I waited, an old Mother Goose
couplet 
I 
used 
to 
read 
to 
my 
children 
suddenly 
flashed 
through 
my
consciousness: I am his Majesty’s dog at Kew/ Pray tell me sir, whose dog
are you? Years earlier, reading it aloud without thinking, I had thought it
only a forced rhyme about a talking dog. Now, I suddenly understood it.
Though I was “upstairs” and more critical to the business than she was, she
was “downstairs” in a finer establishment. As years went by I learned that
quants, like the little boy in A. A. Milne’s poem, are always halfway down
the stairs.
The new new thing in the derivatives world in 1990 was exotic options. My
absorption in this world was triggered by the excitement at Goldman over
what we all referred to as the “Kingdom of Denmark puts.”
On the last trading day of 1989, the Nikkei 225 index of Japanese stocks
reached its zenith of 38,915.90. Throughout its ascent during what is in
retrospect called the Japanese equity bubble, many Japanese companies had
come to the capital markets to borrow from investors. Sometimes, in order
to pay even lower interest rates, the companies had promised to eventually
pay back more than they had initially borrowed, provided the Nikkei were
to drop by the time the loan came due, an event to which they ascribed little
probability. The greater the drop, the more yen the companies promised to
repay. In options parlance, the companies had given their bondholders put
options on the Nikkei, thus providing them with an insurance policy against
a Nikkei decline. Some bondholders kept the bonds but sold the attached
puts for cash to interested parties.
As the Nikkei ascended to ever higher levels during the late 1980s,
Granny had adroitly and systematically bought large numbers of these puts
that now collectively constituted a gigantic insurance policy against a
decline in the Nikkei. He had bought them inexpensively, probably because
the companies that issued them did not believe a sustained decline in the
Nikkei was possible back in those days of soaring Tokyo property values
and rising Japanese equity markets.
When I arrived in QS at the start of that year, everyone in derivatives was
talking about the Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei put warrants. I heard that it
was puzzled-looking Granny who had come up with the idea that Goldman
issue a listed put on the Nikkei. Since we owned the inexpensive insurance
against a Nikkei decline that Granny had bought, we could now sell similar
protection to the public. So, in January 1990 Goldman created the Kingdom
of Denmark Nikkei put warrants, struck at a Nikkei level of ¥37,516.77
with an expiration date in early 1993. They were listed on the American
Stock Exchange, and the Kingdom-of-Denmark prefix referred to the issuer
of the warrants, the sovereign Kingdom of Denmark to whom we paid a fee
to guarantee that they would stand behind the put warrants in the event that
Goldman’s credit failed.
Our issuance was exquisitely timed; the Nikkei was just past its peak, and
many buyers were willing to bet on its further decline. Granny had bought
cheap Nikkei volatility from Japanese yen-based counterparties who didn’t
believe that the Nikkei would drop, and was now able to sell it to American
dollar-based investors who were betting it would. Most profitable options
strategies I have seen have had the same formula: Buy some simple, less
attractive product wholesale, use financial engineering to transform it into
something more appealing, and then sell it retail. It’s a transformation that
requires an understanding of clients’ needs as well as technical skills.
To accomplish this, Granny added a custom-tailored, exotic subtlety to
the structure of the Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei put warrants that I haven’t
yet mentioned. The Nikkei is an index of 225 Japanese stocks whose prices
are quoted in yen. An American dollar–based investor in the Nikkei index
effectively owns Japanese stocks denominated in yen, and then faces two
risks: that the Nikkei drops and that the yen weakens against the dollar.
American investors were happy to buy insurance against a drop in the
Nikkei, of course, but they didn’t want their insurance payment to decline if
the yen were to simultaneously weaken as the Nikkei fell, a not unlikely
occurrence. Therefore, the Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei put warrants also
carried built-in protection against a drop in the yen by guaranteeing that,
irrespective of what happened to the actual yen-dollar exchange rate, the
payoff of the warrant would be converted to dollars at an exchange rate
guaranteed in advance.
For example, if the Nikkei were to drop from 37,500 to 25,000, a drop of
12,500 index points or 33 percent, the holder of a put warrant with a face
value of $1,000 and a guaranteed conversion rate of $1 per yen would
receive $333, even if the yen (to take an extreme scenario) were to become
worthless in dollar terms. If the conversion rate had not been guaranteed,
the holder of a warrant whose payoff was converted to dollars at the
prevailing exchange rate would have received no dollars at all. This was a
very attractive feature for American investors, who naturally measure their
profits or losses in dollars—it allowed them to profit from an overdue
decline in the Japanese stock market without worrying about its effect on
the yen.
The market came to refer to this feature as a “quanto” option, though I
always preferred calling it a “guaranteed exchange rate” (GER) option,
which seemed more apt. This was the first nonstandard or so-called exotic
option 
I 
remember 
encountering, 
and 
like 
most 
successful 
structured
products, its payoff reflected investors’ needs.
This is where the role of financial engineering enters the picture. Even
though Granny had bought yen-based puts cheaply and sold the Kingdom of
Denmark puts more expensively to avid investors and speculators, there
was a dangerous mismatch between their payoffs that could have eliminated
our profit. The options we bought would pay us in yen if the Nikkei
declined, but the Kingdom of Denmark puts we sold would oblige us to pay
our counterparties in dollars. A move in the dollar-yen exchange rate could
therefore diminish or even wipe out our profit. To prevent this from
occurring, we would have to continually hedge the effect of any move in the
dollar-yen exchange rate on the value of both the options we had bought
and those we had sold.
Just as a clothing designer must factor the cost of labor, cloth, and
trimmings into a garment’s price, so we had to reflect the cost of hedging in
the price we charged for our GER option. The hedging strategy involved
daily trading in the Nikkei and the yen, a strategy whose estimated cost we
had to include in the price we charged for the Kingdom of Denmark puts.
Black and Scholes had shown in 1973 that the fair value of a standard
stock option was the price of hedging it over its lifetime. They derived a
partial differential equation for the option’s value and had shown how to
solve it. Ever since, academics and practitioners had kept busy by extending
that insight to all sorts of other options. Now, in late 1989, Piotr Karasinski
had found an analogous partial differential equation for the fair value of the
Kingdom of Denmark GER put. Much to the surprise and near disbelief of
everyone 
on 
the 
desk, 
he 
had 
shown 
that 
its 
value 
depends 
on 
the
correlation between moves in the dollar-yen exchange rate and moves in the
Nikkei index. It was counterintuitive, almost paradoxical that the degree of
correlation between the Nikkei level and the yen should influence the value
of a GER Nikkei put whose payoff was designed to be independent of the
value of the yen.
When I returned to Goldman in that first month of 1990, everyone was
focused on the Nikkei puts, in particular on how to value and hedge them. I
soon met Dan O’Rourke, an options trader newly hired by Granny a few
months earlier, and now responsible for the daily hedging of the Nikkei
book. Dan and I saw the world similarly. First, we both understood that
models alone were inadequate, no matter how good they were. What traders
need is standardized systems that contain the models, systems that force
them to use the models in disciplined ways. Our traders were managing
their books on an inadequate and unreliable Lotus spreadsheet that any
trader could modify at his whim. It was not the right way to run a business.
We felt it was critical to build a risk management system tailored to Nikkei
options, analogous to the sort of trading system I had helped build in FSG
for the bond options desk, similar to the sort of system Garbasz had tried to
create in Chicago. You needed a dedicated computer program to keep track
of the hedging of the hundreds of options, futures, and currency positions
that 
constituted 
our 
desk’s 
Nikkei 
volatility 
book. 
Second, 
and 
more
importantly in the short run, Dan and Bill Toy convinced me of the
importance of demonstrating to the traders that Piotr’s counterintuitive
formula for the value of a GER put was correct.
I began by trying to penetrate to the essence of Piotr’s formula for the value
of a GER option. If you wanted to explain an options formula to a trader,
you couldn’t resort to stochastic calculus and partial differential equations.
Even 
now, 
when 
traders 
are 
more 
likely 
to 
have 
a 
mathematical
background, you still need to have an intuitive way of showing them that a
formula makes sense. I’m never satisfied with myself until I understand
equations in a low-tech, visceral way. Therefore I decided to forget about
deriving the partial differential equation for the Kingdom of Denmark GER
option, and instead tried to obtain a more easily understandable explanation
of its fair value. Feynman’s rules for quantum electrodynamics are a poor
man’s tool for calculating the probability of complex scattering events
correctly. In a lesser but similar way, I wanted to find a set of consistent
rules that would let you convince a poor trader that an option formula was
right 
without 
resorting 
to 
the 
advanced 
mathematics 
behind 
dynamic
options replication.
I thought about what the Black-Scholes formula really tells you. In
principle, you can derive the formula from the Merton strategy of dynamic
replication; from this point of view, the formula dictates in exquisite detail
exactly how to synthesize a stock option out of a changing mixture of stock
and riskless bonds. But looked at more naively, the formula gives you the
fair price of the option in terms of the current price of the stock and the
current price of a riskless bond. Its key insight is that the option is a
mixture. Like the ancient Greeks’ mythological centaur, part horse and part
man, a call option is a hybrid, too—part stock and part bond. From this
point of view, I came to regard the Black-Scholes formula as a simple and
sensible way of interpolating from the known market prices of a stock and a
bond to the fair value of the hybrid. Several economists, Paul Samuelson
among them, had come almost imperceptibly close to obtaining the Black-
Scholes 
formula 
before 
Black 
and 
Scholes 
by 
means 
of 
this 
kind 
of
reasoning.
When you want to estimate the price of fruit salad, you average the prices
of the fruit the mixture contains. In a similar vein, I thought of the option
formula as a prescription for estimating the price of a hybrid by averaging
the known market prices of its ingredients. So I experimented with making
myself a set of rules that a poor man could use for valuing options as
mixtures; I tried to see if I could use them to get the right formula for the
GER option. I eventually came up with the following rationale.
First, as in any mathematical problem, you have to choose your units, the
currency in which to quote all security values. You can choose any currency
you like—yen, dollars, or even shares of IBM stock as the unit measure of
value; it’s like deciding on inches or centimeters in reporting heights. The
cost of creating an option or an apartment building should not depend on
which currency you choose to perform your estimates.
In practice, a little thought often suggests a natural choice of currency that
can immensely simplify the problem. To take an example outside the
options world, stock market analysts often cite a stock’s P/E ratio—its price
divided by its annual earnings—as a measure of a stock’s value. This is
equivalent to using the stock’s annual earnings in dollars, rather than the
dollar itself, as the unit in which to report a company’s stock prices. The
stock price, quoted this way, automatically tells you how many years of
presumed earnings you are paying for when you buy the stock at its current
price.
Many of the advances in options theory in the 1990s involved nothing
more than Black, Scholes, and Merton’s original insight augmented by the
clever choice of a more subtle unit of value than the dollar, a trick first
exploited by Bill Margrabe soon after Black and Scholes invented their
model. Options theorists of a mathematical bent call this trick “the choice of
numeraire.”
Since risk is what you are dealing with, you must then specify the risky
ingredients of the option, those elements whose future values are unknown.
Here, you aim to think of the complex option as a mix of the simplest
underlying securities whose risks you understand. Options modelers call
these the risk factors. For a standard stock option, for example, the stock
price is the major risk factor. For the Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei put, the
most important risk factors were the level of the Nikkei and the value of the
dollar-yen exchange rate.
Next, you must describe the range of future scenarios that the values of
the risky securities can take. The range is usually described by several
model 
parameters 
that 
will 
have 
to 
be 
specified 
when 
the 
model 
is
calibrated. Once you know the range of future scenarios for the risky
ingredients, you can then estimate the value of any other risky security (an
option, for example) as the average of its future payoffs over each of the
scenarios, discounted to the present time. In the Black-Scholes model, for
instance, one assumes that future stock returns lie on the common bell-
shaped 
distribution 
familiar 
to 
all 
users 
of 
elementary 
statistics. 
This
distribution is specified when you know the parameters that determine its
center and width, or, put more mathematically, its mean and its standard
deviation.
You must then calibrate the model, which means you must make its
scenario parameters consistent with the current prices of the simpler, risky,
underlying securities in the natural currency you’ve chosen. In the Black-
Scholes model, calibration means ensuring that when you use the model to
calculate the value of the stock itself, you reproduce the current stock price,
and when you use the model to calculate the value of a riskless bond, you
reproduce its price. This constraint is almost enough to pin down the Black-
Scholes formula. Calibration is absolutely critical. Anytime you use your
model to calculate the value of a simple risky security whose risk you
understand and whose market price you know, your model must match that
price—if it doesn’t, you’re starting off from the wrong place.
Once the model is calibrated, you can use it to calculate the value of the
option as a discounted average of its future payouts over the distribution of
scenarios. I like to call this interpolation, because the model is used to
calculate the “middle” value of a mixture from the known prices of its
ingredients at either end.
There is nothing especially original about my prescription, but it does
demystify the method of options valuation while still preserving much of
the economic logic. I found it a helpful way to explain models to traders,
and a useful intuitive way of thinking myself. You can get the answer to
many complex derivatives problems with less mathematics than you think.
I now proceeded to apply this logic, one step at a time, to the Kingdom of
Denmark GER Nikkei put. Since it paid out in American dollars, I chose
dollars as the natural currency. The relevant risk factors were the level of
the Nikkei (in yen) and the value of the yen (in dollars). Piotr had assumed
the common bell-shaped scenarios of future returns for both the Nikkei and
the yen—good enough at that time when no one yet worried about the fat
tails in the distributions and their effect on options prices.
To calibrate the model, I chose the values of the respective centers of the
bell-shaped distributions of the Nikkei in yen and the yen in dollars so that
both the prices for the Nikkei and the yen, quoted in dollars, matched their
current market values. Now the model was fully specified and ready for
interpolation.
Next I calculated the fair value of the put option by averaging its payout
over all future Nikkei and yen scenarios, first converting that payout to
dollars 
at 
the 
guaranteed 
exchange 
rate. 
To 
my 
great 
gratification, 
I
immediately obtained Piotr’s formula more directly. The value of the option
did indeed depend on the correlation between the Nikkei in yen and the yen
in dollars. My method was much easier to explain to traders; always on the
search for pricing discrepancies, they instinctively grasped that a model had
to be calibrated to agree with the market’s dollar prices for the Nikkei and
yen, securities they could buy or sell at any instant.
In physics I always used to do calculations at least two different ways and
see if they agreed. I decided to do that here, too. If my rules were right and
if I was careful to use them correctly, I should have obtained the same final
answer for the value of the GER put even if I chose an unnatural currency.
To confirm this, I perversely decided to choose the yen rather than the
dollar as my currency, a more contrived choice of numeraire for evaluating
a GER put that pays out in dollars. Now I calibrated the distributions to the
market prices of both the Nikkei in yen and the dollar in yen. I worked out
the fair value of the Nikkei put warrant in yen, even though it paid out in
dollars. When I converted the warrant’s final yen value to dollars at the
current exchange rate, the answer was identical. Everything was consistent
no matter which currency you used to solve the problem.
There was an element of paradox to the appearance of the Nikkeiyen
correlation in the final formula, but over time we got to understand better
why this correlation was so important. The Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei
put’s payout in dollars was independent of the dollar-yen exchange rate; it
varied only with the level of the Nikkei. But, in order to hedge the put, you
had to hedge its exposure to the Nikkei, which required taking a position in
Nikkei futures whose value depended on the level of the Nikkei in yen.
Owning these Nikkei futures induced a secondary exposure to the yen,
which now had to be hedged, too. It was this secondary (yen) hedging of
the primary (Nikkei) hedge that induced a dependence on the correlation.
Once I included the cost of carrying out both hedging transactions over the
lifetime of the option, I obtained the correct value for the GER put.
I was very pleased with my poor man’s rederivation of Piotr’s elegant
result, and ran from trader to quant, excitedly explaining my understanding
to anyone who would listen. Over the next few months Piotr, Jeff, and I
wrote 
a 
paper, 
Understanding 
Guaranteed 
Exchange-Rate 
Options,
intended to be the first of a new series of Quantitative Strategies Research
Reports. 
Though 
it 
contained 
some 
mathematics, 
it 
was 
written 
in 
a
relatively casual style, intended to educate clients and salespeople about
these products. For a brief period I felt that we knew something interesting
that few other people understood, and I looked forward to sending our
report to academic friends and clients. I was happy to be in the publication
business again.
It wasn’t that easy, however. When you send clients a research report
from an investment bank you have to be careful that nothing you write can
be 
construed 
as 
a 
recommendation 
that 
might 
cause 
legal 
problems.
Statements about hedging require disclaimers on the limited efficacy of
theoretical 
models 
in 
the 
face 
of 
actual 
markets. 
Furthermore, 
you
obviously don’t want to reveal anything that could damage your business
franchise. Therefore, after preparing our report, we took it to the new head
of the trading desk for approval.
Several days later he asked us not to distribute the report outside the firm.
Though I was frustrated at not being able to communicate what we knew to
people in our field, I could see that he honestly felt that option pricing
formulas were akin to trade secrets that neither competitors or clients
should know about.
I thought he was wrong. The true commercial value lay in Granny’s great
idea—selling Nikkei insurance that was insensitive to a drop in the value of
the yen to American investors who thought that the Nikkei was overpriced.
But this idea was already in the public domain, since we had listed the
warrants on the American Stock Exchange; sure enough, it was almost
immediately copied by other banks.
Within a few months, finance academics at several universities published
papers on the valuation of GER options. One or two of them got it wrong
the first time, because it was subtle, but several got it right. Had we
published our paper, Goldman would have given up little; they might even
have gained some minor kudos as a haven for analytically talented people.
A few copies of our internal report did leak out over the next year, probably
distributed by salesperson eager to set up a dialogue with clients. Ten years
later it was finally reprinted, belatedly but verbatim, in a book on currency
derivatives.
Later that summer I gave a talk on GER options at a course organized by
John 
Hull 
at 
the 
University 
of 
Toronto. 
While 
listening 
to 
the 
other
speakers, I began to realize how lucky I was to be working in equity
derivatives at Goldman. GER options were merely the forerunner of many
new and intriguing problems that the blossoming equity options markets
were beginning to throw our way, problems of which academics were
unaware.
The problems of intellectual and business interest often came to us as
questions, ill-posed by traders, who knew they had a difficulty but could not
always articulate it. The first battle was understanding what the problem
was. The traders didn’t always have the patience to listen to our solutions.
Sometimes, as we discovered from the salespeople, it was the firm’s clients,
especially in mathophiliac France and Japan, who had a greater taste for
learning about financial models and exotic products. I began to realize that
there was a market for honest, simple, direct and nonpatronizing writing
about complex topics.
During the next ten years in Quantitative Strategies we wrote many
reports on the subtleties and complexities of equity volatility. We tried to
straddle the line between academia and Wall Street, attempting to explain
the theory of trading and valuation in a picturesque and pedagogic style
using only a modicum of academic rigor, the latter often relegated to an
appendix. We aimed to make our papers accessible to an audience of
intelligent 
traders, 
salespeople 
and 
clients, 
all 
with 
a 
presumed 
short
attention span.
In my mind’s eye I retained a 1980s view of quant groups, an outlook I
had absorbed by osmosis from Stan Diller and Fischer. I felt that we were
advantaged by working at the intersection point between theory and the real
world. I saw that it was good to have one foot in both the academic and
practitioner 
universes; 
I 
found 
that 
publication 
of 
our 
models 
could
simultaneously move financial economics forward while bringing prestige
to Goldman Sachs, thereby helping to attract people of high quality to the
firm. Finally, I learned that persuading the world to measure value with
your model is an effective and honest endeavor.
People outside Goldman thought that we spent all of our time doing
abstract research and writing it up for publication. It wasn’t so. Our main
activity was always building models and trading systems for use by the
derivatives desks, trying to solve their practical problems with our theories.
In the time we had left we wrote our reports, often for love rather than
money. 
We 
were 
immensely 
lucky 
to 
be 
the 
theorists 
living 
in 
the
experimenters’ laboratory, with the opportunity to be the first to hear about
new irregularities and the difficulties they posed for trading desks.
The success of Granny’s structured deal made everyone hungry for more. It
was clear that further deals would require more quants and better risk
management systems, and the QS group began to grow.
Though no one used that term in those days, it was Piotr’s “financial
engineering” that showed us how to eliminate the mismatch between the
risk of the warrants we owned and the GER puts we sold. Executing the
hedge in practice was more complicated. The trading desk was long a
diverse assortment of yen-valued Nikkei puts. They were correspondingly
short a large homogeneous batch of the dollar-valued Kingdom of Denmark
Nikkei puts that Goldman had issued. To hedge the mismatch, they had to
continually trade varying quantities of Nikkei futures and yen currency, as
well as some individual Japanese stocks. This entire “Nikkei book” had to
be hedged at least once each day, and sometimes more often.
When I arrived in January 1990, all this complexity was being handled on
a vintage DOS-based PC running a Lotus spreadsheet into which various
Black-Scholes options formulas had been embedded. It was neither flexible
nor robust enough for interactive risk management.
I was lucky to have come to QS from the fixed-income world, which has
always been a few sophisticated steps ahead of equities in these matters.
The rapid rise of interest rates in the late 1970s, after years of stable returns
with low volatility, had forced fixed-income clients and the trading desks
that serviced them to become the early pioneers of portfolio hedging
systems. As a result, I knew a great deal about designing and building risk
systems, and saw that this was where I could contribute.
In a month or two, Piotr and I, together with Rao Achyuthuni, one of the
QS consultants, quickly designed and built a rudimentary Nikkei risk
management system that we called Samurai. It was simple, but it did the
job: We entered our trading positions in tabular fashion into a flat computer
file, one security to a row. Within each row the first column indicated the
number of securities we owned, the second specified the security type
(stock, option, index, futures contract, currency, and so on), while the
remaining columns spelled out the details (strike, expiration, and so on)
necessary for valuation. Each day we edited the file to reflect new trades or
expirations. Samurai read the positions in the file and then reported the
model value and hedge ratio for the entire portfolio at current market levels.
It also reported the impact on the portfolio of more extreme scenarios in
which the Nikkei level, the yen, interest rates, and volatilities moved up or
down by as much as 20 percent. This latter feature was perhaps the most
useful; we could use it to discover the potential “hot zones” in the book that
might take us down, and we could estimate what types of new trades could
ameliorate these potential disasters.
Samurai made a giant splash; simple as it was, nobody in the division had
ever seen a built-from-scratch, risk-management system for derivatives
portfolios before. The desk embraced it and invited Jeff, Piotr, and me to
demonstrate it to Roy Zuckerberg and David Silfen, the dauntingly patrician
heads of the Equities Division.
What we had built suited the desk so well because we had collaborated so
closely with Dan. Traders have their own vernacular and, though he spoke it
himself, Dan was one of the few traders I met who was willing and able to
bridge the language gap. He would spend hours with us on the chalkboard
each day, trying to help specify and test the system; he would patiently
debate with me what should be displayed on the screen and in what format.
Dan was also a bit of a closet quant, who one day proudly took out of his
desk drawer the senior thesis on option pricing he had written years earlier.
Most of the programs we wrote in QS over the next several years worked so
well in part because Dan took on the role of the trading desk’s agent.
Unlike many traders, Dan also knew that success comes from incremental
improvements. We weren’t building the space shuttle, whose specifications
had to be written down in minute detail and handed over to the engineers.
When we began to build risk systems for the developing business of equity
derivatives, we had entered uncharted terrain, and there was no commonly
acknowledged best path through it. Every time we spoke with the traders,
we faced such a flood of demands and choices that it was difficult to decide
what to do first. Dan, more than anyone else I worked with from trading,
understood what physicists call perturbation theory, the approach by which
you get the most critical feature completed first, and then at each next step
you tackle the next most important feature. In contrast, many other traders
and desks were like the “old sailor my grandfather knew” in A. A. Milne’s
poem “who had so many things he wanted to do that whenever he thought it
was time to begin, he couldn’t because of the state he was in.” Dan
perceived his job to be the definition and creation of a uniform and well-
designed trading infrastructure for the entire desk, wherever they worked,
so that traders could move from one country to another and find a consistent
environment. Most traders just want to trade; Dan was willing to think
about the tools you need to trade safely. When the firm moved Dan to
London a few years later, no one adopted his role, and from then on giving
the desk what they needed became much harder. For more than ten years
afterward, the methodology we created in Samurai remained the core of our
risk system, despite manyfold increases in the size of our desk and our
book.
By the early 1990s, the Soviet Union had collapsed, the end of history was
ostensibly 
upon 
us, 
and 
global 
capitalism 
was 
rampant. 
In 
equity
derivatives, 
the 
era 
of 
exotic 
options 
had 
begun. 
Exotics 
seemed 
the
preferred way for investors in one country to gain just the exposure they
wanted to the markets in another. Suppose you were an American investor
who wanted to gain if the French stock market rose. In the old days you had
to buy and hold a diverse collection of French stocks and face the detailed
bother 
of 
tracking 
their 
prices 
in 
francs, 
collecting 
their 
dividends,
converting them to dollars, paying income and capital gains tax; after all
that, however, you were still exposed to the risk that the French franc might
deteriorate against the dollar. Now you could instead come to our equity
derivatives desk and buy a call option on the CAC-30 French equity index,
GER’d into dollars; you got the simplicity of looking at the daily closing
level of the CAC-30 in the newspaper or on a screen and knowing what
your P&L was, as traders like to refer to their profits and losses. You could
leave the messy stuff to us.
Exotic options like these and others were taking off, and Goldman was
determined to build a Structured Equity Products business. The success of
Samurai made QS the natural support framework, and during the next five
years we grew to about 30 people, with approximately three software
developers in our group for every pure quant. Each day we thought about
new options we could design and value, all of them providing exposure to
more granular contingencies than the coarse, standard options on which we
had 
sharpened 
our 
teeth. 
There 
were 
barrier 
options, 
options 
on 
the
maximum of a stock price, options on the average of a stock price, lookback
options, 
outperformance 
options, 
rate-contingent 
options, 
options 
on
options themselves. When, during the late 1970s and early 1980s, these
structures had first been invented and their value found by means of
ingenious mathematical manipulations, they were merely a curiosity, a
pushing of the theoretical limits. Now, ten years later, investment banks saw
them as tailored instruments in the business of giving customers exactly the
risk profile they desired—for a premium of course.
Behind all of these exotic structures, if they were successful in the
marketplace, were two obvious principles. First, since an option is a type of
bet on a future scenario that may never occur, investors want to pay as little
as possible for it. Second, in order to minimize an option’s cost, you must
define as precisely as possible the exact scenario you are betting on. The
more precise you can be about the scenario from which you want to benefit
or protect yourself, the less you pay.
We had options for every attitude. The classic was a standard call option.
A call on the Standard & Poor's (S&P) 500 index, for example, was a
straightforward bet that the index would rise by the expiration date; when
you bought it you paid for all scenarios in which the index would ultimately
rise, including those in which the index first dropped and then recovered.
There were more exotic flavors. A knock-in barrier call option was a bet
that the index would first drop below some barrier level and then regain its
ground. If you thought that this dip followed by a rise were likely, you
could pay only for that scenario, and it would cost you less than a standard
call. There were many similar variations on this theme.
If you didn’t want to worry about small fluctuations in the S&P 500 as
long as its trend was upwards, you could buy an average (or Asian) call
option on the index, whose payout depended only on the average level of
the index over the life of the option. Since the time average of an index is a
more stable quantity than the index itself, this option, too, was generally
cheaper than a standard call.
Alternatively, if you thought that the stock market would rise only if the
Federal Reserve kept interest rates low, you could buy a rate-contingent call
option on the S&P 500 that would extinguish (or knockout, in options
parlance) if interest rates were to rise. Again, since this call would pay out
only if interest rates were to stay low and the index were to rise, a less
likely occurrence than the index rising under all circumstances, you paid
less for it.
A typical buyer of our options was a European commercial bank that, as
interest rates kept falling, wanted to attract depositors by giving them a
chance of earning a higher return. The bank would promise its depositors an
enhanced rate of interest proportional to the rise (if it occurred) in the one-
year average of the CAC-30 over the next year. To provide that payout, the
bank bought options on the average of the CAC-30 index from our desk.
Instead of providing its depositors with a simple fixed-income investment,
it was giving them a hybrid product they couldn’t get elsewhere, a bond
combined with an equity “kicker.”
Conversely, many of the sellers of equity options were European pension
and mutual funds or insurance companies who, unhappy with the decline in
bond yields, sold options on equity indexes to enhance their return. They
gambled that the indexes wouldn’t rise and that the options they sold would
finish out of the money.
The development of new options structures resembled an arms race. Any
firm that created something popular with clients had a few months to press
their advantage before another firm copied them. It took that long to
reverse-engineer a product, add a few wrinkles, develop a risk management
strategy, put in place the legal and technical infrastructure, and then market
it.
Early in the 1990s, most options were written on simple global equity
indexes, like the S&P 500 in the United States or the FTSE 100 in Great
Britain; the exotic nature of the option lay not in the nature of the underlyer,
but rather in the definition of the way in which the payout of the option
depended upon the level of the underlyer. During the technology and
biotech bubbles of the late 1990s, investors became more interested in
options on complex underlyers, baskets of technology or pharmaceutical
stocks, for example. As firms tried to outdo each other, options payouts
became more refined and harder to apprehend. By the end of the decade, the
most popular options were being created at French banks by elite École
Normale 
Supérieure–trained 
mathematicians 
with 
a 
characteristically
French taste for formal mathematics. The exotics they marketed were
options on baskets of stocks whose actual composition kept changing over
time. In one, for example, the number of constituent stocks in the basket
each year decreased as the best-performing stock of the previous year was
eliminated. 
As 
in 
any 
business, 
the 
sales-people 
liked 
tailoring 
and
complexity because not only could you charge more for it, but it was also
more difficult for a client to assess the value of its individual features.
Complexity was also harder for competitors to copy.
Variations flourished. Riding the crest of this wave of innovation, and
simultaneously 
propelling 
it, 
was 
Peter 
Field’s 
inspired 
venture, 
Risk
magazine, to which we turned each month for its mix of industry news,
gossip, and quantitative articles. It was the first glossy in the options world,
replete with advertising and cover art, a magazine aimed at quantitative
practitioners rather than academics or money managers. It spurned the
suffocatingly rigid format of academic periodicals like the Journal 
of
Finance, 
and 
both 
academics 
and 
practitioners 
loved 
it. 
Fischer, 
too,
commented admiringly on it. For several years in the early 1990s each issue
contained topical articles on the newest exotic structures and how to value
them. Soon Risk was organizing expensive courses on exotic options, a
clever arbitrage by which they charged quants from one set of investment
banks to listen to the lectures of quants from another set, while Risk
pocketed the fee.
Other journals sprang up, too. The International Association of Financial
Engineers, a new professional organization of quants, began to specify an
educational syllabus suitable for the training of a quant. New textbooks and
Master’s of Financial Engineering programs sprouted and flourished at the
increasing numbers of universities that, sensing a need, began to cater to
those willing to pay to learn quantitative finance. In 1985 when I entered
Wall Street it was amateur heaven, a fluidly makeshift field filled with
retreads from other disciplines who could learn quickly, solve equations,
and write their own programs. You had to learn options theory on your own
and there were only a few textbooks to help you—those written by Jarrow
and Rudd and Cox and Rubinstein were the only ones I could obtain. The
only derivatives meeting I went to each year was the annual spring meeting
of the Amex. By the late 1990s, there were scores of master’s programs,
hundreds 
of 
conferences, 
and 
thousands 
of 
books. 
Physicists 
and
mathematicians, either unable to find academic positions or, grown weary
of academic politics and pay, increasingly sought out Wall Street jobs.
The quantitative life of practitioners, formerly the happily casual domain
of self-taught amateurs, was becoming a discipline, a business, and a
profession. It was simultaneously becoming a little less fun, too.
...
Chapter 14
Laughter in the Dark
The puzzle of the volatility smile
Beyond Black-Scholes: the race to develop local-volatility models of
options
The right model is hard to find
I first heard about the smile in December 1990 from Dave Rogers, our head
options trader in Tokyo. I had begun traveling to Japan regularly to bring
our traders the latest releases of our risk management tools and to learn
what new models and software they needed. Unlike the New York Stock
Exchange, the Tokyo market closed at midday; traders grew less frenetic
and went out for lunch, salespeople departed to meet clients, and there was
time for leisurely conversations. While we chatted, Dave showed me the
computer screen he used to watch the prices of options on the Nikkei 225
index. He pointed out a peculiar asymmetry in the Nikkei options prices:
The prices of out-of-the-money puts were unexpectedly larger than those of
other options.
Everyone referred to this asymmetry as “the smile,” or “the skew.” At
first it looked only mildly interesting, a peculiar anomaly we could tolerate.
Then, when I thought about it a little more, I realized that the existence of
the smile was completely at odds with Black and Scholes’s twenty-year-old
foundation of options theory. And, if the Black-Scholes formula was wrong,
then so was the predicted sensitivity of an option’s price to movements in
its underlying index, its so-called “delta.” In this case, all traders using the
Black-Scholes model’s delta were hedging their option books incorrectly.
But the very essence of Black-Scholes was its prescription for replicating
and hedging. The smile, therefore, poked a small hole deep into the dike of
theory that sheltered options trading. If Black-Scholes were wrong, what
was the right delta to use for hedging an option?
During the 1990s, the smile, initially a peculiarity of equity options,
infected 
other 
markets, 
taking 
a 
slightly 
different 
form 
in 
each 
one.
Understanding it became a dominating obsession for me and many of my
quant contemporaries. It was an anomaly that sat right at the intersection of
options trading and options theory, and I spent much of my intellectual
energy trying to model it.
Our work started in the typical heady rush of energy and ambition that
made me feel as though I were in physics again, racing to be the first to find
the “right” model for something important and interesting. I fantasized
about building a model that, embraced by everyone, would replace Black-
Scholes. It wasn’t as simple as I thought. During the next ten years I learned
that “rightness” in financial modeling is a much fuzzier concept than I had
imagined.
One of the things you learn repeatedly in a career in financial modeling is
the importance of units. You always want the prices of securities to be
quoted in a way that make it easy to compare their relative values.
When you need to compare the values of bonds, for example, their prices
are insufficient, because each bond can have a different maturity and
coupon. Instead, you quote their yields. A bond yield provides an estimate
of the return the bond will generate for you irrespective of its coupon and
maturity. You may not know whether a discount bond at 98 is better than a
premium one at 105, but you do know that, all other things being equal, a
yield of 5.3 percent is less attractive than 5.6 percent. This conversion of
prices to yields is itself a model, albeit a simple one. It is a convenient way
to communicate prices, as well as a good first step towards estimating
value.
In the options world as well, price alone is an insufficient measure of
value; it’s impossible to tell whether ¥300 for an at-the-money put is more
attractive than ¥40 for a deep out-of-the-money put. A better measure of
value is the option’s implied volatility. The Black-Scholes model views a
stock option as a kind of bet on the future volatility of a stock’s returns. The
more volatile the stock, the more likely the bet will pay off, and therefore
the more you should pay for it. You can use the model to convert an option
price into the future volatility the stock must have in order for the option
price to be fair. This measure is called the option’s implied volatility. It is,
so to speak, an option’s view of the stock’s future volatility.
The Black-Scholes model was the market standard. When I sat next to
Dave in Tokyo that day, his computer screen showed the prices quoted in
Black-Scholes implied volatilities. Even today, when no one believes that
the Black-Scholes model is absolutely the best way to estimate option
value, and even though more sophisticated traders sometimes use more
complex models, the Black-Scholes model’s implied volatilities are still the
market convention for quoting prices.
Options 
are 
generally 
less 
liquid 
than 
stocks, 
and 
implied 
volatility
market data is consequently coarse and approximate. Nevertheless, Dave
pointed out to me what I was already dimly aware of: There was a severe
skew in the implied volatilities, so that three-month options of low strike
had much greater implied volatilities than three-month options of higher
strikes. You can see a sketch of this asymmetry in Figure 14.1. This
lopsided shape, though it’s commonly called “the smile,” is more of a
smirk.
Figure 14.1 A typical implied volatility smile for three-month options on
the Nikkei index in late 1994. The dashed line shows the lack of skew that
was common prior to the 1987 crash.
With implied volatility as your measure of value, low-strike puts are the
most expensive Nikkei options. Anyone who was around on October 19,
1987 could easily guess why. Ever since that day when equity markets
around the world plunged, investors remained constantly aware of the
possibility of an instantaneous large jump down in the market, and were
willing to pay up for protection. Out-of-the-money puts were the best and
cheapest insurance. Like stableboys who shut the barn door after the horse
has bolted, investors who lived through the 1987 crash were now willing to
pay up for future insurance against the risks they had previously suffered.
By 1990 there were similar smiles or skews in all equity markets. Before
1987, in contrast, more light-heartedly naive options markets were happy to
charge about the same implied volatility for all strikes, as illustrated by the
dashed line in Figure 14.1.
It was not only three-month implied volatilities that were skewed. A
similar effect was visible for options of any expiration, so that implied
volatility varied not only with strike but also with expiration. We began to
plot this double variation of implied volatility in both the time and strike
dimension as a two-dimensional implied volatility surface. A picture of the
surface for options on the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 index is illustrated
in Figure 14.2. Like the yield curve, it changes continually from minute to
minute and day to day.
Figure 14.2 A typical implied volatility surface for the S&P 500 in mid-
1995.
This tentlike surface was a challenge to theorists everywhere. The Black-
Scholes model couldn’t account for it. Black-Scholes attributed a single
volatility at all future times to an index or a stock, and therefore always
produced the dull, flat, featureless surface of Figure 14.3a. The best you
could do, if you modified the Black-Scholes model to allow future index
volatility to be different from today’s, was to obtain a surface that slanted in
the time direction, as depicted in Figure 14.3b. But the variation in two
perpendicular directions, time and strike, was a puzzle. What was wrong
with the classic Black-Scholes model? And what new kind of model could
possibly explain that surface?
Figure 14.3 Implied volatility surfaces. (a) In the standard Black-Scholes
model. (b) In an enhanced Black-Scholes model where volatility varies with
time to expiration.
We knew that the Black-Scholes model oversimplifies the behavior of
stock prices. It assumes that a stock price diffuses away into the future from
its current value in a slow, random, continuous fashion, much like a cloud
of smoke from the smoldering tip of a cigarette spreads through a room.
Dense near the tip of the cigarette and sparse farther out, the intensity of the
smoke cloud at a point represents the probability that a particle of smoke
will diffuse to that location. In the Black-Scholes model, a similar cloud
depicts the probability that the stock price will reach some particular future
value at some future time. Figure 14.4 illustrates that cloud of probabilities
for a stock in the Black-Scholes model. The more dispersed the cloud, the
more uncertain the future stock price. A single parameter, the stock’s
volatility traditionally denoted by the Greek letter sigma, s, determines the
rate of diffusion and the width of the cloud. The greater the stock’s
volatility, the wider the cloud.
Figure 14.4 Simple diffusion in the Black-Scholes model. The shaded
regions illustrate the range of possible future prices for a stock whose price
is $100 today. The more time passes, the greater the uncertainty in the
future price. The darker the shading, the more likely the price will be in that
region.
Though simplification is the essence of modeling, the Black-Scholes
picture of smoke-cloud diffusion is too restrictive. First, stock prices don’t
necessarily diffuse with a constant volatility; at some times a stock diffuses
more rapidly than at others. Second, and more gravely, sometimes stocks
don’t diffuse at all. Diffusion, as shown in Figure 14.4, is a slow, continuous
process; in diffusion, a stock price that moves from $100 to $99 passes
through every possible price between them. This is not what happened
during the 1987 crash, however; on that day the Dow-Jones index jumped
its way downward through 500 points like an excited kid on a pogo stick.
Returning 
to 
New 
York 
from 
Tokyo, 
I 
began 
working 
with 
my 
QS
colleagues Iraj Kani and Alex Bergier. I wanted to extend the Black-Scholes
model just enough so that it could incorporate the smile. “Just enough” was
always the aim. A model is only a model; you want to capture the essence
of the phenomenon, not the thing itself. It is far too easy, in the name of
realism, to add complexity to the simple evolution of stock prices assumed
by Black and Scholes, but complexity without calibration is pointless.
The overwhelming fear of equity investors was another 1987-style crash,
so we added this possibility to Black-Scholes. This was not something new;
Merton had done it in his so-called jump-diffusion model in the mid-1970s,
and to begin with, we did it even more crudely than he had. To the constant
diffusion 
of 
stock 
prices 
we 
added 
just 
one 
new 
feature, 
the 
small
probability p that the stock price might take one sizeable jump J downward.
The probability cloud for this process is depicted in Figure 14.5. It shows
the 
two 
scenarios 
the 
stock 
can 
now 
take: 
a 
jump 
J 
downward 
and
subsequent diffusion with a volatility σ
H
, which is likely to be high because
of the after-excitement of the crash; or, more likely, continued diffusion
with the normal, lower volatility σ
L
.
Figure 14.5 The range of possible future prices for a stock that can jump
once and then diffuse. The darker the shading, the more likely the price will
be in that region.
Typically, we assumed the probability p to be of order one percent,
implying that the market assigned about a one-in-a-hundred chance of a
crash during the option’s lifetime. We chose the σ
H
to be about 40 percent
greater than σ
L
, based on a combination of intuition and experience about
the after-effects of stock crashes. Our model now had only two unknown
parameters, the jump size J of the crash scenario and the volatility s
L
associated with normal behavior. This was just one parameter richer than
Black-Scholes, which contained only a single volatility. We calibrated these
parameters by matching the model’s option prices to the two implied
volatilities that defined the shape of the three-month smile, those of an at-
the-money option and a put option struck 5 percent out of the money. With
a normal volatility s
L
in the vicinity of ten percent and a downward jump J
of about 25 percent of the current stock price, we found we could produce
smiles like those in Figure 14.1.
Our model looked at the world like this: During the option’s lifetime the
Nikkei 
had 
a 
roughly 
one-in-a-hundred 
chance 
of 
dropping 
about 
25
percent. This is why you paid so much more for an out-of-the-money put.
We then used the model to estimate the option’s delta, the hedge ratio
necessary to cancel its index risk. We also used it to value the more illiquid
or exotic options that were becoming increasingly fashionable—barrier
options, for example—whose prices were highly sensitive to the probability
and size of the jump. We wanted our traders to search the market for
options whose prices differed significantly from those produced by our
model. They could then buy the apparently cheap ones and sell the rich
ones in the hope that these outliers would eventually revert to our model’s
prices and generate a profit.
Though the jump model captured one essential sentiment responsible for
the smile, it was ultimately too crude. Its view of a future in which the
Nikkei 
awoke 
each 
morning 
and 
decided 
either 
to 
make 
one 
large
instantaneous excited jump downward or else diffuse calmly was still too
simplistic. Looking back, perhaps we should have added a distribution of
possible jump sizes and jump times. But jumps occur rarely, and since there
was little data on their distribution, we would have had to make many
unverified assumptions, something that felt unaesthetic. Rightly or wrongly,
we preferred a more constrained model whose parameters were totally fixed
by calibration to observed options prices. Ten years later, though, more
detailed jump-diffusion models of the smile became popular again.
Our initial model of the smile did find users in Goldman’s risk arbitrage
group, where savvy traders combined worldly knowledge with quantitative
methods to take educated bets. Some arbitrageurs focused on acquisitions in
which the acquiring company tenders for the stock of a target company at a
public offer price that substantially exceeds its current level. If and when
regulators approve the acquisition, the target’s price will jump to the offer
price. 
Until 
then, 
its 
price 
reflects 
an 
estimate 
of 
the 
probability 
of
completion 
of 
the 
deal. 
For 
these 
situations, 
our 
jump 
model 
was 
a
theoretically accurate picture, and the risk arbitrageurs made occasional use
of it to see whether their estimate of the likelihood of the acquisition’s
approval matched the jump probability implied by the current price of the
target.
Meanwhile, from mid-1991 through early 1993, Iraj and I and the rest of
QS turned temporarily to the more pressing problem of enhancing our risk
systems to handle the increasing number of exotic options we traded.
Unfortunately, the more we worked on exotics, the more we ran into the
problems of the smile: Whenever we used the Black-Scholes framework to
value the exotic options in the desk’s book, we were using a model that
produced the wrong value for much simpler standard options, a model
inconsistent with the smile. This wasn’t good—you can’t trust a model for
complex phenomena if it gets the simple stuff wrong. You wouldn’t trust a
NASA computer program that predicted the trajectory of an interplanetary
probe from Earth to Mars if it couldn’t first correctly predict the orbits of
Earth and Mars around the sun.
The right place to start was with a model that could match the market
prices of all standard options, the entire implied volatility surface. Only
then, when it was correctly calibrated, could you sensibly use it to calculate
the value of an exotic. How could we find a model that matched any
surface?
I thought back to our development of BDT. In the mid-1980s, the fixed-
income options world had undergone a similar crisis: Practitioners used a
yield diffusion model like Ravi’s to value an option on any single bond, but
felt uncomfortable because it couldn’t simultaneously match the prices of
all Treasury bonds on the yield curve. BDT was one of the possible
solutions to this dilemma.
We had a tremendous advantage in having come to the equity derivatives
world with a background in fixed income. Iraj and I perceived the following
analogy between bonds and their yields and options and their volatilities:
Bond prices are quoted using current long-term yields, which reflect
the market’s expectation of future short-term rates.
Options prices are quoted using current long-term implied volatilities,
which reflect the market’s expectation of future short-term volatilities.
Our ambition was to build a post-Black-Scholes model that allowed us to
back out the market’s expectation of future short-term volatilities from the
current volatility surface. We weren’t sure how to do it, but we knew that
the 
world 
needed 
a 
better 
model 
and 
would 
reward 
its 
discoverers.
Throughout 1993 we felt as though we were in a race with unnamed
competitors to find it.
Iraj and I were great admirers of the binomial options model, a simple,
picturesque, 
and 
yet 
accurate 
way 
of 
performing 
options-theoretic
calculations on a gridlike tree of future stock prices. On a binomial tree,
prices move like knights on a chessboard, one discrete step forward in time
and up or down a notch in price. Binomial trees are easy to draw and, in a
jerky way, mimic the behavior of real prices or indexes. As the grid of the
chess board becomes progressively finer, prices move more and more
continuously—they 
start 
to 
diffuse, 
in 
fact—and 
the 
binomial 
model
becomes equivalent to the Black-Scholes model. Binomial trees were the
Feynman diagrams of options theory, easy to picture and use, wonderful for
simulating simple trading strategies or developing valuation models. Even
the innumerate traders with whom we often dealt could understand them.
Initially invented by William Sharpe soon after Black and Scholes wrote
their paper, bimonial trees were then cleverly elaborated upon by John Cox,
Mark Rubinstein and Steve Ross. As options theorists grew increasingly
professional and better educated, binomial models fell into a low-tech
disrepute, but we still found them immensely useful.
Therefore, we tried to use a binomial tree of index options prices like the
one shown in Figure 14.6 as a guide to extracting the market’s view of
future short-term volatilities. The left edge of the tree denotes the current
index level. Each step up or down from there illustrates a potential future
index move. Traditional binomial trees make the key assumption that all
moves on the tree are of equal percentage magnitude; at any future time, at
any future level, the index, whether it moves up or down, grows or shrinks
by an identical percentage. In technical terms, the index has a constant
volatility of returns, globally the same across the entire tree, identical at
each future instant of time and index level. This constancy of the index’s
volatility in the Black-Scholes model leads to the associated flat implied
volatility surface that is inconsistent with actual options markets.
Figure 14.6 At left, a binomial tree of future index moves. Each future
percentage move is identical and represents a constant index volatility. At
right, the shape of the corresponding implied volatility surface.
Iraj and I developed an alternate view of the future tree of index levels.
We pictured the usual constant-volatility binomial tree redrawn on a flexible
sheet of rubber, which we could then stretch and distort so as to resemble
the tree of Figure 14.7. On this deformed tree, the size of the moves in the
index at each node of the tree could differ, representing a varying volatility
whose value differed from node to node. In theorists’ jargon, the index
would have a varying local volatility;by “local volatility” we meant the
short-term volatility of the index at a particular future level and time. The
constant or global volatility of Figure 14.6 was 
inconsistent 
with 
the
market’s tentlike implied volatility surface of Figure 14.2. There must be,
we figured, an implied binomial tree whose local volatility could be chosen
to match the market’s implied volatility surface. We expected it to look like
the tree in Figure 14.7, in which the local volatility of the index rises as the
index falls and vice versa, in order to reflect the surface’s variation with
strike.
Figure 14.7 At left, an implied binomial tree of future index moves. Each
future percentage move has a local volatility that rises as the index level
drops. Can one deduce the shape of the implied binomial tree from the
implied volatility surface at right?
It was easy to imagine such a tree. It was even easy to build such a tree by
literally making up a rule for how local volatility varied within the tree and
then constructing it. Given such a tree, you could use it to calculate the
prices of many different options and then plot their implied volatility
surface. We could see that it was possible to pick a local volatility whose
variation produced a realistic-looking volatility surface. But the ultimate
problem we faced was the inverse of what we were doing. We needed to
start with the implied volatility surface the market presented and deduce
from it the unique local volatilities that reflected it. The implied volatility
surface was the primary object, and the whole procedure we envisaged
would only constitute a true theory if you could extract from it a unique
implied binomial tree.
Throughout 1993, as the QS group continued to build the more elaborate
risk-management systems that occupied most of our time, we continued to
ruminate over the smile. In spare moments we tinkered with implied trees,
still uncertain as to whether there was a truly unique relationship between
the volatility surface in Figure 14.7 and the tree we hoped it implied. We
knew 
we 
could 
go 
from 
the 
tree 
to 
the 
surface, 
but 
what 
was 
the
incontrovertible way to go from the surface to the tree? We discussed it
with Dave Rogers and his traders, who, because of our sheet-of-rubber
analogy, always called it the flexible tree. We built versions of it and used
them to price and hedge varieties of options, but, too busy with supporting
the software needs of the desk, we avoided an all-out attempt on the
question of uniqueness.
The relationship between surface and tree reminded me of the lecture by
Mark Kaç I had heard as a graduate student at Columbia thirty years earlier,
when he solved the question of hearing the shape of a drum. Physicists call
this an inverse-scattering problem because, whereas most models in physics
proceed 
from 
the 
physical 
law 
to 
the 
results, 
inverse 
problems 
work
backwards. Newton’s theory of gravitation, for example, commences with
the law of gravitational attraction between the sun and the planets, and
deduces the planetary orbits. Inverse scattering problems go in reverse—
given the observations, they ask, what law would produce them? Imagine,
for example, that astronomers observed some strange perturbation in the
orbit of the earth. What change in the law of gravitational attraction would
account for it?
Our search for a method to extract a unique implied tree from the
volatility surface was an inverse scattering problem. This approach is more
typical of financial modeling than it is of physics. In physics, the beauty and
elegance of a theory’s laws, and the intuition that led to them, is often
compelling, and provides a natural starting point from which to proceed to
phenomena. In finance, more of a social than a natural science, there are
few beautiful theories and virtually no compelling ones, and so we have no
choice but to take the phenomenological approach. There, much more often,
one begins with the market’s data and calibrates the model’s laws to fit it.
This calibration is a kind of inverse-scattering approach, too, and it was
what we were trying to do in our attempt to construct implied trees.
Sometime in late 1993 I went to visit our trading desk in London, where I
also gave a talk at a Risk magazine conference on exotic options. Between
conference sessions, I met Graham Cooper, the new editor of Risk, and also
ran into John Hull. During our conversations I told them what Iraj and I had
been exploring. Graham and John told me that they had heard that Bruno
Dupire at Paribas Capital Markets in London and Mark Rubinstein, the
Berkeley finance professor who was one of the codevelopers of the original
constant-volatility 
binomial 
tree 
model, 
had 
been 
tackling 
the 
same
problem. 
Worried 
about 
giving 
away 
proprietary 
information 
to 
our
competition, I called Dave Rogers in New York and quickly got his
approval to allude in public to what Iraj and I had done. I hurried back to
my 
hotel 
room 
and 
quickly 
appended 
a 
few 
transparencies 
to 
my
presentation to describe our implied tree approach. After my talk, Graham
invited me to submit an article on our work to Risk, while John, hearing me
describe our trees sometimes as “flexible” and sometimes as “implied,”
nudged me towards the use of “implied.”
With competition at our heels, Iraj and I anxiously rededicated ourselves
to proving the uniqueness of our tree. Most of our day was typically spent
enhancing the desk’s trading models, responding to requests for pricing new
structures, and building trading software. Whenever we had spare time
away from desk support, we tried again to define a scheme for uniquely
extracting the local volatility at each future node of the implied binomial
tree.
We began with the market’s implied volatility surface on a given day, as
illustrated in Figure 14.2. We then constructed a binomial tree like the one
in Figure 14.8. Each shaded triangle in this tree, at each index level and
future time, evolves with a different local volatility whose magnitude is
represented by the degree of shading. Higher index levels correspond to
lower (paler) volatilities; lower index levels correspond to higher (darker)
volatilities. How pale or how dark must you choose them to match the
initial implied volatility surface of Figure 14.2? That was the question.
Figure 14.8 An implied binomial tree with varying local volatilities
represented by the shaded triangles in the tree.
The local volatility in Figure 14.8 is a local quality of the tree, the
microscopically viewed volatility within each single small internal triangle.
In contrast, the implied volatility in Figure 14.2 is a global quality, a wide-
angle overview of all the internal triangles seen from 30,000 feet. We
viewed the implied volatility of an option as the average
1
of all the local
volatilities that the index will experience during the life of that option.
Consider the option whose expiration and strike correspond to the time
and index level at the location of the small flashlight in the next-to-last row
of the tree in Figure 14.9. The value of its implied volatility depends upon
the values of the local volatilities in the shaded right-striped triangles; those
are the local volatility regions that the index can traverse in moving towards
the strike during the life of the option. It’s useful to think of the option
expiring at the flashlight as an X-ray source that illuminates all the local
volatilities in the internal right-striped triangles in the tree.
Figure 14.9 The implied volatility of the option whose expiration and strike
lie at the circle illuminates the local volatilities in the right-striped region of
the tree.
Similarly, the option whose strike lies at the location of the lantern in the
tree of Figure 14.10 illuminates the local volatilities in the shaded left-
striped triangles.
Figure 14.10 The implied volatility of the option whose expiration and
strike lie at the location of the lantern illuminates the local volatilities in the
left-striped region of the tree.
The option with a strike at the flashlight illuminates one part of the tree,
while the option whose strike lies at the lantern illuminates another part.
But no single option, neither the one struck at the lantern nor the one struck
at the flashlight, sheds light on just one triangle in the tree, the single node
whose volatility was the obscure object of our desire.
We kept struggling. We wanted a set of options that illuminated the
volatilities at just one internal node. But each scheme we tried failed—there
seemed to be no recipe for the local volatility at a single node.
Then, one day, as we played around with a five-row toy version of our
tree on a spreadsheet, we found something miraculous happened, something
so strange that for a few minutes we thought it was due to a programming
error in the spreadsheet. We noticed, almost by accident, that if we used
three distinct option strikes to illuminate the interior of the tree, two of them
with adjacent earlier strikes and one with a strike one period later—if, so to
speak, we directed X-rays into the tree from three different angles—the
illumination canceled everywhere except at the single node where they
intersected. This is illustrated in Figure 14.11. It was astonishing: We had
found an algorithm that determined the local volatility at a single node in
terms of the market implied volatilities of the options with strikes at the
three surrounding nodes.
Figure 14.11 How three options can illuminate one node. (a) Two options
with adjacent strikes illuminate the triangles to their left. (b) A single option
expiring one period later illuminates all the previous triangles plus one
more. (c) Subtracting the earlier expirations from the later leaves just one
internal triangle illuminated.
Now we knew how to find every local volatility, step by step. We could
select any node on the implied tree, read off the implied volatilities of the
three options adjacent to it from the market’s implied volatility surface, and
then extract the local volatility at that node via our algorithm. In this way,
one node at a time, we could find all the local volatilities. With those local
volatilities and the implied binomial tree on which they sat, we could value
and hedge any option on the index in a manner consistent with the smile.
We 
were 
immensely 
elated, 
believing 
we 
had 
made 
the 
next 
big
breakthrough in options pricing, an extension of the Black-Scholes model to
make it consistent with reality.
We weren’t the only excited ones. Mark Rubinstein and Bruno Dupire had
also spent the past year developing similar extensions of Black-Scholes. A
few weeks later Mark delivered his presidential address at the January 1994
meeting of the American Finance Association on Implied Binomial Trees.
Speaking to him over subsequent years, I learned that he too imagined he
had achieved a great breakthrough.
At about the same time, John Hull mailed me a copy of a talk Bruno had
given on his version of implied trees at a meeting of the International
Association of Financial Engineers (IAFE) in New York a few weeks
earlier. In it, Bruno also claimed to have found a unique way to extract local
volatilities from implied ones.
Each of us—Iraj and I together, Mark and Bruno separately—had tackled
the inverse scattering problem in characteristically different styles. Iraj and
I were used to dealing with the denizens of the investment banking world,
the less numerate traders, salespeople and clients, and so we wrote our
paper as simply and clearly as possible. We wanted anyone reading it to
know exactly how to build their own implied tree. We explained, step by
step, exactly how to build the tree and calibrate it to a given volatility
surface, and we illustrated it with a fully worked-out numerical example
involving a five-period tree that anyone could check.
Mark’s 
presidential 
address 
was 
more 
discursive 
and 
academic, 
and
covered the history of the problem. His initial solution to the inverse
scattering problem focused on matching the market’s implied volatilities at
a single expiration, thereby ignoring some of the additional information
embedded in the implied volatility surface.
Bruno’s IAFE talk was the most tantalizing. As a Frenchman, he had a
taste for formal mathematics, and his very brief report proposed an elegant
formula for the local volatilities in terms of the slope and curvature of the
implied volatility surface at the same strike and expiration. His paper wasn’t
easy to understand and people I spoke to were not sure it was correct.
Sometimes I thought he was being intentionally obscure, staking out his
claim without revealing exactly how he had derived it.
We studied Bruno’s report and soon realized that his concise formula was
exactly equivalent to what Iraj and I had developed on a discrete tree.
Where he had used calculus, we had used algebra. Though it wasn’t
anywhere near as important or grand, we were playing Feynman to his
Schwinger or Black and Scholes to his Merton. In an appendix to our paper
we rederived Bruno’s results and included a more transparent proof and a
reference to his work.
In late December 1993 both Bruno and Iraj and I submitted our respective
papers to Graham Cooper at Risk. Bruno’s appeared in the January 1994
issue of Risk, together with an editorial explaining that ours would follow in
February. The January issue also contained a page-long news report by
Graham Cooper about the work that Mark, Bruno, and Iraj and I had done,
referring to it as the new “supermodel,” and rather accurately describing the
relative merits of our individual approaches. We were all suitably flattered.
For the next several years we toured the seminar and conference circuit. I
spoke at dozens of university finance departments and business schools, at
the 
Vienna 
options 
exchange, 
and 
at 
countless 
industry 
conferences.
Salespeople in Japan, France, Switzerland, Spain and Italy, countries where
the more sophisticated traders loved learning about quantitative theories,
took me to see client after client. We gave day-long seminars to large
groups in Zurich and London, Bilbao and Paris, Milan and Munich. It was
exhilarating.
Iraj and I, together with Mike Kamal and Joe Zou, two more ex-physicists
who joined our group in 1994, continued to enhance the model and to use it
to value exotic options. We also worked with two software engineers in QS,
Deniz Ergener and Alan Buckwalter, to embed the model in the desk’s
trading 
software. 
Most 
of 
all, 
we 
struggled 
to 
abstract 
the 
model’s
mathematical features into a visceral understanding that would make it
accessible to traders. Since all their intuition was based on the Black-
Scholes model, we developed a series of simple approximate corrections,
rules of thumb that traders could use to nudge the Black-Scholes model in
the direction of implied trees.
It turned out to be much harder to explain the model to our traders than to
our clients. The traders were busy, their lives dominated by watching
screens, servicing salespeople, and entering the terms of their transactions
into computer systems. Each day they had to book hundreds or thousands of
new trades, often staying late into the night to make sure all the details were
correctly reconciled between the front-office risk management system on
their desks and the back-office mainframe that held the firm’s books and
records. They were more interested in automating the bookkeeping aspects
of their life than in improving their pricing.
The traders were in charge, and used whatever model they 
wanted
without reason or justification. If you wanted them to hedge differently, the
burden of proof was on you. They weren’t stupid, just sensibly philistine,
averse to using new models they didn’t understand. Unfortunately, they
were also averse to spending time on gaining understanding. When traders
have no model at all, it’s easy to get them to use the very first model
available. Once they have something they rely on, it’s much harder to get
them to accept an improvement.
So, 
they 
simply 
stuck 
to 
using 
the 
Black-Scholes 
single-volatility
framework for valuing exotics, even though it produced a flat volatility
surface. To compensate, they put all their inventive energy and intuition
into picking the “right” single volatility to use in the wrong model. One
senior trader insisted that even if the implied tree model were correct and
the Black-Scholes model were wrong, he would always be able to think his
way through to the correspondingly appropriate single volatility that, when
inserted into the wrong model, would nevertheless produce the correct
value for an option. I was therefore very pleased one day to discover that
there were certain exotic options whose correct value in the implied tree
model lay completely outside the range of values we could obtain from the
Black-Scholes model, no matter what single volatility we entered into it.
For these options there was simply no appropriate single volatility that gave
the correct answer from the wrong model. I showed these examples to the
traders with great glee and some vindictiveness. It was merely a minor
victory, as it failed to alter anyone’s behavior.
By 2000, when I worked on approving the use of all models at Goldman,
the tide had begun to turn. Increasingly, at Goldman and its competitors,
trading desks were obligated to provide some justification that the models
they used were appropriate for their market. Nevertheless, in the tug of war
between traders and risk managers, traders usually have greater pull.
One day in late 1994 the tension between traders and quants led me to do
something particularly stupid. I had spent all day dealing with impatient
demands for systems support that I couldn’t provide. That evening I took a
limo out to Kennedy airport to catch a flight to Vienna, where I was
scheduled to give a talk on implied trees at a conference at the OTÖB, the
Austrian options exchange. Boarding my plane, I sat down in my business-
class aisle seat and finally relaxed. I was frustrated by the constant battles at
work, and swore that I would be pushed around no longer.
As I unwound before takeoff, a family of three boarded the plane at the
last minute and began taking their seats, none of which were contiguous.
The father, a gentleman of about fifty, took the window seat on my right, his
son sat across the aisle from me, and his wife sat farther towards the front
of the plane. As I flipped through the pages of the OTÖB conference
program, the father asked the flight attendant if there were a set of three
contiguous 
seats 
for 
his 
family. 
Finally, 
after 
about 
ten 
minutes 
of
unsuccessful agitation, he turned to me and asked if I would switch aisle
seats with his son. Still smarting from being pushed around all day, I
remembered my “no more Mr. Nice Guy” promise to myself. I was seated
in the aisle seat I had requested and I wasn’t about to give it up for anyone.
Turning to him with misplaced firmness, I said, “I’m sorry, but I’d rather
stay where I am.”
As we took off for Vienna, I was appalled at my pointless recalcitrance.
Both my seat and his son’s seat were on the aisle. I was gaining nothing by
being stubborn. And worse, I had now condemned myself to sit for ten
hours next to someone to whom I had been unnecessarily objectionable.
Guilt began to overwhelm me as I debated with myself how to undo what I
had done.
While I writhed, I continued looking through the conference schedule.
Then, I noticed, the man on my right extracted a similar schedule from his
briefcase and began to look at it, too. I glanced at his face again, and
suddenly realized I was sitting next to Bob Merton himself, the developer of
continuous-time financial modeling, a Harvard professor and also a partner
at Long-Term Capital Management. I had seen his picture just that morning
on the inside flap of the cover of his famous book Continuous Time Finance
when I had been reading about jump-diffusion models.
I turned to him shamefacedly and apologized for my rudeness. By now
his son had fallen asleep, and there was no point in exchanging seats, so we
talked for a couple of hours about the history of options pricing models.
Though Bob was very gracious, I felt mortified at having displayed this
unpleasant part of my character, and for the duration of the conference I
found 
myself instinctively avoiding 
him and his family. Next time, I
promised myself, I would be tough on the people who deserved it.
Though Mark, Bruno, and Iraj and I were among the first theorists to use
local volatility to tackle the smile, various other people had similar ideas. In
particular, I came across a closely connected paper by Avi Bick, an Israeli
finance professor at Simon Fraser University in Canada. In November
1994, speaking at an NYU conference Derivatives: The State of the Art, I
was buoyed to hear Gary Gastineau, himself the author of an options text,
comment that our model would make markets more liquid by making
options pricing more accurate. Although we did live to see local volatility
become a household word and a textbook topic, I discovered that it was
much more difficult than I had imagined to create a truly successful
financial model.
Local volatility was an improvement on Black-Scholes in that it could
account for the smile, but it had three genuine failings. First, our new model
excluded the possibility that an index or stock could jump, and most market
participants nowadays regard that possibility as the main factor determining
the shape of the very short-term volatility smile. Our very first attempt to
model the smile had indeed involved such jumps. We were never fond of
jump models—since jumps are too violent and discontinuous to be hedged,
when you include them you lose much of the coherence of the Black-
Scholes model. But jumps are real, and omitting them made our model less
realistic.
Second, implied trees were difficult to calibrate. Often, as you tried to
build progressively finer-meshed trees for better computational accuracy,
the local volatility surface grew wild, displaying unrealistic peaks and
troughs as it varied from point to point. Over time we developed methods
for smoothing these fluctuations, but the need to smooth them made it
difficult to automate the production of implied trees for the desk. These
waves 
and 
troughs 
were 
themselves 
a 
partial 
consequence 
of 
having
excluded jumps; we were trying to model a violent phenomenon with a
tranquil diffusion, something that was bound to make calibration unstable.
Finally, our model ignored the random nature of volatility itself. Iraj and I
tried to enhance our implied tree model a few years later by adding a
random component to the local volatilities, but it made calibration and
calculation even more complex and unwieldy.
Over time we discovered that it is possible to obtain a smile with local
volatility, jumps, random volatility, or some mixture of all three. So, local
volatility and implied trees didn’t become “the” single model of the smile.
Years later, at a dinner in Manhattan discussing the past, Mark Rubinstein
and I both laughed ruefully at the mismatch between what we had expected
and the way things turned out.
Nevertheless, I was ultimately satisfied. Iraj and I had been among the
first to propose a consistent model of a new and strange phenomenon; we
had created a new framework and vocabulary, and we had done it from the
front 
lines, 
on 
Wall 
Street, 
not 
from 
a 
leisurely 
research 
position 
in
academia. The model was somewhat simplistic, as all models are, and it did
not tell the whole story, but it was a plausible, self-consistent little world
that captured one true and essential feature of equity volatility markets:
Volatility tends to increase when markets fall. Local volatility models have
become 
part 
of 
the 
standard 
arsenal 
of 
tools 
used 
by 
academics 
and
practitioners.
During the 1990s, volatility smiles spread to almost all other options
markets. Wherever there was fear of large market moves that could hurt
investors—downward for equities, upwards for gold, in either direction for
many currencies and interest rates—there smiles and skews appeared, and
our model became a key tool in explaining at least some of these features.
By the new millenium, smile models were ubiquitous, with Risk magazine
conferences devoting entire sessions, year after year, to these issues. In the
Firmwide Risk area at Goldman Sachs, I ran a team of about twelve PhDs
in the Derivatives Analysis group that had to approve the prices set and the
models used throughout the firm’s derivatives businesses, and we soon
found that every desk had its own smile model (all of them different), and
that most of our work involved the verification of these models. The models
differed from desk to desk because their markets differed; each market had
its 
own 
characteristic 
smile 
for 
its 
own 
idiosyncratic 
reasons. 
Equity
markets feared a crash; gold markets, after years of low prices, feared a
sudden upward move; in interest-rate markets, bond investors feared high
rates that would devalue their assets, while insurance companies, who often
guaranteed their clients a minimum rate of interest, feared low rates that
would diminish their incoming cash flow; in currency markets, investors
feared 
a 
move 
outside 
some 
stable 
band. 
Each 
fear, 
based 
on 
bitter
experience, corresponded to a different pattern and required a different
model. There was no single model for the smile.
Years ago, when I first became aware of the smile and hoped to find the
“right” model, I used to ask colleagues at other firms which model they
thought was correct. But now there is such a profusion of models that I ask
more practical questions—not “What do you believe?” but rather “When
you hedge a standard S&P 500 option, do you use the Black-Scholes hedge
ratio, something larger, or something smaller?” Local volatility models
produce smaller hedge ratios, while stochastic volatility models tend to
produce larger ones. The differences between the models are even more
dramatic for exotic options.
In 2003, at a derivatives meeting in Barcelona, I led a small roundtable
discussion group on the smile. There were fifteen of us, traders and quants
from derivatives desks all over the world. I asked everyone my simple
question: When you hedge an S&P 500 option, would you use the Black-
Scholes 
hedge 
ratio, 
something 
larger, 
or 
something 
smaller? 
I 
was
surprised that ten years after the first smile models appeared, with the smile
a 
fact 
of 
life 
in 
almost 
every 
derivatives 
market, 
after 
thousands 
of
published papers, there was still no consensus on how to respond to it.
There still isn’t. Though we know much more about the theories of the
smile, we are still on a darkling plain regarding what’s correct. A decade of
speaking with traders and theorists has made me wonder what “correct”
means. If you are a theorist you must never forget that you are traveling
through 
lawless 
roads 
where 
the 
local 
inhabitants 
don’t 
respect 
your
principles. The more I look at the conflict between markets and theories, the
more that limitations of models in the financial and human world become
apparent to me.
Notes
1
A mathematically complex average, to be honest, but an average
nonetheless.
...
Chapter 15
The Snows of Yesteryear
Wall Street consolidates
Clothing goes casual
Moving from equity derivatives to firmwide risk
The bursting of the Internet bubble
Taking my leave
Life in the first half of 1990s was a bit too good to last. The atmosphere in
Quantitative Strategies was rousing—we were an eclectic bunch of ex-
physicists, ex-mathematicians, and computer programmers, with our own
individual interests but all of us were passionate about finance. Most of the
time we were one happy family—the quants taught financial theory to
programmers who in turn taught programming style to the quants. Best of
all, we worked closely with traders such as Dan O’Rourke to bridge the gap
between 
academic 
theory 
and 
trading 
practice. 
Our 
body 
was 
in 
the
business world but our head was inspired by academia. It was a rich
existence.
To top it off, we had ample resources because we worked for traders who
understood that spending money on research and development is not a zero-
sum game. We believed that our models and systems were the best on Wall
Street. But business is cyclical. After the punishing rise in interest rates of
late 1994, power shifted from our traders to our sales-people, who had
difficulty imagining that investment in new models and trading systems
could lead to more business. Instead, they regarded research as an expense.
Lacking the skill to distinguish indulgence from necessity, they demanded
that each investment, no matter how small, be authorized by someone “on
the 
business 
side” 
who 
could 
determine 
its 
merit 
and 
need. 
But
authorization requires authority, and few salespeople had the time and
interest to acquire it. Instead, they held meetings.
In the short run, it was merely time that was wasted; over the longer haul,
opportunities 
were 
lost. 
While 
the 
business 
grew 
our 
infrastructure
stagnated. Now traders began to stay late into the evening to handle ever
larger numbers of transactions with antiquated systems. Eventually, our
models suffered, too. Then, as our models and software failed to stay state-
of-the-art, our self-respect declined. Soon I found myself spending more
and more of my time consoling the discontented in our group. Money could
no longer keep them happy when daily life ceased to be rewarding. Slowly
but steadily I could feel the need for change growing within me, too.
There was one elementary fact that many of our bosses were unable to
grasp: 
We 
were 
building 
these 
models 
and 
systems 
not 
just 
because
somebody authorized it, but rather because we thought they were the right
thing to do, because these questions fascinated us. We saw a problem,
discerned a need, became absorbed, and tackled it. It was all-engrossing.
Struggling to resolve the paradoxes of convertible bond models that had to
combine credit and equity risk, or trying to figure out how to model the
smile, I would find myself thinking about the problems in mental pictures
while I showered or took a run in the park. Sometimes I lay in bed unable to
put the picture out of my mind. We worked hard out of passion, pride, and
the pleasure of being thanked, recognized, and appreciated; of course, we
also worked for money, but money alone wasn’t enough.
The investment banking universe had changed, too. In 1985 you could
look for a quantitative research job at Goldman, Salomon, First Boston,
Prudential, Drexel, Shearson, Lehman, E. F. Hutton, DLJ, Smith Barney,
Paine Webber, Bankers Trust, Chase, Chemical, Citibank, and Mocatta
Metals, to name just a few among the large and reasonably respectable
banks 
and 
trading 
firms. 
Almost 
none 
of 
these 
firms 
exists 
as 
an
independent entity anymore. By 2000 the bigger fish had swallowed up the
smaller ones, and Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, Merrill, and Goldman faced
off in a competition for business and capital around the globe.
To compete, the firms had grown unavoidably larger. When I began
working at Goldman in 1985, the firm employed fewer than 5,000 souls;
when I ate my daily lunch in the cafeteria of the 85 Broad Street building
that housed all our New York employees, I could recognize many of them.
After the layoffs of 1994 there were about 10,000 employees throughout the
firm. By late 1999, as the millennium drew to a close, we had become a
publicly listed company with a workforce of over 20,000 people. At every
quarterly managing directors meeting I heard company leaders recite the
mantras that more than half the people in the firm had been there less than
two years, that growth was necessary to stay competitive, and that we had
to figure out new ways to maintain our culture.
And there really was a culture. Goldman was a little more gentle, a touch
more thoughtful, a jot more tolerant of intellectual diversity. You could talk
to anyone if you needed to—there was little standing on ceremony. If you
were good at something, you could be different. Even programmers and
quants were paid a modicum of respect for their skill and contribution.
People seemed to understand that all of these activities, in their different
ways, benefited the firm, helped attract employees and customers, and
helped make money.
After the IPO, quotidian life changed. The aristocratic old guard with
whom I was familiar, Bob Rubin, Jon Corzine, and Roy Zuckerberg among
them, had left to make their imprint on politics or enjoy their personal lives.
With its newly minted shares of stock to disperse, Goldman began to raid
other firms’ talent and buy other firms’ businesses. As we grew into a large
public company, the flow of information inside the firm became more
constricted and the hierarchy more stratified. None of this was necessarily
bad; it simply went with the territory. I still liked Goldman better than any
other place I considered.
Appearances were changing, too. In late 1999 the Nasdaq was heading
towards its precipitous peak, and each day there were new cracks in the
Berlin wall of Wall Street’s formal business attire. Each new day another
firm announced that casual clothing was henceforth de rigueur. Each new
morning saw formerly navy-suited partners come to work in manifestly
casual trousers and sports jackets over open-necked shirts. At Goldman, the
first 
to 
crumble 
was 
the 
historically 
more 
plebeian 
currency 
and
commodities division. Fixed income fell rapidly thereafter. Equities, the last
bastion, at first gave in only to casual Fridays. One principled person in my
group continued to wear a suit each Friday; when someone asked him why
he wasn’t going casual, he replied that it was bad enough to wear a uniform
every day, but that wearing different uniforms on different days was too
much. After a few weeks of casual Fridays, Equities fell, too, and the Velvet
Revolution was over. From then on it was all casual, all the time.
The intent, of course, was to continue attracting the best young graduates
to staid old investment banking in the face of competition from hipper dot-
coms. On recruiting trips for Goldman we discovered that many MBA
students were leaving their studies in mid-course to join new get-rich
ventures. Even the undergraduates we interviewed weren’t as sharp as they
had been in previous years. Striking back, Goldman distributed free fruit
and soft drinks each day, and, in case that didn’t suffice, they further
provided concierge services to junior employees working too hard to afford
the time to attend to their own needs.
Finally, the hot thing in equities in the late 1990s was going after retail
customer flow and electronic distribution. Investment banks, traditionally
wholesalers, had to catch up fast. For the next few years, I could see, the
valuation side of the business was going to take a back seat to issues of
technology. So, by late 1999, a little weary of intermediating between
discontented quants and resource-starved traders, I thought about change.
But how to move? On the day when I left Goldman for Salomon Brothers in
1988, Scott Pinkus had offered me the chance to move to another position
within the firm. When I asked him why he hadn’t broached it earlier, he
explained that it would have been poaching. It was bad form to try to recruit
someone from another department.
The inverse held, too. If you wanted to move to another area, you weren’t
supposed to set about it openly—that was putting your needs before those
of the business, a bad character trait. Condoning this would have opened the
floodgates. To be culturally correct, you were supposed to sit down with
your 
boss 
and 
then, 
after 
politely 
explaining 
your 
need 
for 
different
horizons, ask him: Is it okay with you if I explore other opportunities?
But this meant showing your hand—it was difficult to tell someone you
didn’t want to work for him or her anymore. Instead, in practice, you
approached the person you did want to work for and asked discreetly if a
position was available for you in his or her area. Then, if there was interest,
you met several times to discuss possibilities. Finally, if you both wanted to
proceed with the transfer, you went to your current boss and asked: Is it
okay with you if I explore other opportunities?
In late 1999 I spoke to several senior people I knew around the firm and
asked about possibilities. One of them was Bob Litzenberger, the head of
Firmwide Risk Management at Goldman Sachs and a former well-known
Wharton professor. His group’s job was to monitor and report the risk of the
entire firm and all of its subdivisions; Bob was well suited to lead it. He
was immensely broad and knowledgeable, the author of well-known papers
who had also worked in several derivatives trading firms. He also had the
will for it; to control the risk carried by the well-paid heads of powerful
trading desks you had to be tough. Concealed behind Bob’s deceptively
mild facade lay a necessarily stubborn will.
It took only a few meetings to establish that Bob was keen to have me
join Firmwide Risk; for my part, I was eager to move. He needed someone
who was a derivatives expert because many of the more subtle risks to the
firm lay in the complex, exotic, high-margin, over-the-counter options
traded by Goldman. We quickly agreed to move forward. Then, other
opportunities having been explored, we rolled back the odometer. The next
day I went to ask my current boss: Is it OK with you if I explore other
opportunities?
In early January 2000 I departed Equity Derivatives for Firmwide Risk.
The Firmwide Risk group that I joined was located in the division of
Operations, Finance, and Resources (OF&R). It was a service division and
it wasn’t glamorous—Resources meant Personnel, Controllers, and Legal,
all essential but nevertheless auxiliary to the firm’s main business activities.
OF&R was a strange locus for quants, a home so foreign to mathematics
and modeling that it was difficult to tempt experienced strategists to come
and work there.
Despite its dull location, Firmwide Risk tackled important problems. Like
insurance companies, trading desks at investment banks make money by
taking calculated risks for a fee. Our major task was to measure the
magnitude of the current risk of every desk, each division, and the entire
firm in a systematic and uniform way, helping to decide which risks were
inappropriate. Each desk ran its own risk management system, but we were
responsible for coordinating the bigger picture.
Most days, a desk was likely to gain or lose small amounts, but there was
always some chance of a potentially large loss. To quantify the notion of
risk, we and almost everyone else on the Street used the so-called daily
VaR, or Value at Risk, the dollar loss threshold above which greater losses
would occur with a probability no larger than 0.4 percent, or 1 chance in
250. This corresponded to about one trading day in a year. VaR is therefore
the 99.6 percentile loss. So, for example, a VaR of $50MM for the Equities
Division meant that there was only a one-in-two-fifty chance that more
money than this would be lost on any given day in the year.
Invented in 1994 by the J. P. Morgan bank, VaR is an unsatisfactory risk
metric that has somehow become an industry standard. We estimated our
daily VaR by running nightly simulations of the changes in the prices of the
portfolio held by each trading desk. These simulations were huge computer
programs that used the past statistics of each desk’s assets to estimate the
distribution of possible values the portfolio might take in the future. With
those estimates we could predict the distribution of each desk’s portfolio
value a day later. We produced VaRs for each desk, then for each group of
desks in a common trading area, then for each division, and finally for the
entire firm, generating a hierarchy of potential one-day losses that gave a
view of the firm’s riskiness from top to bottom.
Each day, like clockwork, we computed and reported the VaR for the firm
and its parts. Several times a week senior members of our group met with
each division’s risk committee, and once a week, in an unpleasantly early
7:30 A.M. global conference call, we met with the central risk committee
who fine-tuned the entire firm’s risk by setting limits on VaR. During
turbulent times they lowered the cap and during quiet times they raised it.
The aim was to take the appropriate amount of risk for the economic
environment, not to eliminate it. No risk, no return.
VaR is not a panacea, and there are many legitimate objections to its use.
Most importantly, VaR by its nature uses statistical distributions to project
the firm’s value into the future, and statistics are inevitably based upon the
past. But the past doesn’t repeat itself verbatim; people learn enough from
their past experiences to make new mistakes as they struggle between greed
and the effort to avoid the old ones.
VaR is also too simplistic: it’s not possible to capture the profit-and-loss
potential of a complex distribution of future portfolio values in a single
number, 
because 
very 
different 
distributions 
can 
have 
the 
same 
99.6
percentile. We are ignorant of the true probabilities—the extreme tails of
stock and bond price distributions, not to mention the overall distributions
of complex securities like swaptions or weather derivatives, are poorly
understood and may not even be stationary.
Even if you insist on representing risk with a single number, VaR isn’t the
best one. Percentiles don’t reflect the psychology of risk perception very
well—two different securities can each have their own small percentile
losses that combine to produce a greater percentile loss for the portfolio.
The VaR of a portfolio can therefore be greater than the VaR of its
components, 
in 
counterintuitive 
contradiction 
with 
the 
idea 
that
diversification diminishes risk.
As a result, though we used VaR, we didn’t make it our religion. We were
pantheists, praying to many parallel risk gods. For example, we had all
lived through various market meltdowns—the 1987 stock market crash, the
1998 Russian default crisis—whose reoccurrence would cause great losses
even though we had no idea of their probability. Thus, the firm imposed a
bound on the positions on each desk so that they could lose no more than a
tolerable amount in a repetition of such events. These and other stress-test
limits based on similar experienced or imagined catastrophes were imposed
over and above the VaR limits.
I think we did a pretty good job by taking a many-sided view of risk, but
it was a never ending enterprise. Each year we collected more data to
improve our statistics. Each year the simulations were enhanced to better
reflect the behavior of familiar markets. And, whenever Goldman entered a
new business—energy or weather derivatives, for example—that had no
history, we strived to create an imagined history and statistics that would
reflect the risk we perceived. So much of financial modeling is an exercise
of the imagination.
Though most of Firmwide Risk focused on VaR, I didn’t have much to do
with it. I found it useful but inelegant work, aimed more at an audience of
regulators rather than traders. Instead, I spent most of my time in Firmwide
Risk as head of the Derivatives Analysis group, a collection of about twelve
PhDs in New York, London, and Tokyo. Our mission was to ensure that
every trading desk’s derivative deals were “marked to market” accurately.
Marking to market is the act of assigning to each security in your
portfolio a price that reflects its current market value. You have a very good
idea of the value of a share of Microsoft, which trades millions of times a
day at a publicly listed price. Marking it to market is easy. But the
derivatives trading desks at Goldman (and most other investment banks)
had developed increasingly large positions in long-term or exotic over-the-
counter derivative securities, tailored to satisfy the needs of particular
customers. It was harder to mark them to market. It’s much simpler to price
a new pair of Levi’s than a secondhand, custom-tailored Christian Lacroix
evening dress.
Our firm owned hosts of illiquid derivatives in the interest-rate, equity,
currency, commodity, energy, and credit markets. Some structured products
spanned many markets—we traded yen-denominated bonds whose coupons
would increase if the S&P 500 index rose. To manage this position you had
to hedge changes in Japanese and American interest rates, the yen, and the
S&P 500.
There were no current market prices for such securities. Quants and
traders “marked them to model,” which meant they figured out their value
by means of carefully calibrated models, developed with mathematics and
written in computer code that was then embedded in front-office risk
management systems. And there was no secondary market for most of these
exotics—you had to keep them on your books until they expired, and hedge
them by means of the same model along the way.
What is the fair value of an illiquid security that you have to hold for
several years? This was an immensely significant and practical question,
because the value of these securities determines the company’s earnings, its
stock price, and the bonuses of the traders that manage them.
The trading desks typically valued their illiquid positions using their own
models. But this involved a moral hazard; when a trader’s year-end bonus
depends upon the value of a security whose price is both obscure and under
his control, he may be tempted to embellish his profit when payday
approaches.
The Derivatives Analysis group was the firm’s model police: Our job was
to confirm that the billions of dollars of exotic or illiquid derivatives were
being marked fairly. It’s an honorable and important task, one that requires
both knowledge and wisdom. That first year in Firmwide Risk I saw a
plethora of idiosyncratic and illiquid securities on the firm’s books in New
York, London, and Tokyo. The Equities Division was long out-of-the-
money, 
four-year 
calls 
and 
short 
out-of-the-money 
puts 
on 
individual
technology stocks, sold to them by insiders who were hedging the stock
they had received when their firm went public. The value of these options
was somewhat uncertain because there was no listed market at those distant
expirations and strikes. The fixed-income division had much more complex
swaptions on their books, similar to those yen-denominated bonds with
coupons indexed to the S&P 500. The commodities desks traded long-term
barrier options on gold, structured to help mining companies hedge their
future profits against gold price declines. All of these markets manifested
volatility 
smiles 
that 
made 
the 
accurate 
valuation 
of 
these 
highly
complicated securities difficult and uncertain.
Slowly it began to dawn on me that what we faced was not so much risk
as uncertainty. Risk is what you bear when you own, for example, 100
shares 
of 
Microsoft—you 
know 
exactly 
what 
those 
shares 
are 
worth
because you can sell them in a second at something very close to the last
traded price. There is no uncertainty about their current value, only the risk
that their value will change in the next instant. But when you own an exotic
illiquid option, uncertainty precedes its risk—you don’t even know exactly
what the option is currently worth because you don’t know whether the
model you are using is right or wrong. Or, more accurately, you know that
the model you are using is both naive and wrong—the only question is how
naive and how wrong.
No one truly knows the precise value of a stock option that cannot be
traded. Its value depends on what you can squeeze out of it by hedging its
underlying stock through all its future random price changes to expiration.
And this depends on the nature of the randomness and on the particular
strategy employed to hedge against it, both of which cannot be totally
determined in advance.
Faced with uncertainty, I took a many-worlds view of derivatives values. I
assumed that the future could be one of several foreseeable worlds, and that
there was consequently a range of possible values one could legitimately
assign to the option. In one future world, for example, stock volatility might
decrease as stock prices increased. In another, volatility might simply be
random. In each of a host of plausible different worlds, all consistent with
today’s observations, you can work out the correspondingly appropriate
theoretical model and then use it to value the option. You can then compare
the desk’s mark-to-model value with the spectrum of many-worlds values,
and see whether it lies inside their range. If it does, then it’s reasonable and
can be allowed as a mark. But if it doesn’t, you negotiate with the desk to
either justify or amend its estimate. Furthermore, since there is a range of
plausible values, we recommended that Goldman hold in reserve an amount
equal to the average mismatch between the range of plausible values and
the desk’s actual mark. This reserve represented a portion of their expected
profit to be held in escrow against the possibility that their model or
hedging strategy was wrong. It would be released only when the trade was
finally unwound and the true market value of the option would finally be
realized and revealed.
This was the strategy we adopted for appraising the firm’s exotic and
illiquid derivatives, which we regarded in the same way that an art dealer
might think about his inventory of impressionist painting. Suppose an art
dealer’s agent has acquired a valuable Renoir painting for $10 million when
he believes it to be worth $13 million, and now asks to be paid a bonus of
ten percent of the expected profit of $3 million, or $300,000. It would be
foolish of the dealer to pay the bonus until the Renoir has been sold. Until
then, the painting’s value is not merely risky, but uncertain. Illiquid option
or 
illiquid 
painting, 
you 
shouldn’t 
count 
your 
chickens 
until 
they’re
hatched.
The more I thought about it, the more that appraisal seemed like the right
metaphor for options valuation. When you want to estimate the value of an
antique that hasn’t changed hands in a long time, you compare it to
analogous objets d’art that have been auctioned more recently. The more I
dealt with estimating the value of the panoply of option structures and
models we came across, the more I believed that options valuation was
really valuation by analogy.
I recalled that as a child in bible school, I had learned the story of Hillel, a
famous sage, who was asked to recite the essence of God’s laws while
standing on one leg. “Do not do unto others as you would not have them do
unto you,” he is supposed to have said. “All the rest is commentary. Go and
learn.” I believe that you can summarize the essence of quantitative finance
on one leg, too: “If you want to know the value of a security, use the price
of another security that’s as similar to it as possible. All the rest is
modeling. Go and build.”
Financial economists grandiosely refer to this law as the law of one price,
which states that securities with identical future payouts, no matter how the
future turns out, should have identical current prices. It’s the essential—
perhaps the only—principle of the field. To estimate the value of an illiquid
security, you find a set of similar liquid securities, with known market
prices, 
whose 
payouts 
match 
those 
of 
the 
illiquid 
security 
under 
all
circumstances. The best estimate for the value of the illiquid security is then
the value of the set of liquid securities with the same payouts.
Where do models enter? It takes a model to show that the illiquid security
and 
the 
liquid 
portfolio 
have 
identical 
future 
payouts 
under 
all
circumstances. 
Your 
model 
must 
specify 
what 
you 
mean 
by 
“all
circumstances,” and you must show that the replicating portfolio, in every
future 
circumstance, 
has 
the 
same 
payout. 
Most 
of 
the 
mathematical
complexity in finance involves the elaboration of this single principle.
Models are only models, toylike descriptions of idealized worlds. Simple
models envisage a simple future; more sophisticated models incorporate a
more complex set of future scenarios that can more closely approximate
actual markets. But no mathematical model can capture the intricacies of
human psychology. Watching traders occasionally put too much faith in the
power of formalism and mathematics, I saw that if you listen to the models’
siren song for too long, you may end up on the rocks or in the whirlpool.
In September 2000 I was elected Financial Engineer of the Year by the
International Association of Financial Engineers (IAFE). I was the first and,
thus far, only practitioner to receive this award, lucky to be temporarily in
the company of the previous winners: Robert Merton, Fischer Black, Mark
Rubinstein, Stephen Ross, Robert Jarrow, John Cox, and John Hull, all
renowned contributors to the field who had made their major contributions
while in academic life. I considered myself fortunate to have been able to
make a small mark after a late start.
As a practitioner I had always been hands-on. What I had enjoyed most
was research, the primary work that no one has done before, carried out for
a small number of people in trading who were genuinely interested in the
result. Now, in Firmwide Risk at a large firm, I had to accustom myself to
doing secondary research, merely helping to validate the results of other
quants on the desk who had taken the first crack at a problem. I was also
part of a large bureaucracy. Each week I went to two fixed-income risk
meetings, one equities risk meeting, one firmwide risk committee meeting,
at least two Derivatives Analysis group meetings, and a meeting of all the
managers in Firmwide Risk. Then there were three different meetings with
three different controllers for equities, fixed income, and currencies and
commodities respectively, as well as the periodic meeting of all the VPs in
Firmwide Risk.
That was when times were good. By mid-2000, after the bursting of the
technology bubble and the subsequent decline in all stock markets, I had
many more meetings with discouraged young quants in my group who
foresaw a very limited upside. By early 2001 I was spending a large fraction
of my time trying to cheer up disgruntled but talented people.
There was one real perquisite to being a senior person in Firmwide Risk
—you got to participate in the firm’s central risk meeting once a week and
watch all the biggest big shots in action as we listened to the state of our
business prospects and discussed current events and strategies. I was invited
to hear Wesley Clark address us on Iraq, more than a year before the
invasion. In the end, however, I was an outsider. Running the firm was their
world, not mine. I liked smaller worlds and I preferred working on more
specific and detailed topics. Soon, I knew, I would move on.
Every Tuesday morning I held a global call at 10 Hanover Square with all
the senior people in Derivatives Analysis. At 8:00 A.M. New York time
they called in from London and Tokyo. One Tuesday, as we sat around the
speakerphone discussing deals we were vetting, I glanced at the window
and saw sheets of paper cascading out of the sky. I thought it looked like an
archaic ticker-tape parade for returning astronauts or victorious Yankee
teams, but it was too early for a parade. Then someone came running in to
say an airplane had struck the World Trade Center. We switched on the
television perched high in the corner of my office, and saw the flaming
tower, 
listened 
to 
the 
reports 
of 
an 
accidental 
collision. 
Then, 
a 
few
moments later, we heard a thunderous bang through my window as we
simultaneously saw the other tower on TV burst into flame. It was instantly
clear we were under attack.
Outside the building we regrouped, watching the horrific flames and
smoke pour from the towers. I had visions of waves of subsequent airplanes
careening in to strike more buildings. Crowds of us set off for the long walk
north, careful to walk neither too close to the unprotected FDR Drive nor
too close to attractive targets such as the Pan Am building. By the time we
reached Chinatown we heard of the towers’ collapse and the strike on the
Pentagon. By 3 P.M.I reached Sonya’s school on the Upper East Side,
where they were releasing students only into the care of their parents.
Lower Manhattan was like a war zone for the next few months—burnt air
and blockaded streets patrolled by New York City policemen and scared-
looking and out-of-shape members of the National Guard. I took a cab daily
from the West Side to Gracie Mansion, itself surrounded by sand-filled
dump trucks, and a ferry from there down the East River to the South Street
Seaport. Working and living in Manhattan was oppressive; you had no
respite from the expectation of the next assault. Helicopters patrolled the
night sky. People woke at 3 A.M. like clockwork to watch CNN. I noticed
the palpable relief when I spent a weekend in the country or the suburbs—
one felt briefly safe there. The first day I noticed a lightening of spirits in
Manhattan 
was 
more 
than 
two 
months 
after 
September 
11, 
on 
the
Wednesday 
before 
Thanksgiving, 
when 
suddenly 
the 
city 
seemed 
just
slightly festive.
Normally it takes me years to make up my mind about a transition. Now
it took only two months of vacillation before I decided that I was ready to
leave Goldman Sachs. The best times I had had there were when I worked
in small groups of traders and quants with a strong joint purpose—with
Peter Freund’s desk when we developed BDT, and with Iraj and Dan
O’Rourke when we built equity risk systems and developed our implied tree
model. I decided to take a year off, write a book, and then return to work,
either in academia or at a job in a smaller investment firm. On June 7, after
my farewell party, more than 17 years after I started at Goldman, I went
home for good. The next morning I went for a run in Central Park at 11
A.M., the best time for running. I hadn’t done this in several years.
A week later I received an email at home from someone in my old
Quantitative Strategies group who hadn’t been able to attend my party. He
and I had had occasional fierce battles over software standardization. Like
most quants, he was foreign born. “In retrospect,” he wrote, “Working in
your QS has been [sic] my happiest years in Goldman. Very often, I deeply
regret not having recognized fully what a privilege it was to work next to
(sometimes with) you and your colleagues. As time goes by, I realize how
lucky I was to be able to work in the atmosphere of the high intellectual
standards that you set, with extraordinary talented people that gathered
around you. I missed the times, and the opportunities that I did not take a
full advantage of.”
The snows of yesteryear inevitably melt, and there’s nothing sad about it.
I was ready for something new.
...
Chapter 16
The Great Pretender
Full circle, back to Columbia
Physics and finance redux
Different endeavors require different degrees of precision
Financial models as gedanken experiments
A year later, in the fall of 2003, I had come full circle, time present and time
past present in time future. I was back at Columbia, a professor and director
of the program in financial engineering in the Mudd building on 120th
Street and Amsterdam Avenue, a mere 100 yards east of Pupin where I
spent so many years getting my PhD. I was also working part-time with a
fund of funds, a firm that invests clients’ money in a portfolio of hedge
funds.
As I teach, I am struck again by the difference between what can be
taught in school and what can be learned on the job. When I started on Wall
Street, I simply assumed it made good sense to apply the techniques of
physics to financial modeling. In particle physics people dreamed of GUTs
(Grand Unified Theories) and strings and TOEs (Theories of Everything).
The tools they used—differential calculus, partial differential equations,
Fourier 
series, 
Monte 
Carlo 
simulations, 
even 
Hilbert 
spaces—at 
first
seemed as appropriate for describing the movements of stocks and yield
curves as they did for particles and fields.
Looking at the motion of yield curves in the mid-1980s, I saw no reason
why financial theorists shouldn’t shoot for their theory of everything, too.
Why shouldn’t one set of equations describe the motions of all interest
rates, producing one rational set of fair prices for all interestrate-sensitive
securities? If you had asked me where quantitative finance was headed, I
would have hoped for the discovery of that theory.
Seventeen years on, I say without regret that things aren’t the way I
expected. There is no unified theory. Models must necessarily be pragmatic,
and traders typically use a variety of similar but slightly inconsistent models
—one for Treasury bonds, another for corporates, a third for caps, a fourth
for 
swaptions—even 
though 
all 
these 
securities 
depend 
on 
the 
same
underlying 
interest 
rates. 
Though 
we 
aspire 
to 
it, 
we 
don’t 
expect
comprehensiveness. The best quants know that it is unattainable.
Newcomers to the field find it hard to swallow. One French student in my
course recently wrote in his evaluation that, although the course gave him a
good feel for the way quantitative finance is practiced, he is “still not
convinced that an ab initio model in finance (like the sophisticated ones in
other fields) to explain almost everything does not exist.” Physicists new to
finance, as I did, imagine a grand unified theory can be found. Many
finance academics who should know better also seem to imagine it can be
done, but they don’t live in the real world. It isn’t really possible. And it’s
not a question of computational power—even infinitely fast computers
won’t do the trick. The problem is deeper.
The techniques of physics hardly ever produce more than the most
approximate truth in finance, because “true” financial value is itself a
suspect notion. In physics, a model is right when it correctly predicts the
future 
trajectories 
of 
planets 
or 
the 
existence 
and 
properties 
of 
new
particles, such as Gell-Mann’s Omega Minus. In finance, you cannot easily
prove a model right by such observations. Data are scarce and, more
importantly, markets are arenas of action and reaction, dialectics of thesis,
antithesis, and synthesis. People learn from past mistakes and go on to
make new ones. What’s right in one regime is wrong in the next.
As a result, physicists turned quants don’t expect too much from their
theories, though many economists naively do. Perhaps this is because
physicists, 
raised 
on 
theories 
capable 
of 
superb 
divination, 
know 
the
difference between a fundamental theory and a phenomenological toy,
useful though the latter may be. Trained economists have never seen a
really first-class model. It’s not that physics is “better,” but rather that
finance is harder. In physics you’re playing against God, and He doesn’t
change his laws very often. When you’ve checkmated Him, He’ll concede.
In finance, you’re playing against God’s creatures, agents who value assets
based on their ephemeral opinions. They don’t know when they’ve lost, so
they keep trying.
In his textbook Derivatives, Paul Wilmott, an applied mathematician
turned 
quant, 
writes 
that 
“every 
financial 
axiom 
I’ve 
ever 
seen 
is
demonstrably wrong. . . . The real question is how wrong is the theory, and
how useful is it regardless of its validity. Everything you read in any
theoretical finance book, including this one, you must take with a generous
pinch of salt.” I couldn’t agree more. In fact, the very title Wilmott chose
for 
his 
later 
book, 
Wilmott 
on 
Derivatives, 
aptly 
illustrates 
his
understanding of the point. The “Wilmott” in the title implies that a difficult
subject is being explained by an authority, but it also suggests that the
subject matter itself lacks the coherence of true science. True science does
not need this kind of authority—one cannot imagine a 1918 textbook called
Einstein on Gravitation! Unlike finance, the theory of gravitation gets its
weight from the ineluctability of its arguments and its ability to account for
previously inexplicable anomalies. Gravitation needs no Einstein to lend it
gravitas. Personality plays a larger part in economic writing because truth’s
part is smaller.
So, why is it that the methods of physics work less well in finance?
As a physicist, when you propose a model of Nature, you’re pretending
you can guess the structure created by God. It sounds eminently plausible.
Every physicist believes he has a small chance of doing so, or else he
wouldn’t be in the field. Perhaps it’s possible because God Himself doesn’t
pretend. But as a quant, when you propose a new model of value, you’re
pretending you can guess the structure created by other people. When you
try out a new yield curve model, you’re implicitly saying something like
“Let’s pretend people in markets care only about the level of future short-
term interest rates, and that they expect them to be distributed normally.”As
you say that to yourself, if you’re honest, your heart sinks. You’re just a
poor pretender and you know immediately there is no chance at all that you
are truly right. When you take on other people, you’re pretending you can
comprehend other pretenders, a much more difficult task.
But doesn’t God make people, too? Is there really a conflict between
individuals and Nature? These are ancient questions. Schrödinger, the
unconventional 
father 
of 
the 
probability 
wave 
equation 
in 
quantum
mechanics, wrote a short summary of his personal views on determinism
and free will in the epilogue to What is Life?, a compilation of his
influential lectures on the physico-chemical basis of living matter. “My
body functions as a pure mechanism according to the Laws of Nature,” he
wrote. 
“Yet 
I 
know, 
by 
incontrovertible 
direct 
experience, 
that 
I 
am
directing its motions, of which I foresee the effects, that may be fateful and
all-important, in which case I feel and take full responsibility for them.”
The 
only 
way 
he 
could 
reconcile 
these 
two 
apparently 
contradictory
experiences—his deep belief in the susceptibility of Nature to human
theorizing and his equally firm sense of the individual autonomy that must
lie beneath any attempt to theorize—was to infer that “I—I in the widest
meaning of the word, that is to say, every conscious mind that has ever said
or felt ‘I’—am the person, if any, who controls the ‘motion of the atoms’
according to the Laws of Nature.”
Schrödinger was following in the steps of the long line of earlier German
philosophers who thought that all the various worldly voices referring to
themselves in conversation as “I” were not really referring to independent
I’s, but to the same universal I—God or Nature.
Nevertheless, it’s the unpredictable I’s—people like you and me—who
determine financial value. Fischer Black once wrote of financial theories
that:
In 
the 
end, 
a 
theory 
is 
accepted 
not 
because 
it 
is 
confirmed 
by
conventional empirical tests, but because researchers persuade one
another that the theory is correct and relevant.
I would go even further than this. From the viewpoint of someone who
works with traders, I like to think of financial models as analogues of the
way quantum and relativity physicists in the early part of the last century
used gedanken experiments. Gedanken experiments—German for thought
experiments—were imaginary investigations, a sort of mental stress-testing
of the physical world, conducted in your head because they were too
difficult to do in practice. Their aim was to force your conceptual picture of
the world into a contradiction. Einstein imagined what he would see sitting
on the edge of a moving light beam in order to get insight into the
contradiction between a Newtonian observer and Maxwell’s description of
light. Would the light wave still seem to undulate from peak to trough when
you sat on one of its peaks? Similarly Schrödinger, in order to highlight the
radical, 
counterintuitive 
nature 
of 
quantum 
mechanics, 
imagined 
an
unobserved cat sealed in a box containing a radioactive atom that, on
decaying, would trigger a Geiger counter to release a poison. Would the cat,
like 
an 
unobserved 
electron 
oscillating 
continuously 
between 
different
quantum states, swing from alive to dead and back again?
I think this is the right way to use mathematical models in finance.
Models are only models, not the thing in itself. We cannot, therefore, expect
them to be truly right. Models are better regarded as a collection of parallel
thought universes you can explore. Each universe should be consistent, but
the actual financial and human world, unlike the world of matter, is going to
be infinitely more complex than any model we make of it. We are always
trying to shoehorn the real world into one of the models to see how useful
an approximation it is.
You must always ask: Does the model give you a set of plausible
variables to describe the world, and a set of relationships between them that
permits its analysis and investigation? You’re always trying to make a
limited 
approximation 
of 
reality, 
using 
variables 
that 
people 
can
comprehend, so that you can say to yourself or your boss, for example, “I
was short emerging-market volatility, so we lost money when the crisis
came.” Good theories, like Black-Scholes, provide a laboratory of ideas in
which you can work out the likely consequences of possible causes. They
give you a common language with which to quantify and communicate your
feelings about value.
The right way to engage with a model is, like a fiction reader or a really
great pretender, to temporarily suspend disbelief, and then push it as far as
possible. The success of the theory of options valuation, the best model
economics can offer, is the story of a Platonically simple theory, taken more
seriously than it deserves and then used extravagantly, with hubris, as a
crutch to human thinking. “If a fool would persist in his folly, he would
become wise,” wrote Blake in The Marriage of Heaven and Hell. This is
what quants have done with options theory.
A little hubris is good. But then, when you’re done modeling, you must
remind yourself that you’re theorizing about I’s, and that, though God’s
world can be divined by principles, humanity prefers to remain mysterious.
Catastrophes strike when people allow theories to take on a life of their own
and hubris evolves into idolatry. Somewhere between these two extremes, a
little north of common sense but still south of idolatry, lies the wise use of
conceptual models. It takes judgment to draw the line.
Meanwhile, fundamental physics and its visions of ten-dimensional strings
seem 
to 
get 
steadily 
more 
arcane, 
and 
quantitative 
finance 
becomes
progressively more refined and detailed. Being a scientist can sometimes be
depressing. Surrounded by younger versions of yourself, you are constantly
confronted by the mismatch between the dreams of youth and the facts of
maturity.
I once read J.P.S. Uberoi’s biography of Goethe,
1
one of the last people to
make contributions to both art and science. Goethe’s Theory of Colours is a
unified examination of the interior and exterior characteristics of light and
color, conducted with an awareness of the observer himself. According to
Uberoi, scientists tend to regard Goethe as a poet who strayed beyond his
proper place. His critics said he mistakenly thought of Nature as a work of
art, being qualitative and personal where he should have been quantitative
and impersonal. But Goethe was not so naive as to think that Nature is a
work of art, wrote Uberoi. Rather, he believed that the description of our
knowledge of Nature should be a work of art.
I like to think in Goethean terms of what we do in quantitative finance:
We try to make as beautiful and truthful a description as we can of what we
observe. We’re involved in intuiting, inventing, or concocting approximate
laws 
and 
patterns. 
We 
combine 
both 
art 
and 
science 
in 
creating
understanding. We use our intuition, our scientific knowledge and our
pedagogical skills to paint a picture of how to think qualitatively, and then,
within limits, quantitatively, about the world of human affairs, and in so
doing, we influence and are influenced by other people’s thoughts. There’s
not much more one could ask for in this life without being wishful.
Notes
1
J.P.S. Uberoi, The Other Mind of Europe: Goethe as a Scientist, Oxford
University Press, Delhi (1984).
...
Acknowledgments
I am most indebted to Pamela van Giessen, my editor at John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., who, several years ago, let me persuade her that writing a book
about what it’s like to be a quant was a good idea. From then on she
provided inspiration, enthusiasm, guidance, and advice, on the big picture
as well as on details. I’m thankful for her interest and patience; it is very
unlikely I would have seen this endeavor through to its end without her.
Jennifer MacDonald at Wiley also provided useful help, as did the people
at 
PV&M 
Publishing 
Solutions, 
in 
particular 
Joanna 
Pomeranz, 
Matt
Kushinka, and Gabriella Kadar.
The kind encouragement I received from family, friends, and, sometimes,
from relative strangers who later became friends, played a truly large part in
my completing this book. Writing is a lonely pleasure, and a small amount
of 
other 
people’s 
enthusiasm 
can 
have 
a 
disproportionately 
large 
and
beneficial impact. I am pleased to thank Beverly Bell, Steve Blaha, Richard
Cohen, Nancy Cohen, Joshua Derman, Shulamit Derman, Sonya Derman,
Michael Goodkin, Marc Groz, Ruth Jowell, Mike Kamal, Robert Kiernan,
Mark 
Koenigsberg, 
Bob 
Long, 
Helga 
Nagy, 
Nassim 
Taleb, 
and 
Don
Weingarten. Their positive words had more effect on me than they may
realize, and I’m grateful to them. I am especially thankful to Ray Bacon,
who encouraged me and offered helpful comments on the manuscript.
Finally, above all, I am pleased to thank my wife Eva, who patiently and
carefully read and commented on large parts of the manuscript, and give me
thoughtful suggestions, good advice, and moral support throughout its
writing.
...
About the Author
Emanuel Derman is a principal and Head of Risk at Prisma Capital Partners
and a professor and Director of the Program in Financial Engineering at
Columbia University. He was formerly a managing director at Goldman,
Sachs & Co., which he joined in 1985 after an initial career in academic life
and at AT&T Bell Laboratories. He is the co-creator of the widely used
Black-Derman-Toy interest rate model and the Derman-Kani local volatility
model. 
Among 
his 
many 
awards 
and 
honors, 
he 
was 
named 
the
SunGard/IAFE Financial Engineer of the Year in 2000 and was appointed to
the Risk Hall of Fame in 2002. He has a PhD in theoretical physics from
Columbia University and is the author of numerous articles in elementary
particle physics, computer science, and finance.
...
Index
A
A Programming Language (APL)
Academic jobs, scarcity
Academics, isolation
Achyuthuni, Rao
Adams, Scott
Adjustable Rate Mortgage (ARM)
ARM-based structures
idiosyncrasies
pools
prepayment rates, regression model
research group
Adler, Dennis
Adler, Margot
AI. See Artificial intelligence
Akers, Karen
Algorithmics (financial software company)
Allen, Paul
Allstate (company)
Amazon.com
American Express merger
American Finance Association
American Mathematical Society
American mortgage market, size
American Physical Society
meeting (1969)
American put value, closed-form solution (search for)
American Stock Exchange, options conference, Amex
warrants
Analytics (company)
Anderson, P.W.
Animorphic (company)
Anthroposophists
APL. See A Programming Language
Applied mathematics
Applied physics, employment
Arab oil embargo (1973)
Arb group. See Meriwether
Area 10. See Bell Laboratories
Area 90 (Network Systems). See Bell Laboratories
ARM. See Adjustable Rate Mortgage
Aron, J.
Art of Computer Programming, The (Knuth)
Arthur D. Little and Co.
Artificial intelligence (AI), Goldman approach
Asian call option, purpose
Aspen Center for Physics
Asymetrix (company)
Atomic physics
AT&T. See Bell Laboratories
advanced switching systems
business uniform
employment, view of
penal colony, experienced as
share, future price (variation)
AT&T Technical Journal
At-the-money option
At-the-money put
Auguries of Innocence (Blake)
AutoBond (Diller), creation
Average call option, purpose
Avery, Oswald
B
Baby Bells, divestiture from AT&T
Back-of-the-envelope methods
Backus, John
Backus Normal Form (BNF)
Baker, Howard
Bank of America, partnership. See D.E. Shaw & Co.
Bankers Trust
Bannister, Roger
Bardeen, John
Barfield, Owen
Barrier options
hedging gold production with. See Long-term barrier options
jump probability/size, sensitivity to
BDT. See Black-Derman-Toy
Bear Stearns
mortgage portfolio valuation system
Bég, Mirza Abdul Baqi
Bell, Beverly
Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science
Bell Laboratories (AT&T)
Area 10
Area 90 (Network Systems)
arrival
bureaucracy
depth of
irrationality
company rules
employment
exit
managerial hierarchy
manageriality, cult of
Members of Technical Staff (MTS)
programming duties
treatment
space program funding
Bell System Technical Journal
Bell Telephone Companies
Bellcore (company)
Bellow, Saul
Bergier, Alex
Berk, Jonathan
Berkeley University
Bernstein, Jeremy
Beta decay
Bettelheim, Bruno
Bezos, Jeff
BGM. See Brace-Gatarek-Musiela
Big Bang
Binomial model
Cox-Ross-Rubinstein model
Binomial trees. See also Implied binomial tree
Bio-informatics programs
BK. See Black-Karasinski
Black, Fischer
awards
clarity/directness/informality
collaboration
death
disapproval
first meeting
independent thinking
meetings
patience
precision
re-employment by
speech
view of quant groups
Black box computerized statistical arbitrage
Black-Derman-Toy (BDT) model
application
availability
development
equal-period version
research, publicizing
stochastic factor, addition of
two-dimensional version, investigation
work, completion
Black-Karasinski (BK) model
trees (with variable periods), incorporation
Black-Scholes calculator, usage
Black-Scholes distribution
Black-Scholes formalism
Black-Scholes formula
calibration
what it tells you
Black-Scholes implied volatilities
Black-Scholes model coding
Black-Scholes options pricing model
calibration
extensions
improvement, local volatility
risk, cancellation
seminar on
usage
usefulness
Black-Scholes single-volatility framework
Black-Scholes stock option model, modifications for bonds
Black-Scholes value
replication method, convergence to
Black-Scholes-Merton
framework
model
Blaha, Steve
Blake, William. See also Songs of Innocence and Experience, Auguries of
Innocence
Blavatsky, Madame
Bloomberg, Michael
Bloomberg (financial software company)
BNF. See Backus Normal Form
Bohr, Niels
Bond options
model. See Goldman, Sachs and Co.
sale
traders
valuation models
Bond Portfolio Analysis (BPA)
group
reports
Bonds
convexity
duration
issuance
portfolios, structuring
prices, calibrating to
risk system
traders, analytic/mathematical skills
values, comparison
yield
Bookstaber, Rick
Borror, Jeff
Bosco
creation
demonstration
usage
BPA. See Bond Portfolio Analysis
Brace-Gatarek-Musiela (BGM) model
Brattain, Walter H.
Brenner, Menachem
Bronx High School of Science
Brookhaven National Laboratories
Bubble chamber20
Buckwalter, Alan
Buddhism, living principles
Business Analysis Systems Center
arrival
escape from
location
C
C (programming language)
usage
C++ (programming language)
usage
C (program), generation
C programming (test)
CAC-30
call option, purpose
California Institute of Technology (Caltech)
Call options.
purpose. See also Asian call option; Average call option; CAC-30
Callable bonds
Cambodia, American invasion
Cambridge Tripos examination
Cape Town. See University of Cape Town
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
CAPM. See Capital Asset Pricing Model
Casio, information-storing watch
C-ATS (company)
CDC IXIS (company)
Celestial Seasonings Tea Company
CERN. See European Center for Nuclear Research
Chang, Lay Nam
Chaos: Making a New Science (Gleick)
Chargaff, Erwin
Charmed quark
decay
Chase, Chevy
Chogyam Trungpa
Chomsky, Noam
Christ, Norman
CIR. See Cox-Ingersoll-Ross
Circumstance, force
Citibank
Civilization, discontents
Clarendon Labs
Clark, Wesley
CNN
Cobol, usage
Cobrinik, Zach
Cockney rhyming
Collective behavior
Columbia University
antinepotism laws
computer science courses
dog years
graduate study
lessons learned
physics
class, size
department
professors
“quals” (qualifying exams)
Commodity inflation (1990s)
Compton scattering, Klein-Nishina formula
Computer languages, grammar
Computer programs, writing
Continuous Time Finance (Merton)
Continuous-time financial modeling
Cooper, Graham
Coppola, Francis Ford
Corey, E.J.
Cosmic Code, The (Pagels)
Cosmic rays
Cosmology
Courant Institute
Cox, John C.
award
textbooks
Cox-Ingersoll-Ross (CIR) model
Cox-Ross-Rubinstein model. See Binomial options
Cranks
Cronin, Jim
Currency, natural
Cvitanovic, Predrag
D
Dattatreya, Ravi
Goldman departure
introduction
model, for bond options
modification
D.E. Shaw & Co. See Shaw & Co.
Bank of America, partnership
creation
Delta
Dembo, Ron
Demeterfi, Kresimir
Dengler, Ted
Denmark. See Kingdom of Denmark
Department of Defense, research funding
Department of Energy
research funding
research grant
Young Investigator Award in High Energy Physics Research
Derivative security
characteristic
Derivatives. See Interest-rate derivatives
scandals. See Orange County; Proctor and Gamble
Derivatives Analysis group, See Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Derivatives: The State of the Art (conference)
Derivatives (Wilmott)
Derman, Eva
Derman, Joshua
Derman, Sonya
Deutsche Bank
Dexter Earle on Derivatives
Dharmadhattu
Differential equations
Feynman-Kaç method
Diffusion. See also Stock prices
model. See Jump-diffusion model; Yield
Digital (Digital Equipment Corporation)
Dilbert (Adams)
Diller, Stan
FSG control
influence
interview
view of quant groups
Diller’s Dillies
Dillon Reed
Dimuons
distribution
events
production, theory
speed
Dirac, Paul
Dissident Row
Distraction, during meditation
DLJ (company)
Doctoral research
Doctoral thesis
completion
Doers, contrast. See Thinkers
DOS
Dot-com bubble, termination
Dove, Arthur
Downs, Jim
Dress for Success (Molloy)
Dumas, Alexandre
Dumas, William (Roscoe)
Dupire, Bruno
IAFE talk
paper, submittal
Duration hedging techniques
Dyson, Freeman
E
Earle, Dexter. See also Dexter Earle on Derivatives
École Normale Supérieure
Economics, excessively formal mathematics
Education, Steiner (theories)
E.F. Hutton
Eightfold Way (Gell-Mann)
Einstein, Albert
emulation
formalism
imaginary observer
papers
Elective affinities
Electricity/magnetism, relationship
Electromagnetic force
similarity. See Weak force
Electro-Magnetic Pulse (EMP), study
Electromagnetic theory
advanced course
course
problem sessions
understanding
Electromagnetism theory (Maxwell)
unified field theories
Electron-proton collision. See Inelastic electron-proton collision
Electron-proton 
scattering. 
See 
Inelastic 
electron-proton 
scattering
experiment
Electrons
distribution in scattering, prediction
muon, similarity
Elementary particle physics
Elementary particles, discovery
Elements of Programming Style, The (Kernighan/Plauger)
Elements of Style, The (Strunk/White)
EMP. See Electro-Magnetic Pulse
ENIAC computer
Equilibrium Exchanges (Black)
Equity indexes, options (product)
Equity kicker
Equity options
markets
smile
Equity 
volatility 
reports. 
See 
Goldman, 
Sachs 
and 
Co., 
Quantitative
Strategies Group
Ergener, Deniz
Ervine, Jeremy
Essays and Aphorisms (Schopenhauer)
Ethical Culture Society
Ettore Majorana (particle physics summer school)
Euclid
European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN)
Web, invention
Excel (Microsoft)
Exotic options
marketing
valuation
calculation
Exxon Labs
F
Fair value. See Security
FAST (fixed income research group, Bear Stearns)
Feder, Mike
Fehlleistung (Freud)72
Feigenbaum, Mitchell
Feinberg, Gerald (Gary)
Fermi, Enrico
theory. See Weak force
Fermilab
Feynman, Richard. See also Quantum electrodynamics
collision descriptions
derivations. See Quantum electrodynamics
diagrams, usage
Nobel Prize
papers
parton model
rules, usage
speaking
status
Feynman-Kaç method. See Differential equations
Feynman-Kaç theorem
FHLMC
Field theory
Filofaxes
Finance. See Quantitative finance
modern, revolution in
relationship. See Physics
Financial Analysts Journal
Financial economics, foundation
Financial engineering
programs
teaching
Financial modeling, philosophical naivete
Financial products, increase (1980s)
Financial Strategies Group (FSG) See also Goldman, Sachs and Co.
Financial theory
breakthrough
understanding
Financial time series, representation
Finsler spaces
First Boston (company)
IT group
Fixed Income Analysts Society, Hall of Fame
Fixed Income bond traders, nouveau riche
Fixed Income Division. See Goldman, Sachs and Co.; Salomon Brothers
Fixed-income financial modeling infrastructure, construction
Fixed-income securities, riskiness
Fixed-income trading, compared with equity trading
systems construction, object-oriented unified framework. See Goldman,
Sachs and Co.
Flexible tree, See Implied binomial tree
FNMA
Foley, Henry
Formalization, excessive
FORTRAN
financial library
invention
programs
revolution against
replaced by C
Fourier analysis
Fourier series
Fractional charge particle
Frankl, Victor
Freud, Sigmund
Freud and Man’s Soul (Bettelheim)
Freund, Peter
Friedberg, Richard
Friedberg numbering
Friedman, Bruce Jay
Friedman, David
Friedman, Jerome
Friedman, Milton
FSG. See Financial Strategies Group
FSLIC guarantee
FTSE
Fundamental physics
Fury on Earth (Sharaf)
Future scenarios, range (description of)
Futures contracts
embedded delivery option valuation. See U.S.Treasury bonds
G
Galai, Dan
Gansner, Emden
Garbasz, David
Garman, Mark
Garwin, Richard
Gastineau, Gary
Gatarek, model. See Brace-Gatarek-Musiela model
Gauss, Karl Friedrich
Gedanken experiments
Geeks, characteristics
Geller, Uri
Gell-Mann, Murray. See also Eightfold Way
Totalitarian Principle
Pais, enemy
General Motors (company)
General Theory of Relativity, proposal (Einstein)
Generative grammars
Genesis (book)
GER. See Guaranteed exchange rate
Ginsberg, Alan
Glashow, Sheldon
standard model
Glass-Steagall era
Gleick, James
GNMA
Gödel, Escher, Bach (Hofstadter)
Goeppert-Mayer, Maria
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von
influence
GoldC, usage
Goldfield, Jacob
Goldman, Sachs and Co.
approach. See Artificial intelligence
Asset Management
bond option model
bonuses
cultural differences. See Salomon Brothers
Derivatives Analysis group
employees, number
employment
enjoyment of life at
Equities Division
risk management system demonstration
Equity Derivatives
exit.
Firmwide Risk Division
managers meeting
VaR
Fixed Income Division
Fixed Income Research
fixed-income trading systems construction, object-oriented unified
framework
Information Technology
intellectual diversity, tolerance
IPO, impact
Operations Finance & Resources (OF&R)
partners, selection
risk arbitrage group
Goldman, Sachs and Co., Financial Strategies Group
arrival
model, testing
politics
trouble
Goldman, Sachs and Co., Quantitative Strategies Group
equity volatility reports
growth
hardware, focus
head
interview
programs, number of times used
seminars
support for Structured Equity Products
Goldman Sachs Asset Management (GSAM)
Good Earth, The
Gorky, Arshile
Graduate Record Examination (GRE)
Graduate student life
Grammar. See Computer languages; Generative grammars rules
Grand Unified Theories (GUTs)
Granovsky, Bob (Granny)
Nikkei put purchases
Grant, Toni
Gravitation
laws (Newton)
theory (Einstein)
unified field theories
Gravitational force
Gray, Spalding
Green, Mike
Greenberg, Ace
Gregory, André
Griswold, Dave
Group games
GSAM. See Goldman Sachs Asset Management
GS-ONE
work, completion
Guaranteed exchange rate (GER)
option
valuation
value
put, evaluation
Gurdjieff, G.I.
Guth, Alan
GUTs. See Grand Unified Theories
H
Haghani, Victor
Harvard University
Haas School
seminar
Hawking, Stephen
Hawkins, Greg
Headhunters
Heath-Jarrow-Morton (HJM) model
Heaviside (indicator) functions, algebra/calculus
Heavy neutral leptons
Hedge funds
Hedge ratio, in jump-diffusion models
Hedging
strategy
techniques. See Duration hedging techniques
interest rates
Heisenberg, Werner Karl
HEQS. See Hierarchical EQuation Solver
Herman, Ralph
Herman, Robert
Hershey, Roy
Heuristic approximations
Hierarchical EQuation Solver (HEQS)
collaboration
design/implementation
experience
modification
High-energy phenomenology
Higher worlds, knowledge
Hilbert spaces
Hilibrand, Larry
Hillel (sage)
History in English Words (Barfield)
HJM. See Heath-Jarrow-Morton
Hofstadter, Douglas
Hofstadter, Robert
Hot zones, risk
Hull, John
award
correspondence
Hull-White (HW) model
Humboldt’s Gift (Bellow)
Hutton. See E.F. Hutton
HW. See Hull-White model
I
IAFE. See International Association of Financial Engineers
IBM
call options
competition with AT&T
option, creation
shares
future prices, variation
Illinois Institute of Technology (Chicago)
Illiquid options
Illiquid security, value
Implied binomial tree
nodes
Implied Binomial Trees (Rubinstein)
Implied volatility. See also Black-Scholes implied volatilities; Bonds
skew See also Smile
two-dimensional implied volatility surface
Index levels, response to. See Volatility
short-term volatility
Inelastic electron-proton scattering
Infinity
Information
freedom
theory, research
Ingersoll, Jr., Jonathan
Initial Public Offerings (IPOs)
impact. See Goldman, Sachs and Co.
Inside the Yield Curve (Homer/Liebowitz)
Institute for Advanced Study
Institute for Defense Analysis, Jason Division
Insurance companies
Interest rates. See Short-term interest rates
distribution
grand unified theory
increase (1990s)
mean reversion
scenarios
sensitivity
Vasiçek model
Interest Rates as Options (Black)
Interest rate-sensitive security
Interest-rate derivatives
Interest-rate options, sale
Interest-rate risk, management
International Association of Financial Engineers (IAFE)
educational syllabus, specification
Engineer of the Year. See Sungard IAFE Engineer of the Year
Financial Engineer of the Year
meeting
Interpolation, view of option models
Inverse-scattering problem
Investment banks
trading desks
IPOs. See Initial Public Offerings
J
Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics
Japanese interest rates, hedging
Jarrow, Robert
award
model. See Heath-Jarrow-Morton model
textbook
Jason Division. See Institute for Defense Analysis
Java (language)
Ji, Guru Maharaj
Jobs, Steve
Johnson, George
Jonas, Stan
Journal of Finance
Joy, Bill
J.P. Morgan, invention. See Value at Risk
J.P. Morgan Chase
Jump
movement
occurrence
reality of
Jump-diffusion model
Juno (e-mail service)
K
Kaç, Mark
method. See Differential equations
theorem. See Feynman-Kaç theorem
Kafka, Franz
Kaluza, Theodor
Kaluza-Klein theories
Kamal, Mike
Kandinsky, Vassily
Kani, Iraj
collaboration
Karasinski, Piotr
formula for GER options
formula
model. See Black-Karasinski model
Karma
Kegeles, Larry
Kender, John
Kepler, Johannes
laws. See Planetary motion
Kernighan, Brian
Kerouac, Jack. See Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poets
Kingdom of Denmark
GER option, partial differential equation (derivation)
Nikkei put warrants
risk factors
Klaffky, Tom
Klebb, Rosa
Kleene, Stephen
Klein, Oskar
theories. See Kaluza-Klein theories
Klein-Gordon equation
Klein-Nishina formula. See Compton scattering: Photon-electron scattering
Knowledge of the Higher Worlds (Steiner)
Knuth, Donald
Koenigsberg, Mark
employment
Kopprasch, Bob
options research group
Korn, David
Kovalevskaya, Sonya
Krasker, Bill
Kripke, Saul
Kusch, Polykarp
L
Lamb, Willis
Lattice, of interest rates
Lattice computation diagrams
Law of one price. See One price
Lederman, Leon
Columbia experiment
Lee, Tsung-Dao
audience, at seminar and thesis defence
framework, usage. See Parity
intellectual attack by
profile
Yang, feud with
Lee model
Lehman Brothers, merger
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibowitz, Marty
Lepton, decay. See Heavy lepton
Levy, Gus
Lex (computer tool)
Libchard (chaos investigator)
Light
propagation
wavelengths, correction
Linear algebraic equations
Lisp (language)
usage
Lisp (Symbolics computer)
Litterman, Bob
Litzenberger, Bob
Local gauge invariance, symmetry principle (Yang)
Local volatility
impact. See Black-Scholes options pricing model
model. See Implied binomial tree, Smile
Logdberg, Linda
Long Term Capital Management (LTCM)
bail-out
decapitation/collapse
Long-dated bonds, long-expiration options on
Long-term barrier options, hedging gold production with
Long-term yields, viewed as average of short-term rates
Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon
Lotus, usage
Louw, Jannie
Lowenstein, Roger
LTCM. See Long Term Capital Management
M
MacLeod, J.J.R.
Makeveyev, Dusan
Malle, Louis
Managing Traders (Black)
Mandarins
Manhattan Project
Mann, Al
Man’s Search for Meaning (Frankl)
Many-worlds values
Margrabe, Bill
Marino, Jory
Market crashes
Market data
Markiewicz, Ed
Marking to market
Markman, Steve
Markowitz, Harry M.
Marriage of Heaven and Hell, The (Blake)
Marsh, Terrry
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
Black archived files
professors
Mathematical analysis
Mathematical beauty
Mathematical formalism
Mathematical Theory of Communication, A (Shannon)
Mathematica™, usage
Matlab™, usage
Mattu, Ravi
Maxwell, James Clerk
equations
law. See Electromagnetism
theory
Mayer, Joseph
McAdams, Harley
McCarty Maclyn
McNamara, Robert S.
Mechanics
laws (Newton)
understanding
Meditation
Members of Technical Staff. See Bell Laboratories
Mendeleyev, Dmitri Ivanovich
Meriwether, John
arb group
Merrill Lynch
Merton, Robert
award
meeting
replication method
Microsoft, share (value)
Microwave radiation
Middleman, between traders and quants
Millikan, R.A.
Mills, gauge theories. See Weak/electromagnetic interactions
Milne, A.A.
Mocatta Metals
Models, See also Black-Derman-Toy model, Implied binomial tree, Local
volatility models
building, Watson/Crick approach
improvement
pragmatism
variables
Mondrian, Piet
Monte Carlo computer programs
Monte Carlo simulations
model, output
program, construction
Morgan Stanley
pairs trading
Mortgage portfolio valuation system. See Bear Stearns
Mortgages
complications
lifespan
modeling
sale
securitized pools
valuation models
Morton, model. See Heath-Jarrow-Morton model
Morton Thiokol, puts
Motion, laws (Newton)
Mt. Sinai Medical School
MTS. See Bell Laboratories
Muons
production
distribution. See Dimuons
events. See Dimuons
particle
similarity. See Electrons
speed
Muon-type neutrinos
Musiela, model. See Brace-Gatarek-Musiela model
Mutual funds
My Dinner with André (Malle)
Mystic Path to Cosmic Power, The
N
Nabokov, Vladimir
Nanocomputers
Naropa Institute
Natural constants, values
Natural languages, expression
Nature
asymmetry
knowledge
laws, description
permutation symmetry
reflection-invariant forces
Totalitarian Principle, Gell-Mann’s
Ne’eman, Yuval
Network Systems. See Bell Laboratories
Neural-net theory
Neutral heavy lepton
Neutrino. See also Muon-type neutrinos
production
discovery
existence
Neutrino Conference
New York Cryonics Society
New York, life in
New York Road Runners Club
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
New York University
Newton, Isaac
emulation
laws. See Gravitation; Mechanics; Motion
obeying
solving
Newtonian observer
Next (computer)
Ng, John
Nikkei
225 index
book, hedging
futures
hedge
insurance, selling
level, impact of change in
options
low-strike puts
prices, asymmetry of
puts
Nkomo, Joshua
Non-linear algebraic equations
Non-procedural programs
NonVon (computer), plan for, by David Shaw
Nuclear physics, understanding
Nuclear weak decays, parity violation
Nuclei, radioactive disintegration
Number theory, problem/solution
NYSE. See New York Stock Exchange
O
OAS. See Option-adjusted spread
Objective C, usage
Object-oriented language, writing
Object-oriented programming (OOP)
O’Connor & Co.
Oil crisis (1970s)
Omega Minus (Gell-Mann)
discovery
One price, law of
One-Factor Model of Interest Rates and Its Application to Treasury Bond
Options, A, (Black, Derman, Toy)
OOP. See Object-oriented programming
Operations Finance & Resources (OF&R). See Goldman, Sachs and Co.
Oppenheimer, Robert
Option-adjusted spread (OAS)
Options. See Stock options
exotic
creation of model
implied volatility
prices, quoting
pricing
Black-Scholes model
risk system
valuation, method
Options theory
differential equations, solution
history
learning
Orange County, derivatives scandals
O’Rourke, Dan
OTC. See Over-the-counter
OTÖB conference
Out-of-the-money calls
Out-of-the-money puts
prices
Over-the-counter (OTC) call options
Over-the-counter (OTC) volatility swaps
Overtime hours, at Bell Laboratories
Oxbridge, emulation by Rockefeller University
Oxford University Department of Theoretical Physics
postdoctoral study
P
Pagels, Heinz
Paine Webber
Pais, Abraham (“Bram”)
enemy. See Gell-Mann
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics
Palm Pilots
Parallel-processing computer, See NonVon
Parapraxis, See Fehlleistung
Paribas Capital Markets
Parity, law of
Parity-violating weak force
Parsing tools
Partial differential equations
Particle physics. See also Elementary particle physics
summer school. See Ettore Majorana
symmetry in
thesis advisor, search
Particles. See Fractional charge particle detectors, construction
string theory model
proliferation
Partons
model description. See Protons
P/E. See Price to earnings
Peierls, Rudolf
Pencom (company)
Penzias, Arno
Periodic table
construction (Gell-Mann/Ne’eman)
construction (Mendeleyev)
Permutation symmetry. See Nature extension
Phenomenological models
Phenomenology. See also High-energy phenomenology
Photon-electron scattering, Klein-Nishina formula
Physical Review Letters
Physicists. See Theoretical physicists
employment. See Wall Street
Physicists on Wall Street (POWs)
Physics. See Fundamental physics
competitiveness
discoveries, difficulty of
education
finance, relationship
intuition, role of
pursuit (sacred/profane)
summer institute. See Stanford Linear Accelerator Center
Pinkus, Scott
P&L. See Profit and loss
Planck, Max
Planetary motion, laws (Kepler)
Plauger, P.J.
Political correctness
before the time of
Polypaths (company, Diller)
Post-Black-Scholes model, construction
Postdoctoral research positions
POWs. See Physicists on Wall Street
Prepayment rates, regression model. See Adjustable Rate Mortgage
Preprint, circulation
Prescott, Charles
Presentation style, Black
Price to earnings (P/E) ratio
Princeton University
Privacy, invasion of
Probability cloud
Procedural languages
Procedural programs. See Nonprocedural programs
Procter and Gamble, derivatives scandals
Profit and loss (P&L)
Programming: Practice and Experience
Programming (activity)
Prometheus Project, The
Protons
internal structure, investigation
parton-model description (Feynman)
Publish or perish, experience of
Pure theory
Q
QED. See Quantum electrodynamics
Quals. See Columbia University
Quantal (financial software company)
Quantitative Strategies Group. See Goldman, Sachs and Co.
Quantitative Strategies Research Reports
Quanto option
Quants
contrast. See Traders
discontent
envy
history
life
thinking process
Quantum electrodynamics (QED)
derivations (Feynman/Schwinger)
lectures
renormalizability (Feynman)
Quantum mechanics
Quarks. See Charmed quark
discovery
existence
Quotron, (device)
R
Rabi, I.I.
Ranieri, Lew
Raz, Rita
Reductionists
Reflection-invariant forces. See Nature
Reich, Wilhelm
Relativity, theory. See Special relativity
Renaissance
Replication method. See Merton convergence. See Black-Scholes value
Risk (magazine)
Risk management
software
systems, construction/elaboration
tools
construction
Risk Management System (RMS) (company)
Risk systems
Samurai, construction of
enhancement
Risk/return, relationship
Risky ingredient, specification. See Options
Ritchie, Dennis
RMS. See Risk Management System
Rockefeller Foundation
Rockefeller University
Rogers, Dave
Roll & Ross Asset Management
Roscoe. See Dumas
Ross, Stephen A.
award
Rouhani, Ramine
Rubin, Bob
Rubinstein, Mark
address
award
textbooks
Rudd, textbook
Ruderman, Malvin
Russia, default (1998)
Rutherford Laboratories
S
Shopiro, Jonathan
Salam, Abdus
model. See Weinberg-Salam standard model
standard model
Salomon Brothers
bad days
contribution
employment
Fixed Income Division
Goldman, cultural differences
layoffs
OAS concept
take-no-prisoners culture
transfer to
Salthouse, Andy
Samuelson, Paul
Samurai (trading system)
Scheinkman, José
Schlumberger
oil retrieval mathematics
Scholes, Myron
options pricing model. See Black-Scholes options pricing model
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schrieffer, Bob
Schrödinger, Erwin
Schwartz, Mel
Schwenk, Peter
Schwinger, Julian
derivations. See Quantum electrodynamics
Securities Industry Association
Security. See Derivative security fair value
SERI. See Solar Energy Research Institute
Seymour (object-oriented language)
Shakespeare and Co. (bookstore)
Shannon, Claude
Shapiro, Lucy
Sharaf, Myron
Sharpe, William
Shaw, David. See also D.E. Shaw & Co.
secrecy
Shaw & Co., D.E.
Shawn, Wallace
Shearson
acquisition
bureaucracy, depth
Sheppard, Ed
Sherman, Ron
Shockley William B.
Shorter, Frank
Short-term bonds
options, approximation
Short-term interest rates
distribution
Short-term options, expiration
Short-term problems
Short-term volatilities. See also Index, Local volatility
in local volatility model
Showers, Janet
Siegel, Mo
Sigma (σ)
Silfen, David
Simon Fraser University
Simultaneous algebraic equations
Sin, mechanical expiation of
Sinclair, Don
Sitzfleisch
Skew See also Smile Skidelsky, Robert
SLAC. See Stanford Linear Accelerator Center
Sloan School
Smalltalk (computer language), usage
Smile. See Equity options; Volatility
phenomenon, models of
local volatility, as explanation
Smith, Chris Llewellyn
Smith Barney (company)
Smith Hanley (company)
Solar Energy Research Institute (SERI)
Songs of Innocence and Experience (Blake)
S&P. See Standard & Poor’s
Special relativity, theory (Einstein)
Squalid-state physics (solid-state physics)
Standard & Poor’s (S&P)
index
option, hedging
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC)
Stanford Research Institute
Steambath (Bruce Jay Friedman)
Steinberger, Jack
Steiner, Rudolf
influence
theories. See Education
views
Stochastic calculus
Stock options
Black-Scholes model
usage
Stock prices
diffusion
distribution
Stocks
trading
volatility
Stop-time
Stormer, Horst
Strachey, James
String theory
Structured Equity Products business
Strunk, Jr., William
Subnuclear particles
Sun UNIX workstations
SunGard (financial software company)
SunGard IAFE Financial Engineer of the Year
Swaps. See Volatility
valuation
Swiss Bank, merger with UBS
Swiss watch collisions
Symbolics. See Lisp
Symmetry See also Particle physics, Local gauge invariance, Parity, Nature
Szüts, Eté
T
Tachyons
Tao of Physics, The (Capra)
Tartaglia, Nunzio
Tatevossian, Armand
Tau-theta puzzle
Taylor, Richard
T.D. See Lee
TIAA-CREF
Technology bubble
Teller, Edward
Tests for a Weak Neutral Current (Derman)
TeX (computer language)
Theoretical particle physics
employment
Theories, success
Theories of Everything (TOEs)
Theory, exploration/refutation, relation to phenomenology
Theory of Colours (Goethe)
Theory of Electrons (Lorentz)
Theory of Rational Optional Pricing (Merton)
Theosophists
Thermodynamics, understanding
Thinkers, doers (contrast)
Thinktank (computer program)
Thompson, Ken
Tibetan Buddhism
TOEs. See Theories of Everything
Tolstory, Leo
Tomonaga, Shin’ichiro
Totalitarian Principle. See Gell-Mann
Tour de France
Toward a Fully Automated Exchange (Black)
Toy, Bill
Black joke
collaboration
commiseration
Traders
quants, contrast
thinking process
transactions, handling
Trailing zeros, removal
Transformer
Translation process
Trees. See Binomial trees; Flexible tree
calibration. See Yield curve
construction
variable periods, incorporation. See Black-Karasinski model
Treiman, Sam
Treynor, Jack
Trungpa, Chogyam
Tucker: The Man and His Dreams (Coppola)
Turing, Alan
Two-condom problem
U
Uberoi, J.P.S.
UBS, merger
Understanding Guaranteed Exchange-Rate Options (Derman, Karasinski,
Wecker)
Unified field theories
Universe, laws (pursuit)
University of Cape Town
physics department
poems with punched cards, usage
thesis
University of Chicago
University of Colorado loneliness
University of Coral Gables
University of Michigan (Ann Arbor)
University of Wisconsin (Madison)
University of Oregon
University of Pennsylvania
University of Toronto
UNIX
operating system
philosophy
portable versions
programming environment
software development
style
tools
usage
workstations. See Sun UNIX workstations
U.S.Treasury bonds
futures contracts, embedded delivery option valuation
inclusion. See Investment portfolios
interest payment
options business, increase
value, decrease
V
Value at Risk (VaR)
concentration. See Goldman, Sachs and Co.
J.P. Morgan invention
Van Wyk, Chris
Vanya on Forty-Second Street (Malle)
VaR. See Value at Risk
Vasiçek, Oldrich
VAX (computer), usage
Velvet Revolution
Vienna options exchange
Vietnam War
impact
protests
Visicalc, usage
Volatility. See also Local volatility; Short-term volatilities
calculation. See also Yield
local, illumination of
index levels, response to
smile
surface
swaps
von Neumann, John
VT-100 terminal emulator
W
Waldmann, Mike (mortgage research group)
Wall Street
“brutality,”
modeling needs
physicists, employment
Wastrom, Rick
Watson Labs
Weak force. See also Parity-violating weak force
electromagnetic force, similarity
existence
theory (Fermi)
Weak interactions. See Parity-violating weak interaction
analysis
theory
Weak neutral current
Weak/electromagnetic interactions, Yang-Mills gauge theories
Wecker, Jeff
Weinberg, David
Weinberg, Steven
standard model
Weinberg-Salam standard model
Weingarten, Don
Weiss, Larry
Weisskopf, Victor
Weizmann Institute
Wells Fargo
Western Electric
When Genius Failed (Lowenstein)
White, E.B.
White, model. See Hull-White model
Wilczek, Frank
Williams College
Wilmott, Paul
Wilmott on Derivatives (Wilmott)
Wilson, Robert
Wind in the Willows (Milne), The
Wolfram, Stephen
Wolfram Research
World Trade Center, attack
World War II
W.R.: Mysteries of the Organism (Makeveyev)
Wu, Chien-Shiung
recommendation
X
Xerox PARC inventions
X-rays, propagation
Y
Yacc. See Yet Another Compiler-Compiler
Yang, Chen-Ning
feud. See Lee
gauge theories. See Weak/electromagnetic interactions
profile
reputation
symmetry principle. See Local gauge invariance
Yet Another Compiler-Compiler (Yacc)
Yield
diffusion model
tables, book
viewed as an average. See Long-term yields
volatility/uncertainty calculation
Yield curve
movement
modeling
short-term rates
tree, calibration
Yield to maturity
Yiu, Chang-Li
Y2K, anxiety
Yom Kippur
Young Investigator Award in High Energy Physics Research.
See Department of Energy
Z
Zero-coupon bonds, collection
Zero-coupon Treasury Strips, creation
Zou, Joe
Zuckerberg, Roy
...
