Anomalous price impact and the critical nature of
liquidity in ﬁnancial markets
B. T´oth a, Y. Lemp´eri`ere a, C. Deremble a, J. de Lataillade a,
J. Kockelkoren a, J.-P. Bouchaud a
May 28, 2018
a Capital Fund Management, 6, blvd Haussmann 75009 Paris, France
Abstract
We propose a dynamical theory of market liquidity that predicts that the average
supply/demand proﬁle is V-shaped and vanishes around the current price. This result is
generic, and only relies on mild assumptions about the order ﬂow and on the fact that
prices are, to a ﬁrst approximation, diﬀusive. This naturally accounts for two striking
stylized facts: ﬁrst, large metaorders have to be fragmented in order to be digested by the
liquidity funnel, leading to long-memory in the sign of the order ﬂow. Second, the anoma-
lously small local liquidity induces a breakdown of linear response and a diverging impact
of small orders, explaining the “square-root” impact law, for which we provide additional
empirical support. Finally, we test our arguments quantitatively using a numerical model
of order ﬂow based on the same minimal ingredients.
1
Introduction
Price impact refers to the correlation between an incoming order (to buy or to sell) and the
subsequent price change [1, 2, 3]. That a buy (sell) trade should push the price up (down) is
intuitively obvious and is easily demonstrated empirically (see [3] for a recent review). Such
a mechanism must in fact be present for private information to be incorporated into market
prices. But it is also a sore reality for large trading ﬁrms for which price impact induces extra
costs. Indeed, large volumes must typically be fragmented and executed incrementally. But
since each “child order” pushes the price up or down, the total cost of the “metaorder”1 is
quickly dominated, as sizes become large, by the average price impact. Monitoring and con-
trolling impact has therefore become one of the most active domain of research in quantitative
ﬁnance since the mid-nineties. A huge amount of empirical results has accumulated over the
years, in particular concerning the relation between the total size Q of the metaorder and the
resulting average price change. These empirical results come either from proprietary trading
strategies (and are often not published), or from brokerage ﬁrms, who execute on behalf of
clients [4, 5, 6, 7, 8], or else from the exchanges, who give exceptional access to identiﬁcation
codes that allow one to reconstruct the metaorders from some market participants [9, 10]. Re-
markably, although these data sets are extremely heterogeneous in terms of markets (equities,
1We call the “metaorder” (or parent order) the bundle of orders corresponding to a single trading decision.
A metaorder is typically traded incrementally through several child orders.
1
arXiv:1105.1694v3  [q-fin.TR]  1 Nov 2011

futures, FX, etc.), epochs (from the mid-nineties, when liquidity was provided by market mak-
ers, to present day’s electronic markets), market participants and underlying trading strategies
(fundamental, technical, etc.) and style of execution (using limit or market orders, with high
or low participation ratio, etc.), a very similar concave impact law is reported in most studies.
More precisely, the average relative price change ∆between the ﬁrst and the last trade of a
metaorder of size Q is well described by the so-called “square-root” law:
∆(Q) = Y σ
r
Q
V ,
(1)
where σ is the daily volatility of the asset, and V the daily traded volume, both quantities
measured contemporaneously to the trade. The numerical constant Y is of order unity. Pub-
lished and unpublished data suggest slightly diﬀerent versions of this law; in particular the √Q
dependence is more generally described as a power-law relation ∆(Q) ∝Qδ, with δ in the range
0.4 to 0.7 [4, 5, 9, 6, 7, 8]. For example, using a large data sample of 700,000 US stock trade
orders executed by Citigroup Equity Trading, Almgren et al. [4] extract δ ≈0.6. Moro et al.
[9] report δ ≈0.5 for trades on the Madrid stock exchange and δ ≈0.7 for the London stock
exchange. We show in Fig. 1 our own proprietary data corresponding to nearly 500,000 trades
on a variety of futures contracts, which yields δ ≈0.5 for small tick contracts and δ ≈0.6
for large tick contracts, for Q/V ranging from a few 10−4 to a few %. Our data on stocks is
also compatible with δ ≈0.5, although more noisy. We note that all these studies diﬀer quite
signiﬁcantly in the details of (a) how the price impact ∆is deﬁned and measured; (b) how
diﬀerent assets and periods are collated together in the analysis; (c) how the ﬁt is performed:
over what range of Q/V , adding an intercept or not, etc. But in spite of all these diﬀerences
and those mentioned above – in particular concerning the strategies motivating the trades –, it
is quite remarkable that the square-root impact law appears to hold approximately in all cases.
The aim of the present paper is to provide a theoretical underpinning for such a universal
impact law. We ﬁrst give a general dynamical theory of market liquidity that predicts that the
average supply/demand proﬁle is V-shaped around the current price. The anomalously small
local liquidity induces a breakdown of linear response and explains the square-root impact
law. We then study numerically a stylized model of order ﬂow based on minimal ingredients.
The numerical results fully support our analytical arguments, and allow us to get quantitative
insights into various aspects of the problem.
2
An intriguing impact law
One should ﬁrst carefully distinguish the total impact of a given metaorder of size Q from other
measures of impact that have been reported in the literature. One is the immediate impact
of an individual market order of size q, which has been studied by various authors and is also
strongly concave as a function of q, i.e. qα with α ≈0.2, or even ln q [3]. Another easily
accessible measure of impact is to relate the average price change ∆T in a given time interval
T to the total market order imbalance QT in the same time period, i.e. the sum of the signed
volumes of all market orders. This quantity is estimated using all the trades in the market
(i.e. those coming from diﬀerent market participants) and is clearly diﬀerent from the impact
of a given metaorder (see below). However, there seems to be quite a bit of confusion in the
literature and many authors unduly identify the two quantities. If T is very short, such that
there are only one or a few trades, one essentially observes the concave impact of individual
orders that we just mentioned. But as T increases, such as the number of trades becomes large,
the relation between ∆T and QT becomes more and more linear for small imbalances (see e.g.
[3], Fig. 2.5), and on time scales comparable to those needed to complete a metaorder, the
2

10-5
10-4
10-3
Q/V
10-3
10-2
10-1
∆/σ
Small ticks
Large ticks
δ=1/2
δ=1
Impact 
Jun. 2007 - Dec. 2010
Figure 1:
The impact of metaorders for CFM proprietary trades on futures markets, in the period June 2007
– December 2010. Impact is measured here as the average execution shortfall of a metaorder of size Q. The
data base contains nearly 500,000 trades. We show ∆/σ vs. Q/V on a log-log scale, where σ and V are the
daily volatility and daily volume measured the day the metaorder is executed. The blue curve is for large tick
sizes, and the red curve is for small tick sizes. For large ticks, the curve can be well ﬁt with δ = 0.6, while for
small ticks we ﬁnd δ = 0.5. For comparison, we also show the lines of slope 0.5 (corresponding to a square-root
impact) and 1 (corresponding to linear impact). We have removed a small positive intercept ∆/σ = 0.0015 for
Q = 0, which is probably due to a conditioning eﬀect.
concavity has almost disappeared, except in rare cases when QT/V is large, in any case much
larger than the region where Eq. (1) holds.
A square-root singularity for small traded volumes is highly non-trivial, and certainly not
accounted for in Kyle’s classical model of impact [11], which predicts a linear impact ∆∝Q.
A concave impact function is often thought of as a saturation of impact for large volumes.
We believe that the emphasis should rather be placed on the anomalous high impact of small
trades. Numerically, Eq. (1) means that trading one hundredth of the daily volume moves the
price by a tenth of its daily volatility, which is indeed a huge ampliﬁcation. Mathematically,
Eq. (1) implies that marginal impact diverges for small volumes as Q−1/2, meaning that the
susceptibility of the market to trades of vanishing size is formally inﬁnite. In most systems,
the response to a small perturbation is linear, i.e. small disturbances lead to small eﬀects. The
breakdown of linear response often implies that the system is at, or close to, a critical point,
where very special properties emerge, such as long-range memory or scale invariant avalanches,
that accompany this diverging susceptibility. Of course, the mathematical divergence is cut-
oﬀin practice – for one thing, the volume Q of a metaorder cannot be smaller than a single
lot. Empirical data will never be in the asymptotic limit Q/V →0, but this is irrelevant
to our discussion. This is in fact also the case for most physical systems for which critical
behaviour is observed. The important point here is that the proximity of a critical point can
lead to strongly non-linear eﬀects and extreme fragility. As we will argue in detail below, and
substantiate within a precise numerical model, we believe that markets operate in a critical
regime where liquidity vanishes. This oﬀers a framework to understand many of the anomalies
in the behaviour of markets, including the long term memory in order ﬂow and the presence of
frequent unexplained jumps in prices, that are – or so we believe – a consequence of the chronic
lack of liquidity that lead to micro-crisis. The anomalous high impact of small trades implied
by the concave impact law, Eq. (1), is, in our view, another side of the same coin.
3

Numerous interpretations have been put forth to explain a concave impact law, and can be
broadly classiﬁed into three types of mechanisms (which are not necessarily exclusive): a) risk-
reward optimisation of the liquidity providers/market makers, [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]; b) surprise
in order ﬂow and decay of impact [3, 17] and c) locally linear supply proﬁles [18]. Many of the
above stories require that liquidity providers know the fundamental value, carefully monitor the
order ﬂow, identify metaorders and adjust their quotes such that they eke out some proﬁt or at
least break even. There is no doubt that a fraction of market participants strive to achieve such
goals, and develop astute algorithms in this aim. However, liquidity providing is not (anymore)
the monopoly of these market participants, who compete with anyone placing limit orders as
part of an execution strategy, and the concave impact law in fact holds even when a substantial
fraction of the metaorder is executed using limit orders. That individual metaorders can be
detected using statistical methods, as advocated in [17], may well be true for large metaorders
of unsophisticated traders, but it would be surprising (although not impossible) that our own
trades, which are used to obtain Fig. 1, can be systematically detected. The universality of
the concave impact law suggests that a robust self-organizing mechanism is at play. Our thesis,
that we will substantiate below using both analytical arguments and numerical simulations,
is that one can indeed build a theory of impact that relies on minimal assumptions, with no
reference whatsoever to notions such as fundamental prices, market maker proﬁt, or adverse
selection.
3
A dynamical theory for linear supply/demand proﬁles
An interesting idea is that the supply/demand curve is a growing function of the diﬀerence
between the fundamental value p0 and the price. More precisely, suppose the available volume
for sells (resp. buys) at price p or above (below), V±(p), is a linear function, ±b±(p −p0). The
execution of a volume Q of buy orders must therefore take place by moving the price by a
quantity ∆such that:
Q =
Z p0+∆
p0
dp V+(p) = b+
2 ∆2,
(2)
and similarly for sells. Therefore, if the supply/demand proﬁle is linear, the impact is a square-
root: ∆± ≈
p
2Q/b±. It is indeed tempting to wave hands and argue that the available volume
is proportional to the mispricing |p −p0|, but one soon hits a major impediment: what exactly
is p0?
If the above argument is to make any sense, p0 is the fundamental value when the
metaorder starts trading, and the assumption is that p0 should not vary too much (compared
to ∆) during the execution of the metaorder. But this is absurd: there is no equilibrium price
around which the market pauses; prices move all the time, in a diﬀusive way, in such a way
that diﬀerence between p0 and the ﬁnal price pT is in fact much larger than the impact ∆we
try to account for. If the linear proﬁle follows instantaneously the price, the above argument
completely falls into pieces since only the locally available volume would play a role. If the
linear proﬁle for some reason remains centred for some time around a speciﬁc p0, why should
this price coincide with the price at the beginning of the metaorder?
Still, the basic intuition, that the available volume grows as price excursions get larger,
must somehow make sense. The aim of the present section is to propose a dynamic theory of
liquidity largely inspired from [19], based on minimal and plausible assumptions, that indeed
predicts that the average supply (or demand) is a V-shaped curve that vanishes around the
current price pt. The square-root impact then follows from an argument similar to Eq. (2).
These arguments are then tested quantitatively using a numerical model of order ﬂow based on
the same minimal ingredients.
4

Our basic idea is that of a “latent order book” that at any instant of time t aggregates the
total intended volume for sells at price p or above, V+(p, t), and the total intended volume for
buys at price p or below, V−(p, t). We want to emphasize that this is in general not the volume
revealed in the real (observable) order book, in particular for p remote from the current price
pt. It is rather the volume that would reveal itself in the order book, or as market orders, if
the price came instantaneously closer to p. But since there is little incentive to reveal one’s
intentions too early, most of the volume is latent and not revealed. This is obvious from basic
order of magnitude estimates: whereas the total instantaneous volume in the real order book of
a typical liquid stock is of the order of 10−5 of the market capitalisation, the total transaction
volume per day is 10−3, showing that liquidity is a dynamical process. The empirical analysis
of Weber and Rosenow [20] shows very clearly how the volume appearing in the order book is
indeed stimulated by the trades themselves.
So our latent volumes V±(p, t) reﬂect intentions that do not necessarily materialize. How do
these volumes evolve with time? Between t and t+dt, new buyers/sellers may become interested
at levels pt∓u, at a rate λ(u) and with unit volume q = 1; while existing buyers/sellers at pt∓u
might change their price to pt∓u′ at rate ν(u, u′), or even disappear temporarily (corresponding
to u′ = ∞).2 Clearly, V+(p < pt, t) = 0 and V−(p > pt, t) = 0, meaning that there cannot be
unsatisﬁed seller (buyer) below (above) the current price pt.
We now assume that the price process pt is a Brownian walk3, which is only an approximation
since in practice (a) at short times, microstructure eﬀects play a role and (b) large jumps are
present, and in fact quite frequent (the distribution of price changes is well known to be a power
law for large arguments [21]). This approximation however allows us to make precise analytical
calculations that illustrate our main point. Since we are interested in phenomena that take
place on time scales of a few minutes to a few days, drift eﬀects are completely negligible and
we discard them. For the same reason, the diﬀerence between an additive and a geometric
Brownian motion is irrelevant. A simple equation for the latent volume, averaged over price
paths V±(p, t), can be obtained by working in the reference frame moving with the price pt,
provided an extra assumption is made on the rates ν(u, u′). We assume that either u′ = ∞,
with rate ν∞(u), or that the change of price is small, and occurs equally often up or down. We
deﬁne D(u) =
R
du′ (u −u′)2ν(u, u′), where the integral over u′ is rapidly convergent (small
jumps); it can be interpreted as the (squared) volatility of intentions. With D(u) = D(u) + σ2,
where σ is the price volatility, the ﬁnal equation for ρ±(u, t) = V±(pt ± u, t) reads [22]: 4
∂ρ±(u, t)
∂t
= 1
2
∂2
∂u2 [D(u)ρ±(u, t)] −ν∞(u)ρ±(u, t) + λ(u);
ρ±(u < 0) ≡0.
(3)
Note that is all rates are symmetric for buy orders and sell orders, the long-time, stationary
solution ρst(u) is the same for ρ+ and ρ−. It describes the most probable shape of the latent
order book, and is such that the right hand side of the above equation is zero. For arbitrary
function D(u), λ(u) and ν∞(u), the explicit form of ρst(u) is not known, but provided these
functions are regular when u →0, one can show that the stationary proﬁle is linear close enough
to the current price, i.e. ρst(u) ≈bu when u →0, where b is a certain ﬁnite constant. In fact,
J = 1
2
∂
∂u [D(u)ρ(u, t)]

u=0
(4)
2The following equations would not change if we allow q to ﬂuctuate, provided the average of q is ﬁnite and
set to unity without loss of generality. We furthermore assume complete symmetry between p > pt and p < pt;
i.e. λ+(u) = λ−(u), etc.
3That the price is a diﬀusive process is a standard assumption in quantitative ﬁnance. It is also very well
corroborated by data down to very short time scales (see e.g. [25]), at least in liquid markets. This “statistical
eﬃciency” precludes the existence of simple arbitrage strategies.
4Here we assume that F(u) =
R
du′ (u −u′)ν(u, u′) = 0 ∀u, but adding a non zero drift term in the
reconﬁguration of orders would not change any of the following conclusions. Only the value of u∗would change.
5

is the transaction rate per unit time, i.e. the volume of buy/sell market orders per unit time.
If we choose the unit of time to be one day, J is precisely what we called V above. Provided
D(u) is regular at u = 0, the condition ρst(u) = 0 and J positive and ﬁnite is enough to impose
that the proﬁle is locally linear with b = 2J/D(0). Therefore, the hypothesis of a diﬀusive price
with a ﬁnite transaction rate immediately leads on average to a locally linear order book.
As a simple illustration, consider the case where new orders appear uniformly, i.e. λ(u) = λ,
and D(u) = D independent of u. The exact solution is then:
ρst(u) = ρ∞

1 −e−u/u∗
,
(5)
with ρ∞= λ/ν∞and u∗=
p
D/2ν∞, leading to b = ρ∞/u∗. One sees that even when new
orders appear with a ﬁnite density around the current price, they have also a large probability
to be executed and disappear. This eventually leads to a liquidity trough at u = 0 and a linear
proﬁle around u = 0; u∗can be interpreted as the width of the linear region. It is reasonable
to think that D and σ2 are comparable, and that 1/ν∞, which measures the (volume weighted)
average lifetime of an intended order, is dominated by slow players and is on the scale of a few
days.5 Therefore, u∗is of the order of the daily volatility, which shows that the trough in the
latent order book extends over a very signiﬁcant region around the current price. Note that
τlife = 1/ν∞is also the persistence time of the ﬂuctuations of the order book, and the time to
reach the stationary state ρst(u). This time plays a crucial role in the following.
Note that if λ(u) is not constant but decays over a price range uλ, the width of the linear
region is still given by u∗provided u∗≪uλ. In the other limit, on the other hand, one ﬁnds
u∗∼uλ [23]. We believe that uλ and
p
D/2ν∞are in fact of the same order of magnitude (a
few percent); this means that the players contributing to the ‘true’ liquidity of the market are
not sensitive to price changes much smaller than the daily volatility (see also footnote 3).
Eq. (5) contains the central result of the present paper. It predicts that the available volume
in the immediate proximity of the current price goes to zero, which is the reason why we say
markets are “critical”, i.e. they operate in a regime of vanishing liquidity. This scenario does
not arise by ﬁat but is rather a natural consequence of the diﬀusivity of prices: we believe this
is a genuine example Self Organized Criticality [24].
In more concrete terms, the volume at the best quotes (bid or ask), given by qbest ≈bw2/2
(where w is the tick size) is ∼(w/u∗) smaller than the volume ρ∞w one would expect in the
absence of the above sweeping mechanism. This is typically small since w ∼0.05% and u∗∼2%
(for stocks or futures). One can also compare qbest to the the total volume traded in a time
T, which is V = JT ∼ρ∞u∗if one chooses T = τlife ∼one day. The ratio is now qbest/V ∼
(w/u∗)2, which is very small, as is indeed the case empirically: the immediately accessible
volume is typically a 1000 smaller than the daily turnover. This small liquidity compels market
participants to fragment their trades, leading to the universally observed long-range correlation
in the sign of market orders [25, 26]. It also leads to the square-root impact law, if one trusts
the argument after Eq. (2), with here b = ρ∞/u∗. This gives ∆≈
q
2Q
b ∝σ
q
Q
J , where we
have used b ∼J/σ2, with J is the trading rate. This is exactly the square-root impact law, Eq.
(1).
However, this last argument is quite na¨ıve since the average impact ∆is much smaller (for
small Q) than the typical excursion of the price within the same period. Furthermore, the
diﬀusive behaviour of the price is taken for granted in the above calculation, whereas in fact
5Note here that this is where the distinction between latent and revealed orders is crucial: the average
lifetime of orders in the order book is much shorter than this, but this is a result of high frequency strategies
which are sensitive to minute price changes, but does not relate to changes of intentions from slow players.
Correspondingly, the average shape of the true order book is non monotonous [22], and thus very diﬀerent from
the linear prediction, Eq. (5), for the latent liquidity proﬁle.
6

it results from a subtle compensation [25] between a conﬁnement eﬀect created by the linear
supply/demand curve (a price movement in one direction hits larger opposing volumes and
is more likely to revert) and a correlation eﬀect, created by the fragmentation of the trades
[27, 28] – itself imposed by the liquidity trough mentioned above.
Since we are unable at this stage to treat these eﬀects consistently within an analytical
framework, we now turn to a minimal numerical model that captures all the above eﬀects. We
will indeed ﬁnd a linear demand proﬁle and a concave impact function, and gain considerable
insights into the mechanisms leading to such behaviour.
4
A numerical model for an eﬃcient market with long-
ranged order ﬂow
The numerical implementation of the above simple Poisson model for intended order ﬂow is
quite simple, and we follow the framework proposed in [19] – see also the Appendix below. All
orders have unit volume. Limit orders are launched at a uniform rate λ in a ﬁnite (but large)
interval around the current price. Existing limit orders are individually cancelled at rate ν∞.
If market orders are themselves completely random, with buys and sells drawn independently
with probability 1
2 and at rate µ, the result price motion is known to be strongly subdiﬀusive,
in the sense that the lag dependent diﬀusion constant σ2(ℓ) ≡⟨(pt −pt+ℓ)2⟩/ℓdecays when ℓ
increases (here time is counted in number of transactions). This was noted in [19], and is a
result of the conﬁning eﬀect of the supply/demand curve. The price only becomes diﬀusive on
time scales larger than the memory time τlife. Nothing of that sort is seen in real price dynamics.
However, we know from empirical data [25, 26, 3] that the signs of transactions ϵt are in fact
long-ranged correlated, i.e. that C(ℓ) = ⟨ϵtϵt+ℓ⟩is decaying as a power-law, C(ℓ) ≈ℓ−γ, where
γ ≈0.5 for single stocks and γ ≈0.8 for futures markets [29]. This persistent direction of
trading can counterbalance the conﬁnement eﬀect and restore diﬀusion. In fact, if γ is too
small, one expects superdiﬀusion, i.e. σ2(ℓ) growing with ℓ.
We therefore want to upgrade the “zero-intelligence” model of [19] to an “ε-intelligence”
numerical model which explicitly includes the long ranged correlated nature of the trades,
reﬂecting the fact that large metaorders are fragmented and traded incrementally, see Ref.
[27, 28].
We have chosen to work with the LMF speciﬁcation of the sign process [27], i.e.
sequences of +/−signs (buy/sell market orders) are generated, with lengths L drawn from
a power-law distribution: P(L) ∼L−(α+1).
It can be shown that the sign process has an
autocorrelation function that decays asymptotically as C(ℓ) = ℓ−γ with γ = α −1. We do not
expect that the following results depend much on the precise speciﬁcation of the model of signs
[30].
At this stage, the model contains four parameters: the rate of limit orders λ, the rate of
cancellation ν∞, the rate of market orders µ and the autocorrelation exponent γ. In fact, only
three of them are relevant, up to a change of time unit: the ratios λ/ν∞and µ/ν∞, and γ. As
noted above, the ratio ρ∞= λ/ν∞determines the supply depth far away from the best quotes,
whereas the ratio r = µ/ν∞tells us whether we are in a “slow” market, where the renewal time
τlife of the supply/demand is much longer than the time between individual trades (r ≫1),
or if the market is “fast” in the opposite limit r ≪1. It is clear that real markets are in the
former limit: if trades take place on a scale of seconds while the renewal time is of the order of
hours or days, the ratio r is on the order of 104. As will be discussed later, r ≫1 is a crucial
condition for a concave impact law to hold. On the other hand, µ and λ × w are of similar
order of magnitude, which means that, as expected, markets are also “deep”: ρ∞× w ≫1.
The problem is that in the limit of deep and slow markets, the above model is always in
the subdiﬀusive phase unless γ is very close to zero (see Fig. 2 below). We therefore need an
7

extra ingredient to make markets statistically eﬃcient (meaning that prices are diﬀusive), while
keeping γ in the empirical range γ ∼0.5 −0.8. When compared with real markets, the above
model is obviously much too simple. For example, the size of both limit and market orders
is known to be broadly distributed, whereas we assume, as in [19, 31], that all volumes are
unity. The direction and the size of market orders are furthermore strongly conditioned by the
volumes at the best quotes qbest: the volume of market orders is larger when the oﬀered volume
is larger, and the sign of the next market order is anti-correlated with the volume imbalance
(i.e. when qbid ≫qask, the next trade is most likely to be a buy, and vice-versa).
We have chosen to add one extra parameter both to make a step towards reality and solve
the eﬃciency problem, in the following way: the volume of market orders is chosen to be a
random fraction f of the opposite volume at the best, where the distribution of f is given
by Pζ(f) = ζ(1 −f)ζ−1, where ζ is a parameter (ζ > 0), that determines the typical relative
volume of market orders. For ζ →0, the distribution Pζ(f) peaks around f = 1 and most
orders “eat” all the available liquidity; ζ = 1 corresponds to a ﬂat distribution for the fraction
of eaten volume; ﬁnally the limit ζ →∞corresponds to very small (unit) volumes and recovers
the previous model. The correlation between volume at best and volume of the impinging
market order has been reported in many papers (see [32]). This makes perfect sense: since
large metaorders must be fragmented because of the small available liquidity, one expects that
the executed volume opportunistically follows the oﬀered liquidity.
With the help of the extra parameter ζ we can now tune the model to guarantee diﬀusive
prices for any value of γ, even in the limit of deep and slow markets. We deﬁne a measure
of pure diﬀusivity as σ(ℓ1)/σ(ℓ2) for two time scales ℓ1 and ℓ2 > ℓ1. Subdiﬀusion corresponds
to ratios < 1, superdiﬀusion to ratios > 1 and for pure diﬀusion this ratio must be equal to
unity for all ℓ1, ℓ2. In our simulations, we chose λ = 0.5, µ = 0.1, ν∞= 10−4 (corresponding
to ρ∞= 5000 ≫1 and r = 1000 ≫1. We determine the diﬀusion line in the plane γ, ζ,
that separates the subdiﬀusion regime from the superdiﬀusion regime, by setting ℓ1 = 10,
ℓ2 = 1000.6
The result is shown in Fig. 2. As expected, smaller γ’s favor superdiﬀusion,
whereas larger values of ζ (corresponding to less aggressive market orders) favors subdiﬀusion.
On the boundary between the two regimes we ﬁnd the purely diﬀusive, eﬃcient markets we are
looking for; in the following we ﬁx the value of ζ(γ) such as to be exactly diﬀusive.7 Since the
value of ζ is ﬁxed by the condition of price diﬀusivity, our model still has three parameters:
depth (ρ∞), inverse speed (r) and trade persistence (γ).
To illustrate the tight connection between the dynamical theory discussed in the previous
section and the above described numerical model, in Fig. 3 we compare the stationary density
of the book to its expected shape calculated from Eq. (5). The symbols show the stationary
density, ρst, measured in the simulations, while the solid line is Eq. (5) with u∗=
p
D/2ν∞,
D being the actual measured price volatility. The latent order book is found to be linear in
the immediate vicinity of the price, as predicted. The exponential curve with the analytical
expression for u∗leads to a very good ﬁt in the whole range of u.
We now have a model such that (i) the order ﬂow has long range memory but (ii) the price
is diﬀusive. We are thus in a position to test quantitatively our above ideas about the linear
supply function and the impact of metaorders. In order to do this, we add to the above order
ﬂow an extra agent who becomes active at a certain (arbitrary) time t, chooses a random sign
ϵ and a random size Q for his metaorder, which he executes incrementally using market orders
until all the volume is transacted. We have considered two execution styles: a) “ζ-execution”,
6The results are not sensitive to the precise choice of ℓ1 and ℓ2, provided ℓ1, ℓ2 ≪τlife. We have explored a
wide range of values of λ, µ, ν∞. Provided one remains in the limit of deep and slow markets, the broad picture
is unaﬀected, although the precise location of the diﬀusion line in Fig. 2 is changed.
7It would be interesting to obtain an analytical form for the diﬀusion line, but we have not attempted to
make a theory for this at the present stage.
8

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
γ
ζ
subdiffusive
superdiffusive
Figure 2:
Map of diﬀusivity in the plane γ, ζ for λ = 0.5, µ = 0.1, ν∞= 10−4. The large γ, large ζ region
corresponds to subdiﬀusion, while the small γ, small ζ region corresponds to superdiﬀusion. The “eﬃcient
market” (diﬀusive) line determined numerically is such that ζ(0.8) ≈0.65, ζ(0.5) ≈0.95, and ζ(0.3) ≈2.5
(crosses). Note that the unit volume limit ζ →∞corresponds to γ →0. Without volume ﬂuctuations, deep
and slow markets are therefore always found to be in the subdiﬀusive phase.
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
u
ρ ρ∞
G
empirical results
theoretical prediction
Figure 3:
Comparison of the stationary density of the book with the expected shape calculated from Eq.
(5).
The symbols show the empirical shape of the book from the simulations, while the solid line shows
the predicted exponential form, with u∗being computed from the actual price volatility. In the simulations
we used the parameters, γ = 0.8, ζ = 0.65, ν∞= 10−4, λ = 0.5.
The analytical computations lead to
u∗=
p
D/2ν∞= 0.49, while a direct ﬁt to Eq. (5) leads to u∗≈0.48.
9

0.001
0.005
0.020
0.050
0.01
0.05
0.20
0.50
Q V
∆σ
G
G
G
G
G G
G G
G G
δ = 0.5
δ = 1
Figure 4:
Impact of metaorders on log-log scale. We show ∆/σ vs. Q/V , where σ and V are measured over
the timescale τlife. The three curves with symbols show the impact for the ζ-execution with high participation
rate, Φ = 0.3, and three values of the sign autocorrelation exponent: γ = 0.3 (green crosses), γ = 0.5 (black
circles), γ = 0.8 (red triangles). The two blue lines show the impact for low participation rate Φ = 0.05, for the
ζ-execution (full line) and unit-execution (dashed line), both for γ = 0.5. The purple dots show a case when
the time to complete metaorders is longer than the lifetime of the book T > τlife. In this case we get back a
linear impact. The two solid black lines are of slope δ = 0.5 and δ = 1, for comparison, with the choice Y = 1
for δ = 0.5.
where the extra agent trades exactly as the rest of the market, by sending a market order
of volume f × qbest, where f is chosen according to Pζ(f) above; b) “unit-execution”, where
the market orders are all of unit volume, whenever he trades. (We also studied limit order
execution with similar results, see [30].) In both cases, he participates to a fraction Φ of all
market orders. We measure, as the real data shown in Fig. 1, the impact ∆as the price
paid by the extra agent compared to the price pt at the beginning of the metaorder, averaged
over many diﬀerent metaorders of size Q. The results are shown in Fig. 4, where we show
in a log-log scale ∆/σ on the y-axis versus Q/V on the x-axis, for diﬀerent values of γ, r
and Φ, and for both ζ-execution and unit-execution. We also show two straight lines of slope
δ = 1/2, corresponding to a square-root impact, and δ = 1, corresponding to a linear impact.
It is clear that for all cases where the execution time T is much smaller than the renewal time
τlife, the impact is strongly concave and, in a ﬁrst approximation, independent of γ and of the
participation rate Φ, in agreement with empirical observations. The exponent δ is found to be
close to 1/2 for unit-execution, and close to 2/3 for ζ-execution. The Y factor, deﬁned in Eq.
(1), can be measured from the data shown in Fig. 4, and is of order unity, as found empirically.
More details about these results will be given in [30].
Some parameters of the model however do inﬂuence the value of the eﬀective exponent
δ, which might explain why empirical data show some scatter around the value δ =
1
2. In
particular, when the execution time T increases and becomes comparable to the renewal time
τlife, the eﬀective exponent δ increases and the impact becomes linear in the limit T ≫τlife
– see Fig. 4. This is indeed expected since impact is necessarily additive when all memory
of the latent order book has been erased. It is also a direct proof that the persistence of the
supply/demand is central to explain the functional form of the impact. The na¨ıve prediction
for the price impact, Eq. (2), based on the average slope of the supply curve, is shown in Fig.
5 (left), together with the numerical determination of ∆(Q) already plotted in Fig. 4. We see
that the na¨ıve argument indeed leads to the correct order of magnitude for the impact, but
fails to be quantitatively accurate: it underestimates the real impact by a factor ∼2. On the
same graph, we also show the global measure of impact mentioned above, where the average
price change is plotted against the total volume imbalance Q. We see that the latter is very
diﬀerent from the impact of a given metaorder. The global impact is linear in Q (as observed
10

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Q V
∆σ
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
τ T
∆τ ∆T
γ = 0.8
γ = 0.5
γ = 0.3
Figure 5:
(Left) The true impact of ζ-executed metaorders for γ = 0.5, Φ = 0.3 (black circles), the na¨ıve
estimate of the impact from integrating the volume in the average latent order book (blue solid line), and the
average price change against the global volume imbalance in a given period (red triangles). We also show a
power law ﬁt for the metaorder impact, as Y (Q/V )δ, with δ = 0.7 and Y = 1.59 (solid black line) and a linear
ﬁt for the global measure of impact (solid red line). (Right) The decay of impact after the completion of the
metaorder for unit-execution for γ = 0.3, 0.5 and 0.8 and Φ = 0.5. The x-axis is τ/T, the clock-time in units of
the time needed to complete the metaorder (with T ≪τlife), the y-axis is the rescaled price change during the
metaorder. After the metaorder, the price appears to relax to a constant level, which is a γ dependent fraction
of the temporary impact. The dotted horizontal lines correspond to the actual average execution price of the
metaorder, which is found to be ≈0.6 ∆T for all three values of γ.
on empirical data for large enough T) and, for small volume imbalances, much smaller than
the impact of an additional metaorder that perturbs the equilibrium ﬂow.
Another interesting aspect of the problem is the temporal structure of the impact of
metaorders.
In Fig.
5 (right) we show the average diﬀerence ∆τ between the price pt of
the ﬁrst trade of a metaorder and the price pt+τ at time τ later, in the direction of the trade.
The x-axis is in units of the time needed to complete the metaorder. The exact shape of the
build-up in time depends on the execution mechanism, this we will discuss in details in [30].
Here we focus on the price dynamics after the completion of the metaorder. Once the metaorder
is completed (i.e. for τ > T), the impact decays down to smaller values, and appears to reach a
plateau ∆∞, such that ∆∞/∆T depends on the value of γ, and is ∼0.75 for γ = 0.5. The cause
of the reversion in our model is that during the trading of a metaorder, the order book becomes
on average unbalanced: orders on the opposite side become statistically more numerous, as a
consequence of the V-shaped liquidity. This results in a partial reversion of the price, once the
pressure from the metaorder is over.
Interestingly, a similar behaviour has also been observed in [9], and is predicted by theory
of impact recently put forth in [17], which elaborates on the idea of a “fair execution price”. As
emphasized in [9, 17], if a metaorder of size Q has an impact that grows as (qexec/Q)δ (where
qexec is the volume already executed, i.e. qexec/Q is “volume time”)8, then the average execution
price of the metaorder is ∆T/(1+δ). In this case, ∆∞/∆T ≡1/(1+δ) ensures that the average
execution price of the metaorder is equal to the price long after the execution is completed, in
other words that the execution price is fair. Used together with the condition that the price
should be a martingale and that the size distribution of metaorders is a power-law, Q−1−α,
Farmer et al. [17] obtain a concave impact ∆∼Qδ with δ = α −1 = γ.9 Using α ≈3/2 from
8Since the impact is ∆(Q) = Y σ(Q/V )δ, we expect the impact to grow as ∆qexec ≈∆(Q)(qexec/Q)δ meaning
that a metaorder of size Q stopped half-way through execution impacts the price the same way as a metaorder
of size Q/2, which a priori makes sense since there is no way to anticipate when a metaorder is going to stop.
Indeed, we ﬁnd the build-up of the impact in volume time to be concave.
9Note that in the theory of Farmer et al. [17], the exponents δ and γ are equal, whereas in our model δ is
11

empirical data on stocks, the square-root impact law is recovered [17], with ∆∞/∆T = 2/3. We
see however in Fig. 5 (right) that the “fair price” condition does not hold in general within our
model, since the plateau value signiﬁcantly changes with γ, whereas the average price paid is
close to 0.6 ∆T in all cases. Nevertheless, for γ = 0.5 the plateau is not far from the value 2/3
predicted by Farmer et al. [17].
5
Conclusion
Although some elements of our model are common with the framework of [17] (broad distri-
bution of metaorders leading to long range correlation of the order ﬂow, and the eﬃcient price
condition), others are very diﬀerent. The theory advocated in [17] requires that metaorders
can be identiﬁed by market makers, in particular that the very ﬁrst trades can be detected. As
the authors openly admit, the need for market participants to be able to detect the starting
and stopping of a given metaorder is potentially a problem, and in fact our model does not
rely at all on such a strong assumption. On the contrary, we have shown that the universally
observed concave impact law is a consequence of some robust, generic assumptions about mar-
ket dynamics. In particular, we have provided a dynamical theory of liquidity which leads to
a locally linear supply/demand curve, provided high frequency strategies guarantee price dif-
fusivity on all time scales. Our story is purely statistical and does not rely on additional (and
sometimes wooly) notions such as fundamental prices, adverse selection or fair pricing. There
are no explicit market makers, strategic players or optimising agents in our picture, but rather
an ecological equilibrium of indistinguishable traders that interact in a way to make the price
statistically eﬃcient.
Although our “ε-intelligence” numerical model makes an important step towards reality (in
particular by including long-range correlations in the order ﬂow and ensuring a diﬀusive price
dynamics), there are still many assumptions that are ad-hoc. One knows for example that
the deposition/cancellation rates of limit orders do strongly depend on the distance from the
current price [33], that the assumption of a Poisson process is an oversimpliﬁcation [34] (these
observations apply to the real order book, but probably will also hold for the latent order book),
that the volume of limit orders is not at all constant, etc. etc. Building a detailed, realistic
model of order ﬂow is of course needed to get fully quantitative predictions for the impact, but
was not the scope of the present work. We instead wanted to have a simpliﬁed model that
would allow us to test our central hypothesis: that the latent order book is locally linear and
that this is the crucial ingredient to explain the square-root impact law. We believe that this
objective has been reached, and we leave the more ambitious project of building a full-scale
model for future work. We also note that our central assumption of a latent order book has
other, empirically testable assumptions, which we are currently investigating.
As we emphasized in the introduction, understanding impact has immediate practical im-
plications in terms of trading costs and capacity of strategies. In our view, the most important
message of the theory presented above concerns the critical, inherently fragile nature of liquid-
ity. By necessity, a diﬀusive price leads to a vanishing liquidity in the vicinity of the current
price. This naturally accounts for two striking stylized facts: ﬁrst, large metaorders have to be
fragmented in order to be digested by the liquidity funnel, which leads to long-memory in the
sign of the order ﬂow. Second, the anomalously small local liquidity induces a breakdown of
linear response and a diverging impact of small orders. Furthermore, liquidity ﬂuctuations are
bound to play a crucial role when the average liquidity is small, and we expect these ﬂuctua-
tions to be at the heart of the turbulent dynamics of ﬁnancial markets, as postulated in, e.g.
[35, 25, 36].
to a large extent unaﬀected by the precise value of γ.
12

Acknowledgements
We want to thank Paul Besson, R´emy Chicheportiche, Zolt´an Eisler, P´eter Horvai, Fabrizio
Lillo, Matteo Marsili, Marc Potters, Emmanuel S´eri´e, Damien Trouv´e and especially Doyne
Farmer and Jim Gatheral for very helpful discussions and suggestions.
References
[1] J. Hasbrouck, Measuring the information content of stock trades, Journal of Finance,
XLVI, 179, (1991)
[2] J.-P. Bouchaud, Price Impact, in Encyclopedia of Quantitative Finance, R. Cont Edt.;
John Wiley & Sons Ltd. (2010)
[3] J.-P. Bouchaud, J. D. Farmer, F. Lillo, How Markets Slowly Digest Changes in Supply and
Demand in Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics and Evolution, pp 57-156. Eds.
Thorsten Hens and Klaus Schenk-Hoppe. Elsevier: Academic Press, (2008)
[4] R. Almgren, C. Thum, E. Hauptmann, H. Li, Direct estimation of equity market impact,
Risk,18, 5762, (2005)
[5] R. Engle, R. Ferstenberg, J. Russell, Measuring and Modeling Execution Cost and Risk,
working paper (2006).
[6] X. Abdobal, Transaction Cost Estimation, Lehman Brothers commercial document (2006)
[7] A. Ferraris, Market Impact Models, Deutsche Bank internal document (2007)
[8] R. Kissel, R. Malamut, Algorithmic Decision Making Framework, J.P. Morgan internal
document (2005)
[9] E. Moro, J. Vicente, L. G. Moyano, A. Gerig, J. D. Farmer, G. Vaglica, F. Lillo, R. N.
Mantegna, Market impact and trading proﬁle of hidden orders in stock markets, Physical
Review E 80, 066102 (2009)
[10] A. J. Menkveld High Frequency Trading and The New-Market Makers, Working Paper
(2011)
[11] A. S. Kyle, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica, 53, 1315 (1985)
[12] N. Torre, M, Ferrari, Market impact model handbook, (Berkeley, California, Barra, 1997),
available at
http://www.mscibarra.com/research/articles/barra/Market Impact Model.pdf
[13] R. C. Grinold, R. N. Kahn, Active Portfolio Management (New York: The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc., 1999).
[14] X. Gabaix, P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, and H. E. Stanley, Institutional investors and stock
market volatility; Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 461 (2006)
[15] G. C. Chacko, J. W. Jurek, and E. Staﬀord, The Price of Immediacy, The Journal of
Finance, LXIII, 1253 (2008)
[16] Y. C. Zhang, Toward a theory of marginally eﬃcient markets, Physica A269, 30 (1999).
13

[17] J. D. Farmer, A. Gerig, F. Lillo, H. Waelbroeck, How Eﬃciency Shapes Market Impact,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.5457
[18] This is a very old idea. L. Harris, for example, presented a back-of-envelope theory of the
square-root impact based on this idea at the conference “Microstructure, confronting many
viewpoints”, Paris, December 2010. P. Besson also elaborated on this (private communi-
cation).
[19] E. Smith, J.D. Farmer, L. Gillemot, S. Krishnamurthy, Statistical Theory of the Continuous
Double Auction, Quantitative Finance 3 481-514,(2003)
[20] P. Weber, B. Rosenow, Order book approach to price impact, Quantitative Finance, 5, 4,
357 - 364, (2005)
[21] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, L. A. Amaral, M. Meyer, H.E. Stanley, Scaling of the dis-
tribution of price ﬂuctuations of individual companies, Phys. Rev. E60 6519 (1999); P.
Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, L. A. Amaral, M. Meyer, H. E. Stanley, Scaling of the distribu-
tion of ﬂuctuations of ﬁnancial market indices, Phys. Rev. E 60 5305 (1999)
[22] see J.-P. Bouchaud, M. M´ezard, M. Potters, Statistical properties of the stock order books:
empirical results and models, Quantitative Finance, 2, 251 (2002) for an alternative pre-
sentation.
[23] J. Gatheral, private communication (July 2011).
[24] see e.g.: P. Bak, How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality. Copernicus,
Springer, New York, 1996.
[25] J.-P. Bouchaud, Y. Gefen, M. Potters, and M. Wyart. Fluctuations and response in Finan-
cial markets: The subtle nature of random price changes, Quantitative Finance, 4, 176-190
(2004); J.-P. Bouchaud, J. Kockelkoren, and M. Potters, Random walks, liquidity molasses
and critical response in ﬁnancial markets, Quantitative Finance, 6, 115-123 (2006)
[26] F. Lillo and J. D. Farmer, The long memory of the eﬃcient market, Studies in Nonlinear
Dynamics & Econometrics, 8, 1 (2004)
[27] F. Lillo, Sz. Mike, J. D. Farmer, Theory for Long Memory in Supply and Demand, Phys.
Rev. E 71, 066122, (2005)
[28] B. T´oth, F. Lillo, J. D. Farmer, Segmentation algorithm for non-stationary compound
Poisson processes, Eur. Phys. J. B 78, 235-243 (2010)
[29] Y. Lemp´eri`ere, M. Vettorazzo, J. Kockelkoren, J.-P. Bouchaud, CFM report (unpublished)
[30] B. T´oth, Y. Lemp´eri`ere, C. Deremble, J. de Lataillade, J. Kockelkoren, J.-P. Bouchaud,
long version in preparation
[31] see e.g. R. Cont, A. Larrard, Price dynamics in a Markovian limit order market,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1104.4596
[32] J.D. Farmer, L. Gillemot, F. Lillo, Sz. Mike, A. Sen, What Really Causes Large Price
Changes? Quantitative Finance, 4, 383-397, (2004)
[33] M. Potters, J.-P. Bouchaud, More statistical properties of order books and price impact,
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 324(1-2), 133-140, (2003)
14

[34] Sz. Mike, J. D. Farmer, An Empirical Behavioral Model of Liquidity and Volatility, J
Economic Dynamics and Control 32(1), 200-234, (2008)
[35] F. Lillo and J. D. Farmer, The key role of liquidity ﬂuctuations in determining large price
ﬂuctuations, Fluctuations and Noise Letters, 5, L209 (2005).
[36] A. Joulin, A. Lef`evre, D. Grunberg and J.-P. Bouchaud, Stock Price Jumps: News and
Volume Play a Minor Role, Wilmott Magazine, September/October, 2008; J.-P. Bouchaud,
The Endogenous Dynamics of Markets: Price Impact, Feedback Loops and Instabilities, in
“Lessons from the 2008 Crisis”, A. Berd Edt., Risk Publications (2011).
A
Appendix
This Appendix summarizes the main steps of the numerical model discussed in the paper. In
the model we consider that the price axis is very large and is discretized by the tick size (i.e.
the minimum increment of price). The minimum and maximum price are K tick away, with
K ≫1.
Time is measured in discrete steps, and in each time step, three types of events
can happen: new limit orders are placed, market orders are placed or extant limit orders are
canceled. Many of these events can happen simultaneously during a single time step.
• Limit orders are orders to buy or sell, that do not trigger an immediate trade. According
to this, limit orders are placed on a support of size K that is in practice inﬁnite, i.e.
much larger than all other price scales in the system. Limit orders placed below the
current midpoint price are considered as limit orders to buy, while those placed above
the midpoint price are considered orders to sell. All limit orders have unit volume in the
present version of the model (but this is in no way an essential ingredient). Limit orders
arrive with a uniform rate λ per unit time per unit price. In practice this means that in
each time step, there is a probability λne−λ/n! that n new limit orders fall in each of the
K bins of the price axis.
• Market orders are orders that trigger an immediate transaction (with existing limit orders
on the opposite best price level). They arrive with a rate µ per unit time. The sign
(direction) of market orders is generated using the algorithm proposed in [27] with one
active agent at any instant of time.
The volume of market orders is chosen to be a
random fraction f of the opposite volume at the best where the distribution of f is given
by Pζ(f) = ζ(1−f)ζ−1, where ζ is a parameter (ζ > 0), that determines the typicalrelative
volume of market orders. When ζ →0, market orders take all the prevailing volume on
the opposite best.
• In each time step, each limit order in the book has the probability ν∞of being cancelled.
This Poisson process of cancellation deﬁnes the typical lifetime of a limit order (as ν−1
∞).
The order of the processes in each time step is ﬁrst the placement of limit orders, then
the possible execution of market orders, ﬁnally cancellation of some limit orders. As shown in
Fig. 2, with the help of the parameters γ and ζ we can tune the system to guarantee diﬀusive
prices for any value of the parameters µ, λ and ν∞. This diﬀusive market allows us to test the
predictions of our analytical model, about the locally linear proﬁle around the current midpoint
price. To do this, we add an extra “agent” to the model, who wishes to transact a metaorder
that is typically larger than the available volume on the ﬁrst level of the book and thus has to
be split up and traded incrementally. It is the price change from the beginning to the end of
such a metaorder, that we would like to study, in order to compare the predictions of the model
15

0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
253.2
253.4
253.6
253.8
254.0
sell metaorder
time
price
without metaorder
with metaorder
Figure 6:
The price process with and without the metaorder trading, with the same random seed used for
the two simulations. The black curve shows tha price dynamics without the metaorder, while the green curve
shows it with the metaorder, trades of the metaorder are denoted by blue crosses. In the simulations we used
the parameters, γ = 0.8, ζ = 0.65, ν∞= 10−4, λ = 0.5. The participation rate of the metaorder is Φ = 0.05.
to empiricial results. The only remaining point is to deﬁne how the extra agent trades. In
the present paper we allowed two trading strategies for the execution of the metaorder: a) “ζ-
execution”, where the extra agent trades exactly as the rest of the market, by sending a market
order of volume f × qbest, where f is chosen according to Pζ(f) above and b) “unit-execution”,
where the market orders are all of unit volume, whenever he trades.
In Fig. 6 we show a segment of the price process for a simulation run, chosen only for
illustration purposes. We plot the price as a function of time (simulation steps). The two
simulations shown are governed by the same random seed, however in one case an extra agent
trading a metaorder to sell is added to the market. The black curve shows the price dynamics
without the metaorder, while the green curve shows it with the metaorder trades (the metaorder
starts at time 0 and ﬁnishes at time 3000). Blue crosses indicate the moments when a trade
by the extra agent was made. The agent follows the ζ-execution strategy in this particular
run. For a while the two curves are identical, then after the ﬁrst trade of the metaorder the
two curves start to deviate from each other. The coarse-grained dynamics of the two curves
are similar, however the ﬁnal price in case of the green curve is pushed down as a result of the
extra sell metaorder.
16
