 
209
Part IV:  RiskMetrics Data Sets
Chapter 10.
RiskMetrics volatility and correlation ﬁles
 
Scott Howard
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company
Risk Management Advisory
(1-212) 648-4317
 
howard_james_s@jpmorgan.com
 
This section serves as a guide to understanding the information contained in the RiskMetrics daily 
and monthly volatility and correlation ﬁles. It deﬁnes the naming standards we have adopted for 
the RiskMetrics ﬁles and time series, the ﬁle formats, and the order in which the data is presented 
in these ﬁles.
 
10.1  Availability
 
Volatility and correlation ﬁles are updated each U.S. business day and posted on the Internet by 
10:30 a.m. EST. They cover data through close-of-business for the previous U.S. business day. 
Instructions on downloading these ﬁles are available in Appendix H. 
 
10.2  File names
 
To ensure compatibility with MS-DOS, ﬁle names use the “8.3” format:  8-character name and 
3-character extension (see Table 10.1). 
The ﬁrst two characters designate whether the ﬁle is daily (D) or monthly (M), and whether it con-
tains volatility (V) or correlation (C) data. The next six characters identify the collection date of 
the market data for which the volatilities and correlations are computed. The extension identiﬁes 
the version of the data set. 
 
10.3  Data series naming standards
 
In both volatility and correlation ﬁles, all series names follow the same naming convention. They 
start with a three-letter code followed by a period and a sufﬁx, for example, USD.R180.
The three-letter code is either a SWIFT
 
1
 
 currency code or, in the case of commodities, a commod-
ity code, as shown in Table 10.2. The sufﬁx identiﬁes the asset class (and the maturity for 
interest-rate and commodity series). Table 10.3 lists instrument sufﬁx codes, followed by an exam-
ple of how currency, commodity, and sufﬁx codes are used.
 
1
 
The exception is EMB. This represents J. P. Morgan’s Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus.
 
Table 10.1
 
RiskMetrics ﬁle names
 
“ddmmyy” indicates the date on which the market data was collected
 
File name format
Volatility
Correlation
 
File description
 
DVddmmyy.RM3
DCddmmyy.RM3
1-day estimates
MVddmmyy.RM3
MCddmmyy.RM3
25-day estimates
BVddmmyy.RM3
BCddmmyy.RM3
Regulatory data sets
DVddmmyy.vol
DCddmmyy.cor
Add-In 1-day estimates
MVddmmyy.vol
MCddmmyy.cor
Add-In 25-day estimates
BVddmmyy.vol
BCddmmyy.cor
Add-In regulatory 
