The Behavior of Individual Investors
1543
of a positive relation between small trade order imbalance and short-horizon returns, 
followed by return reversals at long horizons, can be explained by the correlated 
sentiment-based trading of individual investors. In the short run, sentiment temporarily 
pushes prices above fundamental value, leading to predictable long-run return reversals.
Kelley and Tetlock (KT, in press) use data routed by retail brokers to two market centers 
over the period 2003–2007 to analyze the trading of individual investors. Brokerage firms 
route a significant fraction of their order flow (roughly 40%) to these market centers, and 
the data contain a code that classifies the order submitter as an individual or institution. 
Using a daily Fama–Macbeth regression approach, KT document that daily order imbal­
ance of retail traders positively predicts returns at horizons up to 20 days. KT (in press) argue 
the strong returns over short horizons is evident in both market and limit orders. They con­
clude: “…retail market orders aggregate private information about firms’ future cash flows, 
whereas retail limit orders provide liquidity to traders demanding immediate execution.”
These four papers use somewhat different approaches, datasets, and time periods. 
All four present intriguing evidence that individual investors’ trades positively predict 
returns at short horizons in the US. There is an ongoing debate in the literature regard­
ing the origins of this short-run predictability in the US.
In contrast to the consistent finding of short-run predictability in the US, the non-
US evidence is mixed. Barber et al. (2009) document that individual investors in Taiwan 
incur losses over short horizons. Long-short portfolios that mimic the buy–sell trades 
of individual investors earn reliably negative monthly alphas of −11.0%, −3.3%, and 
−1.9% over horizons of 1, 10, and 25 days respectively.  Andrade, Chang, and Seasholes 
(2008) document a similar result using changes in stocks held in margin accounts by 
individual investors in Taiwan over the period 1994–2002. In Andrade et al., stocks are 
sorted into quintiles based on their order imbalance in week t; stocks heavily bought 
go on to earn poor returns (−23 bps) in the following week, while those heavily sold 
earn strong returns (29 bps). Kaniel et al. (2008) speculate that their liquidity provision 
story does not apply to the Taiwan market, where individual investors dominate trading; 
roughly 90% of total trading volume can be traced to retail investors in Taiwan.
1.1.3  Market vs. Limit Orders
The evidence on the profitability of market versus limit orders of individual investors 
also yields conflicting results. Kelley and Tetlock (in press), which we discussed in the 
prior section, document short-term profits on retail trades emanating from both mar­
ket and limit orders in the US. Linnainmaa (2010) documents losses on limit orders 
and gains on market orders in Finland. Barber et al. (2009) find the opposite result in 
Taiwan—short-term gains on passive orders and short-term losses on aggressive (quasi-
market) orders.
Linnainmaa (2010) argues that individual investors perform poorly on their trades 
because informed traders pick off their limit orders. Assume sleepy individual investors 
