Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean
1544
have unmonitored limit orders to sell a stock. A savvy investor learns of a good earnings 
announcement that will drive the stock’s price higher. Armed with this earnings news, 
the savvy investor places market orders to buy the stock and profits in the short term 
by picking off the unmonitored limit orders of individual investors. Linnainmaa (2010) 
uses data from the Finnish Stock Exchange over the period 1998–2001 that allows him 
to identify whether an investor has placed a limit or market order. Consistent with the 
hypothesis that individual investors are picked off, he documents that the returns on 
individual investor trades that emanate from limit orders lose 51 bps on the day follow­
ing trade and 3.3% over 63 days. In contrast, the returns on trades that emanate from 
market orders gain 44 bps on the day following trade and 3.5% over 63 days. In Finland, 
individual investors lose money on executed limit orders, but make money on executed 
market orders. When combined, the gains and losses leave individual investors in his 
sample with profits that are indistinguishable from zero.
The evidence from Taiwan is not consistent with that from Finland. Taiwan is an 
electronic limit order market. Barber et al. (2009) categorize the limit orders as passive or 
aggressive. Orders to buy with prices in excess of the most recent unfilled sell limit order 
are categorized as aggressive; those with an order price below the most recent unfilled 
buy limit order are categorized as passive. (Sell orders are categorized as passive or 
aggressive in a similar way.) One can view aggressive limit orders as roughly equivalent 
to market orders since the only way to demand execution in an electronic limit order 
market is to place an order with an aggressive price (e.g. be willing to buy at a high price 
or sell at a low price). At short horizons (of one to 10 days following the trade), indi­
vidual investors make money on their passive trades, though the six-month returns are 
indistinguishable from zero. Individual investors lose money on their aggressive trades at 
both short and long horizons. This is in striking contrast to the results in Finland, where 
individuals lose money on limit orders and make money on market orders.
1.2  Cross-Sectional Variation in Performance
The performance of the average individual obscures tremendous variation in outcomes 
across individuals. Importantly, the cross-sectional variation in performance is predict­
able and can be traced to investment skill, cognitive abilities, investment style, location, 
and gender.
There is strong evidence of performance persistence among individual investors. 
Coval, Hirshleifer, and Shumway (CHS, 2005) use the LDB dataset to analyze perfor­
mance persistence: Do investors with strong past returns go on to earn strong returns? 
They sort investors into deciles based on the performance of their buys during the 
first half of the sample period (1991–1993) and analyze the subsequent performance of 
their purchases in the second half of the sample period (1994–1996). Using buys during 
the latter period, CHS construct a calendar-time portfolio that mimics the buying of 
investors in each performance decile. The return spread between the top and bottom 

The Behavior of Individual Investors
1545
performance deciles is about 5 bps per day in the week following trade. This return 
spread does not account for transaction costs; round-trip spreads and commissions 
would easily wipe out a 25 bps trading advantage. Nonetheless, the evidence of variation 
in investor skill is intriguing.
Barber et al. (2011) analyze the performance of day traders in Taiwan over the period 
1992–2006. Day trading in Taiwan is quite common. Over 300,000 individual investors 
engage in day trading in the typical year, and their combined trading accounts for 17% 
of total trading volume. This is an ideal setting to analyze the performance of specu­
lators, as day traders are certainly not trading for liquidity, rebalancing, or tax-related 
reasons (all reasonable motivations for trading). Furthermore, the large population of day 
traders allows for a more powerful identification of potentially skilled traders. To identify 
skilled (and unskilled) traders, BLLO (2011) rank investors based on their day trading 
performance in year y and analyze their performance in the subsequent year (y + 1). 
The top 500 traders earn intraday returns on day trading that outperform the thousands 
of traders who perform poorly by over 60 bps. As in CHS, there is strong evidence of 
cross-sectional differences in speculative ability though the magnitudes are much larger. 
The best traders, though a rare breed, earn gross abnormal returns of about 50 bps per 
day, which is sufficient to cover a reasonable accounting for transaction costs.
Recent papers suggest cognitive abilities play an important role in investor out­
comes. Korniotis and Kumar (in press) predict cognitive ability using a host of demo­
graphic variables (e.g. age, education, and social networks). Using the LDB dataset, they 
show that smarter investors outperform others by about 30 bps per month (or 3.6% 
annually) both before and after accounting for transaction costs. Smarter investors earn 
returns net of trading costs that are on par with appropriate benchmark returns; they 
make good stock picks, but only good enough to cover their trading costs. Other inves­
tors underperform appropriate benchmarks by a bit more than 30 bps per month (or 
3.6% annually) after costs, with about half of the shortfall being traced to trading costs 
and half to bad stock selection.
In a closely related paper, Korniotis and Kumar (2009) use the LDB dataset to 
analyze the relation between age and performance. Motivated by the observation that 
cognitive abilities decline with age, the authors predict and find evidence to support the 
notion that investment performance declines with age.
Using data from Finland, Grinblatt, Keloharju, and Linnainmaa (GKL, 2012) analyze 
the relation between IQ and stock selection ability. The Finnish Armed Forces admin­
isters an intelligence test (120 questions covering verbal, math, and logical reasoning) 
to recruits around the time of induction into mandatory military duty (generally at the 
age of 19 or 20). The scores range from 1 to 9, and GKL define a low-IQ investor as 
one with a FAF score from 1 to 4 and a high-IQ investor as one with a FAF score of 9. 
Based on these definitions, 24% of their sample are low-IQ investors, while 8% are high-
IQ investors. The spread in portfolio returns earned by low- versus high-IQ investors is 

Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean
1546
2.2% per year and is marginally significant. However, an analysis of the returns following 
purchases provides convincing statistical evidence that high-IQ investors make better 
trades than low-IQ investors. GKL also document high-IQ investors have better trade 
execution, though they do not measure the net portfolio returns of high-IQ investors, 
so it is difficult to know whether high-IQ investors would beat an appropriate bench­
mark after a reasonable accounting for transaction costs.
Ivkovic, Sialm, and Weisbenner (2008) argue that informed individual investors 
would tend to concentrate their portfolios in the stocks for which they hold an infor­
mational advantage. Using the LDB dataset, they document that investors with con­
centrated portfolios (with only one or two stocks) outperform diversified portfolios 
(with three or more stocks) by 16 bps per month. This “concentration” effect is more 
pronounced for local stock and non-S&P 500 stocks.
Finally, Barber and Odean (2001) compare the performance of men and women 
using data from the LDB dataset. Unlike the studies on cross-sectional performance dis­
cussed above, this study focuses on the net returns (i.e. returns net of spreads and com­
missions) of men and women. The study is motivated by the two observations: (1) men 
tend to be more prone to overconfidence than women in areas culturally perceived to be 
in the male domain (Deaux and Farris, 1977), and (2) models that assume that investors 
are overconfident tend to predict investors will trade excessively and to their detriment. 
When combined, these observations predict that men will trade more than women and 
that excessive trading will hurt their performance. Consistent with these predictions, 
Barber and Odean (2001) document that men trade more than women; the annual turn­
over rates of men are about 80%, while those of women are 50%. The excessive trading of 
men leads to poor returns. While both men and women earn poor returns, men perform 
worse. Virtually all of the gender-based difference in performance can be traced to the 
fact that men tend to trade more aggressively than women. Neither men nor women 
appear to have stock selection ability (i.e. the gross returns earned on their trades are 
similar), so men’s tendency to trade aggressively and the resulting trading costs drag down 
men’s returns. Dorn and Huberman (2005) find that men with accounts at a German 
online brokerage trade more actively than women, but gender effects are reduced if one 
accounts for differences in self-reported risk aversion. Choi, Laibson, and Metrick (2002), 
Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sundén (2003), and Mitchell et al. (2006), all report that while trad­
ing levels are low in 401(k) plans, men trade more actively than women. In contrast to the 
US and German and 401(k) plan evidence, Feng and Seasholes (2008) find no significant 
turnover or performance differences in the accounts of men and women in China.
A careful reading of the research on cross-sectional variation in performance yields 
three general conclusions. First, there is strong evidence of cross-sectional variation in 
trading skill. Second, security selection skill among individuals is rare (i.e. confined to a 
relatively small group of stocks or individuals). Third, even the best stock pickers have 
trouble covering transaction costs.
