The Behavior of Individual Investors
1547
2.  WHY DO INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS UNDERPERFORM?
The majority of the empirical evidence indicates that individual investors, in aggregate, 
earn poor long-run returns and would be better off had they invested in a low-cost 
index fund. This evidence of poor performance is particularly compelling when we 
include transaction costs (e.g. commissions, bid–ask spreads, market impact, and transac­
tion taxes). While transaction costs are an important component of the shortfall, a sec­
ond component is the poor security selection ability of individual investors documented 
in many studies that we reviewed in the prior section. These observations lead one to 
wonder why investors trade so much and to their detriment.
2.1  Asymmetric Information
One possibility is that individual investors realize that they are at an informational dis­
advantage when trading and only do so for non-speculative reasons including liquidity 
needs, rebalancing, and taxes. Investors may need to purchase stocks to save, or sell stocks 
to consume. At times, investors may need to rebalance their portfolios to manage risk-
return tradeoffs. Occasionally, investors will want to harvest tax losses to minimize their 
tax bill. When faced with these liquidity, rebalancing, or tax management needs, retail 
investors are forced to trade with others who might be better informed. It is, however, 
difficult to reconcile non-speculative trading needs with the annual turnover rates of 
250% for the 20% most active investors in the LDB dataset (Barber and Odean, 2000), 
annual turnover of 300% in Taiwan (Barber et al., 2009), or annual turnover of 500% in 
China (Gao, 2002). Furthermore, investors who do have unusual non-speculative needs 
to trade could dramatically lower their asymmetric information and transaction costs by 
investing in low cost, no load mutual funds.
Why do so many investors self-manage portfolios when they could earn better 
returns with lower risk in low-cost mutual funds, such as index funds? And why do 
investors with portfolios of individual equities trade actively when doing so lowers their 
expected returns? We turn to possible behavioral explanations.
2.2  Overconfidence
Overconfidence can explain the relatively high turnover rates and poor performance of 
individual investors. A rich literature in psychology documents that people generally are 
overconfident (for an overview of this literature see Moore and Healy, 2008, and ­citations 
in Odean, 1999). One variety of overconfidence is a belief that one knows more than 
one actually does, which is sometimes labeled “miscalibration” or “overprecision”. In 
a classic illustration of this type of overconfidence, subjects are presented a series of 10 
difficult questions (e.g. “What is the length of the Nile river?”). They are then asked to 
provide a low and high guess such that the correct answer is between the low and high 
guess with a probability of 90%. The well-calibrated subject would, on average, provide 

Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean
1548
intervals that contain the correct answer nine out of 10 times. Typically, subjects provide 
intervals that contain far fewer correct answers (Alpert and Raiffa, 1982). A second 
variety of overconfidence is a belief that one is better than the median person, which 
has been (mis)labeled the “better-than-average” effect. For example, when asked about 
their own driving ability relative to the population of drivers, most people rank them­
selves above the driver of median ability (Svenson, 1981). Related to, but distinct from, 
the better-than-average effect is the tendency to overestimate one’s actual ability. For 
example, a student might think his score on a test is 80% when he actually scored 65% 
(and the average score was 90%). (See Moore and Healy, 2008, for discussion.)
Several papers have developed theoretical models based on the observation that 
investors are overconfident (Benos, 1998; Caballe and Sakovics, 2003; Daniel, Hirshleifer, 
and Subrahmanyam, 1998; Gervais and Odean, 2001; Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong, 
2006; Kyle and Wang, 1997; Odean, 1998; Peng and Xiong, 2006; Scheinkman and 
Xiong, 2003; and Wang, 2001). Generally, these models assume investors suffer from the 
miscalibration type of overconfidence. For example, one can extend the classic models 
of Kyle (1985), Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), or Diamond and Varecchia (1981) by 
assuming some investors are miscalibrated (or overconfident) about the precision of 
their information (see Odean, 1999). In these three settings, the overconfidence models 
generally predict that investors will trade too much and to their detriment.
A number of empirical facts line up reasonably well with the predictions of these 
theoretical models. Investors who trade the most perform the worst (Barber and Odean, 
2000). Men, who are more prone to be overconfident than women, trade more and 
perform worse than women (Barber and Odean, 2001).
Empirical work has attempted to tease out the type of overconfidence, miscalibration 
or better-than-average, that is linked to excessive trading. Combining survey evidence 
with trades and positions for 1,345 German investors, Dorn et al. (2005) document that 
investors who think themselves more knowledgeable than average churn their portfo­
lios more. Similarly, Glaser and Weber (2007) use survey evidence and trading records 
for 215 German investors to document a link between the “better-than-average” type 
of overconfidence and trading activity. Using a five-question version of the calibra­
tion experiment described earlier, Glaser and Weber find no reliable link between the 
miscalibration type of overconfidence and trading activity. (While this is a provocative 
nonresult, using a five- or 10-question survey to measure miscalibration strikes us as a 
very noisy measure that would yield low power to reject the null hypothesis that mis­
calibration and trading activity are unrelated.) Finally, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009) 
find that Finnish investors with an inflated sense of their own abilities tend to trade 
more; we elaborate on this finding in more detail in the next section.
Closely related to the notion of overconfidence are self-assessments of competence, 
which are studied by Graham, Harvey, and Huang (2009). They argue that “people are 
more willing to bet on their own judgments when they feel skillful or knowledgeable”. 
