The Behavior of Individual Investors
1549
To test this conjecture, they use survey responses from 475 US investors to study the impact 
of self-assessed competence on trading. Competence is based on the answer to the follow­
ing question “How comfortable do you feel about your ability to understand investment 
products, alternatives, and opportunities?” Subjects responded on a five-point scale ranging 
from “1-very uncomfortable” to “5-very comfortable”. Graham et al. document a strong 
link between self-assessed competence and the propensity to trade. They measure the bet­
ter-than-average effect by taking the difference between the answers to questions about an 
investor’s expected return on their own portfolio and the expected return on the market. 
They find weak evidence that this measure of overconfidence is linked to trading activity.
In summary, a fair amount of evidence indicates that the better-than-average and 
overestimation varieties of overconfidence are correlated with higher levels of trading 
by investors. While the evidence that miscalibration is linked to trading is weaker, we 
suspect this weak link might be partially explained by the current inability to measure 
miscalibration well.
2.3  Sensation Seeking
A noncompeting explanation for the excessive trading of individual investors is the sim­
ple observation that trading is entertainment and appeals to people who enjoy sensation 
seeking activities such as gambling. Using the Finnish dataset, Grinblatt and Keloharju 
(GK, 2009) analyze both sensation seeking and overconfidence as mechanisms that lead 
to trading. They use traffic tickets as a proxy for sensation seeking and argue that those 
who speed are more likely to be sensation seekers. To measure overconfidence, GK use 
data from tests administered to men entering the Finnish Armed Forces that measure 
the candidates’ actual ability (i.e. test outcomes) and perceived ability (i.e. self-assess­
ments). GK use the measure of perceived ability that is orthogonal to actual ability as a 
measure of overconfidence. Using these instruments, GK document that both sensation 
seeking and overconfidence affect trading, though the tenor of their results depend a 
bit on whether one focuses on the decision to trade, the number of trades, or portfolio 
turnover as the dependent variable of interest.
Dorn and Sengmueller (2009) match survey responses to trading records for 1,000 
investors at a German discount broker. Investors are asked whether they agree or dis­
agree (on a five-point scale) with the following four statements: (1) I enjoy investing, 
(2) I enjoy risky propositions, (3) Games are only fun when money is involved, and (4) 
In gambling, the fascination increases with the size of the bet. Investors who agree with 
these statements tend to trade more. Investors who report enjoying investing (question 
1) or gambling (questions 2–4) trade at twice the rate of other investors.
Trading competes with other activities for the attention of sensation-seeking inves­
tors. Thus, we would expect trading to wane when there are a number of thrilling 
activities at their disposal. There is some suggestive evidence that this is the case. Dorn, 
Dorn, and Sengmueller (2007) analyze the trading response of individual investors to 
