Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean
1550
multistate lottery jackpots in the US. Using small trades in the TAQ dataset to identify 
individual investors during the period 1998–2004, they document that a one standard 
deviation increase in multistate lottery jackpots (i.e. Powerball and Mega Millions) is 
associated with a 1% reduction in small trader participation (the fraction of trading 
volume contributed by trades of less than $5000); this effect is most pronounced for lot­
tery-like stocks (e.g. low-prices stocks with high past volatility and skewness). Similarly, 
Barber et al. (2009) find that trading in Taiwan dropped by about 25% when a legal 
lottery was introduced on the island in April 2002. As in Dorn, Dorn, and Sengmueller 
(2007), Gao and Lin (2011) further explore this substitution effect by analyzing the 
volume of individual investor trading in Taiwan around lotteries with unusually large 
jackpots. They document trading by individual investors declines during periods with 
unusually large lottery jackpots; moreover, the effects are greatest in stocks with high 
levels of individual investors participation and skewed returns.
In related papers, Kumar (2009b) and Mitton and Vorkink (2007) hypothesize that 
retail investors have a taste for stocks with lottery-like payoffs. Note that this is distinct 
from the sensation-seeking (or entertainment) hypothesis discussed above. Sensation-
seeking investors will trade to entertain themselves but might hold well-diversified 
portfolios and eschew lottery-like stocks. Investors with a preference for skewness will 
hold lottery-like stocks but might refrain from trading. Thus, preferences for skewness 
may lead to under-diversification but has no immediate implications for trading. We 
elaborate on these findings later when we discuss the literature on diversification.
2.4  Familiarity
There is debate about whether individual investors possess an informational advantage about 
companies that are close to where they live or in their industry of employment. Some 
scholars argue that individual investors are better informed about the prospects of such 
companies and that this information advantage leads to superior investment performance. 
Others argue individuals overinvest in these stocks because they are familiar to them, leading 
to under-diversification and average or even below-par returns. In this section, we discuss 
the evidence on performance. In section 6, we discuss the implications for diversification.
Massa and Simonov (2006) analyze portfolio holdings of Swedish investors and 
document that investors tilt their portfolio toward stocks that are most closely related 
to them, either professionally (e.g. a financial professional investing in a finance stock) or 
geographically (e.g. a Seattle investor investing in a Seattle stock). They argue that this 
familiarity-based investing allows investors to earn higher returns because of the infor­
mation advantage conferred by familiarity. Similarly, Ivkovic and Weisbenner (2005) use 
the LDB dataset to document individual investors tend to overweight local stocks and 
argue the returns on local stocks are strong. Seasholes and Zhu (2010) argue that this 
result is not robust and leans on faulty statistical methodologies. After considering a bat­
tery of tests using the same dataset as Ivkovic and Weisbenner (2005), they conclude that 
