The Behavior of Individual Investors
1557
(2005) document that the disposition effect dissipates with trading experience (time 
since first trade) and various measures of financial sophistication measured early in a 
trader’s history. Seru, Shumway, and Stoffman (2010) examine trading records for indi­
vidual investors in Finland from 1995 to 2003. They find that the disposition effect 
declines with experience when experience is measured in number of trades. The drop 
in the disposition effect is much less when trading experience is measured in years.
The research discussed above presents a remarkably clear portrait of a prototypical 
individual investor who sells his winners and holds his losers. This behavior is broadly 
categorized as an investment mistake because it is tax inefficient.5 Thus, while taxes 
clearly affect the trading of individual investors, they cannot explain the disposition 
effect. Investors’ reluctance to realize losses is at odds with optimal tax-loss selling for 
taxable investments. For tax purposes, investors should postpone taxable gains by con­
tinuing to hold their profitable investments. They should capture tax losses by selling 
their losing investments, though not necessarily at a constant rate. Constantinides (1984) 
shows that when there are transactions costs, and no distinction is made between the 
short-term and long-term tax rates, investors should increase their tax-loss selling 
gradually from January to December.6 Australia has a June tax year end, so the 
Constantinides model would predict accelerated selling in June for Australia, a predic­
tion confirmed by Brown et al. (2006).
Barber and Odean (2004) document the disposition effect for taxable and tax-
deferred accounts for the LDB dataset and for a dataset of trading and position records 
from January 1998 to June 1999 for 418,332 households with accounts at a large US 
full-service brokerage. They find that at both the discount and full-service brokers, the 
disposition effect is reversed in December in taxable, but not tax-deferred, accounts. 
Using a Cox proportional hazard rate model and the US discount brokerage data, 
Ivkovich, Poterba, and Weisbenner (2005) document that: “Investors are more likely to 
realize losses in taxable accounts than in tax-deferred accounts, not just in December, 
but throughout the year.”
3.2  Why Do Investors Prefer to Sell Winners?
While the tendency of investors to sell winners more readily than losers is empirically 
robust, recent research focuses on why investors behave this way. Shefrin and Statman 
(1985) attribute the disposition effect to a combination of prospect theory, regret aver­
sion, mental accounting, and self-control issues. Prospect theory was developed from a 
series of experiments in which Kahneman and Tversky (1979) ask students to choose 
5 In addition, selling winners rather losers arguably leaves individual investors missing out on some returns 
that might be earned because of momentum effects (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1991).
6 Dyl (1977), Lakonishok and Smidt (1986), and Badrinath and Lewellen (1991) report evidence that 
­investors do sell more losing investments near the end of the year.

Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean
1558
between hypothetical outcomes such as: “Which of the following would you prefer? 
A: A 50% chance to win 1000, and 50% chance to win nothing; B: 450 for sure.” It is 
not obvious exactly how such choices translate into the realm of investing. Shefrin and 
Statman assume that, due to mental accounting (Thaler, 1985), most investors will seg­
regate gambles and thus tend to evaluate performance at the level of individual securities 
(e.g. stocks) rather portfolios.
What is less clear is what happens when investors apply prospect theory preferences 
to stock investments. Barberis and Xiong (2009) model the trading behavior of an 
investor with prospect theory preferences. They find that, if performance is evaluated 
annually, prospect theory preferences do not necessarily lead to a tendency to realize 
gains more readily than losses and can even have the opposite effect. Hens and Vlcek’s 
(2011) model questions whether investors with prospect theory preferences would even 
buy stocks in the first place. Henderson (2012) develops an optimal stopping model 
based on prospect theory preferences and finds investors are more likely to realize 
gains than losses. Kaustia (2010b) finds that prospect theory can lead to holding onto 
both losers and winners. Yao and Li (2011) model a market in which investors with 
prospect theory preferences interact with investors with constant relative risk aversion 
(CRRA) and find that this interaction commonly generates a negative-feedback trad­
ing tendency, which favors the disposition effect and contrarian behavior, for prospect 
theory investors.
Barberis and Xiong (2009,  2012) argue that investors gain utility from realizing 
gains and dub this behavior “realization utility”.  They show that, if gains and losses are 
evaluated when they are realized, a disposition effect obtains. In ongoing work using 
brain imaging (fMRI) while subjects are making buying and selling decisions in an 
experimental market, Frydman et al. (2011) present intriguing results that are consistent 
with the notion that investors get a burst of utility when they sell a winner.
Summers and Duxbury (2007) examine the role of emotions in creating the dis­
position effect. They find no disposition effect in experimental markets when subjects 
do not actively choose the stocks in their portfolios; if subjects do not feel responsible 
for decisions leading to gains and losses, they no longer sell winners more readily than 
losers. This suggests that the emotions of regret and its positive counterpart—referred 
to by some authors as rejoicing and by others as pride—contribute to the disposition 
effect. Muermann and Volkman (2006) develop a model of the disposition effect in 
which investors respond to anticipated regret and pride. Strahilevitz, Odean, and Barber 
(2011) document that individual investors are more likely to repurchase a stock that 
they have previously sold if the price has dropped since the previous transaction. They 
attribute this behavior to the emotions of regret when one repurchases at a higher price 
than one sold at and rejoicing when one repurchases at a lower price. Consistent with 
this emotional story, Weber and Welfens (2011) confirm in experiments that subjects 
exhibit this behavior only when they were responsible for the original sale, suggesting 
