The Behavior of Individual Investors
1559
that investors refrain from repurchasing stocks at a higher price than their previous sale 
price to avoid regret.
4.  REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
The simplest form of learning may be to repeat behaviors that previously coincided 
with pleasure and avoid those that coincided with pain. Several studies suggest that 
individual investors engage in such simple reinforcement learning. Choi et al. (2009) 
document that investors overextrapolate from their personal experience when making 
savings decisions; investors whose 401(k) accounts have experienced greater returns 
or lower variance increase their saving rates. Strahilevitz, Odean, and Barber (2011) 
find that investors are more likely to repurchase a stock that they previously sold for 
a profit than one previously sold for a loss. Huang (2010) demonstrates that investors, 
particularly unsophisticated investors, are more likely to buy a stock in an industry if 
their previous investments in this industry have earned a higher return than the market. 
De, Gondhi, and Pochiraju (2010) show that individual investors trade more actively 
when their most recent trades are successful. Kaustia and Knupfer (2008) document that 
investors are more likely to subscribe to initial public offerings (IPOs) if their personal 
experience with IPO investments has been profitable. Malmendier and Nagel (2011) 
establish that investor age cohorts who have experienced high stock market returns 
throughout their lives are less risk averse and more likely to invest in stocks.
5.  ATTENTION: CHASING THE ACTION
Individuals have a limited amount of attention that they can devote to investing. 
Attention can affect the trading behavior of investors in two distinct ways. On one hand, 
directing too little attention to important information can result in a delayed reaction 
to important information. On the other hand, devoting too much attention to (perhaps 
stale or irrelevant) information can lead to an overreaction.
Recent research provides some support for the notion that distracted investors 
miss important information. Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009) find that the market 
reaction to an earnings surprise is smaller and post-earnings announcement drift is 
greater for firms that announce earnings on days that many other firms announce earn­
ings; they argue that this is because more firms are competing for investors’ attention. 
Similarly, Dellavigna and Pollet (2009) document the market reaction to Friday earnings 
announcements is muted and the drift is greater; they argue investors are distracted on 
Fridays and are unable to fully process Friday announcements. However, Hirshleifer et 
al. (2008) are unable to link post-earnings announcement drift to the trades of individ­
ual investors in the LDB dataset, who tend to be net buyers subsequent to both positive 
and negative extreme earnings surprises.
