Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean
1564
7.  ARE INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS CONTRARIANS?
Are individual investors contrarians? Webster defines a contrarian as “a person who buys 
shares of stock when most other investors are selling and sells when they are buying”.8 
By this definition, it is institutions, not individuals, who almost certainly are contrarians 
since when institutions in aggregate are trading against individuals in aggregate, there 
will usually be a greater number of investors on individual investors’ side of the trade. 
The Oxford English Dictionary defines a contrarian as: “A person who (habitually) 
opposes or rejects prevailing opinion … an investor who goes against the current con­
sensus when trading, e.g. by buying shares in a company when their price is falling.”9 
This definition suggests that it is one’s beliefs that make one a contrarian. If investors’ 
beliefs can be inferred from their purchases, individual investors are not contrarians 
since they are far more likely to buy a stock when the price has been rising than when 
it has been falling.
Nevertheless, several authors characterize the trading behavior of individual inves­
tors as contrarian. Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2008) argue that “there is widespread 
agreement in the literature that individuals tend to be contrarian …”. Choe, Kho, and 
Stulz (1999) use data from the Korean stock exchange to examine the positive feedback 
trading of institutions during the Asian financial crisis and document that during this 
crisis individuals tend to be contrarian investors. Grinblatt and Kelharju (2000, 2001a) 
report similar contrarian behavior in Finland. (See also Jackson, 2003; Richards, 2005; 
and Griffin, Harris; and Topaloglu, 2003).
All of these papers label individual investors as contrarian based on the net buying 
(i.e. purchases minus sales) of individual investors in response to recent price changes. 
While the authors are accurate in their empirical observations, in our opinion, label­
ing individual investors contrarians mischaracterizes their beliefs. Barber, Odean, and 
Zhu (2009b) separately analyze the buying and selling of individual investors using the 
LDB and FSB datasets. They document that positive relation between the aggregate 
buying of individual investors and returns lagged up to 12 quarters for both datasets. 
However, a positive relation also exists between aggregate selling of individual investors 
and returns lagged up to 12 quarters (though these effects are somewhat weaker for 
the full-service broker).
In Figure 2, we provide a simple graphic representation of the prior returns of 
stocks bought and stocks sold using a standard event-time analysis. Specifically, we cal­
culate the mean market-adjusted return on all purchases in event time, where day 0 is 
the day of the purchase. These means are cumulated beginning two years (504 trading 
days) prior to the purchase. There is an analogous calculation for sales. Panel A contains 
results for the LDB data, while Panel B contains results for the FSB data. It is clear 
8 Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged, 1993, Merriam-Webster, Incorporated.
9 Oxford English Dictionary, 2011, Oxford University Press.
