Chapter 1
Elective Affinities
The attractions of science
The glory days of particle physics
Driven by ambitious dreams to Columbia
Legendary physicists and budding wunderkinder
Talent versus character, plans versus luck
I expected New York to glitter. Instead, when I arrived on that hot August
afternoon 
in 
1966, 
the 
city 
was 
grimy 
and 
littered, 
disappointingly
unmodern. I was jet-lagged and weary, and the sweaty cab ride from
Kennedy airport to upper Manhattan tilted me towards depression. The
cramped Formica-filled rooms in International House, a graduate student
dormitory established by the Rockefeller Foundation on the far reaches of
New York’s Upper West Side, bore little resemblance to the spacious-
looking illustrations in the brochure they had sent to me in South Africa.
The sickly green-and-white walls in the corridors and the guards at the back
entrance added to the prison sensibility. It took several months before habit
obscured all of this ugliness. “I. House,” as we all called it, was actually a
very good place for foreigners.
A few hours after stepping off the airplane, I descended into a state of
acute 
loneliness. 
It 
must 
have 
had 
something 
to 
do 
with 
the 
sudden
perception of distance and time; I had been away from home many times
before, but never this far, and never for so undetermined a period. For
weeks, verging on months, I walked around with a lump in my throat that
threatened to overwhelm me. This welling-up sensation took a long time to
pass, and when it finally did, I missed the painful intensity that the sadness
and longing had brought to my existence. A few years later I read Young
Törless 
by 
Robert 
Musil, 
and 
recognized 
the 
adolescent 
protagonist’s
piercing and yet delectable unhappiness. The echoes of that first loneliness
never totally faded away. Ever since, whenever I’ve had to start out in a
new city alone, I feel again the resonances of those desolate days, at least
for a short time.
I spoke to almost no one during those first few weeks in I. House, which
was virtually empty in the quiet lull before classes began. Ever cautious, I
had arrived three weeks early, compulsively planning to settle down and get
acclimated before starting my PhD program in physics. Instead, I felt
isolated from everyone I had ever known. It is almost impossible today to
be as cut off from any place in the world as I was from Cape Town during
that first year in New York. There were almost no telephones in I. House—
one extension in a badly soundproofed booth in the corridor served a floor
of fifty people. Phone calls to South Africa were expensive and had to be
booked in advance through an operator. I never called home; instead, I
wrote letters to family and friends several times a week. Finally, mercifully,
my first semester at graduate school started.
A blind but avid desire for success in physics spurred me to leave Cape
Town; simple chance brought me to Columbia. I had entered the University
of Cape Town four years earlier at the age of 16. We were educated in the
British style: You had to choose your major area—science, arts, medicine,
or commerce—before you began your studies. I chose the natural sciences.
In my freshman year I took four separate year-long courses in Physics, Pure
Maths, Applied Maths, and Chemistry. There was not much choice of
subtopics; you studied everything they chose to teach and then received a
grade based on the grand final exam at the end of each year. By my final
year I had decided on a joint major in Applied Maths and Theoretical
Physics. Foolishly, the school had permitted me to study only theoretical
physics from my second undergraduate year onwards, and so I emerged
with no experimental skills. It was a premature specialization that no good
American university would have tolerated.
In late 1965 I suddenly noticed that the more ambitious students in my
class were planning to apply to graduate schools abroad. Serendipitously, I
stumbled on a path to the United States through a bad case of acne. By
coincidence, 
my 
sister, 
a 
clinical 
psychologist, 
had 
helped 
my
dermatologist’s young nephew successfully overcome “poor concentration”
ten years earlier. The dermatologist took a benevolent interest in me, and
encouraged me to apply to study physics abroad. I took his advice without
really understanding what I was embarking on, and began to apply for
scholarships to programs in the United Kingdom and the United States. The
Cape Town physics department was insularly lukewarm about the benefits
of study abroad, but I did not let them dissuade me.
If not for the acne, I might have remained in South Africa. Ever since,
I’ve liked to believe that the course of my life, the old friends I parted from
and the new friends I made, my marriage and my children, were the
consequence of a random case of acne.
1
Particle 
physics 
is 
the 
study 
of 
the 
smallest 
and 
most 
fundamental
constituents of matter. Even in Cape Town, 5,000 miles from Europe and
civilization, we knew that we were in the glory days of the field. As the
1960s passed, each year brought yet another triumph. At accelerators
around the world, experimentalists clashed ultrahigh-speed protons against
each other like cymbals and discovered a multiplicity of new particles
emerging from the collision. Richard P. Feynman once said that doing
elementary particle physics is a lot like banging two fine Swiss watches
against each other and trying to figure out their workings by examining the
debris. That was the challenge.
The proliferation of new particles made it difficult to know which were
elementary and which were compound. The mystery was a recapitulation of
the 
great 
puzzle 
of 
nineteenth-century 
chemistry, 
when 
the 
similar
proliferation of new substances provoked the quest to understand chemical
structure. That pursuit had culminated in Mendeleyev’s construction of the
periodic table, which arranged all the elements in an understandable order
based on their chemical qualities. Empty spots in the table corresponded to
as-yet-undiscovered elements whose qualities, associated with their place in
the table, suggested how to find them. Now, in the twentieth century, the
race was on to find an analogous table for the qualities of so-called
elementary particles. So many new ones were being discovered in cosmic
rays or man-made colliders that some serious physicists (from California, of
course) began to propound holistic sorts of models in which no particle was
more elementary than any other and any particle could be considered a
composite of all the rest.
In Cape Town in the summer of 1964, we heard popular lectures about the
work of physicists Murray Gell-Mann and Yuval Ne’eman, both modern-
day Mendeleyevs, who each invented their own periodic table of particles.
Some of the subtables in their system contained eight distinct particles.
Gell-Mann dubbed his model the Eightfold Way, a sophisticated and hip
allusion to the eight Buddhist principles of living. By looking at the
properties of the unpopulated gaps in their table, Gell-Mann and Ne’eman
had predicted the observable properties of a very strange new particle called
the Omega Minus. Shortly thereafter, exactly as forecast, the particle was
created in a collision in the particle accelerator at Brookhaven National
Laboratories on Long Island. It was recognized by the characteristic trail it
left in a giant bubble chamber, a signature whose properties matched the
exact predictions of the Eightfold Way. It seemed you could apprehend the
universe with thought.
I 
became 
deeply 
attracted 
to 
particle 
physics 
and 
general 
relativity,
subjects that dealt with the ultimate nature of matter, space and time; a life
spent studying these topics would be a life devoted to the transcendental.
Like many of my physics friends, I began to develop an almost religious
passion for fundamental physics. But beneath my passion was an even
greater 
desire 
for 
fame 
and 
immortality. 
I 
dreamed 
of 
being 
another
Einstein. I wanted to spend my life focusing on the discovery of truths that
would live forever. Sometimes, I felt arrogantly superior to people who
were headed for more mundane professions.
My mother encouraged me to devote myself to academic pursuits. My
father, though he was more naturally scholarly than my mother, might
nevertheless have been happier if I had gone into business with him. I
myself would have laughed quite disbelievingly, at age 16, 21, or 34, if
someone had told me that I would be working at an investment bank at age
40.
At registration on the first day of my first semester at Columbia, my
assigned course advisor was Professor Henry Foley, himself a near-famous
physicist who had been part of a classic 1940s experiment that verified
Feynman’s Nobel Prize-winning theory of electrons. Foley, a charmingly
cynical man, quizzed me briefly about my knowledge of atomic physics and
discovered how little I had learned in Cape Town about the details of the
spin-orbit interactions of electrons. Then he commanded me to register for
G4015, the introductory Columbia graduate course in atomic physics and
quantum mechanics.
2
Most physics majors at American schools had taken
the equivalent subject in their junior or senior year of college, so here I was
starting off a year or more behind the rest of the pack. It was a disheartening
setback, the beginning of three long, tedious, and unexpected years of
coursework and examinations at a time when I had expected to soon
embark on original research.
Foley was right, though—I didn’t know enough. In Cape Town in the
early 1960s we had learned a shallow rudimentary version of modern
physics and quantum mechanics. The physics professors there, for the most
part, seemed uncomfortable with everything that had developed after 1930.
Their attitude—that you were lucky if you ever got to really understand
quantum mechanics—stayed with me a long time. Physics in the United
States 
was 
much 
more 
professional, 
hard-nosed, 
and 
businesslike.
Columbia’s physics department, I saw over and over again, didn’t think of
modern physics as something esoterically advanced and difficult, to be
revealed to you only when you crossed some threshold and finally became
an initiate. They expected you simply to plunge right in.
The one subject I had learned really well as an undergraduate was
Applied Mathematics, a slower-moving subject easier to keep abreast of in
distant, isolated South Africa. In Cape Town, the closed-book, year-end
exams were fashioned after the famous Cambridge Tripos examination on
which 
many 
of 
the 
British-educated 
faculty 
had 
been 
reared. 
Rapid,
practical 
problem 
solving 
as 
well 
as 
memorization 
were 
heavily
emphasized. Everything was done thoroughly. In each successive year we
were taught progressively more advanced versions of classical mechanics
and electromagnetic theory. I can still recite some of the indefinite integrals
and Fourier transforms we had to learn by heart in order to take the final
exams.
3
The physics department I entered at Columbia in 1966 was legendary. The
first 
thing 
that 
struck 
me 
was 
their 
direct 
connection 
to 
so 
many
groundbreaking episodes of twentieth-century physics. The recipient of the
first PhD degree ever awarded by the department, at the start of the century,
had been R. A. Millikan. Later he received the Nobel Prize for his precise
measurements of the invisible electron’s charge by ingeniously measuring
the deflection of tiny oil drops carrying an unseen electron or two’s worth
of static electricity.
When I arrived, I. I. Rabi, the grand old man of physics in the United
States after Oppenheimer’s death, was nearing the end of his reign over the
Columbia department. He had received the Nobel Prize in 1944 for finding
a method of measuring the magnetic properties of nuclei. Rabi was the
intellectual father of a whole generation of American physicists, a respected
government advisor, and one of the creators of the Brookhaven National
Laboratory, where Gell-Mann and Ne’eman’s Omega Minus particle was
finally discovered. Now near retirement and seemingly garrulous, he struck
me as more comic than genius. But I was young and a little arrogant then,
and I had no conception of his wisdom and influence. Recently, I saw his
old quote that “If you decide you don’t have to get A’s, you can learn an
enormous amount in college.”
The late Enrico Fermi, a 1938 Nobel Prize winner, was regarded as the
spiritual father of the Columbia physics department. His black-and-white
three-quarter profile photograph graced the seminar room on the eighth
floor of the Pupin Physics Building; he had been on the faculty there during
World War II and the Manhattan Project. Fermi was the experimentalist
who had created the first self-sustaining nuclear reaction at the University
of Chicago, a step on the way to the bombs that leveled Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. Amazingly, he was also the theorist who, in the 1930s, had
predicted the existence of the neutrino, a massless and chargeless particle
that interacted so weakly with ordinary matter that it wasn’t detected until
some twenty years later. He was one of the last physicists to make major
contributions to both theory and experiment, an eclectic Goethe of the field.
Columbia 
had 
also 
been 
the 
wartime 
home 
of 
the 
beautiful 
Maria
Goeppert-Mayer, 
who 
later 
received 
the 
1963 
Nobel 
Prize 
for 
her
theoretical proposal that the nucleus of an atom, like the atom itself,
consisted 
of 
shells 
of 
orbiting 
particles. 
Because 
of 
Columbia’s
antinepotism 
laws—her 
husband 
Joseph 
Mayer 
was 
a 
professor 
of
chemistry—she had been only a member of the research staff of the
university, and not a full faculty member.
Closer to the present, Columbia had been at the center of the postwar
development of relativistic quantum electrodynamics (QED), the fabulously
accurate theory of how electrons emit and absorb light that I would soon
struggle to learn. Atoms and the electrons inside them are so small that
physicists can only indirectly examine their structure. You cannot actually
“see” the inside of an atom; instead, in much the same way that doctors
used to tap a patient’s chest and listen to the quality of the sound emitted in
order to figure out the state of the patient’s insides, so physicists must poke
at an atom and then diagnose the character of its internal electrons from the
light 
they 
emit. 
Until 
the 
late 
1940s, 
QED 
was 
riven 
by 
such 
deep
mathematical 
and 
conceptual 
inconsistencies 
that, 
in 
many 
cases,
calculations of the frequencies of emitted light led to literally infinite
results.
In the late 1940s, Feynman and Julian Schwinger in the United States
(and, unknown to them, Shin-Ichiro Tomonaga in Japan), in a tour de force
of insight and mathematical prowess, showed how to mend the theory of
QED. They were then able to predict correctly minuscule and previously
unsuspected corrections to the wavelengths of the light emitted by the
internal electrons as they jumped from one orbit in the atom to another.
Willis Lamb and Polykarp Kusch, both at Columbia in the late 1940s, had
carefully and accurately measured a variety of these almost infinitesimal
corrections, 
and 
they 
found 
perfect 
agreement 
with 
Feynman 
and
Schwinger. Lamb and Kusch each received a Nobel Prize, as did Feynman,
Schwinger, and Tomonaga a while later.
It didn’t take me long to learn that not all Nobel Prizes are equal. In 1968,
when 
I 
was 
the 
teaching 
assistant 
for 
Kusch’s 
junior-level 
course 
on
electromagnetic theory, I met with him regularly. Soon I began to notice
that people in Pupin treated him as though his Prize was somehow worthy
of less respect than those of the other faculty members. A few years later he
left for the University of Texas.
Also 
at 
Columbia, 
but 
not 
yet 
Nobelists 
at 
that 
time, 
were 
Leon
Lederman, Jack Steinberger, and Mel Schwartz, all of them renowned even
then for a host of elegant experiments and discoveries. In 1988 they
received their Nobel Prize for having shown, almost thirty years earlier, that
there were not one, but two different types of the neutrino that Fermi had
proposed. (The discovery of a third type of neutrino in 2000 was less
astonishing and definitely not Nobel-worthy.)
Finally, fiercely brightest among all the stars in the Columbia firmament
was Tsung-Dao Lee, the embodiment and perhaps even the cause of all the
good and bad qualities of the department. He had won his Nobel Prize in
1957, at the age of 31, for theoretical investigations that led to the startling
discovery of the so-called nonconservation of parity. Lee and his fellow
Prize-winner C. N. Yang had intrepidly suggested that nature’s laws were
not symmetric with respect to the seemingly arbitrary human definitions of
“left” and “right.” It was an almost unbelievable hypothesis, but they
proposed experiments to test it. In less than a year they were proved correct.
When I arrived at Columbia only eight years later, the consequences of this
discovery were still working their way through the framework of physics.
“T. D.,” as everyone called him, was Pupin’s version of the Pope and the
Last Emperor of China rolled into one. He was a holy terror, self-centered
and intense. About ten years ago I saw a photograph of him in the literary
magazine Grand Street, taken as part of a series of photographs of scientists
writing on blackboards. One was of Feynman, lively and jovial, lecturing
on 
QED. 
Another 
featured 
Mitchell 
Feigenbaum 
of 
the 
Rockefeller
University, examining his doubling equations that revealed the hidden order
behind 
apparently 
chaotic 
phenomena. 
Most 
of 
the 
physicists 
looked
prosaic, even Gell-Mann himself. But T. D.’s photo was different. Taken in
the 1950s, it showed his fervent young face glowing with light as he spoke,
for all the world looking like Moses descending from Sinai. T. D. set the
tone at Columbia. His presence could inspire, but it could consume, too.
The faculty were not the only extraordinary beings at Columbia. Many of
the students seemed to be wunderkinder, too. My graduate classes, even the
advanced ones, always contained a smattering of precocious smart-aleck
American undergraduates. I was envious and wary of them. Some, sporting
crewcuts and narrow-shouldered dark suits with ties, were relics of the
Fifties; 
others 
had 
lank, 
long, 
hair 
and 
dressed 
in 
faded 
jeans 
and
sweatshirts. But whatever they wore, they all raised their hands in class to
ask questions whose answers they already knew.
I was awed by these people who knew more than they had been taught. In
South Africa I had mastered only a limited number of skills really well, and
that knowledge lasted a lifetime. There, I had waited obediently year after
year to get to the level at which “they” would begin to teach “me” the
things I was able to handle. It had never occurred to me that I could learn
what I wanted when I chose. In America, I was alarmed to see students who
set about learning things on their own. I’m still embarrassed to admit to
myself that I almost never studied anything I wasn’t officially taught. I
recall one major exception. In my fourth year of college I spent many
months studying unified field theories of gravitation and electromagnetism
for my honors’ thesis. My independent investigation of the extension of
Einstein’s theory of gravitation exhilarated me, but this autonomy was an
exception.
In 1966 and during subsequent years, I dreamed ambitious dreams about
success on the scale of T. D. Lee. By this unrealistic measure, few of the
wunderkinder fulfilled the full magnitude of their intimidating promise.
One became a think-tank military analyst whom I was pleased to recognize
on television during the Gulf War following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Another completed a PhD in physics, moved to medical school, began a
residency 
in 
psychiatry, 
and 
finally 
became 
a 
well-known 
neural-net
theorist. A third, after winning the prize for the best physics undergraduate
at 
Columbia, 
struggled 
with 
manic 
depression. 
Determined 
to 
keep
studying, he would keep a running daily log on his canary-yellow legal
notepad of the exact number of minutes he had spent actually working at
full concentration. Each time he paused or took a break, he stopped the
clock and he wrote down the number of minutes he had worked since the
last interruption. At the end of the day he computed the total. Compulsive
myself, I was sympathetic to his counting; I knew how few were the hours
in 
the 
day 
one 
actually 
works 
seriously 
and 
undistractedly, 
and 
was
momentarily tempted to start my own time sheet.
I learned one lesson from the fates of both the professors and students I
met at Columbia: In the end, character and chance counted at least as much
as talent. Luck, combined with what my mother called sitzfleisch, the
capacity to persevere, played an overwhelming role.
First in Cape Town and then in New York, I had been steadily learning what
kind of physics suited me.
Like most physicists, I was a reductionist: I believed that you can explain
complex things by reducing them to their constituents. Biology depends on
chemistry; chemistry is merely the physics of molecules and atoms; atoms
are made out of electrons and nuclei; nuclei contain protons and neutrons,
and protons and neutrons seem to be made of quarks. What are the ultimate
subnuclear particles at the putative root of this hierarchy, and what are the
laws that determine their behavior? These questions are the domain of
particle physics.
Particle physicists are snobs who think that their field is the source of the
most fundamental 
knowledge, 
and take some mischievous pleasure in
denigrating other messier or more complex areas of physics. Gell-Mann, the
codiscoverer of the Eightfold Way and the discoverer of quarks, succinctly
summarized 
the 
latent 
prejudice 
of 
most 
particle 
physicists 
about 
the
superiority of their enterprise when he famously referred to solid state
physics, the apparently more mundane study of bulk matter and its variety
of forms, as “squalid state physics.”
Nowadays, not everyone agrees with Gell-Mann’s clever bon mot. Over
the 
last 
twenty 
years 
physicists 
have 
discovered 
a 
deep 
commonality
between large-scale bulk matter and small-scale particle physics. Much of
what is new and interesting in both fields seems to emerge from what is
called their “many-body” nature: Both bulk matter and tiny particles can
each be viewed as resembling a medium, each made out of a very large
number 
of 
similar 
constituents. 
When 
many 
similar 
constituents 
are
clumped together, their collective behavior can display completely new and
unexpected characteristics. A drop of water can suddenly freeze and turn
solid in a way that no single water molecule can. A ripple of excitement or
a hush of expectation can sweep over a crowd but not over a single
individual. In the words of another Nobel Prize-Winner, P.W. Anderson,
“More is Different!” He, and many other “squalid-state” physicists believe
that there is no single grand reductionist Theory of Everything.
It is unlikely one will ever know who is right, but, like most aspiring
physicists 
of 
the 
postwar 
period, 
I 
was 
immensely 
attracted 
by 
the
reductionist point of view. I wanted to be the ultimate reductionist, a
particle physicist.
Technically, 
I 
still 
had 
to 
choose 
between 
being 
a 
theorist 
or 
an
experimentalist, but for me, this wasn’t much of a choice. The essence of
theoretical physics is the attempt to look at the universe, and then mentally
apprehend its structure. If you are right, you emulate Newton and Einstein:
You find one of the Ten Commandments. You write down a simple set of
laws that, plucked from nowhere, miraculously describes and predicts how
God’s world works. This was the struggle to which I aspired. Anything else
would have been a compromise that I was not prepared to make.
Even within theoretical particle physics there are further refinements.
Pure theory is the search for abstract laws, for a formulation of the divine
commandments that rule the world. But, for every Moses descending from
the mountain with a valid new law, there are countless well-intentioned
prophets whose proposed laws turn out to be wrong. So how does one tell
when a theory is right?
Beauty, even mathematical beauty, is not enough. Physicists must test a
new theory by elaborating the ways in which it manifests itself in the world.
Physicists who do so-called phenomenology work out the detailed and
observable consequences of a theory, providing the practical link between
principles and experiment, between mind and matter. Phenomenologists
elaborate the theory; they create heuristic approximations to engineer the
theory into a pragmatic tool; they propose experiments to validate or refute
a 
theory, 
using 
the 
theory 
itself 
to 
compute 
the 
expected 
results.
Phenomenologists deal a little more with the ripples on the surface and a
little less with the laws beneath it.
Though I wanted to do pure theory, I ultimately ended up spending much
of my life in physics as a phenomenologist. Over the long run, this stood
me in very good stead. When I moved to Wall Street, I found quantitative
finance to resemble phenomenology much more than it resembled pure
theory. Quantitative finance is concerned with the techniques that people
use to value financial contracts and, given the fluctuations of the human
psyche, it is a pragmatic study of surfaces rather than a principled study of
depths. Physics, in contrast, is concerned with God’s canons, which seem to
be more easily captured in the simple broad statements that characterize
profound physical laws.
I had a passion for the content of physics, but I was also possessed by a
hungry ambition for its earthly rewards. Both passion and hunger persisted
over the years, despite the inevitable disappointments. Ten years later, as a
postdoctoral researcher at Oxford in 1976, I experienced a minor epiphany
about ambition’s degradation. At age 16 or 17, I had wanted to be another
Einstein; at 21, I would have been happy to be another Feynman; at 24, a
future T. D. Lee would have sufficed. By 1976, sharing an office with other
postdoctoral researchers at Oxford, I realized that I had reached the point
where I merely envied the postdoc in the office next door because he had
been invited to give a seminar in France. In much the same way, by a
process options theorists call time decay, financial stock options lose their
potential as they approach their own expiration.
Notes
1
The dermatologist’s poorly concentrating nephew was Jonathan Dorfan.
A few years later he, too, came to graduate school in the United States,
where he is now head of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, one of
the few great global laboratories for experimental particle physics.
2
You may think me pedantic to list the actual course number. But even
now, more than thirty years later, each prosaic course number still
conjures up a vivid subworld of a certain year, a particular classroom, a
specific professor, a sliding chalkboard, and a noisily clanking steam
radiator, together with the exciting sensation of being on the threshold of
mastering some new and arcane alchemical subject.
3

During 
my 
last 
few 
years 
at 
Goldman, 
Sachs, 
I 
interviewed
undergraduates applying for jobs in investment banking, and I was often
surprised at how little of their coursework some of them recalled, how
little a sense they had of the essence of their field. I met juniors majoring
in statistics who couldn’t define standard deviation and students who had
taken several courses in electromagnetic theory but couldn’t remember
Maxwell’s equations. What I had learned I had learned well. Theirs
sometimes seemed a wasted education.
...