Chapter 2
Dog Years
Life as a graduate student
Wonderful lectures
T. D. Lee, the brightest star in the firmament
Seven lean years
Getting out of graduate school only half-alive
If you didn’t mind wasting the best years of your youth, graduate student
life at Columbia was paradise. Once you got over the first two hurdles—
passing the PhD qualifying exams and obtaining a research advisor—no
one seemed to give a damn about what happened to you. Being a graduate
student was not a bad sinecure. The university just kept funneling you a
small but livable stipend and hoped you stayed out of their way. I spent
seven biblically-lean years in the physics department. One friend spent ten.
We both got out alive.
Some didn’t. It wasn’t long before we had all heard the legend about the
graduate student who had shot his PhD advisor. Several years ago I read a
New York Times article about two graduate students who committed suicide
while studying in the Harvard laboratory of Nobel Prize-winner Professor
E. J. Corey. In a subsequent letter to the Sunday New York Times magazine
of December 20, 1998, Linda Logdberg of Upper Nyack, New York, wrote
in to comment on life as graduate student:
. . . Perhaps even more now than then, graduate education is an
extended adolescence during which highly intelligent young people see
their world shrink to fit the dimensions of their advisor’s laboratory. . . .
With 
their 
identities 
bound 
to 
the 
outcome 
of 
the 
thesis 
project,
graduate 
students 
are 
socialized 
to 
view 
other 
options 
(teaching,
industry, 
even 
changing 
to 
another 
type 
of 
work 
altogether) 
with
contempt. Wanting a decent wage and meaningful work that occupies,
say, only 50 hours per week are considered signs of selling out.
It’s an accurate description. We went into science for the love of it and
thought nothing else was half as good. Some failed the PhD qualifying
exam and left at the end of one year. Others passed the exam and then gave
up before getting a thesis advisor. Many threw in the towel mid-thesis. The
remainder struggled through and went on to a life of itinerant postdoctoral
research. Few of us had an easy time. Ms. Logdberg is especially accurate
in acknowledging the undeclared self-hatred we felt in looking down on
those of our friends who, like failed novitiates in a nunnery, shamefacedly
transferred their efforts to less ambitious endeavors. “Shame is Pride’s
cloke,” I read in Blake’s Proverbs of Hell;I understood exactly what he
meant. But that was later.
The first year at Columbia consisted of four courses per semester followed
by “the quals,” the general PhD qualifying examination one had to pass in
order to be allowed to continue with the doctoral program. To be a theorist,
you also had to pass a special theory section on the quals. Without this
formal admittance, no advisor would take you on.
I knew little modern physics so that, even if I were to pass the quals and
be admitted to the rarified world of theory, I would have to spend another
two years taking a host of preparatory courses. If I had gone to graduate
school in Cambridge, England, where there was less required coursework, I
might have finished my PhD in three or four years. Now I would have to
wait that long before even beginning research! I had taken one step forward,
but now faced two disappointing steps back.
Given that I wanted to be a theorist, there was little choice. Without the
proper education, it is impossible to do theoretical research. I half-envied
my budding experimentalist friends who were able to contribute something
useful 
as 
soon 
as 
they 
started 
their 
apprenticeship—they 
could 
build
particle detectors, write computer programs, and analyze data. Despite their
worm’s eye view, they had something constructively rewarding to tackle.
We theorists seemed to be dishearteningly useless and alone.
Years later, when I moved to Wall Street, I especially liked the ways in
which one could be usefully busy in quantitative finance. There was always
a program to write, a trading interface to design, a calculation to do. It was
nice to be able to contribute without having to be extraordinary.
Meanwhile, as I settled down into New York in 1966, life gradually
improved. Every morning I rose to WNEW AM’s Klavan and Finch, who
pretended to be the men in the traffic helicopter that WNEW did not
possess; one of them read printed traffic reports over the rotor noise
simulated by the other. I still meet people who recall their endless pitches
for “Dennison’s, a men’s clothier, Route 22, Union, New Jersey, open 10
A.M. to 5 the next morning. Money talks, nobody walks!” The Route 22 I
imagined as I heard this was some exotic Kerouac cross-country highway,
with a touch of the tawdry charm of Nabokov’s Lolita motels. In 1980,
when I finally decided to leave physics, I found myself driving down the
same Route 22 en route to my interview at Bell Laboratories in Murray
Hill, New Jersey. It didn’t totally disappoint.
I liked New York’s Upper West Side, its almost Caribbean atmosphere
and vibrant street life. Manhattan was a marvelous place in which to be
lonely. You could walk all the way down Broadway from Columbia to
Times Square, watching people, stopping for a solitary coffee at soon-to-be-
extinct Automats or Hopperesque Chock-Full-of-Nuts diners, and never feel
isolated. Hope lurked on every block. The Puerto Ricans around I. House
sat on the steps of their brownstones until late on hot summer nights. My
friend and fellow student Eté Szüts, a 1956 refugee from Hungary, taught
me the ropes. After an evening of doing homework problems, we would
walk down to 123rd Street and Broadway for a midnight slice of pizza
made by a small dapper Italian man in a white apron and T-shirt who
combed his elegant grey hair while he looked at himself admiringly in the
mirror as his enormously fat wife observed him resentfully from a thin
metal folding chair that somehow supported her. The jukebox, I remember,
played “There’s a Kind of Hush (All Over The World).”
Some aspects of life in New York took getting used to. I was surprised by
the easy and familiar kidding around between whites, blacks, and Asians in
I. House. Twenty-one years of seeing blacks regarded as the invisible
backdrop to white life in South Africa had left its mark on me, which only
then began to fade.
I was also struck by the discrepancy in styles of cursing. I had never
actually heard the word “motherfucker” uttered until a few weeks after I
arrived in Manhattan, when two ten-year-old boys imperturbably called
each other just that on the 104 bus that ran up and down Broadway. Heard
for the first time, it sounded shockingly literal.
Finally, I was impressed by the exceptional independence of American
graduate 
students. 
At 
the 
University 
of 
Cape 
Town, 
textbooks 
were
regarded as auxiliary material. We took careful lecture notes and studied
them thoroughly, and that was usually enough. In my second week at
Columbia, I was shocked to discover that one assigned homework problem
was totally unrelated to any material covered in class. Thinking that the
professor had erred, I walked down the I. House corridor to query Eté, who
told me that the relevant material could be found in the last section of the
second chapter of our textbook. I was momentarily dismayed at the notion
that someone might set problems on topics that were never discussed in
class. From then on, I focused as much on textbook reading as I did on
note-taking.
At Columbia, the classes I liked best were taught by people who gave you a
feel for what it was like to discover something new, as well as a sense of
how it had been done.
In my first year, I took a course in advanced electromagnetic theory from
Richard 
Friedberg, 
a 
dishevelled-looking 
wunderkind 
who, 
as 
an
undergraduate, we heard, had cracked a famous unsolved problem in logic
and number theory. The method he used to solve it is still called Friedberg
numbering. Now a young professor, he was one of a stable of young
whizkids who had studied under T. D. Lee and then joined the department
as faculty.
Friedberg was unkempt, distracted, and pale. He often closed his eyes for
long periods in class as he tried to concentrate. Eté delighted in telling me
that Friedberg was a true genius. In keeping with his persona, he quickly
put his own stamp on the course he taught. Instead of taking the standard
didactic approach to electricity and magnetism, Friedberg plunged us into
thrilling intellectual history. We were each told to buy a Dover reprint of the
Dutch physicist Lorentz’s early-twentieth-century classic The Theory of
Electrons. The book, based on Lorentz’s lectures at Columbia in 1906, was
an account of his heroic pre-Einsteinian intellectual struggles to resolve the
contradictions between the laws of Newton and the laws of Maxwell on
which all of physics was then based.
Maxwell’s late-nineteenth-century theory of electromagnetism described
the propagation of light waves through a stationary material fluid, the ether,
that supposedly filled all of space. Newton’s seventeenth-century laws of
mechanics described the motion of all matter, and hence the motion of the
ether itself. Step by painful step, Lorentz explained how to combine the two
theories so as to predict how light would propagate in moving fluids or how
it would change its appearance to moving observers. There were paradoxes
in Lorentz’s stitched-together theory that he could eliminate only by making
modifications to the assumed structure of matter itself. He deduced that
moving objects would have to contract in size as they moved through the
ether. These painstaking conclusions brought him closer and closer to the
formulas of Einstein’s 1905 theory of special relativity, but without the
insight about space and time to match it.
Lorentz’s theories were relegated to the footnotes of history, and he never
fully 
grasped 
Einstein’s 
radical 
insights. 
Friedberg’s 
lectures 
brought
Lorentz’s struggles to life; they gave me an immense appreciation for how
Einstein’s cerebral and yet intuitive analysis eliminated or sidestepped the
confusion that came before. Ever since, I have been curious about how
breakthroughs occur. No discovery, in physics or finance, is as obvious as it
seems to the people who read the textbooks written even a few years later.
It amazed me that, using Einstein’s formalism, I could so easily solve
problems about the motion of light in moving fluids that had once been too
complex for anyone to tackle. Somehow, Einstein had transformed almost
inconceivable mysteries into mere formalism and rules. Now, after a little
education, any first-year graduate student could, like an organ-grinder
making music, calculate the correct answers to questions that couldn’t have
been posed a few decades earlier. I became ever more constantly aware of
the gap between creator and disciple. Everything looks simple once you
have been taught it. However, it is only when you have struggled amidst the
chaos of the sensible world on your own that you can understand how
difficult it is to impose or discern an order that eventually, in retrospect,
looks deceptively obvious.
I still have a copy of my 1967 blue examination book for Friedberg’s
course, filled with my handwritten essay on Lorentz’s attempts to explain
the propagation of light through the ether. Once every few years I like to
take a look at the complimentary comment Friedberg wrote in the margin,
saying that my answer had gone beyond the question asked, but that it dealt
“with the required points as well as the superfluous material in a completely
clear and intelligent way, correct in every detail.”
The best single lecture I have ever attended was a seminar by Mark Kaç
given at Columbia sometime in the early 1970s. Kaç, a Polish-born expert
in probability theory, is well known to both physicists and finance theorists
for 
the 
eponymous 
Feynman-Kaç 
method 
of 
solving 
the 
differential
equations that occur both in quantum mechanics and in options theory. His
seminar had the catchy title “Can you hear the shape of a drum?” In it he
described the conditions under which an imaginary blind listener, endowed
with a perfect ear capable of hearing all the frequencies of the sound waves
emitted from a drum, would be able to mathematically determine the shape
of the drum itself. This problem is part of the more general field of inverse
scattering; years later at Goldman Sachs, Iraj Kani and I used a similar
approach to show how an imaginary options market observer who, having
recorded the prices of all options on a stock, could then mathematically
determine the shape of the surface that described all future stock volatilities.
What was so impressive about Kaç’s presentation was his painstaking
explanation of how he used his intuition to find his way out of the blind
alleys he drifted into as he searched for a solution. He was also amusing. He
recounted that in Amsterdam the same talk had mistakenly been advertised
on campus with the title “Can you hear the shape of a dream?” and had
consequently drawn a large and very different late-1960s audience. It
reminded me of a similar story at Columbia about the curious crowd of
medical students who showed up for an astrophysics seminar on stellar
structure entitled “White Dwarfs and Red Giants.”
To be one of T. D. Lee’s graduate students was everyone’s dream. The
1950s and ’60s were the dawn of the age of symmetry in particle physics.
Lee’s 
theories 
and 
Columbia’s 
experimenters—Lederman, 
Schwartz,
Steinberger, and the one female professor in the department, Chien-Shiung
Wu, whom everyone referred to as Madame Wu—were at the center of the
search for symmetry and the discovery of its subtle violations.
Symmetry is the pattern that tells you how to generate one part of an
object from another. It condenses information. Saying that a human face is
symmetrical is another way of telling you that you do not need to draw both
sides of it; instead, you can generate the left side from the right. Said
differently, a truly symmetric human face is indistinguishable from its
mirror image, which flips the left and right sides.
Before Lee and Yang, every physicist believed it to be obvious beyond
question that the forces of nature are reflection-invariant, so that the mirror
image of every natural event is itself an equally probable natural event. This
assumed property of nature was called the law of parity conservation,
because of the equality or parity between the mirror image and the actual
event itself.
Physicists are familiar with four forces, the strong, the electromagnetic,
the weak, and the gravitational force. The strong force binds together the
protons and neutrons that make up the nucleus at the center of every atom.
The electromagnetic force causes the electrons in atoms to orbit their
nucleus and emit light. The weak force is responsible for “beta decay,” the
radioactive disintegration of nuclei by electron emission. Gravity, the oldest
and most familiar force, governs the motions of falling apples, the earth and
the moon, the planets, stars, and galaxies.
In the 1950s physicists knew that the strong and electromagnetic forces
conserved 
parity. 
They 
unquestionably 
assumed 
that 
the 
weak 
force
conserved parity, too. It seemed inconceivable that it shouldn’t. No one
could imagine that looking at nature in a mirror might yield a world that
couldn’t exist.
Then, two strange new and unstable particles, the tau and the theta, were
discovered in cosmic rays. In most respects the two particles seemed almost
identical; they had the same mass and electric charge, but they decayed
differently. What could make two almost indistinguishable particles decay
into two different final states? That was the famous tau-theta puzzle of the
1950s.
In 1956 Lee and his collaborator Chen-Ning Yang pointed out that the
two particles might in fact be one and the same particle, which then, subject
to the weak force, decayed in two different ways, but that this could only
happen if the weak force responsible for its decay was not reflection-
invariant. It was a preposterous suggestion that Lee and Yang took seriously
and systematically. They analyzed all previous experiments that had studied
the weak force in atoms and nuclei and found that, contrary to everyone’s
unquestioned belief, no previous experiment had ever truly tested the
assumed symmetry between an event and its reflection. With further study,
Lee and Yang suggested specific experiments to check for parity violation
in nuclear weak decays.
Most 
physicists 
were 
skeptical. 
How, 
they 
wondered, 
could 
any 
of
nature’s laws not be symmetric under reflection? But within a few months,
by 
early 
1957, 
Madame 
Wu 
and 
her 
collaborators 
carried 
out 
the
experiment Lee and Yang proposed, and showed that they were vindicated.
Lee and Yang received their Nobel Prize that same year.
Lee and Yang’s discovery that Nature was slightly asymmetric sparked a
revolution. Slowly but inexorably, further experiments in the 1950s and
1960s revealed further subtle asymmetries of the weak interaction. T. D.
was at the center of these investigations.
At Columbia and far beyond, T. D. was renowned and celebrated. At the
weekly research seminars I attended on the eighth floor of Pupin, every
speaker felt compelled to focus on him; as they spoke, their eyes fixated
only on him, and he let no statement he did not fully agree with pass him
by. No matter who lectured at the seminar, T. D. concentrated intensely on
their argument, and interrupted at the first instant something was not
satisfactory. At times he broke in on the initial sentence of the talk, refusing
to 
let 
a 
speaker 
proceed 
until 
the 
point 
was 
clarified. 
Sometimes
clarification never came; I once witnessed the humiliation of a visiting
postdoc who was forced to defend the first sentence he uttered for the entire
hour and a half allowed for his seminar. No one dared restrain T. D.
With his Moses-by-Michelangelo persona, beams of light emerging from
his forehead, T. D. radiated an intense purity. At first I imagined that his
rigorous questioning was the by product of a pure search for knowledge and
truth. Later I began to detect a latent glee with which he savaged the
imperfections in other people’s talks. He enjoyed disorienting them. The
only person I ever saw shake loose of his dogged grasp was the late Bram
Pais, a small but feisty Dutch-born professor at Rockefeller University, who
was able to half-playfully, half-ironically kid T. D. into loosening his jaws.
Brilliance seemed paramount in the Columbia physics department. T. D.
was willing to supervise only the stellar wunderkinder who often went on to
become inordinately young Columbia physics professors. The department
developed an incestuous air; the pressure of his presence on his students-
turned-faculty, like sons in their father’s house, must have been fierce. Over
time they seemed to gravitate towards research problems a little removed
from the mainstream, as though searching for clear air to breathe. Unlike
Rabi or Schwinger, who took on many more students and generated schools
of disciples who propagated out into the world, T.D. never gave birth to
anyone of his caliber.
Over time I noticed a darker side to Lee and Yang’s genius. At an
American Physical Society meeting I attended in the late 1960s, I observed
that 
although 
they 
were 
both 
on 
the 
same 
panel, 
they 
avoided
acknowledging each other’s presence. In class at Columbia, I noticed that T.
D.’s recounting of the insights central to their jointly published discoveries
seemed to focus on his own feats. Finally, someone told me what most
people in the field knew, that Lee and Yang had stopped working together
several years earlier, and now no longer spoke to each other. Years later,
after I left physics, I saw a copy of an angry reminiscence that T. D. had
circulated in response to a published reminiscence of Yang’s. It contained
his vengeful version of how he and Yang had argued and then separated,
and described how Yang had wept in his office.
I have no idea on whose side justice lay. I focus on T. D. here only
because he was most visible to me, because he had made such enviable
discoveries, 
and 
because 
he 
had 
such 
a 
powerful 
influence 
on 
the
atmosphere we inhaled in Pupin Hall. It was disappointing to learn that
even the Nobel Prize and almost eternal fame were not enough to overcome
vanity and competition.
History takes strange turns. To Columbia students in the 1960s, Lee
seemed to have the inside track in what we foolishly thought of as his race
with Yang; I say “foolishly” because both of them had done outstanding
work we could never realistically hope to emulate. Then in the 1970s,
Yang’s reputation accelerated. Two decades earlier, in what is now a classic
paper, he had observed that Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism was the
consequence 
of 
a 
subtle 
but 
powerful 
symmetry 
called 
local 
gauge
invariance. Going out on a limb, Yang extended this symmetry to the strong
and weak forces, too. The idea lay fallow for a decade or more. Then,
suddenly, it provided the foundation for both the Glashow-Weinberg-Salam
unified theory of weak and electromagnetic interactions and Gell-Mann’s
quantum 
chromodynamics 
theory 
of 
strong 
forces. 
Recently, 
some
practicing physicists with an interest in finance have even begun to apply
the same principle to the “trading force” between market participants that
determines financial values. On this matter the jury has not even been
assembled.
For current physics students, Lee and Yang are a part of history. For those
of us who witnessed them, it was hard to resist the unfair urge to rank. The
truth is that any one of us would be happy to have written just one the
several remarkable papers they authored or coauthored. Yet when fellow
Columbia physics students from those days meet up, they still argue about
whether Lee or Yang was a better physicist, discussing the ancient epic feats
of bygone heroes the way that the animals in the final chapter of The Wind
in the Willows reminisce about the fabled exploits of Mr. Toad and his
friends.
I worked studiously throughout that first American academic year of 1966–
67 and then, after a short trip home to South Africa, began my preparations
for the September PhD qualifying exams.
The 
quals 
were 
extremely 
broad. 
They 
aimed 
to 
test 
one’s 
general
understanding 
of 
all 
of 
physics—classical 
mechanics, 
electromagnetic
theory, optics, thermodynamics, solid-state, atomic and nuclear physics, and
quantum 
mechanics—and 
probed 
your 
ability 
to 
explain 
all 
sorts 
of
observed 
phenomena. 
One 
question, 
set 
by 
the 
constantly 
inventive
Friedberg, described the denizens of a planet in a distant galaxy who
recorded the risings, settings, and eclipses of their several suns and moons,
and then demanded that you deduce their orbits from Kepler’s seventeenth-
century laws of planetary motion. For a brief but heady period after I
finished studying, I felt that I had a good grasp of the whole of physics and
would be able to come up with a reasoned answer to any question about the
universe tossed at me.
I also took the theory section of the exam, in which an essay question
asked for a description of some independent theoretical work. I wrote about
the unified field theories of electromagnetism and gravitation that I had
studied for my senior thesis two years earlier in Cape Town. I had been
particularly attracted to a paper by Theodor Kaluza and Oskar Klein, two
European physicists of the 1920s. Their paper had postulated that the
universe we lived in was five- rather than four-dimensional, but that the
extent of the fifth dimension was so small that we were unaware of it. They
had then shown that if Einstein’s general theory of relativity held in this
larger five-dimensional world, with one dimension unobserved, we would
experience the 
theory’s 
forces as those of ordinary (four-dimensional)
electromagnetic 
theory 
and 
gravitation. 
It 
was 
a 
platonically 
beautiful
theory that seemed quaintly irrelevant to the pragmatic particle-hunting
theorists and experimentalists at Columbia in the 1960s, but its day was to
come again later in the 1980s and 1990s when string theories of particles
and their interactions became fashionable.
I passed my qualifying exams easily and well enough to be admitted to
the privileged class of people who were “allowed to do theoretical physics”
at Columbia. But there was a caveat—I was required to complete two extra
years of coursework before beginning my research. I was in for a long haul.
Although it was premature, I soon began to strategize about seeking a
PhD advisor who would take me on as a student. I quickly but regretfully
discarded any idea of working for T. D. Even the thought of approaching
him was too daunting; he accepted only one exceptional student every few
years.
Then I hit on the idea of working for Gerald Feinberg, the earliest of T.
D.’s wunderkinder. Feinberg was a tall, skinny, stiff-looking man with a
flattop haircut that always reminded me of someone I had once seen in an
Archie comic book. Every day he wore a very small conservative bow tie
and a belt whose gold buckle proclaimed “GF.” The whole effect was very
Fifties.
Feinberg was renowned as one of the earliest people to propose that the
muon particle, to all initial appearances simply a sort of heavy electron,
carried a special sort of quantum-mechanical flavor, a sort of “mu-ness”
that differentiated it from the electron. He had attended the Bronx High
School of Science, where he had been a classmate and friend of both
Glashow and Weinberg, the physicists who later won the Nobel Prize for
their unification of weak and electromagnetic interactions. Perhaps in order
to avoid competing on T. D.’s turf, he had drifted out of the center field of
particle physics and was then developing his own esoteric theories of
hypothetical faster-than-light particles that he named tachyons. Physicists
usually conjecture the existence of new particles in order to make a flawed
or incomplete theory consistent, but Feinberg seemed to have had no really
good reason for suggesting the existence of tachyons. Gell-Mann had once
wittily suggested that Nature operated on the Totalitarian Principle that
states, “Everything not forbidden is compulsory.” So, perhaps, Feinberg’s
logic wasn’t as frivolous as it seemed. In any event, it was a risky wager; if
tachyons were found it would be staggering, but if they were not, nothing
would change and no one would care. Anyone can speculate.
I wanted to be Feinberg’s student, but I didn’t know how to go about it.
Since it was premature for formal arrangements and since I was naturally
reticent and shy, I simply began to greet him very politely whenever our
paths crossed.
Graduate school was a small community. In corridors and elevators and
on campus, I was soon running into Feinberg several times a day, always
giving him a polite hello and a nice smile. He would reciprocate similarly
with a sort of nervous curling of the lips. As time passed, this limbo of
flirtatious foreplay continued unabated. I could never find the courage to
broach the question of being his student; I suppose I must have hoped it
would just happen wordlessly. Every time I saw him I smiled; every time I
smiled he bared his lips back at me with greater awkwardness. Our facial
manipulations bore increasingly less resemblance to anything like a real
smile; each of our reciprocated gestures was a caricature, a Greek theatrical
mask signaling friendliness. One day, on about the fifth intersection of our
paths on that particular day, I could stand it no longer. I saw him heading
towards me down one of the long dark, old-fashioned, Pupin corridors, and
immediately turned towards the nearest stairwell and went up one floor to
avoid him. Having succeeded at this once, I was compelled to do it
repeatedly. Soon I was moving upstairs or downstairs to another floor as
soon as I saw him approaching, like the protagonist in some ghastly version
of the video game Lode Runner.
My courtship of Feinberg, now badly out of control, ended abruptly one
discomforting morning when we both entered the same elevator and rode up
eight floors without looking at each other, pretending to be absorbed in
reading the elevator inspection certificate. The end was a great relief.
I watched Feinberg from a distance afterwards. At the weekly coffee hour
in Pupin, I noticed his vaguely Strangelovian bent for carrying logic to
extremes, a weakness I later came to associate with many graduates of the
University of Chicago business school. He had created an organization
called the Prometheus Project, which aimed to plan for humanity’s future. I
observed long discussions between Feinberg and Milton Friedman’s son
David, then a physics postdoc at Columbia, about the application of hard-
nosed rationality to society. I once heard Feinberg suggest that many of
Manhattan’s 1970s social problems could be solved by forbidding anyone
who earned less than, say, $10,000 per year to live there. It had not occurred
to him, apparently, that this excluded many of the people who worked at the
university. Several years later we heard that he intended to be cryogenically
frozen when he died, in anticipation of being reheated and resuscitated at a
later time when whatever would cause his death would be curable. Sadly, he
died of cancer in 1992. I recently found hundreds of Internet references to
both Feinberg and the New York Cryonics Society, lamenting the fact that
despite his advocacy of the Society, he ultimately left no instructions for his
own bodily preservation.
Late in 1968, still searching for a thesis advisor, I ran into one last
temptation to avoid becoming a particle theorist. My American cousin in
Manhattan introduced me to Robert Herman, his old City College student
friend from the 1930s. Herman, a physicist, had abandoned academia for
family 
reasons 
and 
was 
now 
working 
at 
General 
Motors, 
analyzing
vehicular traffic flow. Academic particle physicists looked down on this
kind of applied physics as pedestrian work, so to speak, but Herman had
done outstanding fundamental research before that. In the 1940s he had
coauthored the first paper to suggest that the Big Bang that created our
universe would have filled all of space with microwave radiation. Arno
Penzias and Robert Wilson at Bell Laboratories later fortuitously detected
this background radiation and won the Nobel Prize. Then in the 1950s,
Herman and Robert Hofstadter, another City College friend of my cousin’s,
became the first physicists to probe the internal structure of the proton by
shooting fast electrons at it and then watching them bounce off. If the
proton were a hard, small object—like a miniature billiard ball—one would
expect to see the electron occasionally recoil at a very large angle to the line
of fire; if, however, the proton were spongy, there would be very few sharp
collisions. Surprisingly, Hofstadter and Herman observed very few dramatic
recoils; they concluded that the proton was a cotton-candy sphere with a
soft interior rather than the small, hard, elementary object everyone had
imagined. Hofstadter alone won the Nobel Prize for this work. My cousin
claimed that Herman was deprived of his share of the Prize because of the
selection committee’s prejudice against scientists outside academia.
When we spoke, Herman suggested that I work in applied physics and
sent me some papers on traffic flow he had written, but I was still a stranger
to compromise and I declined. Coincidentally, though, my future PhD thesis
would turn out to be closely related to the Hofstadter-Herman electron-
proton scattering experiment.
I spent my second and third years at Columbia taking the myriad of
required courses, all the while continuing my quest for a particle physics
thesis advisor. Finally, in early 1969 I reached an agreement to work for
Norman 
Christ. 
He 
was 
the 
most 
recent 
in 
the 
long 
line 
of 
T. 
D.’s
wunderkinder, a polite and enthusiastically perky young man who was just
about my age, but who had received his PhD under T. D.’s tutelage in
record time two years earlier, before I had even arrived at Columbia. After
two years as a postdoc at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, he
had returned to Columbia as a tenured associate professor. In terms of a
career, he seemed to have everything one could hope for. It must have been
a heavy burden, however, to carry the weight of so many expectations of
precociousness. 
I 
was 
relieved, 
many 
years 
later, 
to 
hear 
him
uncharacteristically comment that a physicist spends about half of his or her
time 
enthralled 
and 
the 
other 
half 
in 
depression, 
an 
observation 
that
corresponded closely to my own experience.
I was Norman’s first PhD student and, perhaps because he had been a
student so recently himself, our relations were stilted. During the four years
I worked for him he never succeeded in finding a comfortable mode of
addressing me. I suppose that the difficulty arose from the tension between
the parity of our ages and the disparity of our relative positions. He could
not bring himself to simply call me “Emanuel” and so he eventually
resorted to addressing me as “Mr. Derman,” uttered between invisible quote
marks in a manner intended to imply ironic jocosity. I, in turn, could never
manage to call him “Norman.” It was only with my father- and mother-in-
law that I ever again experienced a similar sort of naming difficulty: The
first names they told me to use seemed to connote too much familiarity,
“Dr.” and “Mrs.” seemed too formal, and the Slovak analogs of “Mom” and
“Dad” that my wife used were too unnatural. In the end, with them though
not with Norman, first names prevailed.
In the fall of 1968, I moved out of I. House to share an apartment with a
friend on Amsterdam Avenue and 120th Street, just across the street from
where I now teach financial engineering. With most of my foreign friends
from the previous two years back in their home countries, I spent much
time alone. One evening I experienced my first mugging at the hands of a
group of teenagers, with two more muggings to follow over the next few
years. But, on the plus side, sometime in the spring of 1969, I noticed a new
and exotic foreign female student in the physics department library. Since
women in physics were rare, a new arrival attracted everyone’s attention.
Though I hadn’t yet contrived to meet her, I watched from a distance her
laughter-filled gesticulating conversations with some of the other graduate
students. Then, one Saturday evening, I saw her at a fellow student’s party
on 119th Street. I approached her and learned that her name was Eva. She
had left Czechoslovakia for a summer job in Germany during the Prague
Spring of 1968 and, after the Russian invasion, had not returned. Her
English was charmingly limited; I felt sad to see the skimpy physics lecture
notes she had jotted down in Slovak during physics classes that were
delivered 
in 
English. 
When 
I 
walked 
her 
home 
from 
the 
party 
we
discovered that we both lived in the same apartment building on 120th
Street. Soon we were spending much of our time together.
I spent the summer of 1969 at a particle physics summer school at
Brookhaven National Laboratories in Upton, Long Island. Most weekends I
headed 
back 
into 
the 
city 
to 
see 
Eva; 
sometimes 
she 
came 
out 
to
Brookhaven to visit me. We went swimming in the rough surf off Smith
Point, in Atlantic Ocean waves of a size I hadn’t seen since I had left Cape
Town. But mostly the summer weeks dragged by slowly and yet unquietly
on dreary Long Island, until finally, at summer’s end, I went home to Cape
Town to visit my family.
I was restless there, too. Three years had passed since I had left, and one
day, 
confused 
about 
my 
future 
on 
all 
fronts, 
I 
visited 
an 
Afrikaner
psychiatrist named Jannie Louw at the recommendation of my elder sister.
He listened to my account of distant loneliness and uncertainty, and then
half-pleased and half-displeased me by avoiding specific advice and instead
suggesting a philosophical approach to my suffering. I went to see him once
more, and when I left, he recommended that I read two books: Victor
Frankl’s Man’s Search for Meaning and Rudolf Steiner’s Knowledge of the
Higher Worlds. I found some solace in Frankl, but never bothered with
Steiner until years later.
One person who made a strong impression on me during that Brookhaven
summer 
was 
Mike 
Green, 
a 
graduate 
student 
in 
particle 
physics 
at
Cambridge. Mike was far ahead of me academically, already working on
research for his thesis. Everything went enviably faster in British graduate
schools. In subsequent years I ran into him regularly at summer research
institutes in Aspen and Stanford, and at university seminars at Oxford and
Cambridge. Always, he was single-mindedly working away on his beloved
string 
theory, 
a 
model 
that 
treats 
elementary 
particles 
as 
tiny, 
one-
dimensional, rubber-band-like, vibrating strings that wiggle and move at
relativistic 
speeds. 
I 
always 
admired 
Mike’s 
tenacity, 
his 
capacity 
for
banging away at the same problem for years until it yielded. Fifteen years
later, when I had already left physics, Mike became famous for proving that
string theories could be mathematically consistent only if the universe had
either 10 or 26 dimensions. Uncharacteristically, I didn’t feel the smallest
pinch of envy or competition at his deserved success. Like the Kaluza-Klein
theories I had studied as an undergraduate, Mike’s model of particles was
viable only in a large-dimensioned universe, which could be mapped to our
apparently four-dimensional universe only if its extent in each of those
extra dimensions was so small as to be unobservable. String theory is so
arcane that physicists sometimes describe it as “a little bit of twenty-first–
century physics that accidentally fell into the twentieth century.”
The physics department was home to more passionate clashes. Several
professors, among them Leon Lederman, Malvin Ruderman, and Richard
Garwin, worked part-time for the Jason Division of the Institute for Defense
Analysis, a group of elite scientists from elite universities who studied
defense-related problems. Norman Christ, my young PhD advisor, was a
member, too. During the height of the Vietnam protests, Columbia antiwar
student 
groups 
picketed 
these 
professors 
at 
their 
homes 
and 
in 
their
seminars. Though the contents of the Jason reports were presumably secret,
the antiwar activists circulated their titles. I recall one, “Interdiction of
Trucks by Night,” which we assumed to be about methods of bombing the
Ho Chi Minh trail. One fall we heard that antiwar protesters had picketed
Ruderman’s home in his suburban neighborhood on the eve of Yom Kippur,
pointing out the conflict they perceived between observing the Jewish day
of 
atonement 
and 
writing 
military-related 
advisory 
papers. 
I 
recall
Ruderman responding with great and somewhat disingenuous indignation at
the invasion of his personal life. I was most impressed by Richard Garwin.
Whereas 
most 
of 
the 
other 
professors 
tried 
to 
dodge 
the 
moral
responsibilities 
of 
their 
military-related 
activities 
with 
a 
mixture 
of
righteous outrage, wry charm, and vague ramblings about working from
within the system, Garwin simply asserted that there was a role for force in
the world, and that he believed in what he was doing.
Jason still exists, though a March 23, 2002, New York Times article
reported that the Pentagon has withdrawn its budgetary support. Jason, the
article jokingly noted, is rumored to be an acronym for Junior Achiever,
Somewhat Older Now—English for ex-wunderkind, I guess.
In late 1969 I finally began my PhD thesis. Just at that time, the particle
physics 
world 
I 
was 
entering 
was 
agog 
over 
two 
momentous 
new
developments. First, experimentalists were discovering the earliest hints of
the actual existence of quarks, and second, theorists were beginning to
understand 
the 
origin 
of 
the 
subtle 
similarity 
between 
the 
weak 
and
electromagnetic forces.
Gell-Mann’s version of the Eightfold Way had predicted that the proton,
the neutron, and all the other thus-far observed strongly interacting particles
could in principle be made out of three smaller subparticles called quarks.
Quarks, if they existed, had to be almost unbelievably peculiar; they had to
carry a fractional electric charge of either one-third or two-thirds the charge
of the proton, but no one had ever seen a particle of fractional charge.
Although 
the 
Eightfold 
Way 
implied 
their 
existence, 
physicists 
were
reluctant to take them seriously. Instead, avoiding the reality behind their
mathematics, they had come to think of quarks as mathematically consistent
but fictitious components that could never be observed. It was as though the
only coins you had ever seen in circulation were nickels, dimes, and
quarters, and you had concluded that somewhere there had to be a one-cent
coin.
If a proton really contained three hard little quarks deep inside it, one
should be able to “see” them experimentally by shooting a fast electron at a
proton and observing it recoil sharply when it struck a quark head-on. The
method is a little like looking for bits of eggshell in a sponge cake—once in
a while, as you chew, you hear a sharp crack as your teeth hit a fragment of
shell.
Robert Hofstadter, my cousin’s City College friend of the 1930s, had
observed no such sharp recoils, and everyone had concluded that the proton
was pure sponge and no eggshell. Hofstadter’s experiments, however, were
limited. He had kept an eye only on the so-called elastic collisions, those in
which the target proton remained intact as it recoiled like a struck billiard
ball. Now, in the late 1960s, a later generation of physicists at the Stanford
Linear 
Accelerator 
Center 
(SLAC) 
began 
to 
watch 
so-called 
inelastic
electron-proton collisions in which the proton disintegrated rather than
recoiled after being struck. Amazingly, in these collisions, many of the
electrons did in fact recoil sharply, as though they had struck something
very hard and small. Somewhere deep inside there truly were bits of
eggshell.
Feynman, from his base at Caltech in Pasadena, had developed a simple
phenomenological picture of the proton as a closed bag of hard little quark-
like constituents which he called its “partons.” In Feynman’s picture, the
energetic electrons that scattered off the protons at SLAC provided a
metaphorical X-ray view of the partons inside the proton, much as an
ordinary X-ray or a CAT scan uses high-frequency radiation to provide a
view of our internal organs. Using the information from the SLAC X-ray of
the partons, one could calculate many other properties of the proton itself.
More and more, we began to believe that protons, long thought of as
unsplittable, might be composite—they might contain quarks. But this was
not all that excited us; we were also increasingly becoming aware of the
similarity between the weak and electromagnetic forces. Since the 1930s,
physicists had been aware of an intriguing analogy between Maxwell’s
1873 theory of electricity and magnetism and Fermi’s 1934 theory of the
weak force. However, no one had yet been able to extend this analogy into a
consistent theory of the two forces. Then, in the 1960s, Glashow, Weinberg,
and Salam, all working independently, accomplished this unification by
creating what is now called the “standard model.” They based their theory
on Yang’s symmetry principle of local gauge invariance.
The standard model related nature’s forces to each other much like
Mendeleyev’s periodic table had connected the diverse chemical elements.
Mendeleyev had detected a hint of order in the properties of elements and
then deduced the existence of other as yet-undiscovered elements necessary
to complete the pattern. Similarly, Glashow, Weinberg, and Salam had
detected a pattern in both the weak and electromagnetic forces, and then
deduced 
the 
existence 
of 
other 
previously 
undiscovered 
weak 
forces
necessary to complete their picture. The sum total of all these forces
comprised the standard model. It was an ambitious but compelling theory;
when it was verified, its creators won the Nobel Prize. Much of theoretical
particle physics works in this way: You hear a few isolated bars of a
beautiful song and try to figure out the whole piece by generalizing the
pattern in the fragments.
My thesis work over the next three years employed both the theory of
quarks and the Weinberg-Salam standard model which predicted new weak
forces between electrons and quarks. One of these new forces, the so-called
weak 
neutral current, 
would 
cause 
a 
small 
violation 
of 
parity 
in 
the
collisions of electrons and quarks. If protons were bags of quarks, one
should also be able to observe a small violation of parity in electron-proton
collisions. The effect would be small and subtle, for the most part masked
by the much stronger electromagnetic force between electrons and quarks.
In my thesis I proposed a new test of the standard model. In particular I
suggested that experimentalists at SLAC try to observe the effects of the
standard model’s parity-violating weak force in the inelastic collisions of
electrons with protons. In order to estimate the size of the signal, I made use
of many of the skills I had gained during the past few years. I employed Lee
and Yang’s framework for analyzing parity violation and I used Feynman’s
parton-model description of the proton as a bag of quarks. In this way I
calculated how much of a parity-violating asymmetry would be seen if the
standard model were indeed correct.
I began my research in 1970. Slowly, I read the multitude of papers that
explained 
how 
to 
use 
the 
parton 
model, 
repeating 
their 
published
calculations on my own and checking that I could reproduce their results.
Step by step, I learned the mechanics of the model and how to use it. Then I
began my own work.
My first task was to carry out the long mathematical calculations that
predicted the distribution of electrons recoiling after a collision with a
quark. I did each calculation using “Feynman diagrams,” the cartoon-like
representation invented by Feynman to systematize the ways in which
particles interacted during collisions. I drew all the possible diagrams that
could occur in a theory, and then, using Feynman’s rules, translated each
picture into a mathematical formula and evaluated it. The calculations,
carried out with pen and paper, took up tens of pages. I repeated each
calculation 
at 
least 
twice 
to 
check 
for 
consistency. 
When 
successive
calculations didn’t match, I searched each one for errors and eliminated
them until I found agreement. Today, however, much of the repetitive
algebraic 
manipulation 
would 
be 
done 
with 
symbolic 
mathematical
programs like Mathematica™.
Feynman’s diagrams and rules were a sort of bookkeeping-by-picture
process that miraculously captured all the details of the standard model in a
series of diagrams; they allowed people less talented than Feynman to
perform the most complex calculations carefully and correctly. Many of the
great advances in physics are like this; they codify and make routine what
was formerly almost impossible to think about. Whenever I have a new
problem to work on—in physics or options theory—the first major struggle
is to gain some intuition about how to proceed; the second struggle is to
transform this intuition into something more formulaic, a set of rules
anyone can follow, rules that no longer require the original insight itself. In
this way, one person’s breakthrough becomes everybody’s possession.
After several months I completed the calculations for electrons scattering
off quarks. But in the real world electrons scatter off protons—that is, bags
of quarks. My next task was therefore to calculate what happened when an
electron hit a bag. I embarked on extensive numerical computations using
old-fashioned, punched card programs that I submitted to the university
computer center to run overnight on their IBM mainframe. It was tedious:
In those days we had no interactive terminals or PCs; one typographical
mistake in punching the cards could lose you a full day’s work.
It was then that I learned never to trust any new formula I had derived
without 
thoroughly 
cross-checking 
it 
for 
consistency 
from 
all 
angles.
Usually, anything new and complex is an extension of some older, simpler,
and more familiar calculation. The first check is therefore to switch off the
complexity and verify that you obtain the familiar results. I found it so easy
to make mistakes in my calculations that I began to wonder about the safety
of flying—how could engineers possibly trust their calculations when they
designed airplanes, where life and death rather than theories and reputations
were at stake?
It took me seven years in graduate school to get my PhD, an astonishing ten
percent of a lifetime. There were three preparatory years of coursework, one
subsequent warm-up year in the area of my research, and two more years of
my actual thesis research. Finally, I spent a half-year writing the thesis,
composing a paper for publication, and preparing for my thesis defense. A
small number of my friends got out of Columbia in five years, but many
took eight or nine.
Sometimes we tried to save others from our fate. In the early 1970s Doug
Hofstadter came by our office in Pupin. He was still unknown, a PhD
student in physics at Eugene, Oregon, and not yet the famous author of
Gödel, Escher, Bach. It took some time before I realized that he was the son
of my cousin’s friend Robert Hofstadter of electron-proton scattering fame.
Doug was contemplating a switch to Columbia from the University of
Oregon where he was in graduate school. Though it felt deliciously like
biting the hand that fed us, we tried to warn him away from Pupin.
Most of us grew to hate our stay in the physics department. We spent the
better part of our twenties shuttered there. For the most part we were
ignored, 
receiving 
little 
attention 
from 
the 
people 
to 
whom 
we 
were
apprenticed. My friend Chang-Li Yiu spent more than six months working
on a thesis problem without conversing with his advisor, only to discover
that his advisor had solved the same problem a few months earlier. Then he
had 
to 
begin 
again. 
Though 
I 
was 
better 
off—Norman 
Christ 
was
responsible and I met with him weekly—I often thought I might never
complete my degree. You could coast from year to year, receiving your
Department of Energy research grant, while no one seemed to care when or
whether you finished, or what you would do afterwards.
In defiance, I struggled to look unbeaten during the final few years. I
remember walking hand-in-hand with my wife down Broadway and passing
a crowd of Columbia professors strolling up Broadway on the way back
from lunch at the Moon Palace. As our paths crossed, I tried hard to look
nonchalantly happy and carefree, talking animatedly, pretending to myself
and to the professors passing by that they had no effect on the other parts of
my life.
But of course they did. One summer in the early seventies, during the
student protests against the American invasion of Cambodia, Eva and I
went camping in the Catskills mountains with Chang-Li and his wife. After
several days in a tent, cut off from any news, we went to meet my in-laws
who were vacationing in a nearby hotel. As we arrived, my father-in-law
somberly announced to us that a small bomb had exploded in one of the
physics department’s bathrooms. Without a moment’s hesitation Chang-Li
and I leapt in the air for joy, whooping and cheering. My in-laws looked at
us in bewilderment, and I suddenly realized how far beyond the elastic limit
we had been stretched.
I had waited four years to begin my thesis work, but once I knew enough to
get going, I progressed steadily. Halfway through the research I gave a
seminar 
on 
some 
of 
my 
early 
results 
to 
T. 
D. 
and 
the 
rest 
of 
the
departmental faculty. In early 1972 I finally published my first paper, in
which I used Feynman’s parton model to try to explain the results of a
recent 
Columbia 
experiment 
carried 
out 
by 
Leon 
Lederman 
and
collaborators. My calculation was simply a warm-up exercise for the thesis
work to come, but its publication and the sight of my name in print after so
many 
years 
of 
waiting 
exhilarated 
me 
briefly. 
I 
completed 
my 
thesis
research by late 1972 and, at long last, in the spring of 1973, formally
defended my work in front of a committee consisting of T. D. himself,
Christ, and Lederman. I answered their questions and then I was done.
My thesis, Tests for a Weak Neutral Current in l 
±
+ N → l 
±
+ Anything,
was published in 1973 in the Physical Review. It was a competent piece of
work that analyzed how the then-unverified standard model of weak and
electromagnetic 
forces 
would 
uniquely 
manifest 
itself 
through 
parity
violation in electron-proton scattering. In 1978, a collaboration led by
Charles Prescott and Richard Taylor at SLAC published the results of an
elegant and careful experiment that confirmed a level of parity violation
consistent 
with 
the 
standard 
model. 
A 
recent 
book 
on 
the 
history 
of
twentieth-century 
particle 
physics
1

refers 
to 
the 
audience’s 
prolonged
applause after Prescott’s first presentation of their experimental results as
“the long elegiac salute given to the end of an age.” Their experiment put
the final stamp of approval on the standard model of Glashow, Weinberg,
and Salam. I was pleased to note that my 1973 paper was one of the first
papers they referenced.
Despite the amount of time it took to finish my thesis, I have no real
regrets; in a way, I am proud of the struggle. What I learned in those years
—perseverance as much as mathematics—has stood me in good stead on
Wall Street as well as in academia. When trying to discover something new
in any field, one has to spend many years thinking, making false starts,
wandering down blind alleys and stumbling into ditches, only to emerge
again and keep going. For this, a PhD is a good, if painful, training.
Years later on Wall Street I was horrified to notice quant résumés listing
the nonexistent degree A.B.D. That, I soon discovered, was a common
business-world acronym for “All But Dissertation,” a way of describing
those who had tried to obtain a PhD but left academia before they had
completed their dissertation. Since a PhD is by definition a research degree,
the main achievement of which is the completion of a piece of original
research described in a dissertation, I looked at A.B.D. as a kind of
“Wayne’s World” PhD (not!). I resented the way it devalued the innovation
and effort involved in doing research.
I then began the search for a postdoctoral position, a two-year, low-paying
research appointment that was the standard first step towards an academic
career in science. I mailed out scores of letters with my curriculum vitae to
physicists whose names I knew. I gave research seminars at any of the
schools that invited me. But academic jobs were scarce—the universities
were filled to the brim with young, tenured faculty hired during the past
decade; I might well have to wait for a generation of physicists to die.
As in most endeavors, it helps to have someone pulling for you. At
Goldman Sachs, people like to say that you need a “rabbi” to become a
partner, and the Columbia physics department was definitely short on
rabbis. In the end, because my work was topical and I was lucky, I received
a 
two-year 
postdoctoral 
position 
at 
the 
University 
of 
Pennsylvania 
in
Philadelphia, set to commence in September 1973.
I did not attend Columbia’s May graduation, held outdoors on the giant
plaza in front of Low Library where only a few years earlier I had watched
New York City policemen chase students with truncheons during the nights
of the 1968 student occupation. None of my graduate school friends seemed
to bother with the ceremony either.
I spent one month that summer in Erice, a beautiful town high above
Trapani in western Sicily, where I attended the annual Ettore Majorana
particle physics summer school. Up on the mountain I had a tantalizing
glimpse of the life of successful physicists on the conference circuit, who
visited exotic places each summer. I sat with some of them in the town
plaza, smoking cigarettes and sipping Italian aperitifs. One morning I had a
hot shave at the local barber shop, where I lay tilted back in a heavy leather
chair while the barber sharpened his razor on a strop. Years later I met
corporate lawyers and Wall Street salesmen who touted the fringe benefits
of 
their 
jobs—first-class 
flights, 
expensive 
meals, 
and 
fancy 
hotels. 
I
silently scorned their focus on the material benefits of work. In physics, I
thought, the life itself was the benefit; talking about physics to interesting
people in interesting places was the main dish, not the cutlery.
In Erice I observed with slight envy another attendee, Frank Wilczek. He
had just graduated from Princeton and was already the coauthor of a famous
paper in field theory. Yet a large part of me was exhausted with physics and
the seven-year struggle to shine. I consoled myself with a few sentences
Einstein wrote in his autobiographical notes, composed at the age of 67,
about the aftereffects of his final examinations: “This coercion had such a
deterring effect [upon me] that, after I had passed the final examination, I
found the consideration of any scientific problems distasteful to me for an
entire year.”
Notes
1
Crease, R. P., and C. C. Mann, The Second Creation, Rutgers University
Press, Revised Edition (1996).
...