Chapter 3
A Sort of Life
The priesthood of itinerant postdocs
Research isn’t easy
Almost perishing, then publishing
The delirious thrill of collaboration and discovery
On Labor Day of 1973 I hired a friend of a friend who ran a small part-time
moving business to transport me and my belongings to Philadelphia. In
order to gain respect and imply responsibility, I had told my landlord that I
was “Dr. Derman,” feeling only a slight twinge of guilt at exploiting my
title and trying to pass for a “real” doctor. Our mover, who drove my wife
and me down the turnpike from New York, told us that he routinely rolled
back the odometer on the van he rented before returning it to Hertz, a
common 
1960s-style 
view 
of 
the 
legitimacy 
of 
stealing 
from 
large
impersonal companies.
At 
the 
end 
of 
that 
weekend 
I 
began 
trying 
to 
settle 
into 
solitary
Philadelphia while Eva returned to our familiar Columbia graduate-student
apartment overlooking Tom’s Restaurant at Broadway and 112th Street, a
location later made famous beyond the Columbia community by Suzanne
Vega and the television show “Seinfeld.” Eva still had several years to go
on 
her 
PhD 
in 
molecular 
biology. 
I 
had 
hoped 
she 
could 
move 
to
Philadelphia with me, but it was impossible for her to change schools and
PhD advisors. She had only recently switched from physics to biology, and
as a condition of entry into the biology PhD program, she had needed to
promise that she would complete her doctorate in the department. In
making the move to biology she had asked for a recommendation from
Madame Wu, who herself lived in Morningside Heights near Columbia, 50
miles 
apart 
from 
her 
physicist 
husband 
at 
Brookhaven 
National
Laboratories. Madame Wu had met with Eva and lectured her on the need
for sacrifice, making it plain that, since they knew she was married to me
and that I would graduate before her, she would not be admitted to the
biology doctoral program unless she gave her word that she would stay on
there when I graduated. In an era when no one had yet invented the notion
of political correctness, it was quite permissible for faculty to gauge a
woman’s seriousness before admitting her to graduate school. A few years
later, when I went to work in industry, we heard stories of interviewers in
business who asked women whether they would have an abortion if they
unintentionally 
became 
pregnant 
and 
thought 
that 
childbearing 
would
interfere with their work.
For the next two years Eva and I saw each other only on weekends and
during parts of the summer. The tension of living like this was to be a
perennial feature of my future years in academia.
I had imagined postdoctoral life as a sort of priesthood, the blissful
apotheosis of a life dedicated to knowledge. In top-notch universities, a
postdoc in theoretical physics had no mundane obligations—no teaching,
no administration, no fixed hours. What remained was transcendental. You
were hired for your research talent. All you had to do was find something
conceptually worthwhile that interested you and then work on it. All that
mattered was what you achieved. It was simple, but the stakes were high.
No one I knew thought much about getting rich or about what they would
earn. Everyone hoped to achieve something numinously great and was
willing to work an entire lifetime at it. We looked down on professors who
ceased “doing physics” once they achieved tenure. As we got older, we took
solace in the stories of people who made great discoveries after the age of
thirty. 
It 
was 
very 
different 
from 
Wall 
Street, 
where 
I 
heard 
twenty-
something traders talk about “their number,” the amount of money they
figured they needed to be able to quit, certain that they would never have to
work again.
Reality, of course, was different. I was friendless at Penn, surrounded by
married nine-to-fivers, a sharp change from the casual gregariousness of the
graduate-student life that I had grown accustomed to. Philadelphia was
disagreeably unsafe and deserted compared to Morningside Heights. I was a
married person unaccompanied by his spouse, a little too old and attached
for the company of single graduate students and a little too young and
uncoupled for the domesticity of the married faculty. I had little social life
and spent most of my time alone.
Postdoc life was an atavism, a relic of a time long past. Postdoctoral
research positions had been created to provide a brief interlude between
being a graduate student and becoming a professor. But Americans’ post-
Sputnik view of science as the moral equivalent of war had produced a
bubble of young scientists that, now tenured, occupied all the available
faculty positions; they would not retire in less than thirty years. Faculty
need students, and so aspiring physicists continued to enter the head of the
PhD pipeline, but when they emerged at the tail, there was almost nowhere
to go. Postdoc positions temporarily filled the void. They lasted about two
years and paid little. They worked well for universities, though, for they got
to sample a new bunch of young research physicists each year, and could
pick an exceptional one for the rare faculty position that became available.
It was less pleasant for the average postdoc. You started each two-year
position in the fall with a one-year grace period, during which time you
tried to begin, complete, and publish some interesting research, so that by
the fall of the second year you could apply for another postdoc position in
another 
lab 
or 
department 
somewhere 
else 
in 
the 
world. 
Mitchell
Feigenbaum, famous for his contributions to chaos theory, described it
aptly: “These two-year positions made serious work almost impossible.
After one year you had to start worrying about where you could go next.” If
you were unlucky enough to have only a one-year postdoc position, which
was not uncommon, then you had no respite; you had to start applying for
your next job as soon as you began the current one. The only way out—
other than abandoning academic physics entirely—was to write a paper so
acclaimed that you would be offered one of the few faculty positions
available.
Some of my PhD friends, passionate and desperate enough to stay in
physics even if they were paid nothing, became “freebies,” people who had
found no job anywhere and then asked for and received a desk and
rudimentary research facilities with no pay at a top-ranked institution. Their
aim was to get into a stimulating environment, make good contacts, and
then do a piece of work that would get them a paying job. One friend went
so far as to turn down a paid postdoc job at a secondtier institution in order
to become a freebie at Harvard, where he then pulled off some research that
landed him a subsequent paid position at a first-rate place, SLAC.
At the University of Pennsylvania, now without a PhD advisor, I had to
take my own road, and so I began to look for something new to work on. I
had 
spent 
most 
my 
graduate 
student 
years 
working 
on 
high-energy
phenomenology, comparing other people’s theories with other people’s
experiments. It was useful and interesting, but not as visionary as the
physics I had imagined doing. Trying to be ambitious, I began to study the
so-called Lee model, an idealized and therefore analytically soluble theory
of particle interactions that was the subject of an early paper by T. D.
himself. I hoped that it would form the basis for a deeper understanding of
quark forces. I spent most of my first semester at Penn trying vainly to
master the field. But I found it difficult to concentrate; I was restless from
the lack of friends, tense from the strains of a geographically divided
marital life, and tired from all the back-and-forth driving—I would go to
New York on Friday nights and return to Philadelphia early on Monday
mornings. Some weekends I was just too weary to make the trip and
remained alone in Philadelphia, killing time and feeling half-resentful.
My first semester passed without much significant progress. The tenured
professor 
who 
had 
hired 
me 
had 
his 
own 
problems, 
and 
provided
ambivalent encouragement. He seemed disspirited by the competitiveness
of physics. Once, inviting me over to his home for dinner, he spoke about
how “we” had to resign ourselves to not having achieved something great.
His wife quickly pointed out to him that it was still premature to include me
in that “we.”
I felt time racing by. The same professor tried to guide me into working
on a problem in his area, the algebra of weak and electromagnetic currents,
but it was so far from my interests that it became almost repellent to me.
What was the point of being in physics if you could not pick your own
problems? By May 1974, at the close of my first academic year, I was
heading for trouble. In three months I would have to start my next job
search, and I had not published a paper; worse, I was not even involved in
anything that could conceivably lead to a publication. I developed a visceral
understanding of the meaning of “publish or perish,” and made darkly
foreboding comments to my friends and acquaintances about where I was
headed.
Life wasn’t all bad, though. Three good things did happen that year, all
extracurricular. I spent many evening hours in my Philadelphia bedroom
learning to juggle three tennis balls. I started running more seriously than I
had 
before, tagging on to a cadre of dedicated graduate-student 
long
distance runners who trained every day at noon on the university’s famous
Tartan track, site of the Penn Relays. I remembered when Roger Bannister
broke the four-minute mile, and now, temperamentally overenthusiastic to
the point of stupidity, I ran a single mile against my stopwatch as fast as I
could, several times a week, determined to remain ignorant of the benefits
of warming up or running longer distances more slowly. Every few weeks I
stopped to let my shin splints heal, and it took me several more years to
acquire the patience to train rather than simply run as quickly as I could.
Finally, 
I 
learned 
to 
play 
the 
recorder 
in 
a 
small 
group 
at 
a 
West
Philadelphia arts center, enjoying my capacity to make even low-grade
music in harmony with others.
My first academic year of employment passed, and Eva and I spent a
month together in the summer of 1974 at the Aspen Center for Physics,
where I was awed by the casual proximity of so many famous physicists.
Aspen was popular; research space and apartments were in such short
supply that some of the senior physicists had bought houses there in which
they could spend the entire summer. The junior postdocs were allotted only
a few weeks. We hiked in the mountains once or twice a week and swam at
the Hotel Jerome pool where the women all seemed to have crocheted their
own bikini tops—tops that they removed as soon as they sat by the pool.
Each day I tried systematically to learn more about the theoretical structure
of 
the 
increasingly 
topical 
Yang-Mills 
gauge 
theories 
of 
weak 
and
electromagnetic interactions. I carefully worked my way through New
Yorker 
writer 
and 
physicist 
Jeremy 
Bernstein’s 
pedagogic 
introductory
article in the Reviews of Modern Physics and, since he was an Aspen
regular, I sometimes wandered over to ask him questions. Working, hiking,
talking physics, listening to music at the Aspen Music Center, playing
volleyball to let off steam—this was what academic physics was supposed
to be like, but my enjoyment was tempered by my year without publication,
which made me feel that regular summers in Aspen and the partaking of its
pleasures would not be part of my destiny.
June passed quickly, and in July I traveled to Cape Town. My mother, like
Stephen 
Hawking, 
had 
been 
ill 
with 
amyotrophic 
lateral 
sclerosis 
for
several years, and each year I went home to see her. But while Hawking
miraculously seemed to stabilize, my mother went steadily downhill in the
1970s, growing worse each year, first losing the ability to move her arms,
her hands, and then her legs, until she finally began to have difficulty
holding her head up or swallowing. It was a perpetual mystery to her that no
one knew how to cure her ailment. In August I returned to New York for
one month, continuing to read about gauge theories in our apartment or in
the Columbia library while Eva continued her thesis work. As an academic,
you could work (or not work) wherever you liked. It was freedom, but now,
with one year as a postdoc gone and the future looming, it sometimes felt
like the freedom to fail.
In September 1974 I returned to dreary Philadelphia, where I could no
longer avoid pondering whether to try to seek another postdoctoral position
for the fall of 1975, I had no new accomplishments to report on my résumé,
something which was going to make job applications difficult. I began to
think seriously of ceasing to “do physics,”
1
and to steel myself for the
shame it involved. It seemed like my time had come. Then suddenly
something good happened: A really interesting physics puzzle came along,
and the techniques necessary to resolve it were closely related to those I had
used in my PhD thesis.
Al Mann, one of the senior experimentalists at Penn, had been part of an
international collaboration to scatter high-energy, muon-type neutrinos off
protons at the CERN
2
particle accelerator in Geneva. Mann’s experiment
was very similar to the deep inelastic electron-proton scattering I had
analyzed for my thesis, the difference being that he fired neutrinos rather
than electrons at the proton target. According to what was then known
about weak interactions, one expected the incoming neutrino to turn into a
single negatively charged muon
3
when it collided with the proton. The
proton would in turn then shatter into a debris consisting of many other
protonlike particles, as illustrated in Figure 3.1(a). This was not exactly
what 
happened, 
however. 
Searching 
through 
their 
data, 
Al 
and 
his
collaborators discovered a number of so-called dimuon events in which
there were two muons, one negatively and one positively charged, among
the final products of the collision. These were just the sort of “Swiss watch”
collisions that Feynman had described, in which experimental anomalies
could lead to the discovery of new particles or the new forces that produce
them.
Figure 3.1 Neutrino-proton collisions. (a) A normal collision that produces
a single negatively charged muon. (b) A hypothetical collision that
produces a neutral heavy lepton, which in turn decays into two muons and a
muon neutrino. (c) A hypothetical collision that produces a single
negatively charged muon plus a charmed quark, which in turn decays into a
positively charged muon, a neutrino, and a strange quark.
The puzzle was the cause of the two muons. There were (at least) two
possible explanations, each involving the production of a hypothetical new
particle. The first hypothesis was that the incoming neutrino had turned into
a new neutral heavy lepton,
4
which then, because of the weak force,
decayed into the two muons observed by Mann and his collaborators. This
is illustrated in Figure 3.1(b). The second hypothesis was that the incoming
neutrino had, as is normal, turned into the one negatively charged muon, but
that among the proton debris was a new so-called charmed quark that was
required 
to 
exist 
in 
the 
standard 
theory 
of 
weak 
and 
electromagnetic
interactions, and that this charmed quark then decayed via the weak force to
produce a second positively charged muon, as illustrated in Figure 3.1(c).
Which of these new particles—the hypothetical neutral heavy lepton or
the hypothetical charmed quark—was the progenitor of the dimuons? The
test would lie in the distribution of their speeds. The relative speeds of the
positively and negatively charged muons would depend on whether the
heavy lepton or the charmed quark had been their parent. In the former
case, both muons arose from the decay of the heavy lepton and, because
both had a similar origin, they tended to emerge with similar speeds; in the
latter, the positively charged muon arose from the decay of a charmed quark
and would have a very different speed. Much as each brand of water gun
produces its own characteristic spray of water, so the different particles,
when they decay, produce their own characteristic dimuon distribution.
Together with my colleagues Lay Nam Chang and John Ng, I began to
investigate the properties of the dimuon distribution that resulted from
heavy lepton production in order to compare it with the muon speeds
reported by Mann and his collaborators. It was a classic phenomenology
problem, the comparison of theory and experiment, closely related to my
thesis work, and so I knew how to calculate the distributions of the final
speeds and angles of muons. Lay Nam, John, and I checked each other’s
analytical calculations, and I wrote the computer program to evaluate the
distribution of the muons. Suddenly I was involved again, and it was simply
thrilling to be working on something new and relevant in close proximity to
the experimentalists. I entered a period of great mental stimulation which
resuscitated me. Spontaneously, I began to rise early in the morning; as
soon as I awoke I rushed into work to calculate and program. I participated
in long, intoxicatingly buoyant arguments and discussions on blackboards,
where Lay Nam, John, and I took turns scribbling and talking, one of us
seizing the chalk from the other. Rivalries and self-doubt disappeared as we
pushed forward, working keenly late into the night.
The exact nature of the hypothetical weak force responsible for the decay
of the putative heavy lepton was not known—it had to be conjectured, and
there were a variety of forms it could reasonably take. Lay Nam, John, and I
calculated the relative speeds of the muons for a wide (but not exhaustive)
range of forces. We showed that for all the cases we considered, the
predicted disparity between the speeds of the positive and negative muon,
when both were produced by the decay of a heavy lepton, was much
smaller 
than 
the 
disparity 
observed 
by 
Mann 
and 
his 
collaborators.
Therefore, we claimed, it was highly unlikely that the dimuon events
signaled the production of a new heavy neutral lepton.
We circulated our work as a “preprint,” a mimeographed prepublication
report sent out to other physicists in the field, and it drew a gratifying spurt
of attention. Now, almost down to the wire, I had completed a piece of
research that would get me my next postdoc position, just as my two-year
stint at Penn trailed off into its last few months. I sent out my letters of
application and, late in the spring of 1975, in the nick of time, I received
postdoctoral offers from the University of Wisconsin at Madison and from
Oxford University in England. Eva, who still needed one more year in New
York to complete her PhD was obliged to stay at Columbia. If I was going
to spend one more year on my own, I preferred European Oxford rather
than 
ur-American 
Madison. 
I 
had 
had 
enough 
of 
empty-streeted
Philadelphia.
The work we did on heavy leptons was topical and timely, but not quite
thorough enough. Though we had shown that it was unlikely that a heavy
lepton had produced the dimuons, we had not proved it truly impossible—
we had not calculated the asymmetry for every possible form of the
hypothetical weak force that caused its decay. A few months later, Bram
Pais (one of the few Columbia seminar speakers I had seen stand up to T. D.
Lee) and his long-time collaborator, Sam Treiman of Princeton, entered the
scene. Both of them old hands at analyzing weak interactions, they derived
a very general upper bound to the asymmetry between the speeds of the
positive and negative muons produced in the decay of a heavy lepton, no
matter what the form of its still unknown weak force. They showed that the
maximum value of the asymmetry under any circumstances was smaller
than the one observed by Mann and his collaborators, and so truly excluded
heavy leptons as a source of the dimuons. What we had shown to be
unlikely Pais and Treiman had then demonstrated to be impossible. More
experienced and professional than Lay Nam, John, and me, they received
the lion’s share of the credit, but we got a little, too; it was more than
enough to get me that second postdoc offer from Oxford.
I was through with Philadelphia, although I had survived and eventually
prospered. I spent one month that summer in Cape Town visiting my
mother, and another month at a theoretical physics summer institute at
SLAC, where I renewed my acquaintance with Doug Hofstadter, now living
at home with his family. He invited me to their house on campus, where I
finally met his father Robert and his electron-scattering colleague Robert
Herman, the two ex-City College physicists my cousin had told me so much
about during my first years in New York.
As I prepared to leave for England, once again invigorated by physics but
now slightly fearful of moving to a new country on my own until Eva could
eventually join me, I looked back at my nine years in America.
Physics was filled with so many extraordinary talents, old gods from the
past as well as budding stars preparing to dominate the future. In those first
few years, I saw and sometimes met many of them.
At Columbia, I had taken classes in statistical mechanics from T. D. Lee. I
had listened to his many seminars and discussed my thesis with him. I had
taught problem sessions in electromagnetic theory for Polykarp Kusch,
watching him on campus in his late fifties as he bent over stiffly to play
with his small son from a second marriage. I had drunk coffee and eaten
cookies at countless departmental coffee hours in the company of Leon
Lederman, 
Jack 
Steinberger, 
and 
Jim 
Cronin, 
all 
future 
Nobel 
Prize–
winners then on the Columbia faculty. I had given lectures on my thesis
work to theorists and experimentalists and had been questioned by many of
them. 
I 
had 
heard 
colloquia 
delivered 
by 
the 
legendary 
Dirac 
and
Heisenberg. 
I 
had 
heard 
Feynman, 
too, 
an 
enormously 
charismatic
performer who spoke like a Brooklyn-born taxi driver, so much more
casually charming than the Columbia faculty, and yet so aware of the charm
he radiated. One Friday I listened to Edward Teller, the notorious cocreator
of the hydrogen bomb and destroyer of Oppenheimer’s reputation, as he
lectured 
in the 
Columbia 
theatre while 
a crowd of antiwar protesters
picketed him with posters and then silently walked out as he spoke. Later
we flocked to watch a seminar on Uri Geller, the Israeli spoon bender,
presented by two scientists from the Stanford Research Institute who were
investigating his psychic skills. They were invited, of course, by Gary
Feinberg.
At Penn, the physics department starred Bob Schrieffer, who had just won
the Nobel Prize for his role in developing the theory of super-conductivity.
His white gull-wing Mercedes, reportedly bought with Nobel Prize money,
lent a glamorous touch to the physics parking lot, as did the glimpses of his
elegant, Scandinavian-looking wife. In 1976 our department hosted the
international 
Neutrino 
Conference 
in 
the 
Amish 
countryside 
of
Pennsylvania, and I again heard Feynman lecture. Later I summoned the
courage to join a conversation of his in the bathroom. Seminar speakers
came to Penn from all over the country. One fall Victor Weisskopf, a hero
from the early days of quantum theory and one of the leaders of the
Manhattan Project, came down for a visit from MIT. Another week brought
a 
seminar 
by 
Steven 
Weinberg, 
whose 
standard 
theory 
of 
weak 
and
electromagnetic interactions was just beginning to be vindicated. Among
the pile of résumés that flowed into the department from postdocs in search
of jobs, I remember one from Alan Guth, then a relatively run-of-the-mill
applicant but soon to become the inventor of the theory of the inflationary
universe.
I was beginning to become very aware of my limitations. There were
people you met in physics who were simply off any scale you could
imagine. When I read classic papers by Einstein or Feynman, I realized that
though I could understand and utilize their framework, I could never have
created it. My wife, having left physics for biology, knew something about
both areas, and said that even the smartest biologists didn’t leave you
feeling that they were out of your league. Physics was different.
I have a friend who liked to point out the obviousness of various great
discoveries in physics and finance. The obviousness is a delusion. Many
things seem clear only once they have been taught to you in a historical
context, with all the prejudices, confusion, and competing theories omitted.
Every iota of discovery, in finance or theoretical physics, comes at the cost
of long immersion, hard labor, and struggle. “Improvement makes straight
roads, but the crooked roads without improvement are the roads of genius,”
wrote the English Romantic poet William Blake. Most of us in physics were
lucky to be improvers, and knew we could never negotiate the crooked
roads at all, though we had occasional glimpses, during sudden epiphanies
in our work, of what it might feel like to stumble onto one.
Although 
I 
now 
sensed 
my 
limitations, 
I 
was 
nevertheless 
happily
astonished at the recent reversal of my fortune. Only a few months earlier I
had been morose and ready to quit; now, with one successful bit of work
behind me, I was again thrilled by the hunt and longed to figure out some
puzzle no one had solved before. Ever since, through ups and downs, I have
tried to remember that no matter how low you get, about work or life, you
can take some solace from the fact that the future is unpredictable. Even in
the midst of misery, unexpectedly good things can happen without warning.
Notes
1
My physicist friends and I spoke of what we did as “doing physics.” My
wife’s molecular biology colleagues, strangely, never spoke of “doing
biology,” but rather of “doing science,” a broader name for what seemed
to me an equally narrow field.
2
The European Center for Nuclear Research.
3
A sort of electron, with the same charge but about 200 times the mass.
4
An even heavier sort of electron, but neutral, that is, carrying no charge.
There was no good reason why one should not exist, and so, according to
Gell-Mann’s totalitarian principle, it had to be there.
...