Chapter 4
A Sentimental Education
Oxford’s civilized charms
One physics paper leads to another
English idiosyncrasies
The anthroposophists
From October 1975 to August 1977, I spent my days happily doing physics
at Oxford. Once again, I arrived there alone; my wife arrived seven months
later to begin her first postdoc. Once again, predictably, I found it difficult
to be alone in a strange city, just as I had during my first few solitary weeks
in New York nine years earlier; the same intense feelings recurred.
It didn’t help that social life at Oxford revolved around the autonomous
and distinct colleges that comprised the university, and I didn’t belong to
one. I had been hired directly by the Department of Theoretical Physics,
which was housed in two old, single-family brownstones that had been
joined together. The Anglo-Irish novelist Joyce Cary had lived in one of
them before he died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, my mother’s disease.
While faculty colleagues went off to eat lunch or dinner with port and
walnuts at their exclusive High Table at the head of the college dining hall
and to then smoke their postprandial cigars, and while graduate students
joked together at their much lower tables in the same dining halls, my
uncollegial postdoc friends and I (Indians, Pakistanis, Cypriots, Australians,
and a few Americans) sought out one of the few Indian restaurants in the
nongown section of the city.
I felt naively proud to be at Oxford. Coming from Anglophile South
Africa, I saw Oxford as the epitome of academic life. And doing physics
when I got there was suddenly much easier; I had struggled through the
valley of the shadow in my first year at Penn, but now I knew how to find
suitable problems on which to work. I had learned how to complete a piece
of research or, failing that, how to at least salvage something publishable
and interesting. I learned to let one piece of work flow into the next. I
finally knew how to treat research a little more like a business.
At Oxford I continued working on the theory of dimuon production.
Heavy neutral leptons were dead, as my colleagues and I had suggested and
as Pais and Treiman had proved. The dimuon events could instead signal
the production and subsequent decay of a short-lived charmed quark, an
equally interesting possibility. I set about calculating the distribution of
dimuons that would correspond to the decay of newly produced charmed
quarks. It was useful work, professionally done. I did more theoretical
calculations, 
wrote 
more 
FORTRAN 
programs 
to 
compute 
dimuon
distributions, documented the work, circulated the preprints I wrote to other
physics 
departments, 
and 
published 
the 
papers. 
I 
still 
remember 
the
excitement of working late into the night, hurrying to debug programs and
then submit them to the computer center. I recall best the unspoiled joy of
spontaneously waking early, tired but driven, and then rushing off to work
because I wanted to go to work and couldn’t sleep any more. I was excited
to see what came next.
Meanwhile, back in Philadelphia, Lay Nam and John continued on their
related but independent work. We had no email or ten-cent-per-minute
telephone calls to link us. Collaboration across the Atlantic was cost-
prohibitive and communication was viscous in those pre-Internet days. Not
only did we think it unrealistic to telephone to discuss research, but even
airmail 
postage 
and 
xeroxing 
were 
expensive. 
The 
Department 
of
Theoretical Physics at Oxford, itself on a limited budget, restricted each of
its postdocs to 40 free photocopies a month. After that we paid for copies of
articles we wanted. Computation was more difficult, too. There were no
PCs and no Matlab™ or Mathematica™ programs. I used to crosscheck my
Monte 
Carlo 
computer 
programs, 
written 
in 
FORTRAN 
66, 
by
programming similar but simpler calculations for special cases on the latest
Hewlett-Packard 25 programmable pocket calculator I had bought before I
left New York.
I 
spent 
that 
whole 
year 
working 
on 
the 
phenomenology 
of 
charm
production. It was a good life. I felt adult because I was earning a living, yet
I was often fancy-free in the way that I imagined a life spent on acquiring
knowledge should be. Eva finally arrived in early 1976 and we settled into
the habits of Oxford. We saw exhibitions and art performances at the
Oxford Museum of Modern Art, and took in old movies at the bitterly
freezing Penultimate Picture Palace in working-class Cowley. Once I saw
Iris Murdoch at a College garden party. Eva and I went for long walks on
Port Meadow next to Jericho, where we lived, and drove to the Vale of the
White Horse and the Cotswolds, where the skies could become menacingly
grey in just a few minutes. We watched touring boats wait patiently for
locks to slowly fill and empty in the nearby canals of the Thames. We took
picnics with graduate students in punts on the Cherwell River in the late
afternoon. The northern summer evenings were so long that I could first
have supper and then still have time to go for a late barefoot run on the
trimmed grass cricket fields and tennis courts that tiled the University Parks
next to the Department of Theoretical Physics. I was invited to give
seminars in Cambridge, London, and Paris. I attended another neutrino
conference in Aachen, Germany, where at midsummer the western sky still
continued to glow slightly as the eastern sky began to lighten. We drove
down to London to visit friends on weekends; we went to Crete on
vacation. It was idyllic.
I made one tactical mistake in my research. Though I had been hired by
Chris Llewellyn Smith, a well-known theorist who later became the head of
CERN, I worked alone most of the time that first year. When I completed
my study of charmed quark production and decay, and was ready to write it
up for publication, I thought I sensed a small unspoken expectation on
Chris’s part that we should write the paper jointly. Like the little red hen, I
felt that I had done the work, and so I should publish it. In retrospect, I was
wrong. He had hired me and I had benefited from his advice; there would
have been nothing seriously amiss in working together on a joint paper.
More to the point, it would have been good for my career. Chris was a much
better known (and a better) physicist than I was, and with his name on the
paper, it would have been more widely read and perhaps would have led to
further collaboration. But my pride stood in the way. Later that year, when
another 
physicist 
carried 
out 
a 
similar 
analysis 
and 
received 
broader
attention, Chris pointed out to me that I would have been better off if I had
written the article with him. He was right. Years later, working on financial
models at Goldman Sachs, I became much less compulsive about such strict
authorial cost accounting.
The world of theoretical particle physics in the 1970s was filled with
antediluvian inefficiencies and oddities. Authors circulated their work as
“preprints” 
before 
they 
published 
them 
in 
refereed 
physics 
journals.
Preprints, which had started out as informal research notes to be circulated
among colleagues, had become institutionalized; physicists all over the
world sent their preprints to anyone they thought might be interested or
influential. They also sent a copy to the library at SLAC, which then
compiled a fortnightly list of newly received preprints to its subscribers,
who could then request a copy from the original author. The Oxford
department of physics was relatively poor.
1
When I or anyone else wrote a
new paper, Oxford shipped the preprints by surface mail. As a result,
physicists in the United States first received new work four to six weeks
after it came out, a significant delay if competitors were working on similar
problems. Correspondingly, most physics departments in the United States
sent their preprints by surface mail; this doubled the delay. The playing
field was thus decisively tilted against small or foreign institutions—their
lower budgets meant that they were the last to receive written word of new
work. On one occasion, eager to communicate my results and assure my
future, I paid to xerox, collate, and airmail 60 copies of a preprint at my
own expense. Nowadays, all new research is posted on the Web, itself an
invention of physicists at CERN, and can be downloaded at virtually no
cost by anyone.
Oxford was proudly old-fashioned. One student I knew carefully peeled
his dessert banana and then ate it as though it were a sausage, delicately
pinning it down on the plate with his fork while he cut off slices with his
knife. I met a fiercely Anglophile Canadian who began to smoke pipes and
wear tweed jackets and cavalry twill trousers with handsomely heavy hand-
sewn English shoes, all actually ideal (I had to admit) for walking on the
muddy footpaths in the mild but perpetually damp climate. Within six
months his adopted British accent became indistinguishable from the real
thing. Another friend, a Junior Fellow at his College, took me for dinner at
High Table. All the dons were overwhelmingly courteous, leaning over to
chat with me whenever my friend, the most junior Fellow, was obliged to
leave the table in order to pass around the port and walnuts.
While some of the colleges were exorbitantly rich and had Fellows who
lived really well, the academic departments in the university were less well
off. I shared a crowded office in the Department of Theoretical Physics on
South 
Parks 
Road 
with 
Don 
Sinclair, 
a 
gruffly 
likeable 
but 
difficult
Australian who was an early developer of lattice-gauge theories of strong
interactions. He worked late into the night, using his vast array of colored
felt-tip pens to cover his desk with foot-high reams of paper filled with
lattice computation diagrams that looked like Tinkertoy models. Because
the university provided no heating on winter evenings when the temperature
dropped rapidly in the thinly insulated house that contained our office, Don
stubbornly turned up the heat to maximum during the day in a futile attempt
to 
amass 
warmth 
for 
the 
evening. 
Our 
office 
became 
virtually
uninhabitable, a smelly sauna by day and too cold to hold a pencil without
gloves at night, with only a brief transition between the two. Once, when he
was 
having 
a 
hard 
time 
with 
a 
woman, 
he 
became 
much 
more
communicative and commented to me, sadly but accurately, that he was one
of those people who became much nicer when they had troubles.
I found the English naturally xenophobic. In America it had been a slight
advantage to be South African; foreigners were welcome and considered
interesting. In England, you were just another inferior colonial. Eva’s
Slovak 
friend 
Zuza, 
who 
like 
her 
had 
left 
Czechoslovakia 
when 
the
Russians invaded, had attended Oxford and now taught at a nearby high
school. One day, speaking about an English colleague, she commented:
“You know, he’s really awfully clever, and should be headmaster, but he’ll
never manage it because his wife is Swedish.” This seemed to require no
explanation. I felt similarly discomfited about being Jewish. A graduate
student friend asked why we gave our son, Joshua, born at the end of our
stay in Oxford, “such a Jewish name.” In response I vainly cited Joshua
Nkomo as part of my African heritage. Another student told me how
“Jewish” the computer center was about the amount of time they gave you
on its machines. One day, my banana-slicing friend informed me that his
department 
would 
soon 
be 
hosting 
“some 
Jews 
from 
the 
Weizmann
Institute;” he was clearly quite confused about the difference between Jews
and Israelis. None of these people was trying to be offensive but, after a
year of this, I found myself unthinkingly hesitant to say anything that would
reveal my roots.
Many of the foreigners I knew had similar experiences. Savas, a Cypriot
friend who had lived in England since the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, had a
specially restricted British passport that would expire if he spent more than
three 
years out of 
the country. Soon I realized 
that 
any bias 
against
foreigners seemed vaguely plausible. When an Indian postdoc friend bought
a slightly battered secondhand car and parked it on South Parks Road near
the Clarendon Labs, I teased him by leaving him a note in which I
purported to be the head of the department; I informed him that the shabby
appearance of his car diminished the dignity of the grounds, and asked him
to therefore refrain from parking it so close to the laboratory. He took this in
dead earnest and ran off to speak to the head of the department before I
could catch him.
The university itself was stuffily bureaucratic, and when you angered
them they resorted to reporting you to your superiors. After two years in
Oxford and just two months before I was to return to New York, the chief
medical officer sent me a letter demanding that I be X-rayed to exclude the
possibility of tuberculosis. I wrote back to point out that if they were
seriously concerned about my putative tuberculosis, they should have X-
rayed me when I first arrived. He forwarded my response to the head of the
physics department, adding the following handwritten annotation: “Dear
Prof. ——, What charming people you have in your department!” I was
astonished that the professor himself then took the trouble to rebuke me.
Some experiences left lasting impressions. At one of my wife’s department
parties I was introduced to a Swedish woman who turned out to be the
daughter of the late Oskar Klein, the codiscoverer of the Kaluza-Klein
theories I had studied as an undergraduate in South Africa. Klein was also
the master builder of some of the pillars of particle theory, the eponymous
Klein-Gordon equation that described spinless quantum particles and the
Klein-Nishina formula for Compton (photon-electron) scattering.
Another visiting postdoc, Predrag Cvitanovic, lingered in my mind for
years afterwards as someone who seemed to do exactly what he liked, and
liked what he did. He was a darkly handsome Croatian who had left
Yugoslavia for the United States when he was a teenager. Predrag always
spoke as though he had lived a life of enviable independence, free of other
people’s conventions. He went cycling around the United Kingdom, danced
in Oxford night clubs, and acted in a production of Blake’s “Songs of
Innocence and Experience” that I watched at the University Parks one
evening. 
He 
wore 
tobacco-colored 
Adidas 
sneakers 
and 
blue 
denim
farmer’s dungarees over a checked shirt. When his mother visited him
briefly, he spoke about her as though she were just another of his fun-loving
acquaintances. I was always a little awed by his apparent self-sufficiency. I
recall suffering his scorn once at a very-Oxford garden party. I had uttered
some sentence that contained the phrases “my wife” and “my car,” and
Predrag issued a loud denunciation of people in the world who went around
talking about “my this and my that.” I accepted his display of extreme
independence at face value, never asking about the difficulties that must
have led to it. James Gleick, in his book Chaos: Making a New Science,
mentions that at precisely the time I knew him, Predrag was working on an
aspect 
of 
chaos 
theory 
that 
was 
critical 
to 
Mitchell 
Feigenbaum’s
subsequent breakthrough in the field. Gleick writes that Predrag was so
captivated by the field that he chose to work on it without telling anyone
that he was doing so, even though he had been hired to do particle theory.
Particle physicists, the ultimate reductionists, might well have looked down
on 
chaos 
theory, 
a 
field 
that 
ostensibly 
had 
nothing 
to 
do 
with 
the
fundamental nature of matter and could have been invented fifty years
earlier. When our son Joshua was born in 1977, shortly before we left
Oxford for New York, Predrag brought over a bottle of wine to celebrate,
and that was the last time I saw him at any length. I ran into him once more
in 1984, shortly after the birth of our daughter Sonya, when I was pushing
her in a stroller near the Great Lawn in Central Park. I always remembered
him as someone who seemed to be captain of his fate.
Sometime in 1976 Chris Llewellyn Smith brought Stephen Wolfram to
the department. A precocious Eton high school student of about sixteen,
Stephen was already writing his own research preprints on particle physics.
Those early papers were unexceptional, but the mere fact that he could
produce them at his tender age justifiably intimidated the Oxford graduate
students. I, luckily, was too old to be seriously threatened; he belonged to
another generation. Stephen attended Oxford and eventually became the
head of Wolfram Research and the creator of Mathematica™, a system for
doing symbolic mathematics on a computer that has become widely used by
physicists, mathematicians, and quants.
One afternoon I saw an advertisement in the Oxford papers for the
Anthroposophical Society, an organization of devotees of the late German
guru Rudolf Steiner, whose books had been recommended to me by Dr.
Louw in Cape Town eight years earlier. I had taken a glance or two at them
over the years and had been left cold. During a lonely day in my first few
months at Oxford I walked into the little Steiner bookstore and picked up
his Knowledge of the Higher Worlds. That night in bed I started to read it,
and was astounded and exhilarated to experience in the first few sentences
the clear and authoritative pronunciations on the complexity and confusion
of 
life. 
I 
never 
became 
more 
than 
a 
dabbler 
in 
the 
field, 
but 
the
anthroposophists’ books left a strong and uplifting impression on me,
despite their turgid, Germanically flavored English.
The anthroposophists didn’t reject the scientific approach approach to
knowledge, but they rejected the naive and arrogant materialism espoused
by so many scientists. Instead, as I understood it, they advocated the
reliance on careful external and internal scientific observation in the style
of Goethe. I liked the fact that Steiner referred to the soul as directly as
other people referred to material objects. He attributed a primacy to one’s
inner perceptions, regarding the interior world to be just as much a part of
reality as the exterior. I was pleased, a few years later, to read Bruno
Bettelheim’s Freud and Man’s Soul, in which he pointed out that Freud’s
original German texts had used simple, direct terms to describe the psyche
(the Greek word for soul). According to Bettelheim, it was James Strachey,
Freud’s English translator, who had replaced Freud’s resonant and easily
accessible Ich, Es, and Über-Ich, the German for “I,”“It,” and “Above-I”,
with the faux-medical, Latinized id, ego, and superego. It was also Strachey
who, referring to slips of the tongue, replaced the German “Fehlleistung”
with the pseudoscientific parapraxis.
My interest in the late Steiner intensified following the publicity he and
his disciple Owen Barfield received when Saul Bellow—then a Steiner
devotee, too—won the 1976 Nobel Prize for literature. The narrator in his
novel Humboldt’s Gift studies Steinerian meditation in Chicago, and Bellow
alluded to Steiner and Barfield in several articles and interviews. I went on
to read Barfield’s History in English Words, an enthralling account of his
theory of the development of human consciousness as extracted from the
parallel development of English vocabulary.
Steiner’s views were descended from even stranger turn-of-the-century
mystics, Madame Blavatsky and the Theosophists, and perhaps Gurdjieff,
too. He combined German romanticism with Eastern mysticism. He had
theories about everything—from childhood, education and teaching the
mentally retarded to art and organic gardening, and I liked whatever I was
able to understand. Mostly, whenever I tried to tell my friends about him, I
was met with scorn. Over the years, however, I discovered that other people
I admired had been influenced by Steiner and his school, in particular
several early twentieth-century painters, among them Vassily Kandinsky,
Arshile Gorky, and Arthur Dove, who drew on his lectures and sketches of
the higher worlds. While at an exhibition in a Soho New York gallery in the
late 1990s, I saw large photographs of the colored-chalk illustrations Steiner
had scrawled on a blackboard during his philosophical lectures. Later,
visiting 
clients 
of 
Goldman’s 
in 
Madrid, 
I 
dropped 
into 
the 
Thyssen
Museum, 
where 
I 
stumbled 
across 
several 
Dove 
paintings 
whose
resemblance to those illustrations was immediately apparent. In The Hague,
too, after a Euro-next options conference, I saw early Mondrian paintings of
lilies that were influenced by Steiner’s attempts to portray the spiritual
essence of living beings. More recently, I reread Gleick’s book on chaos
and was intrigued by his description of the influence of Goethe, Steiner, and
Schwenk 
(another 
Steinerian 
artist 
and 
observer) 
on 
the 
early 
chaos
investigators Feigenbaum and Libchard. All of them, as he told it, were
proponents 
of 
the 
same 
ideal: 
Careful 
independent 
observation 
and 
a
reliance on all of one’s own senses.
A year passed and I spent most of the summer of 1976 at the theoretical
physics institute at SLAC, returning to the United States in order to keep
my green card valid. Then, in my last year at Oxford, I began to work on
more fundamental theoretical topics with Tim Jones, a fellow postdoc. We
developed a theory that tried to explain the near similarity of the electron
and the heavier muon by postulating that Nature imposed an additional
permutation symmetry between the two particles. Our model was a simple
extension of the now popular standard model of weak and electromagnetic
interactions that, in addition, linked the electron to the muon. Over the next
few years I continued working on this class of models, extending the
permutation symmetry to include the newly observed tau lepton, an even
more massive sibling of the electron and muon. If our model was right, it
predicted that the muon, the tau lepton, and the b quark should all decay in
peculiar and previously unobserved ways.
Just as beauty in art and music often emerges from the tension of creating
something new within the limitations of an accepted framework, so it is that
many of the deep truths of theoretical physics emerge from the attempt to
describe 
Nature’s 
laws 
within 
the 
confines 
of 
very 
general 
guiding
principles. If one is lucky as well as clever, the principles will rule out
everything except the one true theory. The extensions to the standard theory
Tim and I worked on were not particularly profound, yet it was exciting to
be guessing at the existence of new symmetries and new particles—and to
dream of being right. I felt a hint of the potentially deeper joy that came
from trying to divine God’s laws, which was quite different from the
everyday happiness that came from the workmanlike comparison of other
peoples’ 
theories 
against 
other 
peoples’ 
experiments. 
I 
also 
sensed,
however, the potential of a much greater disappointment: One was most
likely to be wrong.
Thinking back, I am reminded of reading about Feynman’s excitement at
being one of several physicists to first guess the correct form of the parity-
violating 
weak 
interaction 
initially 
observed 
by 
Madame 
Wu 
and 
her
collaborators in 1957. Feynman’s more technical and singular work on the
renormalizability of quantum electrodynamics in the late forties was a tour
de force that created the formalism used by physicists for years afterwards.
Yet he was apparently more excited by his joint discovery of the true form
of the parity-violating weak interaction, because, for a brief period before
he communicated his results, he felt he knew something about the nature of
the universe that no one else did. This was the attraction of working on new
theories.
2
Then, in the autumn of 1976, with one year at Oxford over and one year
remaining, it was time to begin searching for my next position. Though the
department told me I could stay on a third year, it was clear to both Eva and
me that Oxford was only a temporary stopping point. A few weeks later at a
conference at the Rutherford Laboratories near Oxford, I was introduced to
Bram Pais, a professor at the Rockefeller University in New York. He knew
of my work on dimuons, which he and Treiman had so clearly trumped. I
knew interesting things about him, too. I recalled that years earlier, during
an invited seminar at Columbia, I had seen him casually and charmingly
deflect an intellectual attack by T. D. Lee. Chris Llewellyn Smith had told
me that Pais had been in hiding during World War II in Holland, much like
Anne Frank. Finally, I had coincidentally read bits of his doctoral thesis. As
a student at Columbia ten years earlier, I had been required to demonstrate
translation proficiency in two foreign languages used by scientists. Even as
long ago as 1967 that was an already archaic requirement, a relic of the
prewar era when many original physics papers were still written in German,
French, or Russian. Since I had studied Afrikaans, itself a sort of kitchen
Dutch, at school in South Africa, I decided to demonstrate my proficiency
at Dutch translation. Searching through the Columbia physics library for
Dutch papers to practice on, I stumbled across Pais’s PhD thesis on Finsler
spaces in differential geometry; he had written it in Dutch before he
emigrated to the United States in the late 1940s. I recalled it well, not only
because I had studied Finsler spaces in South Africa when I worked on
unified field theories, but also because he had dedicated his thesis “Aan
Mammie en Pappie” (To Mommy and Daddy). Speaking with him in
Oxford, I found it difficult to reconcile this childlike dedication with his
aggressively 
urbane 
persona, 
part 
New 
York 
street 
smarts 
and 
part
European suavity. Nevertheless, with a job at stake, I tried to be charming,
too, and told him I had seen both his thesis and the reference to his parents.
A few months later, I sent off a hopeful application for my next postdoc
to Pais at Rockefeller. I thought a position there would be perfect for my
wife and me: Our first child was on the way, we thought of New York as
home, and there were plenty of academic opportunities for Eva in New
York. But I could not count on a job where I wanted one, and so I applied to
many other schools. Then I waited.
A high school friend in the corporate world passed through Oxford that
spring and asked me pointedly where I would be in the fall. I said I was still
waiting to hear who would offer me a job. “You mean you really might
have 
no 
work 
at 
all?” 
he 
asked, 
demanding 
of 
me 
a 
degree 
of
uncomfortable explicitness that made me doubt his benevolent intent. My
nonacademic friends could not understand the code we postdocs lived by. I
once proudly told a South African friend that an article of mine had been
accepted in Physical Review Letters, one of the most prestigious journals in
the physics community. He asked me how much they paid me to publish
there. I was embarrassed to explain that it worked the other way: My
physics department had to pay the American Physical Society several
hundred dollars in page charges to see the paper into print. This was beyond
his understanding; he thought I was indulging in vanity publishing.
I was lucky that year. In the spring of 1977 I received a letter offering me
a two-year position at the Weizmann Institute in Israel. It was tempting, but
I wanted to go back to the States. A few weeks later, to my relief, a postdoc
offer from Rockefeller arrived and, since Eva could get work there too, I
immediately accepted. I was safe for a couple of years.
The 
summer 
of 
1977 
was 
England’s 
hottest 
for 
many 
years—each
weekend the pubs ran out of ice. We spent the long clear days punting,
picnicking, and working, until our son Joshua was born on August 1.
Because he was born abroad, Joshua was British, and was obliged to endure
an extended interview about his political beliefs and jail record at the
American Embassy in London a week later. I answered for him and he was
given his own green card. It had been a good two years, and a week later we
returned to New York, confident and happy.
Notes
1
Back in academic life after years on Wall Street, I now sometimes feel I
have been spoiled by the resources available at investment banks in the
1990s, where offices were plush, the costs of research journals were
unquestioned, the latest color printers abounded and you simply called
System Administration when you had a computer problem.
2
In the end, the fairly pedestrian theory Tim and I developed was not
right. But an ex-physicist I hired at Goldman, who had searched the
academic citation databases to see with whom he was coming to work,
told me that there are still occasional contemporary references in the
literature to the papers I wrote then.
...