Chapter 5
The Mandarins
Research and parenthood on New York’s Upper East Side
A good life, but ... the tensions of twin careers
The Rockefeller University was a little pocket of privilege. Its faculty and
postdocs lived on their academic salaries in elegant subsidized apartments
near Sutton Place on New York’s Upper East Side. Rockefeller was not so
much a university as it was a large research organization. Established in
1901 as a medical research institute, it evolved in the boom years of
American research funding into a luxuriously equipped and accredited
university that awarded only graduate degrees. In the expansion of the
1960s, 
Rockefeller 
hired 
not 
only 
biologists 
but 
also 
mathematicians,
logicians, philosophers, psychologists, linguists, and physicists. Then, in the
late 1970s, as the good times receded, they slowly rolled the odometer back
until they once again focused predominantly on biomedical work.
It was gratifying to tell people you worked at Rockefeller; it had a sort of
elitist ring because of the famous biologists and logicians who had worked
there. At Rockefeller in 1944, Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty discovered
that genes were made of DNA. The famous analytical philosopher Saul
Kripke worked there in the early 1960s. In the elevator of the Tower
Building where I worked, I used to see Mark Kaç, the stocky, red-faced,
bald, 
and 
charmingly 
accented 
Polish-Jewish 
mathematician 
whose
masterly lecture on drum shapes I had heard as a student at Columbia. At
that 
time 
I 
knew 
little 
about 
the 
Feynman-Kaç 
theorem 
that 
linked
Feynman’s view of quantum mechanical evolution to the solution of the
partial differential equations of quantum mechanics, statistical physics, and
options 
theory. 
Years 
later 
I 
read 
Kaç’s 
short, 
fascinating 
intellectual
autobiography; I discovered how much work he had done on defining the
nature of randomness. On the wall outside his office he had pinned a large
American 
Mathematical 
Society 
photo-poster 
of 
the 
attractively 
regal-
looking 
Polish 
mathematician 
Sonya 
Kovalevskaya. 
When 
I 
once
commented on it, he told me in his heavily accented English that she was
“certainly the best looking mathematician of either sex.”
Rockefeller seemed luxurious and aristocratic, an enclave of gardens,
auditoriums, high-rises, and labs peopled by intellectuals devoted to the
pursuit of knowledge. No teaching, no courses, no undergraduates—just
research. You felt like a philosopher-king in the middle of grimy 1970s
Manhattan. We lived in a university-owned high rise on York Ave., near
New York Hospital and only one block from my office and Eva’s lab. I had
a private office larger than any I have had before or since, with at long last
more than enough bookshelves, all wood-paneled and adjustable. My office
and our apartment both looked out on the East River, a heliport and the
FDR Drive. Looking through the windows at any time of the day or night,
one saw helicopters bearing presidential candidates or trauma victims while
cars snaked up and down the Drive and large boats cruised along the river.
If you narrowed your field of vision just enough to see only the traffic, it
resembled nothing so much as a 1950s comic strip about life in the city of
the future that my father used to read to me as a child.
In homage to Oxbridge, Rockefeller had no traditional departments of
study. Instead, individual professors ran their “labs.” There were several
senior professors of theoretical particle physics. Pais, a tiny man and the
most renowned professor, had hired me into his lab; his former collaborator
Mirza Abdul Baqi Bég, a burly Pakistani with a Pancho Villa mustache who
always cited the famous German-Jewish physicist Rudolf Peierls as his
mentor, ran another lab. In a much more low-stakes version of the Lee–
Yang quarrel, Pais was rumored to be at war with Bég, and we heard reports
of prolonged shouting matches. We also heard that Pais had made a bitter
enemy of Murray Gell-Mann, his 1950s collaborator, who, according to
George Johnson’s biography of Gell-Mann, always referred to Pais as “the
evil dwarf.” After what I had seen of Lee and Yang, I was not overly
surprised by these feuds.
How hard and how long you appeared to work at Rockefeller was
irrelevant; what counted was what you accomplished (and, perhaps, the
aura you radiated of how much you might accomplish). I went in to work in
the late morning and sometimes worked late into the evening, and spent
much time with Josh at both ends of the day.
I was happy at Rockefeller. Josh would wake very early and I would take
him out for long walks in his stroller through East Side neighborhoods,
stopping 
for 
early 
morning 
bagels 
or 
Egg 
McMuffins. 
We 
had 
long
conversations; I was always tired, but it was immensely satisfying. I was
ecstatic 
about 
child 
rearing, 
open 
to 
all 
sorts 
of 
only 
half-plausible
Steinerian theories 
of education. Steiner advocated 
talking to children
above their level of understanding, since, he argued, every word you said to
them when they first entered the world was above their level, and yet they
learned to understand. I did this naturally. What counted in the end was the
time spent with Josh. Watching him through his first two or three years, I
developed a great appreciation for the mystery of life and the strange
abstractness of time. He learned and remembered locations in space, the
names of objects, even adjectives and adverbs, without visible effort and
much more easily than locations in time (yesterday, tomorrow) or states of
color (red, green). Long after he could make sophisticated statements (“I’m
mad at myself!” he once exclaimed when he broke a toy), he would still
confuse yesterday with tomorrow and red with green. I began to half-
believe the theory that time and color were not as self-evident as they seem,
but rather inventions or discoveries made at some earlier point in human
history, like the discovery of farming, and then internalized and transmitted
to us through the generations. Perhaps, when a child remarks that both a
leaf and a sweater are green, he or she is isolating some immensely abstract
quality 
of 
two 
vastly 
different 
objects 
that 
was 
once 
beyond 
human
comprehension.
One of the more interesting Rockefeller physics faculty members was
Heinz Pagels, the author of The Cosmic Code, a popular book on quantum
mechanics. Heinz was the first person I ever saw combine a business suit
with white Adidas Country sneakers. He was charming and easy to like,
with a penchant for trying to impress people by referring to his rich social
life outside of physics. He was a humorously compulsive name dropper. He
could not simply remark “I had dinner with McNamara last night in
Aspen;” he felt obliged to add “. . . you know, Johnson’s Secretary of
Defense.” He was preternaturally attuned to conversational trends, with an
uncanny knack for anticipating the future trajectory of someone else’s
sentence, especially someone politically more powerful. Speaking with
Pais, Heinz could quickly complete a remark that Pais had just begun, first
grabbing hold of Pais’s train of thought in mid-sentence by echoing it softly,
and then, growing louder and bolder and swifter, taking ownership of the
sentence and running it to its conclusion as though it had been entirely his
idea. I liked talking to him. Sadly, he fell and died a few years later while
hiking in the mountains near Aspen where he and his family spent most
summers.
Heinz was friendly with Jeremy Bernstein, the physicist and New Yorker
writer whom I admired because he, too, seemed to be living a more rounded
life than most physicists I knew. Bernstein had written a paper or two with
Feinberg and T. D. Lee, and I had once been amazed to see T. D. harass him
during colloquium at Columbia. Bernstein had been writing books and New
Yorker articles on physics for the general public since the 1960s, starting
with a profile of Lee and Yang after they won the Nobel Prize. He wrote
honestly and clearly, trying hard to demystify the subtleties; as a result, I
think, his books never sold as well as those of the more sensational
popularizers of quantum mechanics and cosmology.
One of the great pleasures of academic life was that, after you had
fulfilled your teaching duties—and there were none at Rockefeller!—your
time and space belonged to you alone. I could work when and where I
liked; I could decide to take an afternoon off to run six miles in the park or
to see an exhibition at a museum, and then work that evening. Heinz and I
went to see Close Encounters of the Third Kind the weekday afternoon it
opened. Such small freedoms, together with the long vacations spent doing
physics in interesting places, gave one the sensation of being nonmonetarily
rich, and compensated for the low noncorporate salaries. My office was
sacred territory; no one walked in after knocking unless I shouted “Come
in!” If I locked the door from the inside, wanting to concentrate or be alone,
people behaved as though I were not there. I thought that this kind of
privacy was a right, but it was a privilege, much rarer than I realized. I was
naively shocked, a few years later at Bell Labs, to apprehend that both my
time and my office belonged to AT&T, and could be invaded at any moment
without apology or warning knock from my boss, my colleagues, or the
mail deliverer. Wall Street, of course, would lay claim to even more of my
personal space and time. Soon this academic freedom would end for me.
But in the meanwhile I did physics, joined the New York Road Runners
Club, ran along the East River Drive and around Central Park, and played
with Joshua mornings and evenings. It was a good life.
As 
my 
two 
years 
at 
Rockefeller 
rushed 
by, 
I 
grew 
increasingly
uncomfortably with Pais and sensed his disapproval. Perhaps he disliked
my relative lack of talent, or my lack of deference on subjects outside of
physics, something that he may have perceived as disrespect. I admitted to
myself that Pais was a much better physicist than I was, but I could not
make 
myself 
unquestioningly 
play 
second 
fiddle 
in 
conversations 
on
novels, movies, or world affairs. I felt obliged to behave as though my
opinions had as much right to be heard as anyone else’s, and it probably
was not a good idea. At the end of my first year at Rockefeller, Pais’s
secretary 
began 
putting 
job 
advertisements 
for 
other 
schools’ 
postdoc
positions in my pigeonhole in the departmental office, and I knew I was not
going to get a third year in his lab.
Eva, Josh, and I spent one month that summer at the Aspen Center for
Physics. Then, in September 1978, I took Pais’s hints to heart and started to
evaluate my situation. I was 33 years old and halfway through my third
postdoc; where was this peregrination going to end? I concluded I either
had to find a position as an assistant professor with a good chance of tenure,
or else get out of physics.
One day in 1978 I suddenly found myself flirting with the idea of going to
medical school and becoming a genuine doctor. My thoughts went pretty
much as follows: Physics is a harsh meritocracy. Most of the merit is
concentrated in a small number of legendary figures at the top. If you aren’t
Feynman, you’re no one. A competent, but not brilliant, research physicist
had little to feel good about; who needs what you provide? You could try to
get 
one 
of 
the 
rare 
full-time 
teaching 
positions 
in 
a 
small 
college
somewhere, but you had to like teaching more than I did to do it that many
hours a week. So, though it was good to think that I was dedicating my life
to what I thought of as transcendental pursuits, it had begun to feel
insufficient. In medicine, in contrast, I imagined that I could so some
palpable good merely by being competent.
I was not the only person who thought this way. Several medical schools
had recently begun to accept applicants with PhDs in the natural sciences
but no premed degree into their program. The University of Miami at Coral
Gables would transform you from a PhD to an MD in two years, summers
included, but in order to apply you need to have passed the Graduate
Record Exam (GRE). Now I had never taken the GRE; it was not even
administered in South Africa when I applied to Columbia in 1966. I
closeted myself in my don’t-come-in-without-knocking Rockefeller office,
telling no one what I was doing, and spent a week or two taking practice
GRE exams. I refreshed my undergraduate physics knowledge, learning the
values of natural constants and atomic physics energy levels by heart. I
revisited all the topics that I had not studied since my first year in graduate
school. Finally, after a sleepless night because Josh was ill and feverish, I
took the general and physics sections of the exam one entire Saturday on
the Columbia campus; I did well. Coral Gables sent one of their graduates,
an intern at Sloan Kettering near Rockefeller, to interview me, and I was
accepted.
I couldn’t do it—I simply lacked the courage to continue down this path. I
would have had to move to Florida for two years, and Eva, whose parents
lived in New York and whose career as a biologist seemed to have more
promise than mine as a physicist, had no reason to disrupt her work by
relocating to Florida. Though I paid the registration fee to keep my place in
the program, I knew I would probably renege. Indeed, a few weeks later,
pleading family difficulties, I called Coral Gables to back out. I would have
had a very different life had I become a practicing physician, and I still
envy people whose work does visible good.
During my last year at Rockefeller, I applied only for “real” physics jobs,
those tenure-track assistant professorships at schools that took research
seriously, 
or 
the 
few 
longer-term 
postdoc 
jobs 
that 
promised 
some
semblance of stability. I spent much of the winter traveling around the
country giving seminars at whichever department or national laboratory
would consider me seriously enough to invite me, and eventually landed
two assistant professorships. The first was at Illinois Institute of Technology
in Chicago, attractive mostly because of its proximity to Fermilab, which
had a giant high-energy particle accelerator and an excellent theory group,
too. The second was at the University of Colorado at Boulder, a good
school with a physics department of reasonable quality that had received
over one hundred applications for their one job in theoretical particle
physics. I interviewed there in December 1978 and then waited. After
several months, I heard I was third on their list. As time went by, first the
female postdoc at the top of their list obtained a better offer elsewhere; then
the second choice, a male postdoc with a wife in academia who had already
obtained a permanent position on the East Coast, declined in order to stay
near his family. The next offer came to me.
I liked Boulder much more than Chicago—I had the chance of a good
position in a beautiful town. Eva, however, had no immediate possibility of
her own long-term job there, and it made little sense for her to accompany
me there without one. So, knowing that I would likely go to Boulder on my
own that fall, I shut my eyes and accepted their offer. Though it wasn’t ideal
for her, Eva agreed to investigate academic opportunities in the Boulder
area. I hoped that some way or other she would soon find a reasonably
permanent position there or in one of the nearby Denver research hospitals.
This was the start of several difficult years. Despite Eva’s own career
demands, a part of me expected her to move to Boulder, and I was resentful
that she did not. In the meanwhile, the State of Colorado declared a faculty
hiring freeze, so that no permanent positions for her could materialize soon.
I had moved to new jobs in new cities and countries on my own with
regularity the past six years, but this time I would be leaving behind not
only a wife, but a son, too. I had been as much a part of his upbringing as
anyone over the past two years. At times I proposed that I should take Josh
with me to Boulder. Eva and I fought and scrambled. In July the three of us
left for a week-long vacation to Abaco, a small and isolated out-island in
the Bahamas. On our second day there, returning from an uncomfortable
trip on a rented motor boat to a nearby island, I found messages instructing
me to call both my home in South Africa and Eva’s parents in New York.
For years I had always left a vacation phone number with my family in
South Africa in case of emergency, so I knew immediately the significance
of the call: My mother had just died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ten
years after she first became ill. Isolated on Abaco, we had to charter a small
plane to fly from Palm Beach and then take us to the mainland. From there
we quickly returned to New York, and I flew off to Cape Town for the
funeral.
At the end of that summer I packed up my office at Rockefeller. On the
Friday at the start of the long Labor Day weekend, I flew out to begin my
work in Boulder. Eva was going to stay on at her postdoc job at Rockefeller
while she tried to find a faculty position in Colorado.
I had explained to Joshua that I had to leave for a while, but that I would
phone and write. In retrospect, I am not sure why I thought I “had to”; I left
because I felt compelled to continue doing physics. With the precocity of a
two-year old who had spent much of his first two years talking to adults,
Josh seemed to understand. Eva brought him down to the taxicab to say
goodbye to me as I left for Kennedy. As I got into the taxi, I saw him in
Eva’s arms; he leaned towards me and shouted urgently “Daddy, don’t go!”
On the flight I drew a picture of myself on the back of an airplane postcard
to send to him, and as soon as I landed in Denver I called him. I felt bitter at
having left and resentful about my situation.
...