Chapter 6
Knowledge of the Higher Worlds
A two-city family
New age meditations
Karma
Goodbye to physics
In 1979 Boulder’s downtown consisted of a pedestrian mall about six
blocks long and a couple of blocks wide, lined with hip clothing and hiking
stores and natural-food cafes. The summer weather was hot but dry; unlike
humid New York, you could feel the cool of the shade as soon as you
stepped into it. Winter was crisp. The canyons twisting out of the town and
into the foothills of the Rockies beckoned weekend hikers, and Frank
Shorter’s store was a mecca for long-distance runners. (It was Mecca
without 
the 
mosque—there 
was 
no 
Tartan 
running 
track 
anywhere 
in
Boulder, although there were many nice runs along the outskirts of the
town.) I had a clean white office in the Gamow physics building, and lived
a short downhill walk across the campus in a low-rise, dark, dingily wood-
paneled and linoleum-floored apartment in faculty housing. It was dated
and dusty, but perfectly okay.
Boulder was also home to the Naropa Institute, the trendy center for
Tibetan Buddhism in America headed by Chogyam Trungpa, Rinpoche,
whose final appellation signified something like the Venerable One. In the
summers, Alan Ginsberg ran their Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied
Poetics. In parallel, the back streets of the town were filled with a ragtag
bunch of small cults and their gurus; I particularly remember seeing the
recruiting center of the Guru Maharaj Ji, the smug-looking, twelve-year-old
Perfect Master who wore a Rolex. Mo Siegel had created Red Zinger and
founded the Celestial Seasonings Tea Company in Boulder; it was one of
the local legends of commercially successful hippiedom, eventually bought
by Hain for about $380 million in March 2000. The campus bulletin boards
and the local newspapers were filled with personals for neighborhood
masseurs, self-help, the Alexander method, and all sorts of other hope-
granting institutions of self-improvement. I had to admit I liked it.
Before moving to Boulder I had received a Department of Energy Young
Investigator Award in High Energy Physics Research. As a result, I had no
courses to teach that year, only some undergraduate problem sessions to
tutor. I was used to rising late, but Boulder ran on an early schedule. Many
restaurants opened only for breakfast and lunch, shutting down completely
by early afternoon, something I had never seen in New York. Every
Tuesday morning I had to start teaching at 8 A.M., one identical problem
session after another for about four hours. It shocked my unworldly system.
A late riser until then, I never succeeded in going to bed early the night
before, and I more or less wearily wasted the Wednesday of every week,
trying to get back to my normal working schedule.
The rest of the time I came into my office each day and tried to work on
various extensions of one of my models. But I was separated from family
and friends and miserable about having left Josh behind, so I worked with a
heavy heart. No one in the department spoke to me much during the day.
The graduate students were busy with their own lives, and the faculty
members, mostly married, worked hard from early in the day and then went
home. As time went by, I hit an impasse in the problem I was working on,
and there were no colleagues with similar enough interests off whom I
could bounce ideas. For months, every new attempt I made to circumvent
the sticking point failed; I needed hope most of all. If, early on a given day,
I had a sudden idea for a strategy that might solve my problem, I would quit
work immediately and go home. In this way I postponed disappointment for
one more day. I preferred to do nothing for a little while, and then go to bed
savoring the little dollop of optimism that my new strategy would work the
following day. Usually, my joy lasted only a few hours; each new method
failed pretty quickly.
When I had first arrived in New York, I appreciated the city’s street life
and diners as an antidote to loneliness. There were always people you could
watch coming towards you as you drifted in the ambient currents of people
along Broadway until all hours of the night: animated Spanish speakers,
bums, people cursing furiously to themselves. Boulder wasn’t quite as
lively, but the outdoor mall I discovered on my first night there was filled
with students and locals and not yet lined with the upscale chain stores that
came 
later. 
Instead, 
the 
mall 
had 
a 
small-scale, 
local-commerce 
aura.
Hippies with backpacks and sleeping bags slept outdoors in the small park.
Every block of the mall teemed with crowds centered around amateur
magicians, folk singers, guitarists, belly dancers, jugglers and acrobats, all
performing till 10 or 11 P.M. I went there almost every evening, strolling up
its length and down again ceaselessly, always alone, stopping for a snack,
eyeing the people and watching the shows. Much of the time, I liked
standing in the crowd around a hip-looking, mustachioed, good-humored,
short, dark guy who juggled, ate fire, swallowed swords, and often used the
word mojo. He never failed to cheer me up. Saturdays and Sundays, after a
run 
or 
a 
movie, 
I 
always 
returned 
there. 
Eventually, 
I 
began 
to 
be
embarrassed 
about 
being 
seen, 
over 
and 
over 
again, 
by 
the 
same
storekeepers, waiters, and waitresses. I was always solitary, always reading
a book. I had no alternative.
During the week I spoke little to anyone in the department. From Monday
through Wednesday or Thursday, I was able to do some physics. Then, as
Friday 
approached, 
I 
grew 
dread-filled, 
apprehensive 
about 
another
weekend with my own company; my capacity to work tailed off as I began
to scan the local papers and make obsessive plans for what I would do in
each segment of the day: pancakes at the communal center table at The
Good Earth, then a run, a little work, a walk on the mall, a foreign movie in
the evening.
My solitary personal life amplified the lonely activities of a theoretical
physicist and an academic. You were always banging your head against a
wall, trying to quell the need for company in order to keep studying or
calculating. I hated the solitude and envied people whose daily work
involved dealing with other people. Years later, I found daily life as a quant
to be richer and less isolated than life as an accademic. On any given day
you might speak to other quants, read theory, interact with traders, write
software, speak with clients, give talks and explain difficult concepts to
smart but relatively innumerate traders. Until I experienced it, I wouldn’t
have believed that an investment bank could be more collegial than a
college.
Shortly after I arrived in Boulder I went to the Buddhist center. Once I had
become fond of Steiner’s Knowledge of the Higher Worlds, I kept the book
around as a talisman, reading bits of it but only occasionally doing some of
the spiritual exercises it recommended. I had never managed to be really
rigorous about it, and grew to understand that you needed a community and
a 
school 
to 
keep 
you 
conscientious. 
Now 
I 
decided 
to 
attend 
a 
few
introductory lectures on Tibetan Buddhism given at the Dharmadhattu.
The classes were given by followers of the Rinpoche who were not hip at
all, but rather businesslike and regular-looking; part of their spiel was that
their practice was consistent with living in the world rather than retreating
from it. As far as I understood it, the meditation required sitting cross-
legged and then simply watching your thoughts as they bubbled up, as
though you were dispassionately watching someone else in a movie. You
paid unsentimental attention to your own fantasies, obsessions, worries,
desires, passions, and disappointments with the detachment of hearing
someone else’s problems. I liked it, but it was very difficult to do: In no
time at all you could suddenly find yourself worrying and strategizing
rather than watching. If you caught yourself getting involved, you weren’t
supposed to grieve or fight it, but simply recognize that distraction itself as
just another distraction to be observed. I started attending the Dharmadhattu
to meditate on some Sunday mornings, sitting for as long as I could. Their
regular 
session 
was 
three 
hours; 
someone 
walked 
silently 
around 
the
flamboyantly 
decorated 
Tibetan-style 
room, 
wordlessly 
correcting 
an
occasional case of bad posture; once an hour a gong rang, and everyone
followed the leader in walking silently around the room for a few minutes,
easing cramped muscles. I never looked at my watch; time was on someone
else’s hands.
The teachers warned you that sometimes, while meditating, you might see
strange visions or experience eerily supernatural sensations. Should that
happen, you were not to pay undue attention or to regard the vision as a
sign of spiritual progress. Instead, you were supposed to acknowledge these
as natural occurrences, similar to the other thoughts or feelings bubbling out
of your mind. Sometimes, indeed, the walls of the room seemed to shimmer
and glow for me, and I couldn’t resist feeling naively pleased and vain,
despite my teachers’ warnings.
At one of the introductory lectures I heard a man in the front of the room
ask a question that reminded me of my Steiner dabblings. His name was
Roy Hershey and he, like me, was relatively new to Boulder. My instincts
were correct; he had trained as a landscape gardener in Europe with the
Anthroposophists who, like Steiner himself, thought of plants as the living
hair on a living earth. I liked Roy and we had occasional dinners together.
Thin and lively and, unlike my physicist colleagues, not career-oriented, he
ate 
more 
slowly 
than 
anyone 
I 
have 
ever 
seen. 
He 
took 
his 
time,
unperturbed by hurried waiters and unapologetic about it; Roy could easily
spend an hour over a plate of pasta. Sometimes he harangued me about the
spiritual benefits of buying and preparing one’s own meals rather than
eating out, but most evenings I still succumbed to the temptation to eat in a
restaurant while reading a book rather than go home alone. One evening I
invited Roy over and cooked pork chops with orange sauce out of Pierre
Franey’s Sixty-Minute Gourmet; then we sat on my carpet and meditated
for half an hour. Roy claimed to meditate every day in his room in the
house he shared with a crowd of people. I envied his free time; he had no
job for most of the time I knew him.
Boulder 
had 
many 
spiritual 
groups 
“doing 
the 
work” 
together. 
Roy
attended one that met once a week, run by Francesca, a quietly tough
woman in her early thirties. She charged about ten or fifteen dollars per
person for the weekly group meeting in her house that Roy invited me to
attend, and I went along, despite my skepticism.
Before allowing me to join, Francesca required that I first have a private
consultation with her. On the appointed afternoon I left my office and went
to her house. I answered her questions and remember telling her about my
difficulties with living so far from my wife and child; I also told her about
my resentments. Then I started attending her meetings.
The group consisted of a range of people, from college kids to dropouts to
one middle-aged married man, each obviously there because of some
personal difficulties. Francesca had little money. She was nice-looking, but
had an unsettlingly bright yellow skin that, she said, was the consequence
of a diet rich in homemade carrot juice. At her meetings, she spoke about
attitudes to life, read to us from self-help books, elicited discussion, and
ended the evening by playing relaxation tapes. It was corny, but not
complete 
nonsense. 
In 
the 
matter 
of 
being 
happy, 
I 
could 
see, 
both
sophisticated and unsophisticated people need the same simple help. It was
humbling to be given what looked like trashy paperback self-help books
(The Mystic Path to Cosmic Power was the title of one, I recall), and see
through the clichéd style to the biblically simple truths of some of the
statements inside. Francesca worked hard at people. There was something
confrontational and unfair about the way she operated, bringing up private
facts she knew about you in front of everyone at the meeting, forcing you to
publicly confront unpleasant problems and your own contribution to them. I
wondered 
whether 
she 
enjoyed 
provoking 
these 
embarrassments, 
or
whether she did it because she thought it was good for you. It reminded me
of a verse in Blake’s Auguries of Innocence: “A truth that’s told with bad
intent beats all the lies you can invent.” Occasionally, an evening would end
with someone feeling really bad about something she had said, and she
would offer to stay up all night with the person involved and talk it through.
We knew little about Francesca’s personal life. Sometime in the spring of
1980 she left Boulder, to follow some man or perhaps to get married,
according to Roy, and then the meetings ceased. I had an uncomfortable
lunch with her at a vegetarian restaurant shortly before she left. As usual,
she was positive but hurtful. “What’s it like being a physicist?” she asked. I
started to bemoan the difficulty of being ambitious, the smart people in the
field, the struggle, the political battles, the need to move, the weariness.
“No, not your complaints, tell me about the good things, the positive parts!”
she insisted. It was sensible. I never saw her again.
The academic year that started in September 1979 sped by rapidly. In late
October Eva’s mother took a week off work to help us and brought Joshua
to visit me. He was two years and two months old, and I was immensely
grateful 
to 
her 
for 
visiting 
with 
him. 
Always 
foolishly 
scared 
of
disappointing Josh, I was quick to explain to him that this was only a
temporary visit, and that he would have to leave in a week. As usual he
seemed to understand everything. We spent a week visiting playgrounds
and the almost fabulous Grand Rabbit toy store, where, on his last day in
Boulder, I bought a Lone Ranger figure; I gave it to him as a gift and
distraction just before he and his grandmother left me and boarded the
plane. Then I was alone again. Eva’s mother called me from New York
when they arrived, knowing that I would be upset at their departure.
At Thanksgiving I went back to New York for the long weekend. As soon
as I arrived I anxiously explained to Josh that in three days I would soon
depart again. Our babysitter Helga, who looked after Joshua all day long,
told me that sometimes, as she wheeled him through the streets in his
stroller, he would point to some stranger who must have resembled me and
ask her “Is that my Daddy?” I had no knowledge of his inner mental states,
but I hurt to think that they might encompass a world in which I could live
in his neighborhood and yet not visit him.
At Christmas I returned to New York for a tense winter semester break. In
January I flew back to Boulder. Having to take care of Joshua on her own,
Eva developed back trouble and had to spend a week in the hospital, prone.
On weekends in Boulder I read Spinoza, taking some comfort from his
rigorous and unsentimental look at the logic of life’s unhappinesses. In May
1980 I returned to New York for the summer. As I began planning for the
course I would teach in the fall, I also began to consider that I might not
return there.
I 
spent 
the 
summer 
working 
in 
an 
office 
kindly 
provided 
by 
the
Rockefeller University, in whose postdoc apartment Eva, Josh, and I still
lived. I considered applying for physics assistant professorships in the New
York area, but there were too few of them and I was exhausted at the
thought of more comprehensive job searches. As midsummer approached, I
realized that I had no intention of going back to Boulder to live another year
like the one I had just endured.
Karma is the mechanical expiation of sin, according to Tolstoy, and at that
time I thought I understood its meaning. The universe wanted you to
renounce vanity, ambition, and pride, and embrace God. To do it voluntarily
would be best. But if you didn’t, then karma, the everyday workings of the
universe, would slowly and mechanically grind away at your vanities,
flaying off your skin of pride and self-importance, like potatoes in an
automated peeler, until you submitted.
What was I to do instead? The oil crisis and commodity inflation of the late
1970s and early 1980s had pushed interest rates up and had driven down the
value of the Treasury and corporate bonds that had long been a staple of
investment portfolios. The world of fixed-income investors longed for the
old days of price-stable products. Investment banks responded with the
financial-products boom of the late 1980s—Treasury bond futures, bond
options, CMOs, swaps, and swaptions, whose increasing mathematical
complexities 
ultimately 
led 
to 
good 
employment 
opportunities 
for
physicists in finance. If I had left Boulder and physics in 1984, Wall Street
would have beckoned clearly.
But in 1980, the early days of the energy crisis, the sirens that sang to
weary physicists as they sailed from postdoc position to postdoc position
were the energy and communications companies: Exxon Labs in Newark,
Schlumberger 
in 
Ridgefield, 
Connecticut, 
the 
Solar 
Energy 
Research
Institute (SERI) in Golden, Colorado, and Bell Laboratories at locations
throughout New Jersey. They were the Wall Streets of the 1980 physics
community.
The smallest deformation of my life in pure physics would have been a
job in applied physics, at SERI or Exxon or Schlumberger, working on the
physics of oil extraction or solar energy heating. But I was disappointed and
ashamed to leave physics, and arrogantly snobbish about its subfields. “If I
can’t do pure physics,” I thought to myself, “I’ll be damned if I do applied!”
If they expelled me from the monastery, I didn’t intend to worship God in
the world. I would rather quit religion forever.
Looking back, I was quite clearly wrong (although in the end fate took
care of me anyway). Everything is interesting when you examine it closely
enough to be able to reconcile its quality and its quantity; every field is
fascinating when you have sufficient familiarity with its nuances and begin
to try to bridge the gap between its form and its implementation. Applied
physics can provide an assortment of tasks, a mix of long-range and short-
term problems, a chance to instruct and entertain—in short, a refreshing
alternation between the obsessive world of solitary research and the lively
world of dealing with people.
“You can do what you want, but you cannot want what you want,” wrote
Schopenhauer in his Essays and Aphorisms, which I had started reading.
This was true, I thought. I could no longer want to do physics, much as I
would 
have 
liked 
to. 
In 
the 
struggle 
with 
myself, 
I 
got 
to 
savor
Schopenhauer’s hard, cynical view of the universe and its driving forces, all
phrased and condensed so beautifully that it read like poetry. I never forgot
it. His crystal analysis and elegant style far transcended Steiner’s clumsy
pronouncements of the truth given without explanation, but they gave a
much colder comfort.
In entering physics almost twenty years earlier and now in leaving it, I
was 
not 
alone; 
I 
was 
in 
part 
a 
follower 
of 
fashion 
and 
a 
slave 
of
circumstance. Despite my sensation of free will, I had been part of the
largest-ever graduating physics class at Cape Town in 1965 and the largest-
ever entering physics class at Columbia in 1966. Similarly now, I was part
of the tidal efflux. Several people I had known as students or postdocs in
physics had already left the field and were now working at Bell Labs.
Furthermore, a molecular biologist acquaintance of Eva’s, Lucy Shapiro,
had a husband, Harley McAdams, who worked at Bell Laboratories in
Murray Hill, New Jersey. Lucy suggested to Eva that I interview with him.
Reluctantly, I went out to spend a day there in the summer. I gave a half-
hour talk on an introduction to gauge theories and the research I had done,
trying hard to be qualitative and entertaining, and soon I had an offer from
them. 
According 
to 
my 
future 
friend 
Mark 
Koenigsberg, 
an 
applied
mathematician from MIT who was already working there but had been
away the day I interviewed, they liked me a lot. Mark had a penchant for
scientific metaphors and used to tease and flatter me for years afterwards
that 
since 
my 
interview 
they 
rated 
everyone 
else 
they 
questioned 
in
milliDermans.
After thinking about their offer, I decided to go back and learn more. So,
in the late summer of 1980 I again drove down the New Jersey turnpike and
turned west on the Route 22. Harley was a Department Head at Murray Hill
in the Business Analysis Systems Center, a group of genuine ex-rocket
scientists 
and 
engineers 
who 
had 
converted 
themselves 
into 
business
analysts in order to extend their careers when the space program funding at
Bell Labs had died out. He had broad interests and liked working there; it
gave you the chance, Harley told me, to delve into all sorts of things you
could 
never 
have 
studied 
otherwise. 
Personally, 
I 
wasn’t 
sure 
I 
was
interested in learning for the sake of learning; I was still ambitious for
achievement.
Though 
they 
offered 
me 
much 
more 
money 
than 
the 
University 
of
Colorado, I still yearned for physics, and asked Harley if I could work three
days per week, pro rata, and continue to do physics at Rockefeller the
remaining 
two 
days. 
He 
declined, 
sensibly 
explaining 
that 
it 
was 
an
arrangement that wouldn’t really work for them. In the end, I accepted the
job with the deepest misgivings and guilt. I was committing treason.
When I told a South African physicist friend that I was going to work for
AT&T’s Bell Laboratories, he uncharitably reminded me that eleven years
earlier, at the annual Washington, D.C., meeting of the American Physical
Society in 1969, we had marched to protest the antiballistic missile system
being built by AT&T. Now, he pointed out, I was going to work for them.
I wrote a letter to the chairman of the physics department in Boulder to
apologize for my decision not to return. A few weeks later, at the very end
of summer, Eva, Joshua, and I flew out to Boulder to pack up all my
belongings. Eva, perhaps fearful that I would hold her responsible for my
situation, spoke to the senior professor in the particle theory group, who
encouraged me to change my mind and stay on. But I was too far gone, and
could no longer even imagine preparing to teach particle physics that fall.
We took a brief, tense holiday in Steamboat Springs, where we watched a
real rodeo to Joshua’s great delight, and then returned to New York. I took
Josh to visit my family in Cape Town in October, and returned to start work
at the Labs at the start of November.
...