Chapter 7
In the Penal Colony
The world of industry—working for money rather than love
The Business Analysis Systems Center at Bell Labs
A small part of a giant hierarchy
Creating software is beautiful
Every morning I had to be at my desk at 9:00 A.M. Now, after seventeen
years on Wall Street, this sounds comfortably late; it seemed remarkably
early then. I woke up around 7 A.M., if Josh hadn’t woken me earlier. I ate
breakfast, skimmed the New York Times, took my car out of the garage
beneath our Rockefeller University apartment building, drove crosstown to
the Lincoln Tunnel, shot down the New Jersey Turnpike, turned west on
Route 24 at Newark, and headed for Murray Hill. It was a reverse commute,
and took about an hour. Coming back, even against the evening traffic,
required anywhere between one and two hours. The first morning, uncertain
of how long it would take to drive there, I arrived early and stopped at the
local McDonald’s for an Egg McMuffin, feeling romantically proletarian in
a Hopperish sort of way.
I had never commuted to work before. I had always worked at what I
wanted to work at. Now, I was like almost everyone else, doing what my
boss wanted me to do, for money. This was the real world.
For the first few weeks, as I drove down the turnpike, I nursed my sad
thoughts like a late-night whisky, taking small slow sips, trying to savor the
taste of my plight, seeking some perspective. At first, I attempted to treat
the entire commute as a meditative exercise. Then, after a few weeks, I
gave that up entirely and instead listened to news and music. What I liked
most was talk radio, then still in its infancy in 1980s New York. My favorite
driving station was WBAI, 1960s-style alternative radio that teemed with
opinionated underdog people who spoke for an hour about anything that
bothered them. I listened to Mike Feder, an Upper West sider who, once a
week, in Spalding Gray-style monologues, spoke ceaselessly and amusingly
about the more harrowing episodes in his life, and also about his occasional
epiphanic moments of happiness. Years later he worked at the Shakespeare
and Co. bookstore on West 81st and Broadway, now long since squeezed to
death by superstores and the Internet. I listened to Margot Adler talk about
women’s 
issues, 
and 
about 
her 
life 
as 
a 
Wiccan 
before 
it 
became
fashionable. A gay guy ran an hour of sentimental show music where I first
heard Karen Akers sing German-style cabaret. Sometimes, I listened to
classic 
novels 
as 
“Books 
on 
Tape.” 
But 
talk 
shows 
suited 
me 
best,
particularly talk by unhappy, oppressed people. I also enjoyed self-help
shows, especially Toni Grant on WABC in the late afternoon when I drove
home, who, with her beautifully enunciated liquid American accent, told
callers with problems to begin by taking “baby steps.” Those five years at
Bell Labs were the only period during which I ever listened to the radio for
longer than a few minutes.
People who had always worked to make a living told me that Bell Labs
was an ivory tower. To me, it was working for money. I had earned about
$18,000 dollars at Boulder. I started at $42,000 at the Labs, moving up to
$49,000 within half a year. But it felt like much less in New York, and the
extra pay did little to relieve my loss of direction in the world, though I
tried to pretend otherwise.
Ever worried and compulsive, I took AT&T’s manifold rules much more
seriously than they did. I was supposed to be there each morning by 9 A.M.
One day a faulty gas pump caused my car to falter en route, and I could see
I was going to be at least ten or fifteen minutes late. Panicked, I stopped at a
public phone near the highway at 8:45 A.M. and called my boss’s secretary
to warn her of my delayed arrival. When I got there only half an hour later,
she scathingly told me I was insane to think anyone cared. But I had been
paid to pipe, so I felt I must play every note of the tune they called. I
resented this so pathologically that I paid more attention to the letter than
the spirit of their rules. Once, I needed a morning off to go to Joshua’s
nursery school and tried to explain it to Harley. He was kind enough to tell
me that he didn’t even want to know about this sort of stuff. But I was too
literal and immature to take advantage of these sensible freedoms. Years
later, after I left, I realized that I could have done whatever I liked there,
and for a very long time too, before anyone would even have noticed. My
friend Mark Koenigsberg, shortly before he left for Salomon Brothers in
late 1986, spent a good part of his time studying books on options theory,
trying to find a closed-form solution for the value of the American put. I
doubt anyone fully knew what he was doing. While it would have been a
great discovery, it would have brought no direct commercial value to the
Business Analysis Systems Center. But then, what would have?
The Business Analysis Systems Center. Or was it the Business Systems
Analysis Center? I truly cannot remember. It consisted of about a hundred
people in Building 5, all of us ex-scientists of various kinds, now thinly
retreaded 
to 
provide 
internal 
consultation 
on 
various 
AT&T 
business
problems that might be amenable to mathematics. We were ruled over by
our director, Jim Downs, a former applied mathematician in his late forties
who had by some latter-day miracle of loaves and fish come to lead this
fiefdom.
Everyone was disproportionately fearful of Downs. He seemed to regard
social intercourse as a competitive Olympic event, perfecting his own jiu-
jitsu style of conversation that aimed to quickly unbalance his opponent. He
accomplished this by making aggressively oracular and cryptic statements
on 
whatever 
topic 
was 
under 
discussion. 
To 
my 
chagrin, 
his 
senior
employees evangelized about his mysterious wisdom. I recently heard
Roger Lowenstein, a reporter for the Wall Street Journal and author of
When Genius Failed, comment that John Meriwether “never played unless
he had an edge.” Downs believed he had an edge everywhere. He had to
dominate every exchange. Any fact you knew, any interest you had, was a
glove 
slap 
that 
required 
him 
to 
retaliate 
and 
outduel 
you. 
If 
Mark
Koenigsberg made a remark about solving a boundary-value problem in
heat conduction, Downs responded with a Southern drawl about something
clever (but unrelated) he claimed to have done with Fourier analysis twenty
years earlier. When he saw a group of us preparing to depart on a lunchtime
long-distance run, he joined us at once, despite having just completed his
lunch. He pushed ahead at a furious pace, determined to subdue every
young or empty-stomached one of us, until he faded out with cramps. I felt
uncomfortable around him and kept my distance, but once, when we got
involved in a pretentious conversation about meditation as a route to
achieving selflessness and humility, he more or less insisted that he was
more humble than the rest of us. The irony in this argument almost escaped
me, and certainly ran far ahead of him. I suppose that all he really suffered
from was an exaggerated form of the insecure competitiveness that afflicts
many scientists and academics, but it made him a disquieting manager.
My 
assigned 
supervisor 
was 
Ron 
Sherman, 
one 
of 
four 
supervisors
beneath Department Head Harley. Ron was a rotundly genial PhD in
Engineering who had coauthored an important Lab study on EMP (Electro-
Magnetic Pulse), the sudden surge of Faraday electrical currents and heat
that would occur in the wires of the national telephone network as a result
of the intense magnetic fields induced by nuclear explosions. A nuclear
attack might therefore melt and destroy the network, even if it left people
unharmed. Ron was one of the gentler people in our center, good-humored
and kind despite an earlier family tragedy that left him a single parent of
two young sons, one of whom was already writing well-received plays. Ron
seemed to me to lead an enviably charmed life at the Labs, setting his own
arrival and departure schedule imperturbably. He had broad interests, and
year by year accumulated more degrees: first a PhD in Engineering, then an
Executive MBA, and finally, I think, a law degree. Clerical and secretarial
help were sparse at the Labs, and Ron seemed to take some small amount of
glee in occasionally giving me long documents to xerox for everyone in our
group, late in the day when I was preparing to leave. Sometimes he asked
me 
to 
take 
minutes 
at 
group 
meetings, 
complimenting 
me 
on 
my
handwriting; sad to say, it succeeded in making me feel simultaneously
important and infantile.
Ron and I were but two nodes in a very large hierarchy that contained not
only the whole Labs, but also AT&T, Western Electric, and God-knows-
what-else that belonged to the Bell System in those predivestiture days.
There were roughly four MTS (Members of Technical Staff, like me) under
each supervisor; there were four or five supervisors (like Ron) under each
department head like Harley, and four Harleys under each Jim Downs.
From 
there 
the 
tree 
branched 
upwards 
to 
higher 
and 
higher 
levels,
eventually 
encompassing 
the 
whole 
company. 
If 
they 
extended 
the
organization by only four more levels, I used to think, they could employ
every adult in the United States.
Every new employee grew to be instinctively aware of these reporting
levels. When you first joined the organization, someone quickly explained
to you that the Bell Labs level structure was shifted up by half a level from
the more or less parallel structure at AT&T, and that, therefore, we lowly
MTS at the bottom of the Labs totem pole were actually almost supervisors
on the AT&T scale! Often, in the five years I spent there, I heard someone
proudly say “I just came back from a four-level meeting!” I never found out
whether this meant that the meeting was important enough to have been
graced by the presence of someone from exalted Level 4, or whether it
meant that the meeting was so diverse that there had been people from four
different levels there simultaneously. Levels with low numbers were more
auspicious, and you trembled at their mysterious splendor. Jim Downs used
to say that you could never comprehend the activities of someone more than
one level above you; the activities of someone two levels higher were
destined to be forever a mystery, unless you got promoted. It sounded very
Kafkaesque. What especially impressed me about Wall Street in general and
Goldman Sachs in particular, when I came to work there five years later,
was the absence of reverential fear. At Goldman, at that time, it was
relatively easy to approach important (and wealthy) people if the business
seemed to require it. As an example, I spoke to Bob Rubin a couple of times
in my first years at Goldman, when he was head of Fixed Income.
The 
Bell 
System 
was 
a 
massive 
bureaucracy 
of 
about 
one 
million
workers, linesmen to lawyers. It had its own enormous encyclopedia of
rules and regulations. I once watched one of my supervisors search through
the book of appropriate practice to find out what to do about my call to New
York City jury duty. Like the army, Bell stripped you of all external
trappings of merit, status or honor, and then imposed its own—Supervisor,
Department Head, Director, and so on. Somehow, one understood that
business 
cards 
could 
carry 
no 
external 
academic 
credentials; 
Andy
Salthouse, an ex-physicist and passionate amateur astronomer and asteroid
hunter who joined the Labs a little before me, explained that this was
necessary in order to avoid the tension that might otherwise occurs when an
MTS with a PhD reported to a supervisor with only a master’s degree.
1
In physical space, the Business Analysis Systems Center was located in
prefabricated barracks at the upper edge of the prestigious Murray Hill
campus, the most interesting and academic part of the Labs. In logical
space, we were part of Area 90, Network Systems. Area 10, the lowest
number, was the crown jewel, a pure research center where first-rate
scientists and engineers carried out advanced research without the burden of
having to seek government funding. As a regulated monopoly in those
precompetitive days, AT&T could charge its consumers whatever it needed
to pay the bills.
Area 10 was absolutely world-class in computer science and physics.
Brian Kernighan, Dennis Ritchie, and their coworkers had invented the now
legendary C programming language and the UNIX operating system there,
and then built the entire suite of programming utilities that carried nerdily
cute names like awk, ed, sed, finger, lex, and yacc. Area 10 had played a
large role in evangelizing the dual view of programs as both tools and text,
written not only to control electronic machines but also to to be understood
and manipulated by people. At the labs people were proud of programming
and viewed it as an art. In physics and engineering the Labs was an
experimental and theoretical powerhouse, producing research in electronics
and 
information 
theory 
that 
made 
possible 
many 
of 
the 
subsequent
advances in communications. Bardeen, Brattain, and Shockley had invented
the transistor there in 1947, and Claude Shannon published his landmark
paper “A Mathematical Theory of Communication” in the Bell System
Technical Journal in 1948. There were fundamental discoveries made, too–
Penzias 
and 
Wilson 
won 
the 
Nobel 
Prize 
for 
discovering 
the 
cosmic
radiation left behind by the Big Bang, as predicted by Robert Herman. Even
during 
the 
period 
I 
worked 
there, 
Horst 
Stormer, 
now 
at 
Columbia
University, did the research on the quantum Hall effect that recently won
him a share of the Nobel Prize. Near the end of my stay there, in 1984,
Feynman came to give a talk on the theory of quantum computing, a
technology then just emerging into infancy. The economics research group
in 
Area 
10, 
later 
disbanded, 
was 
also 
renowned; 
Robert 
Merton 
had
published his definitive paper “Theory of Rational Option Pricing” in the
1973 Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science.
I envied anyone and everyone in Area 10 their apparent freedom, and
rued my self-perceived lack thereof. For several years I commuted in a
shared minivan from Manhattan to Murray Hill and back, and met a number
of other Members of Technical Staff who, like me, worked in the applied
areas of the Labs. I noticed that engineers who had come to the Labs
straight from graduate school became rapidly accustomed to the corporate
bureaucracy and pettiness; they had known nothing better. But those of us
who had previously been independent scientists always chafed at the civil
service atmosphere, and many of us ultimately left.
Bill Toy, with whom I collaborated a few years later at Goldman, had
been a particle experimentalist whose PhD advisor, Jerome Friedman, later
won the Nobel Prize for discovering the quark structure in the deep-
inelastic electron-nucleus scattering experiments that had stimulated my
PhD thesis work. Bill had also worked at the Labs prior to coming to
Goldman and had experienced similar frustrations to mine. Our trouble was
that we wanted to get things done. The Labs could be fun if you were the
kind of person who was simply happy to tinker away with expensive up-to-
date equipment, but we didn’t function that way. I wanted the satisfaction
that comes from creating something. But in Building 5, so many of the
projects I worked on ended in a confused impasse. You did some work; you
wrote some internal document; Harley told Jim Downs about it; he then
pronounced it a failure or a success for some cryptically inarticulate reason
you couldn’t understand. We were forbidden from publishing it because it
was proprietary; yet often, no one inside the company had any real use for
it. 
I 
was 
increasingly 
sympathetic 
to 
whomever 
coined 
the 
slogan
“information wants to be free.”
I detested the cult of manageriality at the Labs. I was thirty-five years old
when I arrived there, and very quickly realized that you got no respect in
Area 90 unless you were a manager. In my previous life in physics, talent
and skill were everything—you felt sorry for people who ceased creating in
order to become administrators. But at the Labs, talent seemed to be a
commodity, fodder for managers to buy and redistribute. Supervisors were
actually 
forbidden 
from 
doing 
“technical 
work” 
on 
the 
grounds 
that
competing with their employees in this way was demoralizing. Instead,
managers became experts at intracorporate maneuvering. They seemed to
have forsaken their abilities for an incestuous familiarity with the system
which was valuable only in that organization, at that time.
I felt old at the Labs. My colleagues treated all forty-year old MTS as
over the hill. Against my best intentions, I began to look at them and myself
in the same way. I could not imagine living like that for the next twenty
years. When I eventually went to work at Goldman, I was relieved and
exhilarated to discover that the firm appreciated solid skill and talent.
Traders, salespeople, programmers, options experts—they all worked with
their own hands and made a very good living.
It was also at the Labs that I first witnessed political correctness. It was
only 1981, but once a year we were compelled to attend a day-long, off-site,
group therapy-style meeting run by external consultants. There, we were
trained in color and gender sensitivity. We played group games in which
you had to declare in public what kind of animal you identified with, and
why. (The otherwise meek woman who became my supervisor a year later
said she identified with lions, because it was the females in the pride who
killed.) We listened to music and described the feelings it evoked. We acted
out skits representing hypothetical crises in the workplace. In one episode,
for example, we were told that a crowd of male and female MTS had gone
for lunch to a nearby offsite restaurant, without their supervisor. While
there, one of the male MTS told a dirty joke. A woman MTS felt demeaned.
Should she have (a) kept quiet, (b) confronted the male, or (c) spilled the
beans to her supervisor on their return to the Labs? I don’t recall the correct
answer.
You were supposed to bare your soul about your prejudices in these
extracurricular sessions in front of your colleagues and supervisors, and
then return to work with them again the next day. The apparent justification
for this invasion of privacy was that your personality and prejudices could
affect the quality of your work and were therefore a legitimate corporate
concern. I detested this conflation of the personal and the corporate. Just
because I worked for them didn’t mean I had to discuss my internal hang-
ups in public one day a year. Nor did I especially want to hear about theirs.
At the tail end of the dot-com bubble, twenty years later, I was dismayed
that for a brief period even Goldman Sachs ran rife with consultants
successfully 
peddling 
their 
quackishly 
trendy 
prescriptions 
for 
team
building.
Meanwhile, in Building 5, conformity of ambition ran wild. Several of the
women there, ex-scientists like the rest of us, were avidly reading Dress for
Success and following its precepts. They began wearing mannish suits with
padded shoulders and silk neckties. One female MTS warned me never to
wear a brown suit, speaking with an earnestness so great that I have never
been able to buy a brown suit since, for fear that she really knew something
significant. One day, nevertheless, she cried in my office while telling me
about her personal problems. No one seemed to know whether to be
businesslike or empathetic. At some time in the middle of my stay there,
Bell Labs itself was rent apart by the breakup of the Bell System and the
divestiture of the Baby Bells. I remained with AT&T, while some of my
colleagues were sent off to Bellcore, the newly formed telecommunications
laboratory of the Bell Telephone Companies.
The inefficiencies and irritations of working at the Labs could fill a book,
but the stupidity that most illustrates the picayune nature of the bureaucracy
was the command, from somewhere above, sometime in 1984, to enter our
overtime hours (at work or at home) onto the time cards we filled out each
week, even though there was no pay for overtime at all. This was simply an
inducement to suck up to your management by lying to them about how
much 
work 
you 
did 
above 
and 
beyond 
the 
call 
of 
duty. 
It 
was 
an
irrationality worthy of the “Dilbert” cartoon, whose creator Scott Adams,
unsurprisingly, spent several of his working years at Pacific Bell.
But there were some good points to life there, too. The Center was filled
with ex-physicists and mathematicians, part of the late-1970s zeitgeist that
caused scientists to stream out of academic life and into corporations. Many
of them were particle physicists I had known before. I grew friendly with
Mark Koenigsberg, who loved puzzles of any kind. He was absent the day I
first came to interview, but soon after I started work we bonded over a
mutual dislike of many of the same things. Six months after I left the Labs
for Goldman, he followed me out the door to Salomon Brothers. Mark and I
became friendly with Larry Kegeles, a physicist about my age whom I had
met a few years earlier when he was a PhD student in general relativity at
the 
University 
of 
Pennsylvania. 
Steve 
Blaha, 
another 
former 
particle
physicist I had met at various conferences over the previous seven years,
had come to work in the Center, too, giving up his academic post at
Williams College. He too left the Labs a few years later to become a
software consultant and author in the Boston area.
Mark, Larry, and I banded together. Once I dragged them to the Ethical
Culture Society in New York to listen to a talk by Chogyam Trungpa
himself. Larry, like me, had an affinity for the offbeat, and he became
interested 
in 
Reichian 
analysis. 
Years 
before, 
I 
had 
seen 
Dusan
Makeveyev’s funny movie about Reich, W.R.: Mysteries of the Organism,
and enjoyed its Slavic sensibility and clever equation of sexual and political
repression. Now I read Myron Sharaf’s Fury on Earth, a biography of
Reich’s strange brave life.
Life at the Labs was lax, and we went out to eat long lunches at low-
quality Jersey restaurants on Route 22. When we occasionally took visiting
interviewees out to dinner, the rendezvous of choice was L’Affaire, whose
pretentiously sophisticated name told you everything about the people who
ran it, the food they provided, and the people who took us there. Once,
sitting in my car in the parking lot outside Building 5 during a prolonged
downpour after a long lunch off premises, Mark, Larry, and I pondered the
famous two-condom combinatorial problem that spread through the Center:
Two (heterosexual) couples decide to have group sex with each other in
all possible male-female combinations. They have only two condoms,
and everyone is scared of catching some venereal disease. How can
they manage four couplings with only two condoms? The first man puts
on two condoms, one over the other, and then sleeps with the first
woman. Only the outer surface of the outer condom and the inner
surface of the inner one has had contact with any potentially infectious
surface. The man removes the outer condom and sleeps with the second
woman. The second man then dons the removed outer condom whose
inner surface has until now had no contact with anyone’s skin, and
sleeps with the first woman, whose only contact has thus far been with
the outside of the same condom. Finally, the second man dons the
second condom over the one he is already wearing, and sleeps with the
second woman, who again only experiences a condom she has already
touched.
It was impossible to resist the temptation to generalize to N couples.
Larry was a serious marathoner, and he and I went running together
several 
times 
a 
week 
at 
lunchtime, 
part 
of 
a 
small 
crowd 
of 
avidly
compulsive runners at the Labs. We would walk down to the small shower
room that belonged to the Building and Grounds staff, change, warm up on
the grass, run for 30 to 45 minutes, warm down, stretch, shower and
change, and then eat lunch in the cafeteria. It took close to two hours, and
put a sizeable dent in the workday, especially if you worked nine to five,
but no one seemed to care. I have never before or since been that fit or that
fast.
We held an occasional educational seminar in our group and once, early
in 1981, Larry gave a talk on the Black-Scholes theory, which I had never
heard of up to that point. I became briefly fascinated by the fact that options
payoffs 
involved 
the 
algebra 
and 
calculus 
of 
Heaviside 
(indicator)
functions, which I had used in particle physics; later I came across an early
paper 
by 
Mark 
Garman 
of 
Berkeley, 
who 
exploited 
these 
same
relationships. But options theory was largely irrelevant to what we did at
the Labs, and my temporary interest quickly faded. I understood nothing
about hedging or risk-neutrality, and I paid no attention to the stock market.
Several years later, Larry, Mark, and I were sent to a two-week MIT
executive summer session on finance, taught by Stuart Myers from his
textbook with Brealey. We lived in a campus dorm and luxuriated in our
freedom from corporate life, running on the MIT track in the late afternoons
and eating in Cambridge in the evenings. Myers’s course focused on the
Capital 
Asset 
Pricing 
Model, 
and 
I 
was 
captivated 
by 
the 
apparent
similarity between financial theory and thermodynamics. I saw a perhaps-
too-facile correspondence between heat and money, temperature and risk,
and entropy and the Sharpe ratio, but have never since figured out how to
exploit it. The course was brief and intense and required more work than we
put into it. One of the lecturers was Terry Marsh, now a Professor at
Berkeley and a founding partner of the financial software firm Quantal. At
that time he was just beginning to make his reputation, and I was always
happy to run into him years later at professional finance meetings or when I
gave a seminar at the Haas business school at Berkeley.
I viewed AT&T as a job, and a disappointing one at that, but Larry had a
strong spiritual streak, and believed that we were all playing a part in
improving 
human 
communication. 
I 
thought 
that 
laughable 
then, 
but
perhaps on some level he was right. Nevertheless, he, Mark and I—all
stifled—were gone within five years.
What I did like above all else at the Labs was the beauty of creating
software. Ignorant people called it “coding,” as though there was something
mechanical about it, the mere uncomprehending translation from one set of
symbols to another. People who liked it unabashedly called themselves
“programmers.” Whatever you called it, I discovered that programming was
one of the purest activities; it was truly architecture with words. By some
strange 
unanimity 
of 
opposites, 
both 
my 
scientist 
and 
business-world
friends were condescending about programming—they thought it inferior to
doing physics or making money. But I fell in love with it.
When you program well, you are trying to design a machine to perform a
task. You design with a man-made programming language—FORTRAN,
Lisp, C++ or Java, for example. Programming is not that different from
instructing a friend to perform a task for you. The big difference is that the
computer is much more literal than any friend, and so every detail of the
task must be specified as though the computer knows nothing about the
world.
Until I arrived at the Labs in 1980, I had never realized how elegant and
challenging programming could be. I had never used a computer terminal.
During my student and postdoc years, all my programs had aimed merely to
obtain the numerical values of complicated mathematical formulae, over
and over again; I thought of the computer as a glorified adding machine.
My only exception had been at the University of Cape Town, in 1965, when
I used punched cards to enter a vocabulary into the machine and then
created randomly generated short poems. I had always thought of that effort
as a childish lark.
But 
at 
AT&T 
in 
1980, 
the 
whole 
firm 
was 
embracing 
C, 
the
simultaneously graceful and yet practical language invented by Dennis
Ritchie about ten years earlier at Murray Hill. He had devised C to be a
high-level 
tool 
with 
which 
to 
write 
portable 
versions 
of 
UNIX, 
the
operating system also invented there by Ken Thompson and Ritchie.
2
Now,
everything from telephone switching systems to word-processing software
was being written in C, on UNIX, all with amazing style. Eventually, even
physicists, who are generally interested only in the number of digits after a
decimal point, began to forsake ugly utilitarian FORTRAN for poetically
stylish C. Programming was in the late stages of a revolution about which I
was just beginning to learn.
The 
revolution’s 
credo 
demanded 
that 
programs 
be 
humanly
comprehensible texts of information. This had not always been the case;
because programs had to be stored in expensive and limited computer
memory, programmers had traditionally concentrated on making them as
concise as possible. They bragged about writing “tight” code that was terse,
condensed, and cryptic, even confusing. It was OK as long as it ran fast, the
thinking went; style was almost irrelevant and content was king. Programs
were therefore error-prone as well as hard for humans to understand and
modify—implicitly, 
they 
were 
written 
for 
the 
computers 
that 
would
mechanically execute their commands. Hard to create, programs tended to
have surprisingly long subsequent lifetimes during which they required
expensive maintenance, modification, and enhancement. This was the set of
circumstances that caused the anxiety behind Y2K.
What are you doing when you program? You are trying to use a language
to specify an imagined world and its details as accurately as possible. You
are trying to create this world on a machine that can understand and execute
only simple commands. You do this solely by writing precise instructions,
often 
many 
hundreds 
of 
thousands 
of 
lines 
long. 
Your 
sequence 
of
instructions must be executed without ambiguity, by an uncomprehending
automaton, the computer, and yet, in parallel, must be read, comprehended,
remembered and modified by you and other programmers. Just as poetry
strives to resolve the tension between form and meaning, so programming
must resolve the conflict between intelligibility and concision. In this
endeavor, the language you employ is critically important.
At the Labs, one regarded code-writing itself as a task in need of tools.
They encouraged programmers to view each specific program they tackled
as an instance of a class of more generally useful programs, and then to use
the computer to create that class. They devised programs to write part or all
of their programs. The UNIX community at the Labs had created, out of
love rather than duty, a suite of editorial and analytical tools to help write,
examine, 
and 
modify 
their 
programs. 
Thompson 
and 
Ritchie’s 
UNIX
programming environment used the computer not merely as the automaton
to execute the program, but, just as importantly, as the tool to create it. The
computer was not just the hammer, but also the forge with which to create
the next-generation hammer.
Bell Labs Members of Technical Staff didn’t just churn out programs;
instead, they thought about the subtasks (reading input, solving equations,
formatting output, for example) that the program needed to do. Then, they
wrote little, special-purpose programming languages that could be used to
generate these subunits of the larger program. Finally, they used these little
languages to create the entire program itself. They were always generalizing
from tasks to tools.
Because AT&T was a regulated utility, forbidden from making a profit by
selling software in competition with IBM and Digital, the Labs distributed
these tools freely to universities. This dissemination produced an entire
generation of programmers who thought of programming not as a chore, but
as a literary endeavor with the computer as medium. How lucid, elegant and
structured your program looked was as important as how efficiently it ran.
Kernighan and Plauger wrote a famous and influential book in the 1970s
called The Elements of Programming Style, its title a homage to Strunk and
White’s classic monograph on writing well, The Elements of Style. They
were 
part 
of 
a 
movement 
that 
perceived 
programming 
and 
code
development as art.
This 
culture 
was 
already 
widespread 
when 
I 
arrived 
at 
the 
Business
Analysis Systems Center. All new employees learned UNIX and its Bourne-
shell scripting language, as well as C for programming, the S language for
statistics, and the line-formatting text editor ed. I remember the excitement
of learning to use Bill Joy’s visual text editor vi shortly after it was released.
To their credit, the Center organized a sequence of master’s-equivalent
courses on computer science, taught mostly by professors from Columbia
University in New York City. I learned software design and algorithms from
John Kender, a mild-mannered, low-key expert on vision software; we
learned 
database 
theory 
from 
David 
Shaw, 
who 
later 
founded 
the
investment boutique D. E. Shaw & Co., as well as the first free email
service, Juno. At D. E. Shaw, David employed Jeff Bezos, who later left to
found Amazon.com.
David was already a free-wheeling entrepreneur. He had run a software
company while studying computer science at Stanford; when I met him he
still radiated a sloppy academic demeanor that didn’t completely jibe with
his business-oriented self-assurance. He was an early incarnation of the now
ubiquitous capitalist academic. In his back trousers pocket he carried his
appointments in a small leather DayTimer that had conformed to the shape
of his body. The book had been manufactured in Pennsylvania and was very
American middle manager, with its one-month spiral-bound inserts with
space 
for 
lists 
of 
Appointments 
and 
Things 
To 
Do. 
It 
looked 
very
unprofessorally businesslike, an early precursor of soon-to-arrive European
Filofaxes and, a decade later, American Palm Pilots.
David clearly thought big. In those days he was planning what he called
“NonVon,” 
a 
parallel-processing 
computer 
comprised 
of 
many 
small
processors and memory units. It was to be the antithesis of the standard
computer with one large central processor, a design that had prevailed since
John 
von 
Neumann 
and 
the 
ENIAC 
computer 
of 
the 
1940s. 
David’s
confidence inspired fear and envy. John Kender complained half-jokingly to
me that while he and the other assistant professors in the tenure race at
Columbia were trying to get modest government grants to do their work,
David was always talking about ambitious proposals on a much larger scale,
with plans for NonVon eventually to require a staff of tens to hundreds.
John thought he and his colleagues had no chance of tenure in comparison
with David’s broad vision and unquestioning self-confidence that bordered
on braggadocio.
John was right about David’s capacious weltanschaung, but wrong about
his exact path to glory. David left Columbia soon afterwards and went to
work in Nunzio Tartaglia’s fabled group at Morgan Stanley, doing pairs
trading.
3
When that effort eventually ended, he created D. E. Shaw & Co.
His 
new 
firm 
touted 
itself 
as 
specializing 
in 
the 
interaction 
between
technology and finance, nurturing their reputation as secretive builders of
high-powered computer systems used to seek out trading opportunities.
Fortune 
magazine 
in 
1996 
referred 
to 
it 
as 
“the 
most 
intriguing 
and
mysterious force on Wall Street today.” I knew hiring managers on Wall
Street who interviewed anyone from D. E. Shaw, if only to find out what
went on in its obscure depths. But most Shaw employees you interviewed
didn’t know much about how things worked there. In 1997, when I was
invited to introduce David as the luncheon speaker at a conference, I said
that “. . . you could think of D. E. Shaw & Co. as the Batcave, with David
as Batman, watching the world, himself visible only through a glass,
darkly.” But building a riskless money machine, especially on a large scale,
is not that easy. There are not that many riskless profits to be harvested in
the world. Eventually the struggle to make the same return on larger
amounts of capital makes ever-riskier strategies tempting. In 1998 D. E.
Shaw & Co., in partnership with the Bank of America, reportedly lost close
to a billion dollars on the same sorts of strategies that decapitated Long
Term Capital Management and took appreciable pounds of flesh out of
many other hedge funds and investment banks.
Meanwhile, in 1981, I attended the computer science courses offered by the
Labs 
and 
learned 
the 
practical 
art 
of 
programming. 
I 
was 
especially
entranced by language design and compiler writing, and spent most of my
time creating specific little languages that allowed users to solve specialized
problems.
In 
high-level 
languages 
like 
Java, 
C, 
or 
even 
ancient 
and 
despised
FORTRAN, 
you 
can 
easily 
write 
brief, 
sophisticated 
commands 
that
instruct the computer to carry out complex operations. You can program in
a style that corresponds rather closely to the way an educated person thinks
or talks about mathematics. But a computer’s central processing unit, the
primitive 
brain 
that 
actually 
performs 
the 
logical 
and 
mathematical
operations, is an idiot savant that has been engineered to “understand” and
respond only to simple babytalk. It is as though you want to tell a small
child who grasps only baby talk (but has a very good memory for long
sequences of it) to take the dog for a walk. You cannot just say “Take the
dog for a walk!”This assumes too much knowledge of the world. Instead,
you 
must 
translate 
that 
high-level, 
big-picture 
command 
into 
a
corresponding list of very elementary sequential actions, each describable
in baby talk. You must say something like:
Fetch the dog;
find the leash;
tie the leash to the dog’s collar;
hold the leash tightly;
open the front door;
follow the dog for five minutes;
if the dog steps off the sidewalk, pull him back using the leash;
. . .
return to the front door;
enter through the door;
unleash the dog.
If 
you 
design 
a 
high-level 
language 
that 
allows 
its 
users 
to 
issue
sophisticated commands such as “Walk the dog,” you must provide a
compiler that translates these commands into the baby talk machine code
that 
the 
central 
processing 
unit 
can 
follow. 
Clearly, 
one 
mistake 
in
translation, or just a little lack of specificity, and the dog and child will
never return!
When John Backus and his team at IBM invented FORTRAN as a
“FORmula TRANslation” language in the late 1950s, they wanted to allow
programmers 
to 
manipulate 
complex 
mathematical 
formulas. 
Their
compiler had to automatically translate any FORTRAN command into a
sequence of the baby talk machine code that the simple logical computer
circuits could follow. The compiler had to not only translate reasonable
commands into baby talk; it also had to refuse to translate unreasonable or
nonsensical ones. It had to to shout “Foul!” if you asked it to compile the
command 
“Dog 
the! 
for 
take 
walk.” 
In 
brief, 
it 
had 
to 
comprehend
grammar.
Grammar is the set of rules that legitimate sentences must satisfy. Adults
recognize grammar intuitively, without thinking, but computers must follow
rules. Backus developed a mathematical formalism for describing and
parsing grammars that facilitated the task of language translation. It worked
well for simple programming grammars that are less complex and subtle
than those expressing natural languages. Backus’s formalism, called BNF
for 
Backus 
Normal 
Form, 
provided 
a 
methodology 
for 
creating
grammatically 
consistent 
computer 
languages, 
and 
paralleled 
similar
discoveries by Noam Chomsky on generative grammars. Working with this
formalism, 
I 
learned 
how 
to 
design 
small 
grammatically 
consistent
computer languages.
BNF helped you to define the grammar of your computer language. It
allowed you to create a compiler that would parse sentences in your
language and accept only the grammatically correct ones. This was half the
battle. The other half was to write the part of the compiler that translated
each grammatically correct sentence into baby talk. This was painstakingly
tedious and difficult; a mistake in translation is potentially fatal in a
program that people rely on to do mathematics or control spacecraft.
The UNIX operating system was a breathtakingly liberating environment
for program writers. It contained two of the most beautiful tools I had ever
seen: 
they were called lex and yacc, 
and 
they 
allowed 
me 
to 
create
compilers 
almost 
effortlessly. 
Lex 
was 
an 
abbreviation 
for 
“lexical
analyzer.” 
Yacc 
stood 
for 
“Yet 
Another 
Compiler-Compiler,” 
and 
was
another of the cute acronyms that characterized many UNIX tools. You
could use lex to create a subprogram that would recognize all the words in
your language. You could use yacc to create another subprogram that would
parse and recognize legitimate sentences, and then take the actions you
deemed appropriate. Lex and yacc were “non-procedural” programs—you
weren’t required to write all the details of lexical analysis and parsing;
instead, you simply told them what grammar you wanted to recognize, and
they wrote a program to do it, using algorithms for matching patterns that
went back to the computer pioneers Alan Turing and Stephen Kleene. With
lex and yacc as aids, I learned to create my own computer languages.
A little like Feynman diagrams, which allowed workaday physicists to
compute unthinkingly the detailed quantum mechanical probabilities that
had formerly demanded the genius of Schwinger or Feynman, these parsing
tools allowed regular programmers to prosaically create languages that
would previously have required magnificent exertions.
I used to always equate computation with numerical evaluation. Now,
having been exposed to the linguistic aspects of computing, I regretted I had
not recognized them before. I fantasized about escaping the Business
Analysis Systems Center to become a true research computer scientist in
Area 10, and made an attempt to transfer. But I had neither the credentials
nor the background, so it was quite impossible.
Nevertheless, for most of my five years at the Labs, I worked on building
compilers. I spent several years designing and implementing a language I
named 
HEQS, 
a 
“Hierarchical 
EQuation 
Solver,” 
an 
equation-solving
language for businesspeople who knew enough to specify the equations
they wanted to solve but lacked either the mathematical ability or the time
to solve them. The name had the obligatory UNIX cuteness, but it was also
a homonym of “hex,” which succinctly reflected my secretly morbid view
of life in Building 5.
Like lex or yacc, HEQS was a nonprocedural language—users could state
what they wanted done (“Solve these equations!”) without having to specify
a procedure for accomplishing it. (FORTRAN and C, in contrast, are
procedural 
languages 
that 
demand 
that 
the 
programmer 
specify, 
in
excruciating detail, how to execute a task.) In its final incarnation, you
could give HEQS a collection of thousands of algebraic equations (linear,
nonlinear or simultaneous) and have it solve them or tell you why some
error you had made in specifying the equations made a solution impossible.
HEQS also provided tools for analyzing the set of equations; users could
examine the relation between input and output, and understand the chain by
which altering one variable’s value affected other variables. In essence, it
allowed 
business 
users 
at 
AT&T 
to 
spend 
their 
time 
specifying 
the
relationships in their business or accounting model without worrying about
how to solve it.
Six or seven years later, after the widespread advent of PCs, spreadsheets
like Visicalc and Lotus provided tools for doing the same thing. Until then,
various 
businesspeople 
at 
AT&T 
headquarters 
used 
HEQS 
for 
model
solving, and programmers in our center employed it as an equation-solving
engine in many of the applications we built. I was pleased to keep one foot
in the research world by describing it in an issue of the AT&T Technical
Journal.
4
I developed HEQS on my own, delving into lex and yacc to design the
language and build its compiler. Once users had entered the equations they
wanted to solve, my program regrouped them into sequences of smaller sets
of simultaneous equations, ordered so that the output from the solution of
one set provided the input you needed to solve the next. Stimulated by the
courses on computer science I had taken at the Labs, I realized that I could
represent each variable in the set of equations by a node in a directed graph,
and that reordering the equations was equivalent to decomposing the graph
into its strongly connected components. I was naively proud to be doing
real math.
There were helpful resources wherever I turned. I found that Chris Van
Wyk, an MTS in Computer Science in Area 10, had written a set of UNIX
tools for solving simultaneous equations. He had started this project while
working on his PhD thesis at Stanford under Donald Knuth, the famous
author of the four-volume The Art of Computer Programming and the
inventor of TeX, a widely used language for mathematical typesetting and
word processing that has become standard among scientists. Steve Blaha,
my particle-physicist friend at the Labs, told me that Knuth had been his
college roommate. As we worked together I was impressed by Chris’s
professional programming skills; I was an amateur, living by my wits, while
Chris was the real thing, a researcher working in his area of expertise. I felt
doomed to remain a mere dilettante.
HEQS was a good idea, and soon, as people in the Center started using it
for solving larger sets of equations, it needed a more skillful and efficient
implementation than I could provide. My version of HEQS allowed users
only single numbers (scalars) and one-dimensional vectors to represent
financial time series. A colleague, Ed Sheppard, was assigned to work with
me, and we planned to rewrite the system to incorporate multidimensional
array variables in order to represent more general financial time series.
While I was away on a two-week beach vacation at Fire Island with my
family, Ed suddenly threw himself into redesigning and then rewriting the
entire system—without giving me advance notice. I returned to a fait
accompli, a completely new, enhanced, and almost unrecognizable APL-
flavored version of the language. Ed’s version now incorporated vastly
complex dynamically linked data structures, whose details I knew I would
not live long enough to master. Ed had also cleverly modified HEQS so
that, once you had used it interactively to develop and solve a financial
model, you could then use it generate a C program that would solve your
equations many times faster.
Programming came naturally to Ed in a way it never would to me, and his
proficiency daunted me. Sometime in late 1984 he left to join Asymetrix, a
Seattle-based company founded by Paul Allen. For the remainder of my
stay at the Labs, I was a victim of our success: I often had to spend days at a
time diving into his code to fix the residual bugs that showed up in
algorithms I had never written and never fully understood.
It was around this time, seeing Ed write and design code, that I realized
how many physicists misperceived the nature of jobs and careers in the
nonacademic world. Physicists tended to think they were so smart that, once
they descended to a job in the “outside world,” their talent would allow
them to work in a 9-to-5 mode and still outperform their colleagues. But, in
any nonacademic job, there are people for whom that particular work is not
a compromise but a passion and dedication, taken seriously. They, rather
than the smart but coasting physicists, set the standards of excellence.
HEQS ended happily for me. Chris Van Wyk and I eventually wrote an
article on HEQS that appeared in the software journal Programming:
Practice and Experience in 1984. I was overjoyed to publish again rather
than perish, to be “doing science.” Even now, I get a small kick out of
seeing occasional references to that paper on the Web, though most of them
undoubtedly 
occur 
because 
Chris 
continues 
to 
work 
in 
the 
field 
of
nonprocedural languages. I was pleased to discover recently that Lucent,
the descendant of Bell Labs, still offers HEQS for sale at $89.00 on its
website at https://www.lucentssg.com/heqs.html. In this era of Mathematica
and Excel, however, I cannot imagine who buys it.
I learned almost nothing about business or finance in the Business Analysis
Systems 
Center 
between 
1980 
and 
1985. 
In 
contrast, 
the 
software
engineering skills I learned there stood me in good stead, and formed the
basis for much of the fixed-income financial modeling infrastructure I later
built at Goldman Sachs in 1987.
Despite the excellent education, I always felt subservient and demeaned
at the Labs. Only a month after starting work there I took Joshua, barely
three years old, to play on the lawns at Rockefeller University where we
still lived. He loved to take off his shoes and run barefoot through the grass.
While he did so, I sat there ruminating about what I was doing. Suddenly,
he came over, looked at me, and asked: “Daddy, why you sad?” I knew
even then that my daily reverse commute to the Labs would be merely
temporary. I just didn’t know how I would find a way to end it.
Notes
1
On Wall Street until the late 1990s, PhDs s rarely listed their degrees on
their 
business 
cards, 
because 
to 
do 
so 
would 
have 
outed 
them
immediately as nonbusiness people. For the same reason, it took a long
time before quants and programmers routinely put their email addresses
on their business cards. A rise in the prestige of PhD degrees occurred
slowly but steadily between 1996 and 1999 as dot-coms prospered.
2
Writing operating systems in a high-level language like C was a new
idea. Operating systems used to be written from scratch, arduously, in the
idiosyncratic, 
low-level, 
hard-to-read, 
and 
primitive 
assembler 
or
machine code that came native on each new machine. By using standard
C 
rather than each machine’s particular 
machine 
code to write the
operating system, you could quickly create a version of UNIX and all its
tools to run any newly manufactured computer, simply, by first getting C
itself to run on that machine.
3
Pairs trading is the search for statistically significant oscillatory patterns
in the spread between pairs of similar stocks. If you believe you have
detected such a phenomenon, you short the expensive stock and buy the
cheap one when the spread is large, and then reverse the trade when/if the
spread narrows. Since Tartaglia’s renowned but temporary successes at
Morgan Stanley, trading houses, hedge funds, and the scientists they
employ have regularly and hopefully attempted to build model-driven,
so-called “statistical arbitrage” money machines of this type.
4
At this time I also began attending various computer science research
seminars and conferences, where I was always struck by the difference in
quality between computer science research and physics research. In
physics, 
seminar 
speakers 
described 
completed 
achievements. 
In
computer science, however, the majority of the talks were about plans for
systems, sketches of new languages, and unimplemented ideas. The
hurdle for declaring accomplishment seemed much lower.
...