Chapter 8
Stop-Time
Wall Street beckons
Interviewing at investment banks
Leaving the Labs
How to get out of the Labs? That was my daily obsession for five years.
Meanwhile, always the complainer, I came home every day and droned on
indignantly about my plight, burdening anyone willing to listen to my own
Passover Seder, the story of how I came to leave the land of academic milk
and honey and live under Pharoah in the land of the Business Analysis
Systems Center. I recounted the heavy labors that were inflicted upon me
and strategized about how to get free. Every day was Paradise Lost and In
Search of a Lost Time. I know I drove my wife half crazy.
When 
I 
took 
three-year-old 
Josh 
to 
the 
Center’s 
Christmas 
party, 
I
worried that he would give me away—I had spent so many evenings at
home disparagingly describing my frustration with bosses and coworkers
within his earshot that I feared he would recognize someone’s name when I
introduced them and repeat one of my remarks. Before driving out to
Murray Hill that morning, I cautioned him not to repeat anything I had said
about anyone. Of course, he didn’t.
At that party, Mark Koenigsberg told me about a date who had taken him
to see a movie he hated intensely. We knew that our tastes in movies were
diametric, and the more he described the plot, the more I was certain I
would like it. As soon as the party was over, I drove back to New York and
went to see the film—Louis Malle’s My Dinner With André, with André
Gregory and Wallace Shawn. The self-indulgent dinner conversation about
the contrast between a mystical search for fulfillment and the mundane
pleasures and disappointments of everyday life resonated deeply in me. It
reminded me of the sense of possibility about the future I had once
experienced when I had first wanted to be a physicist; it also reminded me
of the potentialities for happiness that I had sensed while meditating at the
Dharmadhattu in Boulder. On that December afternoon, My Dinner With
André imbued me with a such a vast sense of hope and salvation that I felt
uplifted. Its aftereffects dissipated astonishingly slowly, trickling out of me
for about a week. Two months later, wondering if its salutary effects had
been merely a fluke, I went to see the movie once again, and once again felt
better, though this time only for several days. Malle, Gregory, and Shawn
depicted the middle ground between hope and despair so well; a few years
ago I saw their Vanya on Forty-Second Street and felt similarly moved, at
the first viewing and the second.
I was naive and felt demeaned by the “moneyness” that underpinned
everything 
we 
were 
supposed 
to 
work 
on 
at 
the 
Labs. 
Despite 
the
vicissitudes of life in physics, I had worked out of love, and now I was
working for money. Though Bell Labs was ranked as one of the top 100
places to work in America in 1985, it was at the top of my own selfish list
of the worst places I’d worked at. My karmic destiny, I suppose, was to
have my vain illusions about life and work painfully sandpapered off me as
I brushed against the rough surface of the world. Later, when that process
was complete, I would be able to enjoy life at Goldman, Sachs and Co. Had
I come to work at Goldman straight out of graduate school, I might well
have hated it for its intensely pecuniary focus just as much as I hated the
Labs.
Meanwhile, I obsessed about changing my life. There were a variety of
excellent programmers who worked in a software research group within the
Business Analysis Systems Center. Dave Korn worked a few offices down
from me, busy creating the now ubiquitous UNIX Korn shell; Emden
Gansner 
and 
Jonathan 
Shopiro 
were 
both 
enthusiastic 
contributors 
to
object-oriented 
programming 
in 
general 
and 
to 
Stroustrup’s 
C++
environment in particular. I tried to transfer into their group, but Downs
insisted that it was narrow-minded of me to think that I had to be located
with them to do interesting work. Perhaps it was just as well. Though I was
envious of Emden’s calm, undistracted ways, I was quite incapable of
emulating his temperament. He never asked for help with debugging, but
read whatever manuals were necessary and then patiently dug deeper,
struggling for as long as it took to solve the problem. I simply ran for help
at the first panicky opportunity.
Even when my managers graciously allowed me to telecommute from
home one day a week, I chafed at my shackles. I yearned for academic life
and considered retracing my steps, exploring how to become a long-term
physics postdoc again with Baqi Bég at Rockefeller or Norman Christ at
Columbia.
Then, in late 1983, Wall Street began to beckon.
The first hints of my life-to-be began with occasional calls from head-
hunters in New York City. Soon, we all knew their legendary names—Jory
Marino, Rick Wastrom of Smith Hanley, Rita Raz of Analytics, Steve
Markman of Pencom, to name just a few of those who preyed on Bell Labs.
Many of them are still active now, still advertising in the Sunday New York
Times or on the Internet. Out of the blue, someone you had never heard of
would cold-call you at work and ask if you wanted a job that paid $150,000
—a huge amount in those days for an ex-physicist making less than $50K—
and then command you, urgently, to come to his or her office immediately,
before it was too late. These recruiters might flatter you by saying they had
heard of you; in fact some acquaintance at the Labs had simply given them
your name, or they had found it in a Bell Labs internal directory wheedled
from some disgruntled employee. A few times, at their behest, I would
leave work early and drive back into Manhattan to meet one of them,
putting on my rarely worn navy blazer and 1960s knitted tie in a poor effort
to simulate business attire. I owned no suits. Headhunters could keep you
waiting for hours, like God as the Puerto Rican janitor in Bruce Jay
Friedman’s Steambath I saw on PBS around that time. Many headhunters
were imperious, high-handed and low-mannered, and none of us knew
enough to doubt their implicit claim that they held the keys to the kingdom.
I had several mostly unpleasant interviews at Wall Street firms in late
1983. I knew nothing about options theory and regarded myself as a
software person. In those days, information technology on Wall Street was a
land of mainframers who were educated in COBOL or FORTRAN or MIS
and you needed only one eye to be king. At the Labs I had learned to design
and maintain programs with a sophistication beyond that of most of the
renegade scientists and coders on the Street. On interviews, because of my
experience with HEQS, I advertised myself as someone who could design a
computer language to match the Street’s modeling needs.
One of my first interviews was with Zach Cobrinik, now an ex-Goldman
partner and then a very boyish member of the Goldman Sachs Quantitative
Strategies group that I headed seven years later. At that time the group was
run by David Weinberger, who shortly thereafter left for O’Connor in
Chicago. Zach seemed most interested in finding a systems administrator
for their VAX, a task of little interest to me, and so I declined to continue
the process.
Some months later, another headhunter sent me to Salomon Brothers
about a position whose nature was never explained. I spent no more than
ten minutes naively informing my interviewer about the benefits I could
bring 
them 
by 
solving 
financial 
models 
with 
simultaneous 
algebraic
equations using HEQS. Then, in the middle of our conversation he was
interrupted by a colleague; he suddenly stood up, apologized curtly, and left
for something that he said had urgently arisen, promising to resume our
discussion at some future time. Neither he nor the head-hunter ever called
again. Despite repeated attempts, I could never get through to the woman in
Personnel who arranged the interview; she was always unavailable. For a
long time I thought they were simply very busy; finally I realized that this
was their way of brushing me off. I never understood why it wouldn’t have
been easier to tell me that they simply weren’t interested.
Then, in late 1983, when Eva was pregnant with our daughter Sonya, a
headhunter I knew arranged an interview for me in Stan Diller’s Financial
Strategies Group (FSG) in the Fixed Income Division at Goldman Sachs.
There I met Ravi Dattatreya, a former PhD engineer from Bell Labs who
had himself migrated to the Street a short while earlier.
Stan’s group addressed a new need for quantitative modeling at Goldman.
By tradition a gentlemanly equity house that concentrated on IPOs and
stock trading for large institutional clients, Goldman had recently begun to
step onto Salomon’s turf, the hurly-burly and plebeian world of bonds and
mortgages. Stock trading was a simple, gutsy, risk-taking business that
required little intellectual or technical capital. Bonds were more complex;
they involved numbers, arithmetic, algebra, even calculus. As my trader
friend said, there’s no competitive edge to being smart in equities.
The trick in the stock market was to estimate the right price for a share of
stock in one of several thousand different companies. The bond market
comprised 
fewer 
securities, 
but 
each 
security 
was 
more 
complex,
sometimes bewilderingly so. The 900-pound gorilla in the market was the
American Government, the source of liquid, ever-flowing Treasury bills,
notes, 
and 
bonds 
that 
sprang 
from 
the 
government’s 
need 
to 
borrow.
Government bonds were characterized by a wide choice of maturities and
coupons and, since they were backed by the full faith and credit of the
United States, they would never default. Foreign governments issued bonds,
too, some of them more prone to default than others. Corporate bonds were
even riskier; a company might run out of cash and then be unable to make
their promised payments. Some bonds could be “called”—the corporation
had the option to end its obligation to keep paying a high rate of interest on
its loan after interest rates had dropped by prematurely repaying the amount
they had borrowed. Mortgages sold by homeowners were among the most
horrifically elaborate bonds; they too could be suddenly called (that is,
prepaid) by homeowners who had either sold their houses and no longer
needed the principal they had borrowed, or who had discovered that they
could now get cheaper financing as interest rates dropped.
All this complexity made it difficult to decide where value lay, and thus
opened the door to mathematically adept modelers on the Street. The Fixed
Income division at Salomon relied for their mathematical analysis on Marty
Liebowitz’s renowned, large, and enviably experienced Bond Portfolio
Analysis (BPA) group. Goldman was slowly realizing that they needed
something similar. FSG and its leader, Stan Diller, a former Columbia
University PhD in Economics and one of the earliest academics to cross
over to the Street, was their solution.
The problem on everyone’s mind was the sudden increase in the volatility
of 
interest 
rates. 
Before 
the 
1980s, 
investors 
used 
to 
apportion 
their
investments 
between 
stocks 
and 
bonds 
in 
a 
fairly 
static 
sort 
of 
way.
Traditionally, they viewed the bond portion as safe and the stock stake as
risky. Then, in the late 1970s, about the time I was teaching physics at
Boulder, American interest rates rocketed and gold and oil prices soared.
Bonds, previously perceived as nonvolatile, became risky. While everyone
knew that stock investors might have to stomach a 40 percent drop in a bear
market, few investors had imagined something similar could happen to
Treasury bonds. The trading desks at investment banks, which naturally
carried large inventories of bonds with which to supply their customers, saw
their portfolios abruptly decline in value. As the intrinsic riskiness of fixed-
income securities became manifest, a new approach to managing interest-
rate risk began to diffuse through the industry. Desks wanted to hedge their
varied and complex bond portfolios with large offsetting trades in cheap
liquid bond futures. Hedging and risk management became the new thing,
crucial 
both 
for 
wholesalers 
like 
Goldman 
Sachs 
and 
for 
institutional
investors, too.
In the universe of equities, arithmetic was enough to do business; you
didn’t have to worry about even the simplest algebra until you got involved
with options. In fixed-income land, by contrast, investors measured a
bond’s value by its yield, the average percentage return you would earn
over its lifetime if you bought it at its current market price and received all
future 
payments 
of 
interest 
and 
principal. 
As 
soon 
as 
you 
began 
to
contemplate the relation between a bond price and its yield, the storm
clouds of algebra, sequences, series, and, finally, calculus loomed blackly in
the appendices at the backs of textbooks. A stock is only a stock, but even
the simplest bond is a derivative security whose value depends on interest
rates.
Therefore, suddenly, bond traders in the early 1980s needed analytic and
mathematical skills to understand a portfolio of hundreds or thousands of
bonds and its characteristics. They also required computing power; paper
and pencil, a book of yield tables, even a hand-held calculator, were too
slow and inflexible to amalgamate all the angles. Only on a computer could
you estimate the value, sensitivity, and risk of many different securities in
real time.
You couldn’t buy commercial risk-management systems in the late 1970s.
Do-it-yourself tools like spreadsheets were not yet ubiquitous. Most of the
programmers in information technology couldn’t handle bond mathematics,
and most of the traders on the desk were unable to program. A trading desk
had 
to 
turn 
to 
some 
jack-of-all-trades 
who 
could 
build 
their 
risk
management tools, from the 
low-level 
databases through the 
financial
valuation models to the high-level user interface.
The jack-of-all-trades in that era was unlikely to be an MBA or a PhD in
Finance—even if they knew enough quantitative finance, most of them
looked down with disdain on programming and mathematics as cheap,
geeky skills they could pay other people to do for them. Mathematicians,
too, tended to avoid programming, preferring analysis to computation.
Computer scientists, though they knew discrete mathematics and Boolean
algebra, were often uncomfortable with continuous-time mathematics.
PhDs in physics or engineering fit the jack-of-all-trades bill pretty well.
First, the mathematics of finance closely resembles the mathematics of
physics. Furthermore, physicists don’t grow up wearing white gloves; they
have no scruples about tackling tasks beneath their so-called dignity. They
do their own math and programming; the willingness to do so is an essential
part of graduate student and postdoc subculture.
This 
was 
probably 
why 
Stan’s 
Financial 
Strategies 
Group 
consisted
mostly of former physicists, applied mathematicians, and engineers, many
with PhDs. All of Stan’s hires came from a culture in which you did your
own 
dirty 
work—you 
developed 
your 
own 
theory, 
did 
your 
own
mathematics, and then wrote your own programs. It was a hiring model I
tended to repeat a few years later, when I staffed the groups I led, not out of
principle but rather because of a natural affinity for that intellectual style.
When I first started interviewing on the Street, Stan was among the most
famous practitioner-quants. An article in Forbes about him in the early
1980s was titled “Diller’s Dillies,” a patronizingly flattering reference to the
awkward, foreign quant-nerds the reporter met. Stan had a reputation for
hiring foreigners; I had heard some people imply that he liked inarticulate
technophiles so that he could manage their work and present their results,
but I think that was unfair. Most quants, then and now, came from abroad
because immigrants often see the quickest path to success in hands-on
work. It’s the next generation that prefers management and business school.
Stan wrote occasional lengthy research reports on his group’s work,
original and creative papers phrased in a distinctively unorthodox and
inbred style.
1
They were insightful and intuitive, but hard to classify and
always a touch off-center: too technical for early-1980s Wall Street, not
quite rigorous enough for real finance academics—and insufficiently hard-
sell for a sales piece. As a consequence Stan gained less influence than he
deserved. But his work on the options embedded in mortgage portfolios was
prescient, foreshadowing the more formal and rigorous work of the growing
number of finance academics already entering the field.
When I met them, Diller and Co. were already pulling together a team
skilled in finance, mathematics, and programming, and they wanted me to
join them. I think it was my software skills that appealed to them as much
as my talents in physics. Stan was a true pioneer in embedding financial
models in portfolio trading systems, and a good decade ahead of his time in
understanding the importance of professional software engineering in this
endeavor. Later, after leaving Goldman Sachs in 1985, he built AutoBond,
an early mortgage portfolio valuation system at Bear Stearns. Today he runs
Polypaths, 
a 
company 
that 
produces 
fixed-income 
portfolio 
analysis
software.
Nowadays, the cosmos of trading systems is very different. PCs are
ubiquitous, spreadsheets are easy to use, and risk management software is
increasingly available from tens of companies selling everything from
building blocks to turnkey systems. Nevertheless, the largest banks still
build their own software in order to book, value, and hedge the latest
products as soon as they come to market. Even today, though, risk systems
are balkanized, each one focusing on one or two product classes at most.
There is still room out there for a system or language which can handle all
the 
classes 
of 
securities—mortgages, 
swaptions, 
currencies, 
equities,
metals, energy derivatives, and so on—that a large firm trades.
I returned to Goldman for another inspection with no idea what to look for.
An article in the New York Times about switching jobs suggested asking
your potential employer what you would be doing ten years in the future. At
the end of my second visit there I sat down again with Stan. He explained to
me that Wall Street was one of the few places you could eventually make
$150,000 
a 
year 
without 
running 
your 
own 
small 
business 
like 
an
accountant or a doctor.
“If I come here,” I said, “What will I be doing ten years from now?” Stan
became instantaneously irate.
“In ten years,” he proclaimed, “You’ll be doing whatever the hell you’ll
be doing now, only making more money! I don’t want to be jerked around
by someone coming in here and thinking about doing something different!”
I 
couldn’t 
comprehend 
then 
what 
infuriated 
him. 
Ten 
years 
later, 
I
understood his frustration. After a few years on the job, quants in banking
often grow envious of the better-paid traders and salespeople who sit in the
driver’s seat. He must have thought that I was applying to his Financial
Strategies Group with the devious plan to insinuate myself into trading. The
last thing Stan needed was a new employee who wanted to tunnel out of the
quantitative group into the business area before even beginning his work.
Ten years later I found myself on Stan’s side. Similarly but with more
restraint, I deplored the ambitious maneuverers I often interviewed who
tried to use the Quantitative Strategies Group I ran as a conduit into trading.
“I’m willing to program for a while in order to pay my dues,” was their
standard refrain, and it put an end to all interest on my part. I was
sympathetic to their aspirations, but I had my own responsibilities and
needed people eager to do the hard detailed analytical work. This meant
programming, too.
Nowadays, transitions are easier and many PhD’s do succeed at getting
positions directly on the “business side,” especially in smaller banks and
hedge funds. But then as now, quants who yearn to move to the business
side often begin to scorn their former academic skills. Stan must have well
understood this self-loathing, this need to become someone else, though he
certainly never seemed to want to be a trader himself. The Forbes reporter
asked him what academic degree he had. “A PhD,” Stan retorted, “But
don’t tell the people I work for—they’ll knock a half million off my pay!”
I agonized over Stan’s offer during a skiing vacation with Eva—pregnant
with our daughter Sonya—and Josh in frigid New Hampshire in late 1983.
Always the obsessive, weighing every alternative, I called everyone in the
world 
who 
knew 
someone 
who 
had 
worked 
at 
Goldman. 
I 
pondered
repetitively. Still, I couldn’t make up my mind.
Through my friend Don Weingarten at IBM I tracked down a scientist
from Watson Labs who had worked for Stan for one year, developing an in-
house computer language for manipulating financial time series. The people
I had met at Goldman told me he had found Wall Street intolerable after a
life in research.
“What was it like there?” I asked him.
“Don’t go,” he said tartly, trying to give me a feel for the environment,
“Unless you’re willing to be yelled at all day for something you didn’t do.”
Those few words settled it. I knew I would not accept the job. I needed to
suffer a little more before I was ready to move.
I 
slogged 
through 
another 
year 
at 
the 
Business 
Analysis 
center,
collaborating on a more advanced version of HEQS. Then, a year later, I
resumed the job search with a few more interviews. Once, I visited Jeff
Borror’s IT group at First Boston and, on the day of the 1985 hurricane
scare in New York, they offered me about the same money as I had made at
Bell Labs. I declined. Another time, a headhunter sent me to a small
midtown medical software company. When I showed up in my AT&T
business uniform—the navy blazer, gray flannel pants, white shirt, and
knitted tie—the door to the office suite was opened by a bunch of barefoot,
twenty-something guys in shorts and T-shirts. They gave me a written test
on C programming; I recall being asked to write a routine to merge two
files, and also to disentangle a sequence of intentionally confusing nested
#define C macros. I wasn’t interested in working there.
By 
mid-1985 
I 
was 
ready. 
I 
called 
the 
headhunting 
firm 
that 
had
originally introduced me to Ravi Dattatreya and Goldman and said I was
now interested in the job I had turned down eighteen months earlier. I got
little 
response—the 
headhunter 
seemed 
to 
have 
lost 
his 
touch 
with
personnel at Goldman, and was unable to get me an interview. Time passed.
I grew impatient and one day I called Ravi in FSG directly. He remembered
me and brought me in, and after a full day there I was once again offered a
job to work on software. During the year-and-a-half that had passed, Stan
had unfortunately left Goldman for Bear Stearns. This time I didn’t agonize
too much and accepted the job.
In November 1985 I left the Labs for Goldman. At my farewell party
Larry and Mark gave warm speeches. My closest friends there, they were
both secretly on their way out, too. Larry, like me close to 40 years old, was
enviably in the midst of deciding that, after having been a physicist and an
AT&T business analyst, he would rather be a medical doctor, and was
taking biology courses in the evenings and preparing for the MCAT. A year
or two later he was at Mt. Sinai Medical School, and is now a psychiatrist at
Columbia doing brain research using positron emission tomography, a true
combination of physics and medicine. Mark, less than a year later, took a
job working for Bob Kopprasch, head of options research in the Salomon
Brothers BPA group.
During the party, my first and most sympatisch supervisor, Ron, took me
aside for a chat. He told me that I already knew more about computers than
I would ever need to know on Wall Street. It seemed self-evident then, but
the world was changing fast. When I got there, Wall St. was indeed
backward, 
mainframed 
and 
undistributed. 
My 
Labs 
training 
in 
UNIX
software development would keep me a little ahead of run-of-the-mill IT
day laborers on Wall Street for only four or five years.
Notes
1
Years later, I noticed that he was almost always the only author on his
reports, 
thanking 
the 
people 
that 
worked 
for 
him 
in 
the
acknowledgements, but never including them on the author byline. After
my experiences in physics, I never again worried too much about sharing
credit with collaborators. It almost never did you harm.
...