Chapter 9
Transformer
The Financial Strategies Group at Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Learning options theory
Becoming a quant
Interacting with traders
A new cast of characters
Is that still the same cold you had when you started here?” a woman in the
crowded elevator asked brusquely as she peered down her dry nose at my
wet one some time in January 1986.
The first day for new hires at Goldman is always a Monday, and mine had
been December 2, 1985. That morning I attended orientation, listened to a
brief description of the firm, chose my health and life insurance plans, got
ID’d and fingerprinted, and, finally, used my free lunch voucher to eat in
the cafeteria. Goldman had a mere 5,000 employees back then, and there
was still an intimate feel to the place.
I had left Bell Labs in late November, with only a few days to decompress
between jobs. The next day the weather turned suddenly chilly. On Friday,
November 29, I went for a run on Riverside Drive, wondering how I was
going to keep fit when I could no longer exercise at lunch-time. By Sunday
morning I was coughing and feverish. Too embarrassed to postpone my first
day at work, I went in for orientation.
For the next few months I simply couldn’t get enough rest to recover. Our
family had been stressed the prior two years: My father-in-law had died
suddenly in early 1984, my father in 1985, and now, only a few months
later, my mother-in-law was in the final stages of pancreatic cancer. While
Eva tended to her mother and tried to still do some laboratory research, I
looked after Sonya on evenings and weekends, bearing the brunt of a
typical two-year-old’s appreciable will. Nights consisted of short bursts of
sleep interrupted by multiple bottle fillings and subsequent diaper changes.
We were all weary and upset.
Six weeks later, the dreaded early-morning phone call came from an
unexpectedly different source. My sister’s husband in South Africa had
suddenly died. The call about Eva’s mother came several weeks later.
Over several weeks my “flu” transformed itself into a semipermanent
cough and runny nose that prevented me from sleeping. One chilly winter’s
Friday night I drove Joshua and Sonya to spend the weekend with some
friends in East Hampton so that Eva could have uninterrupted time with her
mother. By 10 P.M. on Sunday night I was at the end of my tether. What I
needed most was some rest and sleep. I abandoned our apartment at
midnight, left a message at work that I was sick, and checked into the
Empire Hotel at Lincoln Center. Then, I swallowed a Valium to ensure that
I would sleep, and spent the next day and a half in bed. Miraculously, that
minuscule amount of rest did the trick. My nose stopped dripping, my
perpetual cough deliquesced, and by Wednesday morning I was back at
work and more or less normal, at least as far as my physical health was
concerned.
Despite my illness, I had been learning a vast amount rapidly. My
supervisor, Ravi Dattatreya, had a combative sharp-edged personality, and
he liked to take pointy little verbal jabs at people, feigning to see how they
would respond. But he was an excellent mentor: He had deep intuition
about 
financial 
theory, 
and 
he 
understood 
how 
the 
trading 
and 
sales
businesses worked.
When I arrived at Goldman’s Financial Strategies Group I had thought I
was going to work on the software engineering aspects of bond trading. But
in 1985 the over-the-counter bond options business was burgeoning, and
Ravi managed their needs. Within a few days of my arrival he introduced
me to the bond options desk and assigned me to work on its valuation
models. One Friday he gave me a copy of the famous Cox-Ross-Rubinstein
paper on the binomial options model and told me to read it over the
weekend. It was an immensely lucky opportunity; I got to work on an
interesting and very relevant unsolved business problem which eventually
made my reputation, and, just as importantly, I developed a relationship
with traders who had a genuine and practical interest in theories and
models.
The bond options desk was run by Peter Freund, a thirtyish lawyer-
turned-options 
trader. 
Peter 
had 
a 
deep 
and 
serviceable 
grasp 
of 
the
subtleties of options theory, but was busy much of the time writing business
memos to Bob Rubin, then the head of the Fixed Income Division and soon
to 
become 
cohead 
of 
Goldman 
itself, 
before 
eventually 
moving 
to
Washington as Clinton’s Secretary of the Treasury. I enjoyed talking to
Peter, who sometimes placed his outstretched hand on my shoulder as we
spoke, resting the full weight of his arm there for a few minutes. It was my
first experience of the tactile side of being an employee. At Bell Labs
supervisors didn’t touch you much; at Goldman senior people tended to
squeeze your arm or shoulder in a paternal and yet patronizing sort of way,
even if they were much younger than you.
The most striking and voluble member of Peter’s group was David
Garbasz, a former graduate student in geology who had become a trader of
bond options. He befriended me late that December at the annual Christmas
party thrown by the Fixed Income Division at the South Street Seaport. It
was a fabulously raucous party, given during the heyday of Wall Street
ostentation. Giant shrimp and bite-size chunks of steak lay heaped on
tables; we danced to a rock band composed of a bunch of traders; it was
quite unlike the child-friendly, brownies-on-paper-plates affairs at Bell Labs
to which I was accustomed. David took me under his wing and, on that
freezing December night, though I was still half sick, he dragged me to
accompany him on the walk home. We strode several miles from the
Seaport north through the Lower East Side, able to see our breath in the
midnight darkness, until I eventually found a cab to take me the rest of the
way home. David was hot-headed and lively, attractively impetuous and
passionately sharp-tongued and cynical, always writing letters to Bob Rubin
in which he reportedly threatened to leave for greener pastures because of
some dissatisfaction or other. I was a novice, and he took it on himself to
teach me the ropes. We had many lunches together at the Fledermaus, the
“in” place on South Street for the traders.
Another member of Peter’s team was Jacob Goldfield, a young, scruffily
unshaven, lanky Harvard law graduate who never even bothered to take the
Law Boards, but immediately joined Goldman as a trader. David took Jacob
under his wing, too, and we got along well; Jacob had studied physics as an
undergraduate, and was a hands-on programmer who wrote many of his
own 
trading 
tools. 
A 
very 
smart 
kid, 
Jacob 
soon 
radiated 
a 
quietly
impressive mystique, and colleagues began to defer to him. He held his
cards close to chest, absorbing information from everyone while emitting
none himself, the embodiment of a perfect trading temperament. Unlike the
1980s 
masters-of-the-universe-style 
traders, 
Jacob 
never 
used 
foul
language.
Everyone knew that Jacob was a protégé of Bob Rubin and had his ear. It
was clear he was on a fast track.
The problem Ravi had given me in my first week at Goldman was rooted in
the economics of the early 1980s. Goldman was on the “sell side”: We sold
securities 
to 
the 
money 
managers, 
insurance 
companies, 
pension, 
and
mutual funds that comprised the “buy side.” Many of these buy-side firms
bought bonds issued by corporations, municipalities, or governments, and
in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when interest rates were high, they could
earn a pretty good rate of return. As interest rates in the mid-1980s slid
steadily downwards from the inflationary peak of the Carter era, bonds paid
lower interest, and these funds could no longer earn the high yields of the
past few years. In an attempt to pump up their declining returns, many
funds began to generate revenue by the periodic selling of short-dated call
options against the specific bonds they held. There was substantial money
to be made supplying these calls, and so, in early 1986, the Treasury bond
options business at Goldman accelerated.
Loosely speaking, a call option on a bond is a contractual bet between
two parties that the bond price will end up above a prespecified strike price
on some definite future expiration date. The buyer of the option pays the
seller a premium, the cost of the call option. At expiration, if the bond price
is above the strike price, so that the buyer has won the bet, he exercises his
option to receive the payoff. The payoff of the call option is the difference
between the market price of the bond at expiration and the strike price.
Effectively, the seller of the call option has to deliver the bond to the owner
of the call option in exchange for a payment equal to the strike price, even
though it is worth more. The bottom line is that the owner of the call option
receives any upside the bond brings over and above the strike price, but
suffers none of the downside.
The buy-side 
funds sold call 
options to Goldman to generate extra
income. A mutual fund owning a $100 Treasury bond could sell a one-year
call option on that bond, struck at $100, for about $2, thus boosting their
yield. As long as the $100 bond itself didn’t appreciate, this $2 was pure
gravy. But with options, every reward has a corresponding punishment.
Suppose interest rates were to fall and the bond price were to rise to $106 a
year later. In this case, Goldman would exercise its call option and force the
fund to accept a price of only $100 for the $106 bond, leaving the fund with
a gain of $2 from the option premium offset by a $6 loss on the bond—a net
loss of $4. In essence, the fund was taking a bet against interest rates
declining.
Goldman’s role was that of custom tailor. The funds could have sold
listed interest-rate options and bond futures contracts, available on the
Chicago 
exchanges, 
to 
make 
their 
bets. 
But 
these 
listed 
instruments
provided only a limited number of standardized strikes and expirations, too
constrained to match the particular strikes and expirations of the bonds
actually owned by a fund. To accommodate them, Goldman bought over-
the-counter (OTC) call options from each fund, each option a privately
negotiated contract written on the specific bonds held by that fund. The
options contacts were chosen to expire close to the dates on which the funds
had to report their quarterly earnings. If interest rates did not decline and
the funds won their bet, they kept the premium and enhanced their reported
return.
The enterprise of selling bond options, like many early-stage businesses,
was particularly profitable. A trading desk could charge clients an extra fee
for an option that was custom-tailored to fit a fund’s exact needs. The bond
options desk at Goldman offset the risk of the tailored option they had sold
by buying a bundle of cheaper listed options and futures that approximately
matched its payoff. There was some risk involved in hedging tailored
options with listed ones; the mismatch in strikes and expirations made the
hedge approximate rather than exact. You could think of the fee as our
desk’s compensation for being willing to accept and manage this risk.
To hedge one option with another, firms like Goldman needed a model that
told you each option’s value and its sensitivity to changes in interest rates.
The renowned Black-Scholes model for stock options, which Ravi had told
me to learn, did not strictly apply to bond options. Stocks are relatively
simple; they guarantee no future dividend payments and have no natural
termination date, so their future prices are unconstrained. Treasury bonds
are much more intricate: Because they promise to repay their principal
when 
they 
mature, 
their 
price 
on 
that 
date 
is 
constrained 
to 
be 
par.
Furthermore, since all Treasury bonds can be decomposed into a sum of
more 
primitive 
zero-coupon 
bonds 
of 
varying 
maturities, 
they 
are 
all
interrelated.
My new boss Ravi had heuristically modified the Black-Scholes stock
option model to make it work, at least approximately, for short-dated
Treasury bond options. He had written a computer program to implement it,
and the bond options desk now priced and hedged their options by means of
it. As they got more experienced at using it, Peter Freund’s desk discovered
that Ravi’s model was fine for short-term options but questionable for
longer-term ones; it suffered from a variety of theoretical inconsistencies
stemming from its inadequate modeling of the long-term behavior of bond
prices. It was an ingenious first cut, quickly created to catapult the desk into
doing business, but now both the model and its computer interface needed
work. A few days after I arrived, Ravi directed me to extend the model and
the program. It was a feet-first introduction to working with traders, and
much of what I know about the need to be pragmatic and business-oriented
as a quant I learned in those first few months working with Ravi and the
desk.
From the desk’s point of view, the greatest hindrance to exploiting the
model for business was not the theory, but rather the lack of a graphical user
interface. Each time a salesperson needed to value an option for a potential
trade with a client, he or she had to type in, on one line after another, the
bond’s current price, maturity, and coupon as well as the option’s expiration
and strike; then the salesperson had to enter the current short-term interest
rate and the bond’s assumed future yield volatility. One more tap on the
return key and the program computed the model’s theoretical price and told
you how to hedge it with the underlying Treasury bond. If you wanted to
compute the option value for a variety of volatilities, expirations or strikes,
you had to repeat the same sequence, entering items and hitting return keys
all over again.
Setting up a trade could take several days—a typical client might get a
quote from Goldman, hang up, call another dealer to get their price, ponder
a while, and then call us back the next day to continue the discussion. At
that point someone on our desk would have to start running our model again
by reentering all the terms of the deal. This slowed down the interaction
with clients, and was far too viscous for a growing business.
The software engineering was deficient, too. Ravi’s program had been
written in FORTRAN, but the scientific and financial worlds were rapidly
moving towards C, which provided much better tools for collaborative
software development. Ravi instructed me to learn options theory, rewrite
the model in C, and construct a friendlier front end. It was a perfect
assignment since it immediately exposed me to theory, implementation, and
interaction with the business. I spent the next few days making a rapid first
pass through the theory of stock options as described in the original Cox-
Ross-Rubinstein binomial paper. Then, I studied the FORTRAN version of
Ravi’s bond option model and set about rewriting it in C on FSG’s VAX
computer.
Within a few weeks I was learning on many fronts and adjusting to new
social and computing environments. When I ran into hurdles, Ravi grew
impatient and irritable. One day, only three weeks or so after I had arrived,
he suggested that, since I was taking longer than he had expected, he should
perhaps give the work to someone else to do. Upon returning home that
evening I took some perverse pleasure in reporting my first taste of Wall
Street brutality to Eva, and got some shocked sympathy. I wanted to show
her that, with my passage from the civil groves of physics to the harsh
engine rooms of capitalism, I had now entered a world in which people ten
or more years younger than me found it necessary to crack the whip when I
didn’t trot fast enough. But in truth, it wasn’t that bad—Wall Street has
been always meritocratically discourteous. It never seemed to me that great
an indignity. In the nineteen years that have elapsed since then, I have been
ordered about by young traders, had my back patted and my upper arm
encouragingly squeezed in elevators by newly minted partners, and, once,
been pushed across the trading floor and cursed in full view of everyone
there by an angry and foul-mouthed saleswoman. There is a general lack of
respect for age in all of this that makes you disregard your own age, and I
like it.
I 
soon 
finished 
programming 
the 
model 
and 
began 
to 
think 
about
attaching a friendly front end to it. In those pre-Macintosh/pre-Windows
days, 
windowing 
packages 
were 
a 
rarity. 
Brought 
up 
on 
the 
UNIX
philosophy, I began building my own generic toolkit for data entry and
display. I hurriedly force-marched myself through the manual for the UNIX
“curses” library that allowed you to flexibly read and write 80-character-by-
24-line screens of text, and designed an interface. In a month or so I had
created Bosco, a new calculator named after an affectionate abbreviation for
my son Joshua.
Though the new model was better, it was my new user interface that had
the biggest impact. It made negotiating with clients easy. All the model’s
input and output were visible on one screen, with one field for each item of
data to be entered (the bond coupon, maturity, and so on), and one field for
each answer the model provided (the option price, its hedge ratio, and so
on). There were also fields for storing information about the client and the
trade. To run the model and obtain an option price, you simply hit the
“Calculate!” key. To change an input field value, you moved the cursor to
the relevant field, entered the data, and hit “Calculate!”again. This saved
countless keystrokes compared to the command-line interface that drove the
previous FORTRAN version. Best of all, at any instant you could save all
the details of a potential trade to a computer file for future retrieval. If you
used the calculator to value an option during a preliminary conversation
with a client, you could store all the information in the file and then resume
the discussion the next day exactly where you had left off.
Though primitive by today’s standards, this was astonishingly better than
what the desk had used before, and the traders and salespeople were
overjoyed. By creating and saving the most common types of option trades
as templates in files at the start of each day, they could respond rapidly to
clients, accommodating many more requests much more efficiently. Ever
since, it’s been impossible for me to overlook the difference that a simple
and well-designed piece of software can make to a business. Despite the
genuine glories of quantitative modeling, quant groups often have the most
dramatic effect by improving the ergonomics of trading and sales.
When I became head of the Quantitative Strategies Group in the Equities
Division a few years later, I always tried to recreate for anyone new in the
group my first fortuitous experience with a trading desk. I set them a
problem whose solution was useful to traders, and which required both
theoretical analysis and software implementation. In that way, I hoped, they
would develop a relationship with their end users in the trading division,
learn the jargon and style of the business, and combine both theory and
practicality.
Like many organizations, Goldman’s Financial Strategies Group into which
Ravi inducted me that December was rife with politics. Stan Diller, who
had left Goldman shortly before I arrived, had reportedly often kidded that
his was the only second-rate mind on Wall Street. To replace him and grow
the business, the partners in charge of the Fixed Income Division had
brought in two finance professors from the midwest. One was tall and lean,
fast-talking and confident; the other was much shorter and spoke slowly.
Their arrival didn’t displace Stan on the mind-ranking charts.
The new structure they imposed was very different from what I had seen
of Diller’s. Diller appeared to have led FSG autocratically, but with a vision
of 
trading 
as 
science. 
He 
had 
accentuated 
a 
quantitative 
approach 
to
financial research, with an emphasis on software development and trading
systems. 
He 
had 
sought 
out 
PhDs—engineers, 
physicists, 
computer
scientists, and mathematicians—most of whom arrived ignorant of finance
and then learned theory and business on the job. He sought people who
could simultaneously do finance, math, and computer science, and had an
interdisciplinary view of the world to which I’m still partial.
The new hegemony placed more emphasis on management. They had
been given carte blanche to grow and they went on a hiring spree that
rapidly grew the Strategies group from fifteen or twenty ex-scientists to
about a hundred people, many of them professional managers who claimed
they knew how to “talk to traders.” They certainly knew enough to realize
that they were on to a good thing and wisely made the most of it while it
lasted. Over time, the modeling and programming groups became inverted
pyramids: one or two technically skilled people at the bottom, who could
write programs or build models, supporting a larger number of human
conduits above them who passed the results up to the trading desk and then
passed the subsequent responses back down again. Having a PhD and being
good at research or being able to program well was not an advantage in this
structure.
David Garbasz, with his usual accurate eye and sharp tongue, took to
calling the two new heads of FSG Mutt and Jeff, and sarcastically referred
to the organization they now headed as the “Financial Tragedies Group.” In
1986 Goldman was still getting used to managing quants.
Despite the politics, I loved Goldman and FSG, and made many new
friends among the programmers and quants. Most of them were much
younger than me—it was my second career and their first. Working away in
my undistinguished cubicle—for the first year I had no seat in an office—I
did occasionally feel incongruous. One day, as I mindlessly whistled a
Beatles song to myself while I programmed my bond option model, I heard
the 23-year old kid in the next cube turn around and exclaim astonishedly,
“How do you know that?” In fact, though, age didn’t matter that much if
you had ability, and the turbulence in financial markets since then—the
crashes of 1987 and 1989, the collapse of Long Term Capital Management
and Russia’s default in 1998—has made the appearance of maturity an
advantage.
Among 
the 
new 
people 
I 
met 
was 
Roscoe, 
the 
amiable, 
cheerily
disillusioned leader of a group of good-humored programmer malcontents
who occupied the cubicles on what he called Dissident Row. Everyone on
Dissident Row ate lunch early and then took a constitutional up to the
Brooklyn Bridge and back again. Roscoe’s real name was William Dumas
and he was rumored to be related to Alexandre Dumas, père. He had little
respect for the new regime in FSG, and referred caustically to one of the
new MIS managers who circulated ancient corporate memos on good
programming style from his previous employer as the “Master of the Do-
Loop.” 
Roscoe 
had 
a 
minor 
genius 
for 
creating 
inventively 
allusive
nicknames for new people in FSG. His method was Cockney rhyming, an
associative slang in which, for example, the number five is referred to as
“Lady” because Lady is short for Lady Godiva, and Godiva rhymes with
“fiver,” the colloquial term for the old British 5-pound note (as in “Can you
lend 
me 
a 
fiver?”). 
In 
this 
spirit 
he 
dubbed 
a 
newly 
hired 
Pakistani
programmer “Mander,” because his true name was Salah, reminiscent of
Salamander. He christened me “E-man,” which I liked, because it was
almost identical to the shortened version of “Emanuel” that my family and
friends in South Africa had always called me since childhood, and, like
Roscoe’s other christenings, it stuck with me for the rest of my time at
Goldman. After the 1994 fixed-income market slump, Roscoe left Goldman
to work for Iris, a financial software company in San Francisco run by an
old friend of mine, ex-Wells Fargo quant Jeremy Evnine.
Another new hire at Goldman was a fellow South African, Jonathan Berk,
who had come to work at Goldman as an analyst with an undergraduate
degree. He was wildly fired up about finance and markets and I soon got
my 
first 
glimpse 
of 
capitalist 
thinking. 
Shortly 
after 
I 
arrived, 
the
Challenger space shuttle exploded, and Jonathan, young and naive and
enthusiastic, rushed off to call his Goldman stockbroker to buy puts on
Morton Thiokol, hoping to profit from a drop in the price of the company
that designed the leaky seals in the booster. Witnessing his quick response
to the shuttle disaster, I thought Jonathan was destined for the business
world, but I was wrong. Stimulated by financial theory, he left Goldman a
few years later to get a PhD in finance and is now a professor at Berkeley. I
met him again 15 years later, in November 2000, at a meeting of the
sponsors of the new Berkeley degree in financial engineering, where I
represented Goldman. Fervent as ever, he told me that in 1986 he had
expected finance to become the theoretical physics of the twenty-first
century. We laughed a little at the mismatch between fantasy and reality.
Jonathan traveled from business to academia. Others at Goldman took the
reverse route. Another South African colleague in FSG was Ron Dembo, an
academic and expert at optimization whom Mutt and Jeff had brought in as
a consultant to help structure bond portfolios. Ron flew down from Toronto
to New York for three days a week, staying in an apartment provided for
him by Goldman, and in turn hired several other academics. For many of us
it was our first glimpse of the perquisites of life with an expense account,
and we marveled at it. Ron had an entrepreneurial streak and understood the
value of systems and software for managing portfolio risk. He left Goldman
in 1987, and shortly thereafter founded Algorithmics, a now prominent
company that produces risk-management software.
I also began a long association with Bill Toy, who was already working
for Fischer Black in the Equities Division when I arrived. Bill and I had
both come to Goldman from physics by way of Bell Labs, and we had the
same mutual scorn for the Bell environment and its bureaucracy. Fischer,
whom I met only briefly in my first few weeks at Goldman, was in charge
of the small Quantitative Strategies group in the Equities Division that built
models and trading software for the equities business.
Another immensely talented programmer in FSG was Dave Griswold,
who had been hired into Financial Strategies from Grumman Aircraft on
Long Island only a few months before me. In his late twenties and armed
with a BS in Computer Science from Rensselaer Polytechnic, Dave loved
software in general and object-oriented programming, a methodology then
beginning to penetrate the commercial world, in particular. Perhaps because
there are several famous Griswolds in academic computer science, as well
as the character Chevy Chase plays in “National Lampoon’s Vacation”
series, Dave liked to refer to himself as “Griswlod.” It was sophomoric, but
it grew on you.
Dave was less a Wall Streeter and more a genuine computer science
aficionado at heart. In classic UNIX style, he liked to first build the tools he
needed for any new job. He always thought big. Asked to write a new
program, he would ambitiously decide that it should be capable of running
on any hardware and under any operating system. In order to achieve that,
he had to shield his program from the details of a particular machine by
creating his own version of all the infrastructure his program needed. Dave
therefore 
created 
his 
own 
portable 
version 
of 
most 
of 
the 
facilities
(windows, menus, files, databases, and so on) that DOS or UNIX provided.
I have seen many smart programmers indulge themselves by attempting
to create everything ab initio; most of them who try fall into bottomless pits
from which they never emerge, ceaselessly spiraling inwards in their effort
to recreate portable versions of everything you could normally take for
granted and get for free. What distinguished Dave from the ordinary
stubborn people who wanted to build their own hammers, saws, and levels
before starting to build the house was that he knew where to stop; he would
finish building just the tools he needed and then use them to create the
system itself.
David was a great fan of elegant and consistent computer languages. He
loved Lisp and adored Smalltalk, one of the many Xerox PARC inventions
that inspired the Macintosh environment. He was a devotee of Objective C,
a Smalltalk-flavored C dialect that was an integral part of the operating
system for Steve Jobs’s Next computer before he returned to Apple. A few
years later Dave wrote his own object-oriented language, which he called
GoldC, for internal use at Goldman. In the long run, his interests would take
him back to the software world.
Only three months after I arrived, Ravi departed to run Prudential-Bache’s
fixed income strategies group a few blocks away on Water Street. Several
of Diller’s senior strategists in FSG had already left, and now more of them
continued out the door. Dennis Adler left for Dillon Reed and eventually
ended 
up 
at 
Salomon 
Brothers, 
both 
firms 
that 
no 
longer 
exist 
as
independent entities as a result of the enormous consolidation in financial
services over the past fifteen years. Diller called me once to invite me to
join him at Bear Stearns, but, disturbed though I was by Ravi’s abrupt
departure, it was much too soon for me to leave a place where I had just
arrived. Instead, I put my head down and concentrated on work.
The bond options traders who were using Bosco began asking for many
enhancements, 
and 
so, 
sometime 
in 
mid-1986, 
they 
authorized 
Dave
Griswold and me to build them a more advanced trading system. I would
provide the analytical and computational subroutines which Dave would
embed in his infrastructure. For several months we all fiercely debated
which computing platform to use. I was vehemently in favor of UNIX, the
richest development environment, and the one I knew best. Bill Toy, who
claimed great experience with the UNIX file system from the Labs, thought
it was unreliable. Dave, predictably idiosyncratic and uncorporate, wanted
to use Symbolics Lisp machines, then the cutting-edge computers for
artificial intelligence. He envisaged that their massive amount of RAM
would store the entire trading system in memory rather than on disk.
(Massive 
is 
highly 
relative. 
The 
64 
Mb 
RAM 
of 
yesteryear’s 
shared
Symbolics machine is puny compared with the now modest 640 Mb on the
personal Apple laptop that I use today.) Eventually we built the system on
Sun workstations running UNIX.
Thus passed my first few happy months in the financial industry. At Bell
Labs, from the day I had arrived, I had felt like someone past his prime.
Now, at Goldman, despite the forty years behind me, I felt renewed. In the
evenings I rode the subway home along Broadway to the Upper West Side
and pored over textbooks by Cox and Rubinstein or Jarrow and Rudd,
excited to be learning stochastic calculus and using my head again. One
evening, someone from my old vanpool to the Labs got into the same
subway car as me on Fourteenth Street. Seeing me engrossed in symbols,
scribbling proofs on my lap on the shaky train, he laughed good-naturedly
but incredulously at me for sitting there and doing mathematics on the
subway—that was what you were meant to leave behind when you joined
the business world!
But I remember thinking quite the opposite: What an enormous relief it
was to be in a place where people actually wanted you to spend your time
on what you liked! I told my vanpool friend that I could easily imagine
doing this sort of work for another ten or fifteen years.
...