Chapter 10
Easy Travel to Other Planets
The history of options theory
Meeting and working with Fischer Black
The Black-Derman-Toy model
Wall Street had never been a place for academics. Yet, from the day I got to
Goldman in late 1985, I kept hearing people talk with awe about Fischer
Black, codiscoverer of the Black-Scholes equation for options pricing and
the head of Goldman’s Quantitative Strategies group. I saw him once at a
meeting in the first few months after I arrived, but never spoke to him until
the traders on the bond options desk arranged for us to meet.
Some traders are scornful of models; others will rely on them blindly. Our
bond options traders knew that you need to layer visceral trading smarts
over and above a consistent options pricing model. They understood they
needed something beyond Ravi’s original model, and so they approached
Fischer about taking the next step. Since I had earned some credit for
having diagnosed and then eliminated one small but glaring inconsistency
in Ravi’s model soon after I arrived, they therefore suggested that I join
Fischer in an effort to build a better model.
Before I went up to his office on the twenty-ninth floor to meet him, to
show him what I had done so far, and, implicitly, to see if he would have me
work with him, I read a little more on the history of options theory.
Until the early 1970s, no one knew how to estimate the value of options in a
convincing way. A call option that paid off when the stock price rose
seemed much like a bet on a horse: The more optimistic you were about the
stock’s future prospects, the more you should be willing to pay for it. Each
person set his own fair price.
Then, 
in 
1973, 
Fischer 
Black 
and 
Myron 
Scholes 
published 
their
eponymous Black-Scholes equation for the value of an option. That same
year, Robert Merton 
provided 
a more rigorous and 
insightful 
way 
of
understanding 
the 
argument 
behind 
their 
equation. 
Eventually, 
his
formalism came to supplant theirs, and became the standard. Merton and
Scholes won the 1997 Nobel Prize in Economics for their work, but Fischer,
who was certainly their equal, died in 1995. Had he been fortunate enough
to have lived a couple of years longer, he would surely have been a
corecipient of the Prize.
I 
used 
to 
find 
it 
almost 
impossible 
to 
understand 
why 
the 
Nobel
committee didn’t award the Prize for options theory before Fischer died.
Everyone in the finance community knew that it was only a matter of time
before Black, Scholes, and Merton would receive the award, and it had also
been common knowledge for several years that Black was mortally ill with
throat 
cancer. 
I’ve 
heard 
speculations 
that 
the 
Nobel 
committee 
was
reluctant to give the award to someone who worked in the business world,
especially 
in 
the 
profitable 
and 
untheoretical 
business 
of 
investment
banking.
Fischer, who had a PhD in Applied Mathematics from Harvard, had been
a management consultant at Arthur D. Little and Co. when he developed the
Black-Scholes model. One did not think of management consulting as the
locus of groundbreaking theorists, but Fischer was always proud of his
practical 
and 
unorthodox 
background. 
Once 
his 
contributions 
were
recognized, he became a professor of finance at Chicago and then at MIT,
finally leaving academia for Goldman Sachs in 1984. Though Merton and
Scholes had each kept at least one foot in the academic world, both of them
had worked as consultants or employees of Salomon Brothers at various
times, and in 1994, became partners and attractors of capital at Long Term
Capital Management, the leveraged hedge fund run by John Meriwether and
his ex-Salomon “arb group.” I noticed that the 1997 Nobel Prize citation
referred only to the university affiliations of Merton and Scholes, and not to
their corporate connection—perhaps the Nobel committee really did have
an aversion to the business world. Though the Nobel Prize sounds as though
it is awarded by the gods, committees are merely groups of people with
their own preferences.
Throughout his life, Fischer was genuinely in love with the idea of
equilibrium, and he invented the Black-Scholes equation in the late 1960s
by 
applying 
the 
condition 
of 
equilibrium 
to 
markets 
themselves.
Equilibrium 
is 
a 
common 
and 
very 
powerful 
concept 
in 
physics; 
in
equilibrium, the numerical values we observe for quantities of interest in a
stable system are the values that cause two opposing forces to cancel
exactly. 
For 
example, 
the 
temperature 
of 
a 
body 
stops 
rising 
at 
that
equilibrium temperature at which the heat flowing into the body is canceled
by 
the 
heat 
flowing 
out. 
Fischer 
believed 
that 
market 
prices 
were
determined by similar cancelations.
Fischer first obtained the Black-Scholes equation by demanding that an
option on stock and the stock itself be in equilibrium with each other, in the
sense that their respective prices should each provide investors with the
same expected return per unit of risk they carried. An investor would then
be 
impartial 
between 
buying 
the 
stock 
and 
buying 
the 
option. 
This
condition, written down mathematically, was the Black-Scholes equation; it
determined the value of the option. It took several years more before Black
and Scholes provided the eventual solution to the equation.
Merton, working in parallel, went deeper. He showed that there was a
recipe for synthesizing a stock option out of a mixture of shares of stock
and cash, a mixture whose proportions must be readjusted continuously by
exchanging some shares of stock for cash, or vice versa. An investor who
bought the initial mixture and then carried out the readjustment recipe
would end up with precisely the same payout as the stock option, and so the
option’s value should be exactly the cost of purchasing the initial mixture.
The recipe for synthesizing an option was called dynamic replication—
replication because you were reproducing the option, dynamic because you
had to keep changing the mixture in order to do it. Replicating an option
was like riding a toboggan with your eyes closed down its serpentine track
—you needed a recipe for which way to bank at each point in time. Black-
Scholes gave you that recipe. Merton justified it.
That 
you 
could 
dynamically 
replicate 
an 
option 
was 
an 
almost
confounding result. Until Black, Scholes, and Merton, came along, no one
imagined that you could create an option out of simpler securities. Now an
option was seen to be merely a subtle mixture of simpler securities, stock
and cash, in constantly changing but known proportions.
Merton relied on a mathematical formalism called stochastic calculus, the
study of the rate of change of randomly varying quantities such as the price
of a stock or the position of a dust particle in a room. At graduate school in
the 1960s, 1970s, and throughout my subsequent life as a postdoc, I had
never 
heard 
of 
stochastic 
calculus. 
Nowadays, 
its 
methods 
are
commonplace to all quants and graduate students in finance; every ex-
physicist looking for a job on Wall Street begins by studying the subject.
Black and Scholes’s 1973 paper, in which they presented both their own
and Merton’s derivation of the equation, was sufficiently arcane that it took
several years to get it published. Indeed, it was repeatedly rejected until
Merton Miller at the University of Chicago interceded on their behalf.
The two simultaneous but complementary derivations of the theory of
options pricing in the early 1970s, Black and Scholes’s and Merton’s,
reminded me of the complementary derivations of renormalizable quantum
electrodynamics by Feynman and Schwinger in the late 1940s. Feynman
and Schwinger each used drastically different approaches to reach similar
results, their respective formalisms so dissimilar that no one understood
their equivalence until it was demonstrated by Freeman Dyson. Thereafter,
Feynman’s more intuitive approach became the standard. Black and Scholes
and Merton also utilized different approaches; over the long run Merton’s
more 
formal 
and 
powerful 
methods 
became 
the 
standard, 
and 
were
eventually used by Fischer himself.
From the moment it appeared in print, the Black-Scholes-Merton theory
was embraced, not only by academics but by options dealers. Before the
advent of the model, a dealer who sold a call option to a client had to take
the other side of the trade; the dealer then bore the risk, if the stock price
went up, of having to pay the client out of pocket. After the model’s dawn,
a dealer could use its recipe to roll his or her own option out of stock and
cash, and estimate the cost of doing so. The dealer could then sell the
homemade option to the client, ideally being left with no risk at all.
Options 
dealers 
soon 
began 
to 
use 
the 
Black-Scholes 
model 
to
manufacture options out of raw stock and then sell them. Dealers charged a
fee for this manufacture, just like any other value-added reseller.
On Wall Street, quants, traders, and salespeople make daily use of the
stock 
options 
model 
and 
its 
extensions. 
During 
the 
past 
thirty 
years,
academics in business schools, mathematicians in math departments, and
quants in investment banks and hedge funds have applied similar methods
to produce models for options on bonds, options on interest rates, options
on credit ratings, options on energy, and even options on volatility itself.
Though the simple and profound idea of Black, Scholes, and Merton has
remained 
unchanged, 
the 
mathematics 
has 
become 
more 
elaborate,
complex, and daunting.
Black and Scholes’s original model assumed almost platonically simple
markets. They allowed for the uncertainty of future stock price movements,
but ignored other more detailed complexities. However, their model proved
to be extensible and robust—one could augment it to take account of the
imperfections of actual trading. The model accommodated these and other
refinements 
while 
leaving 
the 
basic 
strategy 
substantially 
unchanged.
Options theory is one of the great triumphs of economics, conceptually
simple and pragmatically useful despite its complex mathematics. If only
the rest of economics had similar efficacy!
I knocked on the door of Fischer’s office and entered. Inside, it was quiet
and low-lit, a location for work rather than meetings. At Goldman an office
was a token of seniority, a very expensive pocket of personal real estate.
Many of the fancily furnished offices on the equity floor were largely
uninhabited, filled with tombstones of past deals executed by the traders
and salespeople who had no time for office work. Fischer’s office was much
less glamorous; it was dominated by a large Nike poster of a long road
disappearing into the distance and, below it, the caption: “The race is not
always to the swift, but to those who keep on running.”
Brought to Goldman Sachs from MIT by Bob Rubin in 1984, Fischer was
one of the first finance academics to head for Wall Street; he became a
Goldman partner in 1986. Unlike other professors in the industry who
maintained their umbilical links to the safe haven of academia, Fischer
embraced the business world wholeheartedly. Now I was about to meet him.
After a brief introduction, I began to show him Bosco, the bond options
model and its graphical user interface I had built for the options desk.
Fischer, like everyone else in the less numerate Equities Division, used a
PC running DOS, but I had developed my software on the more advanced
VAX we all used in Fixed Income. I logged on to the VAX through a VT-
100 terminal emulator on Fischer’s PC. Almost as soon as my program
started running the VAX itself crashed, and we were left looking at the
frozen screen image of my calculator. I couldn’t run the program, I couldn’t
toggle or change the values of any of the fields—we could only observe
them carefully on the monitor. I offered to come back later when the VAX
was up again, but Fischer was quite unperturbed. He spent the next hour
carefully examining the screen I had built, commenting on its layout.
Those were the days of limited computer-screen real estate: I had 24 lines
of 80 characters to work with, and all of the approximately twenty-five
input and output fields used in Bosco had to fit in that space. Fischer
meticulously inspected each field, making reasonable but almost picayune
comments about some of their labels. Because of the lack of space, I had
had to abbreviate most labels, and had half-jokingly contracted the variable
named bond duration to the inelegant durn, which he particularly disliked.
Later in the conversation—because I was unschooled in finance and had
been in the field only a few months—I periodically referred to “an option
on a future contract” and each time Fischer quickly corrected me by
brusquely interjecting “futures contract.”
I was surprised at his willingness to spend so much time on the mere
interface to Ravi’s model, when he hadn’t yet seen the calculator work or
listened to my explanation of how I had modified it. When I returned to my
fixed-income colleagues later that day, my feelings a little bruised by his
criticisms, I scoffed at his attitude. But I soon discovered that Fischer was
always a stickler for precision, and clear expression was an invariant
devotion of his. Over the years, I became a convert and tried as hard as I
could, in anything I subsequently wrote, to be as clear and didactic as
possible.
During the weeks after he first examined my frozen Bosco computer
screen, I learned much more about Fischer’s computer prejudices. Some of
them were quite reactionary. He disapproved of “mice” and other computer
pointing devices. He thought keyboards were the ideal means of data entry;
he insisted that anything one could do with a mouse could be done better
with macro redefinitions of particular keys on the keyboard. Finally, he
disliked graphics, and claimed that unadorned tables of numbers were more
evocative and revealing. There was no persuading him on these issues; they
were a part of his near-magnificent obsession about presentation style.
There were other quirks, harmless but irritating. He demanded strict
standards on the display of numbers, intensely objecting to any printout that
included more digits after the decimal point than was warranted by the
accuracy of the calculation. Now everyone agrees that it is objectionable to
report a measurement of room temperature as 73.1457° F—the implied
precision is false—but Fischer logically extended his disapproval to the
display of any excess zeros at the end of a decimal number, a feature he
dubbed “trailing zeros.” If a bond had a yield of 12 percent, he wanted it
printed as a confident “12%” rather than as a tentative “12.00%” which
would have suggested that it was only accurate to two decimal places. If
Fischer did not find the display satisfactory, you could spend too much time
talking to him about style and never progress to the content.
Eventually, therefore, everyone who worked with Fischer for even a little
while wrote their own version of a subroutine that stripped all the trailing
zeros off a number before displaying it. Bill Toy and I used to joke that you
could identify Fischer’s collaborators by searching their hard disks for a
subroutine called removeTrailingZeros( ).
Sometimes Fischer took this a little too far. One day a few months later I
made use of an options calculator built by someone in his group. It required
that you enter the stock’s dividend yield, and so I entered the number “0” in
the field. For a brief subliminal instant I saw the numeral zero I had entered
fluoresce onto the screen, and then vanish, leaving an empty field. Thinking
I had made a typing mistake, I entered the zero again. Again, miragelike,
the ghostly zero flickered and deliquesced. Then I realized what was
happening. The programmer had blindly followed Fischer’s dictum to
remove all trailing zeros, and since the number “0” was all zeros, it
removed the entire number, leaving the impression that nothing had been
entered. The program had no respect for the philosophical distinction
between nothing and zero.
Just as on the first day I visited him, Fischer was always quiet and calm,
always in visible equilibrium. He never seemed to allow his work life to
become an exercise in the exhausting multitasking (and the macho pride in
coping with it) that quickly became a way of life for people at investment
banks. Most often, when you went to visit him, you would find him reading,
or on the telephone, or sitting with his back to the door, his PC keyboard on
his lap and his chair swiveled 180 degrees to face the PC on the bureau by
the window behind his chair, entering notes into Thinktank, a late-1980s
organizer program he used constantly.
Fischer filed all his memos and notes in Thinktank; Beverly Bell, his
editor at Goldman, said that he accumulated over 20 million bytes of text in
it, from addresses and phone numbers to thoughts and ideas. People I knew
in 
his 
group 
claimed 
that 
he 
conducted 
a 
continuing 
and 
eager
correspondence with the Thinktank designers in order to suggest additions
or modifications he wanted to see.
Fischer 
was 
precise 
and 
organized, 
quite 
punctilious. 
Every 
day 
he
ordered the same ascetically healthy meal delivered to his desk. He liked to
wear a Casio information-storing watch, which prompted some of his
employee-admirers to do likewise. In his office giving audience, if you said
something 
he 
found 
useful, 
he 
wrote 
it 
down 
with 
his 
fine-pointed
mechanical pencil on a fresh sheet of his ruled white pad, and then tore it
off and inserted it into a new manila folder which he labeled and then
placed in one of his file drawers. In an article published after his death,
Beverly described the 6,000 files he left behind, now archived at MIT.
Fischer was unashamed of his nerdish enthusiasm for technology, in
contrast to most of Wall Street in the 1980s, where important managers
prided themselves on their ignorance of computers. Some managers I knew
eschewed not only computers, but even desks in their offices, preferring a
large conference table to signify their major role as decision makers.
When I began to work with Fischer, I thought he had some strange tastes.
You couldn’t easily guess his attitude to one question by knowing his
opinion about another, though what he said was always thoughtful and
sensible. But over subsequent years I learned that he was a rarity, one of
those people you only occasionally meet, someone whose character is a
coherent whole even though its parts seem uncorrelated. At bottom, he
simply liked to think through everything for himself. This didn’t make him
a great rebel, but rather an outsider whose work had vast impact on the
world of insiders. It was impressive to watch.
Back in FSG after meeting Fischer, I continued studying the classic Black-
Scholes model for stock options and the way in which Ravi had modified it
for use on the bond options desk.
Options have value because future stock prices are uncertain, and the
further out into the future you go, the more uncertain they become. A great
deal of options theory is concerned with the modeling of future uncertainty.
Figure 10.1 illustrates in a simplified way how Black and Scholes pictured
the uncertainty of a stock’s future price. As time passes, the region in which
the future stock price is likely to lie progressively widens. A stock worth
$100 today could be worth anything between zero and a very large number
thirty years from now. (If you bought internet stocks in the late 1990s, you
understand this all too well.)
Figure 10.1 The distribution of possible future prices over 30 years for a
stock whose price is $100 today. The more time passes, the greater the
uncertainty in the future price. The darker the shading, the more likely the
price will be in that region.
Bonds are different. While no one knows the future price of a stock, a
$100 initial investment in a thirty-year Treasury bond is guaranteed to pay
you back exactly $100 when the bond matures. The shaded region in Figure
10.2 illustrates the approximate range of a bond’s future price: It widens as
we move away from the known bond price of $100 today, and then
converges towards the certain value of $100 thirty years from now.
Figure 10.2 The distribution of possible future prices for a bond whose
price is $100 today. After thirty years, the bond must again be worth exactly
$100. The darker the shading, the more likely the price will be in that
region.
The straightforward but simplistic way to value bond options in 1985 was
to use the Black-Scholes model as is, thereby implicitly assuming that bond
prices followed the distribution of Figure 10.1 rather than Figure 10.2. For
short-term options expiring within a year or two, it didn’t matter much. You
can see that, for the first year, the distribution of bond prices closely
resembles the distribution of stock prices. Consequently, the Black-Scholes
model is not a bad approximation for short-term (one-year) bond options.
But for longer-term options, the bond and stock distributions are vastly
different. For long-term bond options, a different model is needed.
Various academics had attempted to alter some of the assumptions about
the future evolution of stock prices in the Black-Scholes model so as to
make it better mimic the bond price distribution of Figure 10.2. In a similar
spirit, but with greater practicality since he was part of a business, Ravi had
invented 
the 
then-current 
Goldman 
bond 
options 
model 
by 
cleverly
modeling the future behavior of bond yields rather than bond prices. A
bond’s yield is the average annual percentage return you will earn if you
buy it at its current price and then hold it to maturity while collecting all the
coupons and the final repayment of principal. Ravi simply assumed that a
bond’s yield rather than its price obeyed the ever-widening Black-Scholes
distribution of Figure 10.1. In that case, as time passes and the bond gets
very close to its maturity, the future value of its yield, no matter how high
or low it ranges, becomes irrelevant to the bond price; too little time is left
until maturity for the yield to have an effect. Therefore, although the
distribution of bond yields in Ravi’s option model grew limitlessly high or
low as time passed and resembled Figure 10.1, the bond prices computed
from these yields looked much like those of Figure 10.2.
Ravi’s model did a reasonable job of capturing the future behavior of a
bond’s price. It also matched the intuition of the traders, who were already
used to thinking about bonds in terms of their yields, and so took naturally
to thinking about the range or volatility of yields. The same good idea often
occurs to several people simultaneously, and versions of the model soon
popped up independently at other Wall Street firms. When I came to work
at Salomon Brothers a few years later, I found they had a similar scheme.
But there were deeper, subtler problems with the model that arose from its
origin in the Black-Scholes framework. Just as the Black-Scholes model
treats each stock as an independent variable, so Ravi’s model treated each
bond as independent. Doing so led to a host of conceptual inconsistencies.
For, while there is nothing obviously wrong in imagining that the future
prices of a share of IBM and a share of AT&T can vary independently, it is
inconsistent to model the future prices of, say, a five-year bond and a three-
year bond as varying independently. If you do, things fall apart.
Bonds are connected to each other. The future behaviors of a five-year
bond and a three-year bond are not independent, but overlapping: Two years
from now, the five-year bond will be a three-year bond, so you cannot
model one bond’s future without implicitly modeling another. In fact, it is
impossible to model one bond without modeling all of them.
A five-year bond and a three-year bond have other commonalities, too.
You can think of a five-year Treasury bond that pays interest every six
months as a collection of ten zero-coupon bonds with maturities spread six
months apart over the next five years. Similarly, a three-year Treasury bond
is 
a 
collection 
of 
six 
zero-coupon 
bonds 
respectively 
maturing 
every
successive six months over the next three years. Decomposed in this way,
the bonds’ ingredients are shared: Both contain the first six zero-coupon
bonds. Therefore, in modeling the three-year bond, you are also implicitly
modeling parts of the five-year bond.
In essence, Ravi’s model allowed impermissible violations of the law of
one 
price 
that 
lies 
beneath 
all 
rational 
financial 
modeling. 
This 
law
demands that any two securities with the same final payouts must have the
same current value. Now, there is a combination of short-term options on
long-term bonds that has exactly the same payout as a short-term bond, and
therefore, the combination of options should have the same theoretical
value as the short-term bond, despite their formally different names. But
Ravi modeled long-term bonds independently of short-term ones, and so the
model had no way of enforcing this equivalence.
Every hard look at Ravi’s model led to the same insight: It is impossible
to model bonds piecemeal, one bond at a time. You must build a model of
the future evolution of all bonds, that is, of the yield curve itself. This was
our aim.
I had left Fischer’s office a little chastened by his sharp remarks about the
names of the fields on my calculator, but in a few days he let me know that
I could join him and Bill Toy in their effort to create a new bond options
model. It was a singular opportunity that had a large and beneficial effect on
my life.
That spring of 1986 I attended my first options conference, an annual
event organized by Howard Baker, Menachem Brenner, and Dan Galai at
the Amex. I was one of about a hundred participating quants, traders and
academics, all of us actively involved in the field at a time when options
meetings were still a rarity, before the conference-for-profit organizations
like Risk magazine began to dominate the market and eventually put the
Amex options conference out of business. I recall several presentations on
new models for valuing bond options, one in particular by Rick Bookstaber,
then at Morgan Stanley. You could sense a rising urgency, almost a race, to
solve the problem. Fischer told Bill and me that Bob Merton was working
on the same problem as a consultant for another investment bank.
The Goldman contingent at the conference had more than an academic
interest—our traders were making daily markets in long-expiration options
on long-dated bonds, precisely the domain where the contradictions in
Ravi’s model were most severe. The traders were aware of their need for a
better model, and as such were at the forefront of the impetus to replace it.
We knew that we had to model the future behavior of all Treasury bonds,
that is, the evolution of the entire yield curve. How to set about it was
neither obvious nor easy. A stock price is a single number, and when you
model its evolution, you project only one number into an uncertain future.
In contrast, the yield curve is a continuum, a string or rubber band whose
every 
point, 
at 
any 
instant, 
represents 
the 
yield 
of 
a 
bond 
with
corresponding maturity. As time passes and bond prices change, the yield
curve moves, as illustrated in Figure 10.3. To evolve the entire yield curve
forward in time is a much more difficult task: Just as you cannot move the
different points on a string completely independently of each other, because
the string must stay connected, so bonds close to each other must stay
connected, too.
Figure 10.3 Yield curves can vary during the day.
How, then, to project bond prices into the future? Fischer, Bill, and I were
pragmatists. We were building a model for traders, and we wanted it to be
simple, consistent, and reasonably realistic. Simple meant that only one
random factor drove all changes. Consistent meant that it had to value all
bonds in agreement with their current market prices; if it produced the
wrong bond prices, it was pointless to use it to value options on those
bonds. Finally, realistic meant that the model’s future yield curves should
move through ranges similar to those experienced by actual yield curves.
When 
physicists 
build 
models, 
they 
often 
first 
resort 
to 
a 
toy
representation of the world in which space and time are discrete and exist
only at points on a lattice—it makes picturing the mathematics much easier.
We built our model in the same vein. We imagined a world in which the
shortest investment you could make lasted exactly one year, and was
represented by the one-year Treasury bill interest rate. Longer-term rates
would then be a reflection of the market’s perception of the probable range
of future short-term (that is, one-year) rates.
In this spirit, we built a simple model of future one-year rates that
resembled a discrete version of the stock price distributions of Figure 10.1.
The initial one-year rate, as shown in Figure 10.4, was known from the
current yield curve. As you looked further out into the future, rates could
range over progressively wider values.
Figure 10.4 The Black-Derman-Toy model focuses on the distribution of
future short-term rates. Here, each dot corresponds to a particular value of
the future one-year rate. The more time passes, the greater the uncertainty
of future rates.
In order to complete our model, we now had to determine the range of
future one-year rates at every year in the future. In our model, the key
principle 
was 
to 
think 
of 
longer-term 
bonds 
as 
being 
generated 
by
successive investments in short-term bonds. From this point of view, two
years of interest is obtained by two successive one-year investments, the
first at a known rate, the second at an uncertain one. The market’s price for
a two-year bond today depends on its view of the distribution of future one-
year rates. You can calculate the logical value of the current two-year bond
yield, from the current one-year yield and the distribution of one-year rates
one year hence. Similarly, you can calculate the volatility or uncertainty of
the current two-year yield from the volatility of the distribution of one-year
rates one year hence. Alternatively, working backwards, since the current
two-year yield and its volatility is known from the market, you can deduce
the distribution of one-year rates one-year hence, as shown in Figure 10.5.
Figure 10.5 How the distribution of future one-year rates is deduced from
the current yield curve in the Black-Derman-Toy model. The two-year yield
to maturity fixes the distribution of one-year rates after one year, the three-
year yield to maturity fixes the distribution of one-year rates after two
years, and so on.
In the same way, the value of the current three-year yield can be found
from the current one-year rate, the known distribution of one-year rates one
year hence (already deduced from the current two-year yield) and the
distribution of one-year rates two years hence. But, since the value of the
current three-year yield is known, you can use it to deduce the distribution
of one-year rates two years hence. Continuing in this way, you can use the
current yield curve at any instant to pin down the range of all future one-
year rates, as illustrated in Figure 10.5.
This was the essence of our model. When Bill and I programmed it, it
seemed 
to 
work—we 
could 
extract 
the 
market’s 
expectation 
of 
the
distributions of future one-year rates from the current yield curve and its
volatility. There was nothing holy about the one-year time steps we started
with. Once the model worked, we used monthly, weekly, or sometimes even
daily steps on a lattice, determining the market’s view of the distribution of
future short-term rates at any instant from the current yield curve. A typical
lattice (or tree, as we called it, because of the way an initial interest rate
forked out into progressively wider branches) had hundreds or thousands of
equally spaced short periods, as illustrated in Figure 10.6.
Figure 10.6 A schematic illustration of a multiperiod short-rate tree in the
Black-Derman-Toy model with equal periods extending for many years.
We had aimed to make our model simple and consistent, and it was—we
could match all current bond prices with one tree. We could then use the
same calibrated tree to value any security whose payouts in the future had a
known dependence on interest rates by averaging those payouts over the
distribution. In particular, we could value the payout of an option of any
expiration on a bond of any maturity.
It was particularly attractive that our new model satisfied the law of one
price. Our tree functioned as a computational engine that produced the
current value of a security by averaging its future payouts; you put future
payouts onto the end of the tree, cranked the handle that averaged and then
discounted them over the interest rate distribution, and ended up with the
current price. The engine didn’t care what name you gave to the security
that produced the payout—bond, option, call it what you like. As long as
the future payouts were identical, the engine produced the same price.
By late 1986, less than a year after I came to Goldman, we had most of the
model implemented and running at reasonable speed. Now we began trying
it out on actual options traded by the desk, cataloging the ways in which its
prices differed from those of Ravi’s model. Our traders’ intuition had been
honed 
on 
the 
old 
model, 
and 
they 
were 
sensibly 
conservative 
about
switching—it 
is 
never 
wise 
to 
start 
using 
something 
new 
until 
you
understand how well it glues on to what you used before. You need a feel
for a model before you can begin to rely on it. Therefore, some of the sales
assistants in Financial Strategies began to test it, and slowly convinced
themselves that it satisfied the law of one price, something that was
theoretically obvious to us but not yet practically clear to them.
I was tremendously excited by 
what we had done. 
Still 
at heart a
physicist, and still philosophically naive about financial modeling, I half-
thought of what we had built as a grand unified theory of interest rates, and
imagined we could use it to value every interest rate-sensitive security in
the universe.
Fischer, however, disliked this view of our model. More practical and
much more experienced, he knew that there were financial forces that lay
outside our model; it seemed perfectly possible to him that the model might
be good (if it was good at all) for one sector—simple options on Treasury
bonds, for example—but not for callable bonds, caps, or a host of other
optionlike fixed-income instruments. He called what we had created an “as
if” model, by which he meant that we were assuming that the world of bond
market investors behaved as if only short rates mattered.
Despite 
my 
desire 
to 
have 
done 
something 
grand, 
I, 
too, 
began 
to
recognize our model for what it was: a simple phenomenological model in
the sense that physicists use the adjective, a useful but limited toy that we
should take tentatively but seriously, trying to see how far we could push it.
We had assumed that markets care only about a single factor, the short-term
interest rate, and that all longer-term rates simply reflect the market’s
opinion of future short-term rates and their volatilities. Was that strictly
true? Of course not! The world is indescribably more complex. But what we
had was a good starting point from which to capture some of the rational
linkages between long- and short-term rates. Our model may not have been
the real world, but it was a possible real world, one of many, and that made
its prices interesting.
Fischer wanted the paper we were writing to be clear, accurate and yet not
overly mathematical. Over the next year I wrote multiple drafts which he
read and then returned with comments, and with the help of his editor
Beverly, the paper grew progressively shorter. In my previous life as a
physicist I had been a somewhat careless writer with little patience for
revision. That year of draft writing taught me the importance and pleasure
of formulating concepts qualitatively but precisely, and from then on I was
willing to struggle over small things to communicate them clearly.
Our paper, A One-Factor Model of Interest Rates and Its Application to
Treasury Bond Options, eventually appeared in the Financial Analysts
Journal in 1990, almost four years after we had developed it. To my
pleasure and surprise, it was widely adopted and rapidly became known by
the acronym for our names, BDT. It was a pity we hadn’t published earlier,
but Fischer was a perfectionist, reluctant to release it until he was truly
satisfied.
We weren’t the only builders of consistent models of the yield curve. At
Salomon 
Brothers, 
my 
friend 
Mark 
Koenigsberg 
and 
his 
boss, 
Bob
Kopprasch, who later came to head up Financial Strategies at Goldman, had
also built a fairly simple model of interest rates, though it wasn’t quite as
general as ours. Oldrich Vasiçek, always a pioneer, had published the first
Black-Scholes-style model of interest rates a good ten years earlier, in 1977;
Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross had published a more complex but related model
in 
1985. 
There 
were 
others, 
too. 
So 
why 
was 
our 
model 
so 
widely
embraced?
I can think of three reasons. First, we were practitioners and therefore
knew what a trading desk needed. While Vasiçek and the Cox-Ingersoll-
Ross team had been focused on the general problem of modeling yield
curves, we aimed squarely at bond options just when that market was
expanding.
Second, our model was easily accessible to practitioners. It was written in
a down-to-earth style using the language of binomial trees, a poor man’s
description of volatility that everyone on Wall Street could grasp. What we
described was so close to an algorithm that anyone who took the effort
could 
implement 
our 
model 
as 
a 
computer 
program. 
Most 
other
contemporary models demanded a stronger grasp of stochastic calculus to
understand them and a separate effort at numerical analysis to turn them
into 
a 
useful 
computer 
program; 
in 
our 
model, 
the 
medium 
was 
the
message: The description and the implementation were almost one.
Finally, unlike most prior models that produced analytical formulas that
didn’t match the shape of actual yield curves, ours could be calibrated to
almost any curve, and therefore was ready for the trading world. Indeed, the
description of the calibration was a critical part of our paper.
In subsequent years, hosts of new yield-curve models appeared, each
known by their authors’ acronym, and ingenious academics and quants keep
finding new and perhaps more realistic ones. You can now pick from BK
(Black and Karasinski), HW (Hull and White), and HJM (Heath, Jarrow,
and Morton) or its extension BGM (Brace, Gatarek, and Musiela). The
process continues, though which model to employ is still a matter of taste
and compromise. Selecting a model becomes a question of finding one that
is rich enough to represent most of the risks your product faces, efficient
enough to run on a computer in a tolerable amount of time, and simple
enough so that programming it is not too complex and burdensome a task.
BDT was simple and consistent, but, like any model, it was not entirely
realistic, and its limitations became increasingly apparent over the years. At
bottom, it had only a single factor of uncertainty, the future distribution of
short-term rates, and so all rates, both short and long, tended to move
together, preserving the curve’s initial shape a little too well. Therefore,
though the model was good for valuing options on bonds, it was not well
suited to valuing options on more arcane properties of the yield curve, such
as its slope or curvature.
Still, the model’s simplicity made it an easy entry point into the art of
yield-curve modeling for both practitioners and academics, and it left its
mark. It continues to be used even after superior but more complex models
have arrived on the scene.
Building the model had been tremendously absorbing, just like the old days
in physics. For most of each day I had banged my head single-mindedly
against the same problem, thinking about the trees, writing the computer
program that embodied it, searching for ways to speed it up, speaking with
Fischer 
and 
Bill, 
examining 
the 
computer’s 
results, 
making 
further
modifications. 
Sometimes 
I 
had 
difficulty 
sleeping, 
waking 
up
spontaneously in the middle of the night, unable to return to bed until I had
tried out a new scheme.
Unlike me, Fischer was patient. He took an efficient-market attitude
towards building models: Each day you looked at what you knew and
decided what was the best way to proceed next. On at least two occasions
he thought we could do better if we stopped everything and started again
from scratch. It was a trait I admired, but I didn’t have the stomach for it.
Bill and I were new to the field and eager to have our first contribution
complete and disseminated.
The first time Fischer wanted to begin all over again was when we
learned how to introduce the mean reversion of interest rates into our
model, 
an 
insight 
that, 
not 
untypically, 
came 
from 
an 
accidental
observation. Until then we had always run the model with equal time
periods in the tree. In order to speed up the program, I experimented with
varying the period length in the tree, letting it start out small in the present
and then grow large in the future. In this way I aimed to make our valuation
engine take a detailed look at distributions in the present but only a coarse
look at their behavior in the far distant and uncertain future.
When I tried to calibrate these unequally spaced trees to the current yield
curve, I ran into trouble. It often became mysteriously impossible to find
any distribution of future short-term rates that were consistent with the yield
curve. The mystery disappeared when we drew the trees and examined their
topology. Figure 10.7a shows a tree with equal-length periods. We could
now see that the increasing period lengths of Figure 10.7b caused the tree to
grow visibly wider over time, reflecting a tendency for interest rates to
move away from their mean, a runaway behavior that doesn’t mesh too well
with 
reality. 
This 
was 
what 
caused 
the 
difficulties 
with 
calibration.
Similarly, 
if 
we 
decreased 
the 
future 
period 
lengths 
as 
shown 
in
Figure10.7c, we observed that short-term rates reverted to the mean and the
tree 
tended 
to 
grow 
ever 
narrower 
with 
time. 
This 
narrowing 
tree
incorporated a restoring force that stabilized interest rates, akin to what
happens in real markets when governments and central banks intervene to
stabilize economies.
Figure 10.7 BDT short-rate trees with constant volatility but varying
periods.
When Fischer realized that a tree with decreasing periods could describe
mean reversion, he wanted us to drop our equal-period version and begin all
over again. Bill Toy and I were more anxious to complete what we had
started, 
and 
eventually 
we 
prevailed. 
The 
trees 
with 
variable 
periods
eventually became part of the Black-Karasinski model.
Fischer was the first to notice the link between period length and mean
reversion by examining the topology of the trees, and it made me aware of
his intuitive powers. Looking at the tree, he could see the dynamics that its
shape implied. It was only much later, after completing our paper, that we
worked 
out 
the 
description 
of 
our 
model 
in 
the 
elegant 
language 
of
stochastic calculus, the way it is now described in textbooks.
On a second occasion, sometime during early 1987, Fischer became
entranced by the idea of adding a second stochastic factor to our model. The
idea was sensible; our original model had simplistically assumed the entire
yield curve was driven by short-term rates, and we were tempted to make
the model truer to life by allowing longer-term rates to vary independently
of the short-term rate. Adding a second factor in our framework meant
working with two-dimensional trees. We played around with calibrating
such trees to the yield curve. But trees with two or more dimensions are not
only harder to visualize or draw, as you can see from Figure 10.8, but also
appreciably more difficult to handle in a computer program, and I was again
relieved when we postponed this elaboration in favor of completing the
delivery of our simpler model to the trading desk.
Figure 10.8 A two-dimensional tree of future interest rates.
Several years later, Fischer, Iraj Kani, and I began investigating a two-
dimensional version of the BDT model, but we never completed the work.
It takes only a good idea and a few people to develop a model, but it takes
many more people to turn the model into a usable tool. For that you need a
graphical user interface, a database that contains the details of traded
products you own, and current market data for calibration.
But 
even 
collecting 
data 
isn’t 
as 
simple 
as 
it 
seems—models 
are
everywhere. What one thinks of as “market data” are often prices filtered
through another model or calculation. Yields are extracted from collections
of bond prices. Volatility is calculated from historical returns. Each year, as
markets mature, products become more liquid and traders calibrate their
quotes to greater numbers of related securities, sometimes so many that
their prices must be obtained via electronic price feeds. All of this involves
software. Sooner or later everyone who creates a useful model gets exposed
to the truth that building a trading and risk management system around the
model is a huge and often overwhelming software project that requires
many more programmers than quants. Models, critical though they are, are
only a small part of the story.
Back in 1986 when we developed our yield curve model, traders were
quite willing to enter a yield curve into the system manually, and I was
perfectly capable of building most of the system and user interface around
the model myself. I delivered it to the traders on the bond options desk and
they began testing it immediately.
As they began to use our model I ran into my first taste of battle with
“middlemen,” the people appointed to intermediate between the producers
and users of models. Middlemen—usually one per desk—sat with the
traders and got to know their business well.
Middlemen serve a useful task. It’s not easy for a quant to understand the
finance, build the model, do the math, write the program, and still have the
time to work closely with the trading desk. Traders, always rushed, need a
middleman to coordinate their requirements, to make them agree on their
most 
urgent 
needs. 
Since 
traders 
and 
quants 
speak 
slightly 
different
languages, it’s good to have someone who can understand both sides’
dialects and serve as the designated mediator.
Unfortunately, the middlemen on the corporate and Treasury desks at that
time preferred that the model creators remain invisible; one of them who
used our model to generate prices for traders wouldn’t even admit to doing
so. Since you are paid in proportion to the perception of your benefit to the
business, this was not good.
There wasn’t much I could do about being front-run, but I decided to at
least confirm my suspicions. A few days later I went back to the source
code of my program and temporarily added a few lines that ensured that,
when you tried to use it, you got a pop-up window saying “Model Under
Repair.” Within a few hours I started to get calls from the middlemen
asking what had happened to the model they had not admitted that they
were using.
Ever since, I have been wary of people who stand between model creators
and end users. Quants everywhere have firsthand experience of being
bypassed by more technically challenged people who extract information
from you and then pass it on to other people at meetings you’re not invited
to. For a long time afterwards, whenever I wrote programs for traders, I
used to include a swatch of code that kept a log of who used my program,
and when. I encouraged people in my group to do the same. That way I had
documented proof of our utility, even though I couldn’t put a dollar value
on it. In 1994, when the investment banking industry was forced to lay off
people and Goldman went through difficult times, I sent a copy of the log to
my bosses, showing how many tens of thousands of times some of our
Quantitative Strategies group’s programs had been used. No one in our
group was laid off that year, and that bit of information may have helped a
little.
I met with Fischer regularly over the next eight years, though we never
again worked as closely as we did when we developed BDT. He was the
most remarkable person I met at Goldman.
His most noticeable quality was his stubborn and meticulous devotion to
clarity and simplicity. In writing and speaking, he put weight on both
content and style. When we wrote the first draft of our paper on a one-factor
model of interest rates, Fischer wanted no equations in it, and I had to
struggle long and hard to satisfy his standards: He wanted accuracy and
honesty 
without 
the 
technical 
details, 
which 
meant 
that 
you 
had 
to
understand the model viscerally, and then explain that understanding. I
think it was the clarity of the mechanics of our model that made it so
popular and widely used.
Because he liked clarity, and perhaps because his training was not in
economics, Fischer avoided excessive formalization. His papers were the
antithesis of the unnecessarily rigorous lemma-filled research papers of
financial economics journals. He tried to write as he spoke, in a terse but
good-natured 
conversational 
style, 
using 
clear 
but 
casual, 
unadorned
English. There was a touch of jerkiness to his prose because it lacked the
technically superfluous conjunctions—and, but, thus, and therefore—that
people commonly use to link the flow of sentences in scientific articles.
Fischer expected clarity and directness from others, too. Though he was
generous with his time and didn’t care about rank, you had to prepare for an
audience with him. If it was evident that you hadn’t thought carefully about
your question, you quickly discovered that he wasn’t going to do the
thinking for you. And, if you didn’t grasp his answer and repeated your
question, he would simply repeat his answer.
A very direct man, he was uncomfortable with small talk. When he had
nothing 
to 
say, 
he 
said 
nothing; 
this 
could 
be 
disconcerting 
on 
the
telephone, where he often simply kept silent for a minute or two without
terminating the conversation. Sometimes, this led you to babble in an
attempt to fill the silence, until Fischer simply said an abrupt goodbye and
hung up.
He once told me that one of the things that limited his influence was the
fact that he always told people the truth, even if they didn’t want to hear it,
a characteristic I can vouch for myself. When he grew skeptical of some of
the information technology managers in his division at Goldman in the
early 1990s, he purposefully met with them all and then made a frank list of
who was good and who was bad, and handed it over to his bosses. He
laughed sheepishly but half-proudly when he conceded that he had been
naive to think that he would gain anything from this.
Among Goldman partners he struck me as always a bit of an outsider. In
the era before the firm went public, a “class” of partners was appointed
once every two years, and each of them then advanced by being allowed to
buy progressively larger shares of the company. Fischer once said to me
that he was proud of possessing fewer shares than anyone else in his class
of 1986.
This 
directness 
and 
informality 
characterized 
his 
research, 
too. 
His
approach seemed to me to consist of unafraid hard thinking, intuition, and
no great reliance on advanced mathematics. This was inspiring to lesser
mortals. He attacked problems directly, with whatever skills he had at his
command, 
and 
often 
they 
worked. 
He 
gave 
you 
the 
sense 
(perhaps
misguided) that you could discover deep truths with whatever skills you
had, too, if you were willing to think hard. He was guided by his great
economic intuition; though his mathematical skills were unexceptional, his
instinct was strong, and he was tenacious in trying to attain insight before
resorting to mathematics.
In modeling he had a taste for the concrete: He liked to describe the
financial 
world 
with 
variables 
that 
represented 
observable 
phenomena
rather than hidden statistical or econometric factors. He thought practical
usefulness and accuracy were more important than elegance, despite the
unquestionable elegance that lends so much appeal to the Black-Scholes-
Merton framework he founded. He had a strong pragmatic streak; he was at
least as much a practitioner as an academic, willing to devote time and
attention to software, trading systems, and user interfaces. He thought that
these were just as important as the models themselves.
Fischer preferred reality to elegance in modeling. In one of his last
published papers, Equilibrium Exchanges, he succinctly stated his attitude
in the last part of his introduction. “In the end,” he wrote, “this entire article
amounts to a series of conjectures about the nature of equilibrium, if one
exists. I have been unable to provide an exhaustive and precise analysis of
the implications of my assumptions, but I would rather guess about what
follows from more-relevant assumptions than derive precise conclusions
from less-relevant assumptions.”
Clearly, though style was important to him, content was paramount.
Between 1990 and 1995, when he worked first in Goldman Sachs Asset
Management and then in Fixed Income Research, I invited him to come and
listen to the occasional seminar speaker we had visit the Quantitative
Strategies group I ran. I noticed that he didn’t attend if the seminars were on
new or improved numerical solutions to problems that were already soluble;
it’s not that he was uninterested in numerical solutions, but rather that he
was more interested in financial economics. Similarly, he didn’t get carried
away by the need to find analytical solutions to equations; he was just as
happy to use numerical methods when fast computers were available.
Fischer 
also 
had 
a 
good 
grasp 
of 
the 
overwhelming 
importance 
of
computing in making effective use of models. People have often asked why
we publicized our research on the BDT model in 1990, given that we
worked at a profit-making investment bank. In fact, when we published it,
traders at Goldman had already been using it for several years. But more
importantly, Fischer distinguished between releasing models (which he
thought legitimate) and releasing a computer implementation or trading
system that incorporates the model, which he thought should be sold.
The truth is that models are rarely an unambiguous source of profits.
What counts as much or more is the trading system and the discipline it
imposes, the operational errors it disallows and the intuition that traders
gain from being able to experiment with a model.
Fischer had his own way of thinking about markets. He was deeply inspired
by the so-called “general equilibrium” approach of the capital asset pricing
model, the idea that prices and markets equilibrate when the expected return
per unit of risk is the same for all securities. This belief was the source of
much of his intuition, and was the method he first used to derive the Black-
Scholes differential equation. In late July of 1995, shortly before his death,
in response to a question I sent him about these matters, he emailed me: “I
view all our work on fixed-income models as resulting from the application
of the capital asset pricing model to fixed-income markets.”
I had a touching glimpse of his love for this approach a few years before
he died when, together with a few of my colleagues, I tried to assess the
effect of transactions costs and hedging frequency on our trading desk’s
options 
prices. 
We 
built 
a 
Monte 
Carlo 
simulation 
program 
that
dynamically replicated each option as the stock price changed, adding the
assumed transactions costs as each rebalancing of the hedging portfolio
took place. In the long run we intended to use the program to see how much
this caused options prices to deviate from the Platonic Black-Scholes value;
in this way we could estimate the actual cost of our hedging strategy rather
than accept the value of the idealized value embodied in the Black-Scholes
model.
Whenever you write a program to do something new, you should first
make sure that it does the old things correctly. In testing the program
written by one of my colleagues, we first ran it assuming that there were no
transactions costs and that you could hedge continuously, in order to ensure
that we obtained the exact Black-Scholes replication price. Of course, you
cannot really hedge continuously in a computer simulation, so we rehedged
very often, several times a day. To our amazement, we discovered that even
for 10,000 rehedgings on a one-year option—that is, for more than thirty
rebalancings in a day—we still couldn’t obtain the exact Black-Scholes
value. There was always a residual discrepancy. This seemed wrong, so I
wrote my own version of the program and found the same small but
significant discrepancy. This was very puzzling; it suggested that the Black-
Scholes formula was less applicable to the conditions of actual markets than
we had expected.
I was perturbed enough to want to speak to Fischer about this, and went
over to his office in another building on Goldman’s growing campus. When
I explain what I had found, he briefly became quite excited at the apparent
inability of Merton’s replication method to produce the exact Black-Scholes
value, and said something like, “You know, I always thought there was
something wrong with the replication method.”
Sad to say, I discovered a little later that both my simulation program and
my colleague’s contained small but different errors, which, once corrected,
confirmed that the replication method rapidly converged to the exact Black-
Scholes 
value! 
In 
his 
heart, 
though, 
Fischer 
mistrusted 
the 
Merton
derivation and preferred his original proof.
Fischer’s independent thinking led him to unorthodox but well-thought-out
ideas, many of which sounded obvious once he articulated them. He voiced
some of them in speeches, and others in a collection of brief, pointed notes
that he circulated informally at Goldman in the early 1990s.
In one short essay he struck at the foundation of financial economics,
writing that “certain economic quantities are so hard to estimate that I call
them ‘unobservables.’ ” One unobservable, he pointed out, is expected
return, the amount by which people expect to profit when buying a security.
So 
much 
of 
finance, 
from 
Markowitz 
on, 
deals 
with 
this 
quantity
unquestioningly. Yet, wrote Fischer, “Our estimates of expected return are
so poor they are almost laughable.”
In another essay entitled Managing Traders, he argued that a trader
should be judged on the rationale behind his or her methods and rewarded
only if it is sound, irrespective of whether or not he or she profited in the
most recent period. “It’s crucial to judge the stories they trade on,” he wrote
about traders. “Stories can be wrong, but I’m uncomfortable trading without
one . . . Looking only or primarily at their profit and loss statements is a
recipe 
for 
disaster.” 
He 
wanted 
to 
reward 
intelligence 
and 
long-term
thinking rather than the short-term vagaries of markets.
In his speech on being named the Financial Engineer of the Year by the
International Association of Financial Engineers (IAFE) in 1994, Fischer
said that he had always preferred applied research to academic. University
professors, he claimed, should be paid and hired for their teaching, not their
research; he believed that their desire to teach well would then lead them to
do good research.
When he became terminally ill, he neither hid it nor announced it, but
informed the necessary people, and spoke about it in a detached, objective
way that I found admirable. I never heard him complain.
He had a massive operation, and was full of genuine praise for the
surgeon, who he said was “a genius”; it made me briefly envious of people
who help others rather than work on theories. After the operation, he had a
temporary 
recovery, 
and 
worked 
again, 
assiduously. 
For 
a 
while 
we
sometimes 
spoke 
on 
the 
telephone 
about 
building 
models 
of 
options
valuation that included jumps in the underlying index.
He was always frank if you asked about his health, but never volunteered
any information if you didn’t. Later, when one could sense from occasional
remarks and rumors that his condition had worsened, I summoned the
courage to ask how he was doing. He said simply that things looked “pretty
iffy right now.”
When he finally stopped coming to work, he communicated with anyone
who wrote to him via email. I liked to keep in contact, and would send him
comments or short bits of news from work. If my emails were insubstantial,
consisting of small talk or complaints, then, true to his style, he seldom
replied. But if you wrote to him about some genuine issue in finance, you
received a prompt answer. I asked him once if these email questions were
bothering him, and he immediately replied to say no, and then stressed in a
postscript that he liked to receive these questions.
At his memorial service in Cambridge, I heard a moving speech by Jack
Treynor, former editor of the Financial Analysts Journal and, in many
respects, Fischer’s mentor, who concluded by saying that as regards death,
“Fischer wasn’t afraid at all.” This is the way I saw it, too. He rarely
seemed to delude himself about the way the world really worked.
Whenever 
I 
think 
of 
Fischer 
I 
think 
of 
him 
as 
a 
consummately
unsentimental realist. Once, when I was about to travel to Vienna to speak
at a conference at which Robert Merton would be present, I called Fischer
(already ill but more than a year before his death) and left him a voicemail
asking the appropriate way to refer to “the model”—should I call it “Black-
Scholes” 
or 
“Black-Scholes-Merton?” 
Fischer 
replied 
with 
a 
message
saying it was OK to call it the Black-Scholes-Merton model, because it was
Merton who had come up with the replication argument for valuing an
option. Then he added, quite imperturbably, that “that’s the part that many
people think is the most important.”
On a professional and personal level, Fischer always seemed more free of
artifice than anyone I knew, though this sometimes made him difficult to
deal with. He didn’t soft-pedal in giving you his opinion of work you had
done or actions you had taken, but just told you what he thought. He had a
strong sense of what was important, and he always took the long view, in
corporate politics as well as in research. For that reason, he was the perfect
person to call when you needed a clear view about an issue. In the midst of
corporate politics, he told you to concentrate on quality even if people
around you sometimes didn’t appreciate it. He kept your eye on the goal,
which was to help the business in the best way you could, to try to keep
breaking new ground. He didn’t sympathize with holding on to turf; instead,
he always encouraged the search for new opportunities.
Fischer’s last paper, written but not fully completed while he was dying,
was submitted to the Financial Analysts Journal. He called the paper
Interest Rates as Options, and cleverly pointed out that short-term interest
rates themselves resemble call options, a consequence on which he then
elaborated.
In a footnote to the article, the managing editor of the journal explained
the circumstances behind the paper’s publication:
Fischer Black submitted this paper on May 1, 1995. His submission
letter stated: “I would like to publish this, though I may not be around
to make any changes the referee may suggest. If I’m not, and if it seems
roughly acceptable, could you publish it as is with a note explaining the
circumstances?” Fischer received a revise and resubmit letter on May
22 with a detailed referee’s report. He worked on the paper during the
summer and started to think about how to address the comments of the
referee. He died on August 31 without completing the revision.
...