Chapter 11
Force of Circumstance
Manners and mores on Wall Street
The further adventures of some acquaintances
Volatility is infectious
No one stays happy on Wall Street for long. The people who work there
don’t usually think of it as an avocation, like physics or medicine. Instead,
most investment bankers want to get rich as fast as they can and then retire.
And 
so, 
as 
Heraclitus 
wrote, 
all 
things 
happen 
because 
of 
strife 
and
necessity.
At Goldman, in the pre-IPO days, the route to getting really rich was to
become a partner and acquire a stake in the profits of the firm. Those who
succeeded in gaining a partnership tended to last another decade or so and
then retire, some voluntarily, some forcibly. Many partners were gone by
their late thirties.
To join the partnership, or even to be considered for it, you had to have
made a clear contribution to the profits of the firm. As a result, the vast
majority of partners came out of sales, trading, and investment banking,
where the money you made for the firm could be unambiguously counted.
Almost no partners came from information technology or research, whose
contributions, while substantial, did not carry a clear dollar value. Even
Fischer, though he appeared to be an exception to this rule, had reportedly
made millions of dollars for the firm by taking careful account of a
mathematical subtlety in the definition of certain futures contracts of which
most traders were unaware.
In troubled FSG, everyone seemed to know that whoever ran us properly
might get the ultimate Goldman reward, a partnership and all that it
guaranteed. The self-assured young kid in the cube next to me was certain
that 
Mutt 
or 
Jeff 
would 
make 
it. 
“There 
are 
about 
7,000 
people 
at
Goldman,” he intoned. “And there are 70 partners. That’s one partner per
100 people. There are over 100 people in FSG, and they’re in charge.
Therefore, one of them will be a partner.”
It didn’t work out that way. Instead there followed a succession of new
FSG rulers and corulers who entered and exited like lovers in a French
farce. It would take more than a few tries to fix it, but Goldman eventually
got it right.
First came Bob Kopprasch from the Salomon Brothers Bond Portfolio
Analysis (BPA) group, where he had run the options research team in which
my friend Mark Koenigsberg now worked. Kopprasch’s team had written
reports containing some of the best research on fixed-income derivatives in
the 
1980s, 
high 
quality, 
well-written 
pieces 
that 
straddled 
and 
almost
dissolved 
the 
border 
between 
academia 
and 
practice. 
It 
was 
their
publications you turned to if you wanted to understand how to value swaps
and swaptions before the necessary methodology appeared in textbooks.
John Meriwether’s arb group at Salomon cherry-picked some of their best
people 
from 
Kopprasch’s 
team, 
men 
like 
Victor 
Haghani 
and 
Greg
Hawkins, 
who 
later 
moved 
with 
Meriwether 
to 
Long 
Term 
Capital
Management (LTCM). When I ran Goldman’s Quantitative Strategies a few
years later, I always regarded the work done by Kopprasch’s group as a
model for what I tried to achieve. Nowadays, quantitative groups on the
Street devote much less effort to these kinds of publications.
For a while, Kopprasch tried to manage us in an uneasy triumvirate with
Mutt and Jeff. It must have been difficult. Soon Mutt made a graceful exit
to the less quantitative world of asset management. Then Jeff left for a large
Savings & Loan that, like many others, had benefited from the FSLIC
guarantee on their deposits to become a speculative investor in securitized
pools of home-owner mortgages. Then, only a few months into his reign,
Kopprasch seemed to tire of the politics and went upstairs to work with the
futures salespeople. Eventually he left Goldman to join an investment firm
started by Lew Ranieri, former head of mortgages at Salomon Brothers and
one of the creators of the market for mortgage-backed securities.
Then things turned around. In 1987 Bob Rubin appointed Ed Markiewicz
to manage FSG. Ed was a down-to-earth, longtime Goldman accountant,
about 
forty 
years 
old, 
who 
was 
said 
to 
be 
Bob’s 
consigliere, 
his
troubleshooter in difficult situations. Ed knew little about models, software,
or options trading, but he could distinguish flim from flam, a skill in short
supply. He spent his first few months as boss of FSG questioning everyone.
“What do you think of so-and-so?” he would say to you behind closed
doors. Slowly he figured out who had useful skills and who was merely
along for the ride. A semblance of order returned; the overpaid consultants
left; the professional administrators were trimmed. Presuming that I was
one of the good guys, Ed moved me from a cube into an office and put me
in charge of creating a fixed-income software group. Our mission was to
replace our antiquated FORTRAN financial library with something we
eventually 
called 
GS-ONE, 
an 
object-oriented 
unified 
framework 
for
constructing Goldman Sachs fixed-income trading systems.
By early 1988 Ed had restored order. It was reassuring to see that excess
had its limits, and impressive that he accomplished the turnaround so
efficiently, because in truth he understood so little about what people in
FSG really did. But he did understand instinctively when people were
feeding him a line. Temporarily triumphant, he seemed to us to have a good
chance of becoming the partner who would now reign over FSG. Over the
next year he seemed to bloom; he became more confident, working out at
the Health and Racquet Club some lunch times and spending time on the
trading floor with Jacob Goldfield, whose influence kept growing.
New partners were picked every second November at Goldman, and
people who were in the running had some idea of their odds. After the final
deliberations, on the morning when their names were about to be made
public, the head of the firm called up each new partner to congratulate him.
Candidates 
in 
the 
running 
hovered 
around 
their 
desk 
from 
early 
that
morning, waiting for the call or its absence. I was no longer working at
Goldman the day they announced the partners of 1988, but friends told me
that when the call didn’t come, Ed left the office for the remainder of the
day. A few months later he left FSG, and went on to troubleshoot other
problem areas of the firm.
David Garbasz, who took me under his wing when I first came to Goldman,
had his share of subsequent strife, too.
Trained as a scientist but now a Goldman trader, he was always willing to
debate options markets and their theory. It was stimulating to walk upstairs
to the bond options desk and hang out with the aggressively humorous
traders around him. One day a group of us were chatting on the trading
floor, kidding around about the rash of teenage suicides who had apparently
hung themselves in toilets or attics. According to the newspapers, these
boys were the victims of autoerotic asphyxia, a search for the extreme
pleasure that purportedly accompanies a reduction in oxygen supply to the
brain at the time of orgasm. When someone in the group questioned the
authenticity of the phenomenon, David pointed casually over towards one
of the tallest new recruits on the desk and said “Of course it’s true. Why do
you think he’s so tall?”
Like many people on the Street, David wanted faster advancement and
more control. Once every few weeks, he would reportedly talk to Rubin.
Less than a year after I came to Goldman, he resigned and went to work as
a senior options trader at O’Connor, the renowned and very savvy options
trading firm in Chicago.
David was ambitious and volatile, though not, by Wall Street standards,
extraordinarily 
so. 
A 
year 
or 
so 
after 
joining 
O’Connor, 
he 
departed
together with two software engineers he had met there to start a company to
produce fixed-income risk management software. They based themselves in
Chicago and called their firm RMS, an evocative name that I greatly
admired.
1
David’s 
plan 
to 
build 
a 
commercial 
fixed-income 
risk 
management
system was an inspired one, several years ahead of its time. Although many
trading firms and investment banks, including Goldman, wrote their own
risk-management software, at that time no one had yet marketed that type of
product commercially. Stan Diller at Bear Stearns was pushing in that
direction; as head of FAST, their fixed-income research group, he was
building a system called AutoBond, which was intended to first be used by
the trading desks and then, once polished and debugged, to be sold to
clients. He was pursuing every quant’s dream: to convert his work for the
desk into something that would generate measurable dollars and cents for
the firm, thereby eliminating the gap between the luftmensch PhDs and the
revenue-generating “real” businesspeople.
David and his partners hired programmers in Chicago, where rents and
salaries were low compared to New York. There they embarked on the
creation of an elegant bond-and-options-risk system, object-oriented and
written in C++ to run on Sun UNIX workstations. Most investment banks’
financial 
software 
had 
always 
been 
behind 
the 
times, 
but 
RMS 
was
strikingly modern: It had an up-to-date graphical user interface with drag-
and-drop features, graphs, and icons. Several years would pass before other
small 
companies, 
among 
them 
Renaissance, 
CATS, 
Infinity, 
and
Algorithmics, began to build similarly stylish systems. Consolidation has
been swift in this business, too, and only Algorithmics now survives as an
independent company.
Then things accelerated. David returned to New York and took a position
as a trader at E. F. Hutton, where, I heard, he had negotiated a golden
parachute in the event of a change of ownership. I think he intended to use
RMS as the provider of his trading software at Hutton. It was the perfect
confluence; he would be paid for trading, and RMS would have immediate
users to test and improve their software.
Within a year, E. F. Hutton, damaged by a check-kiting scandal, was
acquired 
by 
Shearson 
(another 
famous 
company 
whose 
name 
finally
disappeared after mergers with Lehman Brothers and American Express).
As a result of the restructuring, David pulled the ripcord. With the cash he
received, he continued to fund RMS’s development in Chicago throughout
1988. He told me they were close to making a sizable sale of their system to
Shearson’s trading desk.
David was excited about all these possibilities, and was spending lots of
time in New York drumming up clients. I invited him over for a Rosh
Hashanah dinner. He was tightly wound; he kept everyone entertained,
working the table after dinner like a comedian in a club, sliding from chair
to chair to engage different people, telling everyone about how well things
were going.
Each year the Securities Industry Association has its annual meeting in
New York with many exhibits devoted to financial software and hardware.
RMS took a booth there in 1988 and displayed their risk system. It was
beautiful: You could alter a yield curve by dragging at it with a computer
mouse, and then see the subsequent effect of the change in interest rates on
your bond or options portfolio.
Then came Euripidean disasters. Sometime in late 1989 we heard that
O’Connor & Co. had obtained a preliminary injunction to stop David from
selling the RMS system. We heard that O’Connor claimed that RMS had
used O’Connor’s trade secrets. David told me that he was fighting them in
court. He said that they imagined that the well-known duration hedging
techniques he provided in RMS were proprietary to them, whereas they
were widely used on the Street—industry practice, in fact.
One summer weekend that year he and Ted Dengler, an exoceanographer
friend of David’s who had also become an options trader at Goldman,
visited us in a house that we rented for the season on Fire Island. As we
threw frisbees on a deserted stretch of beach, talking while keeping a
watchful eye on my daughter Sonya, I remember David telling me that he
had gone to see the movie Tucker: The Man and His Dream, directed by
Francis Ford Coppola. It was the true story of how an inventor in the late
1940s tried to take on Detroit by building a much better car, and how
Detroit then both copied and crushed him.
The expensive legal battle and the injunction put an end to RMS. In 1995,
after giving a talk at a conference, I was approached by someone I knew
who had worked at O’Connor during the RMS episode. When I asked if he
had known David, he told me that O’Connor had been intent on shutting
down David’s enterprise. With their deep pockets, he said “they had guys
spending all their time running diff on RMS’s files and the O’Connor code.”
(Diff is one of the great suite of UNIX tools that make a programmer’s life
easier. It compares two different files of text and finds any common strings
of words in them, a simpler version of current bio-informatics programs
that search for common strings of DNA in the mouse and human genome.) I
have 
no 
idea 
whether 
there 
were 
in 
fact 
commonalities, 
but 
even
independent people coding the same well-known algorithm might end up
writing vaguely similar chunks of code.
O’Connor eventually disappeared, too, absorbed into Swiss Bank, which
itself subsequently merged with UBS. Starting in 1990 David disappeared
into some alternate nonfinancial New York; none of his old friends saw him
anymore. Someone reported that he’d become a gourmet cook. I called him
once and left a message, but was unable to track him down. I never resented
it; I understood from my own experience the embarrassment of leaving a
field. Ted told me that he ran into David in Central Park one afternoon in
the mid-1990s, and exchanged a few words with him.
One Sunday morning in the early summer of 1998 I went for a run on
Riverside Drive. The road was filled to overflowing with the annual AIDS
march. Returning to my apartment, I walked past the crowds watching
marchers on the corner of Eighty-Third Street. Suddenly I heard a vaguely
familiar voice behind me, and turned to look. On the corner were a man and
a woman with whom I briefly exchanged glances, and their child of four or
five. A moment later I realized it was David, and I watched as he turned
around and headed back down Eighty-Third Street towards Broadway with
what I presumed were his wife and child.
Then, in October 2000 I was named the Sungard IAFE Financial Engineer
of the Year, and gave a speech at the annual dinner in which I thanked
several people, including David. The speech later appeared on the IAFE
website, and a friend of David’s, “googling” him in early 2002, found my
reference. Suddenly, after more than twelve years of silence, David called.
Now a successful entrepreneur and investor, he was passionately interested
in mathematics education, and was working to persuade Israel, his native
country, to adopt a more rigorous school mathematics curriculum. He
wanted me to get involved. We met once or twice subsequently, and he was
the David of old, confident and energetic. He and his wife and two children
lived in New York and spent weekends on their farm in upstate New York.
He seemed to have every-one’s idea of a good life.
Peter Freund, though he was head of the burgeoning bond options business,
also did not stay very long at Goldman. About eighteen months after I
arrived, he left for Bankers Trust to start up their credit derivatives business,
and is now commonly regarded as one of the founders of that industry.
Dave Griswold, who had used my models to build the new options
trading system for Peter’s group at Goldman, followed him to Bankers as a
software consultant. There he created yet another object-oriented language
he called Seymour, 
a 
pun 
on 
C++. 
Later, 
Dave 
started 
several 
small
companies in succession, most of them focused around his love of computer
languages 
in 
general 
and 
Smalltalk 
in 
particular. 
The 
last 
of 
these
companies, Animorphic, used its Smalltalk expertise to produce a very fast
Java 
interpreter, 
and 
was 
acquired 
by 
Sun 
Microsystems 
in 
1997,
presumably leaving Dave independent enough to continue to follow his true
interests.
Like so many of the firms on the Street in the mid-1980s, when I began,
Bankers Trust no longer exists as an independent entity. It became unviable
in the mid-1990s after its involvement in the derivatives scandals of Orange
County and Procter and Gamble, and was acquired by Deutsche Bank.
Jacob Goldfield, the wunderkind on the bond options desk when I arrived,
was the only one of Peter’s traders at that time who went on become a
Goldman partner, and he did so quite rapidly.
Jacob had a precocious trading-genius aura that was augmented by his
conspicuous idiosyncracies. While almost everyone new to Wall Street in
those days wore suits and carried briefcases, he arrived each day lugging his
belongings in a Jansport backpack. His face stubbled and impassively pale,
he traversed the trading floor and rode the elevators up and down 85 Broad
Street in stockinged feet, a silent character in a Munch painting. I still run
into people nowadays who visited Goldman in the late 1980s and, though
they don’t recall his name, ask me about the trader who wore no shoes.
Jacob was very good at saying very little, an excellent quality in a trader.
He had an intimidating email style, radically terse—no “Dear” or “Hi” at
the beginning, no “Thanks” at the end, no punctuation, grammar or capital
letters, no unnecessary segues or conventional lead-ins or fadeouts—just
one cryptic sentence or query encapsulated entirely in the subject heading
of the email, with no subsequent body. It was instant messaging ahead of its
time, I suppose. “What do u think about xxxx?” the subject of an email
might say. I would reply in a carefully thought out paragraph and then
receive a three-letter message with “Thx” in the subject. I always ended up
feeling like an uninhibited babbler.
One day in 1986 or 1987, Jacob called down from the trading floor to my
office in FSG to ask me to check out a young man who had been introduced
to Goldman through a friend of Bob Rubin’s wife. I went up to Rubin’s
office on Goldman’s executive floor. The interviewee was a young Israeli,
aged 19 or 20, who told me that he had completed high school at fourteen
and proceeded straight to medical school. Several years later, he said, he
had decided to abandon medicine and study physics at the Sorbonne. Now
he had come to New York. Bob Rubin had asked Jacob to speak to the
young man, and Jacob passed him on to me.
When I asked him why he was interested in working at Goldman, he
replied that people had told him that because he was so smart, he should
“go into options.” This didn’t impress me; I have always been skeptical
about intellect in search of problems. We spoke for a half hour or so, and
several things about his story seemed curiously illogical. Medicine seemed
an unlikely choice for someone accomplished enough to finish high school
at fourteen; I found it hard to imagine a fifteen-year-old with the aplomb to
dissect cadavers and perform gynecological exams. And why go all the way
from Israel to the Sorbonne to study physics?
I began to quiz him about physics and found that his knowledge was
semipopular. When I asked him what he had read, he mentioned Capra’s
The Tao of Physics, an entertaining and fashionable mystico-physical book
about quantum mechanics and Buddhism. Though he knew a little about the
definition of an option, he knew nothing about the theory of how to value
them. I pointed out these inconsistencies to Jacob, and said I wouldn’t hire
him.
A few months later, sitting at my desk, I picked up the ringing phone to
hear Jacob, again calling from Bob Rubin’s office. In his usual give-no-
information style, he queried me: “Tell me, do you remember that young
Israeli guy you interviewed? What did we conclude at the time?” The
reverberating tone indicated that my voice was coming out at the other end
on speakerphone.
I answered carefully.
“I thought there was something fishy about him,” I said.“He seemed to
know too little about the things he was supposed to be good at. For
someone who was supposed to have studied physics, he didn’t have much
depth. Why do you ask?”
“He was arrested a few days ago in Ace Greenberg’s office at Bear
Stearns—entering under false pretenses,” replied Jacob, only slightly more
loquacious than usual. I think he wanted Bob Rubin to hear what a good
call he and I had previously made.
After Peter Freund left Goldman, Jacob soon became head of the bond
options desk, and then, a few years later, one of the youngest Goldman
partners ever, eventually running the entire swaps desk. He left the firm in
2000 to pursue his own investments, and recently became Chief Investment
Officer for Soros Fund Management.
Observing all this mobility had its effect on me, too. By 1988, after only
two and a half years in FSG, I had grown weary of the constant instability. I
had worked for four heads of FSG in less than two years, and a fifth one,
Markiewicz’s replacement, was clearly looming.
I had also began to feel that my lack of a formal economics background
would count against me. After completing my work on BDT and GS-ONE I
began to think about new projects. When I told Ed Markiewicz that I would
like to work on a better model for valuing the delivery option embedded in
Treasury bond futures contracts, he said I should check with the “brains
trust” on whether that was reasonable.
The 
brains 
trust 
was 
Jacob’s 
apt 
name 
for 
Bob 
Litterman, 
José
Scheinkman, and Larry Weiss, three very smart PhDs in economics who
were also in FSG. Jacob, now making lots of money for the firm, had begun
to refer to them by that name, and Ed, who admired Jacob, used it, too.
Though Bob, Larry, and José deserved their reputation, I was uncomfortable
with further intellectual constraints.
Finally, there was the question of pay, always forefront in everyone’s
mind. In those days at Goldman, the value of your annual bonus was
communicated to you just before Thanksgiving, and then paid in mid-
December. The archaic payroll system was unable to cut a check for more
than $100,000 dollars. If, on that December day when Goldman delivered
the actual bonus payment to you, your year-end bonus was, say, $1,000,000,
then you received ten checks, each one sealed in its own envelope, the
whole bundle neatly stacked and secured by a rubber band. Bonuses were
all paid on the same day, and someone senior went around the floor handing
out the check bundles to each employee. Thus, although bonus amounts
were private and company heads encouraged you to keep them that way,
you 
could 
guess 
the 
order 
of 
magnitude 
of 
someone’s 
bonus 
by 
the
thickness of their deck of checks. Even a minibundle of two checks was
instantaneously distinguishable from one. Some traders received a fat stack
and some of them flaunted it. One well-paid young trader had a habit of
taking his bundle and silently riffling through it, meticulously counting the
envelopes one at a time in full view of his colleagues. Nowadays, the
payroll system has no check-size limit, or, more honestly, no limit my bonus
was ever able to cross.
Goldman was wisely conservative and pay grew slowly. As long as you
kept working at the same firm, your future bonus was determined by your
past. The raise you got in a good year, or the cut in a bad one, was quoted as
a percentage of what you made the previous year, which had the effect of
damping a raise and cushioning a decline in your compensation. It wasn’t
easy to move to a new level. Some people who worked for me have
detested this smoothing, arguing heatedly you should be paid “what you’re
worth” each year. Personally, I didn’t dislike it that much. In research, who
knows exactly how to put a number on your contribution?
More than pay, I cared about doing something interesting; had someone
offered to make me the Goldman Sachs partner in charge of Information
Technology for the back office, I would have refused. Nevertheless, in early
1988, 
even 
I 
started 
to 
become 
dissatisfied 
about 
my 
compensation
prospects in FSG.
I took to on-and-off commiseration with Bill Toy, also an ex-physicist and
my collaborator on BDT. Bill, who had arrived on Wall Street a year or so
before me, was already in the far reaches of “disgruntledom.” Somehow, he
had 
internalized 
the 
trading-and-sales 
view 
of 
quants 
as 
unworldly
luftmenschen, and had by now acquired a disdain for the stigma of having a
PhD that bordered on self-hatred. Though he wanted to be one of “them”—
the front-office real “businesspeople”—to them, however, he was still just a
quant.
Once a week we had lunch with Ramine Rouhani, who had been working
with Fischer on the theory of portfolio insurance, the trading strategy that
later played a part in the 1987 stock market crash. We would eat cheap
lunches at the long-since-shut Italian Alps on William Street, where I
slowly became slightly depressed and even more corrupted by listening to
the two of them feverishly and incessantly talking about their dissatisfaction
with their role. Ramine and Bill were intent on becoming a part of “the
business,” and were always planning routes of escape to parts of Goldman
that were closer to “the business.”
“I’ve got to get out of here,” Bill would say repeatedly, shaking his head
slowly from side to side and wiping his brow with the back of his right
hand. Over the years, Bill and I would continue to commiserate, and on
occasional bad days I, too, would repeat the mantra “I’ve got to get out of
here.” Whenever I did, Bill would say to me scornfully, “You’ll never have
the guts to leave!”
Ramine left Goldman within a year and now runs fixed income trading at
the New York branch of the French bank CDC IXIS. Bill soldiered on at
Goldman; he became a true expert at the legal, regulatory, and financial-
engineering aspects of structured equity derivative products, and coedited a
book on the subject. Finally, no doubt after many additional lunches similar
to the ones we shared back then, he joined Ramine at CDC in 1999.
Part of me, of course, liked being a dissident. Recently I experienced a burst
of recognition while reading the autobiography of Erwin Chargaff, the
Vienna-born discoverer of the eponymous base-pairing Chargaff rules that
led to Watson and Crick’s discovery of the double helical structure of DNA.
Chargaff, 
who 
disliked 
the 
imaginative, 
shot-in-the-dark, 
theoretical-
physics-like style that characterized Watson and Crick’s approach to model
building, grew bitter at being asked why he had not made the discovery
implied by his rules. In his autobiography he wrote: “Most people are wise
and applaud the inevitable; but I, inexplicably, love to be on the losing
side.”
By this route I came to the point where, in 1988, I began to interview for
positions at other investment banks. It wasn’t hard to get out of Goldman’s
office unobserved during the day. I had been advised that if you left your
jacket at your desk no one would even realize you were gone, and it was
true. Soon a headhunter introduced me to the fixed income group at J. P.
Morgan 
(now 
J. 
P. 
Morgan 
Chase) 
just 
a 
block 
or 
two 
away, 
and 
I
periodically walked over there for a series of protracted interviews with
banking people who were waiting for the end of the Glass-Steagall era so
they could enter the investment banking business whole-heartedly. It was
somewhat disheartening: Most of my interviewers were more interested in
asking me what it was like to work at Goldman than they were in assessing
my credentials, and nothing came of it in the end.
Another headhunter sent me to Shearson, where I was offered a position
in charge of a small group supporting bond futures trading under Stan
Jonas. At that time Goldman still had a simple hierarchy of titles consisting
of 
Analyst, 
Associate, 
Vice 
President, 
and 
Partner. 
I 
found 
it 
almost
impossible to comprehend the seniority that went with the VP title offered
me by Shearson; their bureaucracy seemed to be deeper and closer to that of
Bell Labs. A friend there explained to me that there were divisional VPs
and firmwide VPs, and that it was better to be a firmwide VP than a
divisional one.
2
I liked Stan a great deal and was impressed with his grasp
of theory and practice, but I was still not quite ready to leave Goldman.
Then, 
early 
in 
1988, 
David 
Garbasz, 
by 
now 
in 
charge 
of 
RMS,
introduced me to Tom Klaffky, the head of the BPA group at Salomon
Brothers. Although Salomon had a fearsome reputation as a place with a
coarse and brutal culture, they were without a doubt the best fixed-income
trading firm in the world, and BPA was the premier quant group on the
Street. I was definitely interested in working there.
At David’s suggestion, I sent Klaffky my résumé. Then, a few days later,
I walked the 100 yards from 85 Broad Street to One New York Plaza to
meet him. His claim to fame at Salomon was his participation in the
creation of zero-coupon Treasury Strips out of Treasury bonds. Now in
charge of BPA under Marty Liebowitz, Tom’s empire consisted of several
subgroups. Among these was Bob Kopprasch’s former options research
group, now run by Janet Showers, and Mike Waldmann’s mortgage research
group.
I proceeded to meet with Tom on several occasions in the middle of 1988,
and each time he displayed a burst of fitful interest in having me join
Salomon, but then nothing much would happen. Whenever things slowed
down, David Garbasz would encourage me to push forward, and I would
write 
Tom 
another 
letter 
outlining 
my 
thoughts 
about 
how 
I 
could
contribute to Salomon Brothers. Then I would surreptitiously walk across
the street to drop my letter off at One New York Plaza.
The physical delivery was tricky. My friend Mark Koenigsberg worked
for Janet Showers, and I was always wary of bumping into him in the lobby
of One New York. I didn’t want him to know I was interviewing there. One
lunchtime, walking over to deliver a note to Klaffky on the Forty-Third
floor of One New York, I met Mark coming out of the ground-floor elevator
I was about to enter. Flustered, I told him I was there to get a haircut at the
barber in the basement, and he promptly escorted me down there to show
me where it was. I had to improvise quite fast to avoid getting an unwanted
trim.
Against my nature, I was slowly becoming a little more daring in dealing
with this unfamiliar, nonacademic and money-centered world. I told Tom
(in 
writing, 
not 
in 
conversation—that 
would 
have 
required 
a 
greater
quantity of chutzpah than I possessed) what level of pay it would take to
make me move firms. That I was able to do so impresses me, for inside I
still heard my mother’s unarticulated but clearly communicated sentiment
that one worked for love and interest, and that it was crass to talk about pay.
When Klaffky asked me how much money I was making at Goldman, I
exaggerated a little. As a result, I approximately doubled my annual pay
when I moved to Salomon a few months later. In those days, I’m afraid, it
was common to lie about your salary and bonus. In some sense, we
regarded a question about past pay as an invasion of privacy that didn’t
deserve an honest answer. Many of the people I knew in fact interpreted it
as equivalent to a question about how much money you’d like to earn at
your next job. Nowadays, firms hire companies to conduct background
checks on new employees before they begin work, and you cannot hire
anyone whose résumé differs in the smallest way from the ascertainable
facts.
Klaffky 
seemed 
uncertain 
where 
to 
place 
me 
inside 
Salomon, 
and
eventually arranged for me to have lunch with John Meriwether’s team, the
famed 
arb 
group 
that 
later 
became 
the 
core 
of 
Long 
Term 
Capital
Management. It must have been my collaboration with Fischer that made
them agree to see me, and I worried that I knew a lot less than they thought.
Garbasz, like many traders a fluent bluffer, tried briefly to coach me about
pari-mutuel betting, a topic he claimed was of interest to members of the
arb group. I shudder a little when I think of the day I finally went over to
have lunch with them in one of the catered dining rooms high up in One
New York Plaza.
I don’t remember exactly who was at the lunch. I recall about eight men,
some subset of Larry Hilibrand, John Meriwether, Victor Haghani, Bill
Krasker, Greg Hawkins, and a few of their more junior team members. I
was a comparative novice; in toto, I had had just over two years of
experience on the Street. The work I had done with Fischer and Bill Toy
was inventive and useful, and was later to become a market standard.
Nevertheless, most of my knowledge was theoretical. In contrast, the
members of Meriwether’s group were more savvy than anyone I had ever
seen. They understood both theory and practice.
My lunchtime interviewers were unfailingly polite. I recall their asking
me some general questions about my work with Fischer; sensibly, they tried
to determine to what extent I had truly been his intellectual collaborator. It
was hard to answer; no one I’ve known in finance has displayed Fischer’s
determination to approach any problem without preconceptions and to think
it through for himself. They posed me a technical question about the
relative value of an Asian option and a European option, and I gave what I
later learned was the wrong answer. They nodded at my reply but didn’t
correct me. A few days later Klaffky told me that they didn’t want to hire
me for their group, but thought that I would be a reasonable hire for
someone else.
One morning in 1999, more than a decade later, I participated in a
conference call with some of the same people. I was at Goldman Sachs and
they were at the now collapsed LTCM, being overseen by the consortium of
investment 
banks 
who 
bailed 
them 
out. 
Together 
with 
my 
colleagues
Kresimir 
Demeterfi, 
Mike 
Kamal, 
and 
Joe 
Zou 
in 
the 
Quantitative
Strategies group at Goldman, I had written an expository paper on volatility
swaps, a new over-the-counter instrument that allowed retail clients to trade
volatility itself as an asset. LTCM was interested in buying volatility swaps
in order to offset the volatility risk in some of the still open positions that
had contributed to its demise.
That morning its overseer from Goldman had a few of the LTCM partners
telephone us to discuss the subtleties of swap valuation. The questions they
asked us in that brief conversation showed an immediate understanding of
theoretical subtleties that was far more insightful and sophisticated than any
questions we had been asked by the Goldman traders we knew. It was a
shock 
to 
realize 
that 
people 
whose 
great 
experience 
and 
knowledge
straddled both the quantitative and the trading worlds had, despite their
sophistication, brought themselves into such a catastrophic state.
With no position available for me in the arb group, Klaffky turned to his
own area, BPA, and introduced me to his head of mortgage research, Mike
Waldman, who needed someone to lead a new Adjustable Rate Mortgage
(ARM) group he was forming. Within a few weeks I had an offer to work
for Mike.
I had one brief moment of foreboding when I met with Klaffky to discuss
my offer and he asked if he could answer any questions for me.
“I’ve heard that people at Salomon are much tougher and more hard-
nosed than people at Goldman,” I said. “Is that true?”
“That’s not quite right,” he said to me. “I think Salomon’s a bit like a
shark, in a way. You know, sharks have to keep swimming, keep moving all
the time, or else they die. That’s more or less what Salomon’s like.”
I thought it merely odd that he would try to allay my fears by comparing
his firm to a shark. I ignored the analogy as well as the advice of many
acquaintances, headhunters, and former Salomon employees, who warned
me that Mike could be a difficult boss. When I was being courted he was
congenial. Always cautious, I agonized through the summer of 1988 and
then decided to take the job.
Early in the fall I told Ed Markiewicz I was going to leave Goldman for
Salomon. He spoke with Fischer and Jacob, and, when I told him how much
money I was being guaranteed, did not come back with a counter-offer.
Though I was happy about my soon-to-increase pay, I was just a little
disappointed that they didn’t try to lure me back.
On my last day at Goldman, when I had completed my exit interview and
given up my ID card so that my next exit from the front door of 85 Broad
would be my last, I received a call from Scott Pinkus, Goldman’s head of
Mortgage Research. Scott tried to persuade me stay on at the firm and work
on applying the BDT model to asset-liability management. But he played
up the software side of the work, and I felt that he, too, viewed me more as
a physicist-turned-programmer than a financial modeler. In any event, it
was too late for me to reverse my course. I took a short vacation in the
Caribbean, and a few weeks later started work at Salomon Brothers.
Notes
1
RMS is a common mnemonic for both Risk Management System and
Root Mean Square. Volatility—a crucial measure of risk that is defined as
the square root of the mean of the squares of the stock’s daily returns, or
“root mean square” in common statistical parlance. Root mean square is
also suggestive of Brownian motion, the process by which a randomly
moving stock price diffuses from its initial value in such a way that the
average price change is proportional to the square root of the elapsed
time.
2
A few years later a lady who cut my hair asked for my title at work.
When I said I was a Vice President at Goldman Sachs, she congratulated
me on having only one person above me. She didn’t understand that I
was one of probably 3,000 VPs.
...