Chapter 12
A Severed Head
A troubled year at Salomon Brothers
Modeling mortgages
Salomon’s skill at quantitative marketing
Mercifully laid off
Throughout the next year I was falling in the dark. Each day I could sense
the ground rushing up to meet me, like a bad plane-crash dream that ends in
a 
startled 
awakening. 
That 
year 
at 
Salomon, 
from 
October 
1988 
to
Thanksgiving 1989, was the worst I ever experienced, and much of what
happened to me was as much my fault as theirs. Most of the time I simply
felt incompetent. I kept thinking that perhaps I would eventually adjust. I
didn’t, though I learned a lot.
Mike Waldman, my new boss in Mortgage Research, had quit graduate
school to move to Wall Street in the 1970s, very early in the quant game. I
soon found out that though he had a quick sharp businesslike mind, he had a
brusque manner and some strange habits to go with it. Early every Monday,
right after I dropped Sonya at her nursery school, I would rush to our early
morning mortgage group meeting where Mike led a discussion of the status
of all our modeling projects. We all brought our own breakfast, and as the
meeting started, Mike would devote several minutes to scratching out a
circular moatlike groove in each half of his sliced bagel, throwing away the
doughy detritus and leaving behind a scooped-out half bagel crust into
which you could then put butter or jam. It was very disconcerting. I was
enviously impressed one morning when someone else in the group got the
nerve to ask him “Does it taste better that way?”
I was Mike’s lieutenant in charge of research on adjustable rate mortgages
(ARMs, for short), something I knew little about when I arrived. I had
never had any formal education in mortgage markets; flung into the middle
of this, and supposedly supervising people who knew more about it than I
did, I began to read the Salomon Brothers research papers on the topic.
The American mortgage market, I learned, was gigantic, comparable to
that of Treasury bonds. At the individual level, savings banks all over the
country lend money to homeowners who need to finance their housing
purchase. In exchange, homeowners contract to repay the loan over 15 or
30 years in equal monthly installments of interest and principal. ARMS are
mortgages with an adjustable rate of interest that, every six months, for
example, floats up or down in approximate synchrony with short-term
Treasury 
interest 
rates 
according 
to 
some 
specified 
formula.
Correspondingly, every six months, the homeowner’s monthly mortgage
payment changes, too.
ARMs have all sorts of additional wrinkles. They start out the first year
with a “teaser,” an unusually low and tempting interest rate. Then, over
time, as the rate adjusts, there is a cap on how high it can float and a floor
on how low it can sink. Finally, although a mortgage may have a nominal
life of 15 or 30 years, a homeowner can choose to terminate the loan early
by prepaying the unpaid balance—a smart thing to do if interest rates have
fallen so low that a totally new mortgage with a lower interest rate is
preferable.
Banks who lend to homeowners own the mortgage, the claim to the
homeowner’s 
future 
monthly 
repayments. 
Periodically, 
the 
banks 
turn
around and sell the mortgages they have acquired to GNMA, FNMA, and
FHLMC, 
government 
agencies 
that 
act 
as 
financial 
intermediaries 
by
pooling together vast quantities of similar but not identical mortgages into
more standardized securities. They then resell these pools to large investors
—mutual funds, pension funds, insurance companies, hedge funds, and the
like—in 
search 
of 
interest-bearing 
investments. 
This 
process 
of 
asset
acquisition, 
pooling, 
standardization, 
and 
subsequent 
sale 
provides 
a
liquidity that frees the savings banks to make more loans. As a result, the
percentage of residents who own their own homes is greater in the United
States than anywhere else in the world.
Mortgages are messy, though it takes only a little careful high-school
math to work out the monthly mortgage payment that will draw the loan
down to zero over 15 years. But that’s just the start. Everything about an
adjustable 
rate 
mortgage 
pool—the 
interest 
payments, 
the 
principal
repayments, and so on—varies with the future level of interest rates, so an
ARM is really a complex option whose payments are contingent on interest
rates.
To estimate what a mortgage pool is worth, you have to rely on a model
of future interest rates, something like the BDT model I had worked on, in
fact. 
You 
then 
simulate 
the 
pool’s 
future 
cash 
flows, 
averaging 
over
thousands of interest-rate scenarios generated by the model. You want to
represent the future evolution of long- and short-term interest rates as
realistically as possible, and then, for each future scenario, compute the
adjustment in the floating ARM interest rate that a homeowner will pay
each month. You also want to try to estimate from past experience what
percentage of homeowners will prepay their mortgage as a consequence of
the change in rates on each scenario, since this prepayment alters the cash
flows, too. The output of this Monte Carlo simulation model is the current
value of the mortgage pool.
Mortgage valuation models involve a witch’s brew of assumptions about
yield curve movements and how homeowners respond to them, none of
them well-tested. Even the ZIP code of the homeowners who owned the
houses that were financed by the mortgages in a pool is important—some
localities, 
based 
on 
their 
socioeconomic 
classification, 
had 
a 
greater
tendency to prepay than others—and I had heard of investors who actually
went to check out the neighborhoods for themselves. Compared to the rigor
and predictability of physics or even the simple elegance of the Black-
Scholes formalism, mortgage valuation is ugly. I once remarked on this to
Steve Ross whose investment company, Roll & Ross Asset Management,
specialized 
in 
mortgages. 
“Whenever 
I 
see 
something 
complex 
and
confusing in the investment area,” he retorted, “I see the scope for getting a
little extra benefit out of being smart.”
It’s 
a 
good 
answer, 
and 
probably 
true, 
but 
I 
still 
find 
mortgages
unattractive. Black-Scholes is clean and simple, like the theory of the
hydrogen atom. Modeling mortgages is involved and approximate, more
like trying to explain the structure of the energy levels in the uranium
isotope U
238
. I prefer clean problems. Still, mortgages were what I had
signed on to deal with.
Salomon was a tough place. The first thing I noticed when I started work
was that everyone came late for meetings. The most senior people arrived
last, each of them popping their heads into the door to see if everyone else
was there and then quickly leaving again if they weren’t. The junior people
took advantage of this chronic lateness to be late themselves. Everyone was
so determined to not have his or her own time wasted that they collectively
wasted everyone else’s. This would not have happened at Goldman.
The level of fear that permeated Salomon was more evident, too. Friends
of mine who wanted to leave the firm were semiparanoid that their bosses
would discover that they were interviewing elsewhere and then fire them
before they left. I never heard anyone at Goldman speak this way; despite
the 
natural 
tension 
between 
employer 
and 
employee, 
most 
Goldman
workers never imagined that exercising their right to look at other jobs
would naturally lead to being fired.
There were other signs of Salomon’s take-no-prisoners culture. In the
1980s, the BPA group had written a series of renowned reports for clients
on valuing swaps and other recently invented derivatives contracts. Each
report’s distinctive light brown cover bore the names of its authors printed
in a darker brown. Then, over the years, as one or more of the original
authors left the firm for other banks or trading houses, BPA would reprint
the report, having removed the departed authors’ names. Eventually there
were old but popular reports still being distributed that apparently had no
author at all. This Orwellian rewriting of history struck me as particularly
petty and ineffective, an affront to the notion of research.
At Goldman the enemies were competing firms; at Salomon the enemies
were 
competing 
colleagues. 
Shortly 
before 
they 
were 
acquired 
by
Citigroup, I met with an old friend still working there and asked him what
had caused a well-known acquaintance of ours to have been laid off by the
firm. “Oh him,” my friend said, “It turned out he couldn’t even code a
Black-Scholes model!” Now, the Black-Scholes model is so fundamental
and 
ubiquitous 
that 
I 
had 
little 
doubt 
that 
this 
was 
false. 
But, 
more
interestingly, 
I 
asked, 
how 
did 
anyone 
actually 
know 
that 
our 
friend
couldn’t code the model? Who had put him to the test?
Everyone in the Salomon quant group, I was told, had to recreate their
own computer code for even the simplest things that other people could
already do, because no one who had created something independently was
willing to share it. This was in diametric contrast to the situation at
Goldman, where, because this kind of backstabbing was frowned upon,
software was shared. At Goldman it would have taken longer to find out
that someone couldn’t do something as straightforward as code a simple
model.
The most impenetrable barrier was the wall between Meriwether’s group
and everyone else. Occasionally I would catch distant glimpses of the arb
group. Meriwether, Haghani, Hawkins, Krasker and their colleagues sat
together in the center of the trading floor, a world apart from everyone else,
a little Persian carpet marking the center of their privileged domain, an
exalted clique of happy people who awed everyone and knew it. They had
their own inviolably secret models, their own inaccessible data, their own
computer systems and system administrators, all exclusively theirs. They
also had access, if they wanted it, to the best models and minds in BPA, via
a one-way street that ran only in their direction. They were an elite force, a
Republican guard who could do whatever they wanted, and everyone half-
envied, 
half-resented 
them 
for 
it. 
They 
had 
it 
all—knowledge,
independence, prestige, and lots of money.
I attributed many of these cultural divergences between Salomon and
Goldman to the structural differences between a public company and a
private partnership. Goldman, then still private, functioned more smoothly
because it was run by partners seeded uniformly throughout the firm. They
were the daily overseers who didn’t possess a liquid stock to sell, and so
their long-term profit depended on the firm remaining intact. As a result,
any excessive egotism was eventually squelched, sooner rather than later,
because someone in control, despite his or her desire to win that particular
battle, realized that it was harmful to the firm. Goldman people always told
you that Goldman people were nicer, worked better together, were less
political. Though this was not entirely true, the constant talking about it
helped make it a self-fulfilling prophecy. No matter how self-interested the
partners were, their long-term interests were tied up in the entire company,
not just in their little piece of it.
In the words of a famous Goldman ex-partner, Gus Levy, Goldman was
long-term greedy rather than short-term greedy. At Salomon, I thought, it
was every man for himself and God against them all.
The key responsibility of my research group was to support the ARMs
dealers, who, unlike the arb group, were more interested in earning a spread
by servicing clients than in carrying out genuine proprietary trading. We
helped them by writing short quantitative marketing reports that provided
generally truthful ammunition for use by the salespeople. When the desk
acquired some new pool of mortgages, we ran our models on them and tried
to explain where their value lay.
There was a range of different models and corresponding metrics that you
could use to gauge the value of a pool. The simplest measure was the total
profit that the pool would yield to a purchaser over its lifetime, assuming
interest rates in the future remained unchanged. The most complex, which
used interest-rate simulation models of the BDT type I had helped develop
at Goldman, was Salomon’s option-adjusted spread model that reported the
spread over Treasury bonds the pool would generate, on average, over all
future interest-rate scenarios.
We ran daily reports on the desk’s inventory using both these models.
Different 
clients 
preferred 
different 
metrics, 
depending 
on 
their
sophistication and on the accounting rules and regulations to which they
were 
subject. 
We 
also 
did 
some 
longer-term, 
client-focused 
research,
developing improved statistical models for homeowner prepayments or
programs for valuing the more exotic ARM-based structures that were
growing in popularity.
The traders on the desk used the option-adjusted spread model to decide
how much to bid for newly available ARM pools. The calculation was
arduous. Each pool consisted of a variety of mortgages with a range of
coupons and a spectrum of servicing fees, and the option-adjusted spread
was calculated by averaging over thousands of future scenarios, each one
involving a month-by-month simulation of interest rates over hundreds of
months. Because the number and size of the monthly payments received
from the pool varied in a complex path-dependent way with changes in
interest rates, in 1989, on even the fastest computers, it took vast amounts
time to perform the calculations that led to the model’s recommended bid.
What made all of this complex work so unpleasant was the extreme
urgency of the demands from the desk coupled with the archaic nature of
the computer models we used. Often, we had less than thirty minutes to
prepare a bid for a pool. The outdated and unfriendly FORTRAN program
used to calculate the option-adjusted spread had been written many years
earlier. In order to value the pool, the program needed the parameters that
described its constituents: how many subgroups of mortgages it contained,
each subgroup’s coupon and maturity, the caps and floors on the interest
rate, and so on. You had to type these numbers into a file in a prespecified
order with exactly the right number of blank spaces between each number.
Then the program ran on a powerful supercomputer bought solely for this
purpose.
On a typical day, the starting gun fired when the desk received a page-
long fax from a savings-and-loan with the pool’s parameters. We then had a
half-hour to type the parameters into the input file and submit it to the
supercomputer, which in ideal circumstances took about ten minutes to
complete its calculations. So, every ten minutes impatient traders would call
from the desk for the answer.
Unfortunately, the program was totally unforgiving about input: If there
were just one blank character too many or too few, the program silently
hiccupped, and then went into an infinite loop, pointlessly churning away
on misread data without ever producing an answer. As a result, for the first
ten or fifteen minutes you would sit there nervously waiting for the program
to terminate and an answer to appear on the screen, all the while wondering
whether the supercomputer was simply running a little slowly that day, or
whether you had mistyped the number of blanks and were now in purgatory.
If fifteen minutes elapsed without an answer, you could assume you had
made a mistake; you then killed the program and started over. It was
agonizing.
This schedule of pool valuations dominated our life. Someone always had
to be on duty, preferably someone who could type very fast. It was
maddening to stand by and watch the one slow typist in our group chicken-
peck her way across the keyboard when there was a rush to bid. If you left
your desk for a while, you had to tell the secretary where you could be
reached. No one thought of taking more than a one-week vacation. When I
did take two weeks in the summer of 1989, I could sense Mike’s displeasure
at my lack of professionalism.
Once a week there was an early-morning meeting of S, T, and R, as the
hollowly upbeat sales manager liked to refer to sales, trading, and research,
linking their names together in an effort to give equal status to research.
Occasionally 
I 
had 
to 
deliver 
a 
brief 
two-minute 
presentation 
to 
the
salespeople on the attractive characteristics of some new ARMs pool we
had acquired. The first time I did this I was still shaky and insecure about
the peculiarities of mortgages, and a consultant was brought in to prep me
on how to talk from a script without seeming to look at it. His trick was to
use very large type, so you could invisibly scan ahead and memorize one
phrase at a time with a quick glance down, all the while maintaining
apparent eye contact with your audience. The rehearsals and videotaping
were demeaning, but it was an illustration of their totally professional
approach.
What impressed me most about Salomon was precisely the professional
way they used quantitative research to generate business. I thought of
financial research as a scientific endeavor, and I loved it with an amateur’s
passion. At Salomon, they were businessmen: They used financial modeling
as a marketing tool, and they tackled it like merchandisers. They were
experts at using models as yardsticks to measure and then rank different
securities by value, and they were proficient at then using those rankings to
push securities to clients.
I wasn’t good at marketing and I disliked it, but I learned a lot that year. I
also grew to see the logic of using models as sales tools. The truth is that
there are so many different securities in the world, so many varieties of
stocks, bonds, options, and even bonds with embedded optionality, that it’s
very difficult for anyone to know which security in a class provides the best
value. A model can provide you with a conceptual basis for thinking about
value; it can project a scattered universe of bond prices onto a one-
dimensional line that orders them by value.
I came to see that creating a successful financial model is not just a battle
for finding the truth, but also a battle for the hearts and minds of the people
who use it. The right model and the right concept, when they make thinking
about value easier, can stick and take over the world. A firm whose clients
start to rely on the results that its model generates can dominate the market.
This is what happened with Salomon’s concept of option-adjusted spread—
a short while after they invented it, every other firm on the Street was
writing their own version of the model to do the same analysis, because
clients demanded it.
Salomon people, who had been in the quantitative business much longer
than Goldman, thought about research in this way instinctively. As soon as I
arrived, I noticed that their salespeople and quants were prodigiously agile
at using quick, back-of-the-envelope methods to compare bonds in terms of
yield to maturity or option-adjusted spread. All new hires, not only traders
and 
salespeople 
but 
even 
quants, 
went 
through 
a 
several-month-long
training program. I say “even quants” with real admiration, because at
Goldman, in those days, it was considered a luxurious waste of resources to
send quants to a training program. Salomon’s fixed-income program was
exceptional. It was taught by traders, salespeople, and quants who together
covered market conventions as well as quantitative concepts and the use of
quantitative tools. There were regular exams, and the trainees became
expert at bond math. Everyone had studied Homer and Leibowitz’s classic
Inside the Yield Curve; they emerged from the program with a visceral feel
for yields, forward rates, and durations.
To my admiration, it was clear that someone at Salomon had once
understood 
the advantages of 
a firmwide, uniform interface to 
all 
its
models. The sales tools and models that everyone in the firm used in 1989
ran on an outmoded and clunky Quotron terminal, an infrastructure that had
been 
built 
in 
the 
1970s 
under 
the 
farsighted 
leadership 
of 
Michael
Bloomberg. Awkward though it was, everyone at Salomon had learned how
to use the Quotron proficiently to access internal and external information,
in much the way that people used Web browsers a decade or more later. In
1989 Bloomberg was no longer at Salomon but already the head of his
burgeoning information and modeling-tool empire, and his Bloomberg
terminal for clients was by that time far in advance of the Quotron. A few
years later I was pleased to see that the BDT model, too, was available
through his terminals.
Throughout 1989 my problems worsened. In truth, I was still a bit of an
amateur who didn’t know as much about the world of sales as most of the
comparably senior people around me. My friends Mark Koenigsberg and
Armand Tatevossian still tease me about a stupid answer I gave to a
question about the term structure of volatility that Mike squeezed out of me
at a BPA meeting. I can only plead guilty. It didn’t help that Mark would
joke publicly about how much money he imagined I had been guaranteed to
join BPA.
Month 
after 
month 
I 
clenched 
my 
teeth 
and 
tried 
to 
stick 
it 
out.
Sometimes I imagined that with enough time I would eventually manage to
become one of them. Most of the time, however, I longed to leave, but since
my employment contract guaranteed my bonus for 1988 and my total
compensation for all of 1989, I was reluctant to give that up, and so I
struggled on.
Working for Mike was no pleasure, though, even for someone with fewer
faults than I had. He seemed to have to control everything. Sometime in
early 1990 Phelim Boyle, a well-known pioneer of quantitative finance and
a professor at the University of Waterloo in Canada, invited me to speak at
an academic conference on the BDT model, which had just been published.
Mike refused to allow me to attend and to talk about my previously
published work, even on my own time. When I asked why, he smiled and
said that we shouldn’t help the competition. Like many bosses on Wall
Street, he thought he owned the people who worked for him. I suppose I
believed that, too. I turned down the invitation.
I wasn’t the only unhappy person in the mortgage group. In the end, I
noticed that those who had previously enjoyed some semblance of an
independent life, in business or academia, could not long tolerate Mike’s
need to stifle them. Most of the senior people who joined during that year
were gone a year later. Some, like me, had to leave because they were too
different from Mike; others I knew, like Ravi Mattu who had moved to
Salomon from Citibank, had to leave because they too closely resembled
Mike in their skill sets and felt suffocated. Only fresh young recruits who
had been imperceptibly eased into servitude before they knew any other
kind of life could tolerate the incessant control. Finally, a few years later, I
heard that Mike himself had to leave.
My personal end came fast. In late 1989, in a bad market, Salomon began
to lay off staff. Layoffs are always more convenient for a firm than firings;
it is easier to let someone go because of adverse economic conditions than
because of some inadequacy that might be challenged in court. Firms do not
publicize the names of the people laid off, but this is how it works: First,
you hear the general rumor that layoffs are about to occur. Then you begin
to hear mention of one or two people who have suddenly disappeared from
work. Finally, you notice that some of the people you normally interact with
are beginning to avoid you. Later, you realize that they knew in advance.
The sad truth is that when you know that friends or colleagues are about to
be laid off and you can do nothing about it, you avoid them, too.
One day, walking together down the stairwell between floors, Mike
encouraged me to explain really thoroughly to the young man working for
me exactly how far I had progressed with my regression model of ARMs
prepayment rates. “Got to keep bringing the younger generation up to
speed!” he smirked unconvincingly, as he tried to make sure nothing would
be lost when I was gone. I understood subliminally that I was going to be
let go, but I couldn’t quite absorb it. I continued to think of sticking it out
until I found a better job, but I didn’t really look for one.
Then, one afternoon, early in the Thanksgiving week of 1989, I received a
call at my desk from Mike, who asked me to descend a few floors to see
him in an office downstairs. I felt my heart sink into my stomach. I quickly
called Eva, telling her I thought that “it” was about to happen. She told me
in the nicest way not to worry about it. Then I left my office and went
downstairs.
When I knocked on the door of the unfamiliar office to which I had been
summoned, Mike opened it. Inside were Tom Klaffky, who had hired me,
Marty Leibowitz who ran all of BPA, and someone from Human Resources
or the legal department to ensure that everything was done properly. I sat
down and, in words I no longer recall, they told me that I was being laid off,
but that I would continue to be paid (at a lower rate, sans bonus) for a few
more months. They told me to debrief the people working for me about the
state of my projects and then to leave the building.
When you’re told to leave, you feel as though you’ve done something
shameful and you simply slink out. I spent a short time with the young man
who worked for me, who had obviously been told what was coming, and
then, without a farewell to anyone, set off to meet my wife and daughter
Sonya at a pediatrician’s appointment, glad to have a distraction. Finally, it
was just about over.
We celebrated Thanksgiving with friends in upstate New York a few days
later; then, on the last Sunday of the holiday weekend, I drove downtown to
my office at Salomon at 7 A.M., when it was certain that no one would be
there to see me, to pack my books into boxes for shipping. A few days later
I received confused calls from Mark and Armand, who had no idea why I
was no longer at work.
Ultimately, it wasn’t that bad. I like to imagine there was a kind of karma
working its way with me: If I hadn’t left FSG for Salomon, if I hadn’t
suffered the humiliations of the inadequacy I felt at Salomon that year, I
would never eventually have come back to a position at Goldman that
suited my skills and personality so much better.
I never saw Mike Waldman again, though for about a year I often had
fantasies of what I would say if we met on the street. But, about six years
later I was invited to give a speech about Fischer Black on the occasion of
his posthumous induction into the Fixed Income Analysts Society Hall of
Fame. At the award luncheon I found myself seated at the table of honor
adjacent to Marty Leibowitz, by then the Chief Investment Officer at the
TIAA-CREF, 
Teachers 
Insurance 
and 
Annuity 
Association-College
Retirement Equities Fund. As Waldman’s boss’s boss at Salomon, he had
delivered my sentence on that November day in 1989. This time he was
cordial and complimentary, and neither of us mentioned the circumstances
in which we had last spoken to each other.
...