Chapter 13
Civilization and Its Discontents
Goldman as home
Heading the Quantitative Strategies Group
Equity derivatives
The Nikkei puts and exotic options
Nothing beats working closely with traders
Financial engineering becomes a real field
Out on the street in December 1989, I grew slightly panicked. I visited
headhunters, went on job interviews and called most of the people I knew.
Several possibilities emerged, none compelling. I had no desire to fall into
the wrong position; I had seen too many people move from one one-year
job to another, making money but spoiling their reputation.
Through all these mental peregrinations I thought of Fischer as my lender
of last resort. Holding no grudge against me for having left Goldman, he
brought me in to interview with the Quantitative Strategies (QS) group he
led in the Equities Division. There I reacquainted myself with Jeff Wecker,
who was in charge of the trading systems being built in the group, and Bill
Toy. I also met Bob Granovsky, a yellow-bearded, perpetually perplexed-
looking equity options trader whom everyone called “Granny”; he had been
there trading options for as long as anyone could remember. Then Fischer
offered me a job.
I had been the head of a group in FSG and at Salomon, but QS was a
small, flat organization with no managerial slot for me. Nevertheless, I
thought the position would suit my abilities—at bottom, I liked doing
research. I did worry a little about pay—Bill Toy, now departing the quant
world to realize his dream of moving to the business side, warned me that
compensation in equities was lower than it was in fixed income. I queried
Fischer who brushed this aside. Without further anxiety, in mid-December I
accepted my destiny and agreed to return to Goldman and begin working
for Fischer on January 22, 1990.
It didn’t go as planned. A few days before I was to start, Fischer
unexpectedly called me at home to say that he was leaving the Equities
Division for Goldman Sachs Asset Management (GSAM), and that he had
recommended 
that 
Jeff 
Wecker 
and 
I 
jointly 
comanage 
QS. 
Shortly
thereafter, the heads of the Equities Division sent out a Memo To All that
announced Fischer’s move and our ascension to his former role. Nowhere
did the memo mention that I was not currently an employee of Goldman
Sachs. In subsequent years I learned that there’s nothing the firm likes more
than the appearance of a smooth transition.
For Fischer, GSAM may not have been the best place, and I suspect they
twisted his arm to move him there. Coinventor of the world’s most famous
and useful financial model, he was more of a thinker than the manager or
salesman that GSAM needed. Though his attitude to change was invariably
positive and though he had only praise for the firm, I felt that they had not
completely figured out how to use him to their greatest advantage.
For me, though, this was a lucky stroke and the beginning of several years
of the most absorbing work I had ever had, a time of almost drunk delight,
tempered though it was by battle with my peers (and bosses) far on the
ringing plains of lower Manhattan. I was immensely happy to return to
Goldman Sachs, and lucky, too. By Wall Street standards it was a civilized
place. During bad times in bad organizations, I had sometimes childishly
wished for retribution, willing to be hurt myself as long as it hurt my
employers, too. I never felt that way about Goldman. It was the only place I
never secretly hoped would crash and burn.
Jeff thought it wonderful that he and I had an opportunity to step into
Fischer’s shoes, and predicted that we would be Goldman Sachs partners in
a few years. Older, less upbeat and more battered by history, I was dubious
about our prospects. Still, I set about acclimating to my new home after so
many years as a fixed-income person.
In 1990, Equities was the most old-fashioned division at Goldman. Its
workers radiated a genteel white-collar, white-shoe pedigree, and they
looked down on the rough-and-tumble nouveau riche world of the Fixed
Income bond traders, who in their turn thought themselves a little classier
than 
J.Aron, 
the 
commodities 
and 
currencies 
business 
Goldman 
had
acquired in the 1970s. That year I met a woman from Aron who didn’t have
the obvious Harvard/Wharton aristocratic pedigree typical of so many
Goldman employees, and she unashamedly told me that she would never
have been at Goldman had she not been a part of J. Aron when they were
acquired. Aron had a scrappy make-do culture, and by 2004 their people
were running most of the trading divisions in the firm, including equities.
The QS group Jeff and I inherited was a hodgepodge mix of about four
employees and five long-term consultants who together occupied a messy
warren of shared offices and cubicles in a corner of Equities on the twenty-
ninth floor of 85 Broad Street. I liked the augury of my new phone number,
902-0129, whose last four digits I superstitiously interpreted to indicate that
I was Number One on Twenty-Nine.
We were ideally located about forty feet away from the derivatives
trading 
desk, 
distant 
enough 
so 
you 
could 
concentrate 
quietly 
when
necessary, but sufficiently close to feel part of the same team. You could
stroll over and talk to traders about the market at the end of the day without
seeming too pointed. This proximity to the trading desk lasted only six
months; after that, as both QS and the derivatives business expanded, we
moved a few floors away and lost our sense of community. From then on it
became much harder to acquire the skill of communicating with traders, one
of the more difficult tasks facing a new quant.
Our offices were crowded and littered; piles of documents blocked the
corridors 
between 
the 
cubicles, 
and 
the 
disorganization 
made 
a 
bad
impression on clients who occasionally visited the sales and trading floor.
Periodically one of the heads of Equities would walk by and threaten
reprisals if order were not restored. The worst culprit was Bill Toy, whose
desk 
and 
office 
floor 
was 
stacked 
one 
to 
two 
feet 
high 
with 
every
squirreled-away piece of paper he had ever read or written on—he was
unable to part with anything. When Bill used to complain about wanting to
make more money, Jeff would tell him that the easiest way to get a $50,000
raise was to clean up his desk, and I think it was true.
The only traditional financial modeler in Fischer’s ex-group was Piotr
Karasinski, then still busy writing the paper on the Black-Karasinski yield-
curve model. Most of the other members were talented hardware and
software consultants who had been hired and managed by Jeff to focus on
electronic stock-trading software. Long before most people, Fischer had
foreseen the application of information technology to trading; in 1971 he
had 
written 
an 
influential 
paper 
entitled 
Toward 
a 
Fully 
Automated
Exchange. 
Now, 
together 
with 
Jeff, 
he 
was 
nudging 
the 
firm 
in 
that
direction. It was prescient work, but a little early; if he had lived another ten
years to witness the growth of computerized exchanges he would have had
a riper laboratory in which to test his ideas.
The hardware focus of the QS consultants permeated our surroundings.
Shelves piled high with old computer parts ran along the walls of the long,
narrow, dark office I inhabited, reminding me of the garbage dump of
broken robot parts that C-3PO used to repair himself in the movie Star
Wars. I remember the look of suppressed puzzlement on John Hull’s face
when he visited me there that year and found that people he thought of as
quants were spending so much time and energy on technology. In truth,
though, that was what the business needed. I had seen over and over again
during the past few years that a model only gains its power when embedded
in a useable trading system.
The QS consultants were paid by the hour and many of them worked the
shifted 
day 
of 
computer 
geeks, 
starting 
late 
in 
the 
morning 
and
programming away spacily with CD players on their desk and headphones
on their ears. This was an unfamiliar and unprofessional look in 1990,
especially on a floor that clients visited, and we tried to bring a more
superficially businesslike look to the group. It wasn’t easy. One consultant
who left his CD player inside his unlocked desk drawer overnight found it
gone one morning. He spent the first half of that day speaking to Security in
an attempt to find it, and the second half arguing that we should reimburse
him for the stolen player. It was with great difficulty that I refrained from
pointing out that he had spent the last eight hours looking for the CD player,
and that his hourly rate for that time had already exceeded the cost of it.
The Equities floor I now worked on had a character very different from
the Fixed Income atmosphere I knew so well. In 1990, Equities had not yet
lost its aura of a small, exclusive, old-world club. Partners had their daily
lunch brought to them on a large silver tray delivered by a gracious, white-
coated food server, each plate covered by its own elegant warming dome.
There were luxuries for less important people, too. Employees on the
trading floor received free food during the day; when you arrived in the
morning, a gentleman dropped by to pick up your food order on which you
could select anything you liked from a collection of local restaurant menus.
The point was to keep you at your desk while the markets were open and
clients were calling.
Almost everyone ordered monumentally large helpings of lunch, drinks,
and snacks. It was simply hard to resist. Sitting surrounded by individual
plastic containers of fresh carrots, celery sticks, strawberries, quartered
kiwis and sliced peaches, nibbling the day away, you saw that someone else
had ordered a container of cherries and thought “What a good idea. I’ll do
that tomorrow.”At 11:30 A.M. the hot food started to arrive—swordfish,
steak, potatoes, rice, asparagus, whatever you wanted. To help wash it
down, our food server Neil delivered six-packs of Evian or Perrier, the
smallest round lot. Some people actually left for home in the late afternoon
with doggy bags of food and mineral water.
I 
disliked 
the 
free-food 
perk. 
By 
noon, 
I 
had 
grown 
bloated 
from
consuming a day’s worth of food in only a few hours, and I was genuinely
relieved at the loss of that privilege when QS was moved off the trading
floor in mid-1990. It was easier to simply pay for what you really wanted.
Later, after the fixed-income market’s losses of late 1994, everyone on the
trading floor had their food privileges revoked, and from then on traders,
salespeople and their assistants had to go to the cafeteria or a local takeout
place and buy their own food. There was an elegant VP lounge at the top of
85 Broad Street, where vice presidents could reserve sit-down formal
lunches at tables bedecked with white tablecloths, waited on, for some
mysterious reason, by uniformed, German-accented, middle-aged women
who reminded one vaguely of Rosa Klebb. The restaurant was shut down in
1994, too, and it was high time; it harkened back to an age when being a
vice president was something rare and significant. Ten years later during the
dot-com boom of 2000, when casual clothing ruled, free snacks made a
temporary comeback and every day each floor received Snapples, bottled
water, and very fancy, presliced, Harry-and-David-style fruit. This, too,
disappeared when the technology IPO market collapsed. You could see Wall
Street’s behavior—its manic depressive, feast-or-famine style of hiring and
firing, expanding and contracting, large raises followed by large cuts—all
mirrored in the waxing and waning of the food supply.
My boss was Dexter Earle, a partner at Goldman and a salesperson. This
was the time in my life when I began quite unselfconsciously to refer to the
person I worked for as “my boss.” My wife didn’t like to hear me use the
phrase; she was still in academic life and thought it a dysphemism, but I had
learned over the years to regard it as merely realistic. Dexter’s expertise
was in portfolio rebalancing, so he didn’t know that much about options and
volatility, 
but 
he 
was 
willing 
to 
joke 
about 
his 
ignorance, 
smiling
charmingly as though it didn’t matter when, at group dinners, people
occasionally roasted him by handing out blank books entitled Dexter Earle
on Derivatives. With the confidence of graciousness, polish, silk ties, and
matching suspenders, he outlasted by many years the more knowledgable
but abrasive comanagers the firm brought in to assist him in running the
equity derivatives business. Dexter was terrific with clients—we all used to
laugh at the story of how, when Dexter was asked by a client about
Goldman’s approach to AI (artificial intelligence software), he parried by
replying that “we are going to take a global approach and go slow.” But
what 
impressed 
me 
most 
was 
his 
ability 
to 
tell 
when 
someone 
was
misleading him about topics he didn’t understand. When we listened to the
occasional confident-sounding information technology fact-spinners whom
I knew to be half-charlatan, the heads of trading usually bought their stories
of expertise, but Dexter, a salesman himself, could identify the hollowness
beneath the surface.
Dexter’s secretary was a pleasantly stern woman with a penchant for odd,
homeopathic remedies. The first time I went to speak to her, she made me
stand impatiently at her desk for five or ten minutes while she unhurriedly
filled out various administrative forms. As I waited, an old Mother Goose
couplet 
I 
used 
to 
read 
to 
my 
children 
suddenly 
flashed 
through 
my
consciousness: I am his Majesty’s dog at Kew/ Pray tell me sir, whose dog
are you? Years earlier, reading it aloud without thinking, I had thought it
only a forced rhyme about a talking dog. Now, I suddenly understood it.
Though I was “upstairs” and more critical to the business than she was, she
was “downstairs” in a finer establishment. As years went by I learned that
quants, like the little boy in A. A. Milne’s poem, are always halfway down
the stairs.
The new new thing in the derivatives world in 1990 was exotic options. My
absorption in this world was triggered by the excitement at Goldman over
what we all referred to as the “Kingdom of Denmark puts.”
On the last trading day of 1989, the Nikkei 225 index of Japanese stocks
reached its zenith of 38,915.90. Throughout its ascent during what is in
retrospect called the Japanese equity bubble, many Japanese companies had
come to the capital markets to borrow from investors. Sometimes, in order
to pay even lower interest rates, the companies had promised to eventually
pay back more than they had initially borrowed, provided the Nikkei were
to drop by the time the loan came due, an event to which they ascribed little
probability. The greater the drop, the more yen the companies promised to
repay. In options parlance, the companies had given their bondholders put
options on the Nikkei, thus providing them with an insurance policy against
a Nikkei decline. Some bondholders kept the bonds but sold the attached
puts for cash to interested parties.
As the Nikkei ascended to ever higher levels during the late 1980s,
Granny had adroitly and systematically bought large numbers of these puts
that now collectively constituted a gigantic insurance policy against a
decline in the Nikkei. He had bought them inexpensively, probably because
the companies that issued them did not believe a sustained decline in the
Nikkei was possible back in those days of soaring Tokyo property values
and rising Japanese equity markets.
When I arrived in QS at the start of that year, everyone in derivatives was
talking about the Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei put warrants. I heard that it
was puzzled-looking Granny who had come up with the idea that Goldman
issue a listed put on the Nikkei. Since we owned the inexpensive insurance
against a Nikkei decline that Granny had bought, we could now sell similar
protection to the public. So, in January 1990 Goldman created the Kingdom
of Denmark Nikkei put warrants, struck at a Nikkei level of ¥37,516.77
with an expiration date in early 1993. They were listed on the American
Stock Exchange, and the Kingdom-of-Denmark prefix referred to the issuer
of the warrants, the sovereign Kingdom of Denmark to whom we paid a fee
to guarantee that they would stand behind the put warrants in the event that
Goldman’s credit failed.
Our issuance was exquisitely timed; the Nikkei was just past its peak, and
many buyers were willing to bet on its further decline. Granny had bought
cheap Nikkei volatility from Japanese yen-based counterparties who didn’t
believe that the Nikkei would drop, and was now able to sell it to American
dollar-based investors who were betting it would. Most profitable options
strategies I have seen have had the same formula: Buy some simple, less
attractive product wholesale, use financial engineering to transform it into
something more appealing, and then sell it retail. It’s a transformation that
requires an understanding of clients’ needs as well as technical skills.
To accomplish this, Granny added a custom-tailored, exotic subtlety to
the structure of the Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei put warrants that I haven’t
yet mentioned. The Nikkei is an index of 225 Japanese stocks whose prices
are quoted in yen. An American dollar–based investor in the Nikkei index
effectively owns Japanese stocks denominated in yen, and then faces two
risks: that the Nikkei drops and that the yen weakens against the dollar.
American investors were happy to buy insurance against a drop in the
Nikkei, of course, but they didn’t want their insurance payment to decline if
the yen were to simultaneously weaken as the Nikkei fell, a not unlikely
occurrence. Therefore, the Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei put warrants also
carried built-in protection against a drop in the yen by guaranteeing that,
irrespective of what happened to the actual yen-dollar exchange rate, the
payoff of the warrant would be converted to dollars at an exchange rate
guaranteed in advance.
For example, if the Nikkei were to drop from 37,500 to 25,000, a drop of
12,500 index points or 33 percent, the holder of a put warrant with a face
value of $1,000 and a guaranteed conversion rate of $1 per yen would
receive $333, even if the yen (to take an extreme scenario) were to become
worthless in dollar terms. If the conversion rate had not been guaranteed,
the holder of a warrant whose payoff was converted to dollars at the
prevailing exchange rate would have received no dollars at all. This was a
very attractive feature for American investors, who naturally measure their
profits or losses in dollars—it allowed them to profit from an overdue
decline in the Japanese stock market without worrying about its effect on
the yen.
The market came to refer to this feature as a “quanto” option, though I
always preferred calling it a “guaranteed exchange rate” (GER) option,
which seemed more apt. This was the first nonstandard or so-called exotic
option 
I 
remember 
encountering, 
and 
like 
most 
successful 
structured
products, its payoff reflected investors’ needs.
This is where the role of financial engineering enters the picture. Even
though Granny had bought yen-based puts cheaply and sold the Kingdom of
Denmark puts more expensively to avid investors and speculators, there
was a dangerous mismatch between their payoffs that could have eliminated
our profit. The options we bought would pay us in yen if the Nikkei
declined, but the Kingdom of Denmark puts we sold would oblige us to pay
our counterparties in dollars. A move in the dollar-yen exchange rate could
therefore diminish or even wipe out our profit. To prevent this from
occurring, we would have to continually hedge the effect of any move in the
dollar-yen exchange rate on the value of both the options we had bought
and those we had sold.
Just as a clothing designer must factor the cost of labor, cloth, and
trimmings into a garment’s price, so we had to reflect the cost of hedging in
the price we charged for our GER option. The hedging strategy involved
daily trading in the Nikkei and the yen, a strategy whose estimated cost we
had to include in the price we charged for the Kingdom of Denmark puts.
Black and Scholes had shown in 1973 that the fair value of a standard
stock option was the price of hedging it over its lifetime. They derived a
partial differential equation for the option’s value and had shown how to
solve it. Ever since, academics and practitioners had kept busy by extending
that insight to all sorts of other options. Now, in late 1989, Piotr Karasinski
had found an analogous partial differential equation for the fair value of the
Kingdom of Denmark GER put. Much to the surprise and near disbelief of
everyone 
on 
the 
desk, 
he 
had 
shown 
that 
its 
value 
depends 
on 
the
correlation between moves in the dollar-yen exchange rate and moves in the
Nikkei index. It was counterintuitive, almost paradoxical that the degree of
correlation between the Nikkei level and the yen should influence the value
of a GER Nikkei put whose payoff was designed to be independent of the
value of the yen.
When I returned to Goldman in that first month of 1990, everyone was
focused on the Nikkei puts, in particular on how to value and hedge them. I
soon met Dan O’Rourke, an options trader newly hired by Granny a few
months earlier, and now responsible for the daily hedging of the Nikkei
book. Dan and I saw the world similarly. First, we both understood that
models alone were inadequate, no matter how good they were. What traders
need is standardized systems that contain the models, systems that force
them to use the models in disciplined ways. Our traders were managing
their books on an inadequate and unreliable Lotus spreadsheet that any
trader could modify at his whim. It was not the right way to run a business.
We felt it was critical to build a risk management system tailored to Nikkei
options, analogous to the sort of trading system I had helped build in FSG
for the bond options desk, similar to the sort of system Garbasz had tried to
create in Chicago. You needed a dedicated computer program to keep track
of the hedging of the hundreds of options, futures, and currency positions
that 
constituted 
our 
desk’s 
Nikkei 
volatility 
book. 
Second, 
and 
more
importantly in the short run, Dan and Bill Toy convinced me of the
importance of demonstrating to the traders that Piotr’s counterintuitive
formula for the value of a GER put was correct.
I began by trying to penetrate to the essence of Piotr’s formula for the value
of a GER option. If you wanted to explain an options formula to a trader,
you couldn’t resort to stochastic calculus and partial differential equations.
Even 
now, 
when 
traders 
are 
more 
likely 
to 
have 
a 
mathematical
background, you still need to have an intuitive way of showing them that a
formula makes sense. I’m never satisfied with myself until I understand
equations in a low-tech, visceral way. Therefore I decided to forget about
deriving the partial differential equation for the Kingdom of Denmark GER
option, and instead tried to obtain a more easily understandable explanation
of its fair value. Feynman’s rules for quantum electrodynamics are a poor
man’s tool for calculating the probability of complex scattering events
correctly. In a lesser but similar way, I wanted to find a set of consistent
rules that would let you convince a poor trader that an option formula was
right 
without 
resorting 
to 
the 
advanced 
mathematics 
behind 
dynamic
options replication.
I thought about what the Black-Scholes formula really tells you. In
principle, you can derive the formula from the Merton strategy of dynamic
replication; from this point of view, the formula dictates in exquisite detail
exactly how to synthesize a stock option out of a changing mixture of stock
and riskless bonds. But looked at more naively, the formula gives you the
fair price of the option in terms of the current price of the stock and the
current price of a riskless bond. Its key insight is that the option is a
mixture. Like the ancient Greeks’ mythological centaur, part horse and part
man, a call option is a hybrid, too—part stock and part bond. From this
point of view, I came to regard the Black-Scholes formula as a simple and
sensible way of interpolating from the known market prices of a stock and a
bond to the fair value of the hybrid. Several economists, Paul Samuelson
among them, had come almost imperceptibly close to obtaining the Black-
Scholes 
formula 
before 
Black 
and 
Scholes 
by 
means 
of 
this 
kind 
of
reasoning.
When you want to estimate the price of fruit salad, you average the prices
of the fruit the mixture contains. In a similar vein, I thought of the option
formula as a prescription for estimating the price of a hybrid by averaging
the known market prices of its ingredients. So I experimented with making
myself a set of rules that a poor man could use for valuing options as
mixtures; I tried to see if I could use them to get the right formula for the
GER option. I eventually came up with the following rationale.
First, as in any mathematical problem, you have to choose your units, the
currency in which to quote all security values. You can choose any currency
you like—yen, dollars, or even shares of IBM stock as the unit measure of
value; it’s like deciding on inches or centimeters in reporting heights. The
cost of creating an option or an apartment building should not depend on
which currency you choose to perform your estimates.
In practice, a little thought often suggests a natural choice of currency that
can immensely simplify the problem. To take an example outside the
options world, stock market analysts often cite a stock’s P/E ratio—its price
divided by its annual earnings—as a measure of a stock’s value. This is
equivalent to using the stock’s annual earnings in dollars, rather than the
dollar itself, as the unit in which to report a company’s stock prices. The
stock price, quoted this way, automatically tells you how many years of
presumed earnings you are paying for when you buy the stock at its current
price.
Many of the advances in options theory in the 1990s involved nothing
more than Black, Scholes, and Merton’s original insight augmented by the
clever choice of a more subtle unit of value than the dollar, a trick first
exploited by Bill Margrabe soon after Black and Scholes invented their
model. Options theorists of a mathematical bent call this trick “the choice of
numeraire.”
Since risk is what you are dealing with, you must then specify the risky
ingredients of the option, those elements whose future values are unknown.
Here, you aim to think of the complex option as a mix of the simplest
underlying securities whose risks you understand. Options modelers call
these the risk factors. For a standard stock option, for example, the stock
price is the major risk factor. For the Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei put, the
most important risk factors were the level of the Nikkei and the value of the
dollar-yen exchange rate.
Next, you must describe the range of future scenarios that the values of
the risky securities can take. The range is usually described by several
model 
parameters 
that 
will 
have 
to 
be 
specified 
when 
the 
model 
is
calibrated. Once you know the range of future scenarios for the risky
ingredients, you can then estimate the value of any other risky security (an
option, for example) as the average of its future payoffs over each of the
scenarios, discounted to the present time. In the Black-Scholes model, for
instance, one assumes that future stock returns lie on the common bell-
shaped 
distribution 
familiar 
to 
all 
users 
of 
elementary 
statistics. 
This
distribution is specified when you know the parameters that determine its
center and width, or, put more mathematically, its mean and its standard
deviation.
You must then calibrate the model, which means you must make its
scenario parameters consistent with the current prices of the simpler, risky,
underlying securities in the natural currency you’ve chosen. In the Black-
Scholes model, calibration means ensuring that when you use the model to
calculate the value of the stock itself, you reproduce the current stock price,
and when you use the model to calculate the value of a riskless bond, you
reproduce its price. This constraint is almost enough to pin down the Black-
Scholes formula. Calibration is absolutely critical. Anytime you use your
model to calculate the value of a simple risky security whose risk you
understand and whose market price you know, your model must match that
price—if it doesn’t, you’re starting off from the wrong place.
Once the model is calibrated, you can use it to calculate the value of the
option as a discounted average of its future payouts over the distribution of
scenarios. I like to call this interpolation, because the model is used to
calculate the “middle” value of a mixture from the known prices of its
ingredients at either end.
There is nothing especially original about my prescription, but it does
demystify the method of options valuation while still preserving much of
the economic logic. I found it a helpful way to explain models to traders,
and a useful intuitive way of thinking myself. You can get the answer to
many complex derivatives problems with less mathematics than you think.
I now proceeded to apply this logic, one step at a time, to the Kingdom of
Denmark GER Nikkei put. Since it paid out in American dollars, I chose
dollars as the natural currency. The relevant risk factors were the level of
the Nikkei (in yen) and the value of the yen (in dollars). Piotr had assumed
the common bell-shaped scenarios of future returns for both the Nikkei and
the yen—good enough at that time when no one yet worried about the fat
tails in the distributions and their effect on options prices.
To calibrate the model, I chose the values of the respective centers of the
bell-shaped distributions of the Nikkei in yen and the yen in dollars so that
both the prices for the Nikkei and the yen, quoted in dollars, matched their
current market values. Now the model was fully specified and ready for
interpolation.
Next I calculated the fair value of the put option by averaging its payout
over all future Nikkei and yen scenarios, first converting that payout to
dollars 
at 
the 
guaranteed 
exchange 
rate. 
To 
my 
great 
gratification, 
I
immediately obtained Piotr’s formula more directly. The value of the option
did indeed depend on the correlation between the Nikkei in yen and the yen
in dollars. My method was much easier to explain to traders; always on the
search for pricing discrepancies, they instinctively grasped that a model had
to be calibrated to agree with the market’s dollar prices for the Nikkei and
yen, securities they could buy or sell at any instant.
In physics I always used to do calculations at least two different ways and
see if they agreed. I decided to do that here, too. If my rules were right and
if I was careful to use them correctly, I should have obtained the same final
answer for the value of the GER put even if I chose an unnatural currency.
To confirm this, I perversely decided to choose the yen rather than the
dollar as my currency, a more contrived choice of numeraire for evaluating
a GER put that pays out in dollars. Now I calibrated the distributions to the
market prices of both the Nikkei in yen and the dollar in yen. I worked out
the fair value of the Nikkei put warrant in yen, even though it paid out in
dollars. When I converted the warrant’s final yen value to dollars at the
current exchange rate, the answer was identical. Everything was consistent
no matter which currency you used to solve the problem.
There was an element of paradox to the appearance of the Nikkeiyen
correlation in the final formula, but over time we got to understand better
why this correlation was so important. The Kingdom of Denmark Nikkei
put’s payout in dollars was independent of the dollar-yen exchange rate; it
varied only with the level of the Nikkei. But, in order to hedge the put, you
had to hedge its exposure to the Nikkei, which required taking a position in
Nikkei futures whose value depended on the level of the Nikkei in yen.
Owning these Nikkei futures induced a secondary exposure to the yen,
which now had to be hedged, too. It was this secondary (yen) hedging of
the primary (Nikkei) hedge that induced a dependence on the correlation.
Once I included the cost of carrying out both hedging transactions over the
lifetime of the option, I obtained the correct value for the GER put.
I was very pleased with my poor man’s rederivation of Piotr’s elegant
result, and ran from trader to quant, excitedly explaining my understanding
to anyone who would listen. Over the next few months Piotr, Jeff, and I
wrote 
a 
paper, 
Understanding 
Guaranteed 
Exchange-Rate 
Options,
intended to be the first of a new series of Quantitative Strategies Research
Reports. 
Though 
it 
contained 
some 
mathematics, 
it 
was 
written 
in 
a
relatively casual style, intended to educate clients and salespeople about
these products. For a brief period I felt that we knew something interesting
that few other people understood, and I looked forward to sending our
report to academic friends and clients. I was happy to be in the publication
business again.
It wasn’t that easy, however. When you send clients a research report
from an investment bank you have to be careful that nothing you write can
be 
construed 
as 
a 
recommendation 
that 
might 
cause 
legal 
problems.
Statements about hedging require disclaimers on the limited efficacy of
theoretical 
models 
in 
the 
face 
of 
actual 
markets. 
Furthermore, 
you
obviously don’t want to reveal anything that could damage your business
franchise. Therefore, after preparing our report, we took it to the new head
of the trading desk for approval.
Several days later he asked us not to distribute the report outside the firm.
Though I was frustrated at not being able to communicate what we knew to
people in our field, I could see that he honestly felt that option pricing
formulas were akin to trade secrets that neither competitors or clients
should know about.
I thought he was wrong. The true commercial value lay in Granny’s great
idea—selling Nikkei insurance that was insensitive to a drop in the value of
the yen to American investors who thought that the Nikkei was overpriced.
But this idea was already in the public domain, since we had listed the
warrants on the American Stock Exchange; sure enough, it was almost
immediately copied by other banks.
Within a few months, finance academics at several universities published
papers on the valuation of GER options. One or two of them got it wrong
the first time, because it was subtle, but several got it right. Had we
published our paper, Goldman would have given up little; they might even
have gained some minor kudos as a haven for analytically talented people.
A few copies of our internal report did leak out over the next year, probably
distributed by salesperson eager to set up a dialogue with clients. Ten years
later it was finally reprinted, belatedly but verbatim, in a book on currency
derivatives.
Later that summer I gave a talk on GER options at a course organized by
John 
Hull 
at 
the 
University 
of 
Toronto. 
While 
listening 
to 
the 
other
speakers, I began to realize how lucky I was to be working in equity
derivatives at Goldman. GER options were merely the forerunner of many
new and intriguing problems that the blossoming equity options markets
were beginning to throw our way, problems of which academics were
unaware.
The problems of intellectual and business interest often came to us as
questions, ill-posed by traders, who knew they had a difficulty but could not
always articulate it. The first battle was understanding what the problem
was. The traders didn’t always have the patience to listen to our solutions.
Sometimes, as we discovered from the salespeople, it was the firm’s clients,
especially in mathophiliac France and Japan, who had a greater taste for
learning about financial models and exotic products. I began to realize that
there was a market for honest, simple, direct and nonpatronizing writing
about complex topics.
During the next ten years in Quantitative Strategies we wrote many
reports on the subtleties and complexities of equity volatility. We tried to
straddle the line between academia and Wall Street, attempting to explain
the theory of trading and valuation in a picturesque and pedagogic style
using only a modicum of academic rigor, the latter often relegated to an
appendix. We aimed to make our papers accessible to an audience of
intelligent 
traders, 
salespeople 
and 
clients, 
all 
with 
a 
presumed 
short
attention span.
In my mind’s eye I retained a 1980s view of quant groups, an outlook I
had absorbed by osmosis from Stan Diller and Fischer. I felt that we were
advantaged by working at the intersection point between theory and the real
world. I saw that it was good to have one foot in both the academic and
practitioner 
universes; 
I 
found 
that 
publication 
of 
our 
models 
could
simultaneously move financial economics forward while bringing prestige
to Goldman Sachs, thereby helping to attract people of high quality to the
firm. Finally, I learned that persuading the world to measure value with
your model is an effective and honest endeavor.
People outside Goldman thought that we spent all of our time doing
abstract research and writing it up for publication. It wasn’t so. Our main
activity was always building models and trading systems for use by the
derivatives desks, trying to solve their practical problems with our theories.
In the time we had left we wrote our reports, often for love rather than
money. 
We 
were 
immensely 
lucky 
to 
be 
the 
theorists 
living 
in 
the
experimenters’ laboratory, with the opportunity to be the first to hear about
new irregularities and the difficulties they posed for trading desks.
The success of Granny’s structured deal made everyone hungry for more. It
was clear that further deals would require more quants and better risk
management systems, and the QS group began to grow.
Though no one used that term in those days, it was Piotr’s “financial
engineering” that showed us how to eliminate the mismatch between the
risk of the warrants we owned and the GER puts we sold. Executing the
hedge in practice was more complicated. The trading desk was long a
diverse assortment of yen-valued Nikkei puts. They were correspondingly
short a large homogeneous batch of the dollar-valued Kingdom of Denmark
Nikkei puts that Goldman had issued. To hedge the mismatch, they had to
continually trade varying quantities of Nikkei futures and yen currency, as
well as some individual Japanese stocks. This entire “Nikkei book” had to
be hedged at least once each day, and sometimes more often.
When I arrived in January 1990, all this complexity was being handled on
a vintage DOS-based PC running a Lotus spreadsheet into which various
Black-Scholes options formulas had been embedded. It was neither flexible
nor robust enough for interactive risk management.
I was lucky to have come to QS from the fixed-income world, which has
always been a few sophisticated steps ahead of equities in these matters.
The rapid rise of interest rates in the late 1970s, after years of stable returns
with low volatility, had forced fixed-income clients and the trading desks
that serviced them to become the early pioneers of portfolio hedging
systems. As a result, I knew a great deal about designing and building risk
systems, and saw that this was where I could contribute.
In a month or two, Piotr and I, together with Rao Achyuthuni, one of the
QS consultants, quickly designed and built a rudimentary Nikkei risk
management system that we called Samurai. It was simple, but it did the
job: We entered our trading positions in tabular fashion into a flat computer
file, one security to a row. Within each row the first column indicated the
number of securities we owned, the second specified the security type
(stock, option, index, futures contract, currency, and so on), while the
remaining columns spelled out the details (strike, expiration, and so on)
necessary for valuation. Each day we edited the file to reflect new trades or
expirations. Samurai read the positions in the file and then reported the
model value and hedge ratio for the entire portfolio at current market levels.
It also reported the impact on the portfolio of more extreme scenarios in
which the Nikkei level, the yen, interest rates, and volatilities moved up or
down by as much as 20 percent. This latter feature was perhaps the most
useful; we could use it to discover the potential “hot zones” in the book that
might take us down, and we could estimate what types of new trades could
ameliorate these potential disasters.
Samurai made a giant splash; simple as it was, nobody in the division had
ever seen a built-from-scratch, risk-management system for derivatives
portfolios before. The desk embraced it and invited Jeff, Piotr, and me to
demonstrate it to Roy Zuckerberg and David Silfen, the dauntingly patrician
heads of the Equities Division.
What we had built suited the desk so well because we had collaborated so
closely with Dan. Traders have their own vernacular and, though he spoke it
himself, Dan was one of the few traders I met who was willing and able to
bridge the language gap. He would spend hours with us on the chalkboard
each day, trying to help specify and test the system; he would patiently
debate with me what should be displayed on the screen and in what format.
Dan was also a bit of a closet quant, who one day proudly took out of his
desk drawer the senior thesis on option pricing he had written years earlier.
Most of the programs we wrote in QS over the next several years worked so
well in part because Dan took on the role of the trading desk’s agent.
Unlike many traders, Dan also knew that success comes from incremental
improvements. We weren’t building the space shuttle, whose specifications
had to be written down in minute detail and handed over to the engineers.
When we began to build risk systems for the developing business of equity
derivatives, we had entered uncharted terrain, and there was no commonly
acknowledged best path through it. Every time we spoke with the traders,
we faced such a flood of demands and choices that it was difficult to decide
what to do first. Dan, more than anyone else I worked with from trading,
understood what physicists call perturbation theory, the approach by which
you get the most critical feature completed first, and then at each next step
you tackle the next most important feature. In contrast, many other traders
and desks were like the “old sailor my grandfather knew” in A. A. Milne’s
poem “who had so many things he wanted to do that whenever he thought it
was time to begin, he couldn’t because of the state he was in.” Dan
perceived his job to be the definition and creation of a uniform and well-
designed trading infrastructure for the entire desk, wherever they worked,
so that traders could move from one country to another and find a consistent
environment. Most traders just want to trade; Dan was willing to think
about the tools you need to trade safely. When the firm moved Dan to
London a few years later, no one adopted his role, and from then on giving
the desk what they needed became much harder. For more than ten years
afterward, the methodology we created in Samurai remained the core of our
risk system, despite manyfold increases in the size of our desk and our
book.
By the early 1990s, the Soviet Union had collapsed, the end of history was
ostensibly 
upon 
us, 
and 
global 
capitalism 
was 
rampant. 
In 
equity
derivatives, 
the 
era 
of 
exotic 
options 
had 
begun. 
Exotics 
seemed 
the
preferred way for investors in one country to gain just the exposure they
wanted to the markets in another. Suppose you were an American investor
who wanted to gain if the French stock market rose. In the old days you had
to buy and hold a diverse collection of French stocks and face the detailed
bother 
of 
tracking 
their 
prices 
in 
francs, 
collecting 
their 
dividends,
converting them to dollars, paying income and capital gains tax; after all
that, however, you were still exposed to the risk that the French franc might
deteriorate against the dollar. Now you could instead come to our equity
derivatives desk and buy a call option on the CAC-30 French equity index,
GER’d into dollars; you got the simplicity of looking at the daily closing
level of the CAC-30 in the newspaper or on a screen and knowing what
your P&L was, as traders like to refer to their profits and losses. You could
leave the messy stuff to us.
Exotic options like these and others were taking off, and Goldman was
determined to build a Structured Equity Products business. The success of
Samurai made QS the natural support framework, and during the next five
years we grew to about 30 people, with approximately three software
developers in our group for every pure quant. Each day we thought about
new options we could design and value, all of them providing exposure to
more granular contingencies than the coarse, standard options on which we
had 
sharpened 
our 
teeth. 
There 
were 
barrier 
options, 
options 
on 
the
maximum of a stock price, options on the average of a stock price, lookback
options, 
outperformance 
options, 
rate-contingent 
options, 
options 
on
options themselves. When, during the late 1970s and early 1980s, these
structures had first been invented and their value found by means of
ingenious mathematical manipulations, they were merely a curiosity, a
pushing of the theoretical limits. Now, ten years later, investment banks saw
them as tailored instruments in the business of giving customers exactly the
risk profile they desired—for a premium of course.
Behind all of these exotic structures, if they were successful in the
marketplace, were two obvious principles. First, since an option is a type of
bet on a future scenario that may never occur, investors want to pay as little
as possible for it. Second, in order to minimize an option’s cost, you must
define as precisely as possible the exact scenario you are betting on. The
more precise you can be about the scenario from which you want to benefit
or protect yourself, the less you pay.
We had options for every attitude. The classic was a standard call option.
A call on the Standard & Poor's (S&P) 500 index, for example, was a
straightforward bet that the index would rise by the expiration date; when
you bought it you paid for all scenarios in which the index would ultimately
rise, including those in which the index first dropped and then recovered.
There were more exotic flavors. A knock-in barrier call option was a bet
that the index would first drop below some barrier level and then regain its
ground. If you thought that this dip followed by a rise were likely, you
could pay only for that scenario, and it would cost you less than a standard
call. There were many similar variations on this theme.
If you didn’t want to worry about small fluctuations in the S&P 500 as
long as its trend was upwards, you could buy an average (or Asian) call
option on the index, whose payout depended only on the average level of
the index over the life of the option. Since the time average of an index is a
more stable quantity than the index itself, this option, too, was generally
cheaper than a standard call.
Alternatively, if you thought that the stock market would rise only if the
Federal Reserve kept interest rates low, you could buy a rate-contingent call
option on the S&P 500 that would extinguish (or knockout, in options
parlance) if interest rates were to rise. Again, since this call would pay out
only if interest rates were to stay low and the index were to rise, a less
likely occurrence than the index rising under all circumstances, you paid
less for it.
A typical buyer of our options was a European commercial bank that, as
interest rates kept falling, wanted to attract depositors by giving them a
chance of earning a higher return. The bank would promise its depositors an
enhanced rate of interest proportional to the rise (if it occurred) in the one-
year average of the CAC-30 over the next year. To provide that payout, the
bank bought options on the average of the CAC-30 index from our desk.
Instead of providing its depositors with a simple fixed-income investment,
it was giving them a hybrid product they couldn’t get elsewhere, a bond
combined with an equity “kicker.”
Conversely, many of the sellers of equity options were European pension
and mutual funds or insurance companies who, unhappy with the decline in
bond yields, sold options on equity indexes to enhance their return. They
gambled that the indexes wouldn’t rise and that the options they sold would
finish out of the money.
The development of new options structures resembled an arms race. Any
firm that created something popular with clients had a few months to press
their advantage before another firm copied them. It took that long to
reverse-engineer a product, add a few wrinkles, develop a risk management
strategy, put in place the legal and technical infrastructure, and then market
it.
Early in the 1990s, most options were written on simple global equity
indexes, like the S&P 500 in the United States or the FTSE 100 in Great
Britain; the exotic nature of the option lay not in the nature of the underlyer,
but rather in the definition of the way in which the payout of the option
depended upon the level of the underlyer. During the technology and
biotech bubbles of the late 1990s, investors became more interested in
options on complex underlyers, baskets of technology or pharmaceutical
stocks, for example. As firms tried to outdo each other, options payouts
became more refined and harder to apprehend. By the end of the decade, the
most popular options were being created at French banks by elite École
Normale 
Supérieure–trained 
mathematicians 
with 
a 
characteristically
French taste for formal mathematics. The exotics they marketed were
options on baskets of stocks whose actual composition kept changing over
time. In one, for example, the number of constituent stocks in the basket
each year decreased as the best-performing stock of the previous year was
eliminated. 
As 
in 
any 
business, 
the 
sales-people 
liked 
tailoring 
and
complexity because not only could you charge more for it, but it was also
more difficult for a client to assess the value of its individual features.
Complexity was also harder for competitors to copy.
Variations flourished. Riding the crest of this wave of innovation, and
simultaneously 
propelling 
it, 
was 
Peter 
Field’s 
inspired 
venture, 
Risk
magazine, to which we turned each month for its mix of industry news,
gossip, and quantitative articles. It was the first glossy in the options world,
replete with advertising and cover art, a magazine aimed at quantitative
practitioners rather than academics or money managers. It spurned the
suffocatingly rigid format of academic periodicals like the Journal 
of
Finance, 
and 
both 
academics 
and 
practitioners 
loved 
it. 
Fischer, 
too,
commented admiringly on it. For several years in the early 1990s each issue
contained topical articles on the newest exotic structures and how to value
them. Soon Risk was organizing expensive courses on exotic options, a
clever arbitrage by which they charged quants from one set of investment
banks to listen to the lectures of quants from another set, while Risk
pocketed the fee.
Other journals sprang up, too. The International Association of Financial
Engineers, a new professional organization of quants, began to specify an
educational syllabus suitable for the training of a quant. New textbooks and
Master’s of Financial Engineering programs sprouted and flourished at the
increasing numbers of universities that, sensing a need, began to cater to
those willing to pay to learn quantitative finance. In 1985 when I entered
Wall Street it was amateur heaven, a fluidly makeshift field filled with
retreads from other disciplines who could learn quickly, solve equations,
and write their own programs. You had to learn options theory on your own
and there were only a few textbooks to help you—those written by Jarrow
and Rudd and Cox and Rubinstein were the only ones I could obtain. The
only derivatives meeting I went to each year was the annual spring meeting
of the Amex. By the late 1990s, there were scores of master’s programs,
hundreds 
of 
conferences, 
and 
thousands 
of 
books. 
Physicists 
and
mathematicians, either unable to find academic positions or, grown weary
of academic politics and pay, increasingly sought out Wall Street jobs.
The quantitative life of practitioners, formerly the happily casual domain
of self-taught amateurs, was becoming a discipline, a business, and a
profession. It was simultaneously becoming a little less fun, too.
...