Chapter 14
Laughter in the Dark
The puzzle of the volatility smile
Beyond Black-Scholes: the race to develop local-volatility models of
options
The right model is hard to find
I first heard about the smile in December 1990 from Dave Rogers, our head
options trader in Tokyo. I had begun traveling to Japan regularly to bring
our traders the latest releases of our risk management tools and to learn
what new models and software they needed. Unlike the New York Stock
Exchange, the Tokyo market closed at midday; traders grew less frenetic
and went out for lunch, salespeople departed to meet clients, and there was
time for leisurely conversations. While we chatted, Dave showed me the
computer screen he used to watch the prices of options on the Nikkei 225
index. He pointed out a peculiar asymmetry in the Nikkei options prices:
The prices of out-of-the-money puts were unexpectedly larger than those of
other options.
Everyone referred to this asymmetry as “the smile,” or “the skew.” At
first it looked only mildly interesting, a peculiar anomaly we could tolerate.
Then, when I thought about it a little more, I realized that the existence of
the smile was completely at odds with Black and Scholes’s twenty-year-old
foundation of options theory. And, if the Black-Scholes formula was wrong,
then so was the predicted sensitivity of an option’s price to movements in
its underlying index, its so-called “delta.” In this case, all traders using the
Black-Scholes model’s delta were hedging their option books incorrectly.
But the very essence of Black-Scholes was its prescription for replicating
and hedging. The smile, therefore, poked a small hole deep into the dike of
theory that sheltered options trading. If Black-Scholes were wrong, what
was the right delta to use for hedging an option?
During the 1990s, the smile, initially a peculiarity of equity options,
infected 
other 
markets, 
taking 
a 
slightly 
different 
form 
in 
each 
one.
Understanding it became a dominating obsession for me and many of my
quant contemporaries. It was an anomaly that sat right at the intersection of
options trading and options theory, and I spent much of my intellectual
energy trying to model it.
Our work started in the typical heady rush of energy and ambition that
made me feel as though I were in physics again, racing to be the first to find
the “right” model for something important and interesting. I fantasized
about building a model that, embraced by everyone, would replace Black-
Scholes. It wasn’t as simple as I thought. During the next ten years I learned
that “rightness” in financial modeling is a much fuzzier concept than I had
imagined.
One of the things you learn repeatedly in a career in financial modeling is
the importance of units. You always want the prices of securities to be
quoted in a way that make it easy to compare their relative values.
When you need to compare the values of bonds, for example, their prices
are insufficient, because each bond can have a different maturity and
coupon. Instead, you quote their yields. A bond yield provides an estimate
of the return the bond will generate for you irrespective of its coupon and
maturity. You may not know whether a discount bond at 98 is better than a
premium one at 105, but you do know that, all other things being equal, a
yield of 5.3 percent is less attractive than 5.6 percent. This conversion of
prices to yields is itself a model, albeit a simple one. It is a convenient way
to communicate prices, as well as a good first step towards estimating
value.
In the options world as well, price alone is an insufficient measure of
value; it’s impossible to tell whether ¥300 for an at-the-money put is more
attractive than ¥40 for a deep out-of-the-money put. A better measure of
value is the option’s implied volatility. The Black-Scholes model views a
stock option as a kind of bet on the future volatility of a stock’s returns. The
more volatile the stock, the more likely the bet will pay off, and therefore
the more you should pay for it. You can use the model to convert an option
price into the future volatility the stock must have in order for the option
price to be fair. This measure is called the option’s implied volatility. It is,
so to speak, an option’s view of the stock’s future volatility.
The Black-Scholes model was the market standard. When I sat next to
Dave in Tokyo that day, his computer screen showed the prices quoted in
Black-Scholes implied volatilities. Even today, when no one believes that
the Black-Scholes model is absolutely the best way to estimate option
value, and even though more sophisticated traders sometimes use more
complex models, the Black-Scholes model’s implied volatilities are still the
market convention for quoting prices.
Options 
are 
generally 
less 
liquid 
than 
stocks, 
and 
implied 
volatility
market data is consequently coarse and approximate. Nevertheless, Dave
pointed out to me what I was already dimly aware of: There was a severe
skew in the implied volatilities, so that three-month options of low strike
had much greater implied volatilities than three-month options of higher
strikes. You can see a sketch of this asymmetry in Figure 14.1. This
lopsided shape, though it’s commonly called “the smile,” is more of a
smirk.
Figure 14.1 A typical implied volatility smile for three-month options on
the Nikkei index in late 1994. The dashed line shows the lack of skew that
was common prior to the 1987 crash.
With implied volatility as your measure of value, low-strike puts are the
most expensive Nikkei options. Anyone who was around on October 19,
1987 could easily guess why. Ever since that day when equity markets
around the world plunged, investors remained constantly aware of the
possibility of an instantaneous large jump down in the market, and were
willing to pay up for protection. Out-of-the-money puts were the best and
cheapest insurance. Like stableboys who shut the barn door after the horse
has bolted, investors who lived through the 1987 crash were now willing to
pay up for future insurance against the risks they had previously suffered.
By 1990 there were similar smiles or skews in all equity markets. Before
1987, in contrast, more light-heartedly naive options markets were happy to
charge about the same implied volatility for all strikes, as illustrated by the
dashed line in Figure 14.1.
It was not only three-month implied volatilities that were skewed. A
similar effect was visible for options of any expiration, so that implied
volatility varied not only with strike but also with expiration. We began to
plot this double variation of implied volatility in both the time and strike
dimension as a two-dimensional implied volatility surface. A picture of the
surface for options on the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 index is illustrated
in Figure 14.2. Like the yield curve, it changes continually from minute to
minute and day to day.
Figure 14.2 A typical implied volatility surface for the S&P 500 in mid-
1995.
This tentlike surface was a challenge to theorists everywhere. The Black-
Scholes model couldn’t account for it. Black-Scholes attributed a single
volatility at all future times to an index or a stock, and therefore always
produced the dull, flat, featureless surface of Figure 14.3a. The best you
could do, if you modified the Black-Scholes model to allow future index
volatility to be different from today’s, was to obtain a surface that slanted in
the time direction, as depicted in Figure 14.3b. But the variation in two
perpendicular directions, time and strike, was a puzzle. What was wrong
with the classic Black-Scholes model? And what new kind of model could
possibly explain that surface?
Figure 14.3 Implied volatility surfaces. (a) In the standard Black-Scholes
model. (b) In an enhanced Black-Scholes model where volatility varies with
time to expiration.
We knew that the Black-Scholes model oversimplifies the behavior of
stock prices. It assumes that a stock price diffuses away into the future from
its current value in a slow, random, continuous fashion, much like a cloud
of smoke from the smoldering tip of a cigarette spreads through a room.
Dense near the tip of the cigarette and sparse farther out, the intensity of the
smoke cloud at a point represents the probability that a particle of smoke
will diffuse to that location. In the Black-Scholes model, a similar cloud
depicts the probability that the stock price will reach some particular future
value at some future time. Figure 14.4 illustrates that cloud of probabilities
for a stock in the Black-Scholes model. The more dispersed the cloud, the
more uncertain the future stock price. A single parameter, the stock’s
volatility traditionally denoted by the Greek letter sigma, s, determines the
rate of diffusion and the width of the cloud. The greater the stock’s
volatility, the wider the cloud.
Figure 14.4 Simple diffusion in the Black-Scholes model. The shaded
regions illustrate the range of possible future prices for a stock whose price
is $100 today. The more time passes, the greater the uncertainty in the
future price. The darker the shading, the more likely the price will be in that
region.
Though simplification is the essence of modeling, the Black-Scholes
picture of smoke-cloud diffusion is too restrictive. First, stock prices don’t
necessarily diffuse with a constant volatility; at some times a stock diffuses
more rapidly than at others. Second, and more gravely, sometimes stocks
don’t diffuse at all. Diffusion, as shown in Figure 14.4, is a slow, continuous
process; in diffusion, a stock price that moves from $100 to $99 passes
through every possible price between them. This is not what happened
during the 1987 crash, however; on that day the Dow-Jones index jumped
its way downward through 500 points like an excited kid on a pogo stick.
Returning 
to 
New 
York 
from 
Tokyo, 
I 
began 
working 
with 
my 
QS
colleagues Iraj Kani and Alex Bergier. I wanted to extend the Black-Scholes
model just enough so that it could incorporate the smile. “Just enough” was
always the aim. A model is only a model; you want to capture the essence
of the phenomenon, not the thing itself. It is far too easy, in the name of
realism, to add complexity to the simple evolution of stock prices assumed
by Black and Scholes, but complexity without calibration is pointless.
The overwhelming fear of equity investors was another 1987-style crash,
so we added this possibility to Black-Scholes. This was not something new;
Merton had done it in his so-called jump-diffusion model in the mid-1970s,
and to begin with, we did it even more crudely than he had. To the constant
diffusion 
of 
stock 
prices 
we 
added 
just 
one 
new 
feature, 
the 
small
probability p that the stock price might take one sizeable jump J downward.
The probability cloud for this process is depicted in Figure 14.5. It shows
the 
two 
scenarios 
the 
stock 
can 
now 
take: 
a 
jump 
J 
downward 
and
subsequent diffusion with a volatility σ
H
, which is likely to be high because
of the after-excitement of the crash; or, more likely, continued diffusion
with the normal, lower volatility σ
L
.
Figure 14.5 The range of possible future prices for a stock that can jump
once and then diffuse. The darker the shading, the more likely the price will
be in that region.
Typically, we assumed the probability p to be of order one percent,
implying that the market assigned about a one-in-a-hundred chance of a
crash during the option’s lifetime. We chose the σ
H
to be about 40 percent
greater than σ
L
, based on a combination of intuition and experience about
the after-effects of stock crashes. Our model now had only two unknown
parameters, the jump size J of the crash scenario and the volatility s
L
associated with normal behavior. This was just one parameter richer than
Black-Scholes, which contained only a single volatility. We calibrated these
parameters by matching the model’s option prices to the two implied
volatilities that defined the shape of the three-month smile, those of an at-
the-money option and a put option struck 5 percent out of the money. With
a normal volatility s
L
in the vicinity of ten percent and a downward jump J
of about 25 percent of the current stock price, we found we could produce
smiles like those in Figure 14.1.
Our model looked at the world like this: During the option’s lifetime the
Nikkei 
had 
a 
roughly 
one-in-a-hundred 
chance 
of 
dropping 
about 
25
percent. This is why you paid so much more for an out-of-the-money put.
We then used the model to estimate the option’s delta, the hedge ratio
necessary to cancel its index risk. We also used it to value the more illiquid
or exotic options that were becoming increasingly fashionable—barrier
options, for example—whose prices were highly sensitive to the probability
and size of the jump. We wanted our traders to search the market for
options whose prices differed significantly from those produced by our
model. They could then buy the apparently cheap ones and sell the rich
ones in the hope that these outliers would eventually revert to our model’s
prices and generate a profit.
Though the jump model captured one essential sentiment responsible for
the smile, it was ultimately too crude. Its view of a future in which the
Nikkei 
awoke 
each 
morning 
and 
decided 
either 
to 
make 
one 
large
instantaneous excited jump downward or else diffuse calmly was still too
simplistic. Looking back, perhaps we should have added a distribution of
possible jump sizes and jump times. But jumps occur rarely, and since there
was little data on their distribution, we would have had to make many
unverified assumptions, something that felt unaesthetic. Rightly or wrongly,
we preferred a more constrained model whose parameters were totally fixed
by calibration to observed options prices. Ten years later, though, more
detailed jump-diffusion models of the smile became popular again.
Our initial model of the smile did find users in Goldman’s risk arbitrage
group, where savvy traders combined worldly knowledge with quantitative
methods to take educated bets. Some arbitrageurs focused on acquisitions in
which the acquiring company tenders for the stock of a target company at a
public offer price that substantially exceeds its current level. If and when
regulators approve the acquisition, the target’s price will jump to the offer
price. 
Until 
then, 
its 
price 
reflects 
an 
estimate 
of 
the 
probability 
of
completion 
of 
the 
deal. 
For 
these 
situations, 
our 
jump 
model 
was 
a
theoretically accurate picture, and the risk arbitrageurs made occasional use
of it to see whether their estimate of the likelihood of the acquisition’s
approval matched the jump probability implied by the current price of the
target.
Meanwhile, from mid-1991 through early 1993, Iraj and I and the rest of
QS turned temporarily to the more pressing problem of enhancing our risk
systems to handle the increasing number of exotic options we traded.
Unfortunately, the more we worked on exotics, the more we ran into the
problems of the smile: Whenever we used the Black-Scholes framework to
value the exotic options in the desk’s book, we were using a model that
produced the wrong value for much simpler standard options, a model
inconsistent with the smile. This wasn’t good—you can’t trust a model for
complex phenomena if it gets the simple stuff wrong. You wouldn’t trust a
NASA computer program that predicted the trajectory of an interplanetary
probe from Earth to Mars if it couldn’t first correctly predict the orbits of
Earth and Mars around the sun.
The right place to start was with a model that could match the market
prices of all standard options, the entire implied volatility surface. Only
then, when it was correctly calibrated, could you sensibly use it to calculate
the value of an exotic. How could we find a model that matched any
surface?
I thought back to our development of BDT. In the mid-1980s, the fixed-
income options world had undergone a similar crisis: Practitioners used a
yield diffusion model like Ravi’s to value an option on any single bond, but
felt uncomfortable because it couldn’t simultaneously match the prices of
all Treasury bonds on the yield curve. BDT was one of the possible
solutions to this dilemma.
We had a tremendous advantage in having come to the equity derivatives
world with a background in fixed income. Iraj and I perceived the following
analogy between bonds and their yields and options and their volatilities:
Bond prices are quoted using current long-term yields, which reflect
the market’s expectation of future short-term rates.
Options prices are quoted using current long-term implied volatilities,
which reflect the market’s expectation of future short-term volatilities.
Our ambition was to build a post-Black-Scholes model that allowed us to
back out the market’s expectation of future short-term volatilities from the
current volatility surface. We weren’t sure how to do it, but we knew that
the 
world 
needed 
a 
better 
model 
and 
would 
reward 
its 
discoverers.
Throughout 1993 we felt as though we were in a race with unnamed
competitors to find it.
Iraj and I were great admirers of the binomial options model, a simple,
picturesque, 
and 
yet 
accurate 
way 
of 
performing 
options-theoretic
calculations on a gridlike tree of future stock prices. On a binomial tree,
prices move like knights on a chessboard, one discrete step forward in time
and up or down a notch in price. Binomial trees are easy to draw and, in a
jerky way, mimic the behavior of real prices or indexes. As the grid of the
chess board becomes progressively finer, prices move more and more
continuously—they 
start 
to 
diffuse, 
in 
fact—and 
the 
binomial 
model
becomes equivalent to the Black-Scholes model. Binomial trees were the
Feynman diagrams of options theory, easy to picture and use, wonderful for
simulating simple trading strategies or developing valuation models. Even
the innumerate traders with whom we often dealt could understand them.
Initially invented by William Sharpe soon after Black and Scholes wrote
their paper, bimonial trees were then cleverly elaborated upon by John Cox,
Mark Rubinstein and Steve Ross. As options theorists grew increasingly
professional and better educated, binomial models fell into a low-tech
disrepute, but we still found them immensely useful.
Therefore, we tried to use a binomial tree of index options prices like the
one shown in Figure 14.6 as a guide to extracting the market’s view of
future short-term volatilities. The left edge of the tree denotes the current
index level. Each step up or down from there illustrates a potential future
index move. Traditional binomial trees make the key assumption that all
moves on the tree are of equal percentage magnitude; at any future time, at
any future level, the index, whether it moves up or down, grows or shrinks
by an identical percentage. In technical terms, the index has a constant
volatility of returns, globally the same across the entire tree, identical at
each future instant of time and index level. This constancy of the index’s
volatility in the Black-Scholes model leads to the associated flat implied
volatility surface that is inconsistent with actual options markets.
Figure 14.6 At left, a binomial tree of future index moves. Each future
percentage move is identical and represents a constant index volatility. At
right, the shape of the corresponding implied volatility surface.
Iraj and I developed an alternate view of the future tree of index levels.
We pictured the usual constant-volatility binomial tree redrawn on a flexible
sheet of rubber, which we could then stretch and distort so as to resemble
the tree of Figure 14.7. On this deformed tree, the size of the moves in the
index at each node of the tree could differ, representing a varying volatility
whose value differed from node to node. In theorists’ jargon, the index
would have a varying local volatility;by “local volatility” we meant the
short-term volatility of the index at a particular future level and time. The
constant or global volatility of Figure 14.6 was 
inconsistent 
with 
the
market’s tentlike implied volatility surface of Figure 14.2. There must be,
we figured, an implied binomial tree whose local volatility could be chosen
to match the market’s implied volatility surface. We expected it to look like
the tree in Figure 14.7, in which the local volatility of the index rises as the
index falls and vice versa, in order to reflect the surface’s variation with
strike.
Figure 14.7 At left, an implied binomial tree of future index moves. Each
future percentage move has a local volatility that rises as the index level
drops. Can one deduce the shape of the implied binomial tree from the
implied volatility surface at right?
It was easy to imagine such a tree. It was even easy to build such a tree by
literally making up a rule for how local volatility varied within the tree and
then constructing it. Given such a tree, you could use it to calculate the
prices of many different options and then plot their implied volatility
surface. We could see that it was possible to pick a local volatility whose
variation produced a realistic-looking volatility surface. But the ultimate
problem we faced was the inverse of what we were doing. We needed to
start with the implied volatility surface the market presented and deduce
from it the unique local volatilities that reflected it. The implied volatility
surface was the primary object, and the whole procedure we envisaged
would only constitute a true theory if you could extract from it a unique
implied binomial tree.
Throughout 1993, as the QS group continued to build the more elaborate
risk-management systems that occupied most of our time, we continued to
ruminate over the smile. In spare moments we tinkered with implied trees,
still uncertain as to whether there was a truly unique relationship between
the volatility surface in Figure 14.7 and the tree we hoped it implied. We
knew 
we 
could 
go 
from 
the 
tree 
to 
the 
surface, 
but 
what 
was 
the
incontrovertible way to go from the surface to the tree? We discussed it
with Dave Rogers and his traders, who, because of our sheet-of-rubber
analogy, always called it the flexible tree. We built versions of it and used
them to price and hedge varieties of options, but, too busy with supporting
the software needs of the desk, we avoided an all-out attempt on the
question of uniqueness.
The relationship between surface and tree reminded me of the lecture by
Mark Kaç I had heard as a graduate student at Columbia thirty years earlier,
when he solved the question of hearing the shape of a drum. Physicists call
this an inverse-scattering problem because, whereas most models in physics
proceed 
from 
the 
physical 
law 
to 
the 
results, 
inverse 
problems 
work
backwards. Newton’s theory of gravitation, for example, commences with
the law of gravitational attraction between the sun and the planets, and
deduces the planetary orbits. Inverse scattering problems go in reverse—
given the observations, they ask, what law would produce them? Imagine,
for example, that astronomers observed some strange perturbation in the
orbit of the earth. What change in the law of gravitational attraction would
account for it?
Our search for a method to extract a unique implied tree from the
volatility surface was an inverse scattering problem. This approach is more
typical of financial modeling than it is of physics. In physics, the beauty and
elegance of a theory’s laws, and the intuition that led to them, is often
compelling, and provides a natural starting point from which to proceed to
phenomena. In finance, more of a social than a natural science, there are
few beautiful theories and virtually no compelling ones, and so we have no
choice but to take the phenomenological approach. There, much more often,
one begins with the market’s data and calibrates the model’s laws to fit it.
This calibration is a kind of inverse-scattering approach, too, and it was
what we were trying to do in our attempt to construct implied trees.
Sometime in late 1993 I went to visit our trading desk in London, where I
also gave a talk at a Risk magazine conference on exotic options. Between
conference sessions, I met Graham Cooper, the new editor of Risk, and also
ran into John Hull. During our conversations I told them what Iraj and I had
been exploring. Graham and John told me that they had heard that Bruno
Dupire at Paribas Capital Markets in London and Mark Rubinstein, the
Berkeley finance professor who was one of the codevelopers of the original
constant-volatility 
binomial 
tree 
model, 
had 
been 
tackling 
the 
same
problem. 
Worried 
about 
giving 
away 
proprietary 
information 
to 
our
competition, I called Dave Rogers in New York and quickly got his
approval to allude in public to what Iraj and I had done. I hurried back to
my 
hotel 
room 
and 
quickly 
appended 
a 
few 
transparencies 
to 
my
presentation to describe our implied tree approach. After my talk, Graham
invited me to submit an article on our work to Risk, while John, hearing me
describe our trees sometimes as “flexible” and sometimes as “implied,”
nudged me towards the use of “implied.”
With competition at our heels, Iraj and I anxiously rededicated ourselves
to proving the uniqueness of our tree. Most of our day was typically spent
enhancing the desk’s trading models, responding to requests for pricing new
structures, and building trading software. Whenever we had spare time
away from desk support, we tried again to define a scheme for uniquely
extracting the local volatility at each future node of the implied binomial
tree.
We began with the market’s implied volatility surface on a given day, as
illustrated in Figure 14.2. We then constructed a binomial tree like the one
in Figure 14.8. Each shaded triangle in this tree, at each index level and
future time, evolves with a different local volatility whose magnitude is
represented by the degree of shading. Higher index levels correspond to
lower (paler) volatilities; lower index levels correspond to higher (darker)
volatilities. How pale or how dark must you choose them to match the
initial implied volatility surface of Figure 14.2? That was the question.
Figure 14.8 An implied binomial tree with varying local volatilities
represented by the shaded triangles in the tree.
The local volatility in Figure 14.8 is a local quality of the tree, the
microscopically viewed volatility within each single small internal triangle.
In contrast, the implied volatility in Figure 14.2 is a global quality, a wide-
angle overview of all the internal triangles seen from 30,000 feet. We
viewed the implied volatility of an option as the average
1
of all the local
volatilities that the index will experience during the life of that option.
Consider the option whose expiration and strike correspond to the time
and index level at the location of the small flashlight in the next-to-last row
of the tree in Figure 14.9. The value of its implied volatility depends upon
the values of the local volatilities in the shaded right-striped triangles; those
are the local volatility regions that the index can traverse in moving towards
the strike during the life of the option. It’s useful to think of the option
expiring at the flashlight as an X-ray source that illuminates all the local
volatilities in the internal right-striped triangles in the tree.
Figure 14.9 The implied volatility of the option whose expiration and strike
lie at the circle illuminates the local volatilities in the right-striped region of
the tree.
Similarly, the option whose strike lies at the location of the lantern in the
tree of Figure 14.10 illuminates the local volatilities in the shaded left-
striped triangles.
Figure 14.10 The implied volatility of the option whose expiration and
strike lie at the location of the lantern illuminates the local volatilities in the
left-striped region of the tree.
The option with a strike at the flashlight illuminates one part of the tree,
while the option whose strike lies at the lantern illuminates another part.
But no single option, neither the one struck at the lantern nor the one struck
at the flashlight, sheds light on just one triangle in the tree, the single node
whose volatility was the obscure object of our desire.
We kept struggling. We wanted a set of options that illuminated the
volatilities at just one internal node. But each scheme we tried failed—there
seemed to be no recipe for the local volatility at a single node.
Then, one day, as we played around with a five-row toy version of our
tree on a spreadsheet, we found something miraculous happened, something
so strange that for a few minutes we thought it was due to a programming
error in the spreadsheet. We noticed, almost by accident, that if we used
three distinct option strikes to illuminate the interior of the tree, two of them
with adjacent earlier strikes and one with a strike one period later—if, so to
speak, we directed X-rays into the tree from three different angles—the
illumination canceled everywhere except at the single node where they
intersected. This is illustrated in Figure 14.11. It was astonishing: We had
found an algorithm that determined the local volatility at a single node in
terms of the market implied volatilities of the options with strikes at the
three surrounding nodes.
Figure 14.11 How three options can illuminate one node. (a) Two options
with adjacent strikes illuminate the triangles to their left. (b) A single option
expiring one period later illuminates all the previous triangles plus one
more. (c) Subtracting the earlier expirations from the later leaves just one
internal triangle illuminated.
Now we knew how to find every local volatility, step by step. We could
select any node on the implied tree, read off the implied volatilities of the
three options adjacent to it from the market’s implied volatility surface, and
then extract the local volatility at that node via our algorithm. In this way,
one node at a time, we could find all the local volatilities. With those local
volatilities and the implied binomial tree on which they sat, we could value
and hedge any option on the index in a manner consistent with the smile.
We 
were 
immensely 
elated, 
believing 
we 
had 
made 
the 
next 
big
breakthrough in options pricing, an extension of the Black-Scholes model to
make it consistent with reality.
We weren’t the only excited ones. Mark Rubinstein and Bruno Dupire had
also spent the past year developing similar extensions of Black-Scholes. A
few weeks later Mark delivered his presidential address at the January 1994
meeting of the American Finance Association on Implied Binomial Trees.
Speaking to him over subsequent years, I learned that he too imagined he
had achieved a great breakthrough.
At about the same time, John Hull mailed me a copy of a talk Bruno had
given on his version of implied trees at a meeting of the International
Association of Financial Engineers (IAFE) in New York a few weeks
earlier. In it, Bruno also claimed to have found a unique way to extract local
volatilities from implied ones.
Each of us—Iraj and I together, Mark and Bruno separately—had tackled
the inverse scattering problem in characteristically different styles. Iraj and
I were used to dealing with the denizens of the investment banking world,
the less numerate traders, salespeople and clients, and so we wrote our
paper as simply and clearly as possible. We wanted anyone reading it to
know exactly how to build their own implied tree. We explained, step by
step, exactly how to build the tree and calibrate it to a given volatility
surface, and we illustrated it with a fully worked-out numerical example
involving a five-period tree that anyone could check.
Mark’s 
presidential 
address 
was 
more 
discursive 
and 
academic, 
and
covered the history of the problem. His initial solution to the inverse
scattering problem focused on matching the market’s implied volatilities at
a single expiration, thereby ignoring some of the additional information
embedded in the implied volatility surface.
Bruno’s IAFE talk was the most tantalizing. As a Frenchman, he had a
taste for formal mathematics, and his very brief report proposed an elegant
formula for the local volatilities in terms of the slope and curvature of the
implied volatility surface at the same strike and expiration. His paper wasn’t
easy to understand and people I spoke to were not sure it was correct.
Sometimes I thought he was being intentionally obscure, staking out his
claim without revealing exactly how he had derived it.
We studied Bruno’s report and soon realized that his concise formula was
exactly equivalent to what Iraj and I had developed on a discrete tree.
Where he had used calculus, we had used algebra. Though it wasn’t
anywhere near as important or grand, we were playing Feynman to his
Schwinger or Black and Scholes to his Merton. In an appendix to our paper
we rederived Bruno’s results and included a more transparent proof and a
reference to his work.
In late December 1993 both Bruno and Iraj and I submitted our respective
papers to Graham Cooper at Risk. Bruno’s appeared in the January 1994
issue of Risk, together with an editorial explaining that ours would follow in
February. The January issue also contained a page-long news report by
Graham Cooper about the work that Mark, Bruno, and Iraj and I had done,
referring to it as the new “supermodel,” and rather accurately describing the
relative merits of our individual approaches. We were all suitably flattered.
For the next several years we toured the seminar and conference circuit. I
spoke at dozens of university finance departments and business schools, at
the 
Vienna 
options 
exchange, 
and 
at 
countless 
industry 
conferences.
Salespeople in Japan, France, Switzerland, Spain and Italy, countries where
the more sophisticated traders loved learning about quantitative theories,
took me to see client after client. We gave day-long seminars to large
groups in Zurich and London, Bilbao and Paris, Milan and Munich. It was
exhilarating.
Iraj and I, together with Mike Kamal and Joe Zou, two more ex-physicists
who joined our group in 1994, continued to enhance the model and to use it
to value exotic options. We also worked with two software engineers in QS,
Deniz Ergener and Alan Buckwalter, to embed the model in the desk’s
trading 
software. 
Most 
of 
all, 
we 
struggled 
to 
abstract 
the 
model’s
mathematical features into a visceral understanding that would make it
accessible to traders. Since all their intuition was based on the Black-
Scholes model, we developed a series of simple approximate corrections,
rules of thumb that traders could use to nudge the Black-Scholes model in
the direction of implied trees.
It turned out to be much harder to explain the model to our traders than to
our clients. The traders were busy, their lives dominated by watching
screens, servicing salespeople, and entering the terms of their transactions
into computer systems. Each day they had to book hundreds or thousands of
new trades, often staying late into the night to make sure all the details were
correctly reconciled between the front-office risk management system on
their desks and the back-office mainframe that held the firm’s books and
records. They were more interested in automating the bookkeeping aspects
of their life than in improving their pricing.
The traders were in charge, and used whatever model they 
wanted
without reason or justification. If you wanted them to hedge differently, the
burden of proof was on you. They weren’t stupid, just sensibly philistine,
averse to using new models they didn’t understand. Unfortunately, they
were also averse to spending time on gaining understanding. When traders
have no model at all, it’s easy to get them to use the very first model
available. Once they have something they rely on, it’s much harder to get
them to accept an improvement.
So, 
they 
simply 
stuck 
to 
using 
the 
Black-Scholes 
single-volatility
framework for valuing exotics, even though it produced a flat volatility
surface. To compensate, they put all their inventive energy and intuition
into picking the “right” single volatility to use in the wrong model. One
senior trader insisted that even if the implied tree model were correct and
the Black-Scholes model were wrong, he would always be able to think his
way through to the correspondingly appropriate single volatility that, when
inserted into the wrong model, would nevertheless produce the correct
value for an option. I was therefore very pleased one day to discover that
there were certain exotic options whose correct value in the implied tree
model lay completely outside the range of values we could obtain from the
Black-Scholes model, no matter what single volatility we entered into it.
For these options there was simply no appropriate single volatility that gave
the correct answer from the wrong model. I showed these examples to the
traders with great glee and some vindictiveness. It was merely a minor
victory, as it failed to alter anyone’s behavior.
By 2000, when I worked on approving the use of all models at Goldman,
the tide had begun to turn. Increasingly, at Goldman and its competitors,
trading desks were obligated to provide some justification that the models
they used were appropriate for their market. Nevertheless, in the tug of war
between traders and risk managers, traders usually have greater pull.
One day in late 1994 the tension between traders and quants led me to do
something particularly stupid. I had spent all day dealing with impatient
demands for systems support that I couldn’t provide. That evening I took a
limo out to Kennedy airport to catch a flight to Vienna, where I was
scheduled to give a talk on implied trees at a conference at the OTÖB, the
Austrian options exchange. Boarding my plane, I sat down in my business-
class aisle seat and finally relaxed. I was frustrated by the constant battles at
work, and swore that I would be pushed around no longer.
As I unwound before takeoff, a family of three boarded the plane at the
last minute and began taking their seats, none of which were contiguous.
The father, a gentleman of about fifty, took the window seat on my right, his
son sat across the aisle from me, and his wife sat farther towards the front
of the plane. As I flipped through the pages of the OTÖB conference
program, the father asked the flight attendant if there were a set of three
contiguous 
seats 
for 
his 
family. 
Finally, 
after 
about 
ten 
minutes 
of
unsuccessful agitation, he turned to me and asked if I would switch aisle
seats with his son. Still smarting from being pushed around all day, I
remembered my “no more Mr. Nice Guy” promise to myself. I was seated
in the aisle seat I had requested and I wasn’t about to give it up for anyone.
Turning to him with misplaced firmness, I said, “I’m sorry, but I’d rather
stay where I am.”
As we took off for Vienna, I was appalled at my pointless recalcitrance.
Both my seat and his son’s seat were on the aisle. I was gaining nothing by
being stubborn. And worse, I had now condemned myself to sit for ten
hours next to someone to whom I had been unnecessarily objectionable.
Guilt began to overwhelm me as I debated with myself how to undo what I
had done.
While I writhed, I continued looking through the conference schedule.
Then, I noticed, the man on my right extracted a similar schedule from his
briefcase and began to look at it, too. I glanced at his face again, and
suddenly realized I was sitting next to Bob Merton himself, the developer of
continuous-time financial modeling, a Harvard professor and also a partner
at Long-Term Capital Management. I had seen his picture just that morning
on the inside flap of the cover of his famous book Continuous Time Finance
when I had been reading about jump-diffusion models.
I turned to him shamefacedly and apologized for my rudeness. By now
his son had fallen asleep, and there was no point in exchanging seats, so we
talked for a couple of hours about the history of options pricing models.
Though Bob was very gracious, I felt mortified at having displayed this
unpleasant part of my character, and for the duration of the conference I
found 
myself instinctively avoiding 
him and his family. Next time, I
promised myself, I would be tough on the people who deserved it.
Though Mark, Bruno, and Iraj and I were among the first theorists to use
local volatility to tackle the smile, various other people had similar ideas. In
particular, I came across a closely connected paper by Avi Bick, an Israeli
finance professor at Simon Fraser University in Canada. In November
1994, speaking at an NYU conference Derivatives: The State of the Art, I
was buoyed to hear Gary Gastineau, himself the author of an options text,
comment that our model would make markets more liquid by making
options pricing more accurate. Although we did live to see local volatility
become a household word and a textbook topic, I discovered that it was
much more difficult than I had imagined to create a truly successful
financial model.
Local volatility was an improvement on Black-Scholes in that it could
account for the smile, but it had three genuine failings. First, our new model
excluded the possibility that an index or stock could jump, and most market
participants nowadays regard that possibility as the main factor determining
the shape of the very short-term volatility smile. Our very first attempt to
model the smile had indeed involved such jumps. We were never fond of
jump models—since jumps are too violent and discontinuous to be hedged,
when you include them you lose much of the coherence of the Black-
Scholes model. But jumps are real, and omitting them made our model less
realistic.
Second, implied trees were difficult to calibrate. Often, as you tried to
build progressively finer-meshed trees for better computational accuracy,
the local volatility surface grew wild, displaying unrealistic peaks and
troughs as it varied from point to point. Over time we developed methods
for smoothing these fluctuations, but the need to smooth them made it
difficult to automate the production of implied trees for the desk. These
waves 
and 
troughs 
were 
themselves 
a 
partial 
consequence 
of 
having
excluded jumps; we were trying to model a violent phenomenon with a
tranquil diffusion, something that was bound to make calibration unstable.
Finally, our model ignored the random nature of volatility itself. Iraj and I
tried to enhance our implied tree model a few years later by adding a
random component to the local volatilities, but it made calibration and
calculation even more complex and unwieldy.
Over time we discovered that it is possible to obtain a smile with local
volatility, jumps, random volatility, or some mixture of all three. So, local
volatility and implied trees didn’t become “the” single model of the smile.
Years later, at a dinner in Manhattan discussing the past, Mark Rubinstein
and I both laughed ruefully at the mismatch between what we had expected
and the way things turned out.
Nevertheless, I was ultimately satisfied. Iraj and I had been among the
first to propose a consistent model of a new and strange phenomenon; we
had created a new framework and vocabulary, and we had done it from the
front 
lines, 
on 
Wall 
Street, 
not 
from 
a 
leisurely 
research 
position 
in
academia. The model was somewhat simplistic, as all models are, and it did
not tell the whole story, but it was a plausible, self-consistent little world
that captured one true and essential feature of equity volatility markets:
Volatility tends to increase when markets fall. Local volatility models have
become 
part 
of 
the 
standard 
arsenal 
of 
tools 
used 
by 
academics 
and
practitioners.
During the 1990s, volatility smiles spread to almost all other options
markets. Wherever there was fear of large market moves that could hurt
investors—downward for equities, upwards for gold, in either direction for
many currencies and interest rates—there smiles and skews appeared, and
our model became a key tool in explaining at least some of these features.
By the new millenium, smile models were ubiquitous, with Risk magazine
conferences devoting entire sessions, year after year, to these issues. In the
Firmwide Risk area at Goldman Sachs, I ran a team of about twelve PhDs
in the Derivatives Analysis group that had to approve the prices set and the
models used throughout the firm’s derivatives businesses, and we soon
found that every desk had its own smile model (all of them different), and
that most of our work involved the verification of these models. The models
differed from desk to desk because their markets differed; each market had
its 
own 
characteristic 
smile 
for 
its 
own 
idiosyncratic 
reasons. 
Equity
markets feared a crash; gold markets, after years of low prices, feared a
sudden upward move; in interest-rate markets, bond investors feared high
rates that would devalue their assets, while insurance companies, who often
guaranteed their clients a minimum rate of interest, feared low rates that
would diminish their incoming cash flow; in currency markets, investors
feared 
a 
move 
outside 
some 
stable 
band. 
Each 
fear, 
based 
on 
bitter
experience, corresponded to a different pattern and required a different
model. There was no single model for the smile.
Years ago, when I first became aware of the smile and hoped to find the
“right” model, I used to ask colleagues at other firms which model they
thought was correct. But now there is such a profusion of models that I ask
more practical questions—not “What do you believe?” but rather “When
you hedge a standard S&P 500 option, do you use the Black-Scholes hedge
ratio, something larger, or something smaller?” Local volatility models
produce smaller hedge ratios, while stochastic volatility models tend to
produce larger ones. The differences between the models are even more
dramatic for exotic options.
In 2003, at a derivatives meeting in Barcelona, I led a small roundtable
discussion group on the smile. There were fifteen of us, traders and quants
from derivatives desks all over the world. I asked everyone my simple
question: When you hedge an S&P 500 option, would you use the Black-
Scholes 
hedge 
ratio, 
something 
larger, 
or 
something 
smaller? 
I 
was
surprised that ten years after the first smile models appeared, with the smile
a 
fact 
of 
life 
in 
almost 
every 
derivatives 
market, 
after 
thousands 
of
published papers, there was still no consensus on how to respond to it.
There still isn’t. Though we know much more about the theories of the
smile, we are still on a darkling plain regarding what’s correct. A decade of
speaking with traders and theorists has made me wonder what “correct”
means. If you are a theorist you must never forget that you are traveling
through 
lawless 
roads 
where 
the 
local 
inhabitants 
don’t 
respect 
your
principles. The more I look at the conflict between markets and theories, the
more that limitations of models in the financial and human world become
apparent to me.
Notes
1
A mathematically complex average, to be honest, but an average
nonetheless.
...