Chapter 15
The Snows of Yesteryear
Wall Street consolidates
Clothing goes casual
Moving from equity derivatives to firmwide risk
The bursting of the Internet bubble
Taking my leave
Life in the first half of 1990s was a bit too good to last. The atmosphere in
Quantitative Strategies was rousing—we were an eclectic bunch of ex-
physicists, ex-mathematicians, and computer programmers, with our own
individual interests but all of us were passionate about finance. Most of the
time we were one happy family—the quants taught financial theory to
programmers who in turn taught programming style to the quants. Best of
all, we worked closely with traders such as Dan O’Rourke to bridge the gap
between 
academic 
theory 
and 
trading 
practice. 
Our 
body 
was 
in 
the
business world but our head was inspired by academia. It was a rich
existence.
To top it off, we had ample resources because we worked for traders who
understood that spending money on research and development is not a zero-
sum game. We believed that our models and systems were the best on Wall
Street. But business is cyclical. After the punishing rise in interest rates of
late 1994, power shifted from our traders to our sales-people, who had
difficulty imagining that investment in new models and trading systems
could lead to more business. Instead, they regarded research as an expense.
Lacking the skill to distinguish indulgence from necessity, they demanded
that each investment, no matter how small, be authorized by someone “on
the 
business 
side” 
who 
could 
determine 
its 
merit 
and 
need. 
But
authorization requires authority, and few salespeople had the time and
interest to acquire it. Instead, they held meetings.
In the short run, it was merely time that was wasted; over the longer haul,
opportunities 
were 
lost. 
While 
the 
business 
grew 
our 
infrastructure
stagnated. Now traders began to stay late into the evening to handle ever
larger numbers of transactions with antiquated systems. Eventually, our
models suffered, too. Then, as our models and software failed to stay state-
of-the-art, our self-respect declined. Soon I found myself spending more
and more of my time consoling the discontented in our group. Money could
no longer keep them happy when daily life ceased to be rewarding. Slowly
but steadily I could feel the need for change growing within me, too.
There was one elementary fact that many of our bosses were unable to
grasp: 
We 
were 
building 
these 
models 
and 
systems 
not 
just 
because
somebody authorized it, but rather because we thought they were the right
thing to do, because these questions fascinated us. We saw a problem,
discerned a need, became absorbed, and tackled it. It was all-engrossing.
Struggling to resolve the paradoxes of convertible bond models that had to
combine credit and equity risk, or trying to figure out how to model the
smile, I would find myself thinking about the problems in mental pictures
while I showered or took a run in the park. Sometimes I lay in bed unable to
put the picture out of my mind. We worked hard out of passion, pride, and
the pleasure of being thanked, recognized, and appreciated; of course, we
also worked for money, but money alone wasn’t enough.
The investment banking universe had changed, too. In 1985 you could
look for a quantitative research job at Goldman, Salomon, First Boston,
Prudential, Drexel, Shearson, Lehman, E. F. Hutton, DLJ, Smith Barney,
Paine Webber, Bankers Trust, Chase, Chemical, Citibank, and Mocatta
Metals, to name just a few among the large and reasonably respectable
banks 
and 
trading 
firms. 
Almost 
none 
of 
these 
firms 
exists 
as 
an
independent entity anymore. By 2000 the bigger fish had swallowed up the
smaller ones, and Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, Merrill, and Goldman faced
off in a competition for business and capital around the globe.
To compete, the firms had grown unavoidably larger. When I began
working at Goldman in 1985, the firm employed fewer than 5,000 souls;
when I ate my daily lunch in the cafeteria of the 85 Broad Street building
that housed all our New York employees, I could recognize many of them.
After the layoffs of 1994 there were about 10,000 employees throughout the
firm. By late 1999, as the millennium drew to a close, we had become a
publicly listed company with a workforce of over 20,000 people. At every
quarterly managing directors meeting I heard company leaders recite the
mantras that more than half the people in the firm had been there less than
two years, that growth was necessary to stay competitive, and that we had
to figure out new ways to maintain our culture.
And there really was a culture. Goldman was a little more gentle, a touch
more thoughtful, a jot more tolerant of intellectual diversity. You could talk
to anyone if you needed to—there was little standing on ceremony. If you
were good at something, you could be different. Even programmers and
quants were paid a modicum of respect for their skill and contribution.
People seemed to understand that all of these activities, in their different
ways, benefited the firm, helped attract employees and customers, and
helped make money.
After the IPO, quotidian life changed. The aristocratic old guard with
whom I was familiar, Bob Rubin, Jon Corzine, and Roy Zuckerberg among
them, had left to make their imprint on politics or enjoy their personal lives.
With its newly minted shares of stock to disperse, Goldman began to raid
other firms’ talent and buy other firms’ businesses. As we grew into a large
public company, the flow of information inside the firm became more
constricted and the hierarchy more stratified. None of this was necessarily
bad; it simply went with the territory. I still liked Goldman better than any
other place I considered.
Appearances were changing, too. In late 1999 the Nasdaq was heading
towards its precipitous peak, and each day there were new cracks in the
Berlin wall of Wall Street’s formal business attire. Each new day another
firm announced that casual clothing was henceforth de rigueur. Each new
morning saw formerly navy-suited partners come to work in manifestly
casual trousers and sports jackets over open-necked shirts. At Goldman, the
first 
to 
crumble 
was 
the 
historically 
more 
plebeian 
currency 
and
commodities division. Fixed income fell rapidly thereafter. Equities, the last
bastion, at first gave in only to casual Fridays. One principled person in my
group continued to wear a suit each Friday; when someone asked him why
he wasn’t going casual, he replied that it was bad enough to wear a uniform
every day, but that wearing different uniforms on different days was too
much. After a few weeks of casual Fridays, Equities fell, too, and the Velvet
Revolution was over. From then on it was all casual, all the time.
The intent, of course, was to continue attracting the best young graduates
to staid old investment banking in the face of competition from hipper dot-
coms. On recruiting trips for Goldman we discovered that many MBA
students were leaving their studies in mid-course to join new get-rich
ventures. Even the undergraduates we interviewed weren’t as sharp as they
had been in previous years. Striking back, Goldman distributed free fruit
and soft drinks each day, and, in case that didn’t suffice, they further
provided concierge services to junior employees working too hard to afford
the time to attend to their own needs.
Finally, the hot thing in equities in the late 1990s was going after retail
customer flow and electronic distribution. Investment banks, traditionally
wholesalers, had to catch up fast. For the next few years, I could see, the
valuation side of the business was going to take a back seat to issues of
technology. So, by late 1999, a little weary of intermediating between
discontented quants and resource-starved traders, I thought about change.
But how to move? On the day when I left Goldman for Salomon Brothers in
1988, Scott Pinkus had offered me the chance to move to another position
within the firm. When I asked him why he hadn’t broached it earlier, he
explained that it would have been poaching. It was bad form to try to recruit
someone from another department.
The inverse held, too. If you wanted to move to another area, you weren’t
supposed to set about it openly—that was putting your needs before those
of the business, a bad character trait. Condoning this would have opened the
floodgates. To be culturally correct, you were supposed to sit down with
your 
boss 
and 
then, 
after 
politely 
explaining 
your 
need 
for 
different
horizons, ask him: Is it okay with you if I explore other opportunities?
But this meant showing your hand—it was difficult to tell someone you
didn’t want to work for him or her anymore. Instead, in practice, you
approached the person you did want to work for and asked discreetly if a
position was available for you in his or her area. Then, if there was interest,
you met several times to discuss possibilities. Finally, if you both wanted to
proceed with the transfer, you went to your current boss and asked: Is it
okay with you if I explore other opportunities?
In late 1999 I spoke to several senior people I knew around the firm and
asked about possibilities. One of them was Bob Litzenberger, the head of
Firmwide Risk Management at Goldman Sachs and a former well-known
Wharton professor. His group’s job was to monitor and report the risk of the
entire firm and all of its subdivisions; Bob was well suited to lead it. He
was immensely broad and knowledgeable, the author of well-known papers
who had also worked in several derivatives trading firms. He also had the
will for it; to control the risk carried by the well-paid heads of powerful
trading desks you had to be tough. Concealed behind Bob’s deceptively
mild facade lay a necessarily stubborn will.
It took only a few meetings to establish that Bob was keen to have me
join Firmwide Risk; for my part, I was eager to move. He needed someone
who was a derivatives expert because many of the more subtle risks to the
firm lay in the complex, exotic, high-margin, over-the-counter options
traded by Goldman. We quickly agreed to move forward. Then, other
opportunities having been explored, we rolled back the odometer. The next
day I went to ask my current boss: Is it OK with you if I explore other
opportunities?
In early January 2000 I departed Equity Derivatives for Firmwide Risk.
The Firmwide Risk group that I joined was located in the division of
Operations, Finance, and Resources (OF&R). It was a service division and
it wasn’t glamorous—Resources meant Personnel, Controllers, and Legal,
all essential but nevertheless auxiliary to the firm’s main business activities.
OF&R was a strange locus for quants, a home so foreign to mathematics
and modeling that it was difficult to tempt experienced strategists to come
and work there.
Despite its dull location, Firmwide Risk tackled important problems. Like
insurance companies, trading desks at investment banks make money by
taking calculated risks for a fee. Our major task was to measure the
magnitude of the current risk of every desk, each division, and the entire
firm in a systematic and uniform way, helping to decide which risks were
inappropriate. Each desk ran its own risk management system, but we were
responsible for coordinating the bigger picture.
Most days, a desk was likely to gain or lose small amounts, but there was
always some chance of a potentially large loss. To quantify the notion of
risk, we and almost everyone else on the Street used the so-called daily
VaR, or Value at Risk, the dollar loss threshold above which greater losses
would occur with a probability no larger than 0.4 percent, or 1 chance in
250. This corresponded to about one trading day in a year. VaR is therefore
the 99.6 percentile loss. So, for example, a VaR of $50MM for the Equities
Division meant that there was only a one-in-two-fifty chance that more
money than this would be lost on any given day in the year.
Invented in 1994 by the J. P. Morgan bank, VaR is an unsatisfactory risk
metric that has somehow become an industry standard. We estimated our
daily VaR by running nightly simulations of the changes in the prices of the
portfolio held by each trading desk. These simulations were huge computer
programs that used the past statistics of each desk’s assets to estimate the
distribution of possible values the portfolio might take in the future. With
those estimates we could predict the distribution of each desk’s portfolio
value a day later. We produced VaRs for each desk, then for each group of
desks in a common trading area, then for each division, and finally for the
entire firm, generating a hierarchy of potential one-day losses that gave a
view of the firm’s riskiness from top to bottom.
Each day, like clockwork, we computed and reported the VaR for the firm
and its parts. Several times a week senior members of our group met with
each division’s risk committee, and once a week, in an unpleasantly early
7:30 A.M. global conference call, we met with the central risk committee
who fine-tuned the entire firm’s risk by setting limits on VaR. During
turbulent times they lowered the cap and during quiet times they raised it.
The aim was to take the appropriate amount of risk for the economic
environment, not to eliminate it. No risk, no return.
VaR is not a panacea, and there are many legitimate objections to its use.
Most importantly, VaR by its nature uses statistical distributions to project
the firm’s value into the future, and statistics are inevitably based upon the
past. But the past doesn’t repeat itself verbatim; people learn enough from
their past experiences to make new mistakes as they struggle between greed
and the effort to avoid the old ones.
VaR is also too simplistic: it’s not possible to capture the profit-and-loss
potential of a complex distribution of future portfolio values in a single
number, 
because 
very 
different 
distributions 
can 
have 
the 
same 
99.6
percentile. We are ignorant of the true probabilities—the extreme tails of
stock and bond price distributions, not to mention the overall distributions
of complex securities like swaptions or weather derivatives, are poorly
understood and may not even be stationary.
Even if you insist on representing risk with a single number, VaR isn’t the
best one. Percentiles don’t reflect the psychology of risk perception very
well—two different securities can each have their own small percentile
losses that combine to produce a greater percentile loss for the portfolio.
The VaR of a portfolio can therefore be greater than the VaR of its
components, 
in 
counterintuitive 
contradiction 
with 
the 
idea 
that
diversification diminishes risk.
As a result, though we used VaR, we didn’t make it our religion. We were
pantheists, praying to many parallel risk gods. For example, we had all
lived through various market meltdowns—the 1987 stock market crash, the
1998 Russian default crisis—whose reoccurrence would cause great losses
even though we had no idea of their probability. Thus, the firm imposed a
bound on the positions on each desk so that they could lose no more than a
tolerable amount in a repetition of such events. These and other stress-test
limits based on similar experienced or imagined catastrophes were imposed
over and above the VaR limits.
I think we did a pretty good job by taking a many-sided view of risk, but
it was a never ending enterprise. Each year we collected more data to
improve our statistics. Each year the simulations were enhanced to better
reflect the behavior of familiar markets. And, whenever Goldman entered a
new business—energy or weather derivatives, for example—that had no
history, we strived to create an imagined history and statistics that would
reflect the risk we perceived. So much of financial modeling is an exercise
of the imagination.
Though most of Firmwide Risk focused on VaR, I didn’t have much to do
with it. I found it useful but inelegant work, aimed more at an audience of
regulators rather than traders. Instead, I spent most of my time in Firmwide
Risk as head of the Derivatives Analysis group, a collection of about twelve
PhDs in New York, London, and Tokyo. Our mission was to ensure that
every trading desk’s derivative deals were “marked to market” accurately.
Marking to market is the act of assigning to each security in your
portfolio a price that reflects its current market value. You have a very good
idea of the value of a share of Microsoft, which trades millions of times a
day at a publicly listed price. Marking it to market is easy. But the
derivatives trading desks at Goldman (and most other investment banks)
had developed increasingly large positions in long-term or exotic over-the-
counter derivative securities, tailored to satisfy the needs of particular
customers. It was harder to mark them to market. It’s much simpler to price
a new pair of Levi’s than a secondhand, custom-tailored Christian Lacroix
evening dress.
Our firm owned hosts of illiquid derivatives in the interest-rate, equity,
currency, commodity, energy, and credit markets. Some structured products
spanned many markets—we traded yen-denominated bonds whose coupons
would increase if the S&P 500 index rose. To manage this position you had
to hedge changes in Japanese and American interest rates, the yen, and the
S&P 500.
There were no current market prices for such securities. Quants and
traders “marked them to model,” which meant they figured out their value
by means of carefully calibrated models, developed with mathematics and
written in computer code that was then embedded in front-office risk
management systems. And there was no secondary market for most of these
exotics—you had to keep them on your books until they expired, and hedge
them by means of the same model along the way.
What is the fair value of an illiquid security that you have to hold for
several years? This was an immensely significant and practical question,
because the value of these securities determines the company’s earnings, its
stock price, and the bonuses of the traders that manage them.
The trading desks typically valued their illiquid positions using their own
models. But this involved a moral hazard; when a trader’s year-end bonus
depends upon the value of a security whose price is both obscure and under
his control, he may be tempted to embellish his profit when payday
approaches.
The Derivatives Analysis group was the firm’s model police: Our job was
to confirm that the billions of dollars of exotic or illiquid derivatives were
being marked fairly. It’s an honorable and important task, one that requires
both knowledge and wisdom. That first year in Firmwide Risk I saw a
plethora of idiosyncratic and illiquid securities on the firm’s books in New
York, London, and Tokyo. The Equities Division was long out-of-the-
money, 
four-year 
calls 
and 
short 
out-of-the-money 
puts 
on 
individual
technology stocks, sold to them by insiders who were hedging the stock
they had received when their firm went public. The value of these options
was somewhat uncertain because there was no listed market at those distant
expirations and strikes. The fixed-income division had much more complex
swaptions on their books, similar to those yen-denominated bonds with
coupons indexed to the S&P 500. The commodities desks traded long-term
barrier options on gold, structured to help mining companies hedge their
future profits against gold price declines. All of these markets manifested
volatility 
smiles 
that 
made 
the 
accurate 
valuation 
of 
these 
highly
complicated securities difficult and uncertain.
Slowly it began to dawn on me that what we faced was not so much risk
as uncertainty. Risk is what you bear when you own, for example, 100
shares 
of 
Microsoft—you 
know 
exactly 
what 
those 
shares 
are 
worth
because you can sell them in a second at something very close to the last
traded price. There is no uncertainty about their current value, only the risk
that their value will change in the next instant. But when you own an exotic
illiquid option, uncertainty precedes its risk—you don’t even know exactly
what the option is currently worth because you don’t know whether the
model you are using is right or wrong. Or, more accurately, you know that
the model you are using is both naive and wrong—the only question is how
naive and how wrong.
No one truly knows the precise value of a stock option that cannot be
traded. Its value depends on what you can squeeze out of it by hedging its
underlying stock through all its future random price changes to expiration.
And this depends on the nature of the randomness and on the particular
strategy employed to hedge against it, both of which cannot be totally
determined in advance.
Faced with uncertainty, I took a many-worlds view of derivatives values. I
assumed that the future could be one of several foreseeable worlds, and that
there was consequently a range of possible values one could legitimately
assign to the option. In one future world, for example, stock volatility might
decrease as stock prices increased. In another, volatility might simply be
random. In each of a host of plausible different worlds, all consistent with
today’s observations, you can work out the correspondingly appropriate
theoretical model and then use it to value the option. You can then compare
the desk’s mark-to-model value with the spectrum of many-worlds values,
and see whether it lies inside their range. If it does, then it’s reasonable and
can be allowed as a mark. But if it doesn’t, you negotiate with the desk to
either justify or amend its estimate. Furthermore, since there is a range of
plausible values, we recommended that Goldman hold in reserve an amount
equal to the average mismatch between the range of plausible values and
the desk’s actual mark. This reserve represented a portion of their expected
profit to be held in escrow against the possibility that their model or
hedging strategy was wrong. It would be released only when the trade was
finally unwound and the true market value of the option would finally be
realized and revealed.
This was the strategy we adopted for appraising the firm’s exotic and
illiquid derivatives, which we regarded in the same way that an art dealer
might think about his inventory of impressionist painting. Suppose an art
dealer’s agent has acquired a valuable Renoir painting for $10 million when
he believes it to be worth $13 million, and now asks to be paid a bonus of
ten percent of the expected profit of $3 million, or $300,000. It would be
foolish of the dealer to pay the bonus until the Renoir has been sold. Until
then, the painting’s value is not merely risky, but uncertain. Illiquid option
or 
illiquid 
painting, 
you 
shouldn’t 
count 
your 
chickens 
until 
they’re
hatched.
The more I thought about it, the more that appraisal seemed like the right
metaphor for options valuation. When you want to estimate the value of an
antique that hasn’t changed hands in a long time, you compare it to
analogous objets d’art that have been auctioned more recently. The more I
dealt with estimating the value of the panoply of option structures and
models we came across, the more I believed that options valuation was
really valuation by analogy.
I recalled that as a child in bible school, I had learned the story of Hillel, a
famous sage, who was asked to recite the essence of God’s laws while
standing on one leg. “Do not do unto others as you would not have them do
unto you,” he is supposed to have said. “All the rest is commentary. Go and
learn.” I believe that you can summarize the essence of quantitative finance
on one leg, too: “If you want to know the value of a security, use the price
of another security that’s as similar to it as possible. All the rest is
modeling. Go and build.”
Financial economists grandiosely refer to this law as the law of one price,
which states that securities with identical future payouts, no matter how the
future turns out, should have identical current prices. It’s the essential—
perhaps the only—principle of the field. To estimate the value of an illiquid
security, you find a set of similar liquid securities, with known market
prices, 
whose 
payouts 
match 
those 
of 
the 
illiquid 
security 
under 
all
circumstances. The best estimate for the value of the illiquid security is then
the value of the set of liquid securities with the same payouts.
Where do models enter? It takes a model to show that the illiquid security
and 
the 
liquid 
portfolio 
have 
identical 
future 
payouts 
under 
all
circumstances. 
Your 
model 
must 
specify 
what 
you 
mean 
by 
“all
circumstances,” and you must show that the replicating portfolio, in every
future 
circumstance, 
has 
the 
same 
payout. 
Most 
of 
the 
mathematical
complexity in finance involves the elaboration of this single principle.
Models are only models, toylike descriptions of idealized worlds. Simple
models envisage a simple future; more sophisticated models incorporate a
more complex set of future scenarios that can more closely approximate
actual markets. But no mathematical model can capture the intricacies of
human psychology. Watching traders occasionally put too much faith in the
power of formalism and mathematics, I saw that if you listen to the models’
siren song for too long, you may end up on the rocks or in the whirlpool.
In September 2000 I was elected Financial Engineer of the Year by the
International Association of Financial Engineers (IAFE). I was the first and,
thus far, only practitioner to receive this award, lucky to be temporarily in
the company of the previous winners: Robert Merton, Fischer Black, Mark
Rubinstein, Stephen Ross, Robert Jarrow, John Cox, and John Hull, all
renowned contributors to the field who had made their major contributions
while in academic life. I considered myself fortunate to have been able to
make a small mark after a late start.
As a practitioner I had always been hands-on. What I had enjoyed most
was research, the primary work that no one has done before, carried out for
a small number of people in trading who were genuinely interested in the
result. Now, in Firmwide Risk at a large firm, I had to accustom myself to
doing secondary research, merely helping to validate the results of other
quants on the desk who had taken the first crack at a problem. I was also
part of a large bureaucracy. Each week I went to two fixed-income risk
meetings, one equities risk meeting, one firmwide risk committee meeting,
at least two Derivatives Analysis group meetings, and a meeting of all the
managers in Firmwide Risk. Then there were three different meetings with
three different controllers for equities, fixed income, and currencies and
commodities respectively, as well as the periodic meeting of all the VPs in
Firmwide Risk.
That was when times were good. By mid-2000, after the bursting of the
technology bubble and the subsequent decline in all stock markets, I had
many more meetings with discouraged young quants in my group who
foresaw a very limited upside. By early 2001 I was spending a large fraction
of my time trying to cheer up disgruntled but talented people.
There was one real perquisite to being a senior person in Firmwide Risk
—you got to participate in the firm’s central risk meeting once a week and
watch all the biggest big shots in action as we listened to the state of our
business prospects and discussed current events and strategies. I was invited
to hear Wesley Clark address us on Iraq, more than a year before the
invasion. In the end, however, I was an outsider. Running the firm was their
world, not mine. I liked smaller worlds and I preferred working on more
specific and detailed topics. Soon, I knew, I would move on.
Every Tuesday morning I held a global call at 10 Hanover Square with all
the senior people in Derivatives Analysis. At 8:00 A.M. New York time
they called in from London and Tokyo. One Tuesday, as we sat around the
speakerphone discussing deals we were vetting, I glanced at the window
and saw sheets of paper cascading out of the sky. I thought it looked like an
archaic ticker-tape parade for returning astronauts or victorious Yankee
teams, but it was too early for a parade. Then someone came running in to
say an airplane had struck the World Trade Center. We switched on the
television perched high in the corner of my office, and saw the flaming
tower, 
listened 
to 
the 
reports 
of 
an 
accidental 
collision. 
Then, 
a 
few
moments later, we heard a thunderous bang through my window as we
simultaneously saw the other tower on TV burst into flame. It was instantly
clear we were under attack.
Outside the building we regrouped, watching the horrific flames and
smoke pour from the towers. I had visions of waves of subsequent airplanes
careening in to strike more buildings. Crowds of us set off for the long walk
north, careful to walk neither too close to the unprotected FDR Drive nor
too close to attractive targets such as the Pan Am building. By the time we
reached Chinatown we heard of the towers’ collapse and the strike on the
Pentagon. By 3 P.M.I reached Sonya’s school on the Upper East Side,
where they were releasing students only into the care of their parents.
Lower Manhattan was like a war zone for the next few months—burnt air
and blockaded streets patrolled by New York City policemen and scared-
looking and out-of-shape members of the National Guard. I took a cab daily
from the West Side to Gracie Mansion, itself surrounded by sand-filled
dump trucks, and a ferry from there down the East River to the South Street
Seaport. Working and living in Manhattan was oppressive; you had no
respite from the expectation of the next assault. Helicopters patrolled the
night sky. People woke at 3 A.M. like clockwork to watch CNN. I noticed
the palpable relief when I spent a weekend in the country or the suburbs—
one felt briefly safe there. The first day I noticed a lightening of spirits in
Manhattan 
was 
more 
than 
two 
months 
after 
September 
11, 
on 
the
Wednesday 
before 
Thanksgiving, 
when 
suddenly 
the 
city 
seemed 
just
slightly festive.
Normally it takes me years to make up my mind about a transition. Now
it took only two months of vacillation before I decided that I was ready to
leave Goldman Sachs. The best times I had had there were when I worked
in small groups of traders and quants with a strong joint purpose—with
Peter Freund’s desk when we developed BDT, and with Iraj and Dan
O’Rourke when we built equity risk systems and developed our implied tree
model. I decided to take a year off, write a book, and then return to work,
either in academia or at a job in a smaller investment firm. On June 7, after
my farewell party, more than 17 years after I started at Goldman, I went
home for good. The next morning I went for a run in Central Park at 11
A.M., the best time for running. I hadn’t done this in several years.
A week later I received an email at home from someone in my old
Quantitative Strategies group who hadn’t been able to attend my party. He
and I had had occasional fierce battles over software standardization. Like
most quants, he was foreign born. “In retrospect,” he wrote, “Working in
your QS has been [sic] my happiest years in Goldman. Very often, I deeply
regret not having recognized fully what a privilege it was to work next to
(sometimes with) you and your colleagues. As time goes by, I realize how
lucky I was to be able to work in the atmosphere of the high intellectual
standards that you set, with extraordinary talented people that gathered
around you. I missed the times, and the opportunities that I did not take a
full advantage of.”
The snows of yesteryear inevitably melt, and there’s nothing sad about it.
I was ready for something new.
...