FOREWORD
The title of Brent Donnelly's book is The Art of Currency Trading.
He did not call it The Science of Currency Trading. He also did
not call it the Practice of currency trading, the Study of currency
trading, or the Discipline of currency trading. Currency trading is
an art, much like painting or drawing or playing music. And the
people who are really good at it are like artists.
In recent years there have been several attempts to turn trading
and investing into a scientific discipline. The proponents of
finance as a science call this “evidence‐based investing.” Get into
an argument with one of the evidence‐based investing people and
they will bury you under an avalanche of data and charts. Thing is,
the data and charts are contradicted by the market within a matter
of days, and rendered useless. You can pretty much find any piece
of data to support your conclusion. They have conferences on this
stuff. I am not big on evidence‐based investing.
There are no immutable physical laws in finance. No e=mc2. No
mathematical certainties. You may learn a technique, it may work
for a while, and then it will stop working. The market, as a whole,
exhibits a property known as non‐stationarity, which is the idea
that you are playing a game where the rules constantly change. A
science can't function under these circumstances, unless it is an
adaptive science, which would mean that it isn't really a science.
So we're back to square one: trading is an art.
The funny thing about Wall Street is that even though it is filled
with the archetypal lax bros from Ivy League schools, the people
who really succeed on Wall Street for a long period of time are the
creative types. People who are out‐of‐consensus thinkers. One‐
dimensional linear thinkers don't have a long life expectancy on
the Street. Well‐rounded people who are also divergent thinkers
are survivors. Whenever the tsunami hits, which is usually once
every couple of years, they just happen to be halfway up a tree. It's
not luck.
I've known Brent since we were both traders at Lehman Brothers,
and we have a couple of things in common. We are both creative
types with an interest in writing and music, and we both have a

curiosity about the financial markets that extends beyond the tiny
house that we trade in. Brent says in his book that before 2008 he
was the only one on the desk watching things like gold and oil. At
the same time, I happened to be the only resident bond market
expert on the equity derivatives desk. Cross‐asset trading is more
common these days, and Brent's work in this area is better than
anyone I know. Still, most people are content to live in their silo,
wholly ignorant of what is going on around them and oblivious to
the macro factors that affect the product that they trade.
A trading book like this has been needed for some time: a book
sophisticated enough for professionals to understand, but simple
enough for retail investors to take advantage of. Brent is honest
about his techniques. He doesn't say that they work all the time for
all people; his techniques are what has worked for him, someone
with a 23‐year career who has run a few dealer desks. What many
people don't realize is that experience counts for a lot in this
business, even though the banks and hedge funds are obsessed
with hiring people in their twenties. Outsized returns are what get
people's attention, but they should instead care about risk‐
adjusted returns. Brent talks about this. If more people
understood Sharpe ratio, the world would be a better place.
I'm glad that Brent devotes a section to behavioral finance. I first
started reading about this in 2003, but there was nothing in the
popular press at the time. I found myself reading Daniel
Kahneman and Amos Tversky's academic papers. We have come a
long way since then, and we are now at the point where there are
attempts to systematize and profit from cognitive biases—with
computer‐driven trading strategies. If you're not thinking about
these sorts of things, you're at a disadvantage. You're not even in
the ballpark.
I have written two books: a memoir, and a very dirty novel. It has
never been my aspiration to write a book on trading. Too hard!
Even if I sat down to turn my thought process into a rules‐based
system, there are as many exceptions to the rules as there are
rules. There is no methodology. That's trading. Brent doesn't give
us rules, per se, just guidelines. Best practices. To put an entire
career's worth of knowledge into a 100,000‐word manuscript is an
incredible achievement. There are books on trading stocks, but not
quite like this. There are books on trading options, but not quite
like this. There are books on trading futures, but not quite like

this. There is intellectual rigor in this book, without academic
rigor. The goal isn't to teach you what to do, it's to teach you how
to think.
My hope is that this book becomes the industry standard for
currency trading. And I think it might.
Jared Dillian 
Editor and Publisher, The Daily Dirtnap 
Author of Street Freak and All the Evil of This World
