ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thank you, Mom, for teaching me to take chances. You taught me
real risk appetite (and didn't call me weird when I charted stocks
on taped‐together graph paper and tacked it to the walls of my
bedroom at age 15). Thank you, Dad, for teaching me how to turn
a double play, for teaching me the difference between wrong and
right, and for making me Quaker Oats every day before school
when I was 17.
I appreciate my parents' efforts and struggles a lot more now that I
have kids.
Thanks to Craig for showing me the wisdom of unconditional
happiness and to Steve for the timeless AM/FX logo and for
bringing creativity, games, and music to our family. Thank you,
Sharon and Barry, for showing me at a young age that it's possible
for people to be principled, hardworking, fun loving, and super‐
successful all at once.
Thanks to SJS for NYC 1997/98 and for showing me how
incredibly fun work can be. Thanks to Ed for taking a chance on
me after my “sabbatical” and to Joel for bringing me back to the
major leagues in 2006. Thank you to Rob for teaching me how to
add, and thanks to Pete for imploring me to reduce.
Thank you so much to David Kotok, who has pushed me out of my
professional comfort zone and opened up an entire new world to
me and my sons. Thank you to Jared for the foreword, for good
music and good writing. And for living my dream of one day
writing a financial newsletter in South Carolina.
Thank you, Richard and Clyde, for making me feel valued (even
when I am losing money) and for backing this book. You are the
two best managers I have ever worked for. Thanks to Nick Jonas,
Saleh, and Saed for help with the first draft. And to Michael
Henton at Wiley for buying into my concept and making things
easy and seamless from the start. Thanks Richard Samson and
Beula Jaculin at Wiley for your help in editing and preparing the
manuscript. Thank you, Tad Crawford, for your encouragement
early on, and for suggesting a good title.

Thank you to Gitt for the camaraderie, DFW, and spiritual
guidance and for being so crazy good at your job. And thanks to
NDWY, NSUV, NJAM, and NSGM for best spot desk performance
ever (so far).
The quality of the people we work with determines how much we
enjoy the nearly endless string of weekdays behind the screens.
And, of course, I want to give a shout‐out to the readers of AM/FX
over the past two decades. Thank you so much for your feedback,
criticism, and support. I appreciate every single e‐mail you send.
Last but foremost: Sideways eight thanks to Adam and Oliver for
past and future adventures, like 6 a.m. RPG breakfasts and
exploring downhill through the thick forest, past the alien ferns to
the frozen stream. And thank you, Christine, for teaching me how
to be better at life. And thank you for always believing in me, even
those times when I did not believe in myself. None of this would
be any fun without you guys. I love you.
Brent Donnelly 
Wilton, Connecticut 
2019
