PART I 
Understand the Foreign
Exchange Market (FX 101)
Part One starts with the basics of currency trading and then slowly
digs deeper and deeper into specifics about volatility, liquidity,
and time‐of‐day considerations. Even if you are a seasoned FX
trading veteran, I suggest you read all of Part One. It starts with
simple concepts, but there is substantial advanced knowledge (and
cool random factoids) presented as the section progresses.

CHAPTER 2 
A Very Brief History of FX
Before we dig into what it takes to become a successful currency trader, I want to take a
quick step back and look at some history. I will discuss the history of currency markets
first, and then I will give you a brief background on the history of FX trading. Then, we'll
talk about some important basics: the mechanics and structure of foreign exchange
markets and how currency trading works.
A Very Brief History of Currency Markets
Currency trading has existed since ancient times and there are references to money
changers right back to biblical times.1 The Medici family was among the early traders of
foreign exchange (1400s).2 The monetary and currency system as we know it first started
to take shape in the early 1800s as various countries like the United Kingdom, Canada,
and the United States adopted first a bimetallic standard (gold and silver) and then a
straight gold standard. Under a gold standard, a country's paper currency can be
converted at will into a fixed amount of gold. A gold‐backed system can create high
confidence in a country's currency but the system is very inflexible.
An interesting feature of the gold standard is that it required the government to control
the entire stock of gold. Therefore, individuals in the United States were prohibited from
owning gold (except jewelry) while the gold standard was in force.3 It was a criminal
offense for US citizens to own or trade gold from 1933 to 1975. (See Figure 2.1.)
Figure 2.1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_6102
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Executive_Order_6102.jpg (public domain)
The inflexibility of the gold standard became a problem as early as World War I as
countries generated huge imbalances because of war spending while inflation varied
dramatically from country to country. In 1944, the Bretton Woods system of monetary
management established a fixed gold exchange standard for the major currencies. The
IMF and World Bank were also formed at this time and they remain relevant to this day.
The end of World War II also marked the end of the British pound as the dominant global
reserve currency and the ascent of the US dollar.4
Under Bretton Woods, countries kept their currencies fixed to the dollar. International
balances were settled in dollars using a fixed conversion rate of $35/ounce for gold. This
system was secure and robust as long as money was flowing into the United States, but

when money started to flow out because of US balance of payment deficits, the system
broke down.
As global trade increased after WWII, then the Vietnam War and OPEC embargoes hit,
the pressure on the system became unsustainable. Foreign entities requested more and
more conversion out of dollars and into gold. Gold reserves were falling too fast.
Recognizing that the situation was unsustainable, Richard Nixon met secretly with 15
advisers, including Fed Chair Arthur Burns and Undersecretary for International
Monetary Affairs (and future Fed Chair) Paul Volcker on August 13 and 14, 1971.
On August 15, 1971, Richard Nixon addressed the nation, announcing the end of the gold
standard and the implementation of new wage and price controls. The next few years
were very turbulent for the international monetary system.5
By 1973, exchange rates were flexible and currency trading as we know it began.6 One by
one, most countries moved to floating exchange rates, although some countries remain on
fixed or managed exchange rate regimes to this day.
The system of floating currencies backed only by faith in the issuing country (and not by
gold) is known as a fiat currency system. With no intrinsic backing, the value of currencies
floats based on market perceptions of relative value.
The definition of the word fiat7 is:
A formal authorization or proposition; a decree
An arbitrary order
In other words, paper money is worth something because the government says so. Since
the 1970s, major currency rates have generally been determined by the market but the G7
and G20 monitor markets and intervene verbally or directly by buying or selling when
they believe that currencies have become fundamentally misaligned. Examples of
coordinated FX intervention include:
The 1985 Plaza Accord, where nations agreed to intervene to hold down the
skyrocketing dollar
The 1987 Louvre Accord, where the same leaders put a bottom under the dollar after
it fell too far, too fast
1998 when the Fed, BOJ, and Bundesbank intervened in USDJPY as they believed
the move higher had become too speculative in nature
2000 when the ECB, BOJ, and Fed intervened to support the euro as the market
questioned its viability as a hard currency
2011 as the G7 intervened to support USDJPY after the Fukushima earthquake
There are many other instances of currency intervention by individual central banks but
the list above covers the major episodes of coordinated intervention since currencies
began to float in the 1970s. Generally, the G7 and G20 stance is that currency levels
should be set by markets but extreme volatility or perceived misalignment will sometimes
lead to intervention. Here is the official line from the 2013 G7 Statement.8
We, the G7 Ministers and Governors, reaffirm our longstanding commitment to
market determined exchange rates and to consult closely in regard to actions in foreign
exchange markets. We reaffirm that our fiscal and monetary policies have been and
will remain oriented towards meeting our respective domestic objectives using
domestic instruments, and that we will not target exchange rates. We are agreed that
excessive volatility and disorderly movements in exchange rates can have adverse
implications for economic and financial stability. We will continue to consult closely on
exchange markets and cooperate as appropriate.

That gives you a quick background on the history of currency markets. Now, let's take a
closer look at how currency trading has evolved since the 1970s.
A Short History of Currency Trading
The business of FX trading has evolved dramatically over the years as technology and
regulation have reshaped the landscape many times over. There are four primary eras in
the history of FX trading (start and end dates approximate), as explained in the following
sections.
The Telex Era (1971 to 1981)
In the 1970s and 1980s, currency trading was conducted primarily over telex machines
and telephone lines. A small group of bank traders (primarily in London and New York)
executed transactions for multinational corporations and high‐net‐worth individuals.
Banks traded with each other direct, asking prices via telex and telephone and using
brokers on the telephone to execute trades.
Currency futures were launched on May 16, 1972, as the IMM started trading seven
currency futures contracts.9 This gave non‐bank players a way to get involved in currency
markets. Unlike today, futures trading in the 1970s and 1980s was generally restricted to
high‐net‐worth individuals and sophisticated speculators.
The Direct Dealing Era (1981 to 1992)
In 1981, Reuters launched a computerized dealing monitor service that streamlined the
FX trading process.10 Traders still used human brokers (also known as voice brokers) for
the majority of transactions but could also call other banks and request a two‐way price at
any time. These callouts let one bank call 30+ other banks at once for dealable two‐way
currency rates. This allowed banks to break large trades into smaller chunks and offload
risk to their competitors instead of warehousing large deals internally.
For example, if UBS was given 200 million USDJPY by a client, they could call 10 banks
and give each bank 20 million USDJPY, thereby distributing the risk. In exchange, UBS
promised to show a price to those same banks when they had a large deal to hedge. Voice
brokers still played an important role at that time as they still facilitated the majority of
interbank FX transactions. (See Figure 2.2.)

Figure 2.2 Legendary voice broker Micky Roberts doing his thing in 1983.
The Electronic Era (1992 to 2001)
In 1992, Reuters launched Dealing 2000, an online trading and matching platform that
allows banks to show buying and selling interest (bids and offers) to other banks
electronically. Around the same time, EBS (Electronic Brokerage Services, now a division
of Nex) launched a similar product and the electronic era of FX trading began.
The adoption of electronic brokers was slow at first because traders were used to dealing
with human counterparts and valued the information flow from these FX brokers. Over
time, though, the superior pricing and execution speed of the electronic systems eclipsed
the service offered by the voice brokers and so the electronic platforms relentlessly gained
market share. By the late 1990s, EBS dominated EURUSD and USDJPY while Reuters
took most of the market share in AUDUSD, USDCAD, and other less‐liquid currencies.
Only 50 or 60 human voice brokers remain globally, whereas in the 1980s there were
more than one thousand.
As electronic platforms increased liquidity and transparency, the direct market between
banks closed down because there was no longer a need for banks to trade directly.
The Algo Era (2001 to Present)
In the early 2000s, hedge funds developed algorithms (algos) to trade electronically on
EBS and Reuters. At first, these algos were specialized and mostly performed arbitrage
between platforms. For example, if the futures market showed a 31 bid in EURUSD, while
EBS showed a 30 offer, the algos would pay the 30 offer and hit the 31 bid to capture a
risk‐free profit. Over time, these algos became much more sophisticated and now there
are algos running all sorts of strategies. In fact, there is now more volume done by algos
than by humans in the FX market.11 Estimates vary but most put the algo‐versus‐human
share of FX trading volumes around 60/40.
The late 1990s and early 2000s also saw the birth of retail forex trading. Improved
computing power, regulatory changes, and the birth of the internet enabled individuals

with limited capital to trade FX using leverage. This type of trading has ballooned and
now makes up a small but important part of the foreign exchange market, especially in
Japan.
Competition among retail FX brokers has led to tighter spreads, better software, and a
more even playing field for retail traders. Leverage of up to 100X was once available but
many accounts were wiped out in January 2015, when the SNB dropped the 1.20 floor in
EURCHF and leverage is now much lower.
The current structure of the FX market is discussed more fully in the next section.
FACTBOX: ALGORITHMIC STRATEGIES
The primary types of algorithms running in today's FX market are:
Data trading: Algos read the economic release data and trade instantaneously
based on preprogrammed estimates of how much the market will move.
Market making: Algos show a bid and an offer in the market and attempt to
earn a spread and profit from intraday noise.
Correlation: Algos watch other markets and trade FX based on those moves.
For example, if oil rallies, an algo might buy Canadian dollars because Canada is
a large exporter of crude.
Arbitrage: Systems attempt to profit from disparities in price between venues.
If Citibank is willing to buy at 50 and EBS is willing to sell at 49, the arb algos
will do both sides and capture a nearly risk‐free profit.
Trend following: These systems look for intraday trends and buy pullbacks to
a moving average or buy breakouts. The idea is to benefit from trendiness in
certain markets.
Mean reversion: This is the opposite of trend following. Algos sell rallies and
buy dips in nontrending currencies like USDCAD in an effort to capture mean
reversion.
Gamma trading: A system will buy options and then trade the gamma
electronically to generate income in excess of the cost of the option.
This list is by no means exhaustive and hedge funds and banks are always developing new
strategies and turning off unprofitable strategies.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key concepts:
The evolution of the global monetary system
The history of currency markets and currency trading
What does fiat money represent?
Many different types of algorithm operate in currency markets
Now that you know a bit about the history of FX trading, let's get into the basics of how
currencies trade. While the next chapter is mostly aimed at beginners, even experts
should read it because it will strengthen your overall knowledge and touch on some more
advanced specifics.
Notes
  1 See, for example, Matthew 21:12–13.

  2
https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/aug/10/medicis‐
florence‐renaissance‐art.
  3 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_Reserve_Act.
  4 https://sites.hks.harvard.edu/fs/jfrankel/EuroVs$‐IFdebateFeb2008.pdf
  5 http://www.federalreservehistory.org/Events/DetailView/33
  6 https://www.jstor.org/stable/2706594?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents
  7 https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/fiat
  8 http://www.businessinsider.com/g7‐statement‐on‐currency‐2013‐2
  9 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currency_future
10 http://thomsonreuters.com/en/about‐us/company‐history.html
11 http://www.fxstreet.com/news/forex‐news/article.aspx?storyid=f7cece7b‐e22f‐42e5‐
9769‐16d123085e85

CHAPTER 3 
Currency Trading Basics
It is important to have a very solid grasp of the basics when
trading foreign exchange. It is surprising how often you will
interact with someone who has been in the FX market for years
and yet still uses incorrect terminology or does not grasp some
basic aspect of market structure, order types, volatility, liquidity,
or microstructure. The next two chapters provide a lot of basic
information of this sort but also dig deeper in ways that should
also enlighten even experienced traders.
Floating foreign exchange rates are a relatively new phenomenon
but FX has quickly become the biggest financial market in the
world. According to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS),
the FX market averaged $5.1 trillion/day of turnover in 2016, up
from $4T in 2010 and $3.3T in 2007. Of this volume, $2.0T was
spot FX, which is the product discussed in this book. Spot FX is
simply foreign exchange traded for immediate settlement (i.e.,
within 1 or 2 days). FX can also be traded via forwards and
futures, which means that the trade is done now but settled at a
future date.
The primary difference between spot and forward transactions is
that forward rates depend significantly on interest rates in the two
countries, whereas spot rates are a pure‐vanilla FX transaction
and do not depend on forward interest differentials. This book is
about spot currency trading. Please note that I use the terms FX,
foreign exchange, and currency interchangeably throughout and
move randomly between the pronouns he and she since both men
and women trade foreign exchange.
Now let's start with the basics.
Every exchange rate has a numerator and a denominator and
therefore involves the currency of two different countries. In
theory, any currency pair can be quoted in American terms (with
the USD as the denominator, for example, EURUSD) or European
terms (with the USD as numerator, like USDJPY) but in reality,
there is a standard convention for quoting each currency pair.
Always stick to the standard convention when discussing

currencies or you will create confusion and sound like a noob. (See
Figure 3.1.)
American Terms European Terms Other Conventions
EURUSD
USDJPY
EURNOK
AUDUSD
USDCAD
EURSEK
NZDUSD
USDCHF
USDMXN
GBPUSD
USDSEK
USDZAR
USDNOK
EURJPY
EURCHF
EURGBP
Figure 3.1 Standard quoting convention for major currency
pairs.
Generally, the currency priority is as shown in the following list, so
EUR (as the number 1 ranked currency) will always be the
numerator in a currency pair while JPY (lowest‐ranked) will
always be the denominator. This convention was originally based
on the rule of using the strongest currency as the numerator but
this practice has evolved with the introduction of the EUR and the
passage of time. Here are the currencies, in order of priority:
1. EUR
2. GBP
3. AUD1
4. NZD
5. USD
6. CAD
7. CHF
8. JPY
Standard currency pairs always have the higher‐ranked currency
on top. For example, EURAUD, GBPCHF, NZDCAD, or CADJPY.
You buy or sell the numerator currency against the denominator
currency but always express a trade by stating both. For example,
EURUSD is the rate that euros can be exchanged for US dollars.

So if EURUSD is trading at 1.1300, it takes 1.13 USD to buy one
euro. If USDJPY is at 100.00, it takes 100 yen to buy a dollar. So if
a currency pair is quoted as X/Y, it always takes Y units to buy 1
unit of X.
If you are bullish euro and bearish the dollar, you go long
EURUSD.2 If you are bearish EUR and bullish the US dollar, you
go short EURUSD. If you are bullish AUD, you buy AUDUSD.
It is easy when the denominator is USD. But if the denominator is
not USD, everything flips. If you are bullish CAD, you sell
USDCAD. Therefore, when talking about your position or view,
you are always long or short the first (top, numerator) currency.
This can be confusing if you are new, but don't worry, it quickly
becomes second nature.
To be absolutely clear on this topic: AUDUSD is quoted in AUD
terms so trade direction is expressed in AUD terms. You could say
any of these to say you went short AUDUSD:
“I am bearish AUD so I went short AUDUSD.”
“I am bearish Oz so I went short Ozzie/dollar.”
“I am bullish dollar and bearish Oz so I went short Ozzie.”
USDCAD is quoted with the USD on top so trade direction is
expressed the other way around, in USD terms. When discussing
the Canadian dollar, you could logically say the following:
“I'm bearish USDCAD so I went short USDCAD.”
Or:
“I'm bullish CAD so I went short USDCAD.”
Saying “I'm long CAD” is perfectly logical but can be confusing
(even to FX professionals) because the currency is quoted as
USDCAD. Never flip the currencies. For example, never say:
“I am bullish dollar/euro.”
“I want to sell JPYUSD.”
It's unnecessary, confusing, and if you work at a bank, it's
amateur. Always think and speak in terms of the standard quoting
conventions as described in the list above.

What It Means to Be Long and Short
Currencies
In any financial market, long is the position where you own
something, betting that its price will rise. Short is a position where
you sell something you don't own, expecting it to fall. In FX, every
currency trade is both a long and a short—you are always selling
one currency and buying another.
For example, if you go long EURUSD, you own euros and owe
dollars, hoping that the euro will go up against the dollar. If you
are short EURUSD, you make money when the euro goes down.
When you cover a position, you are said to be flat or square. If you
hold a position past 5PM, you must pay one day's interest on the
currency you are short and you earn one day's interest on the
currency you are long. This is called the roll and it is explained
more fully in a Factbox later in the chapter.
Understand the Different Currency Pairs
In the FX market, 88% of all trades use the USD on one side or the
other.3 The remainder are done in crosses like AUDJPY,
EURCAD, NZDJPY, and so on. You can trade any two currencies
against each other, but the primary FX market consists of specific
pairs.
It is generally best for short‐term FX traders to focus on the most‐
liquid currency pairs. Transaction costs are low in these pairs and
they are easiest to learn and trade. Tight spreads and good
liquidity mean more profit for you and less for whatever bank or
retail platform you trade with. The table below shows the main
currency pairs, sorted by liquidity. Stick to the highly liquid pairs
unless you are very experienced.
Highly Liquid Pairs
These are the majors. The most important and liquid pairs.
EURUSD GBPUSD USDJPY
AUDUSD EURGBP USDCAD

Less Liquid Pairs
These pairs are important but less liquid.
EURJPY USDCHF USDMXN
NZDUSD EURCHF USDZAR
Common Crosses
These pairs are created by combining two major pairs. For
example, AUDJPY is a combination of AUDUSD and USDJPY.
Because they are not truly traded pairs, liquidity is not as good in
the crosses. Note that some very popular crosses like AUDJPY and
EURCAD do have some direct liquidity on some platforms.
EURAUD GBPJPY EURCAD
AUDCAD GBPCHF AUDJPY
NZDJPY CADJPY CADCHF
Illiquid Pairs
These pairs are illiquid and are generally less fun and less
profitable to trade because they generate higher transaction costs.
As a short‐term trader, you should stay away from these pairs.
If you are taking a multiday view, you may find these pairs
profitable at times but for most short‐term currency traders,
90+% of profits come from the liquid pairs, not these.
USDRUB USDSGD EURSEK
EURNOK EURPLN USDTRY
USDCNH AUDNZD XAUUSD
NOKSEK EURCZK
There are other currency pairs out there, but this list covers the
ones you need to know about as a trader. Pairs like USDHKD and
EURDKK, for example, offer close to zero profit potential because
they are managed by central banks and exhibit extremely low
volatility.

Any other currency pair can be triangulated from the pairs above.
For example, there is no direct market for CHFSEK so if you want
to buy that pair, you need to buy EURSEK and sell EURCHF in
equal amounts. Some ECNs will offer liquidity in less liquid pairs
like CADJPY but this liquidity is generally still triangulated from
the primary pairs (in this case USDCAD and USDJPY). So if you
trade CADJPY, you are essentially doing a USDCAD and a
USDJPY trade.
The reason I outline the primary FX pairs for you is that you
should be aware that these pairs are much more liquid than the
nontraded pairs. Therefore, you will notice your transaction costs
are higher as you move out the spectrum, away from heavily
traded primary pairs like EURUSD and USDJPY and towards
tertiary, nontraded crosses like GBPNZD or CADNOK.
Again: Stick to the liquid pairs.
Is gold a currency? You may have noticed I included XAUUSD
in the illiquid pairs. XAU is the three‐letter code for gold.4 Gold
trades on EBS (one of the large electronic FX brokerage systems)
and is often considered a currency. There is debate around
whether or not it is really a currency but if it is not a currency, it
certainly comes close. The debate is mostly semantic. I would say
gold is somewhere on the spectrum, a currency/commodity
hybrid.
For practical purposes, you can think of gold as an illiquid
currency that can be crossed up against other currencies. XAUJPY
or EURXAU are perfectly reasonable crosses to think about,
although you will generally find that liquidity is so poor that they
are not worth trading. I prefer to watch gold as an extremely
important indicator but I refrain from trading it because it
behaves very differently than most currencies.
Is bitcoin a currency? The short answer is no. Bitcoin is not a
currency because it is too volatile and too inefficient to be used as
means of exchange. Most merchants do not want to be paid in a
currency that regularly moves 10% in a day; it is too risky. While
bitcoin could potentially end up as an important store of value in
the best‐case scenario for crypto‐enthusiasts, it is an asset, not a
currency.
Most active currency pairs

The currency pairs shown in Figure 3.2 account for most of the
volume in FX trading.
Currency Pair
% of Daily Trading Volume
EURUSD
23.0
USDJPY
17.7
GBPUSD
 9.2
AUDUSD
 5.2
USDCAD
 4.3
USDCNY and USDCNH
 3.8
USDCHF
 3.5
USDMXN
 2.1
USDSGD
 1.6
NZDUSD
 1.5
Source: BIS 2016 Triennial Survey.
Figure 3.2 Top 10 Currency Pairs by Volume.
These percentages have been fairly stable over the years, although
one notable feature in each BIS survey is that CNH volumes are
steadily increasing. Many think the Chinese currency could one
day rival the EUR or maybe even the USD as a viable reserve
currency.
Quotes, Spreads, Market Structure, and
Order Types
The FX market is highly decentralized and divided into two main
market segments: retail and wholesale. These markets interact
extensively with one another but have some unique
characteristics.
Retail tends to consist of individuals dealing in smaller amounts
while wholesale FX involves larger transactions, usually between
companies, investors, and banks. Wholesale spreads are narrower
than retail spreads, although spreads have converged gradually
over the years as transparency has increased.

Spreads are expressed as pips. A pip is the smallest normal trading
increment in a currency, which for most pairs means 0.0001. So if
USDCAD moves from 1.2833 to 1.2834, it has gone up one pip. In
JPY pairs, a pip is 0.01. So if USDJPY goes from 110.55 to 110.44,
it's down 11 pips.
At one extreme of the retail FX spectrum would be an airport or
roadside currency exchange or bureau de change booth where
spreads could be as wide as 500 pips. At the other extreme, retail
also includes day traders accessing 2 or 3 pip spreads via FX
platforms on the internet. Wholesale involves all transactions
between banks, hedge funds, asset managers, corporations,
central banks, and other large users of foreign exchange markets.
FACTBOX: THE ORIGIN OF THE WORD “PIP”
Some corners of the internet say that “pip” stands for “price
interest point” but the history of this usage is unclear and I
challenge the accuracy of this assertion.
I believe it is much more likely that the word comes from the
traditional (especially British) definition: “a very slim margin”
or “the smallest possible increment,” as in, “One horse pipped
the other horse at the finish line to win the Gold Cup.” Another
definition is that pip refers to one of the spots on dice,
dominoes, or playing cards.
All these centuries‐old definitions of pip suggest a tiny unit or
small increment, just like the usage of pip in foreign exchange.
Another reason I strongly doubt the “price interest point”
definition is that the word is always written in lower case (pip),
not as an acronym (PIP). But I digress.
The spread is the difference between where a dealer (or broker)
will buy and sell a currency pair. For example, when you're at the
airport, they might buy USDCAD at 1.0100 and sell it at 1.0600.
This is a 500‐pip spread. At the other end, a bank might show a
spread of 1.0355 / 1.0356 in 3 million USDCAD. That spread is 1
pip wide. Quotes are usually displayed like this:
1.0355/56 (pronounced: “one oh three fifty‐five, fifty‐six”)

The 1.03 part of the quotation is called the big figure or simply, the
figure. Most professionals will omit the big figure when quoting
because it is understood, and it does not change rapidly under
normal conditions. So in this case, USDCAD is just 55/56.
If USDCAD is trading 1.0300/05, the bid is 1.03 “the figure” while
the offer is 1.0305. You would say or quote this simply as “dollar
cad is figure, five,” with “figure” being the 00 bid and “five” being
the 05 offer. To reiterate, the round number (in this case 1.0300)
is called “the figure.” All other numbers are referred to normally.
So if USDJPY was 102.41/43, you would say “dollar yen is forty‐
one, forty‐three.” I will continually emphasize that using the
correct terminology is critically important, especially if you work
at a hedge fund or in sales and trading at a bank.
At banks, millions are called “bucks” so if someone asks for a price
in 15 bucks, that is 15 million US dollars. This shorthand comes in
handy because there is rarely a voice trade below 1 million USD at
a bank. Average trade size for active clients in the wholesale
market is more than ten million dollars and a very large trade
could be in excess of a billion dollars. Billions are called “yards”
(from the French word milliard).
Banks and retail platforms generally compete primarily on price.
This is not to say that banks and platforms cannot add value in
other ways, such as advisory and research services. This is simply
recognizing that currency markets are generally very transparent
and highly commoditized. “Price” in the context of foreign
exchange trading is the spread, or the difference between the bid
and the offer. Very few FX trades are charged a commission.
Spread is more difficult to see and measure than the brokerage
commission you pay on an equity trade, but it is just as important.
Let's say a day trader does 4 trades of $1 million each in one day.
This means 4 buys and 4 sells, so 8 trades total (because a trade
involves a round trip, in and out). 1 pip X 8 trades X $1 million =
$800. So the difference between a 1‐pip and a 2‐pip spread would
be $800/day for this trader. $800 times 250 trading days is
$200,000/year. So you can see that spreads add up fast.
This example is a trader who is not very active (4 trades per day)
and is trading on tight spreads, yet transaction costs are huge over
the course of a year. Tight spreads are crucially important to
minimizing trading friction. Every time you cross a spread, you

are paying money to the market. This is why FX trading is a
negative‐sum, not a zero‐sum game. Even though there are no
visible transaction costs, you are paying a small but meaningful
tax to the market every time you buy and sell.
It is often necessary to cross the spread, but clearly you want to
cross the fewest, smallest spreads possible. Note that there are
many other features besides price to look at when choosing an FX
broker. Never sacrifice reliability, service, or professionalism to
get a better spread. Plenty of banks and brokers offer competitive
spreads and professional service so you will never need to cut
corners and go to a second‐ or third‐tier provider. Stick to the big
banks and retail platforms with the best service, technology, and
spreads.
Liquidity and trades in the FX market take place in a decentralized
manner as banks, brokers, and electronic communication
networks (ECNs) interact with one another to set prices. In FX, an
ECN is a trading platform or electronic broker that hosts bids and
offers and transmits them to users worldwide. The heart of the FX
market is made up of two primary ECNs: EBS and Reuters.
Although these platforms are slowly losing market share to newer,
smaller ECNs, their prices are still considered the primary market.
Other ECNs include Hotspot, Currenex, FXALL, FXConnect,
ParFX, and many others.
Each ECN broadcasts a price around the world as various
participants leave orders to buy and sell (i.e., bids and offers). The
prices for a currency pair across different ECNs will necessarily be
very similar because algorithms will arbitrage any small
differences between them.
For example, if EBS is 32 bid (someone wants to buy at 32) and
Reuters is 31 offered (someone wants to sell at 31), an algorithm
will do both sides of the trade simultaneously (sell at 32 and buy at
31) and earn the risk‐free profit. Trading to earn a risk‐free profit
is called arbitrage. Once this arbitrage is completed, the two ECNs
will no longer have overlapping prices.
Banks provide streaming prices based on what the ECNs are
showing, and retail FX platforms stream retail traders a price
based on the bank streams. All these price streams are like one
huge connected ecosystem. Banks and platforms will often show
overlapping prices, but rarely will competing streams cross.

For example, Barcap could show 23/26 in EUR while Deutsche
shows 25/28, which is overlapping but not crossed. But if the
prices cross (for example, Barcap remains 23/26 while Deutsche
goes 27/30), they will be arbitraged and very quickly revert to an
uncrossed state. Someone out there will sell to Deutsche at 27 and
buy from Barcap at 26 and earn the risk‐free one‐pip profit. Figure
3.3 shows a diagram outlining how the different nodes in the
market network connect.
Figure 3.3 The decentralized structure of the currency trading
market.
Order Types
There are many different order types in the FX market. Many are
similar to order types used in the stock market, so if you have
traded equities, you will probably have a working knowledge of
many of the order types described below. New order types are
always in development so be on the lookout for exciting new ways
to execute. For now, understand the following order types:

Risk price (also known as crossing the spread or risk transfer) is
the most common way to transact FX and is used by customers in
retail and wholesale. Also known as “hitting the bid” or “paying
the offer,” this type of trade immediately gives you the position
you want at a known price. If a machine is showing you 1.3817/19
in EURUSD and you pay the offer, you have bought at 19 and
you're now long euros. Pay the offer means buy (on the right side
of the two‐way price). Hit the bid means sell (on the left side of the
price).
This type of trade is clean and easy and gets you the position you
want right away with no aggravation or delay. In the long run,
transacting on risk prices all the time generates profits for the
market‐maker banks and retail platforms but it is a simple and
efficient way to trade, especially for beginners.
The trader taking the other side of a risk price trade is called a
market maker. Her ideal scenario is that the market doesn't move
and she is hit on the bid and paid on the offer over and over again
and thus she captures the spread by buying and selling at slightly
different rates. In reality, there is meaningful risk to being a
market maker because prices are not static and traders tend to
move in herds, creating large imbalances. Trading on a risk price
is similar to sending a market order in equities but it differs in that
with a risk price you know what your fill will be before you trade—
with a market order in the stock market, you don't get your fill
until afterward.
Market makers earn a spread when you hit their bid or pay their
offer but this is compensation for the fact that they must bear two
types of risk. First, market makers take on liquidity risk when you
trade with them. This is the notion that only a fixed amount of
currency can be dealt on a given price. So if you hit a bank's bid for
50 million EURUSD, the liquidity risk is defined by how far the
market moves directly as a result of the bank selling as they try to
get out. This is also sometimes called the “footprint” of the trade.
Market makers also bear market risk. This means if you sell to
someone at 45 and the market collapses instantly to 25, the
market maker takes the loss, not you. The market maker bears the
risk of any price movements after a trade.
The next type of order we will discuss is the limit order (also
called “take profit order”). Limit orders are common in both retail

and wholesale FX. A limit order is placed at a specific level and
will only be triggered when the market moves to or through your
level. For example, EURUSD is 1.3820/22 and you want to buy if
it dips to 1.3815. You leave a limit order to buy at 1.3815. This is
usually called “leaving a bid.” If you are selling, you “leave an
offer.” The advantage to limit orders is that you do not cross the
spread, but the disadvantage is that you are not guaranteed to get
filled. In the example described, if EURUSD goes straight up from
1.3820 to 1.3890, you miss the whole move as your 1.3815 limit
order would never get filled.
Limit orders are best when you are in no hurry and you don't think
the market is going to move much, or if you have a specific entry
point in mind. Say EURUSD is 14/16 and you think it's going
nowhere for a while. You want to get long but you're in no huge
hurry. You can leave a 14 bid and because there is a tremendous
amount of random micro movement in FX markets (this is called
bid/offer bounce), your probability of getting filled is high. The
less liquid the currency, the more important is the decision
whether to leave a limit order or simply cross the spread.
You gain more by bidding and offering in illiquid currencies
(because the spread is wider) but you are less likely to get filled
because there is less bid/offer bounce. There is no right answer
when choosing between order types. It is situation‐specific and
you have to make an assessment of what is the best order type
based on your directional market view, your sense of urgency, and
current and expected liquidity and volatility. Limit orders are
sometimes called take profit orders, even when they are used to
initiate a new position.
Two special types of limit orders are if done orders and loop
orders. An “if done” order is simply a limit order that, once
executed, creates another order. For example, say I want to sell 20
million AUDUSD at 0.7299, and if that gets done I want to stop
loss at 0.7336. I would enter an “if done” order.
A loop order is similar to an “if done” but a loop order creates only
new limit orders and it creates them over and over, not just once.
Say I want to buy 10 million USDCAD at 1.3125 and if that gets
done, I want to sell them out at 1.3165 and repeat this process
again if it drops down to 1.3125. I simply enter a loop order as
follows: Buy 10,000,000 USDCAD at 1.3125. Loop sell
10,000,000 USDCAD at 1.3165. I will keep buying at 1.3125 and

selling at 1.3165 as long as the market cooperates. Loop orders are
usually used by traders who own options.
Stop loss orders are used in both retail and wholesale FX
markets and are key to proper risk management. A stop loss order
is an order to buy higher or sell lower if price moves to a certain
level.
For example, I am long euros (positioned for EURUSD to go up)
and my entry point is 1.3825. Based on my analysis, EURUSD
should not go below 1.3780; if it does, my idea is probably wrong.
We will get into detail about position sizing and profit/loss
calculations later.
For now, if I am long 10 million euros, my risk is $45,000 on the
trade (1.3825 minus 1.3780 is 45 pips. 45 pips X $1,000 per pip =
$45,000). If EURUSD goes to 1.3780, I want to sell and exit my
position to limit my loss (hence the term “stop loss”). This avoids
the risk that I watch EURUSD go lower and lower and suffer huge
losses. So I leave an order: Stop loss sell 10 million EURUSD @
1.3780.
If 1.3780 trades, a market maker will sell my 10 euros for me (or
an electronic system will execute on my behalf). The rate is not
guaranteed because the stop loss simply becomes a market order
when the level is triggered. Standard slippage on most stop losses
in the majors is 1 to 3 pips but slippage can vary significantly in
fast markets.
Note that stop losses can also be used to enter new positions. For
example, a trader thinks that a break below 1.1300 in EURUSD
will cause the pair to accelerate lower. He could leave a stop loss
(sometimes called a “stop enter”) order to initiate a new position,
selling to get short when 1.1300 trades. There is a much deeper
discussion of stop loss order strategy in Chapter 12.
Quite often, a trader will send her order as an OCO order (one
cancels the other). This means that the trader sends a take profit
and a stop loss for the same position and if one side gets executed,
the other side is canceled. Whenever I have an open position and I
am off the desk, I pass an OCO order so that my take profit level
and stop loss are watched. Once one side trades, the other cancels.
Market orders (also known as “at best”) are mostly used for
large, wholesale transactions. Customers give a bank an order to
execute a large amount in the best way the market maker sees fit.

This gives the market maker the ability to judge liquidity and
execute the order over time to minimize the market impact as
much as possible and achieve the best possible fill for the client.
Market orders are an efficient way to deal when you trust the
counterparty you are trading with.
No worse than price is a type of order used only in the
wholesale market. A customer will ask a bank for their “no worse
than” price on a very large FX transaction. For example, a
corporation wants to sell 200 million AUDUSD but they are
worried about the market moving against them so they do not
want to pass a market order. At the same time, they want to be as
professional as possible and allow the bank to use its expertise to
execute the transaction smoothly.
The bank will provide an “at worst” price and then if the actual
execution is substantially better than the at worst price, the bank
will share the improvement with the customer. This type of
execution is halfway between “risk price” and “at best.”
A two‐way price is when a customer asks a bank to show them
both a bid and an offer on a set amount. The bank making the
price does not know if the customer is going to buy or sell and so
the bank shows both sides and the customer decides whether or
not to deal and if so, which side. At any moment in time, there are
somewhat standard spreads for two‐way quotes in each currency,
but spreads change frequently and vary by time of day, market‐
maker skill, and market conditions. A spread in a fast market will
generally be wider than a spread in a quiet market.
Let's look at an example. The market is jumping around and a
corporation needs to sell 130 million NZDUSD. The CFO is
worried that liquidity is not good and does not want to show his
exact interest to a bank. The size of the trade is a bit too big to do
on a machine and since the market is volatile, he feels a TWAP
(see below) has too much market risk.
He decides to call a bank and ask for a two‐way price. The market
is currently around 0.6644. In this instance, the market maker at
the bank determines that the appropriate spread in 130 million
NZDUSD is 10 points wide5 so he shows the corporation
0.6640/0.6650 without knowing which way the corporation needs
to trade.

The CFO thinks 10 points wide is a very fair spread in 130
NZDUSD so he says: “Yours at 0.6640.” “Yours” is the FX term for
“I sell.” And “Mine” means “I buy.” So now the corporation has
transferred the risk and the bank is long the 130 million NZDUSD
at 0.6640. The bank trader then needs to figure out the best way
to get out of the risk in a way that makes as much (or loses as
little) money as possible.
Personally, I always enjoy making two‐way prices as it is the old‐
school way to deal and is very clean and easy. It puts all the onus
on the market maker and instantly puts the customer at ease
because the risk is fully passed to the market maker right away.
TWAP stands for time‐weighted average price. VWAP stands for
volume‐weighted average price. TWAPs and VWAPs are
algorithmic orders used primarily for large, wholesale FX
transactions. These orders are managed electronically by slicing a
large order up into smaller pieces and executing the trade over a
given time frame. Say a corporation wants to buy 100 million
USDCAD but doesn't want to leave a big footprint in the market.
USDCAD is trading 1.1010/13 (in other words, USDCAD is
ten/thirteen). A trader or customer could enter the following
variables into a TWAP or VWAP algo and hit GO:
Buy 100 USDCAD over 10 minutes with a limit price of 1.1017.
The system will then start to buy in small slices, 1 million here, 1
million there, buying 10 USDCAD per minute for 10 minutes until
it has bought the 100 USDCAD. The TWAP will try to cross the
spread as little as possible, although in reality TWAPs and VWAPs
tend to pay quite a bit of spread. The TWAP will continue only if
USDCAD remains below 1.1017. If the pair rallies, then the TWAP
will shut off and wait for USDCAD to come back down. If
USDCAD never comes back down, the trade will not happen. The
generic format for a TWAP or VWAP order is:
BUY (or SELL) X amount of CURRENCY PAIR over Y minutes
with a limit price of Z.
Z can also be set to “no limit.” The advantage of this type of order
is that it leaves very little market footprint, but the major
disadvantage is that it takes a long time and so the market can
move significantly against the execution as time passes. In other
words, there is significant market risk and if the market does not
cooperate, the order might never get done.

The ideal time for a TWAP order is when the market is not moving
or when you expect it to move gradually in favor of the trade. If
you need to buy, but you think the market is going to grind lower,
a TWAP is a good idea. If you need to buy and expect the market
to go higher soon, a TWAP is a bad idea. Get a risk transfer price
or do the trade at best.
VWAP is very similar to TWAP but differs in that the amounts
executed are sliced into pieces that match the amount of volume
being transacted in the market. This allows the algorithm to trade
more actively when volumes (and liquidity) are high and less
actively when volumes are low. Generally, TWAP and VWAP
strategies yield similar results.
Iceberg orders are a type of limit order used only in wholesale
FX. An iceberg order shows a small amount to the market but
automatically refreshes the order until a larger amount has been
filled. For example, let's take the example above where the market
maker was given 130 million NZDUSD at 0.6640. The market is
now trading 0.6644/46. The trader wants to reduce his risk by
selling 50 million NZDUSD at 0.6645. He feels that if he shows an
order for 50 million NZD, he might scare the market away because
that is a large ticket for an illiquid currency pair. He fears that if
he posts a visible order to sell 50 million NZD, traders who are
long NZD might get scared and hit the bid, pushing the market
lower. He wants to use a little more stealth, or finesse.
He leaves an iceberg order to sell 50 NZD at 0.6645 in clips of 5
NZD at a time. So the market will see a limit order for just 5
million NZD at 0.6645 but as soon as someone trades on that
order, it will refresh to show 5 million again. This will continue
until the trader has sold his 50 NZD.
Icebergs are popular in less‐liquid currencies, although they have
been adopted more and more even in deeper markets like
EURUSD and USDJPY. The advantage of the iceberg is that you
don't show your full size to the market, but the disadvantage is
that traders looking for liquidity might not deal on a price that
only shows a small amount for fear of moving the market. By
showing your full size, you increase the odds that someone with a
legitimate interest the other way will transact with you.
Another massive disadvantage of using iceberg orders is that once
you sell your initial amount (like the 5 NZD in the example above),

anyone else selling at the same level moves ahead of you in the
queue. In other words, after each clip of an iceberg, you must go to
the back of the line and wait for all other orders at the same rate to
be executed before your next clip will transact. This is a very
detrimental and often overlooked feature of using iceberg orders.
My belief is that iceberg and similar hiding orders are massively
overused and it is generally better practice to show a reasonable
market amount instead of tiny slices of an order. When you use
icebergs, you are constantly getting sent to the back of the line
instead of participating in the full volume at your price.
Dark pools are another type of order available only in the
wholesale market. Traders show an interest to buy or sell an
amount of currency but do not assign a price to the order. The
order goes into the dark pool and waits for someone to match in
the opposite direction. When a match occurs, both sides of the
trade are filled at midmarket (as derived from a separate primary
market price feed). Dark pools have become increasingly popular
in recent years because they allow traders to transact without
showing their interest to the market.
This completes our discussion of order types. Now let's talk about
how to calculate profits and losses in foreign exchange.
Understand Profit and Loss
The math involved in calculating profits and losses (P&L) in
foreign exchange is simple and you will find as time goes on that
you gain an intuitive feel for your P&L. An experienced trader can
quickly eyeball a trade idea and size their position appropriately
based on a given P&L tolerance without the use of a calculator or
spreadsheet. At first, though, you need to be extremely careful as a
simple mathematical error can lead to severe loss or ruin.
P&L is calculated in real time according to market prices. If you
buy EURUSD at 1.1350 and it rises to 1.1355, you will immediately
show a profit even though this profit has not yet been realized and
you still hold the position. This real‐time mark to market is
necessary for proper money management and for calculation of
margin. As the market moves, your P&L changes and you know
where you stand at all times. This is called real‐time mark‐to‐
market P&L accounting.

How to Calculate P&L on an FX Trade
Profits and losses on currency trades are reported in the
denominator currency. So if you trade EURUSD, your P&L is in
USD. If you trade USDJPY, your P&L is in JPY. EURCAD P&L is
in CAD. Calculating P&L on currencies with a USD base is very
simple. Calculate P&L on an FX trade with a USD denominator
(like EURUSD, GBPUSD, etc.) as follows:
So if you make 0.0020 (20 pips) on a 1,000,000 position, your
P&L is:
One pip on a position of 1 million EURUSD is $100.
One pip on a position of 10 million EURUSD is $1,000.
When the base is not USD (like, for example, USDJPY), you need
to do a two‐step calculation. First, calculate how many pips of
profit or loss you made. For example, you buy $10,000,000
USDJPY at 109.60 and sell it at 109.65. That's 5 pips profit. 5 pips
times $10,000,000 = 0.05 × 10,000,000 = 500,000. That's 
500,000 of profit. Then convert the JPY to USD:
So 5 pips on 10 million USDJPY in this case works out to $4,556.
Similar math applies to any currency where the denominator is
not USD. Let's say I bought 3 million USDCAD at 1.3100 and took
profit at 1.3177. P&L is calculated as follows:
That is your profit in Canadian dollars, but you want to convert
that to US dollars:

Remember, long positions profit when the price of the numerator
currency goes up and shorts profit when that price goes down.
Note that the P&L of a trade also includes the roll earned or paid if
you held the position over more than one trading day. The roll is
calculated and paid or earned daily.
As you become more of an expert in FX, you will gain a natural
feel for the P&L on various position sizes but when you are
starting out, always calculate your target profit and loss for every
trade before you initiate. By using a predetermined take profit and
stop loss, you will know exactly how many dollars of P&L you have
at risk on every trade. I will discuss this more fully in Chapter 12.
Figure 3.4 provides a quick table to help you get a feel for different
P&L on various position sizes and currency moves.
Figure 3.4 P&L of various position sizes in FX.

FACTBOX: UNDERSTAND THE ROLL
The roll (aka, rollover or carry) is the interest you pay or
receive each day for holding spot positions overnight. It is the
difference in interest earned on the currency you are long
versus the interest you must pay on the currency you are short.
The concept is very similar to a bank account, with interest
calculated daily for spot foreign exchange positions.
If you are long a currency with a high interest rate and short a
currency with a lower interest rate, you will earn the roll. You
own the currency you are long and you owe the currency you
are short (you are borrowing it at the current market rate). The
exact amount of the roll is calculated using forward points,
which are set by the market but heavily influenced by central
bank policy rates. You can look up the roll points on your FX
platform or on Bloomberg.
The roll is sometimes called tom/next (short for
tomorrow/next) or T/N and is usually quoted in pips. So, for
example, if you are long AUDUSD and T/N is 1.2 pips, you will
earn 1.2 pips on your AUDUSD notional at 5:00PM New York
time every day. So if you are long 10,000,000 AUD, you will
see an extra $1,200 in your account each day once the roll is
calculated. If you go long at 4:59PM, you still get the roll: It is
simply calculated based on balances at exactly 5:00PM NY
time (except NZD, which rolls at 7AM Wellington time, which
is generally 1PM or 3PM NY).
If you enter and exit a trade the same day, there is no roll
earned or paid.
When there is a weekend or holiday, the roll will cover multiple
days so if the daily roll for AUDUSD is 1.2 pips and you are
long the weekend roll, you will get three days of roll, or 3.6
pips.
Short‐term traders don't need to worry too much about the roll
other than to make sure it is calculated and applied correctly.
In a world of very low interest rates, the roll is not very
important, but before 2007 it sometimes mattered even for
short‐term traders. I almost never think about the roll because
it is just about meaningless for short‐term traders.

This concludes our discussion of currency trading basics. Always
remember to use correct terminology and stick to market
conventions or you will confuse and alienate other participants in
the currency market.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key
concepts:
Quote conventions and proper terminology in FX
What it means to be long and short currencies
How the FX market is structured
Order types
Understanding and calculating FX P&L
Let's move on to some very important and practical aspects of
currency market structure, trading, and execution.
Notes
  1 1 AUD and 1 NZD were worth more than 1 USD when they
floated in the 1970s, but their values have fallen significantly
since then.
  2 In any market, bullish means you think the market will go up
and bearish means you think it will go down.
  3 https://www.bis.org/publ/rpfx16fx.pdf.
  4 For a complete list of currency codes, see
https://currencysystem.com/codes/.
  5 This is just an example and I am not making any assertion here
about the correct or appropriate two‐way spread in 130
NZDUSD.

CHAPTER 4 
Understand Market Structure
Now that you understand the basics of how currencies are traded, let's take a look at the participants
and the microstructure of the FX market. Knowledge of the FX players and of the distinguishing
similarities and differences that define different currencies will help you better understand and
forecast market movements.
This chapter will also delve deep into specifics about currency liquidity and volatility with a detailed
discussion of how FX trading activity varies by time of day. This practical information will improve
your execution and timing in the foreign exchange market.
The Players
Banks. Bank trading floors are the epicenter of the foreign exchange market. Most trades that take
place in FX are initiated or facilitated by a bank. Commercial banks dominate the market but
investment banks also play an important role. Trading between banks is called the interbank market
and this is where price discovery happens. Traders at banks are market makers and also take a
substantial amount of directional risk in anticipation of client flow. Figure 4.1 shows the top 10
liquidity providers in foreign exchange by market share in 2018, according to Euromoney.
2018 Rank Liquidity Provider Market Share
  1
JPMorgan
12.1%
  2
UBS
 8.3%
  3
XTX Markets
 7.4%
  4
Bank of America
 6.2%
  5
Citibank
 6.2%
  6
HSBC
 5.6%
  7
Goldman Sachs
 5.5%
  8
Deutsche Bank
 5.4%
  9
Standard Chartered
 4.5%
 10
State Street
 4.4%
Source: Euromoney 2018 survey.
Figure 4.1 Top 10 liquidity providers in foreign exchange (by market share) 2018.
Corporations and hedgers need to buy and sell currencies on a daily basis. There are many
reasons corporations transact in FX, but a simple example is an exporter that sells goods to a foreign
buyer. Let's say a Japanese car maker sells $6B worth of cars in America. That's a big chunk of
dollars coming in as revenue. But they run a balance sheet and pay many of their employees and
shareholders in JPY, so at some point they need to sell the dollars and buy yen. They will call banks
on a regular basis to sell USD as their dollar balances grow. There are all sorts of corporate
transactions involving foreign exchange happening all day, every day as global corporations have
diverse and ongoing operational FX conversion needs.
Another type of corporate transaction that leads to very large FX trades is cross‐border merger and
acquisition (M&A) activity. For example, a large European brewery buys a US beer maker for more
than $50B. They will need to buy USD and sell a big chunk of EUR to pay US shareholders. This
transaction will involve selling billions of EURUSD over the course of many days and might have a
dramatic impact on the market. Corporates tend to be more methodical and less active than other
segments.
Hedge funds are pools of investor capital put together to trade various asset classes in search of
speculative profits. Hedge funds (some of which manage in excess of $10B of capital) are large and
important participants in FX. They value the ample liquidity and transparency of currency markets.
There are different types of hedge funds that participate in FX:
Discretionary/macro funds try to forecast trends and movements in foreign exchange using
macro variables and analysis of the type I describe in this book. In fact, I was a discretionary

portfolio manager at a hedge fund for a few years and most of the techniques I describe in this book
are techniques I used while trading a pool of investor capital in Connecticut. Macro funds can have
different time horizons and the word “macro” is often a misnomer. Many hedge funds trade on a
very short time horizon. Short‐term hedge funds with a macro approach are known as “fast money.”
CTAs (Commodity Trading Advisors), systematic and model funds are hedge funds that
make trades and allocate capital based on computer programs, algorithms, pattern recognition,
correlation trend following, or states of disequilibrium in the market. While trend‐following models
were most common from the 1980s until the late 1990s, more sophisticated approaches have
emerged and the performance of trend‐following strategies has tumbled.
Real money is the term for investors trading FX against an underlying asset. For example, let's say
a US‐based bond fund has decided to buy EUR 2B worth of Greek bonds. To pay for the bonds, they
need euros, but their cash balances are in USD. The real money client calls a bank and buys two
billion euros and sells USD. Real money includes pension funds, mutual funds, bond funds,
insurance companies, and equity hedgers.
High‐frequency trading (HFT) systems attempt to profit from small movements and variations
in FX markets. They use different strategies such as arbitrage between markets, market making,
economic data trading, and short‐term correlation. While HFT is a large part of the volume traded in
FX, most HFT activity is extremely back and forth and thus contributes more to noise trading and
not directional price movement.
Another important category of FX player is the central banks. They operate in FX markets via four
separate channels:
1. Central bank monetary policy is a major driver of foreign exchange rates. High and rising
interest rates tend to attract capital and make a country's currency appreciate while low and
falling interest rates tend to be bad for a currency. This is discussed in Chapter 5.
2. Moral suasion. Central banks attempt to influence currency rates by telling the market their
preference. The stronger the preference of the central bank and the more credible the central
bank, the more the market will listen. By simply “talking down” or “talking up” its currency, a
central bank can often achieve its goal without altering monetary policy or touching the FX
market.
3. FX intervention. This is uncommon but very important when it happens. When a central bank
strongly believes that its currency is misaligned, volatility is too high, or FX moves are in
conflict with monetary policy goals, it can intervene directly in the FX market and buy or sell
currency aggressively. This is also discussed in Chapter 5.
4. Diversification. Some countries hold massive foreign currency reserves as a tool either to
manage their own currency level or to protect against future crises. Most countries look at their
currency reserves the way an investor would look at a portfolio and so they will buy and sell
various currencies in the open market in order to diversify risk and capitalize on projected
future currency and interest rate moves.
Some countries also operate sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) to help manage their currency
reserves and these SWFs trade actively and in large amounts just like the central banks.
While portfolio considerations drive some of the trading decisions made by central banks, the
biggest driver of regular currency purchases and sales by central banks is intervention
recycling. The mechanics of this intervention and recycling of dollars is covered in Chapter 5.
Retail traders are day traders and speculators trading from home or on their smartphones. FX day
trading has become increasingly popular in the past 10 years as equity day trading has plateaued and
reliable retail FX platforms have proliferated. Retail is especially important in Japan, where over
1,000,000 active trading accounts exist, in contrast to just over 150,000 in the United States.
Japanese retail traders are often women who use FX trading as a way of enhancing the yield on their
very substantial pool of savings. They are often collectively referred to as “Mrs. Watanabe.”
Different Currencies Have Different Personalities
It is important to understand that every currency has its own personality. This section discusses the
various ways in which the market places currencies into groups. This can be useful not just for
analyzing currencies, but also for hedging, because currencies that have similar personalities will
tend to be correlated.

The highest level of categorization is to separate Developed Markets (DM) from Emerging Markets
(EM). The currencies in Figure 4.2 are the actively traded DM currencies. Sometimes people will
refer to these as G10 FX or G7 currencies, but neither is exactly accurate. Switzerland, for example,
is not a member of the G7 and if you include DKK, it's really the G11. But there is no need to be
pedantic in this case. If you say G10 FX or G7 currencies, people will know what you are talking
about.
USD AUD CHF
EUR NZD SEK
JPY CAD NOK
GBP
DKK
Figure 4.2 The G10 currencies.
Another high‐level categorization is the group of currency pairs called: The Majors. When
someone refers to “The Majors,” they are referring to EURUSD, USDJPY, GBPUSD, AUDUSD,
USDCHF, and USDCAD.
Next are some other ways to group currencies. The currencies within these groups tend to trade with
some degree of correlation to one another.1 For example, two currencies like EUR and CHF will
always be somewhat correlated because of significant economic linkages between the two
economies.
European currencies include EUR, CHF, SEK, NOK, and DKK. These currencies are highly
correlated and the USD exchange rate against these currencies is determined mostly by EURUSD.
For example, while USDSEK is influenced by EURSEK, most of the volatility in USDSEK comes from
EURUSD. GBPUSD is also sometimes included when discussing European currencies although its
ties and economic links to Europe are not as tight as the others, especially post‐Brexit.
Commodity currencies include AUD, CAD, NZD, BRL, ZAR, and CLP. These are commodity‐
exporting nations whose currencies are somewhat or heavily influenced by commodity prices. There
is significant nuance within the group as BRL, ZAR, and CLP are emerging market currencies and
each country is reliant on different commodities.
AUD is influenced by copper, gold, and iron ore; CAD is driven by crude oil and natural gas; and
NZD is most heavily influenced by the price of soft commodities, especially dairy (Figure 4.3). The
sensitivity of the currencies to various commodities logically relates to how much of each commodity
each country exports.2
Country
Top Exports
% of total exports
Australia
Iron Ore 
Coal 
Gold
20% 
15% 
 5%
New Zealand Milk powder, butter and cheese 
Meat 
Logs and wood
25% 
12% 
 7%
Canada
Energy 
Metals and Minerals 
Motor Vehicles
24% 
16% 
12%
Figure 4.3 Major commodity exports of Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.
Skandies is a catchword for SEK, NOK, and DKK. The Scandinavian economies are grouped as a
block, even though in truth the Norwegian and Swedish economies are quite different given the
Norwegian focus on crude production. Finland is not included because it is part of the euro. DKK
(the Danish krone) is not a free‐floating currency; it is managed by the central bank in a very tight
band around the euro. Therefore, DKK is not a useful currency for speculation.
Emerging Markets (also known as EMFX) is a huge universe of currencies but the most actively
traded EM currencies are shown in Figure 4.4. I sorted them by liquidity/volume/popularity.3
Currencies in bold are the most liquid and thus are the ones most commonly traded by global
speculators.

Asia
Emerging Europe LATAM
CNH and CNY
ZAR
MXN
KRW
TRY
BRL
SGD
RUB
CLP
INR
HUF
COP
MYR
PLN
PEN
PHP
ILS
TWD
CZK
THB
IDR
Figure 4.4 Important emerging market currencies (actively traded currencies in bold).
Note that this is not an exhaustive list; most countries in the world have a currency but most of those
currencies are not actively traded. EM currencies are at times categorized by fundamentals into
groups such as BRICs, the Fragile Five, and so on, but these groupings tend to be transitory and
faddish.
You will often hear people refer to a currency against all others as, for example, “CAD crosses” or
“AUD crosses.” If someone refers to “the CAD crosses,” this is a collective reference to EURCAD,
AUDCAD, CADJPY, CADCHF, CADNOK, and so on.
High yield versus low yield is another useful way to categorize currencies. This is because
investors and speculators treat high‐yielding currencies as a different type of asset than low‐yielding
currencies. The practical reason that a currency's yield is important is called “carry.”
Carry is the amount of interest you earn or pay when you own or short a currency. If Australian
yields are 4% per year and US yields are 1%, you will earn 3%/year for holding a long position in
AUDUSD. While this is small relative to the volatility in the currency pair, it is still an important
consideration for medium‐ and long‐term investors. The higher the carry, the more expensive it is to
hold shorts and the more attractive it is to own the currency, especially when volatility is low.
Interest rates go up and down but in recent years the low‐yielding currencies have been the EUR,
CHF, and JPY. Low‐yielding currencies tend to be safe havens. EM currencies, AUD, and NZD have
had the highest yields over the years and are known as risky currencies because they usually sell off
in times of market stress or fear.4
When people refer to yields, they might mean the central bank rate or overnight rate but they could
also be referring to 2‐year, 5‐year, or 10‐year yields. Considering that there is a strong relationship
between yields all along the curve, a currency that has a high overnight rate will tend to have a
relatively high 2‐year and 10‐year rate anyway so the distinction rarely matters.
The practical way that yields matter is that the market generally has a preference to own high‐
yielding currencies and sell low‐yielders. This leads to structural appreciation and positioning in
higher‐yielding currencies that can unwind rapidly. In 2006, volatility was low and the yield
differential between AUD and JPY was very high (4% to 5%). The NZD versus JPY differential was
even higher (5% to 6%). So if you stayed long NZDJPY for a year and it didn't move, you made more
than a 5% return. With a bit of leverage, the carry trade can yield very attractive returns.
The combination of low volatility and high carry in 2006 attracted huge pools of money to the long
AUDJPY and NZDJPY carry trade and the strategy performed very well. Very well, that is, until the
first tremors of the global financial crisis were felt and speculators decided all at once to unwind
their carry trades as volatility roofed from abnormally low levels. This resulted in a colossal unwind
of all carry trades and saw AUDJPY fall from 107 to 86 in about a month in the Summer of 2007.
In Figure 4.5, you can see the slow, grinding appreciation of AUDJPY from 2005 to mid‐2007 and
then the brutal unwind. There is a market adage: “Carry trades go up the escalator and down the
elevator.” The carry trade is also sometimes known as “picking up nickels in front of a steam roller.”

Figure 4.5 Daily AUDJPY 2005 to 2007.
The AUDJPY unwind of 2007 was colossal but paled in comparison to what happened next, as the
pair dropped all the way from 105.00 to 60.00 in 2008. Check out Figure 4.6, which shows AUDJPY
from the same starting point as the previous chart, but with an end point of early 2009 instead of
early 2008:

Figure 4.6 Daily AUDJPY 2005 to Q1 2009.
AUDJPY in 2007/2008 is an extreme example of how high‐yielding currencies tend to trade. They
appreciate gradually in times of low and falling volatility and then sell off quickly when volatility
picks up. Like a fire in a disco, there is not enough time for everyone to get out of carry trades all at
once and this leads to panic. As a general rule, high yielders go up slowly and down quickly (the
distribution of returns is skewed).
Low‐yielding currencies are sometimes called “funding currencies” because they are good shorts to
fund a long position in a currency with a higher yield.

FACTBOX: THE DOLLAR SMILE
The US dollar has many unusual characteristics compared to most global currencies because
global trade is denominated in dollars and the US dollar is the world's reserve currency.
The dollar smile is a term first coined by Stephen Jen in 2001 while he was a strategist at
Morgan Stanley. It theorizes that the USD appreciates when the US economy is doing very well,
or very poorly, and the USD depreciates when the US economy is in between. In other words,
buy USD when the US is booming or in a recession and sell dollars otherwise. Figure 4.7
explains the dollar smile.
Figure 4.7 The dollar smile.
The dollar smile is a nice (though rather simplistic) model for thinking about US dollar
performance. The most important takeaway is that the US dollar tends to rally when the US
economy is ripping and the Fed is hiking. And the dollar also rallies during US recessions. On
the other hand, the dollar tends to sell off in periods of moderate US growth as long as global
growth is decent.
That the dollar tends to rally into US recessions is counterintuitive. It happens because when
the US economy goes into recession, investors fear that the global economy will follow. The US
dollar is a safe haven, so when a global recession hits, investors buy US treasuries and US
dollars to protect their capital.
Furthermore, global trade is financed in US dollars, so less global trade means fewer dollars in
circulation globally and hence a possible shortage of dollars. Fears of a USD shortage drive the
dollar higher. As with many concepts in financial markets, it is more important to understand
the what (USD rallies into US recessions) than the why. Please note that while the dollar smile
is a handy heuristic, the empirical evidence in support of the concept is mixed and one should
always keep an open mind when forecasting where the dollar might go next.
Managed currencies are pairs that are not completely free‐floating. Examples are CNY, CNH,
KRW, SGD, RUB, and CHF (and sometimes the JPY). Managed currencies are somewhat free‐
floating but the price of these currencies is not 100% set by the free market. Volatility or directional
movement is at times restricted by the central bank. This can make these currencies unattractive to
macro speculators because a knowledge of the central bank's policy, strategy, and thinking is much
more important than any analysis of exogenous macro variables. Domestic investors with inside
information have a substantial edge over all other traders.
Currency management can be very active. In China, the PBoC often restrains volatility and directly
influences the value of the currency via daily interventions and fixings. Over time, the PBoC have
become less active as they allow their currency to float more.
CHF is a different example where the central bank generally allows the currency to float freely but
has intervened when the CHF strengthened too much or gained too much momentum because of
risk aversion. There was a time when the SNB tried to forcefully weaken the CHF by putting in a
EURCHF floor at 1.2000 but this experiment failed miserably and devastated the central bank's

credibility for many years to follow. New traders should avoid trading managed currencies and stick
to the majors.
The Venn diagram in Figure 4.8 will help you understand how the different currencies relate to one
another. (Larger font size indicates a more actively traded currency in that oval.)
Figure 4.8 Venn diagram of relationships between major global currencies.
Understand Volatility and Liquidity
Before you trade any market, you need a good understanding of volatility and liquidity. I am not a
huge fan of paper trading in general but one benefit of paper trading is that it allows you to watch a
market and get in sync with its ebbs and flows so that you understand how it moves. You should
watch a market for at least a month or two before you trade it. This will give you a sense not only of
general volatility but also of what constitutes a fast market or a quiet market.
Another important way to familiarize yourself with a market is to analyze the market statistically
before trading it. Note that volatility and liquidity are not static; they change over time and therefore
historical measures of volatility are by definition backward‐looking—the future can be much
different than the past (as users of standard VAR models in 2008 found out!).5
Volatility is a statistical measure of how an asset price moves. It uses historical data to analyze the
standard deviation of past moves. Assets with higher volatility tend to be riskier by nature. Volatility
is usually expressed as an annual percentage. It can also be expressed as a standard deviation or
histogram of returns. The higher the number, the more volatile the asset.
The reason that volatility matters is that it relates directly to position sizing. You cannot trade as
large a position in an asset that is more volatile, because your risk of ruin is larger. Many
experienced traders that I have worked with over the years never fully understood this concept. For
example, many bank traders I worked with simply ran 10 lots all the time. In other words, they
would tend to be comfortable long or short 10 million NZDUSD or 10 million EURUSD or 10 million
USDMXN, completely disregarding the fact that each of these currency pairs has a different volatility
and therefore the amount of P&L dollars at risk on each position of 10 million is different. You need
to normalize your position size based on volatility. Take smaller positions when volatility is high and
larger positions when volatility is low. This is fully explained in Chapter 12, “Understand Position
Sizing.”
Liquidity is harder to measure than volatility but is essentially the amount of slippage to expect
when you transact. If you look at a price in EURUSD, you might see 1 pip wide, whereas the spread
in NZDUSD might be 3 pips wide. This means that EURUSD has substantially better liquidity than
NZDUSD at that moment. Liquidity is an increasingly important consideration as you increase your
transaction size and/or frequency.
The more you cross the spread and the bigger that spread, the more money you are giving to market
makers in the long run. The importance of liquidity considerations increases as the amount of
capital you manage grows. When you are running a $1B macro fund, for example, managing

liquidity and capacity can be as big a challenge as correctly forecasting market direction. The good
news is that foreign exchange is the most liquid market in the world.
There is a strong relationship between volume and liquidity: High‐volume currencies almost always
have better liquidity. Figure 4.9 shows a list of the top 15 currencies by volume6 along with their
volatility7 and liquidity. The liquidity figure is out of ten and is my best subjective assessment of
liquidity as of late 2018. This number varies over time but the numbers provided are a good starting
point for understanding the relative personalities of different currency pairs.
Volume Rank
1‐year volatility Liquidity
 1
USD
 8.3
10
 2
EUR
 7.7
10
 3
JPY
 8.3
 9
 4
GBP
 9.9
 7
 5
AUD
 9.6
 8
 6
CAD
 7.5
 7
 7
CHF
 7.3
 7
 8
CNH
 6.9
 5
 9
SEK
 9.8
 6
10
MXN
14.5
 4
11
NZD
 9.9
 6
12
SGD
 5.0
 8
13
HKD
 1.0
10
14
NOK
 9.3
 7
15
KRW
 9.3
 7
Figure 4.9 Volume, volatility, and liquidity for the Top 15 currencies.
Volatility and Liquidity Vary by Currency
The best currencies to trade have high liquidity and high volatility, but there is often a tradeoff
between the two. The majors provide excellent volatility and liquidity while EM currencies are
usually volatile but illiquid. Figure 4.10 shows a comparison of approximate liquidity and volatility
for the same 15 currencies. It is simply the data from the table above presented in a scatter plot. You
can see there is a visible but weak inverse relationship between liquidity and volatility.
Figure 4.10 The relationship between volatility and liquidity for the Top 15 currencies.
Almost all traders should stick to liquid G10 FX because it is most liquid. There are numerous
idiosyncratic issues involved in trading less‐liquid currencies. Unless you work at a bank, you will
find trading the illiquid currencies difficult and frustrating, and furthermore you generally cannot
rely as much on stop losses in those currencies, so risk management is problematic.

Volatility and Liquidity Vary by Regime
There are times when volatility across all global asset markets is low (e.g., 2005, 2006, 2014, and
2017) and times when volatility is high (e.g., 1998, 2008, 2011, and parts of 2018). Volatility can
change at lightning speed. FX volatility tends to move in sync with global asset market volatility,
although there are times when stocks could be volatile while FX markets stay quiet or vice versa.
Volatility tends to trend lower in slow motion and then skyrocket when there is a disturbance.
Figure 4.11 shows a 10‐year history of FX volatility as defined by the Deutsche Bank FX Volatility
Index.
Figure 4.11 Currency volatility, 2002–2018.
Source: CVIX Index (Bloomberg).
Figure 4.12 is the same chart with equity volatility (VIX) overlaid so you can see how FX and equity
vol move up and down together, but not completely in sync.

Figure 4.12 Currency volatility vs. equity volatility, 2002–2018.
The main takeaway here is that volatility regimes can change quickly. Don't get too used to one
environment. You always need to be on the lookout for changes in market microstructure and
behavior so that when the sands shift, you are ready. This brings me to the second most important
rule in FX Trading:
Rule #2 of FX Trading: Adapt or die.
I will get to Rule #1 (and 23 others) as the book progresses. My “25 Rules of FX Trading” are listed
in the appendix.
Volatility and Liquidity Vary by Time of Day
The FX majors and developed market currencies are most active in the period when London and
New York business hours overlap. This is 11:00AM to 4:00PM London, which is 6:00AM to
11:00AM in New York. Some EM currencies are more active and liquid in their home time zone
(KRW is more active during Korean business hours, for example) but the NY/LDN overlap is by far
the best time to trade currencies in general.
Figure 4.13 shows average EURUSD volumes by time of day for a three‐month period in 2014.

Figure 4.13 Average hourly volumes in EURUSD by time of day (GMT) February–April 2014.
Volumes are indexed so there is no y‐axis label. This chart simply shows each hour's liquidity
relative to the others and it is highly representative of how volume evolves during the day for all
major currencies. The numbers along the bottom represent the time in GMT so 12 would be noon
GMT, which is 7:00AM NY and noon LDN.8
The Key Times to Observe
GMT TIME (chart) EVENT
LONDON TIME NEW YORK TIME
 7
London Open
7AM
2AM
12
New York Open
Noon
7AM
15
Options Expiry
3PM
10AM
16
WMR Fix
4PM
11AM
17
London Goes Home
5PM
Noon
The area encompassed by the thick black lines is the LDN/NY overlap. This slice represents only a
quarter of the day's hours but more than half of the day's FX volume. This is because London and
New York are the most active currency trading hubs and major events like US economic data,
options expiry, and the WMR fix all take place in that period. The LDN/NY overlap is the beating
heart of every FX day.
Let's look at intraday volumes in USDJPY so that you can see a more granular view of what happens
around economic data, options expiry, and the WMR fix. Take a look at Figure 4.14. There are
clearly three spikes in volume. The first is 8:30AM NY, when most economic data are released. The
next volume spike is 10:00AM NY, when options expire (and also when some second‐tier economic
data are released). The last volume spike is at 11:00AM NY (4:00PM LDN) and that volume spike
coincides with the WMR fix.

Figure 4.14 Average intraday volumes in USDJPY during London hours 7:00AM LDN to 7:00PM
LDN.
Data from Refinitiv.
The spike around economic data is pretty self‐explanatory. When new information is released to the
market, traders and investors want to express views about the information and so they trade
aggressively on the back of the release. The market speeds up and tries to find equilibrium as players
from different time frames all participate at once. The price finds equilibrium and then volumes fall.
There are many other key moments in the FX trading day. Let's go through them in detail.
Understand Time of Day
Big bursts of activity and volatility come at predictable times of day in FX markets and you need to
understand these key times. In this section I will go all the way around the clock to describe every
major time of day effect. To the uninitiated, this might seem like I am getting too far into the weeds,
but believe me: This is important. Time of day is a critical consideration for all currency traders.
Figure 4.15 presents a grid of all the major daily intraday events. Here, I will describe each event in
some detail.

Figure 4.15 Key times of day for G10 FX.
London Open (7:00AM LDN)
The London open is often an inflection point as big risk takers and market makers sit down and
process the information that has filtered into the market since the last daily close. You will often see
an aggressive trending move start at this time.
New York Open (7:00AM NY)
The NY open is the beginning of the NY/LDN overlap, the most liquid period for foreign exchange
dealing. This 4‐hour period tends to be volatile, active, and liquid. Quite often, if there was a big
move in London time, the New York traders will hop on that move and extend it, only to watch it
reverse later.
The pattern of extension and reversal just after the New York open was especially prevalent during
the Eurozone crisis. London would come in and sell euros, then NY would come in and do the same
and then starting around 8:00AM NY time, EURUSD would squeeze and squeeze and squeeze
higher for the rest of the day. Watch for intraday patterns like this; they can be surprisingly
persistent.
ECB Fix (1:15PM LDN)
Before July 2016, some corporations and central banks used the ECB fixing rate to benchmark their
currency positions. These institutions traded very actively around the ECB fix in an attempt to match
or beat the fixing rate. This created a big burst of activity, mostly in EURUSD, in the 15 minutes
leading up to the fix at 1:15PM London. In July 2016, the ECB changed the methodology around the
ECB fix and usage of the fix has dropped off dramatically since then.
US Economic Data (8:30AM and 10:00AM NY, mostly)
US economic data are key for FX direction. This will be discussed in full in Chapter 5: “Understand
Fundamental Analysis” and Chapter 10: “Trading the News.” Also, don't forget about data that come
out at odd times, for example: ADP at 8:15AM NY, Industrial Production at 9:15AM NY and Chicago
PMI at 9:42AM NY (released to subscribers) and 9:45AM NY (released to the public).
Option Expiry (10:00AM NY)
Most currency options expire at 10:00AM New York time. This creates a burst of activity as market
makers hedge the change in their deltas into 10:00AM and those who were using options as a hedge
suddenly find themselves unhedged.
Exotic options (barriers, digitals, etc.) also create hedging needs around 10:00AM as market makers
and end users recalculate their net exposure after options expire. Note that OTC options on some
currencies expire at times other than 10:00AM NY and CME options expire at 3PM NY time.9

Examples of nonstandard OTC option expiry times are USDTRY, which expire at 7:00AM NY, and
USDMXN, which expire at 12:30PM NY.
4:00PM WMR Benchmark Fix (4:00PM LDN)
The WMR benchmark fix is a rate setting that takes place every day at 4:00PM LDN, 11:00AM NY.
WM/Reuters collects data from all trades done in the five‐minute window between 3:57:30 and
4:02:30 LDN (10:57:30 to 11:02:30 NY) and calculates a fixing rate bid and ask for each currency.
The rate represents an approximate best estimate of the average of where currencies traded during
the 5‐minute fixing window. Many, many FX players, especially real money, use the WMR fix to
value their foreign bond and equity holdings.
Because many FX participants use the WMR fix, there is a large spike in trading activity at this time.
Many buyers and sellers converge on the market at the WMR, so there is tremendous liquidity. Fix
users are sometimes able to transact massive amounts with minimal impact.
On the other hand, if everyone is the same direction at the WMR fix (everyone is selling or everyone
is buying), there can be huge imbalances and outsized market moves in a short time period.
The 4:00PM WMR fix essentially marks the end of the London trading session and the end of best
liquidity so many systematic and some discretionary traders use the period leading into that fix to
square up or to transact their last large deals of the day. You can see in the previous chart that the
WMR fix is the last surge of liquidity of the day and then volumes drop off dramatically into the NY
afternoon.
The huge volumes and non‐price‐sensitive nature of the WMR flow means that there can be
incredible opportunities at this time. If you want to buy a currency and it gets absolutely clobbered
into the fix, it could provide a great buying opportunity. Quite often when the buying or selling
pressure related to the fix abates at 4:02:30PM London (11:02:30AM NY) the currency that was
beaten down rebounds or the currency that was on a moonshot comes back down to earth.
Note, however, that it is not profitable to go the other way systematically on every large WMR fix
movement. In other words, just because a currency moved dramatically higher at the fix does not
mean you should automatically sell it.
You should have prior reasons to trade a currency—don't just fade the WMR because there was a big
move. Big WMR moves are an opportunity to execute on ideas you had beforehand. I repeat: Don't
sell a currency just because it is ripping higher at the fix.
One last observation on the 4:00PM WMR: The month‐end fix (the fix on the last business day of
the month) is by far the largest fixing each month and you will often see extreme moves in the hours
leading up to the month‐end WMR fix. This is because most equity funds rebalance their FX
exposures at month end, so if there have been large moves in stocks and bonds (most importantly,
US equities), then firms will have massive FX rebalancing to do.
Month‐end fix activity can be huge and any single bank might at times see upwards of $5 billion in
fixes on its book for just that one day. Watch for crazy moves around 4:00PM LDN (11:00AM NY)
on the last day of every month. The hours leading up to the month‐end fix also see a fair amount of
craziness as traders and hedgers try to pre‐position for the inevitable flurry in the WMR window.
Bank of Canada Noon Rate (Noon NY)
Some Canadian real money and corporate FX participants benchmark to the Bank of Canada's noon
rate. This creates a small burst of hedging activity in USDCAD (and sometimes CAD crosses) right
around noon NY. The use of this fixing has declined over the years but you will still see the odd
USDCAD move or volume frenzy around 12 noon NY from time to time.
CME Close (3:00PM NY)
Many hedge funds, systems, and models benchmark to the close of the futures markets at 2:00PM
Chicago (3:00PM NY). This leads to a flurry of hedging as 3:00PM NY nears. Most activity at this
time comes from models and algorithms that use the 3:00PM CME close as a mark‐to‐market rate
and want to enter or exit positions as close to that rate as possible.
China Fix (9:15AM Shanghai)
At 9:15 Shanghai time, the People's Bank of China (PBoC) sets a daily fixing rate for the US dollar
against the yuan (USDCNY). While this fixing generally comes and goes without much fanfare, there

are times when this is a critical time of day. In August 2015, when China devalued their currency, the
entire market was glued to the screens at 9:15PM every night to see just how aggressively the
Chinese planned to devalue. The China Fix influenced not just USDCNY but all of FX, stock, and
bond markets at that time. When the Chinese currency is in play, the China Fix is key.
It is important to note that the China Fix (unlike the ECB, WMR, and most other fixes) is not set by a
series of transactions in the market; it is set in somewhat arbitrary fashion by the Chinese
government using a formula that factors in both G10 FX USD moves and political and strategic
considerations.
Tokyo Fix (8:55AM Tokyo)
Many corporate and real money FX traders in Japan use the Tokyo Fix to benchmark their currency
trades. Therefore, the Tokyo Fix (which takes place at 8:55AM Tokyo time) is another time of day
where you will see a large burst of trading activity and volatility. Most of the activity at the Tokyo Fix
takes place in USDJPY, although you will also see movement in other related pairs like AUDJPY,
NZDJPY, and EURJPY. Figure 4.16 is a volume by time of day chart for USDJPY so you can see how
important the Tokyo Fix is to that market.
Figure 4.16 Average intraday volumes in USDJPY by time of day (times in GMT).
This chart is similar to the previous chart but this one uses the full 24‐hour chart of USDJPY, not
just 12 hours. Note the large volume spike on the far left. This volume spike is the Tokyo Fix, which
takes place daily at 9:55AM Tokyo time. The Tokyo fix is used mostly by Japanese corporates and
life insurance companies.
Other times of day you need to know about:
API and Department of Energy Data
Each week, the American Petroleum Institute (API) and the Department of Energy (DoE) announce
their estimates of crude oil inventories. These data are extremely important to crude oil traders and
often trigger big moves in energy prices. API releases its figure Tuesday at 4:30PM NY and the DoE
numbers come out at 10:30AM NY Wednesday. The DoE numbers tend to attract the most attention
because the series has been around longer and it is released at a busier time of day.
If you trade currencies correlated to crude oil (Canada and Norway especially), you should be ready
for big moves when the API and DoE figures come out. I feel like there is no edge in studying the
API/DoE numbers themselves as this is too far outside my area of expertise (especially because often
the crude move is counterintuitive after the data). Instead of taking a view on the inventory
numbers, I watch crude oil closely after the data come out and quickly enter or exit CAD trades
based on movements in crude oil.

NYMEX Open and Close
A huge proportion of NYMEX crude volume is executed near the open and the close of pit trading.
This means that 9:00AM NY and 2:30PM NY are critical times of day for crude oil traders. Again, if
you trade CAD, NOK, or MXN, be aware of the potential for big moves at these two key times.
Friday Close
Currency markets close at 5:00PM NY on Friday. Liquidity tends to dry up after 3:00PM so if you
have a large position, keep this in mind. Be aware that any position held into the close on Friday is
subject to potentially significant gap risk.
Usually FX markets will open on Sunday at a level near where they closed on Friday. But if there is
major news over the weekend, FX markets can open at any level. Prudent short‐term FX traders
reduce risk before the close on Friday. Some of my worst trading memories are when I was offside
on a trade and had to sit all weekend worrying about the open. The US downgrade in 2011 (which
was announced after the close on Friday) and the capture of Saddam Hussein are two particularly
large Sunday gaps I remember.
Sunday Open
Currency markets open Monday morning at 7:00AM Wellington, New Zealand, time. In New York,
this is Sunday at 1:00PM or 3:00PM, depending on the time of year (winter or summer). Liquidity is
extremely poor for the first few hours of trading until Tokyo and Singapore come in. If there is major
news over the weekend, the Sunday open can be very interesting as the market attempts to find a
new equilibrium price that incorporates the news. During the Eurozone crisis, there were many large
gaps where EURUSD would open 100 pips or even 150 pips higher or lower compared to the Friday
close.
NZD Date Change
All currencies roll (change value date) at 5:00PM except the New Zealand dollar. NZD rolls at
7:00AM Wellington time, which is either 1:00PM or 3:00PM NY depending on the time of year. This
is not a major deal but keep it in mind when trading NZ in the NY afternoon. Trades done after the
date change are called “new value” and trades done before the data change are called “old value.”
Equity Open/Close
Depending on the regime, currencies are sometimes correlated to equity markets, so there can be
surges of FX volatility around 9:30AM NY and 4:00PM NY, when the New York Stock Exchange
opens and closes.
Twilight Zone
Warning: There is a time of day known as the “Twilight Zone.” This is the period from 5:00PM NY to
6:00PM NY. Most NY bank desks run minimal staffing at this time (one trader, usually) and Tokyo
is not in the office yet so there are very, very few traders active. Most market‐making algos are off
because bank systems run their end‐of‐day process at 5PM. Liquidity is at its absolute worst during
the Twilight Zone. It is not advisable to trade in this period, regardless of your size.
When news comes out at this time, moves can be dramatic as liquidity is close to nonexistent. The
first time the US AAA credit rating was put on negative watch, the announcement came at 5:20PM
New York time and it was absolute bedlam!
You will notice that most of the volatility each day is centered around the volume spikes and
therefore many good FX traders focus on the 5‐hour sweet spot of the LDN/NY overlap and either
ignore the rest of the day or try their best not to overtrade when volumes are thin. This is an
important skill to learn. Overtrading (especially in the afternoon, when there is no reason to trade
most of the time) is one of my greatest weaknesses.
Final Thoughts on the Importance of Time of Day in Currency Trading
When I worked as a hedge fund PM, I graphed my P&L on an intraday basis by recording my
intraday P&L every 15 minutes. There was a definitive pattern where I made money from 7:00AM to
11:00AM NY time and then gave back 20% to 40% of my profits from 11:00AM to 5:00PM. I had the
same experience when I was day trading equities.

You should actively trade the LDN/NY overlap and do something else when volumes are low. Do
research, prepare for upcoming events, exercise, play video games, or write a book about FX trading
like I'm doing right now at 1:45PM NY.
Keep your hands off the keys as much as possible during the quiet periods of the day.
When volumes are low, any one transaction can move the market disproportionately because there
is not enough volume to take the other side. Therefore, you will find that outside of the LDN/NY
overlap there will be a disproportionate number of moves that do not make sense.
During illiquid periods, large corporate or other non‐price‐sensitive users of FX sometimes still need
to transact and so the price will move simply because of that flow. Unless you are the one executing
the flow, you have no edge. I cannot stress this enough. Trade the LDN/NY overlap and then put in
your stop loss and take profit orders and stop trading.
FACTBOX: WHAT ARE THE BEST CURRENCIES FOR SHORT‐TERM
TRADING?
An interesting question that I am often asked is: What are the best currencies for short‐term
trading? Here I answer the question with data.
The ideal currency for short‐term trading is both volatile and highly liquid (i.e., moves a lot but
is cheap to transact). I carefully estimated spread info (width of the bid/offer) for G10 and EM
currencies and found the average daily range for each currency. I then indexed everything and
created a list of currencies ranked by their ratio of: (daily range vs. cost to transact). And voilà!
(See Figure 4.17.)
Figure 4.17 (a) Ranking currencies by daily range compared to spread. In other words:
volatility vs. transaction cost. In other words: What currencies are best for short‐term trading?
G10. (b) Emerging markets. Bid/offer data estimated and liquidity and volatility are not static,
so these charts are meant as a rough guide to comparative trading attractiveness, not a
definitive and permanent answer.
A Note on Choosing Currencies
Quite often you have a view on a specific currency and you are not sure what other currency to pair it
against. For example, you expect the dollar to sell off because of weaker US economic data so you
want to go short dollars, but you are not sure which currency to buy against it. Sometimes, a specific
currency that you really like will come to mind; then the pairing is obvious. At other times, the
prudent strategy is to sell the dollar against a basket of currencies. This avoids the possibility that
your dollar view is correct but you lose money because of some idiosyncratic move in the other
currency.
Say you express your USD‐bearish view by going long AUDUSD (long AUD, short USD); the risk is
that your dollar view is correct but some extremely bad news comes out of Australia, and so AUD
sells off even more than the USD. If you want to avoid this, put on a basket. Instead of buying one
chunk of AUDUSD, do a basket of smaller trades of equal risk: AUDUSD, NZDUSD, GBPUSD, and

EURUSD, perhaps. Then you are not subject to the random risk of an event or news in a specific
(non‐USD) currency.
The other benefit of the basket approach is that it has higher capacity. If you trade large size, that
can be helpful. A position of 500 million USD worth of AUDUSD is somewhat difficult to manage
because it exceeds the capacity of the short‐term market, but 500 million USD split equally or vol‐
weighted between AUD, NZD, CAD, GBP, EUR, and JPY is easier to get in and out one leg at a time.
Understand Jump Risk
For short‐term speculators, one attractive feature of the FX market is that it trades continuously
from Sunday afternoon New York time until 5:00PM Friday New York. If you leave a stop loss on a
small or medium‐sized position, you can generally expect minimal slippage on the fill.
That said, you should familiarize yourself with the concept of jump (or gap) risk because most jump
risk is known in advance and can be quantified approximately. Jump risk is the size of the move
where no trading will take place (the size of the gap) after a news event such as:
Economic data
Central bank announcement
Weekends
Some traders elect simply to avoid all major jump risk by squaring up ahead of major events and
weekends. This is a logical strategy. It is worth noting, though, that research has estimated that
jumps account for between 25% and 40% of FX returns on a 1‐ to 3‐month horizon.10 Further, the
jumps can generally be estimated fairly accurately (on average) using information supplied by the
options market, so overall it is possible to quantify most gap risk. That said, gap risk can only be
estimated; it can never be known for sure in advance, so prudence is never a bad policy.
Figure 4.18 is an example of a jump after a strong Australian jobs data release in December 2015.
The market expected a jobs number of –10,000 and the number came in way above expectations at
+78,000.

Figure 4.18 1‐minute AUDUSD after a strong Australian jobs number, December 9, 2015.
You can see that when the data came out, there was a large jump of 72 pips or 1%. Anyone who left a
stop loss between 0.7250 and 0.7300 would most likely be done above 0.7300. So if you sized your
position using a stop loss at 0.7250, expecting 3 pips of slippage, you would be in for a major
negative surprise and a much bigger loss than expected. Always be aware of jump risk and square up
or size your position accordingly ahead of time.
Estimating Jump Risk
There are two ways to estimate jump risk. The first is to look at historical data for a given event and
take the average and median moves. The Bloomberg function ECMI is useful for this type of analysis.
Looking at how currencies moved over the same event in the past is usually a good way to estimate
gap risk but it is, by definition, backward‐looking. A more accurate way to estimate jump risk is to
use the options market.
The difference between volatility pricing for the day before an event and the day of an event can be
used to extract an approximate jump risk for the currency. The calculation is beyond the scope of
this book. To be perfectly honest, when I want this information I don't calculate it myself, I just ask
an options trader.
If you work at a bank or have an institutional relationship with a bank, you can simply ask, “What is
the options market pricing as jump risk for event X?” and they will give you an answer, usually in
basis points.
Weekend Gaps
Weekends are a special situation because the FX market closes at 5:00PM New York time and does
not reopen until 7:00AM Wellington (1:00PM, 2:00PM, or 3:00PM NY, depending on the time of
year). This creates meaningful gap risk because news over the weekend can trigger changes in supply
and demand for currencies that cannot be reflected until markets reopen. Some weekend gaps can
be predicted (elections, Chinese data, etc.) but some cannot (Saddam Hussein captured, China
revalues currency, etc.).

Many traders go home flat every weekend and I strongly encourage you to do the same. Not only
does this allow you to avoid gap risk, but it gives your mind a rest for the weekend. Instead of
worrying about what news might come out Saturday or Sunday, you can have fun with your friends
or spend time with your family and recharge for another big week of trading. If you insist on having
a position over the weekend, understand that your stop loss could be filled significantly away from
the level. For example, the weekend that Saddam Hussein was captured, EURUSD opened 200
points below the Friday close.

FACTBOX: AN IMPORTANT NOTE ON TRADING NON‐USD CROSSES
I am frequently asked my view on secondary FX crosses like CADMXN and AUDCAD. Often
people think of them as relative macro stories and fail to understand how the relative beta (or
volatility) of each currency is often the main factor driving those crosses.
For example, if you ask me what I think of CADMXN, I will generally just tell you what I think
of USDMXN because USDMXN is much more volatile than USDCAD. In other words,
CADMXN is a main course of USDMXN with a side order of USDCAD. Below I provide some
mathematical and visual supporting evidence.
In Figure 4.19, you can see USDMXN (the thin dotted line) ebbs and flows more with CADMXN
(black bars) and not as much with USDCAD. The thick gray line shows CAD going up and
down, aka USDCAD inverted. In EM selloffs and risk off, USDCAD rallies but it rallies less than
USDMXN, and vice versa. So a CADMXN trade is mostly just a USDMXN trade because it is
driven by USDMXN, the pair with higher volatility. The exception to this rule is around
idiosyncratic Canadian events like Canadian data releases and Bank of Canada meetings, when
USDCAD is more volatile than USDMXN.
Figure 4.19 CADMXN (black bars) vs. USDMXN (thin dotted line) and USDCAD (thick gray
line) (inverted) December 2009 to May 2017.
This is not just true when pairing G10 versus EM. If you look at AUDCAD, the result is similar:
Most of the time AUDCAD is just an AUDUSD trade. Using 500 days of data as of January
2017, here are the correlations between those crosses and their legs:
AUDCAD correlation to: AUDUSD 61.8% / USDCAD 17.5%
CADMXN correlation to: USDCAD −10.2% / USDMXN 76.0%
In addition, look at Figures 4.19 and 4.20, which overlay the cross (in black) with its legs. It
does not take 20:20 vision to see that USDMXN is driving CADMXN and AUDUSD is driving
AUDCAD.

Figure 4.20 AUDCAD (black bars) vs. AUDUSD (thin dotted line) and USDCAD (thick gray
line) August 2007 to June 2017.
Note that the tendency of the higher beta currency to drive crosses is just a tendency, not a hard
rule. When USDCAD was ripping at the end of 2015, it was so volatile that it was driving
AUDCAD for a month or two.
“OK, great,” you say, “but who cares?” Well, you should care because any time you construct a
cross‐trade based on relative fundamentals, you fall into an easily avoidable trap. If you want to
trade two countries against each other, you need to weight your exposure by volatility. So
instead of going long, for example, 130 CADMXN, do a vol‐weighted combo: long 75 USDMXN
and short 100 USDCAD.11 This will deliver returns closer to what you would expect if your
macro, relative performance call is correct.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key concepts:
The players that make up the FX market and their varied roles
Different currencies have different personalities
Liquidity and time of day are important in FX
Volatility varies by currency pair and this is important
Gap and jump risk
That concludes Chapter 4. Next comes the fun stuff.
Chapter 5 is the first time we start to think about how to come up with trade ideas and how to make
money. The chapter will show you how to analyze fundamentals, think about macroeconomics, and
start forecasting currency movements.
Notes
  1 Whenever I write about correlation, it should be understood and emphasized that correlations are
not static. They change over time.

  2 Sources: http://www.dfat.gov.au/tradematters/aus‐graph.html,
https://www.nzte.govt.nz/en/invest/statistics/,
http://www.investorsfriend.com/Canadian%20GDP%20Canadian%20imports%20and%20exports
  3 The rankings are my informed but subjective opinion.
  4 Though in 2018 AUD and NZD rates fell below US interest rates for the first time in recent
memory and AUD and NZD are no longer high yielders.
  5 VAR stands for Value at Risk and is a standard risk measurement model that uses historical
volatility to estimate future risks for a position of a given size. When volatility stays low for a long
time, these models can massively underestimate risk because they only look at recent volatility
and therefore a larger and larger position appears to be reasonable as volatility falls. Until at one
point (sometimes called the Minsky Moment), volatility mushrooms and risks are much, much
higher than suggested by VAR.
  6 Source for volume data: https://www.bis.org/publ/rpfx16fx.pdf (page 5).
  7 Figures are implied 1‐year volatility for each currency against the USD. Implied volatility is the
option market's best estimate of future volatility. You will also see people use Historical Volatility,
which is a backward‐looking measure of how volatile the asset was in the past.
  8 Note that when the clocks change for daylight savings time, the difference between time zones
can change for a few weeks. You can always Google “Current time in London” or “Current time
GMT” to make sure you know what the difference is.
  9 Note that the CME recently changed its rules so options expiring after June 9, 2019, will expire at
10AM NY just like OTC options.
10 https://workspace.imperial.ac.uk/business‐
school/Public/RiskLab/2%20Jul%2013%20FX/irina.pdf.
11 This assumes USDCAD is around 1.30 (130 CAD = 100 USD).
