PART II 
Trade the Foreign Exchange
Market
“Success is no accident. It is hard work, perseverance,
learning, studying, sacrifice and most of all, love of what you
are doing or learning to do.”
Pele
My philosophy is that sustainable long‐term success in FX trading
is best achieved using a fusion approach. This is a hybrid, adaptive
process that combines fundamental and macroeconomic analysis,
behavioral finance, technical analysis, and diligent risk
management to deliver sustainable long‐term trading success.
This book explains trade selection using fundamentals, technicals,
correlation, behavioral finance, and news. When all five branches
of analysis point in the same direction, you have what I call a Five‐
Star setup. Five‐Stars are trade ideas where every indicator points
the same way.
Have the patience to wait for these maximum high‐probability
trades. Do your best to ignore trades where some indicators are
bullish and others are bearish. Put another way: Make sure all
planets are in line before you put on a trade.

CHAPTER 5 
Understand Fundamental Analysis
“In the short run the market is a voting machine. In the long run it is a
weighing machine.”
This quote, attributed to Graham Dodd by Warren Buffett, is a useful way of looking at
the FX market. It means the market oscillates above and below long‐run equilibrium
(fair value) because speculators and their emotional trading decisions drive short‐term
price action. But in the end, fundamentals matter.
This is not a book about macroeconomics or international finance, but you need to
understand the macro backdrop no matter how short your trading time horizon. Even
day traders should have a strong knowledge of fundamentals or they will inevitably be
caught offside by moves they do not fully understand.
“But wait. I trade on pure technicals!” you say.
That's great, but even scalpers need to understand the whole picture. In the long run,
you cannot be all trees and no forest. It is fine to specialize in one type of analysis or one
trading style but to be a great trader you need to have a complete understanding of the
market. And for what it's worth, in my twenty years of trading, I have never worked with
a single top‐notch FX trader who used only technical analysis.
Fundamental analysis is the study of macroeconomic factors that drive markets (as
opposed to other factors like momentum, positioning, and psychology, for example).
Long‐Run Determinants of Currency Values
Long‐term FX valuation is a topic that belongs in finance textbooks; it is mostly useless
for trading. That said, it is helpful to understand the concept of long‐term fair value in
FX because it is frequently discussed and it can provide a better understanding of what
determines currency valuations.
The most common methodology used for of FX valuation is called Purchasing Power
Parity (PPP). This theory suggests that a basket of goods in one country should cost the
same as the same basket of goods in another country and relative currency rates and
inflation should be the equalizer. This is sometimes demonstrated by the “Big Mac
Index,” which compares the price of a Big Mac in various countries to determine if a
country's currency is cheap or expensive.
The theory behind PPP is that if an item is cheaper in one country than in another,
consumers will buy more of the good in the cheaper locale and less in the more
expensive location. But this all rests on the assumption that every good is tradable,
transaction costs are zero, and taxes are not important. As is typical with many orthodox
economic theories, there are so many faulty assumptions that the theory ends up nearly
useless by the time you try to put it into practice. But at least PPP provides a starting
point to assess whether a currency is cheap or expensive.
The IMF conducts regular reviews of member country's foreign exchange valuations and
you will frequently see a headline like “IMF says New Zealand dollar 5 to 15 percent
overvalued.” These are long‐term assessments, usually filled with caveats and are not
important for trading on any time horizon. The reason that fair value measures are not
useful for currency traders is that currencies can stay over‐ or undervalued for years or
even decades at a time.

It is useful, though, to understand why a currency is over‐ (or under‐) valued so that you
know under what conditions the currency might fall from overvalued back toward PPP
or “fair value.” For example, this passage appears in the IMF's 2014 report on New
Zealand:
Our estimates suggest that even with the strong terms of trade, the New Zealand
dollar is currently stronger than would be consistent with stabilizing net foreign
liabilities over the long run, and on this basis appears to be overvalued. There are
other factors contributing to the current level of the exchange rate, including the
gap between domestic and foreign interest rates, New Zealand's favorable growth
outlook, and an appetite for relatively safe New Zealand assets. If any of these
factors were to ease, the exchange rate would likely depreciate. The government's
ongoing deficit reduction plan should also ease pressure on the exchange rate by
boosting national saving. However, global liquidity could remain ample for some
time, and New Zealand's non‐agricultural tradable sector will need to continue to
adapt by further increasing efficiency to remain competitive.
(https://www.imf.org/external/np/ms/2014/033114.htm)
So the fact that a currency is overvalued has little to no importance. It can stay
overvalued for longer than you can stay short. However, it is useful to know what is
driving the overvaluation because those things could change. In this case, the IMF
believes that the strength of the NZD is related to high interest rates, a favorable growth
outlook, and strong global risk appetite due to plentiful liquidity. This list is a good
starting point for what factors to watch when trading NZD. If any of these factors starts
to turn negative, you might expect NZD to fall.
This is all extremely big‐picture stuff and worth only a few pages of discussion. Some
would argue that because in the long run currencies tend to (eventually) revert to PPP,
you are better off trading overvalued currencies from the short side and vice versa to get
an edge, but this only applies to those trading FX on a multiyear time horizon. For those
trading shorter time horizons (i.e., pretty much everyone), you should always be equally
comfortable long or short a currency, no matter how cheap or expensive it is on a long‐
term basis. This flexibility will provide much more edge than any bias toward long‐term
mean reversion.
It is important to note that drivers of FX markets change as you move from long‐term
into short‐term analysis. Valuation matters in the super‐long‐term, for example, while
positioning and momentum matter much more in the short‐term.
FX Fundamentals Can Be Domestic or Global
There are four main global drivers of currency values and three primary domestic
drivers. The drivers are somewhat interrelated but deserve to be discussed one by one.
To give you an idea of how some of the factors interrelate, check out Figure 5.1. I don't
expect you to memorize it but it gives you an idea of the interplay and relationships
between global and domestic fundamentals.

Figure 5.1 How domestic and global factors feed into currency markets.
Let's talk about the global drivers of FX first. The four main global currency drivers
are:
1. Global growth
2. Commodity prices
3. Risk aversion
4. Geopolitics
1. Global growth is important because it influences the flow of money around the
world. Global growth is a major driver of many currencies. When global growth is
strong, exporters like China, Korea, and Brazil tend to do well and when global
growth is weak, money tends to flow into safe haven currencies such as JPY and
CHF (and often the USD).
2. Commodity prices and terms of trade exert a very strong influence on some
currencies. Commodities are usually driven by global growth but they also move
based on other factors such as climate, supply/production, idiosyncratic demand
factors, and the popularity of commodities as an asset class.
Commodity exporters such as Brazil, Canada, and Australia benefit from
commodity price strength while importers like Turkey and India are hurt by high
commodity prices. Certain countries are known for exporting specific commodities
and those commodities tend to influence those currencies more than others. The
more a country exports a specific commodity, the more the price of that
commodity will influence the currency.
3. Fluctuations in global risk appetite and risk aversion often cause FX moves
regardless of the underlying domestic fundamentals of individual countries. As you
learned earlier, different currencies have different personalities and certain
currencies are safe havens. When markets are nervous, traders generally flock to
low‐yielding safe haven currencies like the JPY and CHF. This was on full display in
2008 when the CHF and JPY (and USD, which was a low‐yielder at the time)
exploded higher in response to the global financial crisis.
4. Geopolitics can influence global risk appetite and can also trigger specific
currency moves in affected countries. Instability in Russia will drive selling of RUB,

PLN, and TRY, for example, as the market reduces regional risk in an attempt to
avoid losses. War, elections, or major policy changes in regions or individual
countries can all be sources of geopolitical volatility.
These are the four main global factors that move currencies. Now let's look at domestic
drivers of FX rates. As you gain more trading experience, you will notice that the market
oscillates back and forth, sometimes focusing mostly on domestic conditions and other
times focusing mostly (or only) on global factors.
In times of high‐risk aversion or intense focus on China, for example, domestic drivers
can become totally irrelevant. On the other hand, when the world is stable, changes in
local economies and domestic interest rate policy can be the dominant driver of
currencies, to the complete exclusion of global factors.
Let's look at domestic drivers of currency moves.
Domestic Drivers
1. Monetary policy
a. Interest rates
b. Balance sheet size
c. Growth
d. Inflation
e. Central bank preference for weak or strong currency
2. Capital flows
3. Trade balance

CRITICAL CONCEPT: Understand Change versus Level of the
Fundamentals
When you analyze domestic economic data and interest rates, it is critically
important that you understand the difference between the absolute level of
fundamentals and the delta (change) of those fundamentals. The market trades
off the delta, not the level. For example, a country with poor but improving
fundamentals is more likely to see its currency appreciate than a country with
great but worsening fundamentals.
This is because prices in financial markets are set at the margin. At any given
time, there is a momentary equilibrium price where supply meets demand and
this gives us the current price of each currency. Then, as new information
comes in and time passes, new buyers and sellers emerge and the price
changes.
A country that has had poor fundamentals for years probably has a weak
currency to reflect this. When information is widely known and prices have
moved to reflect this information, the information or news is said to be priced
in. It's in the price because markets have had plenty of time to absorb it and
buy and sell based on the info. Efficient markets should generally factor in all
known information.
Prices will change when new information (i.e., information that is not priced
in) arrives. This is why you will often see a big move in currency markets when
economic data come out or central banks make announcements. Economic
data and central bank moves are substantial new information that may not
have been previously known. The most important aspect of any new
information that arrives is not whether it is weak or strong relative to the past
but whether it is weak or strong relative to market expectations. This concept
will be fully covered in Chapter 10, “Trading the News.”
Monetary policy is the number‐one domestic driver of currency values most of the
time. Monetary policy is most often a reflection of growth and inflation expectations but
can also hinge on other economic, political, and sociopolitical considerations. You
should read every speech and official release of every central bank whose currency you
plan on trading. Every document is publically available and doing the work on monetary
policy is the first step toward becoming a professional FX trader.
There are two main monetary policy levers: interest rates and balance sheet size.
Interest rates are the main monetary policy lever but because many central banks have
hit the zero bound in recent years, they have been forced to resort to quantitative easing
and balance sheet management.
For context, it is useful to know that many central banks have a historical bias. The most
well‐known historical central bank bias is the German Bundesbank's strong preference
for tight monetary policy. This is a direct response to the long memory of hyperinflation
of Germany's Weimar Republic.1 On the other hand, the US Federal Reserve has a
historical bias toward keeping rates too low for too long as Keynesian values dominate
the US economic mainstream.
Much more important than the history, though, is to understand the current monetary
policy bias of a central bank. This bias can be described as either neutral, tight
(hawkish), or loose (dovish). Hawkish monetary policy is a desire for high or higher
rates, while a dovish bias means a central bank is looking for low or lower rates. Central

bank bias is often well known and reflected in the central bank's monetary policy
pronouncements.
Changes in a central bank's bias are extremely important because the market, being the
extremely efficient forward discounting mechanism that it is, often adjusts rapidly in
anticipation of future interest rate moves. You will often see a currency react strongly to
a central bank's change in bias and then by the time the central bank actually moves
rates, the currency barely reacts because the change in rates was fully priced in
(expected) by that point.
Let's take the 2014 New Zealand hiking cycle as an example. People like to trade NZD
via AUDNZD because that is the purest NZD play (as opposed to NZDUSD, which is
highly dependent on the outlook for the US dollar). As the RBNZ becomes more
hawkish (more likely to hike rates), one would expect the NZD to appreciate versus the
AUD, sending AUDNZD lower. Take a look at Figure 5.2 and you can see how the RBNZ
statements evolved in 2013 to lay the groundwork for their interest rate hike in 2014.
Figure 5.2 Daily AUDNZD with key RBNZ (NZ central bank) meetings marked June
2013 to July 2014.
1. “Although removal of monetary stimulus will likely be needed in the
future, we expect to keep the OCR unchanged through the end of the
year,” July 25, 2013.
2. “OCR increases will likely be required next year,” September 2013.
3. “Although we expect to keep the OCR unchanged in 2013, OCR
increases will likely be required next year,” October 2013.
4. “The Bank will increase the OCR as needed in order to keep future
average inflation near the 2 percent target midpoint,” December 2013.
5. Hiked on March 13, 2014.

What you can see is that the market priced in the RBNZ's tightening bias very
aggressively starting with point 2 and point 3 on the chart as the central bank switched
from neutral to hawkish. As the RBNZ continued to promise hikes (point 4), the market
kept selling AUDNZD. When the RBNZ finally hiked (point 5), AUDNZD hit bottom and
the market started to buy AUDNZD (sell NZD), taking profit and unwinding positions.
This is an example of a common pattern called “Buy the rumor/Sell the fact,” which is
covered in Chapter 10. In this case, the change of bias was the driver of stronger NZD
and the actual change in interest rates was the end of the story, not the start.
Understanding the bias of a central bank requires an in‐depth understanding of what
the central bank wants, what data it watches, and what constraints (political or
otherwise) might influence the bank's tactics. While face‐to‐face meetings are the best
way to get a full understanding of a central bank, most people cannot get direct access to
central bankers on a day‐to‐day basis and so you must do the work.
I cannot emphasize this enough. If you trade NZD, you need to read every speech, every
statement, and every interview from the RBNZ and NZ politicians who might influence
the dialogue. If you don't do the work, you are at a huge disadvantage compared to more
educated and more informed speculators.
Rule #3 of FX Trading: Do the work.
Read the speeches. Listen to the central bankers. Analyze, read, and study.
Throughout this book, I will introduce the most important rules of FX trading. With the
exception of Rule #1, they are numbered in the order they appear in the book. The
appendix contains a complete summary of all 25 rules of FX trading.
Politics can have an important influence on monetary policy. This is because not all
central banks are fully independent. Some central banks, like the RBA or RBNZ, are
independent, whereas others are not. The Bank of Japan, for example, is heavily
influenced by the government, especially since Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took over in
2013.
It is important to understand how politics can influence central banks. In general,
politicians prefer a more dovish central bank because low rates make it easier for
governments to borrow and spend freely and keep the economy humming along. When
it comes time to make difficult decisions, central banks that are heavily influenced by
politics will tend to keep rates lower than necessary for longer than necessary to avoid
political problems, discomfort, and interference.
Interest rates are the most important variable driving FX markets much of the time
and they tend to be a product of central bank policy. Both market‐based interest rates
(like bond yields) and the central bank rate are important for the currency. Interest
rates are mainly a product of market expectations for growth, inflation, and future
central bank action and vary by tenor or time frame.
While the central bank controls the front (short‐term part) of the interest rate curve via
its overnight rate, it generally has less and less control of rates as you go further out
from the curve. For example, 3‐month interest rates will be much more sensitive to the
central bank's target rate than 2‐year rates and 2‐year rates would be much more
sensitive than 10‐year rates. Currency traders should look at interest rates all along the
curve—from overnight rates right out to 30 years. There is no rule on which part of the
curve to look at when looking at interest rates.
Traders should look at the absolute level of rates (are rates high or low?) as well as the
direction of rates (are they rising or falling?) when betting on future FX moves. They
should also look at the shape of the yield curve (i.e., the relationship between short‐ and
long‐term interest rates) and levels of real rates (interest rates after inflation).

The most useful way to look at interest rates is to compare one country's rates to those
of another country. For example, if you are interested in USDCAD, you look at the
difference in yield between US 5‐year notes and Canadian 5‐year notes (you can also use
swap rates if you prefer). If Canada's rates are falling rapidly and US rates are rising
rapidly, one would expect USDCAD to go up (ceteris paribus). This is Economics 101
and the holy grail of most of those boring international finance textbooks. For trading
purposes, all you need to know is that as a rule, higher rates attract capital and lower
rates trigger outflows of capital. This rule works most of the time in developed markets
but less often in EM.
Another feature of interest rates that can drive FX is not just the level or direction of
rates but the shape of the yield curve. The yield curve is simply a chart showing interest
rates at different tenors. Figure 5.3 shows what two different yield curves might look
like.
Figure 5.3 Two theoretical yield curves, one positively sloped (gray) and the other
inverted (black).
The upward‐sloping line shows a normal yield curve where short‐term rates are low and
rates get higher as you move further out. A normal and steep yield curve is generally
bullish for a currency as it implies an accommodative central bank (low short‐term
rates) and a bullish longer‐term economic outlook (high long‐term rates).
In contrast, an inverted yield curve suggests that a central bank is holding short‐term
rates too high and that the future outlook for economic growth is uncertain. Inverted
yield curves tend to precede recession. Remember that when you look at interest rates,
it is always important to compare one country to another. Rising US rates are good for
the US dollar in theory, but if Canadian rates are rising even faster than US rates, one
might logically expect USDCAD to fall.
This table shows how currencies generally react to interest rates and gives you a sense of
what happens most of the time. But currency markets do not always behave as we
expect. If they did, trading would be easy.
Bullish for the currency Bearish for the currency
High rates
Low rates
Rising rates
Falling rates
Steep yield curve
Flat or inverted yield curve
Steepening yield curve
Flattening yield curve
Growth is usually a good thing for a country and for a currency. Higher growth
encourages investment and higher rates. High‐growth countries tend to attract capital

because they feature higher interest rates and strong stock markets. Outside investors
need to buy the currency to pay for their investments.
For example, if growth in Canada is strong, foreign investors will want to buy Canadian
equities and to do so they will need to buy Canadian dollars. If you think of a currency
as a country's stock, then growth drives the stock higher, just like it does for private
companies. Key metrics of growth include GDP, Industrial Production, Retail Sales, and
Housing statistics.
Inflation is more ambiguous and can be good or bad for a currency. The impact of
inflation on currencies is especially confusing when it comes to emerging markets. It is
important to understand the current inflation regime for the currency you are trading
because there is no simple relationship between FX and inflation. Some examples of
common currency versus inflation regimes are:
Rising inflation is good for a currency when the country's central bank is credible
and willing to raise rates in response to inflation. This applies to most G10
countries, most of the time. The same can be said of falling inflation—it is generally
bad for currencies in developed nations because it allows the country's central bank
to cut rates. Lower interest rates usually mean a lower currency.
Rising inflation can be bad for a country if the market perceives that the central
bank is behind the curve and will not respond fast enough with interest rate hikes.
This is because lower real rates (real rate = nominal interest rate minus inflation)
mean a loss of purchasing power and potential loss of value for the country's
currency. At the same time, falling inflation or deflation can be good for a currency
if the central bank of that country is perceived to be impotent or unwilling to act.
This was the case in Japan until the deflation/strong currency link was broken by
Abenomics in 2012.
So there is not always a clear and tradable relationship between inflation and currency
values. In order to understand how changes in inflation will affect a currency you are
trading, you first need to understand the central bank's reaction function. If inflation
falls, what will the central bank do? What if inflation skyrockets? Then you can start to
predict the impact of changes in inflation.
An example will help clarify. For many years after the bursting of the Japanese real
estate bubble in the late 1980s, Japan was mired in deflation. Investor perception was
that since interest rates were already zero, Japanese authorities were powerless to fight
this deflation and therefore the yen appreciated for many, many years. As Japan headed
from disinflation into outright deflation, the yen rallied more and more.
This all changed in 2012 when the Bank of Japan declared war on deflation and
promised to massively expand their balance sheet by printing yen to buy Japanese
stocks and bonds. Now, when Japan releases a low inflation number, this is considered
bearish JPY (bullish USDJPY) because the central bank's reaction function is well
known: More deflation = more printing of yen. By reestablishing central bank (and
government) credibility, the BOJ was able to break the deflationary spiral.
Emerging markets are a completely different beast when it comes to inflation. This is
because foreigners tend to buy and sell bonds in EM on a currency‐hedged basis. High
inflation in an emerging market can often lead to a situation where investors need to sell
the bonds and the currency of the country at the same time. Inflation is almost always
bad for bonds but the currency reaction in EM is difficult to predict because inflation
can trigger one of two reactions by investors:
1. Investors liquidate bond positions and sell the currency.
2. Investors are attracted to the currency by high and rising yields.

Trading emerging market inflation requires a strong knowledge of the country's central
bank and of investor positioning and preferences. When the market is heavily invested
in the long‐dated bonds of a country, higher interest rates can be a disaster for a
currency but if the market is not heavily invested, higher rates can attract capital to the
country and lead to buying of the currency. As a rule, I try to stay away from trading EM
currencies after inflation data releases because the moves are often confusing and
random.
Central bank currency preference. Does a central bank want its currency stronger
or weaker? If so, this is important because central banks can directly and indirectly
influence the value of their currency. They do this by raising or lowering interest rates
and via two other approaches: direct intervention and signaling.
Direct Intervention
On rare occasions, when circumstances are deemed to be extreme, central banks will
intervene directly in the FX market, buying or selling their own currency. The year 2011
provides a vivid example of this as the Swiss National Bank put a floor under EURCHF,
promising to sell “unlimited quantities” of Swiss francs (and buy unlimited EUR) to
ensure the pair would not fall below 1.2000. As you can see in Figure 5.4, this was a
dramatic turn of events in EURCHF.
Figure 5.4 Daily EURCHF April 2011 to January 2014.
Signaling
It is expensive and risky for central banks to intervene directly, so a more common
approach is for a CB to signal a desire for a stronger or weaker currency to the market
and hope the market does the work for them. This approach is sometimes called
signaling or moral suasion. It can work if the central bank is credible and the market

believes the central bank is willing to change monetary policy or intervene directly to
influence the currency if it moves further out of line.
An example of signaling is when the European Central Bank (ECB) noted its preference
for a lower EUR at monetary policy meetings in 2014. The market came to believe that if
the EUR did not go lower, the ECB would be more likely to announce a program of
quantitative easing (which is bearish EUR) and therefore speculators sold EUR, driving
it lower. Without changing monetary policy or selling euros directly in the market, the
ECB was able to push the euro lower.
Another example of successful moral suasion of this sort was when Bank of Canada
governor Stephen Poloz drove down the value of the Canadian dollar via comments in
2013. There are, on the other hand, many examples of central banks failing to persuade
the market, including the SNB's famous failure to stimulate a weaker Swiss franc when
EURCHF was trading around 1.5000 in 2009.
Central banks like the RBNZ have at times run into a “boy who cried wolf” situation as
they complain over and over that their currency is too strong but then fail to take action
when the currency keeps rising. When you judge whether a central bank's currency
preference matters, first ask whether the central bank is credible. Second, will it be
willing to take the necessary action if the market doesn't cooperate? Will they be willing
to change interest rates or directly intervene in FX markets? If not, the half‐life of the
central bank's comments will be short.
As a rule, you do not want to bet against a central bank when it clearly outlines a
preference for its currency. There are spectacular examples of speculators taking on
central banks and winning, but unless your last name is Soros, I strongly recommend
you be careful going against the wishes of a central bank.
Understand Intervention and Reserve Recycling
In order to maintain managed or pegged currency regimes, some central banks (most
notably China and the other Asian central banks) intervene in currency markets. This
intervention has a wide‐ranging impact on markets beyond the country's home
currency.
Global central banks hold massive reserves of dollars accumulated over recent decades.
Most of this accumulation took place since the late 1990s after the Asian Financial Crisis
taught global central banks (and especially Asian central banks) the lesson that large
foreign exchange reserves can serve as protection during a crisis.
China is the most extreme example of currency reserve accumulation but other
countries such as Brazil, Russia, Hong Kong, Singapore, and many others intervene in
currency markets. China FX Reserves increased from about $200 billion in 2001 to a
peak of almost exactly $4 trillion by 2014. Many other countries have increased their
reserves in spectacular fashion over the past 20 years.
FX reserves tend to be denominated mostly in USD because currency market
interventions are usually against the USD. For example, throughout most of the 2000s,
China bought USDCNY in the market to keep its currency (the CNY) weak. As USD
reserves ballooned, China needed to sell some USD and buy other other currencies
(especially the euro) in order to diversify, so that all of their reserves were not in dollars.
Instead of running 100% of their reserves in USD, central banks hold a portfolio of
currencies. Figure 5.5 shows the average breakdown of global reserves, by currency.

Figure 5.5 Global central bank reserve holdings, by currency.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_currency#/media/File:Global_Reserve_Currencies.png.
That is the background, but here's where it gets interesting: As central bank reserves
grow and shrink, the central banks need to buy and sell euros and other currencies in
order to keep a steady percentage of their reserves diversified.
To take a simple example: If China's reserves drop from $4T to $3T, that's a drop of
$1T. If 20% of their reserves are in euros, that means they now have $200B too many
euros (one trillion X 20%). So as their reserves shrink, they need to sell EURUSD (and
AUDUSD, GBPUSD, etc.) to rebalance. Many reserve managers rebalance quite actively,
so you will often see that when there is pressure on EM currencies, G10 currencies will
get hit in sympathy.
Whenever a large central bank intervenes in an EM currency, you should be mindful of
the potential contagion to G10 currencies. Strong USD versus EM will often lead to a
stronger USD versus G10 simply because of the mechanical nature of recycling flows.
Quite often, this effect is most visible in the commodity currencies because when EM is
weak, commodity currencies suffer under the double whammy of global growth fears
(which are usually a big driver of EM weakness) and recycling flows from reserve
managers.
Capital flows such as foreign direct investment, mergers and acquisitions (M&A), and
equity and bond flows can be important drivers of FX rates. A cross‐border transaction
can generate massive FX flows in many instances as the foreign company must pay for
the acquisition in the domestic company's currency.
While M&A has a short‐term, immediate impact on FX, portfolio flows can last months
or even years. When Mario Draghi convinced investors that the Eurozone was safe from
breakup in 2012 with his “Whatever It Takes” speech, investors spent the next two years
frantically accumulating Eurozone assets. This pushed up the euro for two years even as
Eurozone economies languished and European rates remained extremely low compared
to global peers.
Investment flows are not usually the biggest driver of FX markets but they can have a
meaningful influence for extended periods. We saw the same thing in the euro again
after Emmanuel Macron won the French presidency in 2017 and fears of a Eurozone
breakup receded.

The problem with using capital flows as an input when trying to forecast FX is that these
flows are fickle and hard to predict. While you will often see flows as an ex post
explanation for currency moves, it is less common to see FX forecasts predicated on
future capital flows.
Most of the time, FDI is not an important variable to consider for G10 FX traders but
there are times like during and after the Eurozone crisis when investor flows can
dominate moves in a currency. Capital flows are much more important in EMFX. Keep
an eye on sovereign credit ratings and foreign equity markets for potential shifts in
investor preference. While capital flows are rarely the number‐one FX driver, it is
important to keep them on your radar.
Trade balance and current account balance are important long‐run determinants
of currency rates but have little influence in the short run. It is often argued that these
balances are influenced by FX, not the other way around. Trade and current account
balances go in and out of vogue as FX drivers but it cannot be denied that a large
percentage of cross‐border FX flows are driven by global trade. Every time someone in
Japan buys a product from a US technology company, for example, there is a tiny
foreign exchange transaction happening as the US tech company receives yen and then
needs to sell the yen at some point to buy dollars to fund its operations in the United
States.
The sum of all the trillions of transactions taking place in the world leaves various
corporations with constant operational FX hedging needs and these needs are a
meaningful part of the FX mosaic. Furthermore, during times of rising global and US
interest rates, investors may become hyper‐focused on current account balances as they
are a useful indicator of potential financing pressure on a country.
Finally, fiscal policy is a variable that can be important at times and irrelevant at
others. It used to be a generally accepted principle that simultaneously loose fiscal and
loose monetary policy were the textbook recipe for a lower currency. Over time the
market has found the relationship between fiscal policy and FX to be much less reliable
than previously thought and so fiscal policy has become less important over time to the
point where people barely pay attention to it anymore. Sometimes loose fiscal policy can
be good for growth and good for a currency. Other times it can trigger worries about
credit quality (more sovereign debt, higher debt‐to‐GDP ratios, etc.) and debt
downgrades.
There is a high degree of interdependence among the fundamental drivers described
above; each fundamental can and often does influence the others. There can also be one
main variable driving all the others, so when you analyze the drivers of exchange rates,
it is always useful to pause and think about what variables are driving the bus and which
ones are just along for the ride.
Now that you understand how macro fundamental factors influence currency markets,
let's zoom in a bit and take a look at the role of US economic releases in currency
trading.
Understand US Economic Data Releases
Before you can trade the economic data, you need to understand it. In this section, I will
give you a detailed description of the most important US economic numbers and outline
specific attributes and features of the data that you need to know before you trade. Non‐
US economic data will be discussed in the next section while how to trade economic
data will be covered in Chapter 10, “Trading the News.”
Economic data come and go in terms of market relevance and so it is key to know what
matters right now. In this section, I will explain the economic data points one at a time.

Remember that I am a trader, not an economist, and this is the lens through which I
view the data.
The market tends to focus on three aspects of economic data: timeliness, relevance, and
reliability. When data ticks two or three of these boxes, the market (and economists)
care about it. US data are much more important to FX markets than data released by
other countries, but you also need to understand global economic data so I will cover
them separately.
Remember that the importance of various data points changes over time. If the market
is focused on a housing‐led recovery, for example, housing data gains prominence.
Usually car sales don't matter much but if there is huge concern about the health of the
US consumer, you might notice an uptick in interest around the auto sales numbers.
The most important thing to understand when it comes to trading economic data is that
the only thing the market cares about is how the number compares to expectations. It
doesn't matter if it's up, down, or sideways compared to last month or last year. Strong
or weak is defined by how the data varies from the median expectation of economists
and traders.
This is the concept of “what is priced in?” that I touched on earlier and discuss in detail
in Chapter 10. The idea is that the price of a currency before an economic release is an
equilibrium price containing all information to that point, including the median
expectation for the data release.2 Therefore, if the number comes out above or below
expectations, this is new information and the price of the currency should quickly move
to a new higher or lower equilibrium.
You need to get a feel for the size of the average miss so that you can appreciate whether
a given release is a major surprise or not. For example: Nonfarm payrolls are expected
at +110,000 and come out at +90,000. Is that a major surprise? The standard deviation
of (ACTUAL – EXPECTED) for nonfarm payrolls is about 75,000. So the answer is: No,
a 20,000 miss on nonfarm payrolls is not a major surprise. Look at a few years of past
releases to get an idea of what is a big miss in any specific economic number.
Note that economists tend to cluster around the mean and shy away from extreme
forecasts. This means that forecasts tend to be way more tightly clustered around the
mean than they should be and therefore there is plenty of room for large surprises on a
regular basis.
The number‐one reason economists do this is to avoid looking stupid. Say you are an
economist and you think the number will come in strong. There is little incentive for you
to put in an extremely high forecast. If you put a forecast way above everyone else and
the number comes in low, you look really bad. If you submit a forecast just a bit higher
than everyone, then no matter how strong the number is, you look smart! And if it's
weak, at least you weren't too far away from the crowd. This type of gaming is a way that
economists manage their career risk and is why you will notice over time that actual
economic data are much more volatile than clustered forecasts suggest they should be.
Let's look at the major economic releases one by one. I will limit my discussion of the
economics and econometrics behind the releases as much as possible and try to focus on
the information that is most relevant to you as a trader. You need to know the basic
underlying mechanics of the major releases so that you understand what is going on
immediately after the release and can properly react to nuances, revisions, or
idiosyncrasies.
Note that when there are multiple time periods for the same release at the same time
(month‐on‐month, year‐on‐year), the shorter time period is always the most important.
In other words, watch the month‐on‐month data, not the year‐on‐year, if both are
released at the same time.

Let's go through the important US data while keeping in mind that different data points
rise and fall in importance over time.
Indicator
Importance Released
Nonfarm Payrolls
⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆
First Friday of the month 
(with a few rare exceptions)
Definition: “Each month the BLS surveys about 145,000 businesses and
government agencies, representing approximately 557,000 individual worksites, in
order to provide detailed industry data on employment, hours, and earnings of
workers on nonfarm payrolls.3”
Nonfarm Payrolls has been the mother of all US economic releases for many years. It is
considered to be very timely, somewhat accurate, and it always has an extremely large
impact on FX markets. There are three numbers to watch on this release.
The main release is the headline figure, which shows the net number of jobs created.
The second number to watch is the Unemployment Rate. The third component of the
release that can be important is Average Hourly Earnings.
Here are some statistics about Nonfarm Payrolls and how the market reacts to the
release.
NONFARM PAYROLLS STATISTICS (2010 to 2018)
Average Miss: 72,200
1 Standard Deviation Miss: 83,600
Average USDJPY range in 5 minutes after number: 66 pips
Average S&P range in 5 minutes after number: 11 points
The chart in Figure 5.6 shows NFP misses from 2010 to 2018. This should help give you
a better idea of what is a big miss and what isn't.
Figure 5.6 US Nonfarm Payrolls (actual vs. expected, 2010–2018).
Data from Bloomberg (000s).

Be ready for the number. Read every preview you can get your hands on. Search the
web for “nonfarm payrolls preview” in the days leading up to the release and absorb
everything you can. It might get boring after a while as most previews are similar, but
you will start to get a good idea of which way economists are leaning and you will pick
up details around the idiosyncratic aspects of the month's release. You also need to have
your trading plan ready before the number comes out, but we will discuss that later.
Indicator
Importance
Released
Initial Claims
⋆⋆⋆
Every Thursday
Initial Claims is a measure of the number of jobless claims filed by individuals seeking
to receive state jobless benefits. The Initial Claims release is very important, as it is the
timeliest of all major indicators. The series is released weekly (Thursday at 8:30AM NY)
and tends to be reliable.
One important thing to remember with Initial Claims is that the release shows the
number of new applications for unemployment insurance—so a high number is bad, and
a low number is good. This can be confusing because most economic data are traded the
other way. To get a better understanding of why Initial Claims is considered so
important, take a look at Figure 5.7, which shows Initial Claims overlaid with the
Unemployment Rate:
Figure 5.7 Initial Claims (GRAY) vs. US Unemployment Rate (WHITE).
You can see that Initial Claims (the gray line) act as a very good leading indicator for the
Unemployment Rate (white line). So why do people still care about the unemployment
rate when claims already tell you where it's going? I have no idea! The market trades off
all sorts of backward‐looking and lagging indicators. My view is that often it is best to
know what markets care about and not worry too much about why.
So many times I have heard traders losing money yelling, “This makes no sense!” or “It's
old news!” as the market explodes or tanks on a lagging or seemingly random economic
release. I always try to focus more on what is happening and less on whether or not it
makes sense. This is a critical concept for you to internalize. Again, when it comes to
markets, focus on what is happening and don't worry so much about the why. Leave the
hindsight explanations to the talking heads on CNBC. The simple fact is that markets
don't always make sense.
Continuing Claims are released at the same time as Initial Claims. While Initial Claims
is the number of people filing for unemployment benefits for the first time, Continuing
Claims is the entire roster of all the individuals who are currently unemployed and
receiving benefits. This number is less volatile than Initial Claims and gets less focus
from traders.

Indicator Importance Released
Indicator Importance Released
GDP
⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆
Quarterly
GDP stands for Gross Domestic Product. It is important to know that there are three
releases for US GDP: Advance, Preliminary, and Final. GDP is an estimated figure; the
government cannot measure it precisely. The Advance release is least accurate (but most
timely) and is followed by the Preliminary and Final releases, which incorporate more
information and produce a more accurate report. The Advance report is by far the most
important release because it is (by definition) the timeliest but also because it tends to
deviate the most from economists' estimates and therefore creates the most volatility.
Remember that it's the difference from expectations that drives volatility, not the
number itself.
By the time the Final report comes along, not only is it somewhat out of date, but the
market has seen most of the inputs and therefore economists are able to more
accurately estimate the release. Note that the average miss for Advance GDP is 0.35%
while the average miss for the Final release drops to 0.10%. I trade Advance GDP as a
release of top importance and I barely pay attention when Final GDP is released. That's
how different they are.
Indicator Importance
Released
Core PCE
⋆⋆
Same time as GDP
The Core PCE price index is defined as personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices
excluding food and energy prices. The Core PCE price index measures the prices paid by
consumers for goods and services, revealing underlying inflation trends without the
volatility caused by movements in food and energy prices.4
Core PCE has traditionally been the Fed's preferred measure of inflation. The Fed has
an inflation target of 2% so when core PCE approaches or breaks 2%, it takes on added
importance. Inflation can also matter on the low side because low inflation can lead to
deflation, every central bank's greatest fear. Low or falling inflation was one of the main
justifications for the endless series of rate cuts and quantitative easing programs since
2009.
Indicator
Importance
Released
Consumer Confidence
⋆⋆⋆1/2
Monthly (mid‐month)
Definition: “The Conference Board Consumer Confidence Index (CCI) is a
barometer of the health of the U.S. economy from the perspective of the consumer.
The index is based on consumers' perceptions of current business and employment
conditions, as well as their expectations for six months hence regarding business
conditions, employment, and income. The Consumer Confidence Index and its
related series are among the earliest sets of economic indicators available each
month and are closely watched as leading indicators for the U.S. economy.5”
Consumer confidence is among the most important of the survey data. Higher consumer
confidence should lead to higher consumer spending (in theory) and consumer
spending represents about 70% of GDP.6 The market tends to buy stocks and USDJPY
on a strong Consumer Confidence number and sell when it is weak. Consumer
confidence and the stock market tend to move in sync.
Figure 5.8 shows an overlay of Consumer Confidence and the S&P 500 since January
2009.

Figure 5.8 Consumer Confidence (WHITE) vs. S&P 500 Index (GRAY), 2010–2018.
Indicator
Importance Released
ISM Manufacturing and Non‐
Manufacturing
⋆⋆⋆⋆
First business day of every
month
Definition: “The ISM Manufacturing Index is a diffusion index based on
information submitted by purchasing and supply executives across the United
States. The survey is sent out to respondents the first part of each month.
Respondents are asked to only report on information for the current month. ISM
receives survey responses throughout most of any given month, with the majority of
respondents generally waiting until late in the month to submit responses in order
to give the most accurate picture of current business activity. ISM then compiles the
report for release on the first business day of the following month.”7
The Non‐Manufacturing Index is similar but deals with the services side of the
economy. While services (aka non‐manufacturing) represent a much larger portion of
the US economy than manufacturing, the releases are of roughly equal importance in
the mind of the market.
The market focuses most on the headline ISM releases but there are also
subcomponents: New Orders, Production, Employment, Supplier Deliveries,
Inventories, Customers' Inventories, Prices, Order Backlog, Exports, and Imports. The
most‐watched subcomponents are New Orders, Prices, and Employment. New Orders
tends to be the most forward looking while the Employment component is an input into
most economists' NFP models because it correlates fairly well with job creation. The
ISM releases are of very high importance because they are extremely timely, relevant,
and reliable.

Indicator Importance
Released
Indicator Importance
Released
CPI
⋆⋆⋆
Monthly (mid‐month)
CPI (the Consumer Price Index) is a measure of the change in prices for the average
urban consumer. Many pundits expected a surge in inflation following the global QE
programs that began in 2008 but this forecast never came to pass as CPI was stable at
fairly low levels for most of the 10 years after QE started. When CPI is low and stable, it
is easy to forecast and surprises are few and far between. When CPI is volatile, the
release is harder to forecast and tends to move the market more.
During 2007–2008 and again in 2018, when prices were rising above 2%, the market
was so fixated on CPI that economists would analyze it to extra decimal places to give
greater clarity on the potential direction of inflation. Instead of 0.2% or 0.3%, the
market would zoom way in and talk about the unrounded number.
For example, a 0.3% release would be discussed as slightly weaker if the unrounded
figure was, say, 0.267%. This is a great example of how economic data can gain and lose
importance in a short period because for many years, like 2013, 2014, and 2015, the CPI
release was all but ignored by the market.
Indicator
Importance Released
University of Michigan Confidence
⋆⋆
Monthly
Definition: “The University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index Thomson
Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers is a consumer confidence
index published monthly by the University of Michigan and Thomson Reuters. The
index is normalized to have a value of 100 in December 1964. At least 500
telephone interviews are conducted each month of a continental United States
sample (Alaska and Hawaii are excluded). Fifty core questions are asked.”8
There is a preliminary and a final UMich number. This release can move the market at
times but it is not as widely followed as the Conference Board figure. The Conference
Board's release is more important and extremely highly correlated to the Michigan
number. The Michigan number also lost some credibility in the early 2010s as the media
caught onto the fact that the figure was sold to subscribers who could see it (and trade
off it) before it was released.
Indicator
Importance Released
Durable Goods Orders (MoM, ex‐transportation)
⋆⋆⋆
Monthly
Definition: “This report is compiled from results of the U.S. Census Bureau's
Manufacturers' Shipments, Inventories, and Orders (M3) survey. This survey
provides statistics on manufacturers' value of shipments, new orders (net of
cancellations), end‐of‐month order backlog (unfilled orders), end‐of‐month total
inventory (at current cost or market value), and inventories by stage of fabrication
(materials and supplies, work‐in‐process, and finished goods).”9
This is a tricky one. The number is very, very volatile. So volatile, in fact, that it looks
more like an EKG than an economic data series, as seen in Figure 5.9.

Figure 5.9 Monthly Durable Goods releases 1960–2014.
But random‐looking series or not, the market trades it, so we need to understand it. The
key aspect to understand about Durable Goods is that the headline number is influenced
to the extreme by one‐off or very large orders. An order for a bunch of Boeing aircraft,
for example, will distort the headline figure massively. You should ignore the headline
number and focus only on the month‐over‐month (MoM) change in Durable Goods ex‐
transportation. This number is still volatile but it tends to be the most important in
terms of gauging market direction.
Indicator
Importance Released
Building Permits 
Housing Starts 
Pending Home Sales 
New Home Sales 
NAHB Housing Index
⋆⋆ to ⋆⋆⋆⋆
Monthly
First off, you need to answer: Is housing a meaningful driver or headwind for the
economy right now? If not, housing numbers are ⋆ or ⋆⋆. If the answer is a resounding
“Yes!” then housing data can rise all the way up to ⋆⋆⋆⋆ importance level. You should
focus on month‐over‐month data in these series.
Building Permits and Housing Starts tend to be considered leading indicators because
they are the steps that must be taken before a new home can be built or sold. The
relationship is not perfect because some permits are subsequently put on hold,
reclassified, or abandoned. The temporal relationship between a permit being granted
and the completion of a project can vary according to many factors, including financing,
weather, and labor availability.
It is important to understand that many economists will disagree on what is a leading,
lagging, or coincident indicator at any given time. Even analyzing the same data, you
will see different economists reach different conclusions on what leads and what lags.
The most important thing is not the actual truth, but what the market perceives to be
the truth. If the market is hyper‐focused on building permits because traders and
economists currently believe it is leading, you should be hyper‐focused on building
permits, too.
Note that the NAHB Housing Index is different from the other data listed above because
it is a survey, not hard data. Here is a description of the NAHB Index: “The Housing
Market Index (HMI) is based on a monthly survey of NAHB members designed to take
the pulse of the single‐family housing market.” The survey asks respondents to rate
market conditions for the sale of new homes now and in the next 6 months as well as the
traffic of prospective buyers of new homes.

The index is a weighted average of separate diffusion indices for these three key single‐
family series. The first two series are rated on a scale of Good, Fair, and Poor and the
last is rated on a scale of High/Very High, Average, and Low/Very Low. A diffusion
index is calculated for each series by applying the formula “(Good‐Poor +100)/2” to the
present and future sales series and “(High/Very High – Low/Very Low + 100)/2” to the
traffic series. Each resulting index is then seasonally adjusted and weighted to produce
the HMI. Based on this calculation, the HMI can range between 0 and 100.”10
Indicator
Importance Released
Industrial Production
⋆⋆⋆
Monthly
Definition: “The Federal Reserve's monthly index of industrial production and the
related capacity indexes and capacity utilization rates cover manufacturing, mining,
and electric and gas utilities. The industrial sector, together with construction,
accounts for the bulk of the variation in national output over the course of the
business cycle. The industrial detail provided by these measures helps illuminate
structural developments in the economy.”11
I am surprised the market does not focus more on the Industrial Production (IP) data. It
is clean, timely, and relevant but the major gripe against the series is that it does not
cover services, which are a large and growing proportion of the US economy. IP is a low
three‐star or high two‐star release.
Indicator Importance Released
Retail Sales
⋆⋆⋆ ½
Monthly
Retail Sales are consistently a 3‐star or 4‐star release year after year. The release is
always considered a good measure of the robustness of consumer spending, consumer
confidence, and the overall health of the US economy.
Definition: “The U.S. Census Bureau conducts the Advance Monthly Retail Trade
and Food Services Survey (MARTS) to provide an early estimate of monthly sales
by kind of business for retail and food service firms located in the United States.
Each month, questionnaires are mailed to a probability sample of approximately
5,000 employer firms selected from the larger Monthly Retail Trade Survey
(MRTS). Firms responding to MARTS account for approximately 65% of the total
national sales estimate.”12
The most important data point to watch is the month‐on‐month figure, ex‐autos and
gas.
Indicator
Importance Released
Chicago PMI, Philly Fed, and Empire State
⋆⋆⋆
Monthly
These are regional business surveys similar to the ISM surveys released at the start of
each month. The numbers are sensitive to the main industries in the respective region
so while they are highly correlated to one another, there is still some meaningful
deviation in the figures.
It is crucial to note one strange feature of the Chicago PMI release: It is released to
subscribers at 9:42AM and then to the general public at 9:45AM. This creates an
unusual setup where half the market seems to think the number has been leaked as the
USD jumps or dumps at 9:42 and then the move is confirmed by the official release at
9:45AM. “The number is leaked!” Every month. By design. So be aware that whatever
moves you see in the market at 9:42AM on Chicago PMI day are not random.
This concludes the rundown of the major economic releases. It is vital to note, however,
that the market constantly evolves. A number that I have not even mentioned could

jump to prominence at any time. There was a time in my career when M2 was a closely
watched figure (released at 4:30PM!) and more recently we have seen TIC data and
other data releases enjoy their 15 seconds of fame.
Keep your finger on the pulse of the market by studying as much as you can before the
numbers come out. There is no excuse for saying, “Whoa! What just happened?” when a
number comes out and the market moves. That's a clown move. You should be ready for
every release and if you're not, find a pursuit you are more passionate about. In FX
trading, preparation, focus, and passion give you a huge edge.
Understand Global Economic Releases
Every country in the world publishes reports on economic growth and inflation along
with many, many other economic indicators. The importance of different economic
releases varies over time as the market focuses on different concerns and pressure
points.
Inflation data were especially important in countries such as Australia and Germany in
the period from 2010 to 2015, for example, as the central banks there cut interest rates
in an attempt to avoid disinflation. At other times, GDP or jobs data are more
important. The list of what economic data matters changes over time but there is a fairly
consistent group of indicators that usually matter.
Below, I provide a list of important global economic releases. The list is not exhaustive
but covers the important releases for each country and currency. As with US releases, it
is important to understand what is priced in (expected) before trading any of these
events. Also note that the directional impact and half‐life of global economic releases
tends to be smaller and shorter than the market reaction to US economic numbers.
Important numbers to watch are:
Europe
Germany ZEW Survey
Germany IFO Survey
Germany GDP
Germany Factory Orders
Germany IP
Germany Inflation (core CPI)
Germany Retail Sales
Euro Area PMI (Composite and Manufacturing)
Eurozone Inflation (core CPI)
United Kingdom
Retail Sales
CPI
GDP
Claimant Count Change (similar to US Initial Claims)
Manufacturing Production
Average Earnings
Manufacturing and Non‐Manufacturing PMI

Exports
Current Account Balance
Japan
Tankan Survey
Trade Balance
GDP
Machinery Orders
Industrial Production
CPI
Canada
Net Employment Change and Unemployment
CPI
Retail Sales
GDP
Ivey PMI
Building Permits
Manufacturing Shipments
Bank of Canada Business Outlook (Future Sales)
Australia
Net Employment Change
GDP
CPI (RBA Trimmed Mean)
Retail Sales
Trade Balance
New Zealand
Employment Change
Unemployment Rate
GDP
Retail Sales
CPI
Trade Balance
Norway
CPI
GDP
Retail Sales
PMI
Sweden
GDP

CPI
Industrial Production
Retail Sales
Manufacturing Confidence
Switzerland
CPI
GDP
KOF Leading Indicator
Manufacturing PMI
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key concepts:
Why fundamental analysis is important, even for short‐term traders
Long‐term FX valuation and why it has limited usefulness
Global currency drivers
Domestic currency drivers, especially monetary policy
Understand US and global economic releases
Now that you have a good understanding of fundamentals and how they influence
currency markets, it is time to move on to a completely different topic: technical
analysis.
Notes
  1 For a fascinating historical account of this period, see Adam Fergusson, When Money
Dies: The Nightmare of Deficit Spending, Devaluation, and Hyperinflation in
Weimar Germany (New York: PublicAffairs, 2010).
  2 It is easy to find the median expectation of economists (check Bloomberg, Reuters, or
the internet). Traders' expectations will normally be very close to those of
economists, although there can sometimes be differences. The number expected by
traders is called the “Whisper Number.”
  3 http://www.bls.gov/ces/.
  4 http://www.bea.gov/faq/index.cfm?faq_id=518.
  5 http://www.conference‐
board.org/pdf_free/press/TechnicalPDF_4134_1298367128.pdf.
  6 https://www.stlouisfed.org/publications/regional‐economist/january‐2012/dont‐
expect‐consumer‐spending‐to‐be‐the‐engine‐of‐economic‐growth‐it‐once‐was.
  7 http://www.ism.ws/ismreport/mfgrob.cfm.
  8
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/University_of_Michigan_Consumer_Sentiment_Index.
  9 http://www.census.gov/manufacturing/m3/adv/pdf/durgd.pdf.
10 http://www.nahb.org/generic.aspx?genericContentID=532.

11 http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g17/About.htm.
12 http://www.census.gov/retail/#marts.

CHAPTER 6 
Understand Technical Analysis I
Introduction
Technical analysis is the study of chart patterns in an attempt to forecast future price movements.
The theory is that in a natural system composed of many human beings, price patterns will repeat
and echo as humans tend to behave in similar and predictable ways over time. This psychological
regularity leads to a series of patterns that can be seen in real time and used as predictors of future
market moves.
There are literally hundreds of technical patterns, ranging from generic (support and resistance
levels) to very esoteric patterns like the “Abandoned Baby” or the “Three Buddha Bottom.” Anything
involving charts and pattern recognition usually falls under the heading of technical analysis.
Technical Analysis: Does It Work?
Before we spend a whole chapter on technical analysis, it is important to ask an essential question:
Does technical analysis work? There is a ton of research on technical analysis out there, but
unfortunately no conclusive evidence. There is some modest evidence of persistent trend and
tradable patterns in certain markets over time but it is unclear how much of this works in real time.
(It could just be hindsight and data snooping.) Trend‐following models in FX have performed poorly
since the 1990s and the evidence generally suggests that some patterns worked for some periods but
profitable technical patterns are arbitraged away over time.
One study of all the literature around technical analysis1 concluded the following:
Early studies indicated that technical trading strategies were profitable in foreign exchange
markets and futures markets, but not in stock markets before the 1980s. Modern studies
indicated that technical trading strategies consistently generated economic profits in a variety of
speculative markets at least until the early 1990s. Among a total of 92 modern studies, 58 studies
found positive results regarding technical trading strategies, while 24 studies obtained negative
results. Ten studies indicated mixed results. Despite the positive evidence on the profitability of
technical trading strategies, it appears that most empirical studies are subject to various problems
in their testing procedures, e.g., data snooping, ex post selection of trading rules or search
technologies, and difficulties in estimation of risk and transaction costs. Future research must
address these deficiencies in testing in order to provide conclusive evidence on the profitability of
technical trading strategies.
A study by three professors at MIT2 concluded:
By comparing the unconditional empirical distribution of daily stock returns to the conditional
distribution—conditioned on specific technical indicators such as head‐and‐shoulders or double‐
bottoms—we find that over the 31‐year sample period, several technical indicators do provide
incremental information and may have some practical value.
So there is some evidence that it works, but also plenty of studies showing it does not. Another
study3 came to this conclusion:
Over 5,000 popular technical trading rules are not consistently profitable in the 49 country
indices that comprise the Morgan Stanley Capital Index once data snooping bias is accounted for.
Each market has some rules that are profitable when considered in isolation but these profits are
not statistically significant after data snooping bias adjustment.
Some people think technical analysis is useless—a complete joke. Other traders think technical
analysis is the only tool you need to trade successfully. My philosophy on technical analysis is
somewhere in the middle.
I think technical analysis is a valuable tool but it does not work well as a standalone trade selection
or forecasting methodology. The more years I trade, the more strongly I believe that technical
analysis should be used as a tactical and risk‐management tool and not as a trade selection tool.
This comes from years of trading experience, from watching many people trade, and from reading
volumes of research on the topic.

While I am sure there are examples out there somewhere, in more than 20 years of trading on both
the buy side and the sell side, I have never worked with a purely technical trader who made
meaningful P&L. Every successful trader I have worked with over the years either trades macro or
uses a multifactor approach. And I have seen many traders who use only technical analysis fail
miserably. Think of the most successful traders of all time: Soros, Tudor‐Jones, Bacon,
Druckenmiller. They are macro or hybrid guys, not pure technicians. They supplement their analysis
with charts but their ideas come from all over the place.
Most technicians I've seen or worked with always think they are just one tweak away from perfecting
their model but can't ever quite produce the profits they just know their system should deliver. There
is an entire industry devoted to selling technical analysis tools and systems of questionable (or
negative) value. So healthy skepticism is warranted.
Do you really think it passes the commonsense sniff test that you can just look at a chart, see a
simple pattern, trade it, and consistently make money? Given the thousands of traders and billions
of lines of code you are competing with, probably not. There were systematic funds that profited
from simple technical analysis in the 1980s and 1990s, but those days are long gone. Systematic
funds now compete on a much more complex playing field and the profitability of simple trend
following and other technical systems has converged toward zero.
While it is hard to assess the forecasting value of technical analysis, there is another simple reason
that using technical analysis is inherently risky (assuming you are a human being). Humans are
designed to see patterns. It's how our biology works. It allows us to simplify and process a complex
world. It is called apophenia: the human tendency to perceive meaningful patterns within random
data.4 This image provides an example.
Just a simple socket, right? Face? What face?
If you are bullish some security, I can guarantee that if you look at a chart long enough, you will find
a pattern that confirms your bullish view. In other words, another problem with technical analysis is
that it is highly subject to confirmation bias. You see what you want to see. A friend of mine once
said, “Charts are like clouds. If you stare long enough, you will eventually see something
interesting!”
Furthermore, most of the empirical evidence from research shows that if you trade the popular
patterns like Head and Shoulders systematically, you do not make money. So I strongly believe that
technical analysis is best used for risk management and tactical considerations and not as a primary
trade selection tool.
While my belief is that the value of technical analysis as a forecasting tool is limited, I use technical
analysis every day. I come up with my trade ideas elsewhere and then go to the technicals to
determine optimal tactics such as entry level, stop loss, take profit, and position size.
Without technical analysis skills, you are too often entering trades at midrange with no clear concept
of where to get out. Techs give you clear‐cut risk management levels and allow you to maximize your
leverage and determine the point at which you will admit you are wrong. Note that my approach also
meshes with research that shows that portfolio managers who use technical analysis outperform
those who do not.5
So, to conclude: I strongly advise you to learn about technical analysis and use it as a tool—but
consider it a risk management and tactical tool, not a trade selection or forecasting tool. Never do a
trade just because a chart looks good or because something is on a big support or Fibonacci level.

The topic of technical analysis is very, very broad. I will explain how I use a few specific technical
formations in my trading but there are hundreds if not thousands of entire books on the topic. See a
list of my favorite technical analysis books in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this
chapter. Now let's get started with the basics.
The Need to Know of Technical Analysis
There are three main branches of technical analysis:
1. Traditional technical analysis. This includes trend, breakouts, cycles, retracements, momentum,
support, resistance, moving averages, overbought, and oversold.
2. Candlestick charting. This is a Japanese method of charting that is popular globally. It provides
a nice, clean, visual way of looking at price charts. While I only know the basics of candlestick
charting theory, I use candlestick charts because I like the way they look and the way they
transmit information clearly. Figure 6.1 shows the difference between a candlestick chart and a
regular Open‐High‐Low‐Close (OHLC) chart.

Figure 6.1 The same hourly EURUSD chart presented two ways: candlesticks above and OHLC
bar chart below.
The primary difference is simply that on a candlestick chart, up bars are white and down bars
are black. Some people use green and red for up and down but the idea is the same. Using
candlesticks gives you a better view of the price action and allows you to more clearly identify
pivotal days such as dojis (indecision days). I will discuss how I use candlesticks in the section
that follows.
3. Elliot Wave and cycle analysis. These are specialized, highly complex systems of analysis used
by a limited group of practitioners. They involve looking at the market as a series of waves or
cycles and applying specific rules to forecast future price changes. The main criticism of the
method is that it can be pseudoscientific and two practitioners will often come up with different
forecasts even though they start with the same methodology and the same chart. This makes the
method highly subject to confirmation bias.

In other words, if an Elliott Wave practitioner is biased toward a bullish view, he will most
certainly be able to find a bullish wave count for the chart of the security in question, and vice
versa. I personally have found the method far too subjective and complicated to have any
practical use, and while I am sure there are some out there, I personally don't know any
successful FX traders that actively use Elliott Wave. I subscribed to various Elliott Wave
services at various times in my career (including the most famous ones) and found their
analysis to be very convincing, highly intelligent, and totally useless.
Choosing Indicators
“Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler.”
—Albert Einstein
Occam's Razor states that among competing hypotheses, the one with the fewest assumptions
should be selected. Other, more complicated solutions may ultimately prove correct, but—in
the absence of certainty—the fewer assumptions that are made, the better.
—Wikipedia
When using technical analysis as a risk management and tactical tool, simpler is always better. First,
I will run you through some of the most useful basic indicators and then I will move on to my
favorite setups. Use what you like; ignore what you do not.
Basic Indicators
1. Support and resistance
The simplest and most useful concept in technical analysis is support and resistance. This is the idea
that price will tend to bounce off the same level more than once. There are four main explanations
for the existence of support and resistance:
a. Large limit orders create pockets of liquidity that can stop the market. Let's say a corporation
needs to buy one billion euros and decides to leave an order to buy them at 1.3335. You might
get something like you see in Figure 6.2. The 1.3335 level will act as support until the order is
filled.
Figure 6.2 Hourly EURUSD, broken support lets the downtrend resume, July–August 2014.

Each time the price of EURUSD sells off to 1.3335, all selling is absorbed by demand from the
large order as indicated by the up arrows. Then finally, once the order is filled, look what
happens at the down arrow—a break through the level and acceleration lower as there is now
no demand to satisfy new supply.
b. Self‐fulfilling prophecy. Another reason support and resistance exist is because many
traders use support and resistance to determine entry and stop loss levels. This somewhat
circular statement is known as the self‐fulfilling prophecy aspect of technical analysis. It works
because people think it will work.
If there is a very obvious support level (like 1.3335 in Figure 6.2) traders will tend to place their
bids ahead of this level and their stop loss orders below. So the more times a currency bounces
off a given level, the more interest that level will attract from buyers.
c. Option‐related. A third reason that support and resistance levels exist is that option strikes
and option barriers create certain hedging needs around specific levels. If there is a large option
in the market at a given level, there will often be large interest to buy or sell near there. This can
create support or resistance.
d. Round number bias. Human beings prefer round numbers to non‐round numbers—it's a
fact! Therefore, traders tend to leave orders at round numbers and tend to attach importance to
breaks of round numbers. This has been revealed time and again in myriad studies. This means
that highs and lows are more often made on round numbers than on non‐round numbers. For
example, 50 is more probable as a daily low than 49 or 51. I have studied the data and this is a
fact, not speculation.
The implication of round number bias is that if you are a buyer, you should leave your orders
just above the round numbers and if you are a seller, you should leave your orders just below
the round numbers. For example, an experienced trader will leave a limit buy order at 1.3001,
not 1.2999, with the knowledge that 1.3000 has a greater than random chance to hold given it
is a major round number. (See “Round Number Bias” in Chapter 9 for more on this
phenomenon.)
Using Support and Resistance in Your Trading
Say you are bullish EURUSD based on your assessment of fundamentals, positioning, and recent
news. Let me emphasize: You have your view already; you don't come up with your view using
technical analysis. Now you are ready to zoom in via the technicals.
While the concept of support and resistance is simple, it is also powerful. The first step when looking
for support and resistance is to simply scan the chart. I use 10‐minute, hourly, and daily charts and
look for major bottoms and tops. I look for bottoms, double bottoms, triple bottoms, and
occasionally more.
The more times a level or zone holds, the more likely the market is focused on it. Keep in mind when
using support and resistance that everyone else is looking at the same chart as you. To avoid trading
with the herd you need to think a bit outside of the box and leave your orders away from where the
herd leaves orders. Let's look at an example.
EURUSD has been falling for two weeks. I'm getting bullish because I think it's come too far too fast
and market expectations for next week's ECB meeting are too dovish. Meanwhile, crude oil and the
IBEX have rallied like mad the past few days and I think these are good lead indicators for EURUSD
direction right now. So I want to go long, but where? Figure 6.3 shows the hourly chart.

Figure 6.3 Hourly EURUSD, August 14 to 29, 2014.
The market (currently 1.3177) has tested and retested the 1.3150/60 level. It has bounced three or
four times now, so people should definitely be focused on the level at this point. Also note the lows
are just above the round number (1.3150), which could suggest a barrier is at 1.3150 and someone is
protecting that level (i.e., bidding for a chunk of euros so that 1.3150 doesn't trade). Or maybe a
patient buyer is on the bid there.
I decide that we are close enough to the support level and I will go long here. Clearly, I want my stop
somewhere below 1.3150, but where do I leave it? Knowing that many people will leave their stops
just below 1.3150, I will give it some room. 1.3129 is probably reasonable. (I take 1.3149—below the
round 1.3150 support—then add 20 pips of additional leeway to avoid a quick bang‐bang stop loss
run.) So I will go long here (1.3177) with a stop at 1.3129.
Now this is of course a simplistic thought process, but most of the time simple is good. Ideally, you
can incorporate other technical concepts to make your thinking more robust and complete.
Something to keep in mind is that if you initiate too far away from a support level, your position
needs to be smaller because you are risking more in terms of percent or pips before you hit your stop
loss. Therefore, the tighter you can fine‐tune your entry point and stop loss, the larger position you
can have and the greater the returns you can achieve if you make the correct call and do not get
stopped out.
There is always a tension between keeping a tight stop loss, which allows high leverage, and the risk
of getting prematurely stopped out by random noise. The tighter your stop, the more likely you are
to fall victim to “bad luck.” I put bad luck in quotes here because it is not bad luck if you get stopped
out on a random move. It means either your idea was wrong, you picked the wrong level for your
stop, or you put your stop too close to the market given current volatility.
This balance of trying to find the optimal stop loss distance (not too far and not too close) is
discussed further in Chapter 12. For now, just understand that your entry point is a major
determinant of how much leverage you have and how big a position you can trade. At the end of the
year, your returns will depend on this leverage.
2. Simple and exponential moving averages (plus crossovers)
A simple moving average (SMA) is the average price of a security over the past X number of periods.
As time passes, the older prices fall out of the average, to be replaced by newer prices. The shorter
the period used for the moving average, the more volatile it will be and the more closely it will track

the price of the security itself. The length of the SMA you use depends on your trading time horizon.
You can use moving averages on daily or intraday charts.
An exponential moving average (EMA) is similar to an SMA but it puts more weight on recent data
versus older data, so the EMA turns up and down faster. Figure 6.4 presents an hourly EURUSD
chart with five simple moving averages 20‐hour, 55‐hour, 100‐hour, 200‐hour, and 600‐
hour.
Figure 6.4 Hourly USDJPY, July 16 to September 4, 2014.
The most obvious feature you should notice right away is that the faster SMA tracks the price of spot
much more closely while the slow SMA barely reacts to recent moves. The challenge is to find the
SMA that approximately defines the trend without too much noise. Eyeballing this chart, the 200‐
hour SMA looks like a good approximation of the short‐term trend. I generally find the 200‐hour to
be the best moving average in most currency pairs.
There are many ways to use a moving average (MA) to help your trade entry and risk management.
Some of the most common are:
a. Use the moving average as support or resistance. As a general rule, you want to be long when
spot is above the MA and short when spot is below. If you are bullish EUR and looking for an
entry point, you buy as the market nears one of the fast‐moving averages and place your stop
loss below a slower one. The ideal bullish scenario is one where spot is above the moving
average, plus the slope of the moving average is positive (i.e., the moving average line slopes
upward).
My trading strategy is short‐term so I use 20‐period, 55‐period, 100‐period, and 200‐period
moving averages on 10‐minute and 1‐hour charts. I prefer the 55‐hour and 200‐hour moving
averages as fast and slow indicators for my trading but whether you use 55‐hour or 100‐hour or
200‐hour, the idea and results will be about the same.
You have probably read about backtesting to find optimal moving averages for each currency
but my belief and experience is that this is mostly data mining and the optimal length of a
moving average that worked in the past is not necessarily the one that will work in the future. It
is better to fit your moving averages to your trading time horizon than to obsess over which
particular moving average worked best in the past.
b. Use a crossover of two moving averages to trigger buy or sell signals and to define the trend.
When the 100‐hour crosses up through the 200‐hour, that indicates prices are starting an
uptrend. There are various nicknames for specific moving average setups, such as the bullish
Golden Cross (when the 50‐day crosses up through the 200‐day) and the bearish Death Cross

(when the 50‐day crosses below the 200‐day). A trader might focus on long positions only
when, say, the 20‐day MA is above the 55‐day and focus on short positions only when the 20‐
day is below the 55‐day. This type of thinking will always keep you on the right side of the trend
and that is the main point of using moving averages—to identify and stick with the trend.
c. Use the slope of a single moving average together with its location to enter newly forming
trends. This strategy waits for a specified moving average to turn up (or down) and then enters a
new trade when price returns to the moving average. Many people will do this with faster
moving averages like the 20‐day MA as a way to align themselves with the short‐term trend. So
when the 20‐day MA turns up, leave a buy order at the 20‐day MA.
d. Another strategy is to use closing prices with a moving average. When the close is above the MA,
go long. If the close is below the MA, exit longs and get short.
Ultimately, you don't want to use moving averages in isolation, you want to use these tactics to enter
and exit trades that you like for other reasons. If you love long EURUSD but you're flat and looking
for an entry point, put some moving averages onto a chart and get a sense of what defines the
current trend. Then plan your strategy.
There are many advantages to this approach versus a purely fundamental or behavioral approach.
The main advantage is that you will not be fighting the market all the time, so you will have less
chance of blowing up. If you are bearish EURUSD but you identify that it is in a full‐steam‐ahead
uptrend, you will wait for technical analysis to signal a turn in trend before getting on board. By
identifying the trend and using moving averages to fine‐tune your entry and exit timing, you will
achieve superior results and will avoid sailing against the wind all the time.
One important thing to know when using moving averages is that they give good signals in trending
markets and are worse than useless in rangebound markets. Moving average systems will get
chopped up when the price is going nowhere because each new trend signal will fail and the price
will reverse back into the range. If you are looking at a currency that you expect to trade in a range,
ignore the moving averages.
As I mentioned earlier: Keep it simple. Your indicators do not need to be mathematically optimized.
For example, if you notice that EURUSD tends to bounce off the 200‐hour when it's trending, you
can buy at the 200‐hour with a stop loss below major support. Or buy at the 100‐hour with a stop
one day's range below the 200‐hour. Those sorts of simple ideas work just fine, no supercomputer
required. Remember that technical analysis is just a fine‐tuning device. It's one more clue, not the
answer.
If you can find a setup where you have a moving average and major support around the same level,
this makes your levels much stronger. When multiple technical indicators come together near a
single level, it is known as convergence.
3. Measuring momentum, overbought and oversold
There are countless indicators used for measuring momentum, overbought and oversold conditions.
I find MACD, RSI, Parabolic SAR, and the Deviation to be most useful. I will discuss the first three
here and I cover the Deviation in Chapter 7.
Momentum indicators are similar to overbought/oversold indicators as they all generally try to
identify moments when price has extended too far, too fast in one direction and could be ready to
turn back around. They attempt to identify overshoots, in other words. If price is like a rubber band,
there is a point where it becomes overstretched and is primed to snap back. While often dangerous
to trade in isolation, these indicators can help you scale in and out of positions at better levels than a
purely naïve or random approach.
Take a look at Figure 6.5. It shows USDJPY in black on top with an RSI below that and MACD at the
bottom. First, notice that the ebb and flow of the RSI and the MACD are similar. They are based on
similar math using the same price series so it stands to reason that there would be a strong link
between the two analyses. This is why I prefer to only use one momentum indicator on my charts—it
is often redundant to use multiple momentum indicators.

Figure 6.5 Hourly USDJPY with RSI and MACD, June 29 to September 7, 2014.
Let's look at the RSI (in the middle). The textbook theory is that when you get below or above certain
thresholds (in this case the horizontal lines at 30 and 70), the currency pair is oversold or
overbought. Most traders wait for the RSI to go down into oversold territory and then rise back
above to get a buy signal, or the opposite for a sell signal.
The reason you wait to sell until the RSI turns back down (instead of just selling when the RSI
crosses up through 70) is that a currency can stay overbought for a long time. Often the most
dramatic part of a move comes while the currency is in an overbought state. The chart in Figure 6.5
sends a bearish signal for USDJPY because the RSI just broke above and then back below 70.
Another way you can play MACD or RSI is to look for divergence between the price and the indicator
in an attempt to determine when the trend is out of steam. For example, in the chart above, price
made a new high on the last run up but the MACD did not. This is called “negative divergence” and
could indicate that the trend is losing power. Looking at this chart, you therefore see two bearish
signals: bearish divergence on the MACD, and an RSI that falls back below 70 after breaking above.
Let's say it is Summer 2014 (the period depicted on the chart) and you are bearish USDJPY for four
different fundamental reasons, but you've been waiting patiently to sell because the currency pair is
in a raging uptrend. Suddenly, this looks like a juicy setup—it's time to get short.
Given the bearish momentum signals, you decide that if USDJPY breaks to new highs you are
probably wrong, so the trade here is to sell and leave a stop loss somewhere above the highs. What
you cannot see on this chart is that there is a major double top on the daily chart at 105.40/45. So,
the ideal trade is to sell here (104.88) with a stop at 105.66 (which allows 21 pips of leeway for noise
above the double top). The first target is the nearby support (103.50/60) and then the next target is
the lows around 102.00/20.
Another tool I like is called Parabolic SAR. The beauty of this system is its simplicity. Here is the
definition from Wikipedia:

In stock and securities market technical analysis, Parabolic SAR (Parabolic Stop and Reverse) is a
method devised by J. Welles Wilder, Jr., to find potential reversals in market price direction. It is
a trend‐following (lagging) indicator and may be used to set a trailing stop loss or determine entry
or exit points based on prices tending to stay within a parabolic curve during a strong trend.
Similar to option theory's concept of time decay, the concept draws on the idea that “time is the
enemy.” Thus, unless a security can continue to generate more profits over time, it should be
liquidated. The indicator generally works only in trending markets, and creates “whipsaws”
during ranging or, sideways phases. Therefore, Wilder recommends first establishing the
direction or change in direction of the trend through the use of Parabolic SAR, and then using a
different indicator such as the Average Directional Index to determine the strength of the trend.
A parabola below the price is generally bullish, while a parabola above is generally bearish.
The system places dots on the chart in response to the past movements of the price and so you can
clearly see if you are in a bull or bear trend. The way I use the Parabolic SAR is mostly as a visual
reminder of the current trend and whether I am in harmony with or fighting against the market.
Figure 6.6 shows what the Parabolic SAR looks like on that same USDJPY chart. (I've zoomed the
timeframe a bit so you can see the dots properly.)
Figure 6.6 Hourly USDJPY with Parabolic SAR, August 24 to September 4, 2014.
The system is nice and simple and that's why I love it. If the dot is above the price, you are in a
downtrend.
The other great aspect of parabolic SAR is that it gives you a very clear (and usually rather tight) stop
loss level. If you are short USDJPY here (104.85), you can stop out at 105.12 (the last black dot). And
you can see that when USDJPY trends, Parabolic SAR catches a good part of the move. When
USDJPY chops around, the signals are not useful.
Note that any trend‐following indicator (moving average, Parabolic SAR, MA crossover) will give you
approximately the same message, so don't clutter up your chart with too many similar indicators.
Pick one or two trend indicators that you like and one or two momentum indicators you like and
stop there.
Different traders will swear by different indicators but just be aware that the math underlying each
group of indicators is similar. Do an online search for “overbought oversold technical indicators” if
you want to learn more ways to find overshoots.
4. Candlestick charts

There is a substantial body of literature outlining various ways to analyze candlestick charts.
Countless books describe how to read and trade candlesticks and there is a ton of information online
for further research. Let me cover the most important aspects of candlestick charting.
First, the basics of candlestick construction. The difference between the open and the close is called
the body of the candlestick. That is the fat part that is black and white (some systems use green and
red in place of black and white). The tails outside the body are called the shadow of the candlestick
and represent the full range that traded outside of the OPEN/CLOSE range.
When the candle is green or white, it means the currency pair went up on the day and if it is red or
black the currency pair went down. So, to recap, the body is the open to close range, the color
defines if the currency pair rose or fell, and the shadows (sometimes called wicks, as in candle wicks)
are the intraday extension outside the open‐to‐close range. The standard up and down candles are
shown in Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7 Standard up and down candlesticks.
Any single candlestick does not have much meaning. Instead, candlestick disciples look at groups of
candles in attempt to identify known patterns. Specific candlestick formations have colorful names
like gravestone doji and hanging man and shooting star. I find candlestick formations especially
useful for identifying reversals. Following are the four candlestick formations I find most useful.
Dojis. A doji is a candle where the open is very similar to the close and therefore the body is tiny
and the wicks are long. A series of three consecutive dojis is illustrated in Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8 Three consecutive dojis on a candlestick chart.
Dojis are important candles because they show market indecision. When you see a doji it means the
market went down then up (or up then down) and closed unchanged. So the market tried to move
but came back to its opening level and closed near unchanged. It could not choose a direction. These
candles are especially important after a long trend. Take Figure 6.9, for example, which shows the
ultimate turning point at the lows of the S&P 500 Index (SPX) in early 2009.

Figure 6.9 Daily S&P 500 (with a doji on March 8, 2009), December 2008 to April 2009.
You can see the February 2009 downtrend was relentless. And then suddenly, on March 8 the SPX
made a doji—the only doji on the whole chart. That doji showed that the market had lost its selling
mojo. There was suddenly great indecision. The market tried to push lower that day and could not.
Then it tried to recover, but again could not. Then finally it closed flat on the day.
This doji was a powerful signal that the epic financial crisis downtrend in the stock market was out
of gas. Stocks never traded at those depressed levels again and quadrupled over the next 10 years.
There are specific types of doji (like the gravestone doji and the spinning top) but in general I think
the concept of any doji is similar. Indecision after a long trend should raise your alert level and
suggest a turn or trend change is possible.
Figure 6.10, a gravestone doji, shows a market that opens on the low, makes a big push higher,
then ends the day at the lows. Given the name, you can probably guess this formation is bearish.
Figure 6.10 Gravestone doji.
Similar to the doji, and even more powerful in my opinion, are the hammer candles. A hammer
indicates aggressive price action and reversal at an extreme and can often predict a trend reversal. I
am using a simplified definition of hammer here compared to what some candlestick experts might

say. When I say “hammer,” I mean anything that looks like a mallet or hammer—in other words, a
long wick with narrow body at the high or low. My four simplified hammer types are seen in Figure
6.11.
Figure 6.11 Hammer candle formations.
In the diagram, the two hammers on the left indicate that sellers dominated early in the session but
the buyers took over into the close. The two hammers on the right show that buyers were active early
but sellers took control into the close and prices closed near the low. The two on the left are bullish
hammers, while the two on the right are bearish. The size of the hammer head is not especially
important but longer wicks make for better hammers because they show larger reversals.
The most important and dramatic hammers hit right at major highs and lows, after a prolonged
trend. These hammers have specific names like shooting star but I just call them all hammers for the
sake of simplicity. Bear hammer at the highs is bearish. Bull hammer at the lows is bullish.
I especially like trading hammers on the daily chart because they can set up trades with very clear
risk/reward. Take a look at Figure 6.12. Let's say it is mid‐September and you are bullish USDCAD
but the currency pair has been in a downtrend for a while and you don't want to fight it. Then you
see that huge bull hammer on September 20. It has extra importance because that same candle is
also a major new daily low that could not hold.

Figure 6.12 Daily USDCAD with a bull hammer reversal, August to November 2013.
Note to self: Resist the urge to make “U Can't Touch This” or “2 Legit 2 Quit” jokes when discussing hammer formations. Readers
will not find them funny.
That is a great setup to get long USDCAD at the close with a stop below the low. Sure, you didn't
catch the exact bottom, but now you have a good trade where you know your exit point and you are
buying into a strong market, not a weak one. It took a while, but this USDCAD trade paid off well.
Hammers are especially powerful if your preferred style is to go against the trend. They stop you
from trying to top tick or bottom tick the market all the time. Instead, they put you in a position of
strength with very clear risk/reward parameters and show you when the uptrend buyers or
downtrend sellers are exhausted. Hammers are valid on charts of any time frame.
One more thing I look for when it comes to candlesticks is candles with long wicks. Long wicks
indicate uncertainty, and they are of extra interest when you see a few in the same area. This is more
common on hourly charts than on daily charts.
Figure 6.13 shows an hourly AUDUSD chart. Note how the rallies on September 4 and September 5
all finish with long wicks. This indicates a quick run higher that was rejected. You can see that after
four or five of these failed spikes higher, AUDUSD finally reversed and went lower. Long wicks show
that price attempted to enter a new equilibrium zone but was quickly slapped back by more powerful
or motivated agents. Finally, note that there is a long wick on that very last candle of the chart,
which may indicate that the downtrend is now running out of steam.

Figure 6.13 Hourly AUDUSD, August 29 to September 9, 2014.
5. Ichimoku
Ichimoku charts are a Japanese method of plotting price and time. They are most commonly used
when trading USDJPY and JPY crosses. The concept is similar to a moving average crossover but it
uses a cloud formation, which attempts to define the current and future trend. The Japanese word
ichimoku means “one look.” That is the beauty of the ichimoku: It gives you a clear view of the trend
with one look and provides firm entry and exit points. Figure 6.14 is USDJPY with a standard
ichimoku cloud.

Figure 6.14 Hourly USDJPY with ichimoku cloud, August 18 to September 18, 2014.
You can see at a glance that the cloud did an excellent job of defining this trend in USDJPY.
My usage of ichimoku is simple. If I'm bullish and USDJPY is above the cloud, I buy near the top of
the cloud and stop loss if USDJPY falls out the bottom of the cloud. You can do the opposite when
you are bearish.
On an hourly chart, the USDJPY cloud is usually 10 to 50 pips thick, so using ichimoku can give you
nice short‐term trades with tight and well‐defined risk/reward. There is a substantial body of
literature discussing ichimoku, so if you find the concept appealing, I encourage you to delve deeper.
6. Market Profile
There are many ways to process the torrent of financial data that rushes through the global pipes
every day. Bar and candlestick charts are the most popular presentation format for financial time
and price movements, but there are other equally valid ways of slicing and dicing the data. One
alternative method of charting that I find useful is called Market Profile (also known as Market
Picture). In this section, I will introduce the basics of Market Profile, discuss how I use it in my
trading, and provide some options for further reading.
Most of the charts on my trading cockpit are in candlestick format. Market Profile is my second‐
favorite way of looking at time and price data. There is a decent body of literature on Market Profile
so consider this section a “quick and dirty” on how I use Market Profile. If you find the topic
interesting, check out the suggestions for further reading at the end of the chapter.
The main benefit of Market Profile is that it gives you a quick and highly visual way of looking at
several days' worth of intraday price action. Figure 6.15 is the Market Profile for EURUSD from July
3 to July 10, 2013.

Figure 6.15 EURUSD Market Profile, July 3 to July 10, 2013.
You can access Market Profile in Bloomberg by typing EUR {CRNCY} MKTP {GO} on
Bloomberg. There is a similar option called “Volume at Price” in Reuters Eikon and you can find
Market Profile in most professional charting systems. If you don't have access to Market Profile on
your system, it is easy and useful to create the charts yourself.
Some people like to create the Market Profile manually as the day progresses using graph paper and
a pencil. It is a really good idea. Manual intraday charting gives you a great feel for how the day is
developing and gives you a more visceral connection to the price action. You will probably find it
gives you a stronger feel for your market. It also gives you a good idea of how the Market Profile is
built from the ground up. When I have the time, I build Market Profile charts manually throughout
the day. I find doing so helps keep me in the zone.
Each letter on the chart represents a block of time throughout the day (60‐minute blocks are used in
Figure 6.15). So if there are many letters in a row beside a price, it means that price traded many
times throughout the day. Each column of letters represents a day and the date is indicated on the x‐
axis below each column. Look at the column of letters above July 10, for example, and you can see
that 1.2770 (the small letter u) only traded during one 60‐minute period, whereas 1.2820 (where you
see “GIKMOQS”) traded in 7 separate hours of the day. The more letters there are, the more the
price traded during the day.
To build the chart manually, simply create a blank grid on graph paper with 10 pip intervals on the
y‐axis. Then put an A beside every price that trades in the first hour of trading, put a B next to every
price that trades in the second hour of trading, and so on. I suggest you try this for a few days and
see how it feels. If your time horizon is shorter, you can use 30‐minute or even 10‐minute intervals.
This can help with focus and concentration. When people read a suggestion like this in a book, nine
times out of ten they just keep reading and forget about it. Don't do that here. Build your own
Market Profile charts during the day! It is a fantastic exercise that will make you a better trader.
Market Profile gives you the ability to quickly identify equilibrium zones. These are the areas where
many letters form large clusters. The longer a row of letters, the more times a given price traded that
day. To repeat, areas with many letters show equilibrium zones where a lot of trading took place.
At levels where there are very few letters, on the other hand, the market traded only briefly before
more aggressive sellers or buyers came in and quickly pushed the price away. This is all you really
need to know to start using Market Picture. The key is to focus on the equilibrium and non‐
equilibrium zones.
The simplest trading strategy I use with Market Profile looks for what is called a single print, which
is a point on the market profile where there is only one letter because the price traded there but then
moved away before the start of the next time period. When you see a single print, you can clearly see

that the market rejected this price point aggressively and therefore this is a price point that you
should consider a key pivot.
Let's look at that same Market Profile chart again. On July 4 (07/04, as indicated on the x‐axis)
there is a series of single prints (all denoted by the letter Q) as EURUSD fell from 1.2990 to 1.2940.
This happened after a very dovish ECB statement.6 The most important thing to know is that price
gapped through this level and therefore anyone who wanted to sell in the 1.2940/1.2990 window was
unable to do so because the price did not remain there for long.
This means that rallies back toward that zone will likely be sold as players that missed selling on the
way down will try to sell when price gets back up there. I would never trade a Market Profile single
print (or any technical formation) by itself. Instead, I note the level as an important pivot and use it
to maximize leverage and/or determine my stop loss when I come up with a view and take a position
in this currency pair.
Let's say now it's July 5 and I am bearish EURUSD because I think yesterday's dovish ECB
statement will meaningfully change expectations for the currency going forward. We are trading at
1.2840 and I believe risk/reward in selling here is poor because we are too oversold. So I don't want
to get short here; I want to sell a rally.
The ideal trade is to wait for the price to get back toward the bottom of the gap down zone from July
4. You can see from the chart that today's high was around 1.2900/20. I would use other charting
techniques like moving averages to further zoom in on the optimal entry level but with the
information we have here it looks like 1.2900/40 is definitely the sell zone. This is an example of
technical convergence as major resistance (today's high 1.2900/20) and the edge of a single print
zone (1.2940) are nearly the same. So we want to get short ahead of those two levels. Ideally other
indicators also highlight the importance of the 1.2900/40 area and we are closer to a Five‐Star trade.
With the information we have here, the optimal trade is to sell EUR just ahead of 1.2900 with a stop
loss above the single prints. So in this case we leave a limit order to sell at 1.2898 and a stop loss at
1.2990. This is highly preferable to selling at 1.2840 because it allows us to take a bigger position
with much better expected value. You can see the next day the high was 1.2900/10, so we went short
and the price soon fell back to 1.2770 over the next day or two.
As mentioned earlier, trading is a game of inches. If you left your sell order at 1.2920 in this
example, you missed the move back down.
There are many, many other interesting ways of looking at Market Profile charts. My main objective
here was (a) to make you aware of the existence of Market Profile, and (b) to inform you of how I use
single prints as key pivots in my trading. As with everything in this book, I encourage you to
internalize what you find useful and discard what you don't. You need to develop your own style and
your own methods. I'm just here to open some doors. Explore Market Profile and come up with your
own ways to use it in your analysis.

FACTBOX
Point and Figure charting is another example of an alternative charting method, but its
popularity has waned in recent decades. The main benefit of Point and Figure charts is that
they are easy to construct manually. This was important before the computer age but now few
traders chart manually. I still have fond memories of manually charting my first stock purchase
on pieces of graph paper taped together and stuck on my wall at the age of 15. The chart was
about fifteen feet wide by the time I finished and it stretched across three walls of my bedroom.
Not exactly the type of activity that attracts high school girls, but it does show the early passion
I had for trading and financial markets! Incidentally, that first stock I owned was in a company
called Cinram, which manufactured blank audio cassettes and compact discs (CDs). It was a
great macro idea at the time (1980‐something) as CD sales were about to take off. The company
did well for many years but went bankrupt in 2012 as the market for physical CDs (and
cassettes!) dried up.
7. Fibonacci numbers
The Fibonacci numbers are the integers in the sequence 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, and so on, where
each number is the sum of the two previous numbers. Fibonacci numbers appear frequently in
nature—for example, in the relationship between the length of tree branches, in the shapes on the
outside of a pineapple or a pine cone, and in the growth and reproduction patterns of many animals,
flowers, and plants. Because Fibonacci numbers appear so frequently in nature and many consider
financial markets to behave much like a natural organism, there has been significant work done in
an attempt to find Fibonacci patterns in financial prices.
The popular Fibonacci (or fibo) ratios in finance are 23.6%, 38.2%, 50%, 61.8%, 76.4%, and 100%.
The numbers are used to estimate possible retracements. For example, if a stock falls from $100 to
$50, the 50% retracement would be $75 as that is the point where price recoups half its fall. The
61.8% retracement would be ($100 – $50)*0.618 + $50, which is $80.90. In other words, if the
stock falls from $100 to $50, the 61.8% retracement would be $80.90. Bearish traders who missed
the first sell‐off would look to sell around $80.90 with a stop above the $100 level.
I suggest a great deal of caution when using Fibonacci numbers because all too often you will find
that traders recognize them and talk about them after they hold, not before. The problem with fibos
is that there are simply way too many of them. Any given trader might use a different high/low and
so if someone says, “Wow, the 50% fibo held perfectly!” keep in mind Figure 6.16, which shows a
chart of EURUSD with all the major fibos marked. Obviously, some of them are going to hold! This
is why I rarely find fibos useful. There are simply too many of them.

Figure 6.16 Daily EURUSD with Fibonacci retracements marked, October 2008 to January 2015.
Rule #4 of FX trading: If you look hard enough, you can always a find a tech level to
justify a bad trade!
Rule #5 of FX trading: “It's a big level” is not a good enough reason to put on a trade.
Here is a simple real‐life example of how I use technicals to fine‐tune a trade idea. I am bullish euro
for various but I have no position yet. I am keen to pull the trigger but the currency is in no‐man's‐
land around 1.3100, so I am waiting for a better level to get in. A headline comes out:
“German Finance Minister Schaeuble says cannot exclude the possibility of Eurozone breakup”
On the surface, this is a bearish headline and the kneejerk reaction for anyone long euros is to sell
immediately. The price gaps lower and the client phone lines trill like crazy. Salespeople yell to the
euro trader: Sell! Sell! Sell!
The thing is, Schaeuble has said this exact quote before and so there is no new information here. The
kneejerk is for longs to cut their positions, but this headline is not really news7 so this is my chance
to buy euros. But where? And when? If I just stick in a bid arbitrarily, I might buy too early and the
price could continue to fall and fall…and fall. If I wait too long, the price will snap back to where it
started and then I missed a great opportunity to get long.
Fortunately, this morning I did my technical analysis and I see in my morning notes that the 100‐
hour MA, the 200‐hour MA, and a major support all come in around 1.3050/55. This is a nice tech
converge and so I know exactly where to look for a reversal. Remember, other traders also use
technicals to enter their positions (and this includes the central banks and the big hedge funds), so
big convergence zones can be great entry points as many players all come in to buy around the same
area. The more different technical indicators that identify the same level or zone, the better.
I put a bid on my machine at 1.3058 and enter my stop loss at 1.3019. The bid is just ahead of the
supports in case others are trying to buy in the same area. I put my stop loss far enough away that
there is a bit of leeway in case price modestly overshoots my levels. I try to get my stop loss entered
as quickly as possible after entering any position. Think of a stop loss as insurance against both
incorrect trade ideas and poor discipline. You are going to be wrong a lot so it is best to have your
risk management plan in place as quickly as possible after you enter a trade.
The stop loss order cements the plan and discourages bad behavior if the euro continues to sell off.
Otherwise, when the euro gets to 1.3019 and I'm supposed to cut my losses, the voices in my head
will start chirping. “Ooh, it looks bid down here; maybe 1.3009 would be a better stop.… Look at that

fibo at 1.3006. Maybe I should let it breathe a bit; there's another tech level just below. Maybe
1.2989 is a better stop.” And so on. As anyone on a diet or trying to quit smoking can attest, these
counterproductive voices can be hard to ignore.
Never worry about missing it. Of course, it is painful to get stopped out of a trade and then
watch it go your way afterwards, but it is much more important to stick to the plan and maintain
discipline than it is to catch any particular move. No matter how awesome or perfect a trade setup
appears to be, the undeniable fact is that there will be more just like it tomorrow and the next day
(and the next day). If you hit your level, stop out and reassess. You are going to sell at the lows
sometimes. That's okay. There will be more great trades, I promise.
Rule #6 of FX Trading: No mo' FOMO. Never worry about missing it. There will always
be another trade.
Accept that you will miss many trades either by failing to pull the trigger or by stopping out before
the expected move happens. You will miss layups. You will lip out the occasional two‐foot putt. You
will fire 15‐feet wide of an open net. Each year is built from hundreds of opportunities and the idea is
to have the correct process and discipline around each trade and then stay emotionally remote
regarding the outcome.
Most good traders are right 50% to 60% of the time. If you suffer emotionally every time you lose
money or get stopped out, you are going to be exhausted as you lose on 40% to 50% of your ideas.
Being wrong is a part of the business. The time to get upset and angry with yourself is when you fail
to follow your plan or when you show bad discipline—not when you watch a great idea crash and
burn. Focus on process, not outcomes.
Now that I am long euros and my stop loss is in, I need to formulate the other side of the plan: the
take profit. Again, I use technicals. As discussed in Chapter 10, “Trading the News,” the first key
pivot after news comes out is the level where spot was trading when the news hit. In this case,
1.3100. Anyone who sold on the Schaeuble headline is by definition short at 1.3100 or lower. If
EURUSD goes above 1.3100, shorts are going to feel the pain and start to cover.
On the other hand, anyone who is long and was too slow to hit a bid (or God forbid, was in the
bathroom when the headline came out) is thinking they dodged a bullet if we rally back up to 1.3100.
Those traders will be happy to sell just ahead of that level. So as the price approaches the original
pre‐headline level, there is likely to be strong selling that, once exhausted, will be followed by equally
heavy buying as shorts stop out on the level breach. If I am extremely bullish, I might add to my long
above 1.3100, but for now I am just thinking about my take profit.
I never set my take profit based on how much I have at risk. To say, “I am risking 30 pips so my take
profit should be 60 pips” is not the correct approach. The take profit should be based on the market,
not an arbitrary ratio. The correct question is not “How much am I risking?” it is “How high do I
realistically think euro can go?”
Again, I go to the charts and see the overnight high and yesterday's high, both around 1.3120. This is
a logical place to take some profit as the multiple tops at the same level probably indicate the
presence of a large seller. I enter my take profit OCO to my stop and now I can relax a little.
Once you have a trade on, the voices in your head will become impatient very quickly. “It's not
bouncing very fast! Man, it looks heavy! It shouldn't be taking this long!”
Ignore them. Your ability to interpret price action is dramatically impaired once you are in a
position. Your ability to remain impartial is so compromised that once you have a trade on you are
almost always better to stick to your original parameters and ignore the price action. Otherwise, you
are bound to do something reactionary or stupid.
I believe to some degree in the power of reading the tape (analyzing price action), but I have an
equally strong belief that you cannot properly analyze the price action of a currency when you have a
trade on. Use tape reading to get into trades but not to get out. If the trade is making you nervous,
stop white‐knuckling it and go refill your water bottle or do some pushups. The market can be
painfully slow when you are in a hurry. In other words, the market doesn't care about your trades or
your impatient thoughts. It will go where it wants to go when it is ready. Be patient.
Identify the Regime
Zooming out a bit now, you also need to make an assessment of whether the currency pair you are
going to trade is in a range or trend regime. This will help you avoid fighting the primary trend all

the time and will allow you to forecast better. Identifying the current regime is usually as simple as
looking at a chart. Are we in a trend or a range? How long has that trend or range been in force?
But to determine whether or not the current regime will remain in force (trend or range) you need to
then overlay your fundamental view. In a trending market, ask yourself: Does the fundamental
reasoning for the trend still make sense? In a range trading market ask: Is the uncertainty that has
been causing the market to trade in a range about to be resolved? Is a major fundamental catalyst
about to break us out of a range? Has the catalyst already happened and the range is about to break?
Your understanding of the fundamentals helps you determine whether the current range or trend
regime is likely to expire soon or continue. Here is how rangebound markets differ from trending
markets and what you can do to capitalize on each.
1. Rangebound markets are the most difficult to trade. They are characterized (as you might
guess) by prices moving within a defined range. Back and forth, back and forth. Bulls and bears
both get more and more frustrated as the big move never materializes. Good news pushes the
market to the top of the range and everyone gets long for a break that does not come. Bad news
drives the price to the bottom of the range but there is not enough momentum to break.
Lather, rinse, repeat.
USDJPY in 2014 is a great example of this. All sorts of downside catalysts appeared (lower US
yields, Russia invading Crimea) and yet USDJPY could never break the 101.00 area. And
whenever good news came out (several strong US economic data prints, for example) USDJPY
would pop to around 103/104 and then fail. Figure 6.17 shows the chart.
Figure 6.17 Daily USDJPY, January 2014 to August 2014.
Yuck. Note that this rangebound market lasted from January to July, an incredibly long time to
be sitting in such a small range. The pain for both the bulls and bears was just about
unbearable. Anyone who bought options during this period lost money and anyone who tried
to play the breakouts or trade the news was badly hurt. The difficult thing about range markets
is that the range is not always perfectly defined, plus you don't really know it's a range until
quite a bit of time and rangebound price action has already transpired. So quite often by the
time you realize it's a range, the range is ready to break!
The strategy in rangebound markets is to buy near the bottom of the range and sell near the top
of the range. Um, pretty easy, right? But if it was that easy, successful trading wouldn't pay so
well. One reason range trading is difficult is that rangebound regimes are characterized by
many false breaks. Another is that usually the bottom of the range touches when bad news

comes out and the top of the range touches when good news comes out. So the range extremes
are very difficult to fade because you need to take the opposite side of what can sometimes look
like important news.
Positioning tends to matter more during rangebound markets because longer‐term players
back away and short‐term speculators and weak hands are left to fight it out. This is in contrast
to trending markets where large and persistent corporate, central bank, real money, and
investor flows tend to dominate and so positioning is not as important.
2. Trending markets are easier to trade, provided you believe in the reasoning behind the trend
and you do not get on board too late. The really big profits in FX come from trending markets.
Most traders simply survive or scratch away a bit of profit during rangebound markets and
make the real money as trends unfold.
Note that when I say “trending markets” it does not have to mean a megatrend like the
USDJPY rally in 2012. I just mean a market that moves in one direction over the time period
you trade. So, if EURUSD drops from 1.1500 to 1.1300 in three days and there are no huge
pullbacks, that is a trending market to me. Or if USDJPY opens the day at 112.25 and rallies
straight to 113.20 by 4PM, that's a trending market, too. The definition of trendiness depends
on your time horizon.
There are two main ways to make money during trends:
a. Trade pullbacks. This is my preferred way to trade FX trends. Identify the trend and then
simply pick a moving average and trade the trend as it pulls back to the moving average.
Figure 6.18 shows a simple chart of this strategy playing out in USDCAD during the major
uptrend of 2014/2015. I show a daily trend here, but like I said earlier, trends are present
on each fractal level of temporal zoom.
Figure 6.18 USDCAD with the 100‐day MA and the 200‐day MA, June 2014 to April 2015.
The two lines represent the 40‐day moving average (the upper line) and the 100‐day
moving average (the lower line). Note how one line crossed up and through the other
line at the start of the trend and then every pullback in USDCAD held the 40‐day MA. This
is classic trending behavior as a moving average crossover signals a new trend and then a
moving average defines that trend for months. The strategy, then, is to identify the trend
as early as possible, and enter on a pullback to the moving average. A new trend is signaled
by two moving averages when they cross. If the faster MA crosses up through the slower
one, that signals a new uptrend. When fast crosses below slow, that signals the start of a
downtrend.

It will not always be the 40‐day moving average that defines the trend. Fit the moving
average to the trend just as you would fit the angle of a trendline to the trend. Then put
your stop loss below the slower moving average. This strategy has the substantial benefit
of trailing your stop loss as the trend moves in your favor.
The USDCAD example given here is an excellent example of how you can trade a trend
because even if you missed the first part of the rally, there were many pullbacks to the 40‐
day MA, which allowed speculators who didn't buy the moving average crossover at 1.0900
to buy the touch of the 40‐day at 1.1100 and 1.1200.
b. Trade breakouts and continuation patterns. There are several ways to do this. First, you can
look for the textbook continuation and breakout patterns like flags, pennants, and triangles
and play those breaks. There are many examples of these but the strategy is always simple.
This is good. When it comes to techs, I favor simplicity.
Identify one of the patterns listed below and trade the breakout with a stop loss of
approximately: (average daily range X 1.5). The advantage of trading breakouts and
continuation patterns is that you are with the directional momentum of the market. The
disadvantage can be that you are most often buying high or selling low, in contrast to the
pullbacks strategy, which allows you to buy low or sell high on reactions against the main
trend. Note that while the cliché is “buy low/sell high,” many successful traders prefer to
buy high and sell higher. Here are some trend‐following (continuation) patterns I look for:
i. Flag patterns are formed when there is a rapid price movement in one direction, then a
sideways consolidation. A bull flag is a sharp rally followed by a tight range. The
inverse is called a bear flag. Flags can be seen on charts of any time horizon. Note that
all well‐known technical patterns are likely to be seen on charts of any time frame
because technical analysis is fractal.
Figure 6.19 shows a nice example of a bull flag. Flag strategy is simple: Buy a break of
the top of the flag. The take profit target is the flagpole length added to levels that
define the bottom and top of the flag.
Figure 6.19 Daily CADJPY, a successful bull flag breakout, May to June 2014.
Let's look at an example in Figure 6.19. Note that the sharp move up in CADJPY
creates a flagpole (the steep vertical line). Then you see a long and frustrating
consolidation, which creates the flag (horizontal lines). There are many intraday
forays outside the flag but each day we close back inside the range until finally there is
a break and then CADJPY explodes higher.

To calculate the target for the move in this example, take the length of the flagpole
(140 pips) and add it to the bottom and top of the flag (93.60 and 94.00) so you get a
target range for the topside breakout of 95.00/95.40. This take profit objective was
touched within 10 trading days.
To trade this pattern:
1. Buy on a daily close above the flag.
2. Leave a stop loss below the bottom of the flag.
Nice and easy.
ii. Pennants are similar to flags but are triangular instead of rectangular. Pennants are
common and can lead to great trend trades. The massive USDJPY rally that started in
2012 stalled before continuing after a huge pennant formation, as you can see in Figure
6.20.
Figure 6.20 Daily USDJPY, a pennant and trend continuation, July 2012 to
September 2015.
iii. Triangles are similar to pennants except they have no flag‐pole. This simply means that
price action coming into the formation of the triangle was more gradual and thus
wasn't sharp enough to create a flagpole. So triangles look more like Figure 6.21.

Figure 6.21 Hourly EURUSD, a triangle and trend continuation, December 2013 to
March 2014.
You can see from the examples above that flags, pennants, and triangles can lead to extremely clean
and profitable breakouts that are almost painless. When you believe a currency is in a strong trend,
look for these patterns and jump on board when they break. Note again that two of the charts above
are daily and one is hourly. Techs are fractal.
Note these two features of solid trends: (1) they hold important support (uptrends) or resistance
(downtrends), and (2) when they break out, uptrends hold above (and downtrends hold below) the
break level.
After the US election in 2016, USDJPY embarked on a fierce trend upward from a low of 101.19 on
election night to levels above 118.00. Throughout that trend, the pair held support every time it
should have and held topside breakout levels once broken. When observing a trend market, always
take note of how it trades around the big levels. The better it behaves, the more you can believe in
the trend.
Check out Figure 6.22, which shows two weeks of price action in USDJPY a little after the 2016
election. There is a double top at 111.36 on Monday, November 21, and Tuesday, November 22,
followed by a big explosion higher on Wednesday. The low a few days later (the up arrow at the
right) was 111.355—an incredibly perfect retest and hold—typical of a strong uptrend. The message
here was that the trend was strong because important support held. The trend was in force and
traders continued to buy USDJPY dips until further notice. USDJPY soon tested a major target at
116 and then blew through that to hit 118.50.

Figure 6.22 Hourly USDJPY, November 15 to November 28, 2016.
CRITICAL CONCEPT: Following Trends
You only do these trend‐following trades if you believe in the trend for reasons other than what
you see on the chart. The trade should make sense to you beforehand, for as many reasons as
possible (macro, positioning, cross‐asset analysis, etc.), and then you use the technical analysis
to formulate your execution strategy. Don't just follow a trend because the chart looks nice. The
trade has to make sense, too.
Reversal Patterns
When trading trends, you need to be on alert for reversal patterns because they can signal a turn
before the fundamentals do. Also, if you are bearish a currency pair but it is trending higher, you can
use reversal patterns to avoid fighting the trend too early. Wait for a technical reversal pattern and
then jump in. This way you have the fundamentals and the technicals on your side before you enter.
My favorite reversal patterns are double and triple tops, which are somewhat self‐explanatory and
simple to trade. Sometimes it will seem like the market hits a brick wall at a particular level and just
cannot get through. Once, twice, maybe even three or four times. This can be indicative of a large
resting order from a participant who is patient and has big size to move. Each time the same level
prints as the high or low, more people notice it, so by the time you get a triple or quadruple top, the
level takes on importance simply because everyone is watching it.
You can use double and triple tops as an excuse to reduce a profitable position and you can also use
them as breakout levels to jump on an existing trend. When the double or triple top breaks, expect a
new round of demand from stop loss buyers and longs adding to their positions. Everything I say
about tops works in reverse for bottoms, of course.
Figure 6.23 shows a textbook triple top at 1.6280 in GBPUSD in 2012. Note that while the triple top
is at 1.6280 on a daily closing basis, there were many intraday stabs through the level, as you can see
by long wicks on the daily candles. The spike to 1.6380 at the end of 2012 was particularly aggressive

but again you can see that the key 1.6280 level held all three times on a daily closing basis and
signaled heavy distribution (selling) of GBP.
Figure 6.23 Daily GBPUSD triple top, February 2012 to February 2013.
The final break higher and failure to hold above 1.6280 is particularly notable because it is a
textbook Slingshot Reversal formation. The Slingshot Reversal is discussed at the beginning of
Chapter 7.
This concludes our look at the basic indicators and patterns I use to trade foreign exchange markets.
Now let's move on to the Seven Deadly Setups.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key concepts:
What is technical analysis? Does it work?
Types of technical analysis
Useful indicators like support, resistance, moving averages, and momentum
The difference between rangebound and trending markets
Continuation and reversal patterns
Further Reading
CME Group. “A Six‐Part Study Guide to Market Profile.” http://www.r‐
5.org/files/books/trading/charts/market‐profile/CBOT‐Market_Profile‐EN.pdf. This
comprehensive and free PDF goes extremely in‐depth into trading with Market Profile. But be
careful when you print: it's 346 pages!
Dalton, James, Eric Jones, and Robert Dalton. Mind Over Markets: Power Trading with Market
Generated Information. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
Murphy, John J. Technical Analysis of the Futures Markets: A Comprehensive Guide to Trading
Methods and Applications. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Press, 1986. This bible of
technical analysis is an absolute must read.

Neely, Christopher J., and Paul A. Weller. “Technical Analysis in the Foreign Exchange Market.”
http://research.stlouisfed.org/wp/2011/2011‐001.pdf.
Nisson, Steve. Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques.
http://www.dlinvt.com/pdf/01ucb/ultimatecandlestickbible.pdf.
Park, Cheol‐Ho, and Scott H. Irwin. “The Profitability of Technical Analysis: A Review.”
http://www.farmdoc.illinois.edu/marketing/agmas/reports/04_04/AgMAS04_04.pdf.
Steidlmeyer, J. Peter. Steidlmeyer on Markets: Trading with Market Profile. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2002.
Notes
  1 http://chesler.us/resources/academia/AgMAS04_04.pdf.
  2 http://web.mit.edu/people/wangj/pap/LoMamayskyWang00.pdf.
  3 https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1181367.
  4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apophenia.
  5
https://www.cfainstitute.org/learning/products/publications/contributed/Pages/head_and_shou
  6 DRAGHI: “RATES WILL REMAIN AT PRESENT OR LOWER LEVELS FOR EXTENDED
PERIOD,” Bloomberg.
  7 As discussed, this is a key factor in evaluating and trading headlines. Is this important new
information? Should it affect the price?

CHAPTER 7 
Understand Technical Analysis II (The
Seven Deadly Setups)
Introduction
It is important to research, study, and understand as many trading
approaches as possible and then adopt and incorporate the ones
that work for you. When it comes to technical analysis, there are
seven setups that I find particularly useful. This chapter discusses
each setup, provides real‐life examples, and explains how and why
the setups work.
It is not necessarily that these setups are better than others from a
probabilistic point of view; it is just that (1) I recognize them
easily, (2) I believe in the underlying logic of why they work, and
(3) they fit my trading style. I tend to prefer mean reversion
strategies (selling high/buying low) more than breakout and trend
strategies but both types are represented in the list. The Seven
Deadly Setups are:
1. Slingshot Reversal
2. Shooting stars and hammers
3. Extreme deviation from a moving average, aka the Deviation
4. Volume spike at a price extreme
5. Broken triangles
6. Double and triple top
7. Sunday Gaps
1. Slingshot Reversal
One of my favorite patterns to trade is the false break and reverse,
or what I call the Slingshot Reversal pattern. In this section, I will
define a Slingshot Reversal, explain why it works, and present an
example from the USDJPY market.

A Slingshot Reversal occurs when an important support or
resistance level breaks temporarily but then fails to hold. In other
words, the market takes out an important support or resistance
but then fails to follow through, runs out of momentum, and
reverses back into the old range. The key to a Slingshot Reversal is
that it must happen around a level of very high importance.
High importance means that many people are watching the level
and orders are likely to be clustered around it. When you prepare
in the morning, do you notice that everyone is talking about a
particular support or resistance level? Keep that level in mind for a
potential Slingshot Reversal.
The Slingshot Reversal pattern is effective because when an
important support level breaks, it triggers capitulation by longs
and encourages shorts to add. It also brings in breakout sellers
like models and trend followers and sellers from other time frames
who feel they have missed out and must capitulate at lower levels.
If price then reverses and recaptures the broken support, the
market is suddenly caught offside. Selling is exhausted, stop loss
orders are filled, the market is max short, and suddenly there is
potential for a very aggressive short squeeze and high‐energy
upside continuation. Let's look at an example.
From April to early November 2017, USDJPY traded in a
108.00/114.50 range despite raging optimism in US equities on
the back of US corporate tax reform. The market expected a
topside breakout in USDJPY and the pair rallied up close to 114.50
in the first week of November.
USDJPY shorts and range traders left stop loss orders above
114.50 while longs were ready to add aggressively on the break and
corporate and real money hedgers with a natural need to buy
USDJPY looked on nervously. On November 7, the pair rallied up
and spiked aggressively through 114.50, touching a high of 114.73
before quickly reversing back below 114.50. Figure 7.1 presents the
chart.

Figure 7.1 Daily USDJPY with a Slingshot Reversal marked,
March 2017 to April 2018.
It looks like a blip on the daily chart but that day massive volumes
transacted above 114.50. Shorts stopped out, longs added, and
those that needed to buy USDJPY bought. But by the end of the
day, the buying was exhausted and the market closed well below
114.50.
You can see that after closing back below the important 114.50
support, USDJPY never looked back and fell back to the old range
bottom (and then through it) within a few months. The pattern
was an excellent reversal indicator.
Trading the Slingshot Reversal is simple:
1. Identify a crucial level that everyone is watching. It is key that
the level is one that many observers have singled out. The
more people are talking about a level, the better it works as a
Slingshot Reversal candidate. I will use a resistance level to
discuss the strategy here but for supports you simply flip
everything around.

2. Wait for the resistance level to break. Once it does, put a stop
entry order 10 basis points (10 basis points is 0.10%) below
the key level. In this case you wait for 114.50 to break, then
insert a stop entry to get short if USDJPY trades at 114.39.1
3. Once your stop sell order is triggered, place a new stop loss on
your short position 10 basis points above the new high. This is
your exit point where you will cut your losses because if
USDJPY makes a new high, the Slingshot Reversal is
invalidated and the idea is wrong. In this case, take 114.73
(the high) and add 10 pips of leeway so the stop loss on the
short position is 114.83.
4. Find a reasonable take profit. 1.5X or 2X average daily range
is often a reasonable target on a trade like this. In this case,
there is a double bottom around 111.50/70 so I put my take
profit at 111.76 (just above the double bottom). Whatever
reasonable take profit you chose in this example, it triggered
within a few weeks.
Note again that the example above uses a resistance level but you
simply reverse everything if the key level broken on the slingshot
is a support.
In this example, the USDJPY market was badly caught out by false
break of 114.50 in November 2017. The Slingshot Reversal is a
common and logical pattern that can be explained by psychology
and positioning. The pattern also tends to allow for a tight stop
(and therefore significant leverage). Watch for Slingshot Reversals
and trade them aggressively.
2. Shooting Stars and Hammers
I touched on shooting stars and hammers in the previous chapter
but let me explain why they are so useful. If your bias is bullish but
the market is in a downtrend, the risk is that you fight the market
and keep buying against the trend all the way down. You can
always find another technical level to justify a bad trade
(especially if you use Fibonacci levels)!
Instead of picking level after level to buy into a raging downtrend,
you are better off waiting for a clear reversal pattern like a
shooting star or hammer. These reversal patterns are like the

market ringing a bell to tell you it is time to get in. They provide a
tradable low to stop loss against and so you can clearly define your
risk.
Here is an example. It is early May 2014. I have been bullish USD
for the past few weeks because I think the market is misreading
the Fed and US rates look set to rise sooner than the market
thinks. But the chart looks like what you see in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2 Daily Dollar Index, August 2013 to May 2014.
Yuck. Despite the big bottom at 79.00 in October 2013, there is no
strong reason to pick a bottom on a chart like this. “There's a
major support nearby!” is not a strong thesis. So I wait. Then a few
days later the chart looks like Figure 7.3.

Figure 7.3 Daily Dollar Index with a hammer bottom, August
2013 to May 2014).
Yum. Now you have: (1) a Slingshot Reversal through the October
2013 lows, and (2) a huge bull hammer bottom. This is a nice
setup with a clear tradable bottom now in place. I know that if we
break to a new low (<78.90), the idea is wrong. If we hold, it looks
like we could rally back all the way to the top of the range around
81.20.
Following the hammer bottom, I have a good reason to expect a
reversal and so I go long at the close (79.35) with a stop loss at
78.75 (below the low). Figure 7.4 shows what happened next (the
chart shows a continuation of the price action from the previous
chart):

Figure 7.4 Daily Dollar Index with a hammer bottom, September
2013 to October 2014.
Kaboom. The dollar exploded higher and never looked back.
Hammers and shooting stars don't always work this well but the
point here is that they give you a strong reversal signal and a clear
exit point so you can size your position with a decent amount of
leverage and know exactly where you're wrong. Look for hammers
and shooting stars when you have a strong countertrend view.
Again, be patient.
3. Extreme Deviation from a Moving
Average (AKA the Deviation)
There are many ways of measuring whether a currency is
overbought or oversold. When you look at overbought and
oversold, make sure you use a metric that is consistent with your
trading time horizon. For example, if you are a short‐term trader,
it is not useful to look for overbought and oversold signals on a
weekly chart.
To match my time horizon, I look at a simple but effective
overbought and oversold measure: How far away is spot from the

100‐hour moving average? I call this “deviation from the 100‐
hour” or just the Deviation and use it as a nice back‐of‐the‐
envelope overshoot warning system.
When trading overbought and oversold you must understand that
you are, by definition, going against a strong trend. Things that
are overbought can get more overbought. Things that are oversold
can get more oversold. So no matter how crazy the move is so far,
things can always get crazier.
As a matter of fact, if things rip way outside of the normal range
you are used to for overbought and oversold, the first thing you
should ask yourself before reflexively wanting to go the other way
is: Why? Sometimes there is a clear reason for the extreme
trending behavior and that reason is perfectly valid and should not
be ignored. You generally want to fade overbought and oversold
markets when there is no strong fundamental reason for the move.
Let's look at an example of this using the Deviation as a tool:
USDCAD is a currency pair known for mean reversion. Therefore,
it is well‐suited to strategies that hunt for conditions of
overbought and oversold. When trading USDCAD, I constantly
monitor how far it is trading from the 100‐hour MA. Take a look at
Figure 7.5.

Figure 7.5 Hourly USDCAD with 100‐hour MA and deviation
from the 100‐hour moving average, July 31, 2014 to October 30,
2014.
The black bars show USDCAD hourly, the line on the main chart is
the 100‐hour MA, and the line underneath the main chart shows
the difference between the two. The farther spot moves away from
the 100‐hour, the more stretched it is, like a rubber band. The
elastic is eventually more likely to snap back than it is to keep
stretching.
You can see in this example that the line below the chart oscillates
roughly between –100 pips and +100 pips. The extreme points
will depend on overall volatility but I have generally found over
the years that anything more than 1% away from the 100‐hour
means USDCAD is overdone. So with USDCAD at 1.10 that means
110 pips. You can see in the chart that USDCAD generally runs out
of steam whenever the deviation touches 100/110 pips on either
side.
As with any technical indicator, I will never use the deviation on
its own to initiate a trade. However, if I am already looking to get
into a short USDCAD trade, I will be on high alert for moments
when spot gets more than 100 pips above the 100‐hour MA, or I

will leave a resting order 100 pips above the 100‐hour when I'm
out of the office.2
The chart shows a great example where USDCAD spiked to 1.1400
and took the deviation up to 140 pips before crashing back down
to 1.1220 just a few hours later. Understand that when you trade
the deviation, you are going against the prevailing short‐term
trend and so you need to be careful and disciplined. I usually set
my position when the deviation touches 1% and then put my stop
loss another 0.7% away to give it plenty of extra room to further
overshoot.
While my experience is that the deviation tends to close as spot
reverts to the mean, there are also instances where the deviation
closes as spot goes nowhere and the moving average catches up
over time. This relieves the overbought or oversold condition
without generating a profitable trade. Note that the deviation is
also a good indicator for take profits on winning trades. If you are
long USDCAD and it rallies more than 100 points away from the
100‐hour MA, sell some out and buy it back lower.
The deviation from a moving average can be useful on any time
frame. A chart that shows how far spot is trading from the 100‐day
or 200‐day moving average, for example, would give a useful
reading of bigger picture overbought or oversold conditions. Just
make sure you know your time horizon.
4. Volume Spike at a Price Extreme
Not many traders use volume when analyzing FX markets. This is
because most FX trading takes place in the interbank or over‐the‐
counter (OTC) market where volume data are not always readily
available. FX volume data can be found, however, using futures
markets or other sources. While I have always traded in the
interbank market, I find futures volumes are an acceptable proxy
for overall volume. This is because actual volume is not important;
what matters is relative volume.
Some questions I ask when looking at volume: Are volumes high
today? Is volume in the latest hour much higher than usual? How
does volume in the past 10 minutes compare with volume in other
10‐minute periods? Are we seeing a big price move on extreme
volume?

There is a large body of theory about how volume and price
interact in financial markets and I encourage you to study it and
come up with your own strategies on how to combine price and
volume in FX. This is a potential source of edge for you because
most FX practitioners barely factor in volume.
My favorite volume plus price setup is when you get a large
volume spike at a price extreme. This is indicative of capitulation
as the market transacts high volumes in a short span. Many
positions are transferred very quickly, usually moving risk from
weak hands to strong hands.
The next chart is an excellent example. On October 15, 2014, the
market was hit by some bad news about Ebola and a weak US
Retail Sales report. The market was wearing a large structural
short position in fixed income (i.e., the market was short bonds,
positioned for higher rates) and there was a massive unwind in the
fixed income markets. USDJPY tends to be correlated with US
interest rates so when US yields started collapsing,3 USDJPY
started to fall.
As the fall gained momentum, volume started to pick up and the
move climaxed with a complete crapout on massive volume. You
can see the low in price (black bars) coincides with the volume
spike (bars below). As volume fell off, USDJPY regained its footing
and slowly rallied back.
The way I trade these volume spikes is to stay out of the way until
the dust settles. Figure 7.6 shows 30‐minute USDJPY bars in
black and volume as bars below. When I see a huge volume spike
like the one in this chart, I wait until I see two or three bars (60 to
90 minutes) of falling volume. After, say, 90 minutes, you can see
that things are settling down so you go long with a stop below the
lows.

Figure 7.6 30‐minute USDJPY candle chart with volume bars
below (in gray), September 29, 2014 to October 28, 2014.
In this case you go long at 105.70 with a stop at 105.14 looking for
a rally back toward the top of the waterfall move (107.40). As I
have stated and restated, I would never buy USDJPY just because
there was a volume/price spike—I always want to have other
reasons for the trade besides a lone technical signal. That said, the
volume/price spike is one of the most powerful signals out there
and can lead to some spectacular trades.
5. Broken Triangles
Triangles tend to attract attention because they are visually
compelling, easy to spot, and logical to trade. The idea is that price
consolidations with higher lows and lower highs create triangles
on the charts and these triangles, when broken, show the way for
either a continuation of the trend or a reversal. Figure 7.7 is a
standard triangle formation and breakout.

Figure 7.7 Daily USDJPY with triangle consolidation, January
2013 to January 2014.
Notice how USDJPY consolidated from April 2013 to October
2013, making higher lows and lower highs until it finally broke
through the top of the triangle and made a run for 100.00. This is
a textbook triangle consolidation and breakout.
The broken triangle setup that I like to trade can be equally
powerful. It is essentially the second derivative of the triangle
breakout and kicks in when a triangle breaks in one direction,
then fails and turns back through the triangle the other way. All
those people who were patiently waiting for the triangle to break
are finally sucked in and they need to stop out when the pattern
fails.
The concept is similar to the Slingshot Reversal in that you have a
clear pattern and breakout that fails, and then rapid momentum
in the other direction. See Figure 7.8 for a nice triangle breakout
to the downside in AUDUSD.

Figure 7.8 Daily AUDUSD with triangle breakout, November
2010 to March 2011.
But Figure 7.9 is what happened next (the chart is zoomed out so
you can see more data).

Figure 7.9 Daily AUDUSD with failed triangle reversal,
December 2010 to May 2011.
Oops! That is a textbook triangle break followed by a very
impulsive reversal.
If I am bullish AUDUSD and I see this triangle setting up, I will
play the breakout to the topside based on the standard triangle
breakout concept. But in the case of this chart, the bottom of the
triangle breaks, not the top. I am bullish, so there is no trade at
first.
Then, when AUDUSD rallies back up inside the triangle (in other
words, when it closes above the bottom of the triangle), I go long. I
place my stop loss outside the bottom of the triangle. This setup is
rare but extremely powerful so I'm always on the lookout for
broken triangles on hourly and daily charts. You can see that once
AUDUSD reentered the triangle, it rallied way, way higher.
6. Double and Triple Top
This is such a simple set up—simple but effective. You are bearish
USDCAD because the pair has just rallied relentlessly, you think
oil is going higher for various fundamental reasons, and you think

the Bank of Canada is worried about currency weakness. USDCAD
has just rallied to the topside 100‐hour deviation and the chart
looks like Figure 7.10.
Figure 7.10 Hourly USDCAD, December 11 to December 21,
2015.
The pair is bumping against a major round number resistance
(1.4000) and has failed three or four times now. It is a triple or
quadruple top. You also remember that USDCAD has rarely
sustained moves above 1.4000 in the past (other than around the
internet/tech bubble), as you can see in Figure 7.11.

Figure 7.11 Daily USDCAD with dotcom bubble marked 1971 to
2014; USDCAD has trouble staying above 1.40 (other than during
the tech bubble).
So the beauty of this setup is that you can sell with leverage
because you are only risking a little. You simply sell near the
double or triple top with a stop above. Here I would sell at the
multiple tops (1.3980) and put a stop loss on the other side (at
1.4017).
My stop is far enough away to withstand a minor breach of 1.4000
but not much more. By trading such a tight entry/stop loss, I can
take a big position. That is the best thing about trading near
simple support and resistance levels—you can leverage your
position aggressively because you are not risking much in
percentage terms. In this example, if you catch the turn, you will
find yourself with the opportunity to make 100 or 150 pips on a
trade where you were only risking 37 pips.
7. Sunday Gaps

The Sunday Gap pattern is one of the most reliable patterns in
foreign exchange but also one of the most difficult to trade. The
pattern arises when there is major news out over the weekend and
the market reopens at a new level on Sunday. There are dozens of
examples in the past 20 years, including the weekend Saddam
Hussein was captured (bullish USD), the weekend Greece voted
against the IMF bailout (bearish EUR), and the weekend Recep
Erdogan declared that financial markets were at war with Turkey
(bearish TRY).
The stunning feature of Sunday Gaps is that they almost always
fully reverse within 48 hours. In 2012 I did a study of 20 different
Sunday Gaps and found 85% of them reverse to the prior Friday
close within two days. This happens because the market gets
overextended and out of balance as it attempts to find a new
equilibrium in a thin market where there are only buyers or sellers
(depending on the news) and nobody to take the other side. This
huge opening order imbalance makes the market move much
more than it would have otherwise and this overextension then
corrects substantially as liquidity returns to normal in the Asia
session.
Example 1: Greek Referendum 2015
In July 2015, Greek voters went to the polls to vote on whether to
accept bailout conditions imposed by the European Commission,
IMF, and ECB. The vote was a resounding no (61% to 39%) and
this was viewed as a negative outcome for the European Union
and EUR. Figure 7.12 shows what EURUSD did on the Sunday
open.

Figure 7.12 Tick chart of EURUSD the Friday before and Sunday
after the Greek referendum in 2015, July 3 to 6, 2015.
This is a classic Sunday Gap. The market closed at 1.1084 on
Friday and then gapped much lower to open at 1.0980 on Sunday
(see the gray area in the middle of the chart). EURUSD probed the
downside one more time (1.0970 is the low) and then rallied all
the way back to the Friday close of 1.1084; this happened even
though the news was unambiguously bad. Let's look at another
more recent example. Note that I could fill 25 pages with examples
like these—it's a common and powerful pattern.
Example 2: Turkish Lira Crisis 2018
In August 2018, investors were on edge about Turkey's massive
current account and corporate financing deficits. The story
escalated as President Erdogan refused to allow the central bank

to raise interest rates. Friday, the market expected things to get
better as President Erdogan was scheduled to speak on Saturday
and he would almost certainly make positive remarks to soothe
nervous markets.
Instead, Erdogan made a fiery anti‐US speech and said that
Turkey would not back down from this “Economic War.” Investors
watched with bated breath as markets opened on Sunday and
Figure 7.13 shows what happened.
Figure 7.13 Tick chart of USDTRY around the August 10, 2018
weekend gap.
USD/TRY closed at 6.40 on Friday and then opened more than
10% higher at 7.10 on Sunday afternoon (see white vertical
section). Over the next 12 hours, the market proceeded to fill the

gap and trade all the way back to 6.40. Once again, even with
terrible news (bullish USDTRY news), the Sunday Gap reversed
completely.
These gaps are extremely difficult to trade because in order to fade
the gap you need to take the opposite side of what looks like very
important news. The strategy is simple: Take the other side of the
gap in the opening hour of trading in a position size that makes
you feel comfortable. Put a stop loss one average daily range away.
Cover (take profit) when the gap is 90% filled.
Precisely because it is so incredibly scary and difficult to trade, the
Sunday Gap is one of the most profitable setups in currency
trading. Watch for it and take advantage if you dare! This is a
double black diamond setup and not for the faint of heart.
Combo Setups
A combo setup is a trade setup where you get a bunch of technical
indicators all saying the same thing at the same time. A Slingshot
Reversal that occurs on extremely high volume at the 100‐hour
deviation, for example, would be a nice triple play. The more
setups that happen simultaneously, the better. This is also true of
standard technical and macro analysis. The more good reasons
you have to put on a trade, the more likely that trade will make
money.
A standard support level on its own would usually have nearly zero
meaning to me but if that support level happens to be the year's
low and it also coincides with a major trendline and major round
number, then I might start to get interested. If I start watching
that level and then we get a Slingshot Reversal through the level
on record volume, then that is a technical Five‐Star. If I am bullish
for three different macro reasons, it's time to get aggressively
involved.
As you develop your own style of analysis and list of favorite
setups, look for moments when you get all sorts of signals at once,
ideally not just technical setups like the ones described above, but
fundamental, behavioral, positioning, news, and other signals, too.
Like I said, the more reasons you can list for a trade, the better the
idea. This is a really important concept and with experience you
will feel these moments where many reasons come in line at once.

These are the moments you summon maximum courage and make
the biggest bet possible within your risk management framework.
As you gain experience, you will start to get a good feel for how
many indicators need to be in sync or how many planets need to
be in line before a trade becomes high conviction. Hunt for Five‐
Stars and when you find one, bet big.
The opposite of a Five‐Star trade is one where you have a bunch of
indicators that all look bullish but then when you dig deeper, you
find a bunch of stuff that is bearish, too. Do not ignore the bearish
stuff just because your initial analysis was bullish! I call these
crosswinds trades because some of the winds are blowing one way
(bullish) and some are blowing the other way (bearish). This is a
recipe for confusion—avoid crosswinds.
That completes our discussion of the Seven Deadly Setups. As you
gain experience, keep track of the setups that work for you and
look for moments when all your favorite indicators are in sync.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key
concepts:
Slingshot Reversals
Shooting stars and hammers
The Deviation
Volume spike at a price extreme
Broken triangles
Double and triple tops
Sunday Gaps
Combo setups
Notes
  1 10 basis points is 0.1%. So 114.50 X 0.999 = 114.39.
  2 The 100‐hour moves, obviously, so you need to recalibrate your
order at times to keep it accurate. I don't change it every hour.
That is not necessary because the MA does not move all that
fast—once or twice a day is fine.

  3 Some interest rate moves exceeded 10 standard deviations that
day!

CHAPTER 8 
Understand Correlation and Intermarket
Relationships
Introduction
Now that you have some basic technical analysis tactics and strategies, let's
look at a more complex topic: correlation between currencies and other
asset classes. I believe that my understanding and application of
intermarket correlations is one of the primary keys to my success over the
past 20 years.1
You need many tools to trade FX effectively, but a strong understanding of
the links between different markets has kept me ahead of the curve over the
years. That said, the world has evolved significantly since I started trading
and there is much less edge in correlation trading than there used to be. I
remember sitting on the trading floor at Lehman Brothers in 2005–2006
and more than half the FX traders didn't even have a live feed for gold,
copper, or oil. My co‐workers would ask me, “What's oil doing?” or
“Where's gold?” which seemed completely ludicrous to me (because it was
ludicrous!). How could people trade FX without knowing where other
markets are trading?
This all changed in 2007–2008. Correlations between FX and other asset
classes jumped toward 1.0 and FX traders suddenly understood how
important it was to watch other markets. Now there are armies of
algorithms that trade FX correlation in real time. There is a phalanx of
hedge funds analyzing fair value of currencies using complex quantitative
cross‐market analysis models. There are fintech startups that will tell you
what is driving currencies right now according to their multivariate
Granger causality or AI regression or machine learning models. Even with
infinitely more competition, though, intermarket correlation is still a great
source of understanding and edge for discretionary human FX traders.
Understand Correlation
Correlation is a statistical relationship showing the interdependence of two
variables. It is used extensively in trading as a way to explain and forecast
price movements. I use correlation to look at current movements in one
asset price and guess what another price might do in the future, using a
historical or theoretical relationship or correlation between the two. This
type of trading is called intermarket, lead/lag, cross‐market, or cross‐asset
analysis.

But whenever you see or read about a correlation in financial markets, you
need to ask yourself:
1. Does the correlation make any econometric/logical sense? This is the
most important question of all. I don't care if the r2 is 99.9%;2 if the
relationship has no underlying logic, either forget about it or search for
a reasonable explanation. Otherwise, it is likely a spurious correlation.
Spurious correlation is when people infer a cause–effect relationship
between two variables when there is no logical or actual connection
between them.
2. Is the correlation likely to continue into the future? Correlations are
inherently unstable. You need to make a logical assessment of whether
or not a given correlation will continue into the future. This comes
mostly from experience. Correlations like interest rates versus
currencies have existed pretty much forever and will tend to be reliable
most of the time, whereas the correlation between, say, natural gas and
CAD might work at times and be completely useless most others.
3. Are there periods of both rising and falling prices in the sample? It is
more likely a correlation is spurious if it is simply two prices going
straight up or straight down. You can easily find a bunch of price
charts that have been rallying steadily for a given time period and then
overlay them to imply some relationship. If prices go up and down
together, it's more likely that you haven't simply found two smooth
trends that happened at the same time by coincidence.
4. What third variables might be influencing the movement in your two
variables? You will hear over and over that correlation does not imply
causation. That is certainly true—but it definitely provides a clue!3
Correlation gives you an idea that you might be looking under the
right rocks, at least. Very often, while two financial variables might
not be causing each other's variability, they are both influenced by a
third variable.
A famous correlation of this type is the finding that as ice cream sales
increase in the United States, so do human drowning deaths. Does
eating too much ice cream make you more likely to drown? No. This
relationship exists because both ice cream sales and drowning go up
in warmer weather and go down in cold weather. A third variable
(temperature) is influencing both. But even though this correlation is
spurious, it is not useless because it is stable and persistent. If you
knew nothing about the temperature outside but you knew ice cream
sales recently started going up, you could logically infer that drowning
deaths are probably going to go up soon, too.
It is not that important whether or not the causality between two variables
is real, direct, or determinable. The existence of the correlation is enough,
as long as it persists. For example, there is a strong correlation between US

and Canadian interest rates, driven by a third variable: changes in the US
economic outlook. This is because the US economy is influential in
determining not just US interest rates but also Canadian output. Canada's
export economy depends on economic growth in the US. Therefore, while
correlation does not imply causation (US rates don't cause Canadian rates
to move), the relationship is logical and tradable and if you see a big move
in US rates, you are probably sane to bet on Canadian rates moving in the
same direction.
An important takeaway here is that you don't need one variable to be the
cause of movement in the other; you just need them to move together in a
semi‐reliable fashion. So when someone tells you that correlation doesn't
imply causation you can respond, “No, but there is most likely a third
explanatory variable driving both asset prices with indeterminate lags and I
am trading off those lags.” In other words, the reasons variables are moving
(causality) are not as important as the fact that they are moving together in
a somewhat predictable fashion. As I have said before, the what matters
more than the why.
The challenge is to be skeptical, but open minded at the same time. It is
important to recognize that with thousands of traders constantly blasted by
a nearly infinite firehose of global financial market data, spurious
correlations are bound to pop up. A spurious correlation for our purposes is
when two variables appear to be related but they are in fact just randomly
moving in the same direction at the same time.
The more back testing and data mining you do, the more likely you are to
find incidents of spurious correlation. Take a look at Figure 8.1, which
shows the relationship between wholesale rabbit meat prices and US
economic surprises. There appears to be a relationship but logic would
suggest that this is probably a spurious and unstable correlation. This is
important because spurious correlations are unlikely to persist, while
correlations based on real economic relationships are more reliable and
persistent. On the other hand, maybe a strong economy means rabbit meat
demand outstrips supply? Maybe. I have never bought or sold wholesale
rabbit meat.

Figure 8.1 Wholesale rabbit meat prices vs. Citi Economic Surprises for
the US, 2009 to 2014.
Some people find spurious correlations very offensive and/or hilarious.
There is a website entirely dedicated to spurious correlations:
www.tylervigen.com. Figure 8.2 features one I enjoy.

Figure 8.2 Annual data for “Letters in winning word of Scripps National
Spelling Bee correlates with number of people killed by venomous spiders.”
There is no magical way to determine which correlations will remain stable
and persistent. As stated earlier, the first step is always to apply a simple
logical filter. Does the relationship make sense? If the answer is no, the
correlation could well be spurious. You need logic first and regression
analysis second. Meaningless correlations can yield high r2 just by random
chance. And at the same time, if there is a lead or lag between two
variables, strongly related asset prices that are great to trade lead/lag
against each other could yield a low r2.
Human beings are programmed to look for and interpret patterns—it's part
of our DNA—but it can lead to overzealous estimates of correlation and
causality, so be careful!
On the other hand, I have had experiences where I felt quite confident
about a relationship and many in the market tried to shoot me down. An
example of this was in 2006 when I pointed out the relationship between
milk prices and the level of NZDUSD in my daily FX commentary for
Lehman Brothers. As time passed, the market and most observers
eventually came to the same conclusion I had reached early on—milk prices
are an important variable in determining the value of the NZD.
The simple fact that New Zealand's most important export is milk products
made the relationship logical to me as financial flows in and out of New
Zealand and New Zealand's GDP are influenced by the price of milk. But it
took a long while before the market bought into the premise.
In the end, there is no right answer for which correlations to monitor and
trade—use what you think makes sense and what you observe to be
meaningful market relationships. In the pages that follow, I will dig deeper

into this concept and provide some examples of how I use correlated asset
to trade FX.
How to Trade Cross‐Market Correlation
The theory behind correlation trading is fairly simple: Markets are driven
by many variables but there is often one or more underlying factors driving
many markets at once. In other words, all markets are interconnected. If
you analyze or even simply follow non‐FX markets, you have an improved
chance of accurately forecasting FX. Other markets will never give you the
answers to the FX test but they will often give you some great clues.
This is not arbitrage. The currency is not guaranteed to revert to fair value.
Think of the correlated variable as one measure of fair value for the
currency pair; the currency oscillates around that value. Much like PPP is
just an anchor for long‐term valuation of currencies, short‐term fair value
estimates provided by correlated variables are just a starting point, a piece
of the puzzle. But unlike PPP, which is completely useless when it comes to
trading, correlated variables suggest short‐term fair value, not long‐term
fair value, and so can be exploited profitably.
When correlation trading works, it feels like you know what will happen
before it happens. When it is not working properly, it is like watching TV
with the audio and video out of sync. It takes significant practice to
decipher the messages from other markets, but it is well worth the effort. A
good correlation analysis can feel like having tomorrow's newspaper today.
There are macroeconomic reasons for relationships between markets and
there are also micro reasons for these relationships. The global economy is
a complex system of nearly infinite connections. When one asset price
moves, the trigger for the move could be something relevant to other assets
as well. Similar to chaos theory where a butterfly flaps its wings in the
Amazon and triggers a monsoon in Thailand, every action in the global
economy triggers a series of complicated actions and reactions.
Let's look at a simple example of why asset price moves can lead to moves
in FX. Gold rallies twenty dollars. A $20 increase in the price of gold
represents a marginal increase in prosperity for exporters of gold.
Therefore, it is an instant change to the potential future value of Australian
exports. This is only a tiny marginal change for an economy as large as
Australia's, but all economics and markets operate at the margin.
So, all other things being equal, a $20 rise in gold is good for the Australian
economy and thus bullish for the Australian dollar. If not much else is
going on, and you see a $20 rally in gold, you should expect the Australian
dollar has a greater chance of going up than down in the short term. If you
also see copper and Australian 5‐year yields going up at the same time,
that's even better. Like I explained in the chapter on technical analysis, the
more factors you have in favor of a trade idea, the better.

For many different reasons, shifts in commodities, bonds, and equities
around the world trigger changes in the perceptions of the value of global
currencies. Furthermore, the reasons those other markets are moving are
probably somewhat relevant to FX as well.
For example, if there is a story on a Canadian news channel saying that the
prime minister might resign, it might take a while for it to hit the US and
financial news headlines. A few traders in Toronto might see the story on
TV and sell Canadian stocks. Then Canadian bonds might rally a bit in
response and then finally, USDCAD might react and go higher five minutes
later.
Even if you don't have a Canadian cable subscription, you see the moves in
Canadian stocks and bonds and you perk up to the possibility that there
might be some CAD‐negative news out there. Keenly observe a large
universe of asset prices and try to build an understanding of how they
interrelate. This will help you win in FX.
There are also micro reasons for FX markets to react to moves in other
assets. Suppose a big hedge fund macro trader is having a terrible month.
He is so bearish he can't see straight and he thinks the global economy is
falling off a cliff. He has expressed this view by going limit short AUDUSD,
S&P futures, and copper. It's the last day of the month, and suddenly S&P
futures rally 25 handles out of nowhere. The macro trader is scheduled to
go on vacation next week and he can't take the pain of his losing positions
anymore. He picks up the phone and calls his execution desk.
“Cover all my positions. I'm taking a week off.”
The execution desk scrambles to buy AUDUSD, S&P futures, and copper
simultaneously and the feedback loops between the products send all three
prices skyrocketing higher.
The proliferation of pod‐based volatility‐targeting macro hedge funds
makes scenarios like the one described above very common in today's
market as portfolio managers put on positions in baskets of related
products and take them off all at once when it comes time to take profits or
stop out. Also note that there can at times be a high degree of correlation
between what different macro portfolio managers are doing—mutual fund
investors and hedge funds can sometimes exhibit herd‐like behavior. This
can exacerbate feedback loops.
Another reason for correlation among asset classes is that traders and
portfolio managers use one asset to hedge another. Say a portfolio manager
is long a huge basket of illiquid corporate bonds and she is worried about
the global economy; she wants out of her corporate bond portfolio. But the
market is too thin; there are no good bids. She decides to hedge the
exposure by selling AUDJPY because it tends to be correlated to corporate
bonds (or at least global risk appetite). Then she leaves a bunch of limit
orders to sell the bonds if they rally.

As the corporate bond markets rally, she is filled on some of her limit
orders. Now her AUDJPY hedge is too big so she will then buy back some of
the AUDJPY. This is how a rally in corporate bonds can lead to a move
higher in AUDJPY or another correlated asset price. You will see similar
activity in other pairs. A trader who is nervously long oil might buy
USDCAD to hedge if he feels he can get more liquidity there. When oil
rallies back and he takes profit, he will sell the USDCAD.
Think of the entire global capital markets as an infinitely complex super‐
organism where action in one part has potential implications for activity in
another. Like a crazy Rube Goldberg machine, activity in one sector or asset
class can echo and rebound and ricochet into others.
As correlation rises, there is also a positive feedback mechanism that leads
to even more correlation. Hundreds of systematic algorithmic hedge funds
detect correlations in real time and trade on them. So when the correlation
between, say, AUDUSD and the S&P 500 is very high (as is sometimes the
case), these algos will reinforce the correlation by trading it in real time.
If S&P futures rally 3 or 4 handles, you will see algos getting on the bid in
AUD and if the S&P turns around, they will move off the bid and get on the
offer. As correlation rises, more and more algos deploy to capitalize on the
correlation, so strong correlation leads to stronger correlation until there is
a regime shift and the correlation breaks down.
Now let's go through the most reliable correlations and get into some more
detail about how to trade them. The most reliable correlations in FX are (in
order of reliability):
1. FX vs. other currencies (one currency vs. another)
2. FX vs. interest rates
3. FX vs. commodities (especially gold, oil, and copper)
4. FX vs. equity indices
5. FX vs. single name equities and ETFs
Understand that even the strongest correlations are dynamic and unstable.
Correlations come and go, but interest rate and commodity correlations
tend to be most persistent. Understanding current correlations and how
they might evolve is critical to your success in short‐term FX trading. I will
now discuss each of the five types of cross‐market correlation listed above.
Correlation of One Currency Pair versus Another
Currency Pair
The simplest correlation in FX is the relationship between one currency
pair and another. For example, EURUSD is the most liquid and important
currency pair in the world. Many speculators will use it to express their

view on the dollar. If EURUSD moves significantly, it is most likely that
other USD pairs such as AUDUSD and GBPUSD will move in sympathy.
There was once a time when you could make money trading AUDUSD
simply by watching EURUSD and doing trades with the expectation that
AUDUSD would catch up to the move in EURUSD. Those days are gone
now as algorithms capture the small deviations in one currency pair and
effectively arbitrage away gains before a human being can capitalize on
them.
It is still important to understand, though, that all USD‐based currencies
have a strong tendency to move together. If EURUSD, GBPUSD, and
NZDUSD rally (and other pairs have not moved), the odds are greater that
the next short‐term move in AUDUSD is up and USDCAD is down as the
overall momentum of the dollar dominates. Get a feel for general dollar
direction and identify which currencies are leading or lagging. If nothing is
going on and USDCAD suddenly moves 30 points higher, you can bet that
the short‐term weak side in AUDUSD will be lower as the USDCAD move
hints at dollar strength.
Some traders believe so strongly in the power of USDCAD to predict the
rest of the dollar pairs that it has earned the nickname “The Truth.”
Correlation of a currency pair versus interest rates in each
country. During my career (1995 to present), the most consistent driver of
currencies has been changes in relative interest rates. This is because
investors tend to favor currencies that pay a higher rate of interest (high‐
yielders) and avoid or short currencies that pay low or negative rates.
Furthermore, most of the reasons that interest rates rise in a country
(higher growth, higher inflation, confidence) support the currency. If things
are going well somewhere, you will tend to see both the currency and
interest rates (yields) go up. So a move higher in rates is often a good
predictor of an upcoming move higher in the currency.
This is important to understand as it is the reason that currencies react so
violently to unexpected moves in interest rates. If a central bank becomes
hawkish (i.e. signals a greater intention to raise rates) or dovish (i.e. signals
a greater intention to lower rates), the currency of that country will react in
a predictable fashion. Here is an example of how a currency reacts when
there is an unexpected move in rates:
On November 1, 2010, the market expected the Reserve Bank of Australia
(RBA) to hold rates steady at its board meeting. Instead, the RBA hiked
their cash rate by 0.25% (25 basis points). Figure 8.3 is a 5‐minute chart of
AUDUSD around the announcement.

Figure 8.3 5‐minute AUDUSD through an unexpected RBA rate hike,
November 1–3, 2010.
The jump from 0.9880 to 0.9990 occurred instantaneously at the moment
the RBA announced the rate hike. This is a very micro example of how
interest rates directly impact the exchange rate. Now let's zoom out and
take a look at the bigger picture. Figure 8.4 shows AUDUSD versus the 10‐
year spread between Australian and US rates from 2006 to 2012.

Figure 8.4 Daily AUDUSD vs. Australia/US 10‐year interest rate
differential (gray), May 2006 to May 2012.
As you can see, the ebb and flow of the interest rate gap tends to be similar
to the ebb and flow of the currency. It is important to note, however, that
while direction of moves tends to match, magnitude does not. Furthermore,
there are leads and lags. These features of magnitude differential and
lead/lag are true of most FX correlations, no matter how strong and
persistent.
Astute readers may be thinking that AUDUSD is a sell based on this chart.
If I had nothing else to trade based on, I would agree. But, of course, in real
life I want to see other variables, like Chinese equities, the price of copper,
and Australian economic data. And I want to know what the Reserve Bank
of Australia (RBA) has been saying about its intention to cut or hike rates.
All in all, though, there is generally a strong relationship between relative
interest rates and currency performance. And for the record, AUDUSD
went down almost immediately after I clipped this chart in 2012. By mid‐
2013 it was trading around 0.9000, roughly what was predicted by the
interest rate differential.
Correlation of One Currency Pair versus
Commodities
Because commodities are mostly priced in US dollars, there tends to be a
strong and persistent correlation between commodity prices and the US

dollar. If the US dollar weakens, commodities instantly become cheaper for
foreigners, so a weaker dollar tends to equate to higher commodity prices.
Conversely, a stronger dollar makes commodities more expensive for non‐
US consumers and thus reduces global demand at the margin, driving
prices lower.
There are also cash flow reasons that explain why the USD is correlated
with commodities. When Middle Eastern countries sell their oil, they
receive USD. They generally do not want to hold all their assets in USD so
they will diversify into other currencies. The more oil rises, the more USD
they need to sell to maintain their benchmark currency weights.
Each currency can be correlated with specific commodities for different
reasons. Let's take the Canadian dollar as an example. There are three main
reasons why the Canadian dollar and crude oil are correlated:
Oil and gas mining are an important contributor to Canadian GDP.
When oil prices rise, it is generally good for the Canadian economy.
This can mean higher interest rates, more jobs, and so on. Generally,
what is good for the economy is good for the currency.
Every time a Canadian oil company sells a barrel of crude, it receives
USD. But it operates in Canada, so it needs to convert most of these
USD into CAD to run its operations, pay its staff, pay dividends, and so
on. The higher oil goes, the more USDCAD they need to sell.
Canada is a reliable, geopolitically stable supplier of crude. So if crude
prices rise on global geopolitical fears, people will buy Canadian
dollars as a safe haven. This is why CAD and NOK are often known as
“petrocurrencies.” In the past, the Dutch guilder and British pound
traded as petrocurrencies because of their abundant North Sea oil
supplies but the Netherlands joined the euro and North Sea production
has fallen, so Canada and Norway are the major oil currencies today.
This is an example of how correlations change over time.
Generally, a rise in the value of a country's exports is good for the currency
and vice versa. Higher gold and copper prices tend to benefit Australia and
Chile (for example) while higher milk prices tend to benefit New Zealand.
These are important relationships founded on the macroeconomics and
terms of trade of each nation. Because of this strong macroeconomic
relationship, these correlations tend to be sticky. Figure 8.5 shows the price
of milk against NZDUSD from 2006 to 2012.

Figure 8.5 Daily NZDUSD vs. Dairy futures prices (gray line), October
2006 to February 2012.
You can see that there appears to be a strong relationship here. Anyone
who deals in correlations and overlays will inevitably be told that
correlation does not equal causation. It is a common cliché and like most
clichés, it is true. The snarky implication is often that most correlations are
bogus—but that is simply not the case.
If you see something that appears to have a strong connection visually and
you can support the connection with reasonable fundamental arguments,
you are probably onto something. Don't worry so much about the
correlation coefficients and r‐squared; they can be less important than the
inherent logic and economic linkages between the two time series.
Remember, we are using correlation between assets as just one input into
our process here. We are not building a systematic correlation trading
algorithm.
Building systems to profit from correlation between markets is certainly
possible and there are many funds that do so. It has become a crowded part
of the quant universe, though, and is beyond the scope of this book.

Understanding not just correlation trading but how the correlations
themselves come and go can be an important source of edge. If everyone is
talking about oil and stories about crude oil are on the front page of every
finance website like in 2014–2015, the correlation between oil and other
assets will tend to be high. As oil finds a base and starts to range trade, you
should expect the market's focus on oil, and the correlation between FX and
oil, to fade. Whatever is top of mind in the market is the first place to look
for correlations.
Correlation of One Currency Pair versus an
Equity Index
In the late 1990s, the US internet bubble was in full swing and when
equities rallied, it was seen as a sign of strength for the dollar because it
signaled money flowing into US technology stocks. The correlation between
the US dollar and US equities was strongly positive. Equities up = dollar up.
Then, from 2003 to 2010, the relationship ran the other way. There was a
strong relationship between risky high‐yielding currencies and equity
performance. This was called the “Risk‐On, Risk‐Off” or the RORO regime,
where a large group of highly correlated risky assets moved together in sync
like a school of fish. When equities went up, the USD sold off and
commodities and risky currencies like AUD, NZD, and CAD rallied.
However, the US economy started to outperform its global peers around
2012, and the correlation flipped again. Stronger US equities were a sign of
US strength while global economies flagged. So once again, rallies in
equities meant a stronger dollar.
As computers detect rising correlation, they contribute to accelerating
feedback loops between assets with potentially different fundamentals. It is
crucial to keep in mind that correlations rise and fall in unpredictable ways.
They can remain important for years at a time or come and go in weeks.
Figure 8.6 shows the inverse relationship between the NASDAQ and AUD
during the dotcom bubble.

Figure 8.6 Daily NASDAQ vs. AUDUSD (gray line), January 1996 to
December 1999.
Now take a look at Figure 8.7, AUDUSD vs. the NASDAQ during the heat of
the RORO period from 2007 to 2010.

Figure 8.7 Daily NASDAQ vs. AUDUSD (gray line), February 2007 to
June 2010.
It is crucial to know what regime you are in when analyzing potential
correlations between equities and currencies. There is usually some
correlation between equity and currency markets but these relationships
are unstable and thus you must always be on the lookout for changes in
direction and magnitude of correlation.
One of the most reliable equity index‐versus‐FX correlations in my career
has been the Nikkei versus USDJPY. This is because Japanese citizens hold
the largest pool of savings in the world. When things look good, they buy
foreign assets and sell JPY, seeking higher returns. When things look bad,
they repatriate money (bring it home), which triggers yen buying (lower
USDJPY).
Next, Figure 8.8 is a daily chart of USDJPY versus Nikkei futures. You can
see that this correlation was strong throughout almost all of the 10‐year
period.

Figure 8.8 Daily USDJPY vs. Nikkei futures (gray line), 2006 to 2016
Another way to look at currency versus equity correlation is to use the
relative performance of two equity indices to determine possible direction
for those two currencies. I like doing this with AUDCAD versus the ratio of
Australian to Canadian equities.
Correlation of a Currency Pair versus Single
Name Equities or ETFs
A smart way to monitor equities is to look at individual stocks and ETFs
that relate to the currency you are trading. In the case of Canada that would
mean crude producers like Suncor, Encana, and Cenovus. With Australia,
you might watch BHP or Freeport (mining stocks) and the China A‐Shares
ETF (FXI). Using ETFs helps you focus on what is happening in specific
sectors relevant to the currency you are trading. Keep in mind that these
equities will be correlated to the related commodities (Suncor is correlated
to crude oil, for example) but still provide a slightly different lens through
which to look.
One particularly powerful use for single names and ETFs is when looking
for divergence or confirmation. For example, if I see a big divergence
between AUD and copper, the first thing I will do is check how BHP and
Freeport are trading. Do the mining stocks confirm the copper move (and
thus give a stronger AUD signal)? Or do they suggest caution?

Trading the Correlations
“Okay, great,” you say. “So there are correlations. But how do I trade
them?”
First, the ideal setup is to create a group of overlay charts if you have the
software to do so. This can be done on Reuters Eikon or Bloomberg or
other high‐quality charting software. Once you have 15 or 20 overlay charts
of FX versus correlated assets, scan for divergences. In my cockpit, I have
every major currency pair overlaid with every one of its key drivers on a
series of separate charts.
In Figure 8.9 you will see a comprehensive table of the asset prices I was
watching for each currency as of January 2019. The table is a starting point
to help you understand the important drivers of each currency pair. As I
have made clear a few times, drivers change over time.

Driver1
Driver2
Driver3 Driver4
USD
US 2, 5, and 10‐
year interest rates
US equities
Gold
ISM/consumer
confidence
EURUSD US/Germany rate
differential
Gold
Italy 2‐
year and
10‐year
yield
Crude oil
USDJPY
Nikkei
US 2, 5 and 10‐
year interest rates
Gold
S&P
USDCHF US 2, 5, and 10‐
year interest rates
Gold
EURCHF German interest
rates
Global risk
appetite
Italy 2‐
year and
10‐year
yield
European
bank stocks
GBPUSD UK/US rate
differential
Crude oil
EURGBP Germany/UK rate
differential
AUDUSD AU/US rate
differential
Gold
Copper
and iron
ore
BHP, FCX, FXI
(equity)
AUDNZD AU/NZ rate
differential
Australia vs. New
Zealand equity
price ratio
NZDUSD NZ / US rate
differential
Dairy prices
(MMRA on
Bloomberg)
USDCAD Crude Oil
US/Canada rate
differential
Canadian
Oil
Equities
(SU etc.)
Gold
EURNOK Crude Oil
Germany/Norway
rate differential
EURSEK Germany/Sweden
rate differential
Sweden equities
(OMX)
Figure 8.9 Some important currency drivers as of January 2019.
I usually run 50 or 60 overlays at a time with maybe 5 or 10 new ones
added each year and 5 or 10 dropped. Many overlays stay the same year
after year (e.g. USDCAD versus crude oil, AUDUSD versus interest rate

differentials, etc.) but I add and remove new overlay charts as time goes on
and correlations evolve, appear, and disappear.
Let's say I sit down at my desk in the morning and have no view and no
position. The first thing I will do is flip through my overlays to look for
major dislocations. Most of the charts will show a market somewhat close
to equilibrium like that seen in Figure 8.10.
Figure 8.10 Hourly USDJPY vs. Nikkei futures (gray line) (2 months of
data), December 21, 2015, to February 18, 2016.
That chart shows that USDJPY and Nikkei futures are moving in tandem
and a simple glance at the chart suggests that USDJPY is not out of line at
current levels. Then I might scroll across to a chart like Figure 8.11.

Figure 8.11 Hourly USDCAD vs. Crude oil (inverted, gray line), December
21, 2015 to February 18, 2018.
Now my interest is piqued. Note that here I am looking at crude oil inverted
so that the overlay is logical (lower crude = weaker CAD = higher
USDCAD). At this moment there is weakness in crude (the gray line is
going higher) and USDCAD has not responded much. Crude is in the
bottom third of its range on this chart (remember the gray line going up
means crude is going down). Meanwhile USDCAD is still near the lows. All
other things being equal, if crude is near the lows, USDCAD should be near
the highs, not the lows. So on this chart both lines should be moving
together so USDCAD looks low.
This is a basic but effective way to find trade ideas. Look for currencies that
have diverged from their current driver variables as a starting point and
then drill deeper via other methodologies (technicals, fundamentals,
positioning, etc.).
This looks at first glance like a decent setup to buy USDCAD, playing for a
catch‐up move to oil. USDCAD is already more than 150 points off the lows,
though, so if you want to go long here, you need a wide stop loss.
Once I see this CAD chart, I flip to my other CAD correlation overlays and
see what the other variables say. The first place I turn is Canadian interest
rates and then Canadian equities and then gold. If the other indicators
support the trade idea, it gets stronger. If they are neutral, that is fine, but
my excitement level drops. If they point the other way (lower USDCAD),
then I'll stay away. Remember to stay away from trades where different
variables point different directions. Avoid crosswinds. You want strong
winds at your back when you put on a trade.

If rates, gold, and Canadian equities support the idea, I'll dig deeper. What
are the fundamentals in Canada and what are upcoming catalysts? How is
the market positioned? And so on. If I like the idea, then it's time to put on
the trade.
I look at the technicals as a guide to where to place my stop loss. In this
case, a lot of other planets lined up so I went long USDCAD spot and placed
my stop loss order below the lows, at 1.3689.
Technicals and the fair value level suggested by the correlated variable (in
this case oil) will both factor into my take profit objective. In this case I saw
the major high in early February at 1.4100 and put my take profit just below
there at 1.4089. Check out the technicals section and the position sizing
section for more on my thought process when putting on and taking off
positions.
I have focused here on the correlation piece, but good trade ideas involve
more planets in line than just a correlation overlay. Perhaps the Bank of
Canada meeting is coming up soon and I expect the market to sell CAD into
it on rate cut expectations. That would be a nice catalyst to throw in the
mix. If I knew from either statistical or anecdotal evidence that the market
was limit short USDCAD—that would add to my conviction. As you read
this book, understand that each form of analysis helps build the picture and
the goal is to fill in as many blanks as possible to find trades where
everything points the same way.
So the objective when you are watching other assets for direction in FX is to
find large divergences between the correlated asset and the currency, then
trade the currency as it catches up to where it “should be.” This is why the
strategy is sometimes called “lead/lag”—you are watching one variable lead
and expecting the other to move in the same direction, with a lag. Let's take
a look at an example of a classic lead/lag setup.
In 2010/2012, markets were embroiled in the heat of the Eurozone crisis as
it looked like Greece might default and other members might be forced out
of the euro single currency. A disintegration of the euro would be
catastrophic for the economies (and corporations and stock markets) of
Europe. This created a regime where moves in European equities had a
strong positive correlation to moves in EURUSD. Good news on Europe
meant buy DAX (the German stock market index) and buy EURUSD. Bad
news meant existential risk in the Eurozone and lower DAX and lower
EURUSD.
The Setup
January 2, 2012, was a holiday in the United States but not in Europe. The
DAX futures opened up 3% but most US traders were still at home. Take a
look at the next chart (Figure 8.12). The gray line is the ratio of DAX to
DJIA (German stock market versus US stock market) and the black bars are

EURUSD. US stock markets were closed for the holiday so any movements
in the gray line on January 2 were driven solely by moves in the DAX.
Figure 8.12 Hourly EURUSD vs. DAX/DJI ratio (gray): Chart 1,
November 8, 2011, to January 2, 2012.
You can see that the equity ratio and EURUSD had been moving together
faithfully throughout November and December, but then EURUSD did not
react to the January 2 rally in the DAX. This is a nice setup because there is
a logical explanation for the divergence: Most traders were on holidays, so
the market is less efficient.
The Trade
The trade was to buy EURUSD on the view that it would catch up to the
move in DAX at some point (see Figure 8.12). In this case, the early short‐
term low was 1.2870 so I went long and put my stop loss order at 1.2839.
This put my stop below the low and below the round 1.2850 level. An
eyeball take profit would be the point DAX suggests as fair value; this looks
like about 1.3170. This would imply a perfect relationship between the two
variables at this exact level of scaling (which is not reasonable) but it's a
good starting point for estimating the potential size of the move higher if it
happens.
The Result

Now look at the bottom right corner of Figure 8.13 and you can see what
happened next. EURUSD went up 150 pips in a straight line the next day.
At this point, I noted major resistance just below 1.3100 (the place where
EURUSD broke down from on December 28) and thought about taking
profit or at least cutting half and letting the other half ride.
Figure 8.13 Hourly EURUSD vs. DAX/DJI ratio (gray): Chart 2,
November 8, 2011, to January 3, 2012.
This was a profitable lead/lag trade with limited risk and attractive upside.
Risking 100 points to make 150 is nice here because the big move up in the
DAX suggested to me the implied theoretical odds of a EURUSD rally were
better than 50/50. In other words, this trade had a high expected value
with a payout of 1.5:1 and a probability of success greater than 50%.
Another Example: The Setup and the Trade
Let's look at another example of how to trade FX versus exogenous
(outside) variables. Remember, good trade ideas are built with multiple
inputs, not just one correlation. Let's look at another example using
USDCAD.
A dislocation between the Canadian dollar and the price of oil is often a
good place to start with USDCAD, but ideally you want other confirming
factors to support your view. What is the macroeconomic backdrop? What
are Canadian interest rates doing? What direction is the trend of Canadian
economic surprises? How is US economic performance? These should all
factor into your decision to trade (or not trade) the Canadian dollar.

The analysis from my January 2012 trading journal captures what I'm
getting at.
January 2012
USDCAD looks extremely elevated as crude oil is very strong (see Figure
8.14). While this weakness in CAD could theoretically be attributed to the
weaker run of Canadian economic data lately, Canadian interest rate
futures disagree as they trade near multi‐month lows (see Figure 8.15).
Figure 8.14 Hourly USDCAD vs. Crude Oil (inverted, in gray), September
29, 2011, to January 13, 2012.

Figure 8.15 USDCAD vs. June 2012 Canadian BAs (gray), September 29,
2011, to January 13, 2012.
BA is short for “Banker's Acceptance” and is the actively‐traded interest futures product in
Canada. All other things being equal: Lower BA prices = higher interest rates = stronger CAD =
lower USDCAD.
The dollar index (DXY) has made yet another top at 81.50, while Chinese
equities have put in an explosive and impulsive 2.5% reversal rally, nearly
engulfing the previous 15 sessions of losses (see Figures 8.16 and 8.17). A
return of confidence at the margin in China plus high and rising confidence
around the US cyclical story suggest to me that USDCAD should be closer
to 1.0150 (not 1.0278 where it currently trades).

Figure 8.16 Daily DXY: Note multiple tops around 81.50 in late 2010,
April 2009 to January 2012.
Figure 8.17 Daily Shanghai Composite: Was that the bottom? September
2011 to January 2012.

I will go short here (1.0278) with a 1.0326 stop loss and take profit at
1.0156.
The Result
By incorporating much more than just the oil correlation, I was able to
generate a nice trade idea with many factors all working together. Figure
8.18 shows what happened.
Figure 8.18 Hourly USDCAD vs. crude oil (inverted, in gray), October
2011 to January 2012.
Nice trade. Oil did nothing and USDCAD went straight down. I also
considered some other factors with this trade, beyond those listed above. I
was watching Canadian resource stocks and US homebuilders as well.
Canadian resource stocks are a major part of the Canadian economy while
US homebuilding is a major source of future demand for commodities like
lumber and copper. By watching these specific sectors, you can also get an
advance read on what CAD should be doing.
This USDCAD trade is an excellent example of how you bring as many
factors as possible into your analysis and act when everything points the
same way.

Understand the Regime and Relevant
Correlations
It is important to understand that regimes come and go and correlations
that work today might not work tomorrow. Correlations can flip without
notice or just fade to irrelevance. The best way to understand what
correlations matter right now is to listen. Listen to traders around you.
Listen to the news. Read the Reuters and Bloomberg stories about FX.
What are traders worried about, excited about, looking forward to?
Very often perception is just as important as reality so you need to know
what other traders care about on any given day. There are correlations that
remain stable over time and there are correlations that will work for a week
and then disappear forever. If you see a correlation developing in real time,
try to figure out why it is happening. Most real, sustainable correlations
have a logical fundamental underpinning.
A Note on Stop Losses and Discipline
One pitfall when trading divergences and correlation is that the larger the
divergence, the more attractive the trade. So if you enter a trade based on a
divergence and that divergence widens, you are tempted to add. This is a
recipe for disaster, similar to the stock trader who likes a stock at $10, buys
some, and then watches it go to $5 and simply loves it at $5. Then it goes to
$2 and he simply must buy more! It's so cheap! If you liked it at 10, you
gotta love it at 2, right? The key to avoiding this trap is that part of your
plan when you initiate a trade is to decide on a firm stop loss level and stick
to it.
If I am playing the divergence between USDCAD and crude oil and I enter
long USDCAD at 1.3740, I will immediately decide on a stop loss level. Say I
pick 1.3639 as my stop. Then no matter what crude and USDCAD do from
that point on, my stop loss remains the same. Even if crude falls another
$10 (which makes USDCAD longs more attractive), I will still stop out of
the position if USDCAD goes to 1.3639. By setting a stop when you get in
and then sticking to it, you acknowledge the reality that trading divergences
is only meant to increase your odds of winning—it doesn't work every time!
Always employ stop losses on every position you trade. Always.
FAQ about Correlation Trading
Lead/lag, correlation, or cross‐market correlation trading is one piece of
the puzzle for me—it's not the be‐all and the end‐all. I use divergences
between correlated variables and FX as one clue in a bigger puzzle that also
includes analysis of macro, behavioral, technical, and other factors. While I
rank cross‐market moves as one of my most important trade selection
tools, there are many challenges to trading this way. I am frequently asked

about various limitations and hurdles to this style of trading and I will try
to address these in the following FAQ.
1. What causes these divergences?
The main reason that a series of variables might move one way and
FX might not is that large flows in FX can distort prices. Taking the
simplest possible example, imagine a scenario where Australian
interest rates and Chinese equities start ripping higher as there is
news out and the market suddenly expects a Chinese fiscal stimulus
package. You see this and then notice that AUDUSD is still at the
lows, hovering around 0.7500; it hasn't moved at all. Why might this
be?
The simplest explanation is often that there is a large, non‐price‐
sensitive player doing something in AUDUSD. Say an Australian
company is buying a US company for $1.5 billion; they need to buy
USD and sell AUD to complete the transaction. They might have a
certain FX rate budgeted and they don't really care what Aussie
interest rates or Chinese stocks are doing. They just need to sell their
AUD and buy USD. In this case, they might leave an order with a bank
to sell 2 billion AUDUSD (buy $1.5B USD) at 0.7500 or better. This is
a big order so the selling will weigh on the AUD for a while, no matter
what is going on with other asset prices.
Astute traders will see other proxy assets rising and buy AUD, but
until the 2 billion AUD sell order is gone, the price will not move.
Eventually, if the China story continues to look good, the AUD sell
order will get chipped away. When it is finally filled, AUDUSD will
jump higher toward a new, more representative equilibrium.
FX flows and orders are often executed for players who are trading a
completely different set of variables and different time horizon than
short‐term speculators and this creates the frequent divergences and
dislocations between correlated variables and FX.
2. Isn't it possible the variable is wrong, not the currency? In
other words, maybe the currency doesn't move to narrow the
divergence but instead the variable turns back the other
way?
This question generally is most valid when running a single variable
against a currency pair. If copper is ripping higher but AUDUSD
hasn't moved: How do you know if AUDUSD is wrong, or copper? It
could be a big, non‐price‐sensitive flow in copper, right?
There are two things to consider here. First, if you have multiple
variables all pointing in one direction as described in Question 1, you
have a better trade because then it is most likely that FX is wrong.
Second, I generally find that the variable with the most momentum
wins. Let's say copper and AUDUSD are both trading a quiet range

and then copper breaks out to the topside. I would favor the direction
of copper (higher) versus AUDUSD in that case so I would go long
AUD, expecting it to catch up to copper.
On the other hand, if AUD breaks higher and copper continues to
flounder near the bottom of the range, I would do nothing. This is
because AUD has the momentum and what you are looking for are
divergences where FX is doing nothing and correlated variables are
moving with momentum in a specified direction. When one variable is
rallying hard and the associated FX pair is selling off aggressively, that
is the most confusing of all—do not touch.
Essentially, what you are looking for are moments when the FX
market is out of line or half asleep and other variables are suggesting
it should wake up soon.
3. Why don't you just do a relative value trade (buy the low one
and sell the high one), instead of only trading one side via the
FX?
I am a directional short‐term FX trader, not a relative value (RV)
trader. RV trading is a different skill set and a different kettle of fish
completely. There are all sorts of subtleties to RV trading, including
position sizing, risk management, when to stop out or add as the
divergence grows, and so on. It is a completely different style of
trading. RV trading between FX and correlated variables is feasible
but it's a completely different skill set and thought process.
I use external variables to give me clues as to future FX direction and
then I incorporate these clues as part of a larger holistic process.
Trading RV between FX and other variables is a completely different
business model. Most successful RV traders put on many, many RV
trades in small size in an attempt to place multiple uncorrelated bets.
Directional FX traders put on a few concentrated and levered trades
looking for directional profits.
4. Doesn't the magnitude of the move and (sometimes) the
direction of the divergence depend on how the chart is
scaled?
Yes! This is a smart observation and you need to be careful about how
you scale your charts. I use hourly charts and overlays and usually
scale them between 21 and 42 days (one to two months or
approximately 500 to 1000 hours) of data. If you use daily charts and
look at 5 years of data, you might get completely different results.
The key is to be consistent with your choice of scales because
otherwise you can fall prey to confirmation bias as you scale your
charts to different dimensions in an attempt to find the answer you
want. Your scaling should fit your time horizon. If you trade short‐

term, you should look at three months of data or less and if you are a
bigger‐picture trader, then scale up the charts to reflect that.
Most short‐term and day traders use 10‐minute, 30‐minute, or hourly
charts looking back one to three months. Anything less than a month
gets noisy and anything more is too zoomed out to see short‐term
dislocations. The ideal scenario is when a divergence appears on all
scales of a chart, but this is not always the case.
One other way of scaling your charts is to capture a specific regime
period. For example, let's say the market doesn't care about
Portuguese yields at all. Then news comes out and suddenly there are
fears that Portugal might default on its debt; so EURUSD starts
trading tick for tick with Portuguese yields. You look at a chart and see
that Portugal yields started ripping on August 1. Now it's September
14. It makes more sense to scale your chart from August 1 to
September 14 than to go back a full three months because you want to
look at the correlation only over the period where it meant something
to the market.
Note that I never think of the divergence and implied fair value
suggested by overlay charts as definitive. When you overlay a currency
pair and a correlated variable, you are getting a rough sense of how
the two relate and interact but it is a combination of art and science,
not just pure math. I have tried to go more systematic with this stuff
and I find that it doesn't work very well because lead/lag relationships
are unstable, imperfect, and hard to measure and because I use many
other types of analysis to make my trading decisions, not just lead/lag.
5. Are there any other ways to trade cross‐market correlations?
Yes! This section has focused on trading commodities, rates, and
equities against FX but I also use cross‐market analysis to help
forecast equities. The stock market can be such an important driver of
overall risk sentiment and currency movement that I tend to have a
view on stocks most of the time. There are a few ways I forecast stocks
using lead/lag:
a. Use leaders to forecast the index. In other words, overlay a
volatile, widely followed stock like Apple over the NASDAQ and
take views on the index based on leadership from Apple.
b. Use sub‐indices to predict moves in the main index. The most
useful analysis of this type is to watch the Transports Index as a
leader for the broader market. Here are some notes from my
February 2016 trading journal that show my thought process on
this topic:
February 2016

Transports are ripping and could be showing the way for the broader
indices. This reminds me of how the Transports showed the way
throughout 2015. Thinking back, I remember July 2015, the Transports
started to diverge aggressively lower even as the S&P was at the all‐time
highs. The first chart (Figure 8.19) shows the Transports (gray line)
heading lower while the SPX (in black) stayed pinned to the highs.
Figure 8.19 Daily SPX vs. Transports (gray), December 2013 to July 2015.
Then the broader market cratered, catching up with the Transports. They
moved together after that, too, with Transports continuing to show the way
in both directions (see Figure 8.20).

Figure 8.20 Daily SPX vs. Dow Transports (gray), January to December
2015.
Now Transports are ripping. This move in Transports makes me bullish
equities (Figure 8.21).

Figure 8.21 Hourly SPX vs. Dow Transports (gray), November 2015 to
March 2016.
For the record, February 2016 was a great time to turn bullish equities!
Be creative and find other ways to trade lead/lag. Wheat versus milk
prices? Brent crude versus NYMEX crude? USDCAD against natural gas
futures? Keep an open mind and logical correlations and relationships will
come to you as you gain trading experience. But always remember that
correlations are just one piece of the puzzle, not the Holy Grail.
This completes our discussion of trading FX via correlation. Add lead/lag
analysis to your toolbox and combine it with other techniques and tactics to
find new and interesting trade ideas. Keep an open but simultaneously
skeptical mind.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key concepts:
What is lead/lag trading and how does it work?
What is correlation?
How to find sensible cross‐market relationships
Coming up with your own ideas for correlation trades
What are some limitations and problems with correlation trading?

Next up, we take on my favorite trading subject: behavioral finance.
Notes
  1 Along with adaptability and a calm demeanor.
  2 r2 is a statistical measure of the correlation between two variables and
can run from 0 (weak/no correlation) to 100% (perfectly strong
correlation).
  3 This paraphrases a quote by Edward Tufte, who said: “Correlation is not
causation but it sure is a hint.”

CHAPTER 9 
Understand Behavioral Finance
“Wouldn't economics make a lot more sense if it were based on how people actually
behave, instead of how they should behave?”
Dan Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions
Introduction
Until fairly recently, the study of finance was dominated by the view that in aggregate,
rational self‐interested humans make utility‐maximizing decisions and this is the best
explanation for how economies and markets work. This fit with the theory of efficient
markets where price discovery is primarily the result of many well‐informed, unemotional
actors incorporating all available information and acting collectively to maximize their own
utility and move prices toward equilibrium.
There is just one problem with this view: It does not reflect how humans behave on planet
Earth. Anyone who has spent time on a trading floor or traded in real‐life financial markets
knows that the idea of rational, unemotional actors moving prices judiciously toward
equilibrium is not how markets function in the short run.
In recent decades, many traders, economists, and academics have focused more on the
irrational aspects of human behavior and how those irrational behaviors influence markets
and create disequilibrium and opportunities for profit. This branch of study, called
behavioral economics, helps bridge the gap between academic theory about financial
markets and the practice of real‐life trading.
Most non‐academics understand that there is a significant behavioral element to price
action on all but the longest time horizons. It is important for you to integrate an
understanding of human behavior into your market analysis. Behavioral finance studies how
human behavior and cognitive bias interacts with financial market pricing and leads
investors to act in irrational (but potentially predictable) ways. Understanding and then
anticipating this irrational behavior is an important way that traders can outperform in all
financial markets, including FX.
Behavioral finance is a large, important, and relatively new field in economics and many,
many works have been published on the subject in recent years. See the Further Reading
section for some must‐reads. For the purposes of this book, behavioral finance includes
human psychology, market positioning, market sentiment, cognitive bias, feedback loops,
and other individual human and group behavior characteristics that lead to price moves that
cannot be explained by rational macro factors.
If you want to trade FX successfully on any time horizon, you need to understand behavioral
finance. Please understand that behavioral finance is a large and expanding academic
universe. I am boiling it down to one chapter of what I believe are the essential need‐to‐
know elements for FX traders. I will inevitably leave out a lot of juicy detail. There are two
sections laid out as follows:
1. Positioning and sentiment
2. Some important cognitive biases
Positioning and Sentiment

“You can't escape the madness of crowds by dogmatically rejecting them… The most
contrarian thing of all is not to oppose the crowd but to think for yourself.”
– Peter Thiel, Zero to One
First of all, let me lead off by saying that it is key to understand that positioning and
sentiment are part of the picture, not the whole picture. I emphasize this early on because I
find that positioning and sentiment tend to be overrated in FX. Traders generally spend way
too much time thinking about positioning and treat it like some sort of be‐all and end‐all.
It does not pay to be a reflexive contrarian all the time.
You will miss almost every major trend and you will find yourself fighting the fundamentals
way too often. You analyze sentiment and positioning only to identify selective extremes
when excessive positioning or sentiment pose outsized risks to the prevailing trend and
justify taking a countertrend position.
Before we start on positioning and sentiment, it is important to understand the difference
between the two. Many traders and analysts use the two terms interchangeably but they are
not the same thing. Sentiment is how people view the market. If you take a poll of traders,
you will get a sentiment reading. An example of this sort of reading is the Daily Sentiment
Index (DSI) published by Jake Bernstein, which is a daily survey of retail futures traders.
On the other hand, positioning is a metric that measures actual positions. An example of
this type of data is the Commitment of Traders report, which comes out every Friday and
summarizes futures positions held by commercial and noncommercial traders.
You can have a market that is extremely bearish, but not heavily positioned and this is
different from a market that is extremely bearish and extremely short. The difference is that
the skew of future moves is completely different in the two situations. The reason is simple:
A market that is bearish but not yet positioned is primed to go down as people take new
positions to reflect their bearish view. On the other hand, a market that is bearish but
heavily positioned short is more at risk of a short squeeze or reversal because there could be
nobody left to sell.
Why would a market see extreme sentiment but no extreme positioning? There are many
possible reasons. For example:
1. The theme is new. It takes a while for positions in one direction to become extreme.
Sentiment moves faster than positioning. Many traders will build into a position as their
conviction rises and as new information substantiates their view. As a general rule,
sentiment leads positioning because it is faster and easier for a trader to get bearish
than it is for her to put on a sizeable bearish trade.
2. Major event risk upcoming. This is one of the most common and highly profitable
setups. Let's say the market is extremely bearish EURUSD but there is an ECB meeting
or nonfarm payrolls coming up. Nobody wants to go into nonfarm payrolls short
EURUSD because there is gap risk or event risk if the number is weak.1
The moment the number comes out (assuming it is not extremely weak), the EUR will
drop aggressively as traders put on the trade they wanted to have all along. Traders
were just waiting for the event to get out of the way and did not really care about the
outcome of the event. This can lead to surprising moves where you get, for example, a
slightly weak US number (which should be bullish EURUSD) and EURUSD drops
aggressively because traders care less about the number itself and more about the fact
that the event risk is out of the way and now it's safer to get short EURUSD.
If you can identify moments where the market has a very strong view but does not have
the position yet because they are waiting for an upcoming event to pass, you can often
profit by simply putting on the position faster than others once the event is out of the
way.
3. Time of year. A trader's risk appetite varies depending on her profitability and the
time of year. For example, as we get close to the end of the year, traders like to reduce

risk and book profits to start the new year with a clean slate. Therefore, you might see a
situation at the end of the year where the market is extremely bullish USDJPY but flat
because of an unwillingness to commit. In this case, the turn of the year could trigger
substantial USDJPY buying even though nothing macro has changed between
December 31 and January 1.
4. Positioning clear‐outs. From time to time, crowded positions will get rinsed by
sharp counter‐moves. The market might hit a point where traders cannot take any more
pain and the majority cut their losses. While they still hold the macro view, they cannot
afford to hold the position any longer and so they cut it. This is called a stop loss run.
A good example of this is the price action in interest rate and FX markets in Fall 2014.
Throughout 2014, the market was heavily positioned for higher US interest rates and a
stronger dollar. In mid‐October, however, the market started to lose faith in the
interest rate trade as global and US inflation fell.
This reached a tipping point on October 15 as a weak US Retail Sales release was the
final straw and the market stopped out of most of its dollar and interest rate positions
all at once. In the weeks following this positioning wipeout, the market came to the
conclusion that while US rates were not set to rise, the dollar should continue to
benefit as the ECB and BOJ embarked on quantitative easing (QE) programs.
This led to a situation a few weeks later where the market was very bullish USD
(sentiment) but flat (positioning) as they simply could not bring themselves to get long
USD again as they were scarred by the pain of October 15. Once new catalysts pointed
to further USD gains, the market went from extremely bullish and lightly positioned
back to extremely bullish and extremely long USD and the dollar shot higher.
While sentiment and positioning move together, it is important to remember that they are
not always the same thing. Most of the time sentiment and positioning will match fairly
closely but it is the times when they do not match that can be most important.
Positioning
In FX, there are many proprietary positioning indicators published by the major banks and
there is the Commitment of Traders (COT) report from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
(CME).
The COT report shows the positions for commercial and noncommercial currency traders as
measured by reported positions in the futures markets. Futures markets represent a fairly
small proportion of the FX market (around 10% of interbank volumes +/‐ depending on the
estimate) but usually provide a decent snapshot of overall market positioning. Commercial
traders are those using futures markets to hedge while noncommercial traders are usually
speculators.
There are many potential sampling issues with the COT data (for example, it overrepresents
carry, trend‐following, and momentum traders) but it is still generally regarded as the best
aggregate measure of FX positioning available. Have a look at how positioning and price
move together (see Figure 9.1).

Figure 9.1 Daily EURUSD vs. COT NON‐COMMERCIAL NET EUR POSITION (gray),
2009 to 2014.
A few observations here:
1. Positions and price normally trend in the same direction. The market tends to follow
the trend and tends to add to winning positions and reduce losing positions.
2. Positioning often leads price at turning points. If you look at the lows in mid‐2012, for
example, you can see that positioning (the gray line) led the move off the lows in spot
(the black line). This is worth noting because you should always keep on the lookout for
moments when price and positioning diverge. This is an early warning that a long‐
running and crowded trend is ready to turn.
3. Positioning can trend for a long time. The market took more than a year to get from the
highs in positioning (and price) to the lows between May 2011 and June 2012.
4. Absolute levels of positioning mean less than the rate of change of positioning. In May
2010, you can see that short EUR positioning reached what was then an extreme level of
more than 100,000 contracts. This then led to a very aggressive reversal from 1.18 to
1.48 in EURUSD. The next time positioning reached short 100,000 contracts (early
2012), many traders took that as an indication that positioning again could go no
further.
Positions then went from short 100,000 to more than 200,000 contracts and EURUSD
kept going down from 1.28 to 1.22 before it bottomed. The overall size of FX markets
varies over time and positioning size can depend on many variables, especially
volatility. In less volatile markets, positions will tend to get larger and when a theme is
very popular and has a strong macro logic, positions will get very large.
When you hear someone say that positioning is extreme, don't get too excited. Usually all
that means is that the market is in a strong trend. Ask more questions: Can positioning get
more extreme? How long has it been extreme? Is the price continuing to go in favor of those
who are positioned with the trend (i.e., do price and positioning confirm each other?) Are
the variables and narrative that led to the big position still in play? Or are the fundamentals
changing? What upcoming catalysts could lead to a turn in positioning?

Simplistic views of positioning will always suggest that you take the other side, but rarely is
that approach profitable because trends can last many months or even years. Most research
shows that it is generally more profitable to go with COT positioning, not go against it.
While positioning data are important, my experience over the years is that well‐informed
observation can be more useful than any quantitative analysis of positioning. As a market
maker, I have often noticed that you can get a good read on positioning by the number of
enquiries you get as the market moves. You can get the same vibe on Twitter.
If people are generally asking “what the…?” about a move, or saying the move is “stupid” or
“dumb” or “ridiculous,” you can assume they are not on the winning side of the move.
Similarly, if you are at a hedge fund and you get 11 different “BUY USDCAD!”
recommendations in your inbox; you should probably hit a bid. The deeper your
involvement in the market and the greater your experience level, the better your sense of
positioning and sentiment.
As outlined in the example above, the most useful trading signals come when sentiment and
positioning are both extreme and at a turning point. This is an important distinction because
sentiment and positioning can remain extreme for a long time and it is often when they are
pinned to an extreme that you get the juiciest and most aggressive part of a trending move.
If you're going to trade sentiment and positioning successfully, you need to identify
moments when sentiment and positioning are both extreme and then wait for signs that they
are starting to turn. In other words, when price is going up and sentiment is becoming less
bullish, there could be an outstanding opportunity to take the other side.
As a general rule, FX pairs tend to be in one of the following six states:
SENTIMENT
BULL MARKET BEAR MARKET
HIGH and STABLE
Bullish
HIGH and RISING
Very bullish
HIGH but FALLING
BEARISH
LOW and STABLE
Bearish
LOW and FALLING
Very bearish
LOW but RISING
BULLISH
You will rarely see, for example, a situation with falling prices and bullish sentiment because
sentiment almost always follows price. If you are looking to use sentiment to take the other
side of a trend, your best bet is to look for the conditions marked in bold all caps in the table
above: situations where sentiment diverges from the price action.
Ideally, you get a sense of this not just from the data but also from talking to other traders
and reading blogs and media reports about the FX market. If you are a professional FX
trader with access to direct market information, quite often you can feel a turn in sentiment
before it shows up in the data; this will help you get ahead of the crowd.
Another way to pick a top or bottom in price is to identify situations where sentiment
readings are extreme and then wait for a reversal formation such as a shooting star or bear
hammer. This is a great way to trade sentiment because you remain very patient, recognizing
that high sentiment readings are a standard part of a bull market; then when you see a
bearish technical setup, you pounce.
The theory is that the elevated sentiment and positioning readings will fuel the correction
that you have been waiting for. I must emphasize once again, though: Never sell just because
“the market's long.” That is a recipe for failure in trading and will constantly put you at odds
with the prevailing trend. Look for points when positioning is extreme and fundamentals are
turning and positioning is turning and there is a clear technical reversal pattern. Then you
have a Five‐Star setup.
Cognitive Bias

Many academics and market practitioners believe that the main source of inefficiency in
financial markets is irrational human behavior. I agree. The idea of markets populated by
totally rational actors trying to maximize their wealth is complete nonsense to anyone who
has ever traded real financial markets.
There are many, many explanations for how and why investors act irrationally. It is
important to understand these types of bias for two reasons: (1) so that you can see others
acting irrationally and capitalize on it and (2) so that you can recognize yourself acting
irrationally and stop it.
Here is a list of important cognitive biases that influence trader and market behavior:
Confirmation
Overconfidence
Extrapolation
Asymmetric loss aversion
Greed and fear
Anchoring
Round number
Favorite/longshot
Herding
Confirmation Bias
Confirmation bias is the single most important bias to understand because it can distort and
impair your decision making at crucial moments. This bias is the phenomenon where
humans tend to absorb and internalize information that confirms their beliefs and ignore or
discount information that contradicts their beliefs or hypothesis.
Confirmation bias is prevalent both in financial markets and in the outside world but I focus
here on confirmation bias as it pertains to trading. Confirmation bias generally means that if
you are bullish, you will be very open to good news but you will tend to downplay, question,
or ignore bearish information. I have seen this many, many times in my own trading and in
the trading of others. You believe what you want to believe. Check out this quote from
Charles Darwin:
“I had, also, during many years, followed a golden rule, namely, that whenever a
published fact, a new observation or thought came across me, which was opposed to my
general results, to make a memorandum of it without fail and at once; for I had found by
experience that such facts and thoughts were far more apt to escape from memory than
favorable ones.”
– Charles Darwin, The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin
Confirmation bias can often be seen clearly when economic data are released. Economic
releases often consist of a headline number plus a bunch of details. The monthly nonfarm
payrolls release (for example) is made up of a headline number (net change in nonfarm
payrolls) and a bunch of details (unemployment rate, hours worked, average hourly
earnings). I have often seen traders go into the release hoping for a strong number, and
when the headline number comes out weak you hear:
“But wait! Look at the details! The details are strong! Ignore the weak headline!”
And then the next month they are looking for a strong number again and the headline is
strong and the details are weak and the trader can't stop hollering about how strong the
headline is… while completely ignoring the details! This is classic confirmation bias.
Another way that confirmation bias plays out is when traders go searching for information
that supports a weak starting hypothesis. A trader might be bullish AUD in her gut but she

has no good thesis yet. So she starts scanning through charts to support the idea. “Wow, this
chart looks super‐bullish!” is usually the eventual result as she keeps changing time horizons
and rescaling overlays and drawing trendlines and Fibonacci levels until she finds a chart
that supports her view.
The only true antidote to confirmation bias is to get flat. It is critically important to
understand the power of flat. Only when you are totally flat can you process incoming
information with zero bias. It is important to truly understand and believe that. No matter
how smart you are, no matter how self‐aware, everyone is subject to confirmation bias. Do
not think you are exempt. Flat is a position. A good position.
When you see incoming news, be aware of your own thought process. Is everybody
interpreting the news as bullish and you see it as bearish? That is a sign you may be falling
victim to confirmation bias. Clearly, it is good to be an independent thinker, so just because
everyone disagrees with you that doesn't mean you are wrong. It just means you need to be
careful. When there are conflicting views flying around, somebody is wrong. Is it you?
If you are confused…get flat.
Rule #7 of FX Trading: Flat is the strongest position. When in doubt, get out.
Overconfidence Bias
There is one simple stat that explains overconfidence bias perfectly: Studies show that 70%
to 90% of all Americans think they are above‐average drivers. Overconfidence bias exists
in many areas, including investing.
I ran a survey in AM/FX in 2014 and 70% of my readers responded that they are “better
than average” or “way better than average” traders while just 5% said they were “below
average.” A 2006 study by James Montier showed that 74% of fund managers believe they
are above average. Reading these studies makes me 120% sure that you are sometimes
overconfident, too.
Overconfidence bias is important because if you are overconfident, you are probably blind to
your weaknesses and overestimate your edge. This can lead to all sorts of faulty behaviors
such as overtrading, confirmation bias, and improper position sizing.
Recognize that you are not the only smart person in the world and be alert to signs that you
may be overconfident in your view. Consider alternative hypotheses. Be confident in your
view but remain open to other viewpoints. Remember that you are human.
Extrapolation Bias (or Recency Bias)
One could write an entire book on the topic of extrapolation bias but the gist of it is that
people tend to assume that whatever is happening right now will continue to happen in the
future. Traders overemphasize recent price action and the current theme and fail to see new
themes that could be just around the corner. Forecasters are guiltiest of this but traders fall
victim as well. A great example of this was seen in the crude oil market in 2013–2015. Here's
what a leading investment bank had to say in August 2013 with oil trading around $110:
“The disruptions in Libyan oil supplies have lasted far longer than we initially thought
with no near‐term resolution in sight, which was further complicated by the involvement
of the military late last week,” said [the analyst] in a new note to clients. “Combined with
the ongoing problems in Iraq which we see extending into the autumn, OPEC outages
since the beginning of the summer have taken 33 million barrels off the market, which
was further exacerbated by a 32 million barrel downward revision to total OECD
petroleum inventories by the IEA.”
“In our view, these developments will likely lend support to Brent prices around the
$115.00/bbl level in the very near term,” he said.
And then as you might be aware, in 2014 oil collapsed from $110 to $50. Here's an update
from early 2015 as the same analyst then confidently justifies a lower forecast:

“To accommodate the substantial expected first half inventory build and using the storage
arbitrage to the one‐year ahead swap, we are revising down our 3‐, 6‐ and 12‐month price
forecasts for Brent to $42, $43 and $70 respectively, from $80, $85 and $90,” the bank
said in a report by [the same analyst].
“While history would suggest that a storage blow‐out would push spot prices below $35,
we believe that by avoiding breaching storage capacity, the market will hover around $40,
potentially dipping at times into the high $30s which we see as the likely lows of this
cycle,” the report said.
Figure 9.2 presents this in a chart.
Figure 9.2 Two untimely crude oil forecast changes.
http://www.businessinsider.com/goldman‐raises‐oil‐price‐target‐2013‐8
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/01/12/us‐research‐goldmansachs‐crude‐idUSKBN0KL0RR20150112
The point here isn't to say that this analyst or investment bank is bad at forecasting. The
point is that humans in general are bad at forecasting. We tend to overweight recent
information and assume that whatever is going on right now will continue into the future.
When oil is collapsing, it is very hard to imagine a scenario where it turns back around.
Extrapolation bias leads to all sorts of bad trading behaviors and provides an important part
of the overall explanation for why individual investors consistently underperform the
market.2 When individual stocks or the overall market are up, investors buy on the belief
that the rally will continue. When stocks are selling off, investors sell on the assumption that
the moves will continue.
The antidote to extrapolation bias is an open mind. Think independently and question
whether a continuation of the current trend and economic narrative makes sense. Is it fully
priced in? Has the market overshot? If the market has been talking about the same theme
for six months and a currency pair has moved 20% on the back of that theme, maybe it's
time to be wary?

It is easy to get caught up in a theme for too long, especially when the price action supports
it. Think for yourself. Read everything you can but trade your own view, not someone else's.
Ignore professional forecasters as much as possible as they will constantly adjust their
forecast as spot moves. As my friend Jared Dillian once put it: Read many, respect few.
A classic example of extrapolation bias in the FX market is when USDJPY rallied from 75 to
120 in the 2012/2014 period. The BOJ started a massive quantitative easing program in
2012 and this pushed the yen down (and USDJPY up) steadily for 2+ years. When the move
started, most forecasters correctly predicted yen weakness on the back of BOJ action and set
targets for 2015 of 100 or 105. When USDJPY reached 100, however, instead of declaring
mission accomplished, almost every forecaster then raised their forecast for USDJPY to 105
or 110. When USDJPY hit 110, they raised their forecast to 120. At 120 they wheeled out a
130 forecast. The higher USDJPY goes, the higher the forecasts go so the forecasts tend to
have no meaning or predictive power whatsoever.
The direction of the forecast and the underlying logic often have some use but the point
estimates are meaningless and subject to constant revision. You can see in Figure 9.3 that if
you simply took USDJPY spot and multiplied it by 1.08, you would get a good estimate of
where the professional forecasters saw USDJPY ending 2015.
Figure 9.3 USDJPY spot vs. forecast, 2012 to 2014.
The inverse of extrapolation bias is the Gambler's Fallacy. This is the assumption that many
gamblers make where they see a roulette wheel land on red 10 straight times and thus expect
the next spin to land on black. This is wrong because each spin of the roulette wheel is an
independent (mutually exclusive) event. You will sometimes hear arguments like “Euro is
down seven days in a row, you have to be long!” Umm, no. No you don't. Extrapolation is
much more common than the Gambler's Fallacy in FX markets.
Asymmetric Loss Aversion
A significant body of research shows that humans feel more pain from losses than they feel
joy from wins in a ratio of about 2:1. We will go out of our way to avoid losses whenever
possible. Humans will also take more risk to avoid a loss than they will take in pursuit of
gains. If you are a human, it is important that you understand this fundamental quirk in the
human psyche as it leads to all sorts of suboptimal behavior.

The most important behavioral issue that arises from loss aversion is that traders find it
hard to exit losing positions because once they exit the position the loss becomes crystallized
and thus real and irreversible. If you hold onto (or double down) on a position, you might
get back to flat or even make money on the trade, but once you cut out, the trade is over.
You're a loser. Nobody likes a loser.
But the thing is: Most successful traders take many, many small losses and achieve fewer but
larger gains. So you need to turn off this instinctive loss aversion and embrace the idea of
taking frequent but small losses. You need to ride your profitable trades and get out of your
losers as quickly as possible. When you take a loss after hitting a predetermined stop loss
level, try to pat yourself on the back. Say, “Good, another small loss. I am sticking to my plan
and showing solid discipline.” We will discuss this concept more in Chapter 14, “Common
Weaknesses in Trading.”
Loss aversion also leads to a strange psychological asymmetry where you will find that the
joy you feel on your up days is half as strong as the pain you feel on your down days. Over
the course of many years, this can lead to trader burnout. Let yourself to be happy. It is
simply too exhausting to be either (a) bummed out because you lost money or (b) afraid to
be happy when you're making money because you don't want to jinx it.
It is okay to be happy when you are making money (just not too happy)!
If you are interested in reading more about loss aversion, check out the classic 1984 paper
from Kahneman and Tversky or Thinking Fast and Slow by Daniel Kahneman
(http://dirkbergemann.commons.yale.edu/files/kahnemann‐1984‐choices‐values‐
frames.pdf).
Emotions: Greed and Fear
Emotional decision making leads to suboptimal outcomes and creates frequent periods of
extreme inefficiency in the market. Greed and fear are such powerful forces that they can be
the primary (or only) market driver at times. Economics and fundamentals can go
completely out the window when people hit extreme levels of greed or fear. You need to
recognize these moments and take the other side.
A strong battery of quantitative measures for evaluating prices can be a key tool for avoiding
greed and fear extremes. For example, the large price move on volume spike discussed in
Chapter 7 is an example of using quantitative analysis to identify peak moments of fear or
greed.
Professional traders with experience can sometimes feel these extremes by observing the
behavior of those around them, from watching price action, and from the overall electricity
in the market. I remember in 2008 there were many moments when the guano was hitting
the fan and everyone on the trading floor was freaking out. You could feel these frenzies
reach a fever pitch and then when the volume and electricity started to subside, just a little,
it was always a fantastic short‐term buying opportunity.
One piece of advice when you are taking the other side of a market that is gripped by
extreme fear or greed: Make sure your position is not too big. Smaller positions allow you to
ride out the extra volatility that usually accompanies highly emotional market moves.
As the mother of all bias, emotion leads to many interesting market tendencies and helps
explain why there are many, many times when you will hear a trader screaming “THIS
MAKES NO SENSE!” Remember: It doesn't have to make sense; quite often, it won't!
Markets are driven by much, much more than economic fundamentals or logic.
Greed and fear can create feedback loops between news and price as news causes price to
move and then price moves cause new behavior as traders react not to the news but to the
move in the price itself. As prices fall, other sellers come into the market either willingly (as
they fear prices will fall even lower) or unwillingly (because of margin calls or a shoulder tap
from their boss).

Feedback loops are endogenous drivers of price action and can drive markets in one
direction for much longer than anyone would rationally expect.3 This leads to what is known
as overshooting. This type of overextension is common and FX rates are notorious for
overshooting on all time horizons.
Warren Buffett said it best: “Be fearful when others are greedy and greedy when others are
fearful.” The only thing I would add is: Make sure your position is sized correctly or you will
be adding to the feedback loop when your stop loss order is triggered. There is much more
on position sizing and risk management in Part Three.
Anchoring
Anchoring is another behavioral bias that is hard to avoid. Quite often, even when I know I
am anchoring, I have trouble ignoring the anchor and behaving rationally. The concept of
anchoring says that once a human being is given an initial starting number for something
that they are trying to estimate or value, they have a hard time moving away from that
starting point. Here's an excerpt from the Wikipedia entry on anchoring:
The anchoring and adjustment heuristic was first theorized by Amos Tversky and Daniel
Kahneman. In one of their first studies, participants were asked to compute, within 5
seconds, the product of the numbers one through eight, either as 
 or reversed as 
. Because participants did not have
enough time to calculate the full answer, they had to make an estimate after their first few
multiplications. When these first multiplications gave a small answer—because the
sequence started with small numbers—the median estimate was 512; when the sequence
started with the larger numbers, the median estimate was 2,250. (The correct answer was
40,320.) In another study by Tversky and Kahneman, participants observed a roulette
wheel that was predetermined to stop on either 10 or 65. Participants were then asked to
guess the percentage of the United Nations that were African nations. Participants whose
wheel stopped on 10 guessed lower values (25% on average) than participants whose
wheel stopped at 65 (45% on average).4 The pattern has held in other experiments for a
wide variety of different subjects of estimation.
Anchoring influences many areas of economics, especially finance and marketing. In
investing, anchoring makes it difficult for traders and investors to sell an asset below the
price they initially paid for it. For example, you buy EURUSD at 1.1633 and then two
minutes later, you change your mind. If it's trading at 1.1638, you probably just hit a bid, but
if EURUSD is trading 1.1631, your first instinct will probably be to try to get out at 1.1633 or
better on a small bounce. This is not rational. The market doesn't care where you got in, and
neither should you.
You will see this bias again and again as it infects both short‐term traders and long‐term
investors. How many times have you heard yourself or another trader say something like:
“I'll just wait 'til I get back to flat. Then I'll cut this position for sure. I promise!” Be aware
that just because you bought EURUSD at 1.1633 doesn't mean the market will go back there
when you change your mind. If you change your mind on a position, get out. Do not wait for
it to get back to your entry level. Just get out.
Round Number Bias
Round number bias is less important than other types of bias outlined above but it is
nevertheless interesting and worth knowing about. Humans behave as though round
numbers are more important than non‐round numbers. If you don't believe me, next time
you are meeting someone tell them, “I'll be there in 19 minutes!” It sounds weird even
though it is not appreciably different in any way from the normal‐sounding “I'll be there in
20 minutes!” Humans just prefer round numbers.
Round number bias shows up frequently in financial markets. In FX markets, for example,
most hedgers and investors will naturally leave their orders on the round numbers,

preferring 50 to 49 or 00 to 99 for no rational reason. Going through all the daily highs and
lows in EURUSD from 1999 to 2011, you get the distribution seen in Figure 9.4.
Figure 9.4 Last two digits of the highs and lows in EURUSD since inception.
I only used data from 1999 to 2011 because EBS went to half pips after that.
If you analyze any other currency, the distribution looks about the same, with clustering of
highs and lows on the round numbers.
Why are round numbers more likely to be highs and lows? There are two reasons: (1) Less
sophisticated market players tend to leave take profit orders on the round numbers just
because of human nature. It feels kind of weird to leave a bid at 52 so customers just
generally leave the bid at 50 instead. (2) Barriers and option strikes are usually on round
numbers and so bids and offers tend to cluster there.
The takeaway for short‐term FX traders is that you should assume extra stickiness at the
round numbers and put your orders on the appropriate side. If you are trying to buy the dip,
for example, put your bids at 03 or 01, not 99 or 97. On the other hand, if you are leaving a
sell stop, put it below 00, not just above. If you find this topic interesting, here are some
links for additional reading on round number bias:
http://www.michiganjb.org/issues/62/text62b.pdf
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/devin.pope/research/pdf/Website_Round%20Numbers.pdf
http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr150.pdf
http://www.psyfitec.com/2010/02/irrational‐numbers‐price‐clustering.html
Favorite/Longshot Bias
Favorite/longshot bias is another human trait that you need to be aware of when trading,
especially when trading options. Human beings overvalue longshots and undervalue
favorites because:
a. The perceived asymmetry provided by the respective payouts makes the longshot look
good.
b. Humans tend to overweight small probabilities.
In other words, longshots are tempting because of the high payoff odds but are generally bad
value because people systematically overpay for them and overestimate the chance they will

pay off. Figure 9.5 shows what this bias looks like in horse racing, where betting on favorites
is expected to cost you about 10% of your money in the long run while betting on longshots
gives you expected losses closer to 80%!
Figure 9.5 Rate of return of horse racing win bets, by odds.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/655844?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents
One way this bias manifests in financial markets is through a consistent bias to overpay for
tail options and tail trades that offer high leverage. Tail options also tend to be overpriced
because there is no natural seller, but always plenty of natural buyers. So not only are out‐of‐
the‐money options more expensive than in‐the‐money options, the more out of the money
you get, the more you have to pay in transaction costs and skew to get the trade done.
Another way of saying this is that the market loves to buy lottery tickets and hates selling
them.
Traders love ideas that pay 10:1 or 20:1 but fail to recognize that those ideas often have
negative expected value because of their very low probability of success.
FX traders display this bias when they ignore the routine 50 to 70 basis point moves that the
market presents just about every day and try to capture the rare 5% or 10% moves instead.
Don't feel the need to go for home runs all the time. Success comes from repeatedly
executing trades with high expected value, not from the occasional monster trade.
If you put on a longshot bet, make sure you have evaluated the payoff so that you are getting
fair odds, not just getting sucked in by the optics of a juicy payout. For example, say you are
bearish AUDUSD and you price up an option that pays 7:1. Your gut reaction as a human is
to be attracted to such a large payout ratio. But take a deep breath. Make a fair assessment.
What are the true odds that AUD moves enough to trigger the 7:1 payout? Clearly if you
think about it and conclude that the real odds of the event happening are closer to 10:1, then
you should stay away from the option, whether or not a 7:1 payout will make your year!
Herding Bias
Herding bias directly impacts economists, investors, and traders on all time horizons. The
simple explanation of this form of bias is that for most people it is safer to be wrong with
everyone else than to try to be right on your own.

If every other trader you work with is long dollars, can you be comfortable short dollars?
Most traders (if they were being honest) would say no. It's easier to run with the pack. If
everyone is wrong and loses money, you can easily justify your poor performance but if
everyone has the big trade on and you miss it, you feel like a donut.
In a world of perfectly rational economic actors, there would be no need to worry about what
your boss will think of your positions or whether your investors will think you are an idiot
for going against a long‐running and supposedly logical market trend. But in the real world,
there are plenty of non‐economic reasons that people trade, and a big one is to manage
career risk by staying with the crowd.
You see the same phenomenon with economists. If every big‐name economist on Wall Street
is predicting higher US interest rates, an economist needs to have extremely high conviction
to publicly predict lower rates. Yes, if he's right, he might be celebrated, but if he's wrong, he
looks bad and his job could be in jeopardy. And he probably has a wife and kids and a
mortgage payment to worry about!
There are examples of this type of behavior everywhere in FX but a great one is 2010–2011
when every investor in the world dumped their Eurozone assets. Yes, it was a scary time for
Eurozone assets as the Greek and PIIGS crisis sent shockwaves around the world. But the
selling of European assets was greatly exacerbated because investors figured: “If I hold onto
my European assets and they bounce back, I will outperform the index and get paid a little
more” versus “If I hold onto my European assets and the Eurozone breaks up, I will be fired
for not protecting my investors against a known risk.”
Even if a money manager felt that the market was overreacting to the European crisis and
felt European assets were discounted to unrealistic or cheap levels, they made the personal
calculation to manage their career risk. They decided it was better to sell like everyone else
rather than risk a career‐ending loss in the unlikely event that Mario Draghi failed to do
whatever it takes.
Another important instance of herding occurs when economists forecast economic data.
Let's say you are an economist and your job is to predict next month's US Retail Sales figure.
You have been looking at your handy‐dandy models and you see that all signs point to a very
strong number next month. A normal month's release for Retail Sales is in the range of –
1.0% to +1.0% but your model is saying a good estimate for this month's release might be
closer to +2.5%. You have a peek at other economist forecasts and see that the highest
forecast is +1.1%. Suddenly, you feel like your +2.5% estimate might be a tad extreme. Why
bother going so far away from the rest of the forecasts? Might as well just submit a forecast
of 1.2%. Maybe 1.3%. You are still the highest forecast but you don't look too stupid if the
number comes in weak.
Evidence supports the idea that economic forecasters herd around the mean and fail to
forecast large economic surprises in either direction despite the fact these surprises are
common. Figure 9.6 shows the distribution of economists' estimates for Retail Sales from
2010 to 2014 versus the actual distribution of the data releases. You can see that in general,
forecasts are clustered in a tighter range than the real data and economists don't forecast
extremes very often compared to reality.

Figure 9.6 Distribution of economist forecasts and actual releases of US Retail Sales, 2010
to 2014.
This is rational behavior if you are an economist who does not want to look stupid or get
fired, but as a trader you need to be aware that economic data are distributed in a less
normal way than economists' forecasts would imply. Economic numbers, like financial
market returns, are not normally distributed—they have fat tails. A lack of imagination can
catch you by surprise and so you should always remember that anything can happen, even if
nobody is forecasting it!
Conclusion
In the end, many of the types of bias that I describe are similar or interrelated and come
down to one fact: From time to time, individual humans act in a way that is not rational. And
as a group, humans can sometimes act in totally insane ways.
Markets are made up of fallible, irrational human beings with imperfect information. These
human beings are emotional and constantly scrambling to maximize their wealth, protect
their families from ruin, and avoid getting fired. Investors pivot frequently from
emphasizing return on capital to worrying about return of capital and these oscillations
between fear and greed are punctuated by short and temporary periods of sane equilibrium.
This leads to all manner of wild, herd‐like, and irrational behaviors and these behaviors
create all sorts of price distortions, dislocations, and overshooting in the market. If you
understand behavioral FX, you will sometimes find yourself on the winning side of these
dislocations. Instead of acting as part of the feedback loop problem, you will be greedy when
others are fearful and take the other side. You will be a strong hand, not a weak one.
Good trading takes courage.
Anecdotal Evidence
Anecdotal evidence is any information you gather by personal observation or from one‐off
stories. It is fun, but also usually unscientific and often unreliable. There is a wide range of
anecdotal evidence you can incorporate into your analysis of the financial markets and use
to confirm existing views or establish new conclusions.

There is a saying that the plural of anecdote is not data and like most sayings, it contains
some truth. The risk with anecdotal evidence is that it is fraught with the potential for
sample size issues, confirmation bias, and other types of prejudice. This is because the
anecdotes you choose to focus on could be biased either by your preexisting views, by
regional idiosyncrasies,5 or by other factors. The advantage of anecdotal evidence is that it
can be observed in real time and can be easy to understand, logical, intuitive, and sometimes
obvious proof of sentiment extremes.
First, let's look at the Magazine Cover Indicator, an anecdotal indicator that is well known,
logical, and effective. The indicator says that when a financial story or market theme is
displayed on the cover of a magazine, that theme or the related trend is near exhaustion. In
other words, magazine covers are reverse indicators.
Two famous examples of this phenomenon are when the cover of BusinessWeek hollered:
“The Death of Equities,” right as the stock market made a major bottom in August 1979
(Figure 9.7) and when the Economist proclaimed the world to be “Drowning in Oil” just as
oil bottomed in 1999 (Figure 9.8).
Figure 9.7 S&P 500, 1965 to 2000.
Figure 9.8 Crude oil, 1990 to 2016.
Two other well‐known examples of the Magazine Cover Indicator are the appearance of Jeff
Bezos as Time magazine's Person of the Year in 2000 just before the tech bubble burst

(Figure 9.9) and Russian President Vladimir Putin as Person of the Year in 2007 right before
the collapse of oil brought down the Russian economy.
Figure 9.9 Daily NASDAQ Composite 1995 to 2003.
The premise behind the indicator is that when a journalist or editor finally devotes a cover to
a market trend, company, country, or person, the story or theme has been in the market for
some time and is likely past its peak. Positioning and sentiment should already fully reflect
the story on the cover of the publication. In other words, by the time a magazine features a
trend, it is not news. The story is priced in.
My former colleague Greg Marks and I researched this phenomenon and found that there
does tend to be a major reversal in a market after it is featured on the cover of the
Economist. We found that Economist covers that express a strong bias toward an asset or
asset class are a reverse indicator one year later about 68% of the time.6
The Skyscraper Indicator
The Skyscraper Indicator suggests that when a country builds the world's tallest skyscraper,
it is a sign of overconfidence and a potentially imminent financial crisis. Countries build
world‐record‐setting skyscrapers only during bull markets when credit is plentiful, and thus
historically there have been many instances where the country building the world's tallest
skyscraper subsequently fell upon hard times.
Some salient examples are 1929, The Empire State Building (followed by Great Depression);
1972, the World Trade Center and Sears Tower (1970s stagflation); 1997, the Petronas Tower
(Asian Financial Crisis); and 2005, the Burj Dubai (real estate collapse and financial crisis).
The indicator doesn't produce many signals, of course, but it has an impressive track record.
An interesting academic paper on the topic can be found at
http://mises.org/journals/qjae/pdf/qjae8_1_4.pdf.
Instead of focusing on a single anecdotal indicator, you can also observe extremes in
sentiment when many anecdotes come together at once. A good example of this was in 2007,
when fears of a dollar collapse raged because of the twin US deficits (trade deficit and
budget deficit) and massive dollar selling by central banks like China and Saudi Arabia. The
following three anecdotes appeared around the same time:
1. November 6, 2007: Supermodel Gisele Bunchen asks for her contracts to be modified
and paid in euros instead of dollars.
2. November 17, 2007: In his new rap video, Jay‐Z is featured making it rain euro notes
instead of the traditional Benjamins (US dollars).

3. November 2007: This meme goes viral: 
The EUR hit an all‐time high shortly after these three anecdotes circulated. The weak dollar
was part of the mainstream narrative and these anecdotes were evidence that the theme was
popular, well known, priced in, and at risk of turning stale. The dollar peaked four months
later and the EUR never traded higher again.
One major caveat here (and a recurring theme when dealing with anecdotal evidence) is that
EURUSD was 1.4800 in November 2007 and went all the way to 1.6040 before it finally
peaked. It then sold off aggressively to close 2008 around 1.2500.
In this case, the anecdotal evidence provided an accurate but not timely signal of excessive
bullish EURUSD sentiment (see Figure 9.10). The pair went 12 big figures higher over six
months before finally crashing, so anyone who went short on the anecdotal evidence had to
endure a lot of pain. This is typical. Quite often the last wave of euphoria is the most violent
and the most obviously extreme sentiment period with the most anecdotal evidence of
euphoria or despair.
Figure 9.10 Daily EURUSD, 2001 to 2008.
Anecdotal evidence of extreme bullish sentiment was piling up by November 2007 but the high came 6 months and 12
big figures later.
Overall, anecdotal evidence is interesting and fun and can be a useful input into your big‐
picture macro analysis. Just be aware that anecdotal evidence is unscientific and fraught
with pitfalls. The power of contrarian anecdotes tends to be evident in hindsight but my
experience is that people are constantly pointing out anecdotal evidence to support their
contrary view during strong trends and some of it works, and some of it doesn't.
Don't get too excited about anecdotes. Treat them as one extremely fascinating but not very
predictive input into your process. Those with experience will recognize when history
repeats or rhymes and anecdotes from the present market will match past anecdotes and
help the experienced trader to see patterns that may have some forecasting value. If you find
yourself thinking, “I've seen this movie before,” you probably have.

A good example of anecdotal evidence successfully calling a top was the bitcoin bubble in
December 2017. The anecdotal evidence of the bitcoin bubble was so obvious and so similar
to the crazy stories I lived through in 1999 that it became obvious at that point the bitcoin
story was set to pop. This is not a hindsight call; I (and many others) identified the absurdity
of the cryptobubble in December 2017 using mostly anecdotal evidence.
A more robust approach to anecdotal evidence collects data in various ways (by adding up
the number of bullish articles on the front page of the WSJ versus the number of bearish
articles, for example) to avoid sample size and confirmation bias pitfalls. This approach is
sensible and many natural language approaches are currently in use to extract sentiment
from Twitter and other newsfeeds.
The Cheer Hedge
The Cheer Hedge is an interesting psychological phenomenon I have observed throughout
the years. Early in my career as a trading desk manager, I noticed that any time one of my
traders yelled or pumped his fist in celebration, or cheered in any way for a profitable
position, the trade turned against him almost immediately. This pattern was so persistent
that after a while, whenever someone on the desk cheered or celebrated a winning position, I
took the opposite position in my management book. The contrary positions always made
money.
I started noticing this effect in early 2004 and I'm writing this almost 15 years later—the
effect still happens all the time. Extreme exuberance is a very important tell. When someone
screams “AMERICA!” on a trading floor as the dollar rips higher after strong US data, that is
always the intraday high!
The reason this happens is that cheering and yelling happens only at emotional extremes.
Price extremes and emotional extremes tend to coincide. When someone around you cheers,
most likely (1) she feels invincible as her position is well in the money with strong
momentum, and (2) others around the world are probably feeling the same euphoria. So
keep this in mind: When someone around you cheers in celebration of a winning position—
go the other way. And if you feel yourself wanting to cheer or sing, take note of that emotion
and quickly ask yourself what it might mean.
A similar effect can be seen when you find yourself counting up how much money you are
going to make on a trade as it goes your way. Countless times I have had a big overnight
position and as I get ready for bed, it's already deep in the money. My mind whirrs as I count
up all the P&L that will be waiting for me in the morning when I wake up as I am certain that
all my take profit orders will be executed while I'm deep in REM sleep.
When I wake up in the morning, you can bet I have been stopped out on a massive reversal
that started the second my head hit the pillow. Look for patterns like this that show you are
overconfident and find ways to manage these situations.
Now, when I find myself counting up P&L as I brush my teeth before bed, I know it's a sign
of euphoria. I log in to Bloomberg on my phone and get the guys in Hong Kong to cut 30% to
50% of my positions.
The WTF Indicator
Another anecdotal indicator I find works well is: When many people are asking “WTF”7
about a move, the move has farther to run. It is easiest to observe this if you work at a bank
because you receive incoming calls from clients, but if you trade from home, this can be
surmised via Twitter.
People asking WTF about a market move are almost certainly on the wrong side of that
move; that's why it's a good sentiment indicator. When traders are frustrated or confused by
a move, it is a strong signal. If I'm long a currency and it's going up, I am not asking WTF.
When a position goes my way, it makes perfect sense every time!

Watch for moments when the market is angry and confused about a move. Expect that move
to continue. The stock market rally from 2014 to 2016 is a good example of this. If a move is
making people viscerally angry, it probably has further to run.
The IPO Indicator
A massive IPO8 can be another indicator to watch for as the sign of a top in a specific
industry or for the stock market as a whole. By definition, the only time the market will
absorb a very large IPO is when sentiment is bullish and the market is trading extremely
well. Companies will never go public in a weak market because they want to sell shares in
their company for the highest price possible.
IPOs tend to be plentiful in the late stages of a bull market as owners of companies see their
market value rise and decide to cash out. IPOs are often seen as smart money selling out to
dumb money. After all, if you strongly believed that your stock was cheap and your company
was set to grow dramatically, why would you sell?
A great example of the IPO indicator is when Glencore sold its initial public offering in 2011.
Glencore is one of the largest commodity producers in the world and in 2011 the world was
in the midst of the second wave of an extreme bull run in commodities known as the
Commodity Supercycle. Chinese and speculative demand had pushed commodity prices to
new peaks and investor appetite for anything commodity‐related was insatiable.
The insiders at Glencore were smart and realized that if they ever wanted to sell their
company (which was massive at the time, valued at about $60B), this was a great time to do
so. It is not hindsight to talk about how they sold the top—many observers and analysts
(including me) pointed out at the time that the IPO could be a textbook sign of a top for
commodities.
Take a look at Figure 9.11, which shows the Glencore IPO marked on a chart of the CRB. The
CRB is the benchmark commodities index. Note how the Glencore IPO marked the exact top
tick for commodity markets.
Figure 9.11 Daily CRB Index, 2003 to 2015.
Monster IPOs do not happen often but the signals are so powerful that it is worth keeping
this indicator in the back of your mind in case you see something similar in the future.
While behavioral finance is a huge topic, I hope this chapter has given you a solid
introduction to the topic and opened your mind to some new ways of looking at positioning,
sentiment, and behavioral bias. I strongly encourage you to read all five books in the Further
Reading section. All these books are fantastic and should be on every trader's must‐read list.

After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key concepts:
Markets are not always efficient and humans are not always rational.
Understand the difference between positioning and sentiment.
Understand cognitive bias, especially confirmation bias and overconfidence.
Anecdotal evidence is fun but unscientific.
The Cheer Hedge
The WTF indicator
Further Reading
Dorsey, Woody. Behavioral Trading: Methods for Measuring Investor Confidence and
Expectations and Market Trends. New York: Texere Publishing.
Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011.
Montier, James. Behavioural Finance. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Shiller, Robert J. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015.
Silver, Nate. The Signal and the Noise. New York: Penguin Press, 2012.
Notes
  1 Weak US data tend to lead to selling of USD, which is bullish for EURUSD.
  2 https://www.qidllc.com/wp‐content/uploads/2016/02/2016‐Dalbar‐QAIB‐Report.pdf.
  3 Endogenous means “from within” and so endogenous drivers like feedback loops are
different from exogenous (aka external) drivers like economic data or central bank
actions and often much more difficult to identify or understand.
  4 http://www.its.caltech.edu/∼camerer/Ec101/JudgementUncertainty.pdf.
  5 An example of the regional issue is that many people living in New York City observed the
bustling restaurants and packed shops and concluded that the US economy was on the
mend in 2010. On the contrary, it was probably foreign shoppers, a rebound in the
finance industry, and worsening income inequality that caused the economic boom in
New York while the rest of the United States languished, underemployed in the new
normal.
  6 https://www.economist.com/buttonwoods‐notebook/2016/10/26/are‐magazine‐covers‐
a‐contrarian‐indicator.
  7 What the fudge!
  8 IPO stands for “Initial Public Offering” and is the process where a private company sells
stock to the public. Often called “going public,” it is an extremely important one‐time
event in the life of a company. Cynics say IPO stands for “It's Probably Overpriced.”

CHAPTER 10 
Trading the News
Introduction
Once you have a solid understanding of the fundamentals that
drive your currencies and you have a good handle on the current
narratives in the market, you are ready to trade the news. With
your knowledge of current themes along with positioning and
sentiment, you are ready to figure out how new information will
move prices. Remember that the current price is the sum total of
all the known information in the world.
When news comes out (e.g. economic data, monetary policy
announcements, or unscheduled headlines) the price zigs and zags
as it looks for a new equilibrium level. This search for equilibrium
is sometimes said to be guided by an “invisible hand”1 because it is
uncanny how price rapidly incorporates new information and
adjusts to the new outlook.
When news hits, there is significant opportunity for profit. Traders
who have the best understanding of the fundamental backstory
going into an event will have the best chance of coming out the
other side in the black. Before you trade the news, you need to
have a solid understanding of what is driving the FX pairs you
trade and any correlated markets.
The prevailing economic and fundamental landscape has a
massive influence on how the market interprets new information.
For example, during the 2010–2012 period, the stock market
consistently rallied on bad economic news because it was
perceived that bad economic news meant the Fed would announce
more quantitative easing (QE), and more QE usually means higher
stock prices.
Traders who weren't fully cognizant of the macroeconomic
landscape in those days were always complaining, “This price
action makes no sense! Why are we rallying on bad news?!” Those
who were focused and did their homework understood the
reaction function perfectly. A nuanced understanding of the
market gives you a huge edge when trading the news.

There are many types of news and events that can generate
profitable trading opportunities. In this section I will discuss the
following:
a. Economic data
Trading economic data using NewsPivots
Beat the algos! When the headline number is not the whole
story
b. Central bank meetings
FOMC
ECB
Other
c. Central bank speeches and comments
d. Other headlines and news events

CRITICAL CONCEPT: Understand What Is Priced In
Before you can trade a data release, central bank meeting, or
other event in the FX market, you need to understand what is
priced in. This is an absolutely critical concept for anyone who
trades any financial market. If you trade or you are ever
planning on trading any security in any market, you need to
fully and completely grok the concept of “priced in.” If you read
this section and still don't really get it, ask someone to explain
it more fully. Do not trade the news until you are completely
comfortable with the concept of what is priced into a market.
Financial market prices are generally set by the sum total of all
the buying and selling done by every human and computer
market participant. Different buyers and sellers will decide to
buy or sell depending on the price, and as prices move different
actors with different time frames will enter or exit the market.
Decisions to buy and sell are generally driven by the market's
assessment of fair value for the security and this assessment
should (in theory) be composed of all the available information
that relates to that security. As new information comes in,
prices move in real‐time and should reflect and anticipate all
available information, often before the information itself is
released. Let's look at an example.
Currencies are highly sensitive to interest rate movements.
Therefore, it makes sense that currencies should move when
central banks adjust their primary interest rate. Figure 10.1
shows an example of how a currency can move when a central
bank unexpectedly changes interest rates.

Figure 10.1 Hourly USDCAD around a surprise interest rate
cut from the Bank of Canada, January 2015.
Note USDCAD higher = weaker CAD, stronger USD.
When something unexpected like this happens, it is not priced
in. This move higher is what you would anticipate because an
unexpected rate cut makes holding Canadian dollars less
attractive given the lower yield. The market sells CAD and buys
USD, driving USDCAD higher.
All other things being equal, would you rather hold something
that yields 1% or something that yields 0.75%? Obviously, the
higher yield is more attractive and so when the Bank of Canada
cut rates, the market sold CAD to reflect the news. This, again,
was not priced in. Let's look at an interest rate move that was
priced in. You may remember this story from Chapter 5 when
we looked at how a central bank changes its bias.
In 2008, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) cut rates
dramatically in response to the global financial crisis and then
they cut rates again after the 2011 Christchurch earthquake. By
2013, economic activity had rebounded significantly and it was
clear to the RBNZ that rates were too low. Inflation was
starting to pick up and so the RBNZ felt it would become
appropriate to start raising rates at some juncture, but not

right away. The story plays out as shown in Figure 10.2. The
first hint that the RBNZ wanted to hike rates was delivered on
July 25, 2013, and it is marked by point 1 on the chart.
Figure 10.2 Daily AUDNZD, June 2013 to July 2014.
The pair falls as the market anticipates a NZ rate hike, then rallies when the
RBNZ hikes.
You might recognize this chart from earlier discussions. I have
used AUDNZD to show the evolution of the story because
AUDNZD is the purest play on the New Zealand dollar. Take a
look at the chart and the comments marked. You can see that
the RBNZ slowly prepared the market for the interest rate hike
over a period of 8 months and the NZD gradually appreciated
over this time period (lower AUD, higher NZD). Finally, the
RBNZ hiked in March 2014 but it was completely expected—
fully priced in. The market priced in the hike over the course of
many months and when the hike finally arrived, NZD sold off
in response.
This reaction is counterintuitive to someone who is not
following the NZD closely. “They hiked and the currency sold
off? What the…?” But any professional following the NZD
would know that the hike was fully priced in and so the
reaction in the currency market is perfectly understandable.

There is no need for NZD to rally after a rate hike that is fully
priced in.
In fact, quite often the reaction to an event that was priced in is
the opposite of what the macroeconomic textbooks might
suggest because those who had been buying the NZD in
anticipation of the rate hike sell (take profit) on the day of the
event.
1. “Although removal of monetary stimulus will likely be
needed in the future, we expect to keep the OCR
unchanged through the end of the year.” – July 25, 2013
2. “OCR increases will likely be required next year.” –
September 2013
3. “Although we expect to keep the OCR unchanged in 2013,
OCR increases will likely be required next year.” – October
2013
4. “The Bank will increase the OCR as needed in order to
keep future average inflation near the 2 percent target
midpoint.” – December 2013
5. RBNZ hiked on March 13, 2014.
This concept of a market pricing in an event and then reversing
(somewhat counterintuitively) after the event is known as “buy
the rumor/sell the fact.”

CRITICAL CONCEPT: Buy the Rumor/Sell the Fact
Buy the rumor/sell the fact is a common trading pattern. The
market prices in an event in advance and then reverses after
the anticipated event takes place. The AUDNZD story above is
a good example. Let's look at one more using GBPUSD in
September 2014.
Currencies are often sensitive to political noise and prefer
stability over instability. For example, when Quebec voted on
whether to separate from Canada in 1995, investors sold
Canadian dollars in the lead‐up to the event in order to hedge
the risk that Quebec might leave.
In 2014, there was a similar situation in the United Kingdom
as Scotland called a referendum on whether to stay in or leave
the United Kingdom. Initially, GBP barely moved because
there was an overwhelming view in the market that the Scots
would vote NO. The way the ballot was worded, a NO vote was
a vote to stay in the UK. So a NO vote was bullish for GBP.
As the referendum drew near, however, the polls moved from a
clear NO majority to a near 50/50 split between YES and NO.
This triggered several rounds of GBP selling as each new poll
suggested the vote would be closer and closer. When
referendum night came, the market was on edge as results
came in one council area at a time.2 I stayed in the office past
midnight (on my birthday!) to trade the event.
You can see in Figure 10.3 how GBP rallied gradually
throughout the day and evening of the referendum as good
news trickled in council area by council area. Odds of a Scottish
NO vote (remember NO = stay in the UK = good news) rose
with each exit poll released. GBP rallied gradually and then
finally the currency peaked on one last push higher right as the
official result (bullish GBP) was announced.

Figure 10.3 Hourly GBPUSD around the Scottish
Referendum September 18 and 19, 2014.
Then the market spent the next 12 hours selling GBP in a
classic buy the rumor/sell the fact pattern. Quite often, the
exact moment of a news release is the absolute apex of
sentiment.
Let's look at one more example of buy the rumor/sell the fact
because this is an important and counterintuitive pattern that you
need to fully understand.
In August 2018, tension was high as Donald Trump threatened to
withdraw from the North America Free Trade Agreement. Over
the weekend of August 26–28, news came out that suggested the
United States and Mexico had just about agreed on a new Mexico–
US trade pact. This was viewed as positive for Mexico and so
USDMXN opened lower on Monday. But the news was not yet
official. As more details of the announcement leaked to the media,
USDMXN slowly pushed lower. Then (see Figure 10.4), the
moment Donald Trump appeared on TV to formally announce the
pact, USDMXN made one last hard push lower.

Figure 10.4 5‐minute USDMXN as news comes out that the
United States and Mexico will agree to a trade pact, August 13 to
September 4, 2018.
The news is bearish USDMXN but the market reverses (buy the rumor/sell the fact).
With the news out, the market subsequently scrambled to take
profit and with buyers substantially outnumbering sellers,
USDMXN exploded higher. Traders were screaming “This makes
no sense! The deal is good for Mexico!” and such but the news is
not the point. When good news gets priced over time, the
announcement of the news is not a surprise and it triggers profit
taking and a reversal.
While buy the rumor/sell the fact is a common market pattern,
you can go broke fading every news release. Buy the rumor/sell
the fact is only applicable when an event is highly anticipated, the
result comes in as expected, and the market has been moving in
the direction of pricing that specific outcome for some time.
Trading Economic Data
In the “good old days” before algorithmic trading, you could make
money trading economic data in the seconds right after the

release. If a US data release was strong, you could just quickly buy
20, 30, or even 50 million USDJPY and then sell it out just as
quickly to slower traders at other banks as it rallied. Those days
are long gone. There are now hundreds of algorithms programmed
with code that reads something like:
If nonfarm payrolls headline number beats by 80,000 jobs or
more, buy USDJPY at current market or up to 50 points
higher.
If NFP number beats by 150,000, buy USDJPY up to 100
points higher.
If NFP number misses by X, sell Y… and so on.
Instead of gyrating back and forth for a while before finding
equilibrium, the market now finds equilibrium very quickly after
the release of economic data. Hedge funds and banks use
regression analysis before the data release to estimate how far
each asset should move on various outcomes and they execute
trades via algorithm at the moment of release. They will buy or sell
until all asset classes are approximately in line with where history
suggests they should be and this will happen in microseconds.
There is nothing left on the table for the human traders because all
the liquidity in the market is hoovered by the bots in the first few
microseconds.
Imagine you are in a gymnasium with poor lighting, trying to
shoot rats with a slingshot. There are a few other people in the
room doing the same thing but you are a pretty good shot and
your vision is good. You are doing okay. You are hitting your fair
share of rats.
Suddenly, a cyborg marches into the gym. He is equipped with
infrared night vision and a fully automatic laser gun with motion‐
sensitive targeting. He shoots 50 rats in 10 seconds without
missing. You and the other human rat hunters stand there, jaws
on the floor.
That is what trading economic data is like now that algos are
programmed to trade every economic release. With hundreds of
electronic players all using similar algos, competition is at the
microsecond level and humans are shut out. Pre‐2005 or so, you
could just about make your year trading economic data alone.
Now there is far less money to be made by humans after data

releases. This is one of many examples of how you need to adapt
to changing market conditions over time. Remember Rule #2 of
FX trading: Adapt or die.3
Despite the depressing scenario laid out above, there are still
many profitable ways to trade FX around economic releases. Here
are the best ones:
Trade the Extreme Data
Algos will take out the first pocket of liquidity when economic data
are released, but there are still opportunities for profit when
important data come in extremely strong or extremely weak. This
is because the bots can only buy or sell so much (they have risk
limits too!). The first wave of algo trades can be followed by more
waves of macro and hedge fund trades in the same direction and
you can get in after the algos but before everyone else. Let's look at
the US Retail Sales release in April 2015 as an example.
The Setup
The US economy is performing well, job growth is strong, and oil
prices have recently collapsed. There is an expectation that some
of the money saved on gasoline will be spent on other items; that
should boost Retail Sales. Despite positive momentum in the
economy, Retail Sales have been consistently weak over the past
12 months, so there is expectation for a catch‐up. Adding up the
12‐month cumulative difference between Actual and Expected
Retail Sales over time you get the chart seen in Figure 10.5.

Figure 10.5 12‐month cumulative miss in US Retail Sales (ex‐
autos and gas), October 2010 to March 2015.
The chart shows that on average, Retail Sales have missed
significantly month after month since mid‐2014. Thus, the market
expects a rebound (mean reversion) in the data because the
weakness in Retail Sales doesn't appear to match the strength in
the rest of the economy.
Important reminder (as explained in the section on “What's Priced
In”): The only thing that matters when you are trading economic
data is the actual release compared to what was expected. A
strong number compared to last month means nothing; the key is
always whether data come in better or worse than expected this
month. You can find economist forecasts for economic data on the
web, Bloomberg, or Reuters.
Economists look for Retail Sales ex‐Autos and Gas to come in at
+0.6% but traders are thinking that this estimate is probably low
and the whisper number4 is closer to 0.8% or 0.9%. The market is
structurally long dollars and has been adding to longs ahead of the
release on the assumption the data will be strong.

Traders wait patiently for the news. How strong will the number
be? Heart rates rise across global trading floors and dreams of a
skyrocketing dollar percolate inside the mind of every FX trader
on the street. The question is not whether to be long dollars, but
how many dollars to be long!
The Result
Ouch. The number comes in weak. The actual release is +0.5%
with negative revisions to prior months. The market is caught
wrong‐footed.
Look at the 1‐minute USDJPY chart in Figure 10.6 and focus on
the moments labeled 1, 2, and 3. The first gap move at Point 1 is
the moment immediately upon release as the algos sell whatever
dollars are available on the bid. This takes USDJPY from 119.92
pre‐release to 119.57. Then, the market consolidates for a few
minutes, rallying back to 119.68/70 (Point 2). Somewhere in this
small rally is the place where human traders should sell, knowing
the market has not yet found equilibrium.
Figure 10.6 1‐minute USDJPY, April 14, 2015.
It is not prudent to “go with” every economic data release, but in
this case you know that the market was heavily positioned long

dollars for a strong number and therefore there is more downside
for USDJPY. So on this day, I went short USDJPY at 119.66 with a
stop loss at 120.03 (10 pips above the pre‐release level).
I call the level where a currency was trading the instant before the
news release the NewsPivot. NewsPivots are important levels to
watch after any release; how price behaves around the NewsPivot
is critical. 120.03 is a sensible stop loss because if USDJPY rallies
above the NewsPivot (119.92—where USDJPY was trading before
the number came out) it means the market has completely
rejected the bearish Retail Sales news and there is something
bigger happening. This is a concept known as bad news/good
price. We will discuss this concept more fully later in this section.
Point 3 shows where I took profit on the trade. Usually I would use
some basic technical analysis to determine my take‐profit level. In
this case, I simply covered around 11:00AM because the FX
trading day is mostly over by this time and most major buyers and
sellers should have done whatever they were going to do. Expect
momentum to dwindle after 11:00AM NY as London goes home
and liquidity dries up.
The strategy of going with an economic release works best when
the number is extremely counter to expectations and the market
has a strong bias and a big position the wrong way into the
number. Make sure you understand the specific economic release
well before the number comes out so that you know what is an
extreme release and what is not.
The simplest way to measure extremes is to look at the standard
deviation of the data. A miss or beat of more than 2 standard
deviations on any major economic release is important. In this
case, the miss was much less than two standard deviations and the
move was driven more by positioning and less by the size of the
miss.
Beat the Algos! Going the Other Way after
Economic Data
Another way to profit from economic data is to take the other side
(or fade) the initial kneejerk move. The term “fade” means to take
the other side of a big move or view in the market. Sell a rally or

buy a dip. Quite often on a trading floor you will hear someone
say, “This move is a fade” or “This move is baloney; I'm fading it.”
Fading economic data is a scary strategy because you are going
against short‐term momentum and against the theoretically
logical direction dictated by the economic release. That said, with
the proliferation of algos trading the initial headline, quite often
the fade strategy is most profitable.
The reason fading the kneejerk move often works is that algos and
humans pile in based on the initial reading but there are quite
often times when the details are not as strong as the headline or
the headline is not really all that strong in the first place. Then you
often see a rapid turnaround in the market because the algos are
risk‐averse and so they hit or pay almost any price to get out of a
trade that is not instantly in the money. As usual, it pays to know
the setup going in. Which way is the market leaning? What is the
asymmetry?
A key skill in trading is to identify asymmetries. Always be on the
lookout for moments when the market looks much more likely to
go a particular direction after an event due to positioning or some
other bias in the market.
As a human trader, there is sometimes a profitable opportunity to
take the other side of a move if the headline is not representative
of the full story. For example, say the headline jobs number is
extremely strong but the details of the report (unemployment rate,
average hourly earnings) are weak. You can sell the spike in
USDJPY because the bots will be long too many USD and will
need to sell. The best way to be ready for this type of reaction is to
listen to the immediate reaction and commentary from
economists and strategists.
This is easiest if you work at a bank or hedge fund because you can
hear your economist's reaction almost immediately, but there is
also real‐time reaction on CNBC, Twitter, Reuters, Bloomberg,
and so on. If the headline is very strong but the details are weak,
the dollar will often fail to hold initial gains as the market views
the knee jerk as incorrect or exaggerated and fades it.
Remember that the last trade before the release (the NewsPivot) is
a simple but effective reference point for trading economic data
and other news releases. Make a note of where each of the majors
is trading before any major release and consider those levels to be

the critical pivots for each pair for the rest of the day. This works
because the reaction to the news is often just as important as the
news itself.
If very good news comes out and the currency goes back through
the level it was trading before the news, that's bearish price action.
This is a concept known as good news/bad price. The opposite
situation (bad news/good price) is bullish.
Why would a currency rally on bad news? There are all sorts of
reasons for counterintuitive moves in FX after news and economic
releases but the two main ones are (1) the underlying details of the
release are not consistent with the headline release (strong
headline/weak details) and (2) supply and demand, not news,
determine FX rates. Let's look at these two situations separately.
Reversal for a Good Reason (Headline and
Details Do Not Match)
In this situation, the reversal makes sense. The initial headline
looks extremely bullish (or bearish) but then there are details or
mitigating factors that offset the headline release. Here's an
example.
The Setup
September 10, 2014. Traders wait nervously for the Australian
jobs release. The market has been expecting a big fall in AUDUSD
for months but the currency is extremely resilient. Any sign of
economic weakness is likely to open the door for the sellers while
longs are praying for strong data to keep their P&L afloat.
AUDUSD is trading at 0.9160. The market expects the Australian
economy to add 15,000 jobs and economist forecasts range from
−5k to +35k.
Traders in New York are eating dinner with one eye on the
conversation at the table and another eye on their smartphone FX
app while traders in Singapore, Sydney, Hong Kong, and Tokyo
hunch over their keyboards. Everyone watches the seconds tick off
until the number is finally set to come out: 3… 2… 1…. The number
hits the screens:
The Result

KABOOM!… +122,000 jobs! The strongest jobs number in the
history of Australia! AUDUSD spikes 60 pips instantly from
0.9160 to 0.9220 and shorts cover in a panic, paying any offer
they can. Algos go limit long AUD to capitalize on their
calculations that show such a huge beat means AUD should go up
at least 1%.
Buyers are frantic and AUD trades wildly back and forth between
0.9200 and 0.9220 for 90 seconds or so, trying to find
equilibrium. Then, after about three minutes.… Wait! What's
this!? Full panic on the trading floor as a new red headline hits the
wires.
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS SAYS
METHODOLOGY CHANGE HAS DISTORTED JOBS DATA
In other words, the release is meaningless. Most of the shorts have
already been obliterated and anyone who is long is now badly
caught. Traders in a position of strength see an incredible
opportunity to get short as AUDUSD goes down, down, down.…
Check out the chart in Figure 10.7.
Figure 10.7 10‐minute AUDUSD around the Australian
employment report, September 10 and 11, 2014.

This type of scenario provides a tremendous opportunity for profit
to anyone who is paying attention and is ready to act quickly and
forcefully. Look at how AUDUSD went straight down after the
spike, falling 1.5% over the next few hours.
Reversal for No Reason
The other type of reversal on news is more confusing. It occurs
when the news is unambiguously bullish (or bearish) and the
market goes the logical way at first but then reverses for no
understandable macro reason. Perhaps large buyers were waiting
on the sidelines and want to use the selloff following bad news to
buy at attractive levels.
When price reverses after big news, the “what?” is much more
important than the “why?” If a currency is rallying hard after bad
news, don't worry too much about trying to figure out why it's
rallying. The fact that it is rallying on bad news is all the
information you need. Counterintuitive reactions to data can give
you important information about underlying supply and demand.
Rule #8 of FX Trading: It doesn't always have to make
sense.
The media's job it is to tell a story around every market move, and
even the best journalists cannot always come up with a coherent
narrative. It doesn't always have to make sense.
Let's look at an example of a big reversal after a data release:
The Setup
September 19, 2014. The market has been long USDCAD since
1.00 and now the pair is trading around 1.10. Spot traders and
hedge funds are keen to add to long USD positions but Canadian
CPI is out today and traders are nervous. A strong number could
increase the odds of an interest rate hike by the Bank of Canada
and so a strong CPI is bearish USDCAD. The median economist
forecast for Core CPI is 1.8% with the lowest estimate at 1.5% and
the highest at 1.9%. Anything above 1.9% is big and above 2.0% is
a blockbuster.
NY traders put their Starbucks somewhere safe so it won't get
knocked over when they lunge for the BUY and SELL buttons

while Canadian traders do the same with their Tim Hortons.
USDCAD traders around the world count down the seconds as
they wait for the data to hit the screens: 3, 2, 1…
The Result
BLAMMO! The number comes out… 2.1%! Higher than the
highest forecast. USDCAD immediately plummets from 1.0980 to
1.0895. But then suddenly, there is one wave of buying. And then
another wave… and another… and less than four hours later,
USDCAD is all the way back to unchanged. Figure 10.8 shows the
chart.
Figure 10.8 10‐minute USDCAD chart around the release of the
CPI number, September 18 and 19, 2014.
There was no fundamental or macro reason for this reversal in
price. This is a classic bad news/good price setup. There was very
bad news for USDCAD but it could not hold onto losses and
reversed nearly immediately for no known reason. This is bullish
price action.
Now look at Figure 10.9 to see what happened after. You can see
in the first chart that USDCAD rallied right back to the NewsPivot
level (1.0980). The NewsPivot became resistance for a few hours

and then when it broke, zoom‐zoom, USDCAD trended higher to
1.1070.
Figure 10.9 30‐minute USDCAD chart showing what happened
in the days after the CPI release, September 18 to 23, 2014.
Always be on the lookout for moments when things don't move the
way you would expect them to. This counterintuitive price action
can provide clues as to future direction.
Economic data releases are just one type of news trading
opportunity. Now, let's look at another: central bank meetings.
Central banks are the biggest drivers of currencies as they set
interest rate and currency policy in most developed countries.
While in theory central banks are independent, there are various
levels of political interference in different countries and so this
section will also touch on the political aspects of central banking.
Understand Central Banks
There is a skill to understanding central banks; it comes mostly
from doing the work. I cannot emphasize this enough: If you want
to trade FX, you need to do the work on the central banks. Yes, the
speeches and official statements are usually pretty boring… but
yes, you need to read every one of them if you want to be a serious
FX trader. The evolution of a central bank's thinking is mostly
communicated via speeches and official statements and therefore

you need to read every single one. Don't be lazy! The longer you
follow a central bank, the more of a feel you get for their bias,
tactics, and communication strategy.
Central Bank Meetings
Central bank meetings can have a dramatic impact on currencies
as central banks use regular official meetings to communicate
their most important policies such as the level of official interest
rates and the size of quantitative easing programs. To make
money on central bank meetings, you need to be prepared. I
cannot overstate this enough. You need to fully understand all the
subtleties of the story going in or you can never trade successfully
in the fast market aftermath.
Some traders take this so seriously that they will specialize in a
small group of central banks (Australia and NZ, perhaps, or
Norway and Sweden) and try to develop a superior edge in
forecasting and trading them. Other traders will attempt to
forecast and trade every central bank meeting. One trader I know
was only allowed to trade Norway for his first year after joining a
hedge fund. His boss wanted him to learn everything about that
market before branching out. He studied it intensely, went to
Norway to meet the central bankers, and ended up subsequently
crediting some of his success to this initial constraint.
You need an expert‐level understanding of what's going on to
maximize your edge. The main levers central banks use to
influence markets are target interest rates, balance sheet
management, and forward guidance.
The first and most important variable controlled by the central
bank is the target interest rate. This is often called the overnight or
cash rate and it has a very strong influence on market interest
rates such as T‐Bill rates, the prime lending rate, and mortgage
rates. Central banks generally raise rates to fight inflation and cut
rates to battle unemployment, weak growth, or
disinflation/deflation.
The second variable that central banks control is the size of their
balance sheet. They increase balance sheet size via asset purchases
(usually called quantitative easing or QE). These asset purchases
mostly involve domestic bonds but sometimes will include

domestic stocks or even foreign assets. Central banks can also
reduce the size of their balance sheets. This tends to happen
slowly and methodically.
QE is a relatively new tool for central banks and is still somewhat
experimental. The policy has gained importance since the Global
Financial Crisis because many central banks reduced interest rates
to zero (or below) and still needed more stimulus ammunition.
While the merits of QE and its supposed impact on the real
economy are hotly debated, there is no denying that QE has a
massive and important influence on asset prices. All other things
being equal, theory suggests that interest rate cuts and QE should:
Push a country's currency lower
Drive bond yields lower
Drive its stock market higher
Increase inflation
In practice, results have been extremely mixed and as more
empirical evidence builds, more questions pile up about the
unintended consequences of QE and sub‐zero interest rates. Like a
drug, loose monetary policy creates dependence and also has
many side effects. These side effects can outweigh the benefits as
the dosage increases and the years go by.
Side effects of prolonged QE include greater wealth inequality and
risks to financial stability. Note that the textbooks say that rate
cuts and QE are bad for a currency, but in reality this is not always
true. When the Bank of Japan cut interest rates below zero in
January 2016, the yen sold off for just one day.… Then it rallied for
a year!
The third tool a central bank uses to influence markets is forward
guidance. By telling participants what it plans to do in advance,
the central bank can guide behavior (in theory) and influence
markets without actually doing anything. An example of this is
when the Federal Reserve promised to keep rates at extremely low
levels throughout 2012 and 2013.
By making this promise, the Fed encouraged market participants
to buy riskier assets with higher yields and this pushed the stock
market higher. The Fed hoped that a higher US stock market
would generate a wealth effect. The wealth effect posits that

people feel richer as stocks rally and so they spend more. The
evidence for a wealth effect is mixed.
Like every news trade, the most important thing for you to
understand going into central bank meetings is: What is priced in?
In other words: What is expected to happen at the meeting? If
everyone expects the central bank to hike rates and they hike
rates, financial markets should not move much. On the other
hand, if nobody expects the central bank to hike rates and they
hike rates, you can expect a massive market reaction.
Positioning into a Central Bank Meeting
The key factor when positioning into a central bank meeting is
that you need to have a view that differs from the market. If the
odds of a rate cut are priced at 50/50 and you believe the true
odds are 50/50, there is nothing to do. On the other hand, the
ideal setup is when you have a view that strongly differs from the
market.
Say you think the RBA will hike interest rates but the odds of a
hike are only priced at 20%. The expected value of going into the
meeting long AUD is very high. I usually construct a simple
expected value (EV) diagram to see if a central bank trade is
worthwhile. Here is an example of how I approach a central bank
meeting, estimate EV, and then take a position before the meeting.
The Setup
June 18, 2015. The Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway) meets
this week and the market is split on whether or not they will cut
rates. The pricing is about 40/60 for a cut versus no cut. But
reading all the Norges Bank speeches this year, I have the strong
impression that the plan is to cut rates once in the first half of the
year. It's June and they have not cut yet so it is about time!
In fact, after the last meeting where the Norges Bank stayed on
hold, the governor said this: “Following an overall assessment of
new information and the risk outlook, the Executive Board
decided to keep the key policy rate unchanged at this meeting. At
the same time, there are still prospects that the key policy rate will
be lowered in June.”

My base case is always to take what the central bankers say at face
value. The Norges Bank has been saying they want to cut in the
first half of the year and the statement above is clear. This meeting
is the last meeting in the first half of the year.
Next, I go through all the recent economic data to see if there is
any compelling reason for a change of course. In this case, the
recent economic data are mixed to weak since the Olsen speech
and so there is no reason to expect a change of direction or bias
from prior statements.
The interesting part of this setup is that the market is 40/60 on
whether the Norges bank will cut rates while I think the odds are
closer to 65/35. I have a different view than the market so I want
to bet on a Norges Bank rate cut.
To assess the possible outcomes for this trade, I need to estimate
how much EURNOK will move under each scenario (cut and no
cut). Note that EURNOK is always the best way to play Norway
monetary policy because it is the most liquid and purest play on
NOK.
I can look at past reactions to Norges Bank moves (and non‐
moves) plus use past experience and the options market to
estimate potential volatility. Overnight option breakeven prices
will give you a decent estimate of how much FX will move on any
given event. I then assign probabilities to each outcome and come
up with a standard expected value grid (see Figure 10.10).5
Figure 10.10 Expected value calculation for a theoretical
EURNOK trade.

This grid tells me based on my probabilities that positioning for a
rate cut has a very high expected value. The probabilities you
insert and the estimates of where you think spot will go allow you
to make an informed wager on the outcome of the central bank
meeting. This grid also allows you to play around with the inputs
so that you can take a look at where your breakeven expected
value lands. If you only need a 50% chance of a cut to generate
breakeven EV (for example) and you think the real probability is
65%, then clearly you have a good trade.
This goes back to the concept of a strong process. If you do this
type of analysis and then the Norges Bank does not cut rates, you
can file it under “good decision/bad outcome” and move on. But if
you go in unprepared and have no idea where spot will end up
under various scenarios—that's just bad trading.
The Result
I went in long 15 EURNOK, risking $175,000 on the idea. This
estimate of dollars at risk was calculated using an entry point of
8.7300 and a worst‐case stop loss level of 8.6400.6 Here is what
happened.
The Norges Bank cut rates by 25bps, just as I hoped. Check out
Figure 10.11. The huge spike in the middle of the chart is where the
Norges Bank announcement hit. NOK was clobbered and so
EURNOK ripped higher. My estimate was good and I sold the
EURNOK between 8.83 and 8.85. Total P&L was almost
$200,000. Nice trade!

Figure 10.11 Hourly EURNOK around a Norges Bank meeting,
June 14 to June 24, 2015.
Let's look at another example of how you do the work and then
profit from a central bank meeting.
The Setup
It is late October 2016 and there is an RBA meeting tonight. The
RBA have cut rates twice this year and there is an outside shot at a
cut tonight. While most traders are calling for no move, some
analysts are calling for a cut and others are expecting a strong
easing bias to send the currency lower. There is a new head of the
RBA as Glenn Stevens has retired and Philip Lowe is in charge.
Conveniently, Lowe just gave a detailed speech on monetary policy
less than two weeks ago, so there is an opportunity to do the work
and come up with my own conclusions. After reading the speech
and thinking about the global macro story, I wrote out the
following trading thoughts:
Six out of 28 economists are calling for a cut tonight. Many others
are expecting a dovish outcome even if the RBA does not cut rates.
I carefully read through Philip Lowe's October 18 speech on
Inflation and Monetary Policy and my conclusion is different; I do
not expect a cut, and I do not expect a dovish outcome. Here is

how I dissect the speech. Philip Lowe's text is centered in italics
and my comments are in a normal font.
Recent Decisions
Over the course of this year the Board has lowered the cash rate
twice, in May and August. These reductions followed inflation
outcomes early in the year that were lower than expected as
well as an assessment that inflation was likely to remain quite
low for some time, for the reasons that I have discussed. The
easing in policy was not in response to concerns about
economic growth. If anything, the growth outcomes over the
past year, as measured by real GDP or the trend in
unemployment, have been a bit better than expected.
My takeaway: The RBA's focus is on inflation, not growth.
We have continued to carefully examine the incoming flow of
data. On balance these data suggest that the economy is
continuing to adjust reasonably well to the downswing in
mining investment. This downswing still has some way to go,
but the end is now in sight. And recently, commodity prices
have picked up, which is a marked change from the large
declines in prices we have seen for some years. Measures of
business and consumer sentiment are also slightly above
average.
Commodity prices and the Aussie terms of trade have rebounded
dramatically in recent months. Business confidence is stable near
the highs.
In terms of inflation, we have been looking carefully at the
various measures of inflation expectations, which have clearly
declined, although not to unprecedented levels. The experience
elsewhere suggests that we do need to guard against inflation
expectations falling too far, for if this were to occur it would be
more difficult to achieve the inflation target. Of course, one of
the key influences on inflation expectations is the actual
outcomes for inflation. We will get an important update next
week, with the release of the September quarter CPI.
The Australian CPI update he refers to came out with a strong
headline and weak details. RBA inflation policy is a:

…flexible medium‐term inflation target, with the objective of
delivering an average rate of inflation over time of between 2
and 3 per cent…
This is not a mechanical framework set to react to current
inflation readings.
With the recent rise in Chinese inflation, the rally in oil, the
improvement in Australia's terms of trade, and two rate cuts this
year yet to fully pass through to the Australian economy, I doubt
there would be much alarm right now as the RBA assesses the
future path of inflation. Inflation is currently low but the mania
around global deflation has passed its peak. The RBA will see the
same turn in global inflation momentum that I see.
In terms of the labour market, as I said earlier, the picture is
mixed. The unemployment rate has drifted down, but growth in
hours worked is weak and many part‐time workers would like
to work longer hours. Wage pressures remain weak, although
there are some signs that the downward pressure on average
wages from workers moving out of high‐paying mining‐related
jobs might be coming to an end.
Labor markets are sending a neutral picture and downward wage
pressure might be coming to an end.
My expectation for tonight is a relaxed RBA that shows little desire
to cut rates further. Global deflationary psychology is reversing
and the RBA will view monetary policy as appropriate for now
given this reversal, especially with two cuts already in the pipe.
Downward momentum in wages and CPI looks like it has waned.
I included this write‐up to give you a sense of how you can go
through a central banker's speech and then figure out what
matters to that central bank and what does not. Then you add in
your own assessment of the global macro picture (and ideally your
best guess of how the central bank sees the global macro picture)
and come up with a prediction for the outcome. Think about what
is expected and compare it to the outcome you expect. If there is a
divergence, there is an opportunity.
As the day rolled on, I spoke to many other traders and I noticed
that absolutely everyone I talked to expected either a rate cut or a
dovish result. This was very different from my interpretation,
which was a relaxed and neutral RBA that thinks the worst is over.

Therefore, I decided to go into the meeting long AUDUSD with a
75‐point stop, thinking there would be a meaningful short squeeze
if the outcome resembled my forecast.
I chose 75 pips, or 1% for my stop loss because I figured no matter
how much noise there was around the RBA meeting, the only way
I would be stopped out of the position was if the meeting was
extremely dovish or the RBA cut rates. You want to make sure
your stop loss is far enough away to survive the noise before and
after the event; otherwise, you might be right and still lose money
as you are stopped out before the event or on pre‐release noise.
I considered the idea a 3.5‐star trade—a good trading setup but
not worthy of huge sizing. I decided to risk $200,000. I will
discuss position sizing later but for now the math is simple:
Because I am risking 75 pips, my position should be ($200,000
divided by 0.0075). Remember in USD‐based currency pairs that
0.0075 = 75 pips; $200k / 0.0075 is $26.7 million so I go long 27
million AUDUSD at 0.7620 with a stop at 0.7545
The Result
The RBA was neutral and my assessment was correct as they
elevated their concern about Sydney housing and showed new
optimism on global growth. They upgraded their language on
China and reduced their concern about the jobs market. Overall,
the statement was balanced but the market was expecting
something much more dovish so relative to expectations it was a
hawkish statement.
Figure 10.12 is a chart of the price action.

Figure 10.12 10‐minute AUDUSD around an RBA meeting,
October 31 to November 2, 2016.
Given that I was not expecting a home run here, I took profit when
I woke up the next morning with spot at 0.7670 for a profit of 50
pips or $135,000. Note here the risk/reward was worse than 1:1. I
am fine with that once in a while.
Here I thought there was a much better than 50/50 chance of a
neutral/hawkish outcome and I viewed the odds of losing the full
75 pips as sub‐20%. So this trade was clearly positive EV despite
risking 75 pips to make 50. As a general rule, though, this type of
risk/reward ratio is not the path to long‐run success.
Trading the Outcome of a Central Bank
Meeting
If you do not see any edge in taking a position beforehand, you can
often make money trading the outcome of a central bank meeting
afterward, especially when the outcome is a major surprise. This is
a similar concept to trading economic data, although central bank
surprises are often easier to trade because they are unambiguously
important whereas economic data matter on some days and don't

matter on others. The key to remember is that unexpected central
bank moves are a go with, not a fade.
Rule #9 of FX Trading: Never fade unexpected central
bank moves. Jump on them!
Let's take a look at an example.
The Setup
January 21, 2015. Oil prices are in freefall, down from $120 in
June to a current level of $50. The market is starting to freak out
because in the past ten years the relationship has been “oil down =
global demand crumbling.” The pace of the drop in oil is so
extreme that economists cannot forecast the short‐term or long‐
term impact.
The regularly scheduled Bank of Canada meeting is at 10:00AM
today and while it is clear that the drop in oil is bad for Canada, no
change is expected from Bank of Canada Governor Stephen Poloz
at today's meeting. Up until very recently, most market
participants had expected the next move by the Bank of Canada to
be a hike in interest rates, not a cut. But with the drop in oil, the
market now expects the Bank of Canada will switch into neutral
for the foreseeable future. USDCAD is 1.2070.
The Result
Wait! What?
BANK OF CANADA CUTS KEY OVERNIGHT LENDING RATE
BY 25 BASIS POINTS
The 1‐minute chart in Figure 10.13 says it all.

Figure 10.13 1‐minute USDCAD, January 21, 2015.
Governor Poloz made a surprise move; he cut rates by 25 basis
points and shocked the world. USDCAD was 1.2070 one second
and 1.2230 the next. Note that any USDCAD you bought in the
minutes after the cut were deep in the money by the end of the day
as USDCAD closed around 1.2340. When a central bank moves
like this, it is a huge opportunity. Jump on it. Be fast and be
aggressive. Figure 10.14 shows what happened in the following
days (with the surprise cut at the far left of the chart).

Figure 10.14 Intraday USDCAD, January 21 to January 30, 2015.
Figure 10.15 5‐minute NZDUSD, June 10 to June 11, 2015.
You can see the first move after the interest rate cut at the very far
left of the chart and then USDCAD continued to rally, trending all
the way up to 1.2800. A totally unexpected move like this comes
infrequently and so this is a time to go all in.

Now let's look at a less extreme example:
The Setup
June 11, 2015. After completing a hiking cycle in 2014, the Reserve
Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) is now facing a stunning reversal in
inflation. Recent speeches by the assistant governor have
indicated that the central bank is losing patience with the strong
currency and with falling inflation and the RBNZ is considering a
rate cut. Half of economists expect a cut today but the other half
feel that it is a bit premature and a rate cut in July or September is
more likely. Pricing is very close to 50/50 for cut versus no cut.
Positioning is short NZD but not extreme.
The Result
The RBNZ cuts rates and releases a very dovish statement. Again,
look at the 5‐minute chart (Figure 10.15) and you can see that this
rate cut (even though it was partially priced in) is a “go with.” The
first trades are 0.7050/0.7070 and a few hours later the NZDUSD
is trading below 0.7000. The pair continued to drop in the days
afterward.
Central Bank Speeches
Central bank speeches can be viewed as miniature versions of a
central bank meeting. Some speeches are irrelevant, while some
(like the 2010 Jackson Hole Speech by Ben Bernanke that pre‐
announced QE2 in the United States, or Mario Draghi's “Whatever
It Takes” speech in 2012) are monumental. There can be edge in
trading central bank speeches because traders are not always
ready for them and speeches cannot easily be traded by
algorithms. Advantage, humans! Often you will find that traders
are taken by surprise when a central bank speech hits the
headlines. You need to do your research and be prepared. Almost
all of them are announced in advance.
Sometimes, you can predict the approximate content of a speech
simply by its title. If you see the governor of the RBNZ will make a
speech called “Currency implications for monetary policy” and you
know that the governor's view is that the NZD is overvalued, you
should go into the speech short NZD and be ready for something
dovish.

Usually central bankers talk down their currency more when
speaking to exporters so the audience for the speech matters, too.
Also know the bias of the speaker: Is she always dovish? Always
hawkish? Flexible and pragmatic? You can often put a bunch of
clues together and hazard a good guess as to whether a speech will
be bullish or bearish for the currency.
Trade central bank speeches just like you trade central bank
meetings but because the market impact is usually less
pronounced, you need to be careful not to get too excited. The
moves will tend to be smaller. That said, stay on high alert for the
occasional game changer.
Other Headlines and News Events
There are countless other opportunities to trade headlines and
news events. Examples include:
Unscheduled central bank actions. These are similar to
normal central bank moves but have a much larger impact
because they are completely unexpected. The element of
surprise makes these actions epic because no one is
positioned for them. There was a flurry of surprise actions in
the 2008–2009 financial crisis but there are other examples
of central banks acting between meetings since then. Any
unscheduled central bank action is a “go with.” Jump on it
and do not get out unless the market goes back through the
initial NewsPivot.
Correlated news releases. If USDCAD is highly correlated
to oil prices and there is an OPEC meeting today, you can
trade the result of the OPEC meeting via USDCAD. Let's say
OPEC is expected to announce production cuts (less
production is bullish crude) and they do not. When the
headline hits, OPEC ANNOUNCES NO CHANGE TO
PRODUCTION, you can bet that oil will sell off dramatically
and so you can buy USDCAD before it moves much.
These can be very profitable trades because the market is not
always ready to jump on the correlated product the way they
would be ready to trade the primary one. The Department of
Energy (DoE) inventory data (released every Wednesday at
1030AM) is another example of a news release that will

influence crude prices and therefore will move USDCAD.
New Zealand milk auctions are another good example. The
price of milk is extremely important to the NZ economy and
so the biweekly milk auctions sometimes impact NZDUSD.
Sympathy plays. Global central banks often move in the
same direction at approximately the same time as they react
to global conditions in similar ways. This implies that if one
central bank starts to move aggressively in one direction, the
probability of other central banks doing the same rises. This
can result in sympathy moves.
A good example of this is when the Bank of Canada cut rates
unexpectedly in January 2015. There was a very aggressive
move lower in AUDUSD as the market (correctly) figured
that the odds of a cut from the RBA were instantly higher
than previously estimated. Traders that were smart and
focused that day made money by selling AUDUSD in the
hectic moments after the Bank of Canada cut rates.
Geopolitical events. Wars, invasions, attacks, and
geopolitical instability can often have an important impact on
markets. Obviously, news of war is generally bad for a
currency but it can also have big effects on bond markets and
commodities (especially oil). When a geopolitical story hits,
you can put yourself in a strong position by staying as
informed as possible. Information gives you the power to
understand events as they unfold and react to news as it
happens. You need to be smarter and faster than the
competition.
This is in keeping with the idea of staying as informed as
possible on all current themes. You don't need to be an
expert on global geopolitics but if there is a major
geopolitical event going on you should read as much as
possible relating to that event. This will keep you in a
position of strength. The trader who has to ask, “What does
that headline mean?” or “Is that bullish or bearish?” hasn't
done the work and doesn't deserve to make money. Do not
rely on other people. Do the work yourself.
Natural disasters. Occasionally a major natural disaster
will have a big impact on foreign exchange markets. The
Christchurch earthquake in New Zealand in 2010 and the
Fukushima earthquake and subsequent nuclear disaster in

Japan in 2011 are good examples of market‐moving natural
disasters. While these are exceedingly rare, they are
important to be aware of because they can generate massive
market moves out of nowhere.

FACTBOX: STEPS TOWARD BECOMING AN
EXPERT IN YOUR CURRENCY
Read everything on the central bank's website.
Read all the central bank speeches.
Watch the currency all day and chart the market profile
manually on graph paper to get a feel for the texture and
price action.
Always be completely on top of what strategists and
technical analysts are saying about your currencies by
reading Reuters, Bloomberg, and other articles.
Have a list of all major support and resistance levels on
hand for any currency you are trading.
Make a list of what drives your currencies and learn as
much as you can about those correlated markets,
especially:
Interest rates
Commodities
Read the press of the country you are trading:
Canada: the Financial Post and the Globe and Mail
Australia: AFR
UK: Telegraph and the Guardian
List the central bankers and outline some bullet points on
their recent views/comments. This allows you to interpret
headlines quickly. You will instantly know if a central
banker's comments are news or just repeats of comments
they made in the past. For the major central bankers, you
should know his or her:
Interest rate view (dove/hawk)
Currency view
Most recent comments
Make a list of the strong and weak parts of the economy:

Jobs
Manufacturing
Trade/import/export
Housing
Inflation (How does it relate to official target? Do you
understand the central bank's target? Do they target
core or headline, etc.?)
Understand what is priced into interest rate markets.
Learn as much as possible about what moves the drivers of
your currency.
For example, if you trade a commodity currency:
What are the main commodities that matter?
What is the major narrative for those commodities
right now?
What is the supply/demand dynamic?
Trading news and events can be a huge source of edge for skilled
traders. By understanding initial conditions and how new
information impacts the equilibrium, you can move faster and
trade smarter than your competitors. Do the work and then be fast
and courageous when news comes out. Trust your instincts and
capitalize before the invisible hand finds a new equilibrium.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key
concepts:
When news comes out, whether it is economic data, monetary
policy announcements, or unscheduled headlines, the price
moves quickly to find a new equilibrium. This process
presents significant opportunities for profit.
Critical concept 1: What is priced in?
Critical concept 2: Buy the rumor / Sell the fact
How to trade economic data using NewsPivots
How to trade central meetings and speeches and other events

Notes
  1 “Every individual… neither intends to promote the public
interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it… he intends
only his own security; and by directing that industry in such a
manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends
only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led
by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his
intention.” Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments.
  2 A council area is similar to a county. They have awesomely
Scottish names like Clackmannanshire, Dumfries,
Aberdeenshire, and Nah‐Eileanan Siar, to name a few.
  3 http://uk.reuters.com/article/2012/05/02/uk‐markets‐forex‐
ranges‐idUKBRE8410YN20120502.
  4 The whisper number is the number expected by the market, as
opposed to the number predicted by economists. Usually those
two numbers are similar but sometimes traders will expect
something different. The whisper is the most important as it
best defines how the market will react.
  5 You need to have a clear understanding of the concept of
expected value to be a good trader. If you don't, read this:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expected_value.
  6 (8.7300 – 8.6400) * 15 million / 7.8000 = $175,000; note:
7.8000 is the USDNOK rate, which is used because profits in
EURNOK are earned in the denominator currency (NOK) and
so you have to convert the NOK back to USD.
