PART III 
Understand Risk Management
“Yes, risk‐taking is inherently failure‐prone. Otherwise, it
would be called ‘sure‐thing‐taking.’”
Jim McMahon
For every 100 books on trade selection, there is one great book on
risk management. This is why so many traders spend so much
time coming up with the perfect trade idea, only to blow up their
trading accounts thanks to poor risk management.
You cannot trade successfully without a proper risk management
framework and I would strongly suggest to you that risk
management is much, much more important than trade selection
when it comes to long‐run trading success. You need a clear risk
management plan before you do a single trade. The smartest guys
in the room can still blow up. Priority number one is to avoid ruin.
Spend time thinking about risk management. Create a formal plan
of action so that when the market starts flying around, you know
what your parameters are supposed to be. Ideally, your framework
should be flexible but systematic so that you reduce your volatility
and risk when things are going poorly and increase risk in a
controlled way as your P&L builds.
In Part Three we will look at risk management and investigate the
role of stop losses and how to properly size your trades.
Understand that there are very few correct answers or absolutes
when it comes to risk management. I will explain how I think
about risk, and then it is up to you to develop a framework that
works for you.

CHAPTER 11 
Understand Free Capital
There are many different ways that banks, hedge funds, and individuals
define “capital” but it all comes down to one question: How much
money can you afford to lose? That is your free capital. Make sure you
understand this section before moving on.
If you have $150,000 in your FX trading account but you have 10X
leverage, is your free capital $1,500,000? No. It is $150,000.
Let's say you are at a hedge fund and you have $100 million of capital to
manage. Is that your free capital? No. Your contract probably includes a
maximum drawdown or stop loss. Your contract might say that if you
lose more than 10% of the $100m, you are out of a job. So in that case,
your free capital is $10 million.
This is not just a matter of semantics; it is an important concept to
internalize. In the hedge fund example, sure you have $100 million of
trading capital; but you can only lose $10 million before you're going to
have to update your LinkedIn profile. So $10 million is your free capital
—that is the number that matters.
Set Goals
What are you trying to accomplish? Without a clear set of goals, it is
hard to create a sensible risk management plan. You need targets for
returns and volatility because these targets, plus your amount of free
capital, will determine how much risk you can take any day, month, or
year and how much money you can lose before you have a problem.
These targets vary, depending on where you work. They could be:
Your budget or revenue target if you work at a bank
Your absolute return target (in % or bps), volatility target, and
target Sharpe ratio if you work at a hedge fund
Monthly USD P&L goal or % return goal if you are a retail FX
trader
Once you have determined your free capital and your P&L target(s), you
have set the approximate boundaries for your downside and upside
performance. Free capital and P&L targets are the two critical support

beams in any risk management framework and you should spend a good
chunk of time coming up with numbers that make sense.
It is important to use manageable chunks of time when thinking about
your P&L. I always have a yearly goal, which I set in January, but I
manage my risk and P&L on a monthly basis. I have tried various
approaches but this is the method that works best for me. I break the
year into monthly chunks and set objectives and stop loss limits for each
month.
I have tried daily and yearly chunking but I find that daily limits fail to
recognize that the opportunity set varies dramatically from one day to
the next (so it doesn't make sense to allocate the same amount of capital
to each day) while thinking only about yearly goals is just not granular
enough. A year is simply too long a period to manage—and it is too
exhausting to focus on the same YTD number for 12 full months.
Weekly or monthly chunking of goals and risk makes the most sense for
short‐term traders. It gives you a regular mental reset, too, which is
extremely useful whether you are trading well or trading badly. You can
also ignore the chunking suggestion and portion your risk management
on a trade‐by‐trade basis. I will discuss that later.
Monthly chunking means this: Every month I reset my P&L target and
risk limits to zero and start over. I have a new stop loss limit and a new
goal. This goal is not static; it goes up or down depending on my year‐
to‐date P&L. As my YTD P&L goes up, my monthly risk goes up. As my
YTD goes down, my monthly risk goes down.
There is no correct formula for how to determine your monthly target
and stop loss, but here is how I do it. Let's say I'm trying to make $10
million in a year and my max drawdown limit (peak to trough) is $5
million. That is a pretty standard setup if you work at a bank or if you
manage around $100 million of hedge fund capital. In this scenario, my
free capital (money I can afford to lose) is $5m. My January stop loss
will be 10% of my year's free capital ($500k) and my January P&L
target will be 2X my stop loss ($1 million).
Depending on my YTD going into a new month, I will adjust my goal
and stop loss for the following month so that my goals (and thus my risk
appetite and position size) reflect how I am doing. As I make money, my
risk increases, and when I lose money I take less risk in the following
month.
When you reset your risk on a monthly basis, you get a fresh outlook for
the new month and you are not bogged down by emotions related to
your performance or specific trades from prior periods. Another benefit
of this approach is that you increase risk throughout the year when you
are doing well and you reduce risk if you are trading poorly.

Let's look at a realistic example using the criteria described above. Say I
make $2 million in January. Now my free capital for the rest of the year
is $7m (the original $5m plus the $2m I just made in January). So now
I can risk $700k in February (10% of $7m) and aim for a target P&L of
$1.4m (2 X $700,000). As the year progresses, I take more and more
risk when I'm doing well and less and less risk if I am losing money.
Each month I reset my parameters and go from there.
To be clear. In January:
Free capital X 10% = January stop loss
Stop loss × 2 = Take profit objective
In each subsequent month:
(Free capital at start of month) X 10% = Stop loss for the month
Note (Free capital at start of month) = (Free capital at start of year
+ YTD P&L)
Stop loss X 2 = Take profit objective
What happens if I hit my stop loss for the month? I stop trading
completely and wait for the calendar to roll over. This allows a mental
reset and forces me to take my foot off the gas when things are not going
well. When I hit my P&L target for the month, on the other hand, I do
not stop trading but I do my very best to slow down and protect the
successful month.
Rule #10 of FX Trading: Making money is hard. Keeping it is
harder.
When I found myself in a trading slump one time, my manager said to
me, “You don't have a money‐making problem, you have a money‐
keeping problem!” Which sounds funny; but it's funny because it's true.
Many traders become sloppy when they are doing well because they
subconsciously feel like they are playing with house money. The
purpose of the P&L target for the month is to remind you that at a
certain point you have done a good job and thus it's time to book
profits, not increase leverage.
This is also a nod to the fact that trading P&L tends to mean revert. If
you are overearning for a period, there is a point where you want to
reduce risk in anticipation of a pullback. Some model funds do this
systematically. As P&L gets too far above trend, the models will reduce
risk in anticipation of some mean reversion in the performance of the
model.

Many people (logically) ask: Doesn't a monthly chunking approach
create arbitrary breaks in your risk management? You are potentially
taking different risk on the 31st of the month than you will take on the
1st of the following month even though the opportunity set might not
have changed.
The answer is yes, it does create an arbitrary break in your risk
management. I believe, however, that the psychological and process‐
related benefits of a fresh start every month substantially outweigh the
negative of using arbitrary time period breaks to frame your risk.
Furthermore, the turn of the month is not completely arbitrary because
opportunities tend to cluster near the start and end of the month for
most traders, given the distribution of economic data and central bank
meetings.
The monthly chunking approach I have described is not for everyone. I
am sharing what has worked for me over the past twenty years. It is up
to you to take what makes sense and discard what does not as you build
your own risk management framework.
Now let's look at other strategies I use to manage risk effectively.
Track and Analyze Your P&L
There are many metrics you can use to track your trading P&L. A simple
framework is best. If you track too many statistics, you will find yourself
inundated with data and find it very difficult to draw useful conclusions.
Every trader should track the following statistics:
Daily P&L
This is the most basic unit of P&L tracking. Create a spreadsheet with
OPEN, HIGH, LOW, and CLOSE P&L for each trading day. OPEN is
your overnight P&L. That is, how much money you are up or down
when you sit down in the morning. If you go home with no positions
overnight, your OPEN figure the next day will be zero. HIGH and LOW
allow you to track the volatility of your intraday P&L and can provide
important insights. CLOSE is your total end‐of‐day P&L.
If you trade many different products, you should also set up columns in
your P&L spreadsheet to track performance by product or product type.
I do not track my P&L by currency but I like to keep separate columns
for options, commodity, and interest rate P&L so that I know if I am
making money when I move away from my core product (G10 spot FX).
Every six months or so, I sit down and look at my daily data and ask
questions like:

How does the HIGH compare to the LOW? I want my upside
volatility higher than my downside volatility. Are there many days
where I am down significantly and recover back to flat? This might
signal that I'm starting too aggressively in the morning instead of
waiting for better opportunities later in the day. Or is it the
opposite pattern, where my CLOSE is often way below my HIGH?
This might signal that I trade too loose after I'm up money on the
day.
Is there a level where my HIGH tends to peak? Personally, I have
had the experience many times over the years where I tend to hit a
specific P&L number (say $1M on the day) before reversing and
closing lower on the day over and over. In my case, there are two
reasons this happens. The first is that markets often tend to mean
revert intraday. This means that if I catch a big intraday trend, my
peak in P&L will coincide with a peak or trough in a specific
market. As the move reverts, my P&L reverts.
The second reason you might regularly peak near a specific P&L level is
that your position size combines with average daily volatility to create
rough limits on how much you can make on most days. If you are
trading an average position size of $100M and intraday moves tend to
max out around 1%, you will notice many days where you peak around
$1M P&L.
If you consistently trade the same risk units intraday, you will probably
find that there is a specific level where your P&L tends to peak and only
on extremely volatile days will you ever exceed that level. If you tend to
hit the same HIGH all the time and then finish significantly below by
the CLOSE, this can be a useful signal. This tells you that going forward,
you should reduce risk as you near what is typically your intraday high‐
water mark.
Create a Chart of Your Daily and YTD Data
Figure 11.1 is a sample P&L chart showing daily bars and YTD P&L.

Figure 11.1 Sample P&L chart showing daily and year‐to‐date P&L.
Left y‐axis is YTD P&L (rising line) and right y‐axis is daily P&L (gray bars).
Some takeaways from this chart, which is a realistic representation of
the P&L for a solid trader at a bank (stylized, not real data):
1. Note the skew in the gray bars. A good day is up $1.5 million, while
a bad day is down $750,000 (right‐hand y‐axis). This is how you
achieve very strong performance while making money on only 50%
of days. The trader shown above made more than $15 million
dollars of P&L while putting up a winning percentage of just 46%.
This is because his average up day was $411,000 while his average
down day was $273,000.
2. Note the big bursts in P&L followed by flat line and consolidation.
This is what my P&L looks like when I am trading well. It is
symptomatic of small position sizes and small losses while dabbling
and then big positions on high‐conviction ideas. The result is that a
few bursts of “in the zone” trading account for most of the year's
P&L. Some traders are more consistent than this and others are
less consistent. There is no correct profile, although the
relationship between good periods and bad periods obviously
determines the end result so you need to make hay while the sun
shines. Extract as much money as possible from the market when
things are going well.

3. If you look very closely, you will see that there are a few periods
where the P&L doesn't move at all for 5 or 10 straight days. This
shows the trader took some time off and was perfectly flat while on
holiday. This is a healthy practice that keeps you fresh all year and
extends your career longevity.
Month‐to‐Date P&L
Monthly P&L increments are the most important units for your long‐
term success. Can you make money most months? Are your good
months substantially better than your bad months? Obviously, each
month is made up of many days but there is huge randomness in daily
performance. Luck will have a significant influence on daily P&L,
whereas monthly and yearly performance is primarily determined by
skill, not luck.
A month is a big enough unit to eliminate some of the noise and allow
many good trading opportunities to play out. Most successful traders
will record mostly positive months throughout the year, even if they
only win 50% of the days.
Rarely will you find a successful trader who doesn't make money at least
7 or 8 months of the year, although it is possible. Your best months
should be much larger than your worst months.
Year‐to‐Date P&L
This is the ultimate measure of your long‐run performance and most
people cannot survive more than two or three bad years before running
out of capital or losing their job. Ideally, you want to behave like a call
option. This means that your bad years are flat or down small and your
good years are up and potentially up big.
This is the payoff profile that management is looking for when they hire
hedge fund or bank traders and it is the payoff profile you need as an
individual trader if you want to succeed long term. This payoff profile
(down small or up big) is achieved through a risk management system
that increases risk when things are going well and reduces risk when
they are not.
Win%
This is the number of days you make money divided by the number of
days you trade. Most traders are in the 45% to 60% win% area, while
bank traders with good franchise books can hit a win percentage as high

as 80%. Win% depends on your trading style. Those who chip away and
trade very tactically will have high win%, while those who go all in on
big opportunities and stay flat much of the time will have a lower win%.
Average Gain/Loss
Your ultimate success will depend on a combination of your win% and
your average gain/loss ratio. Generally, traders with higher win% have
shorter holding periods and lower gain/loss ratios. There is no right
answer when it comes to these ratios but the important thing to
understand is how your ratios are evolving.
If you see, for example, your average gain/loss ratio is falling month
after month, then it probably means you are cutting your winners too
early or riding your losing days for too long. Big up days and small
down days are the key to success in trading. It sounds simple but I
present it here so that you take time to think about how you can
increase that ratio. It is the most important ratio in your P&L
spreadsheet.
Rule #11 of FX Trading: Successful traders make more money
on up days than they lose on down days.
A good strategy once you have a decent amount of P&L data is to zoom
in on one particular metric and think about how you can improve it. For
example, I noticed in the past that very often I would not stick to my
original plan on winning trades and would tend to book profits before
the intended take profit level hit. For example, if I went long at
AUDUSD at 0.7710 with a take profit of 0.7880, I would often take
profit at, say, 0.7840 as the price action stalled, instead of riding out the
trade and extracting the maximum P&L as originally planned.
It is always a tricky situation when you have made 70% or 80% of your
planned profits on a trade because the risk/reward at that point looks
bad if you hold on all the way back to your original stop loss. On the
other hand, if you consistently take profit too early, then the
risk/reward you had originally planned for is not realized. In addition, if
you trail your stop loss up too much, you are frequently stopped out by
noise.
Once I analyzed the metric, I decided from that point on to simply stick
to my original plan and stop changing my parameters once a trade
moved deep in the money. By discovering and fixing this leak, I made a
meaningful improvement in my average gain/loss ratio.
Sharpe Ratio

The Sharpe Ratio is a commonly used measure of trading performance
that measures the relationship between volatility and returns. It is the
idea that if an investor receives the same return from two investments,
she will prefer the investment with lower volatility.
Let's look at a simplified example. Trader A made $320,000 this week
and Trader B made $300,000. Who did a better job? With only that
information, the answer is Trader A. But now let me give you some
more information. Here is the daily P&L for Trader A:
And here's the P&L for Trader B:
Now who did a better job? I pick Trader B because I would expect from
this distribution of P&L that there is a much better chance that Trader B
performs well going forward while Trader A was probably lucky and has
too much volatility/variance/randomness to his revenue stream to
validate the tiny difference in absolute returns.1 Obviously, the data set
provided is too small to make sweeping generalizations; this is just a
stylized example.
The formula for Sharpe Ratio is: (Return minus risk‐free rate /
Standard deviation).
Higher Sharpe ratios are almost always better as they represent higher
returns relative to volatility. In the example above, you have Trader A
with a Sharpe Ratio around 1.0 for the week while Trader B comes in
with a Sharpe Ratio of about 7.0. Almost every investor would prefer the
lower returns of Trader B because his Sharpe is so much higher.
For most strategies and traders, a Sharpe above 1.0 is good and a
Sharpe above 2.0 is outstanding. Some traders can maintain Sharpes as
high as 4.0 for certain periods but most humans find it hard to sustain a
Sharpe above 2.0 for long. Sharpe ratios can be very stable or extremely
erratic and so a Sharpe is just one measure of performance and not the
be‐all and end‐all.
It is very important to note that Sharpe ratios can be meaningless if a
trader or strategy has very non‐normal returns. For example, a trader
who sells S&P 500 puts or VIX futures will have a very good Sharpe
Ratio for extended periods but this high Sharpe Ratio will obscure the
fact that the trader will almost certainly blow up one day when volatility
spikes (like it did in February 2018, for example). Especially in small

samples, the Sharpe Ratio can hide the non‐normal distribution of a
strategy's returns.
The more years of data, the more informative the Sharpe Ratio. Sharpe
ratios are most useful when comparing traders and strategies in similar
asset classes. Hedge funds often focus on Sharpe Ratio while banks
focus much more on absolute returns because market making distorts
the Sharpe Ratio and renders it somewhat meaningless.
Regardless of where you work, better P&L analysis leads to better risk
management.
Fat Tails and Risk of Ruin
Good returns and even a good Sharpe can hide some types of risk. A key
risk that is not always captured by Sharpe ratios is tail risk. This is an
absolutely key type of risk because tail risk can lead to ruin. Risk of ruin
is the premise that if you lose a certain amount of money, you are done.
Out. Fired. The first consideration for every trader should be to avoid
risk of ruin. Live to fight another day.
Tail risk can come from one specific trade or from an overall trading
style. A famous example of tail risk is the 2015 SNB CHF trade. In 2011,
the Swiss National Bank announced a currency floor at 1.2000 in
EURCHF as a way to stop the relentless buying of CHF (selling of
EURCHF) triggered by the Eurozone crisis. The SNB committed to sell
unlimited CHF and buy unlimited EUR in order to protect the floor. The
floor held successfully for several years despite a few tests and more and
more speculators viewed long EURCHF positions as nearly risk‐free
because everyone knew the SNB had their back at 1.2000.
Then, in early 2015, concerns about Greek finances and expectations of
a huge quantitative easing program from the ECB unleashed relentless
supply of EURCHF. The SNB was there on the bid, buying billions and
billions of euros around 1.2010 in order to enforce their commitment to
the 1.2000 floor. Various SNB board members continually reiterated
their commitment to the floor, saying they would sell unlimited CHF to
protect it. This statement, made on January 12, 2015, is a good example
of the message consistently delivered by the SNB:
“We took stock of the situation less than a month ago, we looked
again at all the parameters and we are convinced that the minimum
exchange rate must remain the cornerstone of our monetary policy.”
– SNB Vice Chairman Jean‐Pierre Danthine
There appeared to be a nearly risk‐free trade from 2011 to 2015. Simply
buy EURCHF every time it gets close to 1.2000 and sell any rally. Figure

11.2 shows the chart.
Figure 11.2 Daily EURCHF February 17, 2011, to January 5, 2015.
You can see it was an extremely profitable trade to simply buy EURCHF
every time it went near 1.2000 and wait for the rally. What could
possibly go wrong?
However, simmering in the mind of anyone doing this trade was: What
if the floor breaks? Most traders (including myself) figured this was a
very, very low probability given the SNB had high credibility and they
frequently and passionately emphasized their commitment to the floor.
Many, many traders strapped on huge long EURCHF positions,
assuming a break of the floor was impossible. A tail risk not worth
worrying about.
Then, just three days after that Danthine quote above, here's what
happened (note that Figure 11.3 is a 1‐second chart!).

Figure 11.3 1‐second EURCHF, January 15, 2015.
Look at that right y‐axis! A 30% move in less than 30 minutes!
Figure 11.4 shows the daily chart.

Figure 11.4 Daily EURCHF January 5, 2015, to February 22, 2015.
The SNB unexpectedly pulled the floor and EURCHF collapsed in the
biggest one‐day move in the history of floating exchange rates. If you
followed foreign exchange markets at all in 2015 you know what came
next was a string of bankruptcies and blowups. Here is a sampling of
headlines from that time:
Everest Capital to Close $830 Million Global Fund After Losses on
Swiss Franc
Swiss Franc Shock Shuts Some FX Brokers; Regulators Move In
Fortress Macro Hedge Fund Lost 7.6 pct in Week to Jan. 16 –
Investor Letter
Harness Loses 8.8% in January: Currency Fund Tumbles; Caught
Out by Spike in Swiss Franc
It was not just small hedge funds and retail FX brokers (and their
clients) that were hammered. The big boys suffered immense losses as
well. In fact, several major hedge funds never recovered from the
damage done that day and closed their doors soon afterward.
While some funds were wiped out completely and others survived or
prospered, the lesson is the same. Anything can happen.
Rule #12 of FX Trading: Anything can happen.

Astute readers may have noticed that I have not yet introduced Rule #1
of FX Trading and so I will do so now because it fits here.
Rule #1 of FX Trading: Don't blow up. Avoid risk of ruin
above all else.
If you blow up, none of the other rules of FX trading will matter because
you will be bankrupt or unemployed.
Sure, there was profit to be made trading long EURCHF for several
years, but the problem was that while the rewards were clear, the risks
were not measurable. Many people expected that if 1.20 broke, they
would be able to sell their EURCHF at 1.15 or maybe 1.12 as a worst
case. Instead, the first trades were around 1.0100 and the pair quickly
traded down to 0.8500 within minutes!
The first priority for every trader is to avoid risk of ruin. Live to trade
another day. It is possible that a tail risk could appear out of nowhere,
but that was not the case with the CHF move. It was a well‐known risk
and yet still it ruined many traders' careers and cost shareholders and
investors hundreds of millions of dollars.
Tail risk can come from sudden changes in policy but crashes can come
out of nowhere, too—for example, the “Flash Crash” in GBPUSD in
October 2016. That move happened at 7:00PM NY time, on no news,
and caught traders badly off guard as they sipped their still‐hot cups of
tea in Singapore. GBPUSD traded from 1.26 to 1.15 in a matter of
minutes and soon rebounded back to 1.24. Figure 11.5 shows the chart.

Figure 11.5 10‐minute GBPUSD, the GBP Flash Crash of October 6,
2016.
Tail risks can be known in advance (like the CHF) or can come out of
nowhere (like the GBP flash crash). There are plenty of currencies to
trade, so avoid any pair (like pegged currencies) with tail risk; it's not
worth risking your year or your career on anything that looks like it
might have abnormal discontinuous gap risk.

FACTBOX: FATTER TAILS
While it is well known that currency returns are not normally
distributed, tail events in FX have been abnormally frequent in
recent years. Look at Figure 11.6, which shows the largest range of
the day for the US dollar versus G7 currencies from 1990 until the
end of September 2017.
Figure 11.6 Largest range of the day for US dollar vs. G7 currencies
(1990 to 2017).
Data from Bloomberg.
Certainly not anti‐fragile! A daily range of 6% or more in the dollar
was nearly unheard of before 2008; since then, we have seen eight
different 6%+ ranges, including three events that produced daily
ranges in excess of 10%. The challenge in diagnosing the multitude
of tail events is that when we look at the triggers and causes of the
events individually, it is hard to find common ground. The numbers
on the chart correspond to the events listed in Figure 11.7.

Event
Date
Currency Trigger
Other
Cause 1
Other
Cause
2
1 Asia Crisis,
LTCM
unwind
October
8, 1998
NZD and
USDJPY
LTCM
unwind
Asian
Financial
Crisis
Central
banks
sold
USDJPY
2 GFC
October
2008
AUD and
NZD
Financial
crisis
US politics
(TARP
rejected)
3 US stock
market
flash crash
May 6,
2010
USDJPY
Stock
market
flash crash
4 US
downgraded
August
9, 2011
USDCHF
S&P
downgrade
of USA
Government
shutdown
5 SNB puts in
the floor
Sep 6,
2011
USDCHF
SNB
6 SNB
removes the
floor
January
15, 2015
USDCHF
SNB
Positioning
7 China reval
August
24,
2015
NZDUSD
PBoC
8 UK votes to
leave EU
June
24,
2016
GBPUSD
UK voters
9 Flash crash
October
7, 2016
GBPUSD
Stop losses Time of day Human
error
Data from Bloomberg.
Figure 11.7 USD vs. G7 moves of 6% or more since 1990.
Fatter tails in FX have come while overall FX volatility has not
changed, as you can see in Figure 11.8.

Figure 11.8 100‐day rolling median daily range of USD vs. G7
currencies.
Data from Bloomberg.
There is no meaningful difference in FX volatility before and after
2008. Furthermore, global currency market volumes continue to
grow, so there is no shortage of volume transacted.
Reading government reports on recent crash events in FX and other
markets sheds very little extra light on causality as these reports
generally cite a multitude of factors. For example, the BIS Markets
Committee report “The sterling ‘flash event’ of 7 October 2016” says,
“This analysis points to a confluence of factors catalyzing the move,
rather than to a single clear driver,” while the “Joint Staff Report:
The US Treasury Market on October 15, 2014” says, “While no single
cause is apparent in the data, the analysis thus far does point to a
number of findings which, in aggregate, help explain the conditions
that likely contributed to the volatility.”
In other words, when tail events happen, it is often hard to nail
down a single cause.
As we try to explain the rising frequency of tail events in FX since
2008, it makes sense to start with what is different about FX
markets now compared to pre‐2008. There are five important
differences:

1. The number of senior traders in FX has dropped substantially
in the past decade. This is partially because of automation and
also follows the disciplinary actions resulting from multiple
investigations into currency trading from 2013 to 2015.
The BIS report on the GBP flash crash says, “The presence,
outside the currency's core time zone, of staff less experienced
in trading sterling, with lower risk limits and risk appetite, and
with less expertise in the suitability of particular algorithms for
the prevailing market conditions, appears to have further
amplified the movement.”
It is sensible to think that less‐experienced traders are more
likely to deal off market or trigger panic moves compared to
senior dealers with experience in fast markets.
2. Electronic trading is now more than 60% of the FX market.
Algorithmic volumes rose throughout the second half of the
2000s (see Figure 11.9). It is possible that we hit a tipping point
in human versus algorithmic participation right around 2008
and this has opened up cracks in the FX microstructure.
Correlation does not always imply causation but there is plenty
of evidence and logic to support a relationship here.
Figure 11.9 50‐day moving average of the participation rate of
algorithmic traders in FX markets, 2004 to 2009.
Source: US Federal Reserve
(https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2009/980/ifdp980.pdf).

For example, many market‐making algorithms are price makers in
slow markets and price takers in fast markets. This can exacerbate
feedback loops and generate negative convexity. Unlike market
makers of yore, hedge funds and other non‐bank electronic market
makers are not obligated to maintain orderly markets. If things get
crazy, VAR warnings sound and the algorithms reduce risk and turn
off.
Also, the behavior of algorithms is not always perfect, adaptable, or
logical. Similar to inexperienced human traders, algorithms might
accidentally exacerbate large moves and flash crashes as they fail to
adapt to regime shifts and fast markets.
3. Order slicing/hiding has left fewer resting orders away from top
of book. Pre‐2007, most orders left on ECNs showed full size
and trader interest. Now, most orders are sliced into the tiniest
possible increment or show nothing to the market and wait only
to aggress others' liquidity. Many trading algorithms sense
aggression or velocity in the market and pull back or cancel at
the moment that liquidity is needed most. All this means fewer
truly firm orders in the market.
4. Central bank pegs, bands, caps, and floors lead to great stability
at first but extreme instability later. Stability breeds instability.
While the EURCHF market was placid when the SNB supported
the 1.2000 level, it was abnormally volatile before and after.
When currencies are pushed away from fair market value by
central bank intervention, they have a strong compulsion to
revert to equilibrium once policymaker intervention stops.
5. There are fewer strong hands on the buy side. The number of
hedge funds approximately doubled from 2003 to 2007. Many
of the new pod‐based hedge funds operate with similar
strategies and similar volatility and stop loss targets. Instead of
buffering volatility by taking the other side of dramatic moves,
volatility‐targeting and momentum‐chasing hedge funds are
more likely to add to fat tails.
I believe these are the main drivers of the recent rise in
frequency of tail FX moves.
I am not arguing that we turn back the clock. Electronic markets are
here to stay and are not a bad thing. However, in a world where
many humans and algorithms are running similar strategies at
higher and higher speeds, there are bound to be some accidents.
So first and foremost, my suggestion with regard to the rise in
frequency of FX tail events is this: Get used to it. Markets populated

by algorithms and inexperienced traders will have a propensity
toward fatter tails. This is a fact that FX practitioners need to accept.
It has important implications for the future of FX risk management,
option pricing, and execution strategies.
Rolling Drawdown
Rolling drawdown gives you a nice visual representation of your
downside volatility over time. This is in contrast to the Sharpe Ratio,
which shows returns adjusted for both upside and downside volatility.
There are other measures, such as the Sortino Ratio, that single out
downside volatility but I have found that a combination of Sharpe Ratio
and rolling drawdown gives a view of performance that is simple and
easier to understand than more sophisticated metrics. Simply create a
chart of your current P&L minus your YTD high P&L and this will show
you rolling drawdown from peak.
P&L by Time of Day
An extremely useful analysis for short‐term traders is P&L by time of
day. The way I collected this information when I worked at a hedge fund
was to manually record my P&L in a spreadsheet every 30 minutes. If
you can have this done automatically, that is even better. After
collecting intraday data for a while, I noticed that my P&L very
consistently rose from 7:00AM and peaked around 11:00AM. It then
came off gradually until the end of the day. The chart looked something
like Figure 11.10.

Figure 11.10 Approximate P&L by time of day when I traded at a
hedge fund.
The y‐axis is percent of total daily P&L, on average.
I was unaware of this pattern until I started recording intraday P&L
data. There is a strong logic to a pattern like this because the volatile
and liquid period for FX markets in the New York time zone is 7:00AM
until 11:00AM. After that, London goes home and things tend to die
down.
Armed with the information from this chart, I started to square up
much, much earlier each day. Instead of taking my risk down in the
afternoon, I tried my best to reduce risk around 11:00AM. This helped
me lock in more P&L and it reduced my overall stress level because once
I knew that all my trading after 12 noon was net negative, I could reduce
my risk and use the afternoons for research, exercise, and other more
useful endeavors. An added benefit of squaring up earlier is that
liquidity is much better at 11AM NY than it is at 4PM NY.
This is a good example of how data collection and P&L analysis can
make you a better trader. Be very mindful of what data you collect,
though, because the risk is that you collect so much data that you don't
know what to do with it. Use data to investigate sensible hypotheses and
ideas. Don't expect it to speak for itself all the time.
Be thoughtful about what data you collect so that you do not waste time
dealing with a firehose of useless information. Do you think you might
trade best on Mondays and worst on Fridays? Investigate it. What about

the start of the month versus the end of the month? Whenever you think
about your trading and performance, go back and look at your P&L data
to better understand your strengths, weaknesses, and leaks.
Collecting trading performance data is extremely useful and allows you
to accumulate useful quantitative data. Instead of guessing, you can go
to the numbers. Armed with quantitative data, you have a good
snapshot of your trading. But qualitative information is useful, too. In
order to collect qualitative information, you need to maintain a trading
journal.
Keep a Trading Journal
Every trader, regardless of experience level, should keep a trading
journal. A journal helps track the evolution of your trading and captures
emotions, themes, and thoughts throughout the process. Many people
think of a trading journal as something just for noob traders. It is not.
You should use it as a professional trade strategy planning and
assessment tool. There are many ways that a journal can help you.
Most of the columns in Figure 11.11 are self‐explanatory, but let me
explain a few that might not be:
Figure 11.11 Sample entry from an Excel trading journal.
$target = P&L if I hit my take profit
$atRISK = Loss if I hit my stop
Factor buckets are the motivation behind the trade. CORR =
correlation, TECH = technical convergence, and so on. This is important
because then I can see which styles and factor buckets are working and
which are not.
Above all, a trading journal gives you a chance to be honest with
yourself. It's one thing to think and think and think about your trading,
but things become more concrete when you write them down. By
writing down each trade along with a rationale and thought process, you
can pick up on recurring errors, themes, and leaks in your trading.
Rule #13 of FX Trading: Keep a trading journal. Thoughts are
abstract and fuzzy. Writing is concrete and solid.

A trading journal also helps you identify bias. Are you always the same
way in a specific currency? Do you tend to short commodity currencies?
Long the USD? You can also look at your time horizons and study
whether you make more money on certain time horizons or on specific
types of trades. The more you write down, the more you can go back
later and investigate various hypotheses and answer questions about
your trading.
A trading journal also helps you stick to your plan. If you type your plan
in your journal before you do a trade (or immediately thereafter), you
are much (much!) more likely to stick to that plan. Bad discipline often
comes from having no plan whatsoever and just hitting the buy and sell
keys in response to random market stimuli. A plan written down has
100 times the value of a plan loosely formulated in your head.
I believe that everything in your head is abstract and fuzzy and subject
to change. It's noisy in there. Sometimes there is more than one voice
talking. Thoughts become more concrete and more intelligent and lucid
when they are recorded in print (written or typed is fine). When you
write something down, it solidifies. It becomes much more concrete and
real and firm.
I write a daily newsletter called AM/FX in which I outline my trading
plan for the day and discuss the themes in focus. When I moved from an
interbank trading job to a hedge fund for a few years, I stopped writing.
I found that this had a major negative impact on my trading. I would
walk in some mornings and just start hitting the buy and sell buttons,
reacting to price action and headlines instead of trading logically
according to a plan.
If you go into a trading day or into a specific trade without a written
plan, it is a recipe for poor trading. If you have a written plan for every
day and every trade, you will find your trading is tighter and your risk
management is better. The process of writing down your plan also
filters out some bad trades in advance because you realize as you write
out the plan that the idea is not solid enough to deserve an allocation of
risk capital.
Once trades are closed, you record the information about the trade and
after a while you have enough numerical and qualitative data to go back
and assess your performance. Wait until you have a few months of
trades in your journal before you assess anything because otherwise you
will run into sample size issues. Statistical analysis of trading and P&L
is covered in the previous section, so now it's time to start asking more
subjective questions such as:
Is there a mistake you make repeatedly? One of the best predictors
of failure is the trader who keeps making the same mistakes over

and over.
Do you stick to your plan? Or do you always take profit too early?
Do you stop out at worse levels than you planned?
Do you always lose money in a specific currency? Are some times of
day or days of the week or times of the month better or worse for
you?
Are your high‐conviction trades more profitable than your low‐
conviction trades? If yes, why? Are you sizing the different trades
appropriately?
And so on. This type of analysis can really improve your game and
reduce errors. Be creative when slicing and dicing the information and
try to make an honest assessment of your performance. Always think
about what is working and what is not. Do more of what works and less
of what does not.
You should always work hard to understand and analyze your trading
performance. This will lead to greater self‐understanding and improve
your chances of long‐term success. Be thoughtful about your trading
and about your strengths, weaknesses, and leaks. This will lead to
greater self‐understanding and greater profits.
This concludes our look at free capital and P&L analysis. Next, we will
dig deep into two crucial topics: position sizing and stop losses. These
are topics where even many experienced traders fail to optimize and
therefore underperform their potential.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key
concepts:
What is free capital and how do you measure it? Why is it
important and how is it different from total capital under
management?
How much can you afford to lose?
How to measure and analyze P&L
How to set goals and track your performance
Why a trading journal is important
Note
  1 Clearly a sample size of 5 is not good enough to make a truly accurate
assessment. This is a simplified example for explanatory purposes.
When analyzing real P&L figures, larger data samples are necessary

and anything less than 30 to 50 data points would make any analysis
meaningless. The more data points, the better.

CHAPTER 12 
Understand Position Sizing
Position Size as a Percentage of Capital
There are many ways to determine position size. The four primary
factors that determine position size are: (1) How much free capital
do you have? (2) How confident are you on this trade? (3) How
volatile is the currency pair? (4) Where is your stop loss?
Over the years, by studying many risk management texts and
books on professional gambling, I have come up with a very
simple but effective approach. Before I do a trade, I rate it by
conviction as Three‐Star, Four‐Star, or Five‐Star. Then, I allocate
approximately the following amount of adjusted free capital to the
trade:
Three‐Star 1%
Four‐Star 3%
Five‐Star 6%
Remember, when I refer to adjusted free capital, I define that as
how much you can afford to lose from now until the end of the
year. Adjusted just means the initial free capital adjusted for my
year‐to‐date P&L. If my adjusted free capital is $8 million and a
Five‐Star trade comes along, I will risk $480,000 on it ($8 million
times 6%).
It is important to note that the bar for a Five‐Star trade is very
high and these trades are rare. I might see 10 of them in a good
year. Also note that I always calculate my risk amounts based on
my adjusted free capital. If I could afford to lose $8m on January
1, but I'm up $4m on the year, I now have $12 million in adjusted
free capital. If a Five‐Star trade appears at that point, I will risk up
to $720,000 on it ([8 million + 4 million] times 6%).
Many people will say that 6% of capital is too much for a single
trade but I disagree. I believe that when you see a Five‐Star setup,
you need to be very aggressive. But this is only true when you are

in a position to be aggressive. You cannot be extremely risky like
this when you are in a weak capital position.
Understand that because of leverage available in most trading
seats, you are not really allocating 6% of your total capital to a
Five‐Star trade. Just 6% of free capital. There is a big difference
between free capital (amount you can afford to lose) and your total
capital.
Let me explain a bit more because this concept is very important:
Say you have $100m in capital but a 9% drawdown limit. You can
only afford to lose $9m, not $100m. So I am saying you would be
risking 6% of $9m, which is $540,000—less than 1% of your
$100m capital under management. Some traders use only a trade‐
by‐trade risk allocation system and others use only a monthly
system. Some (like me) overlap the two. I am describing both
methods and you can use them independently or in combination.
These numbers are starting points for risk allocation, not
absolutes. I have sometimes allocated 7% or even 10% of my free
capital to a trade when I believed in it very strongly and I was in a
strong P&L position YTD or MTD. Obviously, you cannot be
wrong many times at 10% of free capital before the hit to your
equity becomes problematic. So I feel much better about taking
larger risk once I am significantly profitable.
I use these per‐trade risk allocations along with monthly risk
limits so that I only take really big risk when I have high
conviction and I am trading from strength. As I make money, my
per‐month and per‐trade limits increase and if I'm in a slump, my
per‐month and per‐trade risk allocations fall, ensuring that I don't
blow up. If I am near my monthly stop loss and a Five‐Star
opportunity presents itself, too bad. I can only risk the remaining
portion of my monthly risk allocation.
For example, if I start the year with $4m in free capital and have
somehow lost $1m by mid‐February, I probably would not be
feeling very risky and would not want to put $300k (10%) of my
remaining $3m on the line no matter how high my conviction on a
particular trade. On the other hand, say it's June and I am up
$10m so my free capital is now $14m. An extremely juicy trade
idea comes along. I would probably be comfortable risking 10% of
my free capital ($1.4m) on the idea knowing that if I am wrong, I
am still up $8.6m on the year.

I will always trade looser when I am up and tighter when I'm
down. This helps avoid risk of ruin and opens up the right tail of
the distribution. Remember you want to be a call option—limited
downside but unlimited upside. By trading aggressively when you
are up and sticking to conservative risk percentages when you are
flat or down, you maintain strong risk management in the tough
times and have the potential for massive upside in your good
years.
There is a time and a place to move a big stack of chips into the
pot. To become the best trader possible and realize your ultimate
potential, you must identify moments when you see a fantastic
market opportunity and you have a big war chest of P&L. Those
are the moments to go big. There is a cliché that says bulls and
bears make money and pigs get slaughtered but I think that's
wrong.
Rule #14 of FX Trading: There is a time and a place to go
big.
Part of it comes down to personal preference and I acknowledge
that some traders succeed by risking only 2% or even less on any
given trade. I can only tell you what I do—I cannot guarantee it
will be right for you.
Always remember: Risk of ruin is the first and biggest risk to
manage. Being a pig means betting heavily on a great idea when
you are already highly profitable. It does not mean risking your
job or your firm on a single idea or theme. Managing risk of ruin is
much more important than worrying about “risk of missing a huge
opportunity.” While some managers will tell you to chip away and
chip away, I do not see many highly successful traders who just
chip away all the time.
Most successful traders chip away until a fat opportunity comes
along and then they bet big on that opportunity. This creates a
right tail to the P&L distribution and acknowledges that very
outsized opportunities are rare. Those superior opportunities offer
very high expected value and should be met with very large bets.
In poker, you are only dealt AA once in a while. You want to get
paid on it.
Dynamic sizing based on capital and conviction levels
automatically increases risk when you are doing well and reduces

risk when you are struggling. This approach is simple to automate
in a spreadsheet.
Finally, note the nonlinear jump from three‐star to Five‐Star. You
want to keep your investment in low‐conviction ideas small and
save money for the big kahunas.
Rule #15 of FX Trading: Good traders vary bet size.
There is another consideration when sizing your position:
Different currencies have different volatility profiles, so you need
to size your position according to the volatility of the currency
pair. You should take smaller positions in extremely volatile
currencies and larger positions in currencies that barely move (all
other things being equal). This will naturally happen if you use
volatility and logic to choose your stop loss levels.
For example, if one day's range in EURUSD is 1.5% and one day's
range in USDCAD is 1.0%, your stop losses should generally be
closer in USDCAD and further away in EURUSD. The wider your
stop, the smaller your position size if you plan to risk the same
amount in $. The position sizing versus volatility dynamic should
happen naturally. Don't be the person who always trades the same
position size in everything, regardless of conviction or market
volatility.
To find up‐to‐date relative volatility for different currencies, just
look at 1‐month implied volatility on Bloomberg, or try this link:
https://www.investing.com/tools/forex‐volatility‐calculator.

FACTBOX: SEARCHING FOR FIVE‐STARS
When multiple indicators from different branches of market
analysis all point in the same direction, you have a Five‐Star
trade. The more indicators pointing the same way, the better.
Understand that there is a difference between a Five‐Star (very
high‐probability trade) and a perfect trade. There is no such
thing as a perfect trade. No trade is guaranteed or risk‐free, so
be realistic. Stay ready and willing to pull the trigger. Here are
the features of a Five‐Star trade:
1. Fundamentals. Recent information suggests a change in
fundamentals that is not fully reflected in the price.
Fundamentals are improving (or getting worse) but the
currency has not rallied enough to reflect the
improvement (or sold off enough to reflect the
deterioration).
2. Cross‐market signals. Correlated variables are suggesting
the currency pair is away from fair value. The more
variables signaling the same thing, the better.
3. Positioning. Sentiment and positioning support the idea or
at least do not hurt it.
4. Technicals. Multiple levels and patterns support the idea
and allow it to be put on with good leverage. Ideally, one
or two of the Seven Deadly Setups are in play. Note that
sometimes all other factors are in line and technical
analysis suggests patience as you wait for a better entry
point. Be patient. Great trades can be ruined by terrible
entry points.
5. Gut feel. The first four points are all “head.” The fifth is
how you feel about the trade. Do you feel extremely
confident? Good. Does everything look good on paper but
you have a weird feeling about the trade? Bad. This is
important because when you feel strongly about a trade,
you will trade strong and if you don't feel right about the
trade, you will trade weak.

In other words, you will stop out at the first sign of
trouble when your gut is not on board. You will size it
wrong. You will be nervous when random news hits or if
the price action does not immediately go your way. Listen
to your gut but treat it only as a fifth factor, not the only
one in your process.
Many traders would include a sixth condition: catalyst. Is there
news or an upcoming event that might push the currency pair
and give it some momentum? This is a reasonable factor to
look for but I find catalysts overrated. Currencies move when
they want to move and sometimes there is a catalyst and
sometimes there isn't. Sure, I would prefer to enter a trade
when I see an upcoming catalyst, but it is not a necessary
condition for me to get excited about a trade.
The percentages I describe for trade sizing are simple when you
are only doing one trade. When you put on more than one trade,
you need to think about the correlation between your trades and
your overall P&L risk if all your trades go wrong at once. When I
outline percentages to risk on a trade, sometimes that could mean
dollars at risk on a theme or basket of trades as opposed to risk on
a single trade.
For example, I think the dollar is going higher and it is a clear
Five‐Star trade. I decide to risk 6% of my free capital on that idea.
I will not invest any more in anything correlated to a stronger
dollar until the original trade is closed. And no matter how
confident I am, I would never have three different trades on at the
same time, all risking 6% (even if they appear to be uncorrelated).
I prefer never to have more than 8% of my free capital at risk at
any time, no matter how many trades I have on or how
uncorrelated those trades might be. Something between 3% and
5% is much more reasonable most of the time.
There is a huge benefit to keeping your trading methodology as
simple as possible. If you keep your methodology simple, your risk
management will be simple. I rarely have more than three or four
trades on at a time and often I will only have one trade on. So my
sizing advice relates to distinct, individual trades executed in
succession.

If you are a short‐term trader or market maker who day trades, I
would not think about risk on an individual trade‐by‐trade basis.
Instead, simply allocate 1% to 6% of your capital to each day
depending on the opportunity set you see for that day.
Conceptually this is very similar to a trade‐by‐trade allocation but
accounts for the fact that some short‐term traders might do 20,
30, or 100 trades in a day and so it simplifies the methodology and
makes it safer and easier to risk manage. Remember that your
daily risk allocation has to overlap logically with your monthly risk
management process if you are using one. If you are down on the
month, your daily risk allocation will be driven by your monthly
stop loss, not your free capital.
Another Simple and Effective Way for
Short‐Term Traders to Determine Risk
A different, safer, and simpler approach for day traders is this:
Simply take your opening free capital in the morning and multiply
by 0.02. Don't lose more than that much money in a given day.
Each day you reset—it is all very methodical and rule based. You
don't need any monthly limits under this system and it will keep
you out of trouble. Every day, you risk 2% or less of your free
capital. That's it. Like the other systems I describe, this system
increases your risk as you accumulate profits and decreases your
risk when you are losing. But this system is super ‐easy.
I would like to reemphasize that I am simply providing different
risk management frameworks that I have used successfully at
various times. You can use these as a starting point but you need
to find your own methodology that is consistent with your risk
appetite, volatility, and trading style. Trade at your own risk. Past
performance does not guarantee future results. Etcetera.

FACTBOX: A SIMPLE AND EFFECTIVE RISK
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR NOVICE TRADERS
Risk 1% of capital per day. This is a simple, effective, and
nearly foolproof way to manage your risk. Each day is a new
day and you risk no more than 1% of your free capital.
Remember to fully understand the definition of free capital (as
opposed to total capital) before using this system. The system
self‐regulates. When you struggle, your risk allocation goes
down automatically and as you make money, you risk more.
Set up a simple spreadsheet like the one shown in Figure 12.1.
Figure 12.1 Sample risk management spreadsheet for a novice
trader.
And follow it so that you never lose any more than 1% in a
given day. This system is very simple to maintain. Let me

explain how the sheet works.
Start with row 1 (21‐Apr). A is the date. B is your free capital. C
is Column B times 1%. D is where you record the main theme
of the day just to make it easier to remember what happened if
you are curious later on. E is overnight P&L. F and G are the
high and low intraday. H is the closing P&L. I and J are month‐
to‐date and year‐to‐date P&L.
Then in the second row (24‐Apr) you simply take your starting
capital (500,000) and add your YTD P&L (4,400) for a new
starting capital of $504,400. So you can see as the month goes
on and you make money, your risk appetite increases in linear
fashion. If your capital doubles, your trade size doubles.
It is critical that you stick to the daily (or per‐trade) risk limit.
You can see in the sample P&L sheet that the trader broke her
limit twice (the highlighted cells in row G). This could be
because of bad discipline or gap risk. Use conditional
formatting to color the limit breaches in red on your
spreadsheet so that they stand out.
If you want to learn a systematic and mathematical approach to
position sizing, you should study the Kelly Criterion. While it
cannot be applied directly to trading, the theory and math behind
the Kelly Criterion are very useful when thinking about risk
management. The Kelly Criterion is a formula used to determine
optimal bet size under a few simplifying assumptions. The Kelly
strategy will outperform every other bet size strategy in the long
run, so it has become an important part of probability theory that
applies to both gambling and trading.
The Kelly strategy was described by J. L. Kelly, Jr. in 1956. Here is
a quote from the smart folks at lesswrong.com
(https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BZ6XaCwN4QGgH9CxF/the‐
kelly‐criterion):
It [the Kelly Criterion] is elegant, important and highly useful.
When considering sizing wagers or investments, if you don't
understand Kelly, you don't know how to think about the
problem.

The Kelly Criterion helps gamblers determine bet size based on
known probabilities and known payouts. I encourage you to read
about the Kelly Criterion because conceptually it is highly relevant
to trading risk management. William Poundstone's book Fortune's
Formula is an entertaining and educational book about the Kelly
Criterion (and other useful topics related to gambling and
investing).
If you have a good idea of your probability of winning (either on a
specific trade or on a given day) and you know your average gain
compared to your average loss, you can plug it into this formula:
So let's say it's the first trading day of the year and I have
$4,000,000 of free capital. I make money on 50% of my trades
and my average winning trade is $370,000, while my average
losing trade is $300,000. I know this from collecting three years
of historical P&L data. The figures I am using here are realistic
and approximately reflect real‐life daily trading performance data
for someone generating around $10 million dollars per year of
P&L at a commercial bank. So, plugging these numbers into the
formula we get:
So 9.4% times $4,000,000 would suggest this trader should risk
$378,400 on their first trade of the year. The Kelly number tends
to be very high relative to what you might expect because it
represents the most aggressive allocation possible to maximize
your upside given the parameters. Understand that the Kelly
Criterion was developed for gambling scenarios where you know
the exact odds beforehand and every bet is made in a series. Kelly
assumes you are making one bet at a time, whereas in trading you
might have multiple bets on at once. There are critical reasons
why the Kelly Criterion is better suited to gambling games than to
trading.

The main problem with a strict application of the Kelly Criterion
to investing (unlike, say, blackjack) is that the probability of
winning or losing on any given trade is not known beforehand.
You might know, from past experience, your approximate win/loss
percentage and average win versus average loss for each trade or
for each trading day. But you don't have perfect knowledge of the
exact future probabilities the way you do in casino gambling.
In trading, you use a past probability to estimate a future
probability. To compensate for the fact that you don't know your
real odds going forward (you can only estimate the future using
historical odds) you should consider half‐Kelly or quarter‐Kelly
sizing. This depends on how confident you are in your
performance data and how consistent your performance has been
over the years.
I used the Kelly Criterion along with my historical trading
performance data over the past 10 years as a starting point for the
risk allocations I described earlier for three‐star, four‐star, and
Five‐Star trades. I use less than full Kelly, even for Five‐Star
trades, because there is too much uncertainty in the probabilities
and you can survive much longer if you err on the small side
rather than the big side.
Once you find a risk percentage you are comfortable with, simply
set up a spreadsheet and update your risk allocations based on
YTD performance. So if I'm up $5,000,000 halfway through the
year, I would add this to my original $4,000,000 and my daily or
per‐trade risk would be substantially more than it was on January
1.
Understand that this dynamic methodology increases risk when
you are doing well and reduces it when you are doing poorly. That
is the path to limited downside and huge upside and every risk
management system should have this characteristic.
Determine Position Size
Now let's discuss how to determine appropriate position size. Say
you are a junior FX trader at a bank and your maximum
drawdown is $1,000,000. You have determined that your daily
stop loss should be $20,000 (2% of $1M). You will treat each day
as a separate bet to avoid issues around correlation or portfolios of

trades. You have no positions on. You have just spent two hours
conducting multifactor market analysis and you conclude that
EURUSD is a screaming buy. Right here! Right now! How big a
position should you take?
The first question you should ask is this: Do you want to risk your
whole day on one idea? As a short‐term trader there are a
maximum of two or three good opportunities per day and often
there is only one. Let's say the VIX is around 15 and there is not
much going on—intraday opportunities are fairly limited. Usually
when volatility is low, there are fewer opportunities. If it was
7:15AM and the VIX was at 40, we might want to save some of our
risk capital for later because high volatility usually means more
opportunity. In this case, we are going to risk the entire $20,000
on this trade.
Before determining your position size, you need to choose your
entry point and stop loss. Let's assume we buy at 1.2670 and after
much analysis we have determined that the ideal stop loss is
1.2622. The process for determining the position size is simple.
You just back out the position size from the potential loss. The loss
if the position is stopped out equals approximately (1.2670 −
1.2622) + (2 pips of slippage),1 which equals 50 pips. How many
euros can we buy so that a 50‐pip loss = $20,000? The answer is
4,000,000. Calculation: (20,000 / 0.0050). Therefore, we can run
a position of 4 million euros and know that if we are stopped out,
we will lose approximately $20,000.
This is all fairly easy to set up in a spreadsheet and there would be
a similar logic for any other product. Let's look at another
example.
I think gold is going up and I decide I want to go long GC (gold
futures) at $1730. My stop loss is $1680 and I expect negligible
slippage. I want to risk $50,000 on the trade. How many contracts
can I buy?
First, we need to know how the value of an increment in each
contract. You can find this online or pull up the contract on
Bloomberg and type DES {GO}. For gold, each dollar move on one
contract is $100, so a $50 change in price on 10 contracts is equal
to $50,000. Therefore, the correct position size is 10 contracts.
The formula is: POSITION SIZE = ($ AT RISK) / (LOSS PER
UNIT IF STOP TRIGGERS).

There is no other way to choose your position size. Maintaining
the same position size all the time ignores the fact that your stop
could be wide on one trade and tight on another trade. Your
position size should always be determined by the location of your
stop, not the other way around.
Here's a good example of how incorrect position sizing can hurt
you. Picture a trader who doesn't like to lose more than $100,000
in a day. Every seasoned trader knows the scenario seen in Figure
12.2.
Figure 12.2 Walkthrough of how position size impacts P&L.
Undisciplined Trader with No Strong Position Sizing
Process.
# Current
P&L
EURUSD
spot
level
Thought process
Action and
position with
average price

# Current
P&L
EURUSD
spot
level
Thought process
Action and
position with
average price
1
Flat
1.2700
OK I've been
waiting for
EURUSD to get to
1.2700 for three
days! This is it…
Here's my chance.
Buys 30 EURUSD 
Long 30 @ 1.2700
2
−
$32,000
1.2690
Hmm, it trades kind
of heavy.
Buys 10 more
EURUSD 
Long 40 @ 1.2698
3
−
$70,000
1.2680
It looks like it's
basing.
Buys 10 more
EURUSD 
Long 50 @ 1.2694
4
−
$95,000
1.2675
Well, this isn't
good; let me see
what level I should
be stopping out.
(Sees a nice
convergence of
technical levels
around 1.2650/55
and decides to stop
out if 1.2650
breaks)
5
−
$130,000
1.2668
Ah man, I'm down
$130k! That's half
my P&L for the
whole month.
6
−
$160,000
1.2662
Man, this is getting
out of hand. I'm
down $160,000
here. Why the heck
did I buy so many
euros?
Sells 25 EURUSD 
Long 25 @ 1.2726

# Current
P&L
EURUSD
spot
level
Thought process
Action and
position with
average price
7
−
$40,000
1.2710
Man, I totally
screwed this up,
what a terrible bit of
trading. At least I'm
only down $40k.
But my position is
too small! I'll get
back to 45 euros
and everything will
be fine when we go
1.2750 paid! I'm
starving but I better
not leave the desk.
What a roller
coaster!
Buys 20 EURUSD 
Long 45 @ 1.2719
8
−
$211,000
1.2672
ARGHHH. I hate
myself! Why the
heck did I buy that
spike? Am I an
idiot? This thing is
gone now; it's going
to make a new low.
I might as well stem
the bleeding and get
out. ARGGGHHH.
Sells out his entire
position 
Flat

# Current
P&L
EURUSD
spot
level
Thought process
Action and
position with
average price
9
−
$211,000
1.2715
I knew it was going
to rally! I am so
hating this market
right now, it's
impossible! So
freaking choppy!
He reports his daily
P&L of minus
$211,000 and feels
furious that he
didn't stick with the
plan. EURUSD is
higher on the day
and yet he just lost
his whole month's
P&L despite being
long euros! He goes
home, argues with
his wife, and goes
to bed early.
And here's how it works if you size the position correctly:
Disciplined Trader with Strong Position Sizing Process.
# Current
P&L
EURUSD
spot
level
Thought process
Action and
position with
average price
1
Flat
1.2700
OK I've done all my
analysis and I want to
be long EURUSD. I've
been waiting for
EURUSD to get to
1.2700! This is it…
Here's my chance.
She did her
technical analysis
this morning and
sees that 1.2644
is the optimal
stop. 
Knowing she
doesn't want to
lose more than
$100,000, she
buys 17 million
euros at 1.2700
and places her
stop loss on an
automated
system.

# Current
P&L
EURUSD
spot
level
Thought process
Action and
position with
average price
2 −$17,000
1.2690
Hmm, it trades kind
of heavy.
3
−
$34,000
1.2680
It looks like it's
basing.
4
−
$42,500
1.2675
Well, maybe my
analysis was wrong. I
know if 1.2644 trades,
I'm out. My historical
win% is around 55%
so I'm certainly not
going to get
emotionally involved
in any single trade. If
I'm wrong, I'm
wrong.
5
−
$54,400
1.2668
Reads some research.
6
−
$64,600
1.2662
Finishes reading
research and gets
some fresh air outside
for 10 minutes
knowing her stop is
being watched by a
machine.
7 +$17,000
1.2710
Reads some more
research and prepares
some ideas for
tomorrow.
8 −$47,600
1.2672
Grabs a healthy lunch
and goes for a short
walk to get a bit of
exercise and
sunshine.

# Current
P&L
EURUSD
spot
level
Thought process
Action and
position with
average price
9 +$25,500
1.2715
Finishes her plan for
tomorrow's trading.
Reports daily
P&L of +$25k.
While it's a small
number for her,
she feels good
about sticking
with the plan.
She goes home
and has a nice
dinner and a
glass of wine.
I hope these contrasting examples illustrate the dramatic
difference in P&L that can result from different position sizes and
different intraday behaviors. Put your trade on in the correct size
and give it time to work.
Common Errors in Position Sizing
Position sizing is one of the great challenges in trading because
you need to balance two countervailing realities: (1) the largest
position makes the most money when you are right, but (2)
smaller positions are much easier to manage and allow you to ride
out the inevitable market noise. Traders of all experience levels
make three common errors in position sizing:
Positions Are Too Big
Young traders and very aggressive traders tend to run positions
that are too big for their P&L tolerance. They always feel like “This
is the big one!” and they want to be fully leveraged for the
inevitable big move. This can be problematic as the increased
volatility of the P&L on a large position means that the trader is
more likely to stop out at the wrong time. To get an idea of how
position‐sizing impacts your P&L, let's look at a regular day in
EURUSD (Figure 12.3) and see how different position sizes would
have generated different P&L.

Figure 12.3 5‐minute price action from midnight to 5:30PM in
EURUSD on November 13, 2012.
Now let's say you went long right at midnight (the far left of the
chart). It moved immediately against you but eventually closed the
day (5:00PM, far right of chart) slightly higher. Look at Figure
12.4, which shows the running P&L (in dollars) for different‐sized
long EURUSD positions on this day.

Figure 12.4 5‐minute running P&L of going long EURUSD at
midnight on November 13, 2012.
Unless you have fairly deep pockets, the 50 million EURUSD
position is clearly problematic as the worst drawdown is more
than $200,000. On the other hand, most bank traders could ride
out the P&L on the 20 million EURUSD position shown in Figure
12.4 while home traders might receive a margin call with even the
3 million EURUSD position.
You need to size the position so that you can survive the volatility
if and when you are temporarily wrong. And FYI, you will be
wrong a lot. The key is riding out the P&L volatility without
blowing yourself up. Now let's look at the other two common
position sizing errors.
Positions Are Too Small
Many traders make the opposite mistake and trade too
conservatively. If you are a bank trader and your annual budget is
$10 million, can you succeed with an average position size of
$5,000,000? No. You need to trade big enough that you make real
money when you are right. If you need $3,000,000 of trading P&L

just to cover your base salary and IT expenses at a small hedge
fund, you can't be trading $2,000,000 positions back and forth.
Positioning too small won't blow you up but it can lead to a slow
and inevitable death by 1000 cuts. If your positions are too big,
you blow up. If they are too small you fade away. Trading too
small is a problem more associated with bank traders than retail
or hedge fund traders.
A Third Mistake Is Always Trading the
Same Size of Position
If USDMXN moves 1.2% per day and AUDCAD moves 0.6% per
day, does it make sense for a trader who is bullish both (with
similar conviction) to be long 10 million of each? No. You need to
size your positions according to the volatility of the product you
are trading and the expected risk and reward of the individual
trade. This is called volatility adjustment or vol‐adjusting.
Sizing should relate not just to the volatility of what you are
trading but also to your level of conviction. When you see a very
powerful setup, you should be aggressive. This is similar to the
concept that in poker you will bet much larger when you have a
pair of aces than when you have a pair of threes. Remember Rule
#15 of FX Trading: Good traders vary their bet size.
I try to size my super‐high‐conviction trades at least 3X or 4X my
lower‐conviction trades. Varying bet size is a key concept in
successful gambling and there is a strong analogy to trading.
When expected value of a trade is high, trade big. When you are
less confident, trade small.
Stop Losses
Stop losses are a key feature of any good risk management system.
Without a stop loss, you don't know your downside on a given
trade or your downside for a given day or month of trading. This
introduces risk of ruin, which is always the number‐one risk to
avoid. By leaving stop loss orders, you can effectively measure the
risk of every trade you put on and exit risk when trades go wrong.
The fundamental fact that you need to fully embrace is this: You

will be wrong. A lot. So manage your risk using stop losses. Let me
give you some thoughts on stop loss strategy.
Where to Put Your Stop Loss
I use the following approach, combining three techniques to come
up with my stop loss levels:
1. Use technical analysis to determine the optimal stop loss level
and then add about 20% of a day's range as extra room.
Ideally (as discussed in Chapters 6 and 7 about understanding
technical analysis), I can find an area where there is a
convergence of tops, bottoms, trendlines, and other levels.
Then I put the stop past those levels to give it some room.
For example, I am short EURUSD. I see a bunch of topside
levels in EURUSD at 1.1500/20 and the average range in
EURUSD these days is about 100 pips. Then I would take
1.1520 and add 20 pips (20% of the 100‐pip daily range) and
so my stop should be 1.1540. Because of round number bias,
I never leave my orders at round numbers, so in this example
I would leave my stop at 1.1541.
In an ideal world, you do not want to leave your stop loss
where everyone else is leaving their stop, so some second
derivative thinking is required. If you see a very obvious
place to leave your stop loss or you read that many stop
losses are clustered in a particular area, try to avoid getting
caught up with all the other stops. Leave some extra room.
I believe that the most useful application of technical
analysis is right here. By picking the right stop loss using
technical analysis, you maximize your leverage (because the
closer the stop loss, the bigger position you can take) and
create a firm and mechanical stop loss level.
2. The second criterion I use for setting stops is average daily
range. My starting point is that I normally want to set my stop
loss at least one day's range away from my entry point (but
not always). Just remember there is too much noise in the
market to trade profitably using super‐tight stops all the time.
Occasionally you might find adequate risk/reward on super
micro trades but opportunities where you can risk 10 or 20

pips are rare unless you are trading a level break or a news
event.
Also note that there should be a relationship between your
stop and your time horizon. For short term trades, you could
use a standard formula of CURRENT PRICE + (1.2 X
AVERAGE DAY RANGE) and that would be reasonable. On a
medium‐term trade you might take something more like
CURRENT PRICE + (AVERAGE DAY RANGE X 2.5).
3. Trailing stop losses. As a trade moves further into the money,
you can lock in some profit. The simplest way to do this is to
move your stop up as spot moves in your favor. You can do
this using a moving average or a simple, preexisting plan like:
I went long at 1.1480 with a stop at 1.1397 and take profit at
1.1699. If spot gets to 1.1625, I'll move my stop up to 1.1499 to
lock in a guaranteed win. This avoids a winner turning into a
loser but lets the trade continue to run and make money
toward 1.1699. The other way is to use a moving average such
as the 100‐hour MA (or another MA, depending on the time
horizon of your trade).
Let's look at an example using Figure 12.5. You went short
EURUSD (the black candles) at the top left of the chart
(around 1.1000) with a stop at 1.1205 and a take profit at
1.0511. The 40‐hour exponential moving average (the black
line) has been defining the trend pretty well. So ideally you
will take profit at 1.0511 but if the currency bounces
significantly, it seems crazy to leave your stop way up at
1.1205 when EURUSD is now trading at 1.0585.

Figure 12.5 Hourly EURUSD with 40‐hour EMA, March 5 to
March 11, 2015.
So you decide that on an hourly close above the moving
average, you will cut the position. This is still called a stop
loss even though in reality you are taking profit because you
sold way higher. Any order where you are buying on the way
up or selling on the way down is always called a stop loss.
You don't need to update your stop on an hourly basis; you
can update it once every 12 or even 24 hours by simply taking
the moving average and adding 20 pips of extra space.
Understand Risk/Reward
There should be a relationship between your stop loss level and
your take profit level with regard to risk/reward. As a general rule,
if a trader consistently risks 100 pips on his stop loss and takes
profit after 30 pips, he will not be profitable in the long run. That
said, I believe that it is absolutely incorrect to insist on a fixed
risk/reward ratio all the time.
Quite often it could be acceptable to risk 100 pips to make 100 if
you believe the probability of making the 100‐pip profit is far
greater than the probability of losing the 100 pips. This boils down
to expected value. If you do not understand the concept of
expected value, you should Google it and do a bit of reading

because it is very important. Expected value is an absolutely
critical concept in many areas of finance, trading, and gambling.
Here is an example of a trade with great expected value where you
are risking 100 pips to make 100 pips:
Don't mechanically shy away from a trade just because it's not,
say, 3:1 risk/reward. If you look at only the stop loss to take profit
ratio, you are taking a one‐dimensional view of a two‐dimensional
problem. Risk/reward is calculated not just from the relationship
between the stop and the take profit but also from the estimated
probability of each event. Once in a while I will see a setup where
the expected value looks positive even though I'm risking 70 pips
to make 50. These are rare but my point is simply to keep an open
mind on this topic and don't be overly rigid.
The big challenge in using an expected value framework, of course,
is assessing the probability of hitting your stop loss and your take
profit. These are estimates with very large potential error and so
you should be conservative when estimating the probabilities. If
you have a detailed trading journal, you can accumulate data that
will help you assess the real‐world probability of different types of
trades hitting the stop loss or take profit.
You might notice that trades with 3:1 risk/reward win only 20% of
the time while your trades with 1:1 risk/reward win 65% of the
time. This type of observation can be very useful in improving
future trading strategy. It is important to understand that in
trading you deal with subjective probabilities, not objective
probabilities like in a game of chance involving dice or cards. So
the expected value calculation suggests more precision than it will
deliver.
Here are three rules you should always follow for stop losses:
1. Write your stop loss down in your trade journal or on a scrap
piece of paper in front of you before or immediately after you

put on a trade. As I have discussed previously: Something
written down is concrete and firm. Something in your mind is
abstract and fuzzy—subject to change and manipulation.
Always record your stop loss and treat the level with
paramount importance. When you are in a losing trade, you
are subject to all sorts of irrational and emotional behaviors.
When you originally record the stop loss, you are acting
rationally. Don't let the emotional mind override that
original, rational mind that wrote down the stop.
2. Don't keep changing your stop loss level as the market moves
and you discover new technical levels or excuses to let a losing
trade run. A currency chart can give you level after level as
justification for losing trades, especially if you cycle between
5‐minute, hourly, and daily charts. There's always another
technical level to use as an excuse to change your stop. Don't
do it.
Once you have recorded your original plan, just follow it like
a robot. If you are stopped out, the idea was wrong. You can
always put the trade back on later but that is totally different
from moving your stop over and over. If I am stopped out, I
will allow myself to put the same trade back on with a
different stop loss after a 4‐hour cooling‐off period. In
theory, this is somewhat equivalent to moving the stop on an
existing trade but the important difference is the cooling‐off
period. By staying flat for four hours I give myself the chance
to cool off and to be free of confirmation bias and emotional
decision making.
Remember, the only time you are truly unbiased and
unemotional is when you are flat. Any time you have a
position, you are influenced by a huge range of emotions
related to that position. I cannot emphasize this enough. DO
NOT MOVE YOUR STOP LOSS LEVEL.
3. Automate your stop loss process, if possible. The best risk
management system is one where you input your stop loss
and it is automatically executed when your level hits. This
prevents bad discipline and makes things automatic. Rule‐
based and independent risk management systems are much
more robust than discretionary risk management run by the

trader. The more you can outsource your risk management
and stop loss execution, the better.
Reasons People Move Their Stop Losses
Good reasons:
Upcoming event risk
Trailing the stop loss to lock in profits
Risk management trigger reached
Bad reasons:
“I know if I just survive a bit longer, this will be a winner!”
“Oh wait, I didn't notice this major technical level before. I
better move my stop below it.”
“My other trades are doing well so I can let this one run
against me a bit longer.”
Slippage on Stop Losses
Slippage on stop losses will vary considerably depending on the
liquidity of the currency pair and whether price action is gappy or
continuous and fast or slow when the stop loss is executed. There
are no guarantees on stop losses but as a very general rule, most
stops of 20 million USD or less in liquid pairs are executed within
about 2 or 3 basis points of the trigger level. So on trades under 20
million, this generally means 2 or 3 pips slippage in most G10 FX
pairs or 20 or 30 pips in something like EURNOK, EURSEK,
USDNOK, or USDSEK. Larger notional amounts lead to greater
slippage.
In fast markets, stop loss orders will suffer from extra slippage.
Sometimes this extra slippage can be significant. This is especially
true through major economic data releases like nonfarm payrolls
and through central bank announcements. You should make sure
your positions are sized correctly if you have a position going into
an event because you might end up losing more than you
expected. Check out the volatility around prior releases and
calculate your downside using similar slippage.

When the SNB dropped the EURCHF floor, slippage was
absolutely apocalyptic with many traders losing 5X their entire
trading account or even more. As discussed, this was a known tail
risk and so anyone with a position at that time should have known
what they were getting into.
Slippage on stop losses can be a source of great frustration for
both market makers and speculators. This is because stop losses
tend to be a no‐win situation on both sides. The trader leaving the
stop is unhappy by definition when the order is executed because
he is getting taken out of his position. On the other side of the
coin, market makers usually struggle to execute stops without
losing money because stops are always on the weak side of the
market and tend to come in clusters. This is known as “negative
gamma,” which means market makers become short on the way
up and long on the way down when they have stop loss orders.
Nobody likes negative gamma.
You will often see situations where a customer trader is stopped
out on the buy side (and not happy with his fill) while on the sell
side, the market maker has done his best for the customer and still
lost money himself! Everybody loses. Keep this in mind when you
leave stop loss orders and when grading your fills afterward.
Take Profits
Take profit levels should be chosen using a similar approach to
stop loss selection. Do the work on the technicals and err on the
conservative side of your level. So if you figure that 1.1500 is a big
level, put your buy order at 1.1511 to get ahead of it. You will be
happy to take profit anyway and the extra 11 pips is the price you
pay for the added probability of a fill as you stay ahead of less
sophisticated players who leave their buy orders at exactly 1.1500.
Many traders find it very difficult to stick with their take profit
plan because a trade will be doing well when it gets to the take
profit level. It will often look like it has significant momentum and
the trend will look strong and ready to continue.
Rule #16 of FX Trading: It always looks bid at the highs.
It always looks heavy at the lows.
The beauty of an advance plan is that when news comes out or a
trade rips in your favor, you will take profit at the preplanned level

instead of doubling down like an emotional monkey on tilt.
Here are some terrible reasons traders move their take profit
orders:
“Whoa! This thing is ripping! No point taking profit yet!”
“Whew, I'm back to flat. I'll just get out here and forget about
this stupid trade.”
“I'm deep in the money here but my take profit is still another
25 pips away and we're stalling. If it turns against me now, I'll
never forgive myself!”
Establish a Clear, Rule‐Based Risk
Management Approach
Good traders have good risk management systems. You will read
about superheroes who go all in and bet everything on one “can't
miss” position but for every one of those who hit the jackpot there
are twenty funds that you will never hear about because they went
under with similar all‐in bets.
If you want to rely on luck, then don't worry about risk
management, but if you want to survive in the industry for a
prolonged period, be vigilant. Develop a risk management process
that is rule‐based. If you tend to be poorly disciplined, outsource
your risk management.
When I say outsource, it doesn't mean that you need an external
third party. You can use an internal trader or execution person
and have them monitor your risk and help manage it. This is
obviously not possible for an individual trader at home but if you
are at a hedge fund you can use your execution person as a risk
manager to enhance your process. If you are at a bank, talk about
your rules with other traders. Rules discussed out loud are more
likely to be followed than rules tossed around in your head.
None of this is easy. I have been trading for more than twenty
years and I still find it hard to stick to my own rules.
Process versus Outcome

Now that you understand the importance of developing and
maintaining a proper risk management process, there is one more
concept that you need to internalize: process versus outcome. This
concept is extremely important in professions where short‐term
results are strongly influenced by chance.
Rule #17 of FX Trading: You control the process but you
do not control the outcome.
In this section, I will explain the importance of fully internalizing
the difference between process and outcome in trading. This will
keep you focused on your daily process and allow you to remain
unemotional when bad luck hits.
The more luck is a factor in your job, the more you need to
understand the role of luck and become emotionally immune to its
whims. If you are going to succeed in trading, you need to
understand a few things:
The market does not know you exist. It does not hate you. It
does not like you.
Luck is a crucial short‐term factor in trading. Accept that any
given day could bring good or bad luck and move on.2 Be
stoic.
The importance of luck drops toward zero in the long run.
God doesn't care about your trades. God will not push the
market in your favor no matter how hard you pray.
Rule #18 of FX Trading: Each trade is a drop of water.
The market is an ocean.
You can see how luck loses its importance over time by analyzing
potential outcomes for a realistic set of assumptions. Let's say
your UP DAYS and DOWN DAYS are both the same in $ terms
and you are profitable on 55% of days. Your odds of making
money today are 55%. But your odds of making money this week
are closer to 60%. Your odds of making money this month are
close to 75%, and your odds of making money this year are above
90%!
You just lost money today. Should you feel bad? Not really. It's
part of the game. Prepare for tomorrow.

Separating process and outcome will help you find peace after
your very best trade idea gets steamrolled by a random headline or
you are stopped out 1 pip from the low before a trade rockets 2.5%
in the money. You control the process, not the outcome.
Another way of looking at the process‐versus‐outcome dichotomy
is to look at two poker hands. You're playing a cash poker game at
the Bellagio and after grinding through bad cards for the past two
hours, you are dealt a pair of aces. The player next to you is
wearing a glow necklace and a $45,000 watch and he just came
from a “bangin'” DJ pool party. He has been drinking vodka and
soda since 11:00AM. Everyone folds to him and he raises 5X the
pot. You go all in, and drunk guy calls right away. He turns over
A/9 and you know you are a huge favorite (around 12:1). The
dealer turns over a harmless flop and then the drunk guy is dealt
runner/runner 9s. He wins the entire pot with 3‐of‐a‐kind.
Do you feel angry and upset about your bad luck? Or do you
understand there is variance in poker and you made the right
decision, despite the bad outcome? A good poker player
understands this is classic good decision/bad outcome and starts
thinking about the next hand. Same goes for trading. This is
something that is very easy to understand conceptually but very
difficult to internalize. Internalize it.
PROCESS VERSUS OUTCOME IN TRADING
GOOD OUTCOME
BAD OUTCOME
GOOD
DECISION
Win. Will probably lead
to more good process
and more good
decisions.
Disappointing, but nothing
to worry about. Do not
respond emotionally to
these trades.
BAD
DECISION
Lucky. Will probably
lead to more bad
process and more bad
decisions. Good traders
know when they get
lucky despite doing the
wrong thing and are
willing to admit it.
Disappointing, but will
probably lead to change in
behavior. Learn from these
trades. Are you making the
same mistakes over and
over? Keep a list of your
mistakes and see what
patterns emerge.
Understand that good decisions often lead to bad outcomes in
trading but in the long run luck evens out. An amateur has a

chance against pro poker players if the game goes on for only a
short time. But the longer he plays with the pros, the closer his
odds of going broke approach 100%. As a good trader, you know
that over time your good decisions and solid risk management
framework will pay off but on any given day you could win or lose.
Make sure you fully absorb this concept. When you evaluate losing
trades, have a solid understanding of whether you were a victim of
bad luck on a given trade or whether your process is leading to bad
outcomes. The next time you're on a bad streak, take a step back.
Is this just a run of bad luck, the way a roulette wheel sometimes
comes up red ten times in a row? Or is this something different?
Are you pressing too hard? Unable to pull the trigger? Too tired?
Too angry? Too chicken?
Figure it out.
This concludes Part Three and our discussion of risk management.
Now we have covered how to come up with trade ideas and how to
manage risk. That's all we need to know to succeed right? Book
over? Not yet.
Your biggest enemy in the market is not the central banks or other
traders or hedge funds or bad luck. It's you. All the rules in the
world will not mean a thing if you do not follow them. So now we
go to Part Four, “Understand Yourself.”
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key
concepts:
How to size your positions
How position size relates to your targets
Common mistakes in position sizing
The importance of stop losses and how to use them
What is the Kelly Criterion and how does it relate to trading?
The difference between process and outcome
Further Reading
Duke, Annie. Thinking in Bets: Making Smarter Decisions When
You Don't Have All the Facts. New York: Portfolio, 2018.

FACTBOX: MY FAVORITE QUOTES ON PROCESS
VERSUS OUTCOME

David Sklansky, The Theory of Poker:
“Any time you make a bet with the best of it, where the
odds are in your favor, you have earned something on that
bet, whether you actually win or lose the bet. By the same
token, when you make a bet with the worst of it, where the
odds are not in your favor, you have lost something,
whether you actually win or lose the bet.”
Colm O'Shea's in Steven Drobny's The Invisible Hands:
“I do, actually [visualize every shot while playing golf]. I
believe in visualization, and the analogies between golf
and trading go beyond just visualizing the trade. With golf,
you can only control your process, not the result. You can
control your swing, but you cannot control where the ball
goes—there are too many variables You can make a great
shot but the ball could take a bad bounce and go into a
bunker, or take a great bounce and go in the hole. Once
the ball leaves your club after impact, you lose control and
become subject to myriad imperfections on the course.
Trading can be similar. You can have a great trade that
loses money, or conversely a terrible trade that makes
money. Regardless, the process is the only thing that you
can control, never the result. My process is such that we
will occasionally lose money, but over time, on average, we
will make money. I try not to get too worried about good
patches or bad patches in the shorter term, but rather
always come back to focusing on the investment process
and how we make money over time.”
From a story about Brad Stevens, coach of Butler's top 10
ranked basketball team:3
“With his team trailing by a point in the final seconds in a
Hinkle Fieldhouse cauldron of tension, Stevens watched
Roosevelt Jones steal a wayward Gonzaga lob pass, drive
into the frontcourt and launch a shot at the buzzer that
improbably swished for a dramatic victory. Stevens
observed this thrilling, stunning turn of events with his
arms folded across his chest, looking more like a man
watching the grass grow than his team snatching another
last‐second triumph. When Jones launched his shot,
Stevens started to turn and walk to the Gonzaga bench,

arms still folded. When it went in, he did not break stride,
did not change body language, did not pump a fist or let
out a howl or dance a jig. As his players dashed around the
floor in celebration and the fans poured out of the stands
to join them, Stevens paid no heed. He walked down and
shook the hand of Gonzaga coach Mark Few…
The analytical side of his job has in many ways shut down
the in‐game emotions that he felt in his youth.… He is
analytical enough to know that his team's performance
cannot be accurately appraised on the basis of a single
shot going in.… One of the reasons he was already turning
to walk when Jones' shot was in the air is because it was
almost irrelevant to how he viewed his team's
performance. “What goes through my mind is, the hay is
in the barn,” Stevens said. “If a guy makes a shot like that
or doesn't, it doesn't define who we are. It doesn't affect
how I evaluate our team. It doesn't break our season.…” As
such, Stevens knows that growth comes more from the
daily habits in practice and preparation, the small pieces
that make up a whole body of work.
Notes
  1 Slippage will vary based on position size and platform. You can
usually ignore slippage in many products because it will not be
significant, but if there is going to be slippage, it's best to
include it in your estimate of the loss if you get stopped out.
  2 This is essentially a variation of the Serenity Prayer, which I
recited quite often in 2008 as I was trading USDJPY at Lehman
Brothers: God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I
cannot change, the courage to change the things I can, and the
wisdom to know the difference.
  3 https://sports.yahoo.com/news/nba‐‐forde‐minutes‐‐butler‐s‐
flair‐for‐dramatic‐doesn‐t‐excite‐brad‐stevens‐‐
074407732.html.
