PART IV 
Understand Yourself
“90% of the game is half mental.”
Yogi Berra
Learning the rules is easy. Following them is hard. Once you finish
this book and feel that you have a strong understanding of how the
FX market works, the hard work begins. As years pass and you
gain more and more experience, you will find trading is more and
more about psychology and channeling mental chaos than it is
about charts and macro and behavioral analysis. You need to
understand your weaknesses (and your strengths) and develop a
systematic process so that you do not make the same mistakes
over and over. Mistakes are how we learn in trading. Repeating
mistakes is how we fail.
I know and can outline all sorts of risk management strategies in
this book. Yet I have leaks. I overtrade because I'm bored.
Sometimes my emotions take over and I size my positions way too
big out of excitement and FOMO. After 20 years in the market, it
is still a challenge for me to consistently follow my own rules. The
number one determinant of a trader's success is how well he
follows his own rules. All good traders need self‐discipline.
Good traders share many other characteristics. We will look at the
most important ones in Chapter 13.

CHAPTER 13 
Characteristics of a Successful Trader
Finds the Balance between Risky Behavior
and Discipline
To be good, you need this balance. Many people are too risk averse
to be good traders while others are too wild and undisciplined to
succeed. The combination of mega risk appetite and disciplined
personality is rare. Usually you will meet traders with heavy risk
appetite who find systematic ways to manage their risk, or risk‐
averse traders who implement systems that allow them to take
meaningful risk in a prudent way.
Over many years managing many FX traders, I have generally
found that there are many more risk‐averse traders than those
consistently willing to take courageous risk, but both imbalances
can be fixed with a solid process.
Thinks Independently
Don't follow the crowd, but don't be a reflexive contrarian. Think
for yourself. Read everything you can but come to your own
conclusions. I am going to repeat part of a quote from earlier
because I think it is incredibly pertinent to trading:
“The most contrarian thing of all is not to oppose the crowd but
to think for yourself.”
– Peter Thiel, Zero to One
You should read and absorb as much as you possibly can but
always trade your own view—never someone else's.
This is a concept worth emphasizing: Trade your own view. If you
trade someone else's idea, you will inevitably do everything wrong.
You will stop out at the wrong levels because your conviction will
not be high when the trade goes against you. Also, if you are
trading someone else's view, you might not know when their view
changes. Frequently you will hear someone moaning about

someone else's idea they followed and then have insult added to
injury as they find out the original trader exited long ago or even
flipped her position.
Successful traders do their own work and come to their own
conclusions.
Knows Their Edge
Are you faster than other traders? Better at processing new
information? Maybe you are really good at studying central banks
and predicting what they will do. The cliché in poker is that if you
don't know who the sucker at the table is, the sucker is probably
you. Same goes in trading. If you can't say with a straight face that
you know exactly where your edge comes from, you are in serious
trouble.
Because of transaction costs, FX trading is a negative‐sum game.
You need an edge to win. What is your edge?
Rule #19 of FX Trading: Know your edge.
Trades One Time Horizon
Every trader should choose a time horizon and stick to it. Most of
my trades last 3 hours to 7 days and the vast majority of my trades
fall in the 1‐day to 3‐day bucket. The more tightly you can define
your time horizon, the better. FX is the most liquid market in the
world and thus it is perfectly suited to short‐term trading.
Whatever you do, stick to one time horizon. Yes, markets are
fractal, but mixing time horizons is a recipe for disaster for many
reasons, the main one being that you will start to notice that
poorly timed short‐term trades become longer‐term “investments”
while successful swing trades yield only tiny profits as you trade
out too quickly in order to “improve your average.”
I have worked with dozens of top traders over the years and I have
never seen a highly successful trader take meaningful risk on
multiple time horizons. To give yourself the best possible odds of
sustainable success, your goal should be to master one explicitly
chosen time horizon in one explicitly chosen product: foreign
exchange. Forget about other time horizons and forget about

trading crude, gold, and S&Ps. Jack of all markets = master of
none.
Rule #20 of FX Trading: Know your time horizon.
The beauty of short‐term FX trading is that there are great
opportunities every single trading day. Not almost every day.
Every day. This gives you great freedom and peace of mind as a
trader because you know that as long as your risk management
process is sound, you will always have another chance tomorrow.
A big‐picture macro trader might see three or four juicy
opportunities per year. She can't afford to make many mistakes.
Short‐term currency trading is different. Each trade is like a drop
of water in the ocean. There is always another trade and another
opportunity right around the corner.
Controls Emotion/Acts Like a Robot/Self‐
Aware
Humans are not robots but your goal is to be as unemotional as
possible. Emotion kills. If you feel yourself getting emotional, take
a step back. Recognize and acknowledge the emotions. Assess
where they are coming from. When you feel emotional, whether it
is happiness or frustration, you should reduce your position size.
Euphoria and disappointment both lead to all sorts of suboptimal
decision making.
The key is to be self‐aware.
Know when you are on tilt. If you high‐five someone as a trade is
moving your way, be aware that this high five is probably a sign of
euphoria and could be signaling a turning point in the market (see
Chapter 9, “Understand Behavioral Finance”). As you gain
experience, you will start to see mistakes you are making as you
make them and change course.
Implements a Consistent Daily Routine
Good traders are totally prepared before they start trading. They
have a process and a plan before they hit any buy or sell keys. I
have a daily sheet that I complete each morning before things get
busy. This sheet helps me gauge where I am at emotionally and

also puts numerical brackets around my day as I set a profit target
and a stop loss number. This helps enforce discipline so that I
know at what point I will stop myself out (how much money can I
lose today?) and when I should be taking some profit (what P&L
would make this a successful day? A great day?).
Rule #21 of FX Trading: Good traders have a plan. They
may not always stick to the plan but they always have
one.
I talked about this concept in the trading journal section but I am
going to revisit it here because it is so important. Thoughts are
abstract and noisy, whereas anything you write down is by
definition more concrete and focused. Concrete and focused
writing leads to focused trading while abstract and noisy thinking
leads to noisy trading.
I encourage every trader to create at least a brief written plan
before they start trading. It can be one or two paragraphs, written
to yourself or sent to others. But I cannot emphasize this enough:
Have a written plan every day. It can be incredibly simple. Write it
on a Post‐It Note if you want. But do it. This simple daily practice
will make you a better FX trader.
Happy to Be Flat
This was touched on earlier, too, but I want to repeat it. Good
short‐term traders get flat. You don't always have to have a
position. There are not always top‐quality opportunities available.
Part of your job is to show the willpower and patience to wait for
good opportunities. I am not very good at this but I keep trying to
improve.
Understands Tight/Aggressive
One of the most successful and common approaches used by good
poker players is called “tight/aggressive.” The concept is that you
don't want to be involved in very many pots but when you are
involved, be as aggressive as possible. In other words, wait until
you have great cards and then go for it. While you never want to
literally go all in when trading, the tight/aggressive strategy in

poker is a great analogy. Wait, wait, wait… and then when
everything lines up, pounce!
Rule #22 of FX Trading: Tight/Aggressive wins.
Self‐Understanding and Metacognition
Good traders are self‐aware and understand the importance of
thinking about thinking (metacognition). This self‐awareness
usually develops over time but after several years of trading, you
should start to hear and understand your own thoughts more
clearly than you did in the past.
Know yourself. What is your edge? Understand your information
processing strengths and weaknesses. Identify your biases. Do you
trade poorly after fighting with your boss? Are you aggressive
when selling a certain currency but full of hesitation when you go
long that currency? These are questions to ask yourself. Do more
of what works and less of what does not.
Assess your state of mind on an ongoing basis. Are you feeling
euphoric? Depressed? Often your state of mind can provide
warning ahead of potentially bad trading decisions. Whenever I
find myself feeling euphoric (singing on the desk, annualizing a
fast start to the year, celebrating a great trade), I know I am
probably about to receive a huge kick in the pants. When I feel
euphoric, I reduce risk.
Loves Trading
You cannot succeed at trading if you don't love it. No matter how
much money you make—that's not success. Success is coming in
every day and enjoying yourself and if that leads to substantial
wealth, that's great. The best traders I have worked with seem like
they were born to trade.
I grew up in middle‐class Ottawa, Canada, and nobody in my
family had any interest whatsoever in finance. Yet by the age of 14,
I was already so interested in trading that I used my earnings from
delivering the Pennysaver to subscribe to the Financial Post.
When I was 15 I started charting stocks by hand on graph paper
and taking a by‐mail investment course. I worked for a
stockbroker after school and opened my own trading account with

$500 at the age of 16. At 18 I was the first person from my family
to go to university.
I have no idea where it came from, but I was driven to become a
trader from a very young age. Passion for trading is a key success
factor. If you are trading just for the money, you can't win, because
even if you make a ton of cash, you still lose as you miss out on
whatever career should have been your true passion.
Learns and Adapts
Good traders keep learning. They adapt. They want to improve
every day and have a growth mindset. They don't sit there and
complain about how the market sucks; they identify new market
regimes and try to understand whether their current process will
work as the regime shifts. This ability to adapt has been especially
important in recent years as market microstructure has changed
dramatically with the rise of the algos.
As trading was increasingly automated during the 2000s, there
were two groups of traders: One group complained every day
about the algos and how they were messing up the market and
changing the game in unfair ways. The other group of traders
analyzed the new market structure and adapted, changing their
trading style to fit the new regime. Guess which group of traders
lost their jobs?
When volatility, liquidity, microstructure, and correlations
change, good traders see it happening and adapt their process.
Those who do not adapt are eliminated by natural selection.
Remember Rule #2 of FX trading: Adapt or die.
Gut versus Head: Two Very Different
Decision‐Making Systems
Whenever you think about a trade or potential trade idea, you run
two parallel systems:
Head: This is the logic and analysis system. You analyze
everything and make a decision to do a trade.
Gut: This is past experience and intuition. But it is also fear,
hope, greed, and many other emotions, plus a bunch of

different types of bias all boiled into one steaming, confusing
pot. Your gut can signal a familiar pattern and a profitable
trade idea—or it can signal you are afraid to lose money or
take a risk.
Those with years of trading experience can use a combination of
head and gut to their advantage. My strongest views come when
my head and my gut are in sync. When strong analysis intersects
with a strong gut feel, you have yourself a winner. As a general
rule, the longer you have been trading, the more you can trust
your gut. New traders should rely mostly on their analytical
process and less on instinct. But sometimes, head and gut don't
align…
All Head, No Gut
You will sometimes experience a situation where you do the
analysis, come to a strong conclusion, and then find your gut is
just not on board. In that case, it's time to do some deep thinking.
Why is my gut not on board? Is it some sort of bias or fear? Or
perhaps a pattern you subconsciously recognize that suggests the
trade will not work? Maybe it's the feeling of “I've seen this movie
before and I don't like how it ends!”
Or are you just afraid to lose money because you are on a cold
streak? Good trading takes courage. When a good trade idea
comes along, you need to do it, even if it's scary. Do your best to
figure out what is troubling your gut. You will not always be able
to unpack where the gut feeling is coming from but you need to
try.
All Gut, No Head
The opposite situation is where you have a strong gut feel that
something will happen but no logical foundation for the idea.
Then you start doing analysis in an effort to confirm the gut feel.
This is a tricky situation because your strong gut feel will almost
certainly lead to confirmation bias as you look around for
information and “logical” reasons to do the trade.
Be honest with yourself and look for information that both backs
up your idea and contradicts it. Do not simply look at your main
hypothesis. Think of alternative hypotheses and assess them as
objectively as possible. If you find you cannot be objective, ask

someone else to play devil's advocate. When you can honestly say
that your logical analysis supports the gut view, go for it.
As you gain experience, you can trust your gut more and more, but
the best trades happen when your gut and your head are
completely aligned. Recognize those moments and allocate the
maximum possible capital to those trades. When your gut and
your head are in conflict, do more work or better yet: Do nothing.
Wait for high‐confidence setups and ignore trades that cause
internal dissonance.
To learn more about instinctive versus deliberate decision making,
you should read Daniel Kahneman's classic, Thinking Fast and
Slow. He calls the two cognitive processing systems “System 1”
and “System 2” and explains (with the help of supporting
research) where each system can be useful or detrimental. The
book is a must‐read for anyone interested in trading or behavioral
finance.
This chapter is all about what makes a good trader. Go through the
characteristics listed and pinpoint where you are weak and where
you are strong. And then get to work on your weaknesses.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key
characteristics of a good trader:
Finds the balance between risky behavior and discipline
Thinks independently
Controls emotions and is self‐aware
Implements a consistent daily routine
Deals from a position of strength by getting flat
Understands tight/aggressive
Learns and adapts
Further Reading
For more on the importance of analyzing alternative hypotheses I
strongly suggest you read this:
https://www.cia.gov/library/center‐for‐the‐study‐of‐

intelligence/csi‐publications/books‐and‐
monographs/psychology‐of‐intelligence‐analysis/art11.html.

CHAPTER 14 
Common Weaknesses in Trading
While it is obvious that bad traders do not display the positive
qualities listed above, there is a separate list of negative qualities
that often lead to failure. Here are some characteristics of traders
who fail:
Poor Risk Management, Bad Discipline,
and Negative Risk/Reward
This is the number‐one reason traders fail. They run their losing
trades too long, cut their winners too fast, and pile new losses onto
prior losses. This is what happens when you do not have a
consistent process and good discipline. Before you do a single
trade, make sure you fully and completely understand the concept
of risk of ruin and how it applies to your trading. How much can
you lose before you are done, fired, bankrupt, blown up? How will
you avoid ever getting close to that point?
Trading for the Wrong Reasons
People don't trade just to make money. There are all sorts of other
less obvious reasons traders trade. What follows is a list of bad
habits and bad psychology that lead people to trade for the wrong
reasons.
1. Overtrading, gambling, entertainment, and addiction
People have many motives (some conscious, but most
subconscious) for overtrading. They trade because they are
bored. They trade because they can't help themselves (bad
impulse control, compulsive behavior). They trade because
they are somewhere on the unsafe part of the continuum
between healthy risk taking and pathological gambling.
Below is a list of behaviors that DSM‐VI1 describes as signs
of a pathological gambler. Do you recognize some of these

traits in yourself or other traders? Substitute the word
“trading” for “gambling” and see.
Preoccupied with gambling (e.g. preoccupied with
reliving past gambling experiences, handicapping, or
planning the next venture, or thinking of ways to get
money with which to gamble).
Needs to gamble with increasing amounts of money in
order to achieve the desired excitement.
Repeated unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back, or
stop gambling.
Experiences restlessness or irritability when attempting
to cut down or stop gambling.
Gambles as a way of escaping from problems or of
relieving dysphoric mood (e.g. feelings of helplessness,
guilt, anxiety, or depression).
After losing money gambling, often returns another day
in order to get even (“chasing” one's losses).
Lies to family members, therapists, or others to conceal
the extent of involvement with gambling.
Has committed illegal acts such as forgery, fraud, theft,
or embezzlement in order to finance gambling.
Has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or
educational or career opportunity because of gambling.
Relies on others to provide money to relieve a desperate
financial situation caused by gambling.
Yes, trading is fun. There is no doubt about that. But when you
read Reminiscences of a Stock Operator and think, “Wow, trading
is so fun and exciting!” just remember that despite all that
excitement in the 1920s and 1930s, Jesse Livermore went
bankrupt multiple times and committed suicide in the cloakroom
of Manhattan's Sherry Netherland Hotel in 1940.
Trading for fun is not a recipe for long‐term success or happiness.
Your goal needs to be long‐term success, not short‐term
entertainment.

To Feel Smarter Than Anyone Else
Contrarian traders love the feeling of being right when everyone
else is wrong and this can create all sorts of bad behaviors. I had
this problem a lot when I was young but have mostly plugged the
leak as I got older and less arrogant.
The main risk of trying to be smart all the time is that you will
miss the obvious trades because they seem too obvious or too easy.
You will try to pick tops and bottoms all the time because these are
the ultimate “I feel so smart!” trades when they work. And you will
avoid the strong trends because you always think that everyone
else is already on board.
Many, many obvious trades work; do not be afraid to jump on a
trade even if it's simple. Sometimes simple is best. Remember
your goal is not to be the smartest trader in the world. Your goal is
to make money in a healthy and repeatable way.
FOMO (Fear of Missing Out)
…price increases generate enthusiasm among investors, who
then bid up prices more, and then it feeds back again and
again until prices get too high. During that period, people
are motivated by envy of others who made money doing it,
regret in not having participated and the gambler's
excitement.
– Robert Shiller, Irrational Exuberance
One of the most common weaknesses I see in both rookie and
veteran traders is the fear of missing out. If there is a trade that
makes a ton of macroeconomic sense, traders feel stupid if they
miss it. So they will protect themselves from FOMO by chasing the
trade whenever it starts working. If there is a strong narrative that
supports a higher dollar, for example, nobody wants to miss “The
Big Dollar Rally” and so whenever the dollar moves a bit higher,
traders feel compelled to chase it.
If the dollar is stuck in a range, this will lead to a lot of suboptimal
buying at the highs and then stopping out at the lows when the
momentum and P&L turn lower.

Here is an example of how FOMO plays out: You've been bearish
and short USDJPY for three weeks and it has gone nowhere. You
feel like you've been banging your head against the wall. Each time
it dips, you think, “This is it!” and then it recovers and goes back
to the top of the range. You are not losing much money on the
trade but it's been exhausting to watch the pair drop and then rally
back over and over.
Your logic was very strong when you put the trade on a few weeks
ago but in the last few days you have seen that the narrative is
changing and the idea has become a tad stale. Some of your
original reasoning no longer applies and you know in your mind
and your gut the idea is at best 50/50 at this point. Can you pull
the trigger and get out? Or are you afraid of missing out if the
thing finally collapses? You need to be honest with yourself and
exit trades that you think are wrong, while ignoring that insistent
voice in your head that says, “But what if it collapses right after I
cover my short?”
The worst cases of FOMO I've seen occurred in traders who were
locked into the same view for a prolonged period. I knew three
different traders in the mid‐2000s, for example, who were always
bearish USDJPY. They were bearish for so long that they couldn't
bear the thought of missing “The Big One.” USDJPY tended to
move very asymmetrically in those days. The expression was
“USDJPY goes up the escalator and down the elevator.” If you
were bearish USDJPY, you knew it was always possible it might
completely collapse at any moment.
But what it actually did most of the time was grind slowly and
painfully higher. Even when all the short‐term evidence said it
made no sense to be short, these traders could not help themselves
because they were so afraid of missing a big selloff, they were
willing to pay the cost of being wrong over and over.
In the end, all three of those traders failed to make money and lost
their jobs in 2006–2007, just before USDJPY finally collapsed.
One of the most dangerous mistakes you can make as a trader is to
get married to a view. That is why my AM/FX signoff is: Good
luck, be nimble. Always stay flexible and never get married to a
view.
Rule #23 of FX trading: Be flexible. Don't get married to
a view.

If you miss a move, there will be countless others.
FOMO can also lead short‐term traders to chase trades. Let's say
you are bullish AUD but haven't managed to pull the trigger to go
long. It's 0.8010 right now and your plan is to buy near a major
technical support zone at 0.7950/60. Your target is 0.8150. So if
you buy here (or better yet at 0.7950/60), your profit objective is
150 to 200 points. But AUDUSD starts rallying: 0.8030, 0.8040.
Darn it, 0.8065… Grrr. Now you're kicking yourself because you
should have (obviously) just paid the offer and gone long at
0.8010. Now it's breaking out and it looks like you missed it. Argh.
0.8070 trades and it's taking off just like you expected. It looks
like it's going to 0.8150 in a straight line. You can't control
yourself. Against your better judgment, you decide you don't want
to miss the move so you buy some AUDUSD at 0.8072. You were
afraid of missing out but now you have a trade with poor risk
reward and only 78 more pips of upside. AUDUSD peaks and
turns back lower, breaking back down below 0.8000. Frustrated,
you stop out of the stupid position at 0.7986, just 26 pips above
your ideal 0.7950/60 buy zone.
Understand this: You will miss many, many trades. But there are
infinitely more opportunities ahead. Never fear missing out on a
trade. If you miss it, you miss it.
To Lose Money
You read that right. This is a crazy one but some people trade to
lose money. Why would someone trade to lose money? Mostly
subconscious reasons. The number‐one reason people lose money
on purpose is that they don't believe they deserve the money they
have already made.
Anyone raised by hard‐working parents might find it difficult to
reconcile enormous profits from trading with the minimal physical
exertion required to earn them. This manifests in the
subconscious and leads to money‐losing behavior. “I don't deserve
this money and so I am going to give it back.”
You need to appreciate and internalize that trading is a very
difficult skill to learn and those who succeed at trading deserve to
be compensated for their success. If you don't feel deserving of the
money you make, you will give it back.

Another reason people lose money on purpose is that they are too
tired or burnt out to care but too scared to quit trading and do
something else. This is similar to the person who treats their
girlfriend or boyfriend badly in the hope that the person will break
up with them.
Traders will also lose money on purpose (again subconsciously)
when they hit a P&L target early in the year. The feeling of
reaching a destination or goal is the ultimate reward and once a
dream comes true or a goal is reached, many human beings feel a
strange and hard‐to‐explain emptiness. By losing money and
falling back away from the goal, the trader gives himself a second
opportunity to get that good feeling you get when you reach a goal.
As Miley Cyrus says: It's the climb.
I acknowledge that this section might sound a little weird to some
people, especially younger traders. But I assure you that traders
who subconsciously lose money on purpose is a real thing. Think
about your subconscious motivations and make sure there is
nothing simmering under the surface that might lead to
suboptimal trading performance.
Waiting for the Perfect Trade
Risk‐averse traders are often paralyzed as they wait for the perfect
trade. If you often feel this way, you can still be a successful trader.
Force yourself to do a certain number of trades every day, week, or
month (depending on your trading time horizon).
While setting a quota for number of trades goes somewhat against
the tight/aggressive mantra, if you are too tight and regularly
cannot pull the trigger, a trade quota system will force you to get
out of your shell and take some risk. Remember: There is no such
thing as a perfect trade.
Invincibility/Overconfidence
Traders should operate close to the middle of the emotional
spectrum most of the time. If you are feeling invincible right now,
I bet you are about to lose a ton of money. Many traders will feel
more and more confident as they perform well and then finally

blow up as the building confidence turns to a feeling of
invincibility and excessive risk.
Most traders and poker players are aware of the concept of tilt.
This is when you are trading very poorly or have just hit a run of
bad luck and your performance goes off the rails because your
emotions get the best of you. You start making stupid plays out of
frustration. You are betting to recoup losses, not because the
opportunity set looks good. This is the standard definition of tilt.
But be aware there is another type of tilt: winner's tilt.
For me, winner's tilt is more of a problem than loser's tilt. When I
am trading poorly, I have no trouble tightening up and cutting risk
because I understand that controlling the left side of the P&L
distribution is what lets me survive in the long run. And I want to
do this job as long as I can because I freaking love it. But when I
am doing very well, I get this rush of excitement and
overconfidence and go on tilt the other way. I get cartoon dollar
signs in my eyes.
To manage this, I have set up conditional formatting in my P&L
spreadsheet to highlight when I am overearning significantly
relative to budget. These orange cells light up and tell me to settle
down and reduce my risk.
You are never invincible. The market wants your money and it will
figure out all sorts of ways to take it. Always exercise caution if you
feel the urge to cheer or high‐five or celebrate or sing out loud. If
you feel this way, it is very likely you are near an emotional zenith.
Get flat and reset.
Woulda, Coulda, Shoulda Syndrome
Many rookie traders spend way, way too much time thinking
about the past. Once you close a trade, it is literally history. It
doesn't matter anymore. Yes, it is useful to analyze past trades to
understand what you have done right and wrong. But careful
analysis is different from banging your head against the desk over
past trades or missed trades. Once you get flat, it doesn't matter
what the price does afterward. Move on.
Picture each trade that you do as a single drop in an infinite ocean.
When one trade is over, there will be another. Then another.

Quickly extract the lessons from failed trades and then flush them
from your memory.
Directional Bias
Bad traders stick with the same view for way too long. This
depends partly on your time horizon because if you are a long‐
term trader you are much more likely to be successful maintaining
the same view for a long period. If you are a short‐term trader, you
should be flexible and able to trade every currency from both the
long and the short side.
Identify currencies where you have a bias and get used to trading
them from both sides. For example, if you can't stand being long
AUD, try a tiny long position one day, just to see how it feels. The
best short‐term traders can flip from long to short and back to
long as new information comes in. Sticking with a core view too
long is like wearing trading handcuffs. You can waste a month or
even a year committed to a faulty core view and watch dozens of
great opportunities come and go. Again: Don't get married to a
view.
This concludes my list of characteristics of a bad trader. Check this
list and find where you match up. Write down a short list of ways
you can improve in these areas. And ask yourself once in a while:
Why am I trading?
The obvious answer is “to make money” but if you are honest with
yourself, you might slowly pick out some other more complex
reasons. Boredom, gambling, fear, to show off what big risk
appetite you have, for entertainment, and so on. There are many
non‐economic reasons people trade and if you recognize yours,
you will instantly become a better trader.
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key
characteristics to avoid:
Poor risk management, no consistent process, bad discipline
Trading for the wrong reasons
Waiting for the perfect trade
Invincibility/overconfidence

Directional bias (always wanting to be long or short a specific
currency)
Further Reading
Baumeister, Roy. Willpower: Rediscovering the Greatest Human
Strength. New York: Penguin, 2011.
Note
  1 American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed. (Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association, 1992), p. 616.

CHAPTER 15 
The Voice of Experience
This chapter is a collection of other thoughts, tips, and advice I
can offer after 20‐plus years of trading experience. I have learned
a lot from all the success, mistakes, joy, pain, slumps, hills, and
valleys. Remember: Take the advice that resonates with you and
ignore the advice that does not. Develop your own process and
find a trading style that suits your personality. Do not copy
someone else's methodology. Learn and gain experience and
develop your own way of doing things.
Without further ado…a few more tips.
Don't Let Random Trades Bleed You
Do you believe in the trades you have on? If yes, great. If no, get
out. If you are not sure, set a clear stop loss level and stick to it.
Too many random trades done out of boredom or poor discipline
can drown out the P&L from your good ideas.
Quite often when I am trading poorly, my primary, well‐thought‐
out ideas are still good but the P&L from these trades is wiped out
by losses on spontaneous, knee‐jerk trades. This type of
overtrading can be very discouraging as you are forced to cut good
ideas to cover losses in stupid ding‐dong trades.
Rule #24 of FX trading: Do not let random, low‐
conviction trades kill you.
The human brain loves novelty. It is always looking for something
new to do and a new trade to consider or add to the portfolio.
Resist this constant need to adjust your positions. Let your trades
breathe.
How to Avoid Overtrading
The simplest way to avoid overtrading is to be extremely
disciplined. This is obvious and self‐explanatory. But what if you
are not a very well‐disciplined person or have poor impulse

control? You need to understand yourself and be honest about
your strengths and your weaknesses. The x‐factor skills that make
good traders (risk appetite, strong instincts, rapid decision
making, courage, decisiveness, confidence) can also be the trader's
worst enemy as the flipside of those positive traits can be: too
much risk, overtrading, overconfidence, and impulsive, addictive,
reactionary behavior that deviates from plan.
If you have a severe problem with overtrading, set a trade quota or
specific time windows to trade. Use stop loss and take profit
orders to manage your positions the rest of the time. A quota
system means simply allowing yourself only a certain number of
trades per day or per week. Maybe three. Maybe five. Set the quota
based on your trading history. When you are trading well, how
many trades do you average per day?
If you don't like the quota approach, another trick is to allow
yourself to trade only at specific times. For example, it often
makes sense to put new trades on or take trades off at 7AM NY
and then leave everything until at least 11:00AM NY. This allows
your trades a full NY/LDN overlap session to play out and avoids
the need for instant gratification and constant fine‐tuning. It also
saves mental energy because you are not constantly analyzing and
reevaluating everything on a second‐to‐second basis. Finally, it
avoids the very high transaction costs and P&L drain associated
with frequent unnecessary intraday trading in and out of the same
position.
Under this time of day method, you do as many trades as you like
but only at the designated times of day. This could be the equity
open, end of day, the 11:00AM fixing (when FX volumes peak), or
any other time related to your trading style. When I am trading
well, I tend to put new trades on in the morning (7/8AM) and
reduce them or take them off at either 11:00AM or 4:00PM. This
is because I feel like the good moves tend to happen during the
NY/LDN overlap and because I tend to have more risk during the
day than overnight.
The quota or time‐based approaches are effective because they are
very clear and rule‐based. Write down your rules and follow
them. Set yourself a trade quota or set specific times of day when
you are allowed to trade and then stick to your rules. A major side
benefit of this approach is that it gives you more time to
concentrate, read, and do research, undistracted by flickering

price action on the screen and free of the need to constantly
reevaluate and make new decisions.
In my early years of trading, it was always a huge struggle to solve
my overtrading problem. I would write myself Post‐It Notes and
stick them all over my desk: “Don't trade until 9AM!” or “WAIT!
WAIT!” and so on, but nothing worked. I wouldn't follow my own
rules. Then finally (after a great cost) I had a breakthrough.
Recognizing that I have the sort of personality that makes me
frequently trade out of boredom, I found a new technique. Instead
of trying to abstain completely from trading, I decided to vary my
position size dramatically. Now I trade all the time, but when I'm
dabbling and messing around, I trade 1 unit of risk compared to 5
or 10 or 20 units of risk on a high‐conviction trade. This is riskier
and more open‐ended than the rule‐based approach outlined
above but sometimes you have to be realistic and make your
approach fit your personality, style, and job description.
The benefit of this extremely flexible position sizing strategy is
that I remain involved in the market all the time. That helps keep
me in the zone and gives me a feel for the market while I wait for
high‐conviction trades to emerge. If I can break even or lose small
on my 1‐unit trades and they help me be in the right place at the
right time for the Five‐Star, 20‐unit trades, that's a win. This
method of managing my overtrading has improved my
profitability and reduced my frustration level dramatically. It
acknowledges the faults in my personality and deals with them in
an honest way.
Try to design rules, systems, and processes that fit your
personality and allow you to function with as little mental friction
as possible. Overtrading is one of the main issues that ruins
traders. If you are prone to overtrading, get serious about it and
fix the problem before you churn away your trading career.
Trading Slumps
There is nothing more gut‐wrenching than a major trading slump.
No matter how many losing streaks you have experienced, each
slump brings with it the same array of negative emotions. Self‐
hate, frustration, self‐doubt, physical nausea, a lump in the throat,

the urge to smash keyboards, sadness, confusion, and vertigo are
all normal symptoms of a trading slump.
Slumps can come completely out of the blue. One day you seem to
know what will happen before it happens. The next day, you have
fat fingers, you hesitate, you miss the great opportunities and
double down on the bad ones. Suddenly, you've lost money eight
days in a row and you feel like you might never make money
again. FX is hard.
The first thing to understand is that there are probabilities at
work. A trader with 55% winning days will average two or three 5‐
day losing streaks per year and probably one 6‐day losing streak. A
6‐day losing streak is enough to make the best trader feel like a
complete moron. But he isn't. It's just probability.
It is easy to say this, and a totally different thing to embrace and
accept it. That is why slumps can be very dangerous. They can
morph from a simple run of good decision/bad outcome into
something much more nefarious. If the run of bad outcomes leads
to process breakdown and bad decisions, what was initially just
bad luck becomes a negative feedback loop. If you are normally a
55% winner and you came in this morning angry, frustrated, and a
bit hopeless, what do you think your odds of making money are
going to be today? 40%? 35%?
The first key to dealing with slumps is good self‐awareness.
Recognize physical signs of frustration and acknowledge them.
You cannot deal with a trading slump if you are not aware of it or
you are in denial.
Once you realize that you are in a slump, the first thing to do is
slow down. Breathe. Take a day off or cut your positions down
dramatically. If I usually trade 100 million USD positions, I might
cut myself down to 20 million. If I lose money again, I'll drop to 10
million.
Why not stop trading completely?
This is a matter of personal preference but I rarely stop trading
completely. I might take one day off to reset mentally but if I am at
work I keep trading, just in smaller size. Short‐term trading has a
rhythm and you are apt to lose that rhythm if you stop trading
completely. Instead, cut yourself down to something small enough
that it will not matter if you are right or wrong. The object at this

point is not to make money but to reset your emotions while still
maintaining a connection to the market.
If things are going really, really badly, and I feel really dejected or
down, I will stop trading altogether for one or two days and jump
into a research project. I keep a file of ideas and projects so that
when I hit a very rough patch, I can step away from the market
and still feel like I am doing something useful. It's hard to do
research when you are in the zone trading so I try to see bad
slumps as blessings that finally let me get to that backtesting or
correlation research project I have not had time for.
Some traders prefer to disconnect from the market completely by
pulling out temporarily, but as Jared Dillian once said, the
markets are like a story. You can't just flip ahead 10 pages and
know what is going on.
My view on taking scheduled time off is different. Vacations are a
necessary part of a healthy trading process. Your brain cannot
process billions of bits of market information efficiently 52 weeks
a year. You need to turn off the noise now and then.
Three or four days away from the market should be enough to
clear your brain and allow you to come back fresh. The only way to
achieve this is to go on vacation and stay flat while on vacation;
otherwise your brain will be running all the scenarios about
possible EURUSD outcomes instead of just digging holes with
your kid on the beach or enjoying the music at Ibiza or whatever it
is you do to unwind.
Go on vacation flat at least once per year. Any positive P&L you
might generate with your holiday positions is more than offset by
the mental damage you do to your brain when you refuse to let it
disconnect from the matrix.
With experience, you will know when a slump is over. Things will
seem easier again. Each losing trade will not trigger an emotional
or physical reaction (tight throat, white knuckles). Given my belief
that trading is very much about probabilities and process, I don't
stay in defensive mode for very long. Once I feel okay, I go back to
my normal size. The best cure for a trading slump is a perfectly
executed Five‐Star trade.
A different type of slump is one precipitated not by a run of bad
luck but by a concrete externality. This type of slump is totally
different from a normal slump and is triggered by something

outside the market, not just random variance: your health,
financial security, marriage, mental well‐being, an addiction, or
something of that sort. If a slump like this comes along, get flat
right away and figure things out before you come back.
Trading is not an escape and there are cheaper ways to forget
about your worries. Until the issue is resolved or dealt with in a
way that will not interrupt your train of thought at work, stay flat.
Trading is stressful enough; if you are shaking with anger as you
just hung up the phone after a fight with your sibling about who
will take care of your sick mother, take the rest of the day off.
Next‐level trading is when you know yourself and you consistently
put that knowledge to use. Don't let externalities ruin you. You
will never know what kind of trader you have the potential to
become unless you give yourself the opportunity to succeed. Part
of this is knowing when to trade and when not to trade.

FACTBOX: HOW I HANDLE SLUMPS
Here is my step‐by‐step strategy for handling slumps.
Square Up
First, I cut all existing positions so that any residual frustration
related to those losing views can dissipate.
Trade Smaller
Next, I cut my position size for new ideas to about 20% of
normal for a few days (or more) until I get a strong feeling and
high‐conviction idea. Some people recommend not trading at
all for a bit but I find this disconnects me too much from the
market and I lose my feel. I would rather trade small, wait for a
Five‐Star idea, then fully reengage. If I am feeling extremely
frustrated (angry lump in throat) or recognize my state of mind
is poor (bad health, external real‐life issues), I'll stop
completely, but this is rare.
Talk about the Slump
I find just talking about a slump makes me feel better about it.
Frustration boils inside but releases when you open up. Some
firms have trading psychologists around but you can also just
talk to your peers or friends or boss. When you discuss your
trading out loud, it helps crystallize your thoughts and leads to
forward progress and a calmer state of mind.
Read and Do Research
When I'm trading well, my entire focus is on the market and on
staying in the zone. When things are not going well, it's a
chance to catch up on reading, do some cool research projects I
haven't had time for, and get back to basics by rereading stuff
like the Market Wizards books.

Get Some Perspective
I am one of 7.6 billion people sitting on a huge, spinning rock
hurtling around a spherical ball of hot plasma in an infinitely
large universe. Meanwhile, this is the safest time in human
history to be alive. My wife and kids are healthy. It's sunny and
warm outside. No matter what happens in G10 FX today, the
sun will still come up tomorrow. Markets always get better; you
just have to ride out the tough times and stay resilient and
optimistic.
Tips for a Happy Life
Believe it or not, there is more to life than FX trading. Think about
the long game and your entire career. While it is fun to trade all
night and live a fast and exciting life, you cannot do that forever.
FX does not provide a path to happiness, no matter how much
money you make. Financial freedom is one small part of
happiness, but most research shows true happiness comes from
other areas: health, relationships, family, friends, and a feeling of
purpose.
In fact, the relationship between money and happiness becomes
very weak once you break above around $75,000 in the United
States. A variety of research1 shows that once you can comfortably
provide food, clothing, and shelter plus a bit more, money doesn't
make you any happier.
Get Some Perspective
While it might feel like your P&L ups and down are a matter of life
and death, they are not. Traders spend way too much time
thinking about P&L and money and all the things it might mean to
them. The reality is that money is a small input into overall
happiness. Focus on trading when you are at work and focus on
relationships and activities you love when you are not.
A life of trading is a life full of hills and valleys. Every time you
lose more money than you ever have before, it hurts. Right in the
gut. And every time you make a new “best day” or hit your lifetime

high‐water mark, there is a giddy sensation that is hard to
regulate. If you are a good trader, you will trade with more and
more capital and bigger and bigger positions as the years go by
and therefore by definition your biggest up and down days will get
bigger and bigger over time.
Some traders (including myself up until about 5 or 6 years ago)
are afraid to feel happy or admit their satisfaction after a great day
or a great trade because they don't want to jinx themselves. This
creates an asymmetry where you feel bad after bad days but you
don't give yourself the right to feel good after good days. Over the
years, this can be incredibly draining because you only let yourself
feel the bad emotions. If you have a good day, feel good about it.
Be happy. Go celebrate. Buy the better bottle of wine. But don't
celebrate until you have taken profit! Celebrating while in a
winning position is a recipe for upcoming disaster. Take profit,
then go be happy.
So again, it is fine to feel good about your trading. It is fine to give
yourself credit where credit is due. Don't dissect your great days to
find the tiny thing you could have done better. Just be happy for
one day.
Make lower highs and higher lows emotionally as time goes on.
Avoid euphoria but give yourself permission to be happy and to
feel fulfilled when you are trading well. A life of hating yourself
when you're down and fearing the next drawdown when you're up
is not healthy. When you do a good job, it's okay to be proud of
yourself.
As time goes on, you should be able to figure out how to manage
your emotions so that while your P&L is making higher highs,
your emotions become less volatile. You recognize after a while
that no matter how bad the day, or how bad the loss, you don't die.
It might feel like you are going to die, but you don't. The only way
to learn this is to experience mind‐numbing losses. As my boss
once told me after a particularly bad day of trading: You don't
learn anything when you win. Every loss is a lesson. Every gain is a
blessing. Stay positive.
A major requirement for staying positive is that you must have a
risk management system that you trust. If you know you can trust
yourself and your risk management, the sick feeling of having
blown through your stop loss can be avoided. Many world‐class

traders are only right 50% or 55% of the time. There is no reason
to feel bad on days you lose money. Imagine if Michael Jordan got
down on himself every time he missed a shot. He would be a sad
person, full of self‐loathing.
The time you should feel bad is when you planned to risk
$200,000 on a trade and you lost a million dollars. These are the
cases when you should feel bad because deep down inside these
days make you wonder if you can really trust yourself and if you
are truly in control of the process. This is the worst possible
feeling. It's scary.
You need to have clear risk management rules and then treat every
day as a separate unit and compartmentalize your feelings. You
run into problems when your risk management is bad and it spills
into the next day and the next because it puts you under pressure
or forces you to change your process or abandon your plan.
Don't break the rules.
Simple right?
No. It is very, very difficult. Everyone knows that if you eat too
much and don't exercise, you will gain weight. But there are still
plenty of overweight people around. Knowing the rules is easy.
Following them is hard.
Always remember though: hills and valleys, hills and valleys. Don't
let yourself get too high or too low. Regardless of your P&L, the
sun will still rise tomorrow, your kids will still love you, and even
in the most extreme situation where you end up losing your job as
a trader, life still goes on.
Don't Constantly Check the Market
Spend time with your family. Stop checking the market every two
seconds for no reason when you have a one‐week view! Exercise,
play with your kids, and get a solid block of sleep every night.
Turn off Your Phone at Night
It sounds cool to tell people at parties that you wake up at 2:00AM
every night to check the market and do some FX trades, but it is
counterproductive. You will burn yourself out. The net result of

getting up to trade in the middle of the night will be that your
career will be shorter and your lifetime earning potential will be
lower. You will also trade poorly the next day because of fatigue. I
have a strict policy: I turn my phone off at 10:00PM and turn it
back on when I wake up at 4:00AM. Phone calls in the middle of
the night don't have enough upside to justify the downside. You
make poor trading decisions when you are half‐asleep.
Read Nonfinancial Books
I like to alternate between finance/math books and “other.” There
is nothing more boring than a person who reads only finance
books.
Eat Properly and Exercise
I know I'm starting to sound like your mom, but she was right.
Bank traders tend to eat fatty restaurant food every day because
the desk analyst takes one bulk order and picks up lunch for
everyone. It is easier just to add your order to the list than to get
off the trading floor and get your own lunch. Don't be lazy.
A secondary benefit to getting your own lunch is that there is value
in getting away from the market intraday to collect your thoughts.
Many traders report moments of clarity and trade ideas that came
to the surface on the way to or from the bathroom. It won't hurt
you to go for a quick walk once or twice a day. Sure, there is a
chance you might miss a great headline trade but in the long run
you will be better off. Take care of yourself and think about the
long game.
Have Fun
This is a tough one because most traders beat themselves up when
they lose and are afraid to be happy when they win. But remember
that FX trading is a fun job compared to most—you are lucky to be
a trader. When I was day trading the NASDAQ with my own
money during the tech bubble, the firm where I rented a seat had a
huge banner hung above the trading floor that read: THANK GOD
IT'S MONDAY. If you don't feel like that most of the time, find
another job.

To succeed, you need to absolutely love FX trading. Smile, have
fun, and be thankful you get to enjoy such an intellectually
challenging and heart‐pounding pursuit.
When people used to ask me why I chose trading as a career, I
would answer:
“Because I am not good enough to play major league baseball.”
Trading is the second‐best job in the world.
I am thankful.
Rule #25 of FX trading: Have fun. If you don't enjoy it,
what's the point?
After reading this chapter, you should fully understand these key
concepts:
Do not let random trades bleed your capital
How to deal with trading slumps
How to maintain a healthy perspective on life and trading
Why it's important to have fun
Further Reading
Coates, John. The Hour Between Dog and Wolf: Risk Taking, Gut
Feelings and the Biology of Boom and Bust. New York:
Penguin Press, 2012.
Douglas, Mark. The Disciplined Trader: Developing Winning
Attitudes. New York Institute of Finance, 1990.
———. Trading in the Zone: Master the Market with Confidence,
Discipline and a Winning Attitude. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall Press, 2000.
Gardner, Dan. Risk: The Science of Politics and Fear. London:
Virgin Books, 2008.
Krakauer, Jon. Into the Wild. New York: Anchor Books, 1996.
Pirsig, Robert. Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance: An
Inquiry into Values. New York: William Morrow, 1974.

Thoreau, Henry David. Walden. Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1854.
Note
  1 This is a good example:
http://www.pnas.org/content/107/38/16489.full.pdf.

CHAPTER 16 
Conclusion
When I started trading at a commercial bank in 1995, my boss said
to me, “Burl,1 you're in the right place at the wrong time.
Everything is going electronic and there will be no such thing as
human FX traders in the next 10 years. Sorry about your luck!”
Needless to say, the guy was blunt. To the point. And to be fair, his
overall thesis was accurate. Major spot FX trading desks that
employed 20 or 30 traders in 1995 now employ 3 or 4. But those
who survived this attrition (like me, thankfully, so far) continue to
prosper and the job has become much, much more intellectually
stimulating.
When it was busy in the 1990s, you spent your whole day acting
like a broker, executing client trades with no regard for any macro
or fundamental stories. All you wanted was to keep your position
straight and survive the waves of insanity and yelling. Now,
electronic platforms handle the majority of client flow and human
traders are left to manage the big tickets and think about how to
stay one step ahead of the market. Instead of pushing through
client tickets all day like an agent, FX traders today spend most of
their time thinking about how to beat the market.
With electronification comes other new opportunities. Retail FX
technology has gone from 0 to 100 in two short decades and now
individual traders can buy and sell currencies from home on
spreads as narrow as one basis point. They can access almost all
the same research that was once available only to interbank and
buy‐side traders. Quant and research jobs are no longer niche;
they are a big part of every FX business. As transaction costs
tumble, high‐frequency strategies and electronic market making
have gained a foothold and opened the door for a whole new
generation of mathletes.
Things will always change. Rangebound markets will range and
range until they break and finally trend. Trending markets will
grind through painful consolidations and eventually fail.
Correlation traders will clean up one year and get rinsed the next.
Momentum rules, until it doesn't.

There is a world of money to be made in the FX markets. Those
with skill who do the work and have the discipline to stick to a
plan will win. Those without skill, those with poor self‐control,
and those who are lazy or cannot adapt will go extinct via natural
selection.
Do the work. Have courage. Follow your own rules. Enjoy yourself,
and be thankful.
Thank you so much for taking the time to read my book. I hope it
has given you a new perspective on trading along with new
strategies, tools, and ideas that you can put to work right away. I
hope it makes you a better currency trader and helps you generate
profitable trade ideas. I hope you have enjoyed The Art of
Currency Trading.
Good luck ↕ Be nimble
www.theartofcurrencytrading.com
Note
  1 He claims to this day that I look like Burl Ives.
