vii
Preface
History, particularly financial history, is not random. The key idea in this 
book is that economic cycles are driven by financial flows, namely quanti-
ties of savings and credits, and not by high street inflation or the level of 
interest rates. Their sweeping destructive powers are expressed through 
Global Liquidity, a US$130 trillion pool of footloose cash. Our Central 
Bank policy-makers should, consequently, about-turn and focus more on 
financial stability than on hitting phantom consumer price inflation targets. 
The economist John Maynard Keynes distinguished the economy’s financial 
and industrial spheres in a similar way to how we might, today, separate the 
asset economy from the real economy. Trying to stimulate the real economy 
with liquidity always runs the risk of creating asset price bubbles instead. In 
the 1930s, facing a near-identical situation to the post-GFC years, policy- 
makers then unleashed an analogous stimulus with the same outturn: near-
flat high street prices, but soaring asset prices. A fractured, uncertain World 
encourages investors to hold excessive amounts of ‘safe’ assets, like cash and 
government bonds and, particularly, US dollar assets, rather than putting 
money to work productively. When the State fails to produce sufficient safe 
assets, then the private sector steps in with less good substitutes, whose val-
ues unfortunately move procyclically. Governments’ austerity policies and 
quantitative tightening programmes might not sound such good ideas in 
this light? Think of this mechanism as the so-called precautionary demand for 
money, hurriedly skipped over in the traditional textbooks, but which seems 
to better describe the growing systemic risks we face than the better-known 
speculative motive, which assesses the chances of rising (as opposed to fall-
ing) interest rates and can lead to a ‘liquidity trap’. I argue that Global 

Liquidity is never trapped: it waves no flag, knows no boundaries and shifts 
all too rapidly between markets and asset classes.
What appear as two puzzling features in the latest policy debates, in fact, 
emphasise the importance of Global Liquidity. First, the widespread con-
sensus view, underpinned by repeated Central Bank claims, that more QE 
(quantitative easing) lowers, and does not raise, term premia and hence 
government bond yields. The academic argument, summarised by Gagnon 
(2016), quantifies this as 67 basis points (bp) per 10% of GDP injected via 
QE. Second, many believe that the slope of the yield curve is an unambig-
uous predictor of the business cycle. Hence, an inverted yield curve should 
warn us that a recession is fast approaching. In fact, neither statement is 
true. The former is easily refuted by the data, which show that QE periods 
in the US have unequivocally been associated with higher yields, with term 
premia rising by an average 134 bp through each past QE phase. The effi-
ciency of the Treasury yield curve as a predictor of the business cycle is ana-
lysed elsewhere (Howell 2018). This confirms that the standard 10-2 year 
yield curve slope is, at best, a flaky predictor. This analysis points out that, 
because different maturity spreads work at different times, what also matters 
is the curvature of the term structure. In other works, slope and curvature 
must be assessed together. A key component explaining curvature is the pat-
tern of term premia. Term premia are liquidity phenomena, largely reflecting 
the excess demand for ‘safe’ assets.
The liquidity shocks that ricocheted across the World in 1989 as the 
Berlin Wall fell ultimately forced interest rates down and helped to reverse 
the polarity of the global financial system. Capital raced Eastwards along 
what I call the Financial Silk Road, while politics and people marched West, 
causing too many countries, and notably China, to lean too heavily on the 
US dollar and the US Treasury market for safety. Linked to these changes, 
today’s financial markets increasingly have to serve as refinancing mechanisms 
rather than as new financing mechanisms, making the capacity of capital, i.e. 
balance sheet size, more important than the cost of capital, i.e. the level of 
interest rates. The heightened supply of poor quality ‘safe’ assets, or what I 
more formally describe as the shadow monetary base, compromises the abil-
ity of private balance sheets to roll over the huge volumes of outstanding 
debts left over from the GFC era. Ironically, a reduced supply of liquidity 
and ‘safe’ assets, increases the demand to hoard them. Together these fea-
tures amplify the swings in Global Liquidity and explain why, as the World 
has got bigger, it has also become more volatile. The underlying scarcity 
of high-quality assets leads on to Capital Wars. Here, the battleground 
embraces money, technology and geopolitics, with the struggle fought out 
viii       
Preface

between the two key superpowers: Chinese industry and American finance. 
China’s presence is weighing more and more: in the year 2000, China 
accounted for 5.9% of Global Liquidity, or less than one-fifth of America’s 
share; China’s share reached 10.1% at the time of the 2007–2008 GFC 
and, today, it has swelled to a whopping 27.5%, significantly out-pacing 
America’s slipping 22.5% slice. China matters hugely to both the World 
economy and World finance. I conclude that whereas America needs to rein-
vigorate her industry, China has the more pressing need to rapidly develop 
her financial sector. Like history, these are processes, not events, but we can 
still ask whether the final victor in the markets will be the US dollar or a 
digitally based Chinese Yuan?
This book is a hybrid of economic and finance theory and real-World 
experience. Unlike traditional finance, which focuses on the merits of indi-
vidual securities, I concentrate on asset allocation and evaluate the potential 
for macro-valuation shifts based on the interaction of investment crowds and 
monetary institutions. The approach is my own, but several people deserve 
a hat-tip. Among those academics that have influenced me, foremost have 
been Ron Smith, Richard Portes, Helene Rey and Pavol Povala. In business, 
I had the good luck to work with innovative researchers Henry Kaufman, 
Marty Leibowitz and Chris Mitchinson, and thoughtful bankers, most nota-
bly Ewen Cameron-Watt and (the late) Michael Baring. The collection and 
implementation of liquidity and capital flow data is the specialisation of 
CrossBorder Capital, an investment advisory firm we set up in 1996. My col-
leagues need special praise, most particularly Angela Cozzini. I owe a debt to 
Tula Weis and Lucy Kidwell, the editors at Palgrave Macmillan. Above all, 
heartfelt thanks to my long-suffering family for putting up with so much.
London and Oxford	
Michael J. Howell
November 2019
References
Gagnon, J. 2016. Quantitative Easing: An Underappreciated Success. PIIE Policy 
Brief No. 16-4. Washington, DC.
Howell, Michael J. 2018. What Does the Yield Curve Slope Really Tell Us? The 
Journal of Fixed Income 27 (4): 22–33.
Preface        ix
