1
The money power preys upon the nation in times of peace and conspires 
against it in times of adversity. It is more despotic than monarchy, more 
insolent than autocracy, more selfish than bureaucracy. Abraham Lincoln 
(Attributed, purportedly from a letter to Colonel William F. Elkins [November, 
1864] following the passage of the National Bank Act [June, 1864])
Capital Wars: The New Trade Wars
Surveying the shattered certainties of the post-2008 era, what can we learn? 
The 2007–2008 Global Financial Crisis1 (GFC) was a devastating global 
liquidity shock. But already by the early 1980s, the warnings were there. 
New factors had by then evolved to displace the prevailing doctrine of earn-
ings power as the main driver of stock prices: foremost among these is money 
power. We focus here on a specific type of money power that we dub Global 
Liquidity: a US$130 trillion pool of footloose capital that is currently two-
thirds bigger than World GDP. See Fig. 1.1.
The 2007–2008 GFC happened when a dramatic escalation in monetary 
tensions triggered a frantic scramble for US dollars. Europe’s demands alone 
exceeded a whopping US$8 trillion. Yet, there was no automatic interna-
tional lender of the last resort and, with the IMF’s firepower then still only 
counted in billions, there was no pool of reserves anywhere in the World, 
outside of the US Federal Reserve and its system of swap lines, that was large 
1
Introduction: Capital Wars
© The Author(s) 2020 
M. J. Howell, Capital Wars,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39288-8_1

2        M. J. Howell
enough to backstop the international financial system. This gap remains 
and US dollar swap lines have since become even more politicised. The 
US authorities officially target ‘favoured nations’, which, for now, excludes 
Emerging Market economies and, pointedly, China, the biggest dollar user.2 
America’s decisions to deploy Fed swap lines, and whom to allocate these to, 
have essentially become Nero-like choices and conditional on who sits in the 
White House. With close to US$17 trillion of debt now owed by non-US 
corporations, and with over two-thirds of this debt US dollar-denominated, 
these decisions matter.
In facing up to these tensions, the last decade has not surprisingly seen 
an explosion of monetary policy accommodation to fill the gaps left by the 
many private sector casualties, and rightly analogous to the billion light-
ening volts that Dr. Frankenstein jolted through his slumping monster. 
Figure 1.2 shows that Global Liquidity continues to outpace World GDP, 
even besting its pre-GFC peak ratio to GDP in both 2009 and 2017. The 
continuing crucial role played by the US Federal Reserve means that its 
actions now largely dictate whether global investors move risk-on or risk-
off. Consequently, US Fed-watching has turned into a much-prized skill, 
sometimes even serving as a dark art worthy of Hogwarts and Harry Potter. 
The collapse of global banks in 2007–2008; the Eurozone banking crisis of 
2010–2012; the subsequent injection of over US$10 trillion into financial 
markets through the widespread adoption of explicit quantitative easing 
'ůŽďĂů>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ
h^ΨϭϯϬƚƌŝůůŝŽŶ
tŽƌůĚ'W
h^ΨϴϬƚƌŝůůŝŽŶ
Fig. 1.1  Global Liquidity

1  Introduction: Capital Wars        3
(QE) policies by Central Banks, as well as their more recent dalliance with 
quantitative tightening (QT), all underscore the importance of monitor-
ing and understanding liquidity conditions Worldwide. Simply put, money 
moves markets.
Democrat strategist James Carville shrewdly recognised how finance con-
trols the World when he famously quipped that if there is reincarnation he 
wanted to “…come back as the bond market ”. These days it more obviously 
dominates the complex interaction between the industrial economy and the 
markets. But then who or what controls finance? We focus here on the driv-
ers of Global Liquidity, namely the financial and exchange rate relationships 
within and between countries and the determinants of cross-border flows of 
money, securities, goods and services. These same factors have become the 
new weapons in the escalating Capital Wars between the US, Europe and 
China. Think of capital wars as a conflict between nations, fought out in 
investment markets, that parallels the more familiar concept of trade wars 
and which ultimately involves a battle for currency supremacy in the World 
economy. Global Liquidity embodies the idea that money, here meaning 
savings plus credit, is never entirely exogenous to the economic system, 
Ϭй
ϮϬй
ϰϬй
ϲϬй
ϴϬй
ϭϬϬй
ϭϮϬй
ϭϰϬй
ϭϲϬй
ϭϴϬй
Fig. 1.2  Global Liquidity (% of World GDP), 1980–2019 (Source CrossBorder Capital )

4        M. J. Howell
even at the national level and even for the World’s largest economies. Global 
Liquidity shocks compound and spread internationally via cross-border 
flows. These shocks still obey the classical rules laid down by David Hume’s 
specie-flow mechanism, updated to include cross-border capital flows; they 
continue to obey Gresham’s Law,3 where overvalued (or ‘bad’) money drives 
undervalued (or ‘good’) money out of circulation and into hoards, and they 
still respect Triffin’s dilemma4 over international confidence in the US dollar. 
Throughout history, the problems caused by money are always the same: it is 
the proposed solutions that differ.
As history’s clock has swept forward, the deregulation of both domestic 
credit markets and cross-border capital flows, lower taxes and falling infla-
tion rates have together helped to mobilise the swelling savings pools that 
accumulate in the large money-centres of London, New York and Tokyo 
into fast-moving and sometimes menacing cross-border capital flows. 
Controversy surrounds whether these flows are ultimately driven by ‘push’ 
or ‘pull’ factors. In truth, both apply. Financial capital tends to flow towards 
countries where economic growth rates are accelerating, because these econ-
omies often have a natural shortfall of domestic savings relative to invest-
ment opportunities. Similarly, when economic growth rates slow, financial 
capital typically quits in step with declining investment potential. However, 
the clustering and commonality of capital flow movements, both between 
countries and between asset and liability components, highlight the vital 
push from some Global Liquidity cycle.
For most of the period since the end of WW1, America’s economic domi-
nance meant that her external payments position could provide a convenient 
cushion or shock absorber for the Rest of the World against these waves of 
international capital. The two World Wars accelerated American economic 
growth and gave her a generous savings surplus, which, at first sight, resem-
bles that of China today. But unlike our current setting, America’s ability 
to fund post-war reconstruction in the 1920s and once again in the 1950s, 
coincided with huge investment and savings shortfalls elsewhere. Thus, the 
US could easily export her vast savings through increased foreign trade, even 
though this increased her vulnerability to tariff wars and a subsequent trade 
contraction in the 1930s.
Things changed by the late 1960s. The advanced economies, and notably 
Germany and Japan, had by then been rebuilt and global savings were again 
abundant. Instead of needing access to scarce capital, these economies now 
hunted out foreign export markets for their tradable goods, while at the same 
time protecting their home industries by limiting consumer imports. In short, 
they wanted to export their excess savings as capital. With their large and 

1  Introduction: Capital Wars        5
open financial markets and with the background already set by a progressive 
elimination of controls on capital flows through the 1950 and 1960s, the US 
and UK economies started to run ever-larger trade deficits to accommodate 
these Asian and Continental European surpluses, albeit at a cost to them-
selves of higher unemployment and more consumer debt. Ironically, these 
large deficits were likely a better measure of the competitiveness of British and 
American finance, than a signpost to their relative industrial inefficiency.
Lately, we have seemingly reached the apogee: spurred by the vast eco-
nomic changes that followed the fall of the Berlin Wall, the entire World 
economy now enjoys excess production and abundant savings, with China 
alone having to deploy an annual US$6 trillion nest-egg. Not surprisingly, 
more and more economies are seeking to increase their trade surpluses, so 
becoming potentially even bigger net exporters of capital. However, this 
plainly requires some other economy (or economies) to run large counter-
part trade deficits.5 And, since trade deficits effectively mean deficits for 
domestic manufacturing industry, which is a key source of future productiv-
ity growth and remains a major urban employer, this policy creates emotive 
political challenges. The need to run large, persistent trade deficits may also 
explain why it is probably still too early for China to take America’s place in 
the World trading system. Without the US as the facilitator, other smaller 
economies would be forced to run deficits to accommodate China, which 
could sizeably reduce their underlying rates of economic growth. Some esti-
mates even suggest that a switch from a World trading system centred on 
American deficits to one revolving around Chinese surpluses could ultimately 
dampen World GDP growth by as much as 2% per annum.6
In this new World of capital abundance, we have seemingly hit an 
impasse. America has lost her willingness and her ability to absorb the excess 
savings of others. The US share of World GDP is plainly lower than it was 
after WW2, domestic income inequality is greater, and the geopolitical ben-
efits of accommodating economic rivals, like China, has become far less 
obvious. But surely excess liquidity should drive down the price of money 
and help restore balance? Given that the true price of money is the exchange 
rate7 (not the interest rate), a question related to this capital abundance is 
what currency arrangements now best serve the diverging interests of the 
US and her economic competitors? For most of the last two centuries, the 
US dollar and other international currencies have been pegged, initially 
under the gold standard (1717–1934)8 and subsequently under the Bretton 
Woods (1944–1971) fixed exchange rate system. Bretton Woods was set up 
as a dollar-based system, although some have since argued that this outcome 
was not predetermined, but largely driven by British nervousness over their 

6        M. J. Howell
inability, at the time, to guarantee future sterling stability. Whether or not 
it came as a coincidence, the Bretton Woods era proved a comparative eco-
nomic nirvana, enjoying GDP growth rates roughly twice those seen in the 
preceding and following decades of fluctuating currencies, modest albeit 
creeping inflation, the absence of major bank failures and financial crises, 
and more homogeneous distributions of both incomes and wealth.
Following the demise of Bretton Woods,9 the major World currencies 
have now been floating for most of the last fifty years. Alongside, capi-
tal flows became progressively deregulated. Almost the first act of Britain’s 
incoming Thatcher Government in 1979 was to abolish UK capital con-
trols. Other countries followed. The evolution of the so-called Washington 
Consensus policies through the 1990s featured tax reform and fiscal disci-
pline, combined with trade liberalisation and the opening-up of capital 
accounts to inward investment. These initiatives were led by the IMF, the 
World Bank and the US Treasury, all of whom encouraged their adoption by 
the Emerging Market economies. As we explore in a later chapter, the sym-
bolic Fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the earlier 1985 reforms in China 
enacted by Deng Xiaoping effectively economically enfranchised some 2–3 
billion workers, across many previously State Socialist governments and for-
merly closed economies. China further nailed-down her rapid growth path 
by joining the WTO (World Trade Organisation) in 2001. The decision 
by several of these fast-growing countries to either officially fix their cur-
rencies to the floating US dollar, or else closely shadow it, gave the green-
back a much-needed shot in the arm. It follows that the period of floating 
exchange rates should not be seen as part of a natural evolution into a mul-
ti-currency system, as some have suggested, but it should be viewed as three 
distinct eras. From 1974 until the early 1990s, the World operated on an 
oil-based standard,10 which effectively underwrote the continuation of the 
US dollar system. And, from the early 1990s onwards, new demand from 
the Emerging Market economies has replaced currency demand from the oil 
producers to similarly help underwrite the US dollar. We shall argue that 
here-in lie the roots of our current financial instability.
The original proponents of floating exchange rates advanced several 
inflated claims in the 1950s and the 1960s to promote their attractions, 
including gradualism in terms of the scope and pace of currency move-
ments and the greater independence for national monetary policies. Yet, 
even though financial crises were not unknown under the gold standard, 
the last 30 years have been among the most tumultuous in monetary his-
tory; the pace and scope of movements in exchange rates have been larger 
than ever before, with greater exchange rate ‘overshooting’11 and, yet, with a 

1  Introduction: Capital Wars        7
clearly failing ability to hold back the destructive waves of Global Liquidity. 
Whereas in the 1960s, the World economy mostly suffered labour cost 
shocks and, in the 1970s and 1980s, oil and commodity-price shocks, it is 
more often buffeted these days by Global Liquidity shocks. Financial mar-
kets spin on fragile axes and this common driver emphasises that modern 
financial crises tend to be neither purely national, nor simply isolated events. 
Moreover, the Global Liquidity shocks are typically bigger, longer-lasting 
and more pervasive than the calibre of shocks studied by economists and 
Central Banks when using their so-called DSGE12 models of the economy. 
In fact, since 1980 well over sixty countries have experienced asset booms 
followed by banking crises, with at least six episodes of major asset price 
bubbles: (1) 1980s Japan; (2) early 1990s in Sweden and across much of 
Scandinavia; (3) Thailand and the neighbouring South-East Asian econo-
mies in the mid-1990s and (4) US in the late 1990s and, so far, twice again 
in the 2000s. The social and economic costs have been high, with national 
banking systems in many of these countries subsequently collapsing, after 
facing loan losses from these bubbles that on occasions exceeded a staggering 
one-quarter of their GDPs. As 007 agent, James Bond, keenly observed in 
Goldfinger: “Once is happenstance. Twice is coincidence. Three times is enemy 
action ”.
The most recent and deepest of these crises is the 2007–2008 GFC. In 
the event, this proved to be as much a crisis about ‘bad liabilities’, i.e. unre-
liable funding structures, as a crisis over ‘bad assets’, i.e. poor investments. 
The GFC is widely dated from the run on Bear Stearns investment bank 
in March 2008, with the crisis precipitated by the US Administration’s 
September 15th decision to allow the venerable investment bank Lehman 
Brothers to fail. This single event caused interbank credit markets 
Worldwide to freeze as banks with excess reserves quickly turned more risk-
averse. Indebted banks suddenly had to find alternative sources of finance 
to avoid shrinking their balance sheets. Yet, at the same time, there is a 
compelling argument that the roots of the GFC instead trail back to the 
2002–2006 US real estate boom, with the trigger revealing clear Chinese 
fingerprints: once again underlining her growing economic and financial 
sway. Closer inspection of capital flow and credit data highlight the People’s 
Bank (PBoC) tightening Chinese credit conditions in early 2008, prob-
ably to defray industrial pollution concerns and improve air quality ahead 
of the showcase August 2008 Beijing Olympics? Figure 1.3 tracks the roll-
ing 12-month total of funds injected or withdrawn from Chinese money 
markets by the PBoC, which recorded a cumulative drawdown exceed-
ing RMB650 billion (circa US$95 billion) or 6.3% of its balance sheet. 

8        M. J. Howell
This forced credit-starved Chinese borrowers into the offshore Eurodollar 
markets in search of replacement funding. Could their demands have simul-
taneously clashed with the rising needs from Western borrowers, who were 
increasingly struggling to finance their leveraged mortgage-backed and asset-
backed security portfolios, particularly following the failure of Bear Stearns?
Cross-Border Capital Flaws?
With hindsight, the pattern of all these crises looks remarkably similar. 
Every national crisis is preceded by an economic boom, although not every 
economic boom has been followed by a financial crisis. Their cause is not 
so much floating exchange rate regimes, per se, but the destructive effect 
of rapidly shifting cross-border capital flows. Those economies that suffer 
severe crises tend to have previously experienced above-average increases 
in cross-border capital inflows, which lead on to higher financial asset and 
real estate prices. Ahead of the 2007–2008 GFC many countries, includ-
ing even the US, saw sharp jumps in their cross-border capital activity. 
Notwithstanding, the rising ratios between investment inflows and GDP 
ͲϴϬϬ
ͲϲϬϬ
ͲϰϬϬ
ͲϮϬϬ
Ϭ
ϮϬϬ
ϰϬϬ
ϲϬϬ
:ĂŶͲϬϲ
DĂƌͲϬϲ
DĂǇͲϬϲ
:ƵůͲϬϲ
^ĞƉͲϬϲ
EŽǀͲϬϲ
:ĂŶͲϬϳ
DĂƌͲϬϳ
DĂǇͲϬϳ
:ƵůͲϬϳ
^ĞƉͲϬϳ
EŽǀͲϬϳ
:ĂŶͲϬϴ
DĂƌͲϬϴ
DĂǇͲϬϴ
:ƵůͲϬϴ
^ĞƉͲϬϴ
EŽǀͲϬϴ
ZDŝůůŝŽŶƐ
Fig. 1.3  Liquidity injections into Chinese money markets, 2007–2008 (RMB billions, 
rolling 12-month total) (Source CrossBorder Capital, People’s Bank)

1  Introduction: Capital Wars        9
were multiple times bigger for the smaller economies of Ireland, Greece, 
Spain and Iceland, with their large-scale inflows often resulting, ironi-
cally, from the whopping debts issued by their banks and corporations in 
the major offshore funding centres of New York, Frankfurt and London. In 
contrast, the parallel increase in capital inflows into America largely arrived 
from fast-growing Emerging Market economies, namely China and South-
East Asia, and from the oil-exporting economies all eager to buy more US 
dollar ‘safe’ assets. Admittedly, these capital flows were also at times unusu-
ally large: China enjoyed a dramatic windfall increase in her exports after 
joining the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, and the oil export-
ers benefitted from the tripling of crude oil prices to $90/barrel between 
2001–2006.
Such risks were well-known to the architects of Bretton Woods. They 
deliberately restricted private capital movements, blaming the depth of 
the 1930s Depression and the turmoil of the interwar years on the violent 
swings of capital between nations. Ironically, the original case for floating 
exchange rates largely ignored capital movements, seeing them, at worst, 
as adjusting passively to current account imbalances. Not only did these 
experts miss the size and velocity of capital flows, but they failed to recognise 
that it is also likely that current accounts adjust to capital flows: a possibility 
that echoes an earlier debate in the 1920s about the so-called transfer prob-
lem over German WW1 reparation payments. There is, of course, no reason 
why capital flows should sum to zero. In fact, they are the necessary coun-
terpart to current account imbalances. There is also no reason per se why 
large or small net capital flows tell us everything about exchange rates. What 
matters for the exchange rate is the net balance between overall supply and 
demand. A surge of capital inflows is likely to increase the exchange rate 
unless there is a corresponding expansion in the supply of the currency. But 
even when the exchange rate is bid higher, there is no guarantee that it will 
rebalance flows. Exchange rate movements act as a more plausible equilib-
rium mechanism following trade shocks than after capital flow shocks. In 
reality, in the wake of a capital flow shock, it is often hard to predict whether 
the financial system will converge or diverge from its equilibrium position, 
because capital flows may, at least for a period, become self-sustaining so 
causing currencies and asset prices to overshoot. These rapid, large-scale 
cross-border capital flows consequently demand equally large offsetting 
movements both in current accounts and potentially in exchange rates. To 
help ensure economic stability, many national governments have insisted on 
maintaining currency parities against competitor currencies, and notably by 
staying closely aligned with the US dollar.

10        M. J. Howell
It would, therefore, seem that modern financial crises have less to do with 
lax regulation, excessive risk-taking by imprudent bankers and policy-makers’ 
obsession with inflation-targeting than might be presupposed. Central Banks 
have power, but they do not always have control. And, often they exercise 
unelected powers. According to an anonymous governor,13 the ECB: “… 
threaten[s] governments that misbehave with financial destruction. They cut off 
refinancing and threaten to kill the banking system. They create a roll-over crisis 
in the bond market. This is what happened to Italy in 2011 ”. We focus on the 
similar disruptive potential of Global Liquidity in aggregate; its role is raising 
cross-asset correlations, and its contribution towards the build-up of systemic 
risk. The expansion of domestic credit and heightened asset demand in each 
of these previous crises was largely a consequence of the inflows of cross-bor-
der capital, which substantially eased funding constraints on local banks. 
This extra ability to borrow allowed certain governments, businesses, house-
holds and even other banks to side-step the burdens imposed by their exist-
ing debts, often for years. Each crisis broke when the global credit providers’ 
appetite for new debt slowed. This forced hasty liquidations of remaining 
assets to quickly repay debts and it often occurred alongside a sliding national 
currency unit when the direction of capital flows suddenly reversed. At the 
same time, the collapse in their capital bases forced banks to sharply shrink 
their loan books, which, in turn, led on to further falls in the value of bank 
capital and ever tighter credit conditions. Not only is this the very reverse 
of what had happened in the preceding boom years, it sounds remarkably 
like the classic ‘debt-deflation’ model described by American economist 
Irving Fisher in his Booms and Depressions (1932) written about America’s 
Depression years, but now brought up-to-date with what Rey (2015) 
describes as a single global factor and we explain in terms of Global Liquidity.
The First Sightings: Salomon Brothers Inc.
Whether or not we can rightly claim responsibility for first coining the term 
Global Liquidity, we were certainly among its very earliest pioneers. These roots 
run back to the mid-1980s when Salomon Brothers,14 the US investment 
bank, was set to make its big push into international financial markets. At the 
time, Salomon dominated securities’ trading. Underpinned by a whopping bal-
ance sheet, its financial punch was led by an innovative research department, 
directed by the restless geniuses of Henry Kaufman and Marty Leibowitz. 
What Henry knew about credit and currencies, Marty matched him on bonds 
and duration. Investment policy was implemented by a pre-eminent team of 

1  Introduction: Capital Wars        11
researchers and economists, several plucked from the IMF and recruited from 
the Federal Reserve, among them Nick Sargen, John Lipsky, Dick Berner, Kim 
Schoenholtz, Robbie Feldman, Ron Napier, Chris Mitchinson and Laszlo 
Birinyi. All now form part of the far-reaching Salomon Diaspora.
Many of Salomon’s traders believed that watching money and capital 
flows was the nearest thing to obtaining insider information. What’s more, it 
was perfectly legal. In planning its mid-1980s business expansion, Salomon 
needed estimates of the size of cross-border investment and trading flows 
and this writer, brilliantly assisted by Angela Cozzini, was tasked with gath-
ering the data. Our researches ultimately led to an annual publication (now 
defunct) called International Equity Flows that surveyed the cross-border cap-
ital markets and featured estimates of what we dubbed Global Liquidity and 
defined, in the Salomon tradition, as the total inflow of savings and credit 
into domestic and cross-border financial markets. Salomon Research Head, 
Henry Kaufman’s famous dictum is of course: “…money matters, but credit 
counts ”. The first Salomon Brothers publication tracking Global Liquidity 
was published in 1986.
Global Liquidity can be split functionally, as well as geographically, 
by type of liquidity, which helps to isolate its changing quality. In other 
words, certain components exercise a greater influence over the future size 
and direction of the total pool than others. We focus on three liquidity 
components: (1) Central Bank provision; (2) private sector supply and (3) 
cross-border inflows. We think in terms of three broad liquidity transmission 
channels, with each one affecting or amplifying risk-taking behaviour. First, 
the sum of domestic Central Bank and private sector liquidity tends to affect 
the relative prices of ‘safe’ assets, through a risk-taking channel. By reduc-
ing the odds of systemic risk, more domestic liquidity increases the term 
premia on government bonds as the demand for safety falls, while simul-
taneously reducing the equivalent premia assigned to risk assets. When the 
‘safe’ asset is used internationally, cross-border inflows are also likely to come 
into play. Second, the exchange rate channel reflects the changing quality-mix 
of liquidity between the private and public sectors. More private sector or 
‘good’ liquidity strengthens a currency unit, whereas more Central Bank or 
‘bad’ liquidity weakens it. Third, the spillovers of domestic liquidity from 
the core economies into outward cross-border capital flows are typically 
amplified both by offshore funding markets and by other policy-makers in 
the ­periphery economies into bigger increases in Global Liquidity and more 
risk-taking by investors. This latter cross-border capital flow channel is shaped 
by the current institutional make-up of the World economy and embodies 
many of the structural differences between America and China.

12        M. J. Howell
Although conventional finance theory typically ignores the impact of 
liquidity factors, a straightforward example can show their importance. 
Between the start of the Reagan Presidency in 1981 and the end of the 
Clinton Presidency in 2001, or some twenty years later, Wall Street jumped 
by almost tenfold. Yet, profits increased by a miserly 236% and so could jus-
tify less than one-quarter of this rise. The increase in investors’ appetite for 
risk assets proved more decisive, with equities (held directly and indirectly) 
rising from a little over 14% of aggregate US financial wealth to more than 
42% and safe asset holdings correspondingly tumbling. Similar experiences 
are shared Worldwide and even in Emerging Markets, such as India, near-
flat earnings have not deterred waves of foreign money and domestic mutual 
funds, fuelled by aspiring middle-class investors, from driving-up stock prices. 
Now with Central Banks actively pursuing QE policies, industrial corpora-
tions flush with cash and aggressively buying-in their equity, and wealth levels 
rising among Emerging Market investors, the liquidity theory of investment 
has never been more important. Yet, the sources and uses of liquidity need 
to be better understood by investors and policy-makers alike. It is these mac-
ro-valuation shifts in asset markets that liquidity analysis seeks to explain.
Global Liquidity: Endless River  
or High-Water Mark?
Putting this into context, the US, the main supplier of the global currency 
to World markets, is a large, low productivity growth economy, with highly 
developed financial system and a capital surplus. In direct contrast to the 
US, China is a large, high productivity growth economy, with underdevel-
oped financial markets and a far greater need for ‘intelligent’ and risk-seeking 
capital. China increasingly dominates World industrial production and has 
become the major international user of the global currency, through her sup-
ply chains and logistic companies that span Asia, Europe and the Americas. 
The resulting vast capital flows into China describe what we call The Financial 
Silk Road, echoing the monetary factors that drove capital and trade flows 
along the dusty, historic caravan routes between the West and China during 
the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries. After the Fall of Constantinople to the 
Ottomans (1453), the old Silk Road became as much about China’s lust for 
silver as the West’s demand for paper, silk and spices. China’s monetary sys-
tem became tied to the silver peso, with at times, more coins circulating in 
China than in Mexico itself. In the late 1590s, the gold/silver ratio in China 

1  Introduction: Capital Wars        13
stood around 6:1, or more than twice the 13:1 ratio that then prevailed in 
Spain. In the more than 50 years that it took to eliminate this huge silver 
arbitrage, large-scale trade and capital flows reshaped the historic World econ-
omy. This was to happen again in the early 1700s, when a Chinese popula-
tion boom, literally fed by the new American crops (maize, peanuts and sweet 
potatoes), triggered further large demands for silver coin. And, it is happen-
ing once more right now through the US dollar.
Yet, the modern international monetary system is becoming evermore ill-
suited to intermediate our current vast capital and trade flows. It evolved 
from a pragmatic mish-mash of various agreements, whose origins primarily 
lie in the WW2 institutions, such as the IMF. It is not designed for a billion 
hard-working, high savings Chinese determined to rapidly pull their country 
out of poverty. Not surprisingly, China, for one, is eager to displace both the 
US dollar and America’s financial imprint, especially in Asia:
…we should promote the Renminbi15 to be the primary currency of Asia, just 
as the US dollar first became the currency of North America and then the cur-
rency of the World … Every globalisation was initiated by a rising empire … 
As a rising super power, the ‘One Belt, One Road’ strategy is the beginning 
of China’s own globalisation … it is a counter-measure to the US strategy of 
shifting focus to the East. (Excerpts from a speech by Major-General Qiao 
Liang, Chinese PLA, April 2015)
China needs to create an alternative international means of payment that 
looks more like the Swiss Franc than the Argentinean peso, but whether or 
not she can ever get herself off the US dollar hook, the challenge adds a geo-
political dimension to the latest monetary trends. It also highlights the great 
importance of seigniorage, namely the facility of national monies to com-
mand a greater purchasing power. Put another way, this describes the ability 
of, say, the US authorities to buy real resources with a US$100 bill that costs 
the US Treasury only a few cents to print. International financial systems, 
from ancient Greece and Rome, through to the nineteenth-century domi-
nance of Britain’s pound sterling are always built around a key currency that 
embodies seigniorage. China now wants its slice. We shall argue that a key 
risk to international financial market stability is that China is too hooked on 
the US unit: she effectively re-exports US dollars, when she should export 
Yuan. This will likely have big cross-border effects as it forces China to open 
up her domestic bond market to foreign capital; invoice more and lend 
more in Yuan; onshore or regionalise more of her supply chains and establish 
and promote a digital Yuan currency.

14        M. J. Howell
If capital is power, capital also needs power. Put another way, what exactly 
constitutes a ‘safe’ asset embodies a crucial geopolitical dimension. Thus, 
the British pound sterling dominated the nineteenth century in many ways 
because of her vast navy. Both expected to dominate the twentieth. On 
26 June 1897, 165 ships of the Royal Navy lined up at Spithead to mark 
Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee. The assembled fleet stretched for miles. 
Their bunting gracefully receding into the sun-blazed horizon. This armada 
included 21 battleships and 44 cruisers, their names projecting the arro-
gant confidence of a global Empire: Victorious, Renown, Powerful, Terrible, 
Majestic and Mars. It was an emphatic message sent out to friends as well 
as foes, and one that projected the persistence of British imperial power 
alongside the continuing integrity and soundness of the pound sterling. 
The Prince of Wales, soon to become Edward VII, took the salute from the 
quarterdeck of the royal yacht on behalf of his mother. Her Majesty the 
Queen, then 78 years old, had perhaps wisely opted to observe the great 
fleet by telescope from nearby Osborne House on the Isle of Wight. For this 
vast, intimidating military presence took fully eight hours to sail past, and 
yet its assembly still did not require the recall of one single ship from the 
Mediterranean or from those distant squadrons guarding Britain’s imperial 
sea lanes in India and Asia. Capital wars are not simply the battles for cur-
rency supremacy.
Sceptics who dismiss China’s future threat might recall that just over a 
hundred years ago, around the outbreak of World War One, the US dol-
lar was quoted and convertible in far fewer international markets than was 
the contemporary Austro-Hungarian krone. In 1984, Shenzhen’s Special 
Economic Zones (SEZ) were a tiny blip that barely registered on the radar 
of World trade. The latest US$4½ trillion annual rate of Chinese exports 
dramatically emphasises the impact of three decades of breakneck growth 
and economic ‘catch-up’. On many measures of financial might, China 
has already overtaken America, as Fig. 1.4 confirms. Economic adjustment 
is being channelled through a weaker US dollar and a loose US monetary 
policy/tight fiscal policy mix, into a heightened and more fragile Global 
Liquidity cycle. America’s domestic policy imperative alongside China’s pro-
ductivity catch-up essentially results in an unstable financial World. The 
tension between the strength of the Chinese economy and the evermore 
inadequate supplies of US Treasuries, for ‘safe’ savings assets, incentivises 
more and more dangerously complex forms of financial engineering. The 
Global Liquidity cycle vents these tensions. Our mantras are—don’t ignore 
liquidity and don’t underestimate China. These subliminal messages of the 
past two decades have now become the explicit warnings for the future.

1  Introduction: Capital Wars        15
In the following chapters, the second tries to put Global Liquidity into 
context. In Chapter 3, we trace the key forces of change and summarise our 
argument. Chapter 4 analyses the economics of flow of funds accounting 
that lies at the heart of our approach. The real exchange rate adjustment 
mechanism is explained in Chapter 5. Chapters 6–8 consider in more detail 
the three main sources of Global Liquidity: private sector funding, Central 
Bank provision and cross-border capital flows. It specifically identifies the 
rise of CICPs. Chapter 9 looks more closely at the immature financial sys-
tems in China and the Emerging Market economies. How liquidity shocks 
are transmitted is examined in Chapter 10. Chapter 11 revisits questions 
over the safe asset shortage. Chapter 12 discusses globalisation, FDI and 
questions over the direction of Europe, and Chapter 13 explains the use of 
global liquidity index (GLI) data. Chapter 14 concludes.
Notes
	 1.	 The accepted appellation for the financial and economic turmoil that struck 
in 2007–2008 is the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and Great Recession.
	 2.	 See Adam Tooze, Crashed, 2018.
	 3.	 Gresham’s Law, namely after the Elizabethan financier, states that “bad 
money drives out good ” from circulation, so that coins with a higher intrinsic 
than their face value are withdrawn from circulation and hoarded.
Ϭ
ϭϬ
ϮϬ
ϯϬ
ϰϬ
ϱϬ
ϲϬ
ϳϬ
ϴϬ
ϵϬ
ϭϬϬ
dƌŝůůŝŽŶƐ
h^
ŚŝŶĂ
Fig. 1.4  China’s relative financial power, mid-2019 (US$ in trillions, except PPP/head 
in US$ ‘000s) (Source CrossBorder Capital )

16        M. J. Howell
	 4.	 An eponymously named puzzle usually associated with the role of the US 
dollar in the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system. It highlights the 
conflict between national and international economic objectives, when the 
international liquidity demanded from a nationally supplied currency unit 
leads to a permanent current account deficit.
	 5.	 The US could export short-term dollar liquidity to the RoW to meet the 
demands for trade finance without necessarily going into current account 
deficit, simply by accumulating long-term assets claims on foreigners. This 
argument is different.
	 6.	 IMF estimate.
	 7.	 The ‘price’ of anything is its purchasing power, i.e. what it can buy. The 
interest rate is the premium charged on the use of borrowed money.
	 8.	 In 1717, Sir Isaac Newton, Master of the Royal Mint, established a new 
mint ratio between silver and gold that effectively put Britain on the gold 
standard. President Roosevelt took America off the gold standard by intro-
ducing the Gold Reserve Act, 30 January 1934.
	 9.	 It was over when President Nixon ended US dollar convertibility into gold 
on 15 August 1971.
	10.	 In July 1974, US Treasury Secretary William Simon (another Salomon 
Brothers’ alumnus) agreed with Saudi Arabia and subsequently OPEC that 
crude oil would in future be priced solely in US dollars. It still remains 
true that the Saudi holdings of US Treasury securities are not separately 
disclosed.
	11.	 Measured, say, by the differences between market and purchasing power par-
ity (PPP) or trend exchange rates.
	12.	 Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) are the workhorse mod-
els used in many Central Banks to better understand how the economy 
responds to policy changes.
	13.	 Quoted by Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, Telegraph, October 30, 2019.
	14.	 Salomon Brothers Inc. was eventually acquired and absorbed into Citigroup 
in 1996.
	15.	 ‘RMB’ or ‘Renminbi’ and ‘Yuan’ can be considered as alternative terms and 
used, respectively, in the same manner as ‘Sterling’ and ‘British pound’. 
Chinese prices are denominated in Yuan.
Reference
Rey, Hélène. 2015. IMF Mundell Fleming Lecture.
