17
How Big Is the Pool of Global Liquidity?
The wealth of modern capitalist societies appears as an immense collection 
of stocks, bonds and short-term liquid instruments. Most of these financial 
assets have seen a huge growth over the past three decades. Global finan-
cial markets now total some US$250 trillion of listed assets (primary secu-
rities) or roughly 3½ times World GDP, even ignoring the sizeable pools of 
unlisted and off-market OTC1 instruments. This is equivalent to a potential 
nest-egg of more than US$40,000 for every living person on the planet. Or, 
advertising our ‘green’ credentials, a hefty US$42 of paper wealth for every 
tree growing in every country in the World. Figure 2.1 reports the ratio 
between US households’ net financial wealth (i.e. excluding housing) and 
GDP since 1950 and highlights its recent parabolic rise to test an impres-
sive ratio of four-times income. Never has the World enjoyed such a rapid 
increase in its average per capita wealth.
The equivalent more than 10-fold leap in the size of World financial mar-
kets that has occurred since the early 1980s has been paced by a similar-sized 
explosion in Global Liquidity, with much of these flows criss-crossing inter-
national borders. This pool of liquidity alone, covering retail and wholesale 
liquid assets, totals close to US$130 trillion, making it some two-thirds big-
ger than World GDP. See Fig. 2.2. Alongside, World credit markets have 
become both more international and more interconnected, spanned by com-
plex intermediation chains, involving so-called shadow banks, and financed 
by the increasing use of market-based collateral. The cross-border dimension 
2
Global Money
© The Author(s) 2020 
M. J. Howell, Capital Wars,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39288-8_2

18        M. J. Howell
Ϯ͘ϬϬ
Ϯ͘ϱϬ
ϯ͘ϬϬ
ϯ͘ϱϬ
ϰ͘ϬϬ
ϰ͘ϱϬ
ϭϵϱϭͲϭϮͲϬϭ
ϭϵϱϰͲϭϬͲϬϭ
ϭϵϱϳͲϬϴͲϬϭ
ϭϵϲϬͲϬϲͲϬϭ
ϭϵϲϯͲϬϰͲϬϭ
ϭϵϲϲͲϬϮͲϬϭ
ϭϵϲϴͲϭϮͲϬϭ
ϭϵϳϭͲϭϬͲϬϭ
ϭϵϳϰͲϬϴͲϬϭ
ϭϵϳϳͲϬϲͲϬϭ
ϭϵϴϬͲϬϰͲϬϭ
ϭϵϴϯͲϬϮͲϬϭ
ϭϵϴϱͲϭϮͲϬϭ
ϭϵϴϴͲϭϬͲϬϭ
ϭϵϵϭͲϬϴͲϬϭ
ϭϵϵϰͲϬϲͲϬϭ
ϭϵϵϳͲϬϰͲϬϭ
ϮϬϬϬͲϬϮͲϬϭ
ϮϬϬϮͲϭϮͲϬϭ
ϮϬϬϱͲϭϬͲϬϭ
ϮϬϬϴͲϬϴͲϬϭ
ϮϬϭϭͲϬϲͲϬϭ
ϮϬϭϰͲϬϰͲϬϭ
ϮϬϭϳͲϬϮͲϬϭ
Fig. 2.1  US household wealth (net, excluding housing) as multiple of GDP, 1950–
2019 (quarterly) (Source US Federal Reserve)
Ϭ
ϮϬ
ϰϬ
ϲϬ
ϴϬ
ϭϬϬ
ϭϮϬ
ϭϰϬ
:ĂŶͲϴϲ
:ĂŶͲϴϴ
:ĂŶͲϵϬ
:ĂŶͲϵϮ
:ĂŶͲϵϰ
:ĂŶͲϵϲ
:ĂŶͲϵϴ
:ĂŶͲϬϬ
:ĂŶͲϬϮ
:ĂŶͲϬϰ
:ĂŶͲϬϲ
:ĂŶͲϬϴ
:ĂŶͲϭϬ
:ĂŶͲϭϮ
:ĂŶͲϭϰ
:ĂŶͲϭϲ
:ĂŶͲϭϴ
dƌŝůůŝŽŶƐ
KƚŚĞƌŵĞƌŐŝŶŐ
KƚŚĞƌĞǀĞůŽƉĞĚ
h^
:ĂƉĂŶ
ŚŝŶĂ
ƵƌŽǌŽŶĞ
Fig. 2.2  The pool of Global Liquidity, 1986–2019 (US$ in trillions) (Source 
CrossBorder Capital )

2  Global Money        19
is especially important because it links the fortunes of Emerging Markets to 
the gyrations of Western wholesale money markets in the core economies. 
Through a network of foreign currency loans made to local and regional 
banks, large global banks domiciled in the major financial centres are funded 
through repos and commercial paper, usually denominated in US dollars. 
These funds are on-lent often against local currency collateral, which means 
that US dollar devaluation (itself commonly associated with American mon-
etary expansions) encourages still greater leverage. On top, local policy-mak-
ers in the Emerging Markets typically try to monetise these capital inflows, 
so further fuelling the Global Liquidity cycle.
Global Liquidity represents a pool of funds bigger than the annual 
flows of World savings, as reported by the IMF and shown as a percent-
age of World GDP in Fig. 2.3. Within this total, the pool of Emerging 
Market Liquidity is near US$50 trillion according to Table 2.1, or some 
38% of the total. However, China makes up almost US$36 trillion of this 
figure, or some 70% of Emerging Market liquidity, and she has provided 
most of the recent impetus, expanding by a jaw-dropping near-15-fold in 
less than 20 years. Figure 2.4 reports the growth rates of Global Liquidity 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
Global Liquidity
Savings
Fig. 2.3  Global Liquidity and World savings, 1980–2018 (annual, percent of GDP) 
(Source IMF, CrossBorder Capital )

20        M. J. Howell
Table 2.1  Global Liquidity—regional breakdown, 2000–2019E (US$ in trillions)
E—estimate
Source CrossBorder Capital
Of which
End-year
World
Developed
Emerging
Eurozone
China
Japan
USA
2000
37.95
32.49
5.47
12.09
2.43
5.01
12.01
2001
38.11
32.50
5.59
11.72
2.68
4.31
13.05
2002
45.03
38.68
6.32
15.42
3.03
4.72
14.26
2003
51.86
44.47
7.35
18.78
3.50
5.19
15.23
2004
57.45
48.97
8.44
21.11
3.92
5.22
16.53
2005
59.96
50.09
9.82
21.16
4.63
4.63
17.83
2006
67.73
56.15
11.51
24.43
5.39
4.34
19.51
2007
81.69
66.63
14.96
31.34
7.05
4.96
20.77
2008
82.40
66.22
16.08
29.77
8.67
6.08
22.47
2009
89.54
69.91
19.49
32.54
10.75
5.96
22.02
2010
93.69
69.43
24.10
31.97
13.71
6.54
21.26
2011
100.12
71.90
28.05
31.78
16.80
7.26
22.21
2012
104.34
72.51
31.64
32.49
19.50
6.25
22.84
2013
107.43
71.68
35.54
30.42
23.24
6.34
24.02
2014
104.77
66.71
37.85
25.17
25.91
6.23
25.25
2015
106.21
67.03
38.92
24.66
27.50
6.79
25.99
2016
112.59
70.76
41.52
25.59
29.23
8.10
26.96
2017
128.67
79.58
48.74
31.02
34.59
8.84
28.00
2018
127.65
77.99
49.26
28.94
35.18
9.20
28.56
2019E
128.90
78.51
49.99
28.61
35.58
9.41
29.24
%change  
2000–19
240
142
835
137
1366
88
143
ͲϭϬ͘Ϭй
Ͳϱ͘Ϭй
Ϭ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϭϬ͘Ϭй
ϭϱ͘Ϭй
ϮϬ͘Ϭй
Ϯϱ͘Ϭй
:ĂŶͲϵϬ
:ĂŶͲϵϭ
:ĂŶͲϵϮ
:ĂŶͲϵϯ
:ĂŶͲϵϰ
:ĂŶͲϵϱ
:ĂŶͲϵϲ
:ĂŶͲϵϳ
:ĂŶͲϵϴ
:ĂŶͲϵϵ
:ĂŶͲϬϬ
:ĂŶͲϬϭ
:ĂŶͲϬϮ
:ĂŶͲϬϯ
:ĂŶͲϬϰ
:ĂŶͲϬϱ
:ĂŶͲϬϲ
:ĂŶͲϬϳ
:ĂŶͲϬϴ
:ĂŶͲϬϵ
:ĂŶͲϭϬ
:ĂŶͲϭϭ
:ĂŶͲϭϮ
:ĂŶͲϭϯ
:ĂŶͲϭϰ
:ĂŶͲϭϱ
:ĂŶͲϭϲ
:ĂŶͲϭϳ
:ĂŶͲϭϴ
:ĂŶͲϭϵ
tŽƌůĚ
h^
Fig. 2.4  Growth in Global Liquidity and US Liquidity, 1990–2019 (YoY% change) 
(Source CrossBorder Capital )

2  Global Money        21
against benchmark US Liquidity since 1990. Global Liquidity experiences 
the bigger swings. Its annual growth has often been negative and generally 
it appears to amplify the US moves, likely operating through a mechanism 
linked to movements in the US dollar. While some economies, such as Japan 
have come and largely gone as major financial players, others continue to 
muscle forward, notably China, which looks ultimately set to wrestle control 
over global, or at least Asian, finance from the USA. As we detail later in 
Chapter 9, China accounted for barely 6% of Global Liquidity in 1990, but 
this has since leapt to a 28% share, with the other Emerging Markets adding 
a further 11% points. The wrinkle in this story is that China’s huge financial 
footprint is still largely dollar-based, and her future challenge is to encourage 
a commensurate growth in the international use of the Yuan. The US which 
made up a huge 39% of Global Liquidity in 1985 is now down to under 
23% or the same as the Eurozone, while Japan has skidded from her peak 
contribution of 21% in 1989 to just a 7% share. Over the period since the 
year 2000, Global Liquidity has increased by 240%, led by a huge 1366% 
jump in Chinese liquidity and a strong but less pacey rise in other Emerging 
Market liquidity of 374% (Table 2.1 and Fig. 2.4).
Figure 2.5 highlights the current distribution of the Global Liquidity 
pool using a block-map technique. This may better describe the concen-
tration and hierarchy of Global Liquidity than the more conventional pie 
chart shown in Fig. 2.6. It is clear from these charts that China, the US, the 
Eurozone and Japan dominate. The UK looks comparatively small, notably 
when taken relative to France and Germany, although her financial influence 
is far greater because of the importance of the City of London as an interna-
tional banking and foreign exchange trading centre, as well as through the 
cross-border foreign currency lending undertaken by Britain’s large inter-
national banks. Switzerland also punches above her weight for similar rea-
sons. Figure 2.7 compares the development of Chinese, US and Eurozone 
Liquidity, expressed in US dollar terms. Although foreign exchange move-
ments are important in explaining some of this relative performance, the 
two standout facts are: (1) the surge in Eurozone Liquidity from shortly 
after the introduction of the Euro in 1999 until the 2007–2008 GFC and 
2010–2012 Eurozone banking crisis, and (2) the exponential rise in Chinese 
Liquidity following her entry into the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in 
2001, but particularly in the immediate post-GFC period. Eurozone bank-
ing expanded largely through rapid cross-border loan growth between banks 
in the core economies, such as Germany, and borrowers in the peripheral 
Eurozone economies, such as Spain, Ireland and Greece. Despite a renewed 
and sizeable policy easing from late 2008, China’s liquidity expansion over 

22        M. J. Howell
ƵƌŽǌŽŶĞ͕ϮϮ͘Ϭй
ŚŝŶĂ͕Ϯϳ͘ϯй
:ĂƉĂŶ͕ϳ͘Ϯй
h^͕Ϯϯ͘Ϭй
KƚŚĞƌ
ĞǀĞůŽƉĞĚ͕ϴ͘ϵй
KƚŚĞƌŵĞƌŐŝŶŐ͕
ϭϭ͘Ϯй
Fig. 2.6  The pool of Global Liquidity, 2019 (percent) (Source CrossBorder Capital )
Fig. 2.5  How US$130 trillion of Global Liquidity is distributed, end-July 2019 (Source 
CrossBorder Capital )

2  Global Money        23
the period was largely the result of the parallel rise in her foreign exchange 
reserves, which policy-makers monetised into major increases in domestic 
credit. The large jump in China’s foreign exchange reserves, in turn, largely 
follow from her 2001 entry into the WTO; her policy of closely shadowing 
the US dollar, and the associated build-up of dollar-based regional supply 
chains. China’s sophisticated and extensive industrial base sharply contrasts 
with her relative financial immaturity.
What Is Global Liquidity?
Although Global Liquidity itself is a much-discussed concept, it can be 
sometimes vaguely defined and is often hard to pin down. It does not refer 
to a single-minded mass of money denominated in the same currency and 
warehoused together in some secret offshore jurisdiction. Nor it mainly used 
to ease the buying and selling of goods and services. Global Liquidity is the 
collective term we use to describe the gross flows of credit, savings and inter-
national capital feeding through the world’s banking systems and wholesale 
money markets and used in and between World financial markets to facili-
tate debt, investment and cross-border capital flows. In this study, we shall 
analyse three specific sources of Global Liquidity:
Ϭ͘Ϭ
ϱ͘Ϭ
ϭϬ͘Ϭ
ϭϱ͘Ϭ
ϮϬ͘Ϭ
Ϯϱ͘Ϭ
ϯϬ͘Ϭ
ϯϱ͘Ϭ
ϰϬ͘Ϭ
:ĂŶͲϴϲ
ƉƌͲϴϳ
:ƵůͲϴϴ
KĐƚͲϴϵ
:ĂŶͲϵϭ
ƉƌͲϵϮ
:ƵůͲϵϯ
KĐƚͲϵϰ
:ĂŶͲϵϲ
ƉƌͲϵϳ
:ƵůͲϵϴ
KĐƚͲϵϵ
:ĂŶͲϬϭ
ƉƌͲϬϮ
:ƵůͲϬϯ
KĐƚͲϬϰ
:ĂŶͲϬϲ
ƉƌͲϬϳ
:ƵůͲϬϴ
KĐƚͲϬϵ
:ĂŶͲϭϭ
ƉƌͲϭϮ
:ƵůͲϭϯ
KĐƚͲϭϰ
:ĂŶͲϭϲ
ƉƌͲϭϳ
:ƵůͲϭϴ
KĐƚͲϭϵ
dƌŝůůŝŽŶƐ
ŚŝŶĂ
h^
ƵƌŽǌŽŶĞ
Fig. 2.7  The major players—China, US and Eurozone, 1986–2019 (US$ in trillions) 
(Source CrossBorder Capital )

24        M. J. Howell
•	 domestic private sector funding, e.g. corporations, banks and shadow banks 
and financial institutions (see Chapter 6)
•	 official monetary institutions, e.g. Central Banks (see Chapter 7), and
•	 foreign investors and lenders through cross-border flows (see Chapter 8).
Global Liquidity (Definition): A source of funding that measures the gross flows 
of credit and international capital feeding through the world’s banking systems 
and collateral-based wholesale money markets. It is determined by the balance 
sheet capacity of all credit providers and represents the private sector’s ability 
to access cash through savings and credit.
We think of liquidity in terms of the sources of funds available for the pri-
vate sector to use, rather than the traditional way of defining money supply 
as bank deposits, which is technically a use of funds. Credit, in other words 
national and international IOUs, dominates Global Liquidity. Monetary 
savings sit more prosaically alongside. In modern economies, money is 
sometimes thought of as a higher form of credit that is ultimately underwrit-
ten by the State. Liquidity is a looser and more fluid concept than money, 
per se, because it includes what might be termed ‘moneyness’. This is a qual-
itative attribute, much akin to the roots of the term credit from credibility 
or belief (origin Latin), which moves procyclically with business activity and 
gives liquidity more elasticity. In pure accounting terminology, liquidity 
measures the ability of a household, firm or investor to pay their upcom-
ing liabilities at any point in time.2 A useful definition comes from Lance 
Taylor3: “Liquidity is often interpreted as a measure of the financial flexibility of 
an individual actor, group of actors, or the financial system as a whole. It repre-
sents the resources readily available for purposes of capital formation or financial 
transactions ”.
A similar perspective is taken by the far-reaching Report on the Working of 
the Monetary System in Great Britain published by the Radcliffe Committee 
in July 1959. The essence of the Radcliffe Committee’s view was that: “… 
[t]hough we do not regard the supply of money as an unimportant quantity, we 
view it as only part of a wider structure of liquidity in the economy … it is the 
whole liquidity position that is relevant to spending decisions … ”. Liquid assets 
are taken to refer to “… all such assets which can be exchanged for money (or 
for other liquid assets, normally through the intermediation of money), at any 
time, at short notice, and at a relatively small transaction cost ”. It concludes 
that: “… decisions to spend on goods and services — the decisions that determine 
the level of total demand — are influenced by the liquidity of the spenders … 

2  Global Money        25
The spending is not limited by the amount of money in existence, but it is related 
to the amount of money people think they can get hold of whether by disposal of 
capital assets or by borrowing ”.
In practice, the term ‘liquidity’ is both used to describe the ease of financ-
ing (i.e. the availability of cash to meet expected liabilities), or so-called fund-
ing liquidity, and the ease of trading (i.e. the ability to buy and sell assets and 
commodities in size around current prices), or market liquidity. We think of 
funding liquidity as a measure of balance sheet capacity. It represents the pri-
vate sector’s access to finance through savings and credit, with future liquidity 
growth dependent both on lending by traditional banks and by the credit pro-
vided by international and collateral-based wholesale markets (often dubbed 
shadow banks). Funding liquidity and market liquidity are closely connected,4 
particularly in market-based credit systems. The fact that they can interact 
adversely to create dangerous downward liquidity spirals suggests that they 
should neither be seen in isolation, nor as independent. Although we are more 
interested in funding liquidity, per se, it also makes sense to cross-check our 
calculations with the related measures of market liquidity. From now onwards, 
we shall use the terms liquidity and funding liquidity interchangeably.
Market Liquidity refers to the ability to execute large transactions with 
limited price impact. It is also associated with low transaction costs and 
immediacy in execution. Liquidity in financial markets is central for effec-
tive market functioning. It facilitates the efficient allocation of economic 
resources through the better deployment of capital and risk, and the more 
effective dissemination and use of information. Low liquidity introduces 
frictions and costs, so potentially reducing market efficiency and disrupting 
economic growth. Market liquidity conditions can differ significantly across 
different asset classes, even in normal times. Financial assets with lower levels 
of liquidity tend to have higher liquidity risk premia, and investors also typ-
ically face higher transaction costs and wider bid-ask spreads when trading 
in these instruments. By acting as counterparties to transactions, specialised 
market makers, such as banks and trading firms provide a vital liquidity and 
risk-taking role. This often involves the buying and selling of financial secu-
rities without an immediate off-setting transaction, and therefore to carry 
and fund inventories.
Global Liquidity is simply another way of expressing international fund-
ing liquidity, i.e. by aggregating across economies Worldwide and including 
cross-border capital movements. To put our measure into context, the Bank 
for International Settlements (BIS) produce different Global Liquidity esti-
mates.5 They concentrate on the cross-border component of our definition. 
This they estimate6 at US$32.5 trillion, which falls to US$16 trillion when 

26        M. J. Howell
interbank claims are excluded. It excludes domestic credit denominated in 
local currencies (US$68.5 trillion), but includes foreign currency lending by 
domestic banks (US$5 trillion). Adding these different elements together, 
the closest BIS data match to our Global Liquidity figure of US$128.2 
trillion comes in around one-third smaller at US$85 trillion. Alternative 
Global Liquidity measures are also produced by other data providers, but 
these are far smaller. The two most popular variants are: (1) the sum of the 
US monetary base plus foreign official holdings of US Treasuries held at the 
Federal Reserve (US$7.4 trillion), and (2) an aggregate consisting of the US, 
Eurozone, Japanese, UK and Swiss monetary bases, plus Chinese foreign 
exchange reserves, plus foreign official holdings of US Treasuries held at the 
Federal Reserve (circa US$20 trillion).
It follows that with its strength partly dependent on the buoyancy of cap-
ital asset prices and exchange rates, Global Liquidity moves procyclically, 
or much like domestic funding liquidity. As well as possessing national and 
cross-border dimensions, Global Liquidity similarly has private and public 
components. Quantitatively, private sector liquidity dominates publicly cre-
ated liquidity in size, but qualitatively Finance Ministries and Central Banks 
matter more, particularly during times of economic stress. Admittedly, tra-
ditional high street banks also hold a unique position within the financial 
system because their credits can create deposits. This follows because their 
retail deposits are guaranteed by the State, which gives the illusion that 
banks are always self-funding and can magically produce money out of 
thin air, limited only by the Central Bank’s statutory reserve requirements. 
However, the reality is different. When these deposits are exchanged, what 
is really being spent is, say, a JPMorgan credit, a Citibank credit, a Barclays 
credit and a HSBC credit. The State’s role in backstopping the balance 
sheets of these banks is crucial. Deposit guarantees encourage redeposit-
ing and access to emergency funding, through the official lender of the last 
resort facility, can provide immediate cash. These State backstops ensure 
that a notional Citibank dollar always exchanges at parity for a JPMorgan 
dollar, and a notional Barclays pound always exchanges one-to-one for a 
HSBC pound. Shorn of such backstops these bank credits might otherwise 
trade at discounts related to their perceived credit quality. Hence, funding 
problems can arise when the State’s backstop boundaries are exceeded by, 
say, large-sized deposits (e.g. above America’s US$250,000 limit for deposit 
guarantees) from corporate and institutional cash pools (CICPs), or by 
non-regulated banks requiring emergency funding, such as shadow banks 
and foreign banks operating outside their national jurisdictions. At these 
times credit risks can escalate, as the 2007–2008 GFC evidenced. Recent 

2  Global Money        27
new regulations by policy-makers aim to improve banks’ capital and restrict 
their operations in order to mitigate these credit risks.
The dynamics behind liquidity can be understood by digging still-deeper 
into the evolution of money. Historically, money appears in two general 
forms: commodity money, such as gold and silver, and credit money, such as 
banknotes and loans. These twin forms, in turn, both serve two uses: as a 
standard of value and as a means of circulation. The standard of value func-
tion is paramount and determines circulation insofar that money circulates 
because it has value, but it does not have value just because it circulates. 
Thus, stable money can be invested for longer; devaluing money is passed on 
faster, and appreciating money is hoarded. Experience shows that the sup-
ply of commodity money tends to be countercyclical, which, by definition, 
frustrates trade, whereas credit monies are typically produced procyclically; 
they are also characterised by varying degrees of elasticity, and they depend 
on the growth, development and innovation of the financial economy. In a 
commodity-based financial system, declines in the price level, i.e. increases 
in the price of money, lead to an expansion in the money supply as the pro-
duction, say, of gold is stepped-up. This does not tell us whether or not gold 
will be hoarded given lower prices, but importantly new supply should auto-
matically occur because it has now become more profitable to mine gold. 
Thus, ‘liquidity’ in a commodity-based financial system depends on the 
production of precious metals. This property is self-balancing since the sup-
ply of commodity money expands as the price of money rises. In contrast, 
in a modern debt-based financial system, the supply of liquidity crucially 
requires the issuance and take-up of new credit. This is often dependent on 
the prevailing pricing background, because in periods of deflation and fall-
ing prices, i.e. increases in the price of money, borrowers are more reluctant 
to borrow and lenders become less willing to lend, since default risks are 
greater when the real value of debt rises. Here, unlike in commodity-based 
systems, the new supply of liquidity is procyclical because new credit faces 
rising costs for the debtor in a deflation, and in contrast becomes cheap in 
an inflation. Therefore, the supply of credit money contracts as the price of 
money rises (i.e. price deflation), but it expands when the price of money 
falls (i.e. price inflation). Movements in the value of the US dollar epitomise 
these effects in cross-border lending markets, because a stronger (weaker) US 
dollar exchange rate often has the same effect as a monetary tightening (eas-
ing), as we show later in Chapter 8. Such positive feedbacks amplify initial 
monetary shocks and they can help to explain why monetary inflations and, 
particularly, monetary deflations lead on to financial crises. Figure 2.4 has 
already warned us that Global Liquidity often proves fragile. Self-sustaining 

28        M. J. Howell
and adverse dynamic effects can be set in motion such as those often seen 
around financial crises. Importantly, experience shows that liquidity is not 
fungible in crises (i.e. it quickly disappears) and nor can it be properly meas-
ured by the level of interest rates.
Despite the importance of Global Liquidity, these days the most visible 
and most discussed monetary instrument remains the policy interest rate. 
In the modern economy, this is typically a market-based overnight rate, 
such as US Fed Funds. This interest rate is widely thought to impact mar-
kets through the expectations of investors and credit providers, and so affect 
long-term yields, consumer and capital spending, cross-border capital flows 
and the exchange rate. See Bernanke (2008). However, we argue through-
out this book that when the economic background is characterised by the 
need to refinance large outstanding debts, rather than to finance new cap-
ital projects, balance sheet capacity, i.e. liquidity, is crucial, and the cost 
of capital, i.e. interest rates, becomes secondary. Indeed, the 2007–2008 
Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and the subsequent policy response evi-
denced that interest rates are not the main channel of monetary transmis-
sion. This period demonstrated unambiguously that setting the short-term 
interest rate is, by itself, an inadequate monetary policy tool, and that 
so-called ‘forward guidance’ on rates,7 quantitative easing (QE) and quan-
titative tightening (QT) policies, and changes in banks’ regulatory capital/
asset ratios matter much more. Using these latter tools, both Central Banks 
and Financial Regulators can affect the aggregate growth rates of money and 
credit by slowing or stimulating the expansion of banks’ assets and liabilities. 
Notes and coin, as well as bank deposits, loans and securities all exist in the 
real world and their rates of growth are affected by these policy decisions. 
In other words, all money that is anywhere, must be somewhere. Attention 
has, consequently, refocussed on alternative monetary channels, such as the 
quantitative effect of these direct supplies of credit and overall capital market 
funding conditions. By disturbing balance sheet quantities and specifically 
the balance sheets of financial intermediaries that invest and directly supply 
credit to the private sector, the policy-makers can affect risk-taking, wealth 
and collateral values, and, hence, GDP. See Borio and Zhou (2008).
Are Policy-Makers Behind the Curve?
Not surprisingly, Global Liquidity has become a highlight of international 
policy debates and investor concerns over recent years. In many of the writ-
ings by researchers based at the BIS, disruptions to Global Liquidity are 

2  Global Money        29
frequently cited as a potential threat. See, for example, BIS (2011): “Global 
Liquidity has become a key focus of international policy debates over recent 
years. This reflects the view that global liquidity and its drivers are of major 
importance for international financial stability… In a world of high capital 
mobility, global liquidity cannot be approached as it used to be a few decades 
ago. It has both an official and a private component…These two concepts both 
capture one common element, namely the ease of financing ”. The European 
Central Bank (ECB) is even more explicit: writing in its Financial Stability 
Review (December, 2011), the ECB warned that: “Global Liquidity, both 
in times of abundance and shortage, has a range of implications for finan-
cial stability. Surges in global liquidity may be associated with strong asset 
price increases, rapidly rising credit growth and – in extreme cases – excessive 
risk-taking among investors. Shortages of global liquidity may lead to disrup-
tions in the functioning of financial markets and – in extreme cases – depressed 
investor risk appetite, leading to malfunctioning markets ”. Adding later that 
“… in the run-up to the financial crisis the level of global liquidity was an 
important determinant of asset price and consumer price dynamics in several 
economic regions … and … measures of global liquidity are one of the best 
performing leading indicators of asset price booms and busts ” (ECB 2012). 
Federal Reserve Board (2012) appears to agree: “…financial crises create and 
are then perpetuated by illiquidity…concerns about liquidity rapidly become 
concerns about solvency …the evolution of the financial system away from tra-
ditional banking [and] towards a system dominated by a complex network of 
collateralized lending relationships serves only to increase the primacy of liquid-
ity ”. Moreover, the role of quantities, i.e. flows is explicitly acknowledged 
by the Banque de France (2018): …most of the channels through which QE 
[monetary policy] might work…are entirely independent of the accompanying 
level of nominal interest rates ”.
Put into context, modern industrial economies are usually dominated by 
a capital expenditure cycle. Economic growth depends on capital accumu-
lation, which must be financed. A key characteristic of Capitalism is that 
investment is financed by liquidity and not just through savings. Capital is 
raised over several years, with funding needing to be refinanced several times 
over the lifetime of a project. This is more-than-ever true today given the 
large outstanding stock of global debt that needs to constantly refinanced. 
We know that the refinancing process is a frequent source of weakness: “…
the remote cause of [the] commercial tides … seems to lie in the varying propor-
tion which the capital devoted to permanent and remote investment bears to that 
which is temporarily invested soon to reproduce itself ”.8 Mismatches between 
assets and liabilities can occur at different points between gestation and the 

30        M. J. Howell
project completion, leading cash pay-outs to fall short of cash receipts and, 
thereby, threaten temporary illiquidity, regardless of long-term solvency. It 
follows that there are predictable periods of both stable and unstable financ-
ing regimes, or much as the economist Hyman Minsky has proposed. 
In other words, the modern business cycle is increasingly dominated by 
changes in the broad capital structure, rather than simply by changes in the 
underlying pace of economic growth. With its complex and towering capital 
structures, modern capitalism has become far more a refinancing system than 
a new financing system.
As we argue in Chapter 6, the problem is that over the past two decades 
the global financial system has moved from retail bank-based credit provi-
sion to wholesale market-based provision, where the source of liquidity is 
the repo rather than the bank deposit, and where gross funding, i.e. refi-
nancings and debt rollovers, dominates net credit provision, i.e. new financ-
ings. Repos require a stable collateral base. Traditionally, this has been 
provided by ‘safe’ asset government bonds, i.e. Treasuries. However, the 
widespread pursuit of austerity policies by several Western governments, 
and often with the IMF’s blessing, has limited the new supply of these safe 
assets, against a background where the rising debt levels Worldwide require 
ever-larger balance sheet capacity in order to roll-over these sizeable posi-
tions. Consequently, lower quality private sector securities are being used as 
an alternative source of collateral. But a collateral pool skewed towards flaky 
private sector debt makes liquidity procyclical and potentially fragile. The 
solution requires a major injection of safe assets though more government 
bond issuance, and/or greater Central Bank liquidity. This is not yet happen-
ing. In fact, lately we have suffered the very opposite. The credit mechanism 
is broken and, ironically, despite their homage to the importance of Global 
Liquidity, the policy-makers seemingly appear not to know how to fix the 
problem, and, in cases, they are making things worse.
‘New’ Global Liquidity Shocks
Whereas dislocations in the real economy in the 1960s mostly took the form 
of wage and labour cost shocks, and in the 1970s oil and commodity price 
shocks, we now face an entirely different regime characterised by repeat-
ing financial shocks. Such international financial instability is frequently 
driven by wayward fluctuations in Global Liquidity. Market practitioners, 
such as Barry Riley, writing in the Financial Times back in 1990 then caught 
the mood vividly: “There is a vast pool of liquidity, much of it borrowed, 

2  Global Money        31
under-pinning share prices and ready to move in on any setback. Only when the 
credit markets are disrupted … is the buying power undermined. The investment 
fundamentals now play little role … ”. Legendary American investor Stanley 
Druckenmiller summed things up with brilliant clarity in a 1988 Barron’s 
interview: “…the major thing we look at is liquidity … looking at the great 
bull markets of this century, the best environment is a very dull, slow economy 
that the Federal Reserve is trying to get going ”.
From our experience, the two main independent drivers of Global 
Liquidity are the US Federal Reserve and, increasingly, the People’s Bank of 
China (PBoC), the main organ of Chinese monetary authority, which, iron-
ically, is still tightly controlled by the Communist Party. By balance sheet 
size, the PBoC is already one-fifth bigger than America’s Federal Reserve. 
Admittedly, its large size also helps the PBoC stabilise the US dollar-based 
international system, because China has lately become a major user of dol-
lars, as we show in Chapter 9. Alongside, private liquidity in both econo-
mies is increasingly collateral-based, rather than bank-based, and it depends 
significantly on attitudes towards risk-taking and the, sometimes fuzzy, per-
ceptions as to what constitute ‘safe’ assets. The rise of non-traditional banks, 
or what are now termed shadow banks, as providers of funding rather than 
just new credit, has compromised existing methods of monetary control. 
Expressed differently, financing chains have grown more in length than in 
number. These shadow banks have been fed by the recent rapidly growing 
corporate and institutional cash pools (CICPs), that, in turn, largely owe 
their existence to geopolitical developments, demographics and financial 
deregulation over the past twenty-five years.
New industrial technologies have been quickly exploited and propagated 
by these fast-moving flows of Global Liquidity. This has resulted in a grow-
ing disconnect between economic textbooks and the practical operation of 
the economy. The theoretical assumptions,9 critical for market equilibrium 
between producers and consumers, are probably absent and the independ-
ence between supply and demand, vital for economic stability and for build-
ing an academic case in favour of free market capitalism, are being more 
frequently questioned. What’s more, traditional policy tools, such as the 
Phillips Curve trade-off between inflation and unemployment, no longer 
seem to work. Widespread technological innovations and the importance for 
many economies of ‘catch-up’ growth, following the Fall of the Berlin Wall 
in 1989, drive increasing returns from production and help underwrite lim-
itless numbers of ‘free’ web-based products. These forces skew Western econ-
omies towards the service industry, but alongside they also intensify the use 
of debt, widen trade deficits, change the distribution of incomes and alter 

32        M. J. Howell
the pattern of savings. They may help to explain why capital markets have 
shifted their character from being essentially money-raising mechanisms into 
becoming more refinancing and capital redistribution mechanisms, domi-
nated by these rapid flows of Global Liquidity.
Our central contention is that the financial system has changed rad-
ically over the past three decades, with new players, both from within 
Emerging Markets and from beyond the traditional banks, essentially 
reversing the polarity of the circuit. Financial innovation is an important 
factor behind the more elastic liquidity supply. In the earlier bank-dom-
inated financial World, M2 money supply, defined as the sum of notes, 
coin and bank deposits,10 served as a decent measure of the balance sheet 
size of leveraged lending institutions, but today this ignores increasingly 
important market-based liabilities, e.g. secured repos and commercial 
paper, and large-sized corporate deposits. The World is changing. There 
has been a shift from unsecured funding to secured funding. There has 
been a shift in the denomination of Global Liquidity towards the US 
dollar, with much of it now transacted outside of mainland USA. There 
has been a shift in the benchmark rate for global dollar funding from 
bank-based LIBOR in the Eurodollar markets to the collateral-based US 
repo rate. There has also been a shift in credit provision from the bal-
ance sheets of global banks to the balance sheets of asset managers and 
broker-dealers. And, there has been a shift towards alternative monies, 
such as Bitcoin, XRP, Ethereum and other cryptocurrencies, as well as 
alternative policies, such as the latest proposal11 for a ‘People’s QE’, so 
signalling our growing distrust in the abilities of both global banks and 
national Central Banks to maintain financial solvency and promote future 
economic growth.
Unfortunately, policy-makers and many experts have failed to keep up 
with these shifts. We can better understand these challenges in terms of 
the three key features of modern economies, namely: (1) the high pro-
ductivity of industrial capital; (2) the ever-greater elasticity of finance, 
and (3) the persistent instability of the investment cycle, together with a 
fourth, namely (4) the economic ‘catch-up’ of China and the Emerging 
Market economies. All four find their voices in today’s financial mar-
kets. Worryingly, instability is becoming more regular, more inclusive 
and deeper. These crises are systematic, not idiosyncratic. Their roots lie 
in the progressive maturity of Western capitalism relative to the financial 
underdevelopment of China and other Emerging Markets, and specifi-
cally with the shift from a capital-raising to a predominantly capital dis-
tribution-focussed financial system. This features inventive bankers and 

2  Global Money        33
rapacious speculators, rather than economist Joseph Schumpeter’s empha-
sis on innovative industrial entrepreneurs, and it is coloured by periodic 
lurches between ever-greater regulation, followed by periods of sweeping 
deregulation.
How Do the Academics See It?
Traditional economics and finance have until recently either ignored these 
liquidity factors entirely or else grudgingly accepted them as annoying fric-
tions. For example, the standard neo-Keynesian economics textbooks (see, 
for example, Woodford 2003; Galí 2008) argue that output is demand 
determined in the short run, and monetary policy stimulates aggregate con-
sumption and investment. In this narrow world of economic theory, nei-
ther spreads nor risk premia, the very essence of financial markets, play a 
role. Rather identical individuals act selfishly, singularly, independently, 
instantaneously without making any obvious error. These individuals are 
endowed with a unique precocious prophecy and they live forever, seem-
ingly knowing everything about every possible future outcome! In other 
words, such ‘assumptions’ remove all those phenomena that should be inter-
esting to economics, e.g. quantity rationing, deep uncertainty, involuntary 
unemployment, inflexible or ‘sticky’ prices and balance sheets (since in this 
World, why hold assets or be required to manage the duration of assets and 
liabilities?).
A plausible reason why liquidity is shunned in the traditional literature 
is that it is perceived to be both hard to measure and difficult to define. But 
just because a task is challenging, there is no reason not to try. Economics 
is itself often guilty of raising to heights of great importance factors that 
are easily measured. This fallacy can be colourfully described by the tale of 
the drunkard searching for lost keys under a streetlamp: not because this is 
where they were lost, but simply because that is where the light is better! 
Often economic truths lie in the shadows where they can be hard to see. A 
compelling real-World example is the economists’ worship of foreign trade 
and current account balances. Why focus so much on trade imbalances, 
when economic welfare is surely determined more by the sum of exports 
and imports than by their differences, because the size of total trade gov-
erns the division of labour? What’s more, many experts simply assert that 
capital flows passively adjust to balance the corresponding trade surpluses 
and deficits. Balance of payments ‘balance’, by definition (the clue is in the 
name), but, in practice, not only are the size of current accounts often forced 

34        M. J. Howell
to passively adjust to capital movements, these net flows themselves hide a 
richer and much wider network of gross capital flows, involving the buying 
and selling of different assets and large-scale borrowing and lending, in turn, 
involving both foreigners and domestic residents.
This inadequate theoretical structure permits economics to pay infrequent 
attention to balance sheet analysis. Yet, digging into the detail contained 
within the international balance sheet reveals that the bulk of cross-border 
capital movements are speculative portfolio flows and bank financing flows, 
and not foreign direct investments (FDI). And, although capital appears 
to be exported from high savings Emerging Market economies to a few 
advanced economies with relatively slow domestic demand growth, the real-
ity is different as we explain in Chapter 8. Gross balance sheet analysis shows 
large-scale bank and portfolio flows heading into these risky Emerging 
Markets, with slightly larger amounts flowing back into the deeper capi-
tal markets located in the large money centres of New York, London and 
Frankfurt, and often in search of ‘safe’ assets. In other words, risk-seeking 
capital enters and risk-averse capital leaves. What’s more, the former tends to 
be more long-term in nature than the latter. Modern economics also misses 
the importance of this gross funding dimension, because it takes every 
credit as a debt (debit), every debt as a credit: so assets and liabilities must 
match, and the system always balances to zero, by definition. Thus, it never 
acknowledges either the character of these flows nor how big these gross 
numbers are: regardless of how much credit or debt there is in the system, 
the net figure is always the same. But knowing this fact is akin to scaling the 
World’s longest ladder and promising never to fall off!
When liquidity does appear in academic writings, it tends to be used in 
one of three senses:
•	 Market Depth12: describes the ‘liquidity’ of an individual investment posi-
tion and denotes the ease of selling (or buying) the security in size and at 
short notice, without affecting its ‘price’.
•	 Money-plus: a more refined term for the economy’s entire money stock, or 
some characteristic of money, such as broad credit or equally high-pow-
ered money (e.g. 1959 UK Radcliffe Report).
•	 Risk: a gauge of the robustness of financial sector balance sheets, or “…the 
ability to settle obligations with immediacy. Consequently, a bank is illiquid 
if it is unable to settle obligations in time ”. ECB (WP#1024, March 2009). 
The Basel Committee’s liquidity definition is similar, adding that banks 
must also “…unwind or settle positions as they come due ”.

2  Global Money        35
Some frustration with the adequacy of these separate definitions of liquid-
ity has spawned a number of recent hybrids that pair up in various combi-
nations. For example, Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) embody ‘market 
depth’ in their concept of market liquidity, which they define as the difference 
between the transaction price of a security and its fundamental value. They 
also integrate what we call the ‘risk’ definition of liquidity with the ‘mon-
ey-plus’ notion to describe their funding liquidity concept. Funding liquidity 
risk arises when the net capital of a dealer bank decreases, short-term bor-
rowing availability is reduced, and margin requirements increase, thereby dis-
turbing cash flows. Brunnermeier and Pedersen allow these two concepts to 
negatively interact and so give rise to so-called downward liquidity spirals. For 
example, heightened market risk from, say, greater realised asset price volatil-
ity, leads to higher margin requirements and, hence, tighter funding liquidity, 
which, in turn, feeds back to reduce market depth and further undermine 
market liquidity. Similar hybrid measures include empirical risk statistics, 
such as the recently published Bank of England financial market liquidity 
index and the US Office of Financial Research (OFR) financial stress index.13 
These combine ‘market depth’ measures of liquidity, such as bid/ask spreads 
in the gilt repo market and LIBOR/OIS spread, with ‘risk’ measures, such as 
data on commercial bank funding and the CBOE VIX index of implied vola-
tility on the S&P500, the headline US stock market index.
Not surprisingly, the idea that shocks suffered by the financial sector 
matter for the real economy has gained significant attention in the wake of 
the 2007–2008 GFC. There is a large and growing body of academic work 
supporting this link, with plenty of empirical evidence that financial cycles, 
and their specific credit and asset price components, are prescient leading 
indicators of financial crises (e.g. Borio and Drehmann 2009; Schularick 
and Taylor 2012; Detken et al. 2014). Financial crises typically lead to deep 
and lengthy recessions, as Jordà et al. (2018) and Adrian et al. (2014) show. 
A number of studies also suggest that credit booms weaken medium-term 
industrial output (e.g. Mian et al. 2017; Lombardi et al. 2017; Borio and 
Zabai 2016). Most of this work focusses on the yield curve, i.e. the spread 
between longer-dated and short-term Treasury yields. As we have demon-
strated elsewhere (see Howell 2017) these conclusions are flaky and more 
likely to involve other hidden variables. Refreshingly, new work by Borio 
et al. (2019) shows the greater predictive power of financial flows. They 
compare the signalling power of the yield curve against measures of the 
financial cycle for the US, as well as for sixteen other advanced economies 
and nine Emerging Market economies over the period from 1985 to 2017.

36        M. J. Howell
Gerdesmeier et al. (2010) carry out an extensive literature review and con-
clude that “…the one robust finding across the different studies is that meas-
ures of excessive credit creation are very good leading indicators of the building 
up of financial imbalances in the economy… ”. Their results regarding exces-
sive money creation prove less conclusive than for credit. Alessi and Detken 
(2011) compare the performance of a large number of global and domes-
tic variables (real and financial) as early warning indicators of (composite) 
asset price booms. They find that global liquidity measures (based on the 
aggregate for 18 OECD countries), notably a global private credit gap or a 
global M1 gap (defined as detrended ratios to GDP) are the best early warn-
ing indicators. Borio and Lowe (2002) use a noise-to-signal approach and 
show that a domestic credit gap is a better early warning indicator of finan-
cial crises than a domestic asset price gap, a domestic investment gap (all 
gaps are defined as detrended ratios to GDP) or domestic real credit growth 
in a sample of 34 countries. Drehmann et al. (2011) use data for 36 coun-
tries and show that a domestic credit gap achieves the lowest noise-to-signal 
ratio for predicting banking crises, relative to 14 other indicators, including 
measures based on GDP, M2, property prices and equity prices.
Bierut (2013) shows that global liquidity measures outperform domes-
tic measures as early warning indicators of asset price booms. This study 
confirms the conclusions of the Committee for Global Financial Stability 
(BIS, CGFS 2011) that quantity measures are better suited to capture the 
build-up of potential risks. It notes evidence that Basel III capital, leverage 
and liquidity rules are likely to reduce traditional bank-based intermedi-
ation, in favour of non-banks. This implies that the scope of quantitative 
measures of liquidity may in the future need to be extended to include 
non-banks in order to support their early warning properties. Adrian and 
Shin (2007) were among the first to detail the procyclical amplification 
mechanisms embedded in the modern financial structure. Parallel work 
by Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2019) finds that a single global factor 
can explain up to a quarter of the variation in World risk asset prices. This 
commonality is also confirmed by Jordà et al. (2018). In a study of finan-
cial cycles across 17 advanced economies over the past 150 years, they find 
that the co-movements of credit, housing prices and stock markets have hit 
historical highs during the past three decades. Both sets of research lend 
weight to the notion of a Global Liquidity cycle. Baks and Kramer (1999) 
find that global liquidity is negatively correlated with interest rates and pos-
itively related to equity returns. The IMF (2010) has examined the linkages 
between global liquidity expansion, asset prices and capital inflows in emerg-
ing economies. This study found that rising global liquidity is associated 

2  Global Money        37
with rising equity returns and declining real interest rates in 34 ‘liquidi-
ty-receiving’ economies. Bruno and Shin (2015) show that a strong dollar is 
associated with tighter credit conditions Worldwide and emphasise the key 
role played by US monetary policy in driving global risk premia. Rey (2013) 
also shows that US monetary policy influences financing conditions even 
in economies operating with fully flexible exchange rates, such as Canada, 
Japan, the Eurozone and the UK. This seriously questions whether floating 
exchange rates really can provide an effective barrier14 for Emerging Markets 
against the growing power of global capital?
What precisely comprises these liquidity transmission channels is still 
hotly debated among academics. When capital market frictions and bal-
ance sheets are included, an expansionary monetary policy should lead to 
an increase in the net worth of borrowers and investors. This feature helps 
to explain the subsequent expansions in lending and in aggregate demand, 
or the so-called credit channel of monetary policy (see Bernanke and Gertler 
1995). Other researchers emphasise instead the risk-taking channel of mon-
etary policy (see Borio and Zhou 2008; Bruno and Shin 2015; Coimbra 
and Rey 2019), where financial intermediation plays a key role, and where 
system-wide monetary expansions relax leverage limits and encourage lend-
ers to take additional credit risks. It seems plausible that these two channels 
often complement and reinforce each another. Indeed, the importance of 
credit and its role in financial instability are emphasised both by Alessi and 
Detken (2011): “… global monetary liquidity measures … are more informa-
tive than real variables in detecting boom and bust cycles ”, and by Schularick 
and Taylor (2012): “…with respect to crises, the results of our analysis are clear: 
credit matters, not money … financial crises throughout history can be viewed 
as ‘credit booms gone wrong’ … [and] past growth of credit emerges as the single 
best predictor of future financial instability ”.
Recently, it is argued that Central Bank quantitative easing (QE) reduce 
transactional frictions through a liquidity channel that operates by increas-
ing the opportunities for sellers of those securities targeted by the author-
ities. Evidence comes from several so-called event studies, such as of the 
Federal Reserve’s second QE programme where the liquidity premiums 
between TIPS yields and inflation swap rates were reduced, implying that 
QE improved market liquidity. Market liquidity is derivative, whereas fund-
ing liquidity is more fundamental. Here, onshore and offshore wholesale 
money markets have become central to the supply of funding liquidity. 
Aligned with this is the demand for ‘safe’ assets. The supply of safe short-
term debt requires collateral as backing. We have noted that this collateral 
can be Treasuries, as well as privately produced safe debt. Holmstrom and 

38        M. J. Howell
Tirole (2001)15 present an asset pricing model that includes a liquidity 
demand factor. In their model, risk neutral firms willingly pay a premium 
on ‘safe’ assets that provide benefits when liquidity is scarce. This premium 
persists because collateralisable assets are assumed to be in short supply. 
Gorton et al. (2012) finds around one-third of total assets are ‘safe’ and, 
in turn, around one-third of these are government securities. We show in 
Chapter 6 that private sector financial intermediaries are able to produce 
additional safe assets and through this channel they can affect asset prices. 
He and Krishnamurthy (2012), Adrian et al. (2014), Brunnermeier and 
Sannikov (2014), and Moreira and Savov (2017), among others, all empha-
sise this supply-side channel. In this new world, we warn in Chapter 11 that 
the quality mix of collateral in the economy becomes critically important to 
the supply of liquidity. Too low a stock of outstanding Treasuries results in 
an increase in privately produced collateral and a credit boom, which likely 
increases financial fragility. In the previous, retail-based market this was of 
less concern because the dominant form of safe debt, i.e. demand deposits, 
was insured by the State. However, the composition of private sector ‘safe’ 
assets has since changed with bank deposits now down to 30 from 80% in 
1950s. We are in a different place.
The Key: Flow of Funds Analysis
Many of these academic approaches bring together the ‘risk’ and the ‘mon-
ey-plus’ definitions. Some also explore how funding liquidity affects sys-
tem-wide liquidity, often by using a flow of funds analysis. We strongly 
favour a flow of funds approach. The methodology was pioneered by Morris 
Copeland16 (1952) and first developed in the US where flow of funds 
accounts have been regularly published by the US Federal Reserve System 
since 1951. Henry Kaufman popularised flow of funds analysis during the 
1970s and 1980s as one way to understand both the credit creation pro-
cess and the changing position of the interest rate yield curve through the 
credit cycle. An important contemporary international contribution came 
from Raymond Goldsmith’s Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study 
of Twenty Countries, 1688–1978 (1985). Flow of funds accounts are vital 
tools, because in standard National Income accounting, income equates 
with expenditure, but financial assets and debts, and their relationship to 
current and capital account transactions are all ignored. This may help to 
explain why financial markets are not integrated into traditional economic 
analysis, which notionally devalues the importance of finance. Flow of funds 

2  Global Money        39
accounting, in contrast, links income and expenditure flows to their counter-
part changes in stocks of assets and liabilities. They effectively ensure that all 
money that is anywhere is accounted for somewhere, guaranteeing consist-
ency between stocks and flows, and between different economic sectors and 
the national and international economies. The stock consequences of flows 
are incorporated into the flow of funds arithmetic, e.g. government budget 
constraints are satisfied, and the consequences of runaway government debts 
are acknowledged. According to Kaufman,17 flow of funds data capture 
financial transactions and financial positions of sectors in the economy, and: 
“…provides perspective and, like double-entry bookkeeping, contains built-in 
features that help prevent errors in logic … the amount of funds supplied must 
equal the amount demanded because it is impossible to lend money unless some-
one borrows it … the function of interest rates is to allocate the funds supplied by 
lenders among those who want to borrow ”.
More recently the German Central Bank has given a ringing endorse-
ment to flow of funds accounting and described how it is used to compile 
the German national financial accounts: “Financial accounts (FA) are a part 
of the national accounts, a macroeconomic statistical accounting system that 
encompasses the entire economy … The FA, which are usually compiled by cen-
tral banks because of their access to primary statistics, thus add to the picture 
provided by the national accounts focusing on the real economy that are supplied 
by statistical offices by including transactions in the financial sphere that run in 
parallel with real transactions. The results show who in an economy is providing 
or drawing what amount of funds in what form, and the financial intermedi-
aries that are involved in the economy’s financial flows. This provides an idea 
both of the basic structure of the economy’s financial flows (i.e. the channels of 
domestic financial investment and external borrowing) and of financial behav-
iour, particularly among households and enterprises…The results are used, inter 
alia, to analyse the investment and financing behaviour of enterprises and house-
holds, which, in turn, provides information about the monetary policy transmis-
sion process. For instance, these analyses focus on studies on shifts in financial 
structures and on the relationship between lending by domestic banks and other 
sources of financing (such as capital markets and foreign lenders)… ” (Deutsche 
Bundesbank 2013).
A major leap forwards in our understanding of the impact of these flows 
came with Gurley and Shaw’s Money in a Theory of Finance (1960), which 
argues that there is a continuum of financial assets and institutions based 
on their ‘liquidity’. This resembles Keynes’ use of the term ‘liquidity prefer-
ence’ to describe a monetary attribute. Gurley and Shaw saw little difference 
between the assets of non-bank financial institutions and bank assets. In 

40        M. J. Howell
short, certain non-bank financial institutions (or what we now dub shadow 
banks) can create liquidity.
Flow of funds analysis has proved useful in untangling the increasingly 
convoluted nature of the financial markets. Financial crises often result from 
abrupt ‘stops’ in funding liquidity that prevent essential projects and asset 
holdings from being refinanced. Traditional economics focusses, instead, 
almost exclusively on the uses of funds, rather than fluctuations in their 
sources. Thus, the economic categories of government spending, retail sales 
and money supply each represents a different use of funds. Because it high-
lights sectoral imbalances and balance sheet mismatches, flow of funds data 
is a far more important tool for assessing financial stability. It gave insights 
that allowed Kaufman (1986) to foresee upcoming financial turmoil, ema-
nating from the growth of institutional money. Thus, he could warn as early 
as the mid-1980s that: “Vast improvements in communications and financial 
technology have created close linkages within the US credit markets and with 
markets abroad. Distinctions among institutions have been so blurred that it 
would be impossible to put Humpty-Dumpty together again. We need to imple-
ment the best aspects of deregulation and the best applicable safeguards of regula-
tion. By and large, this will require injecting some friction into the debt creation 
process – not more lubricants ”.
More Capital Ideas?
It is worth setting these ideas about ‘liquidity’ into a broader context. Recently, 
investment commentator John Authers18 reflected on the impact of Peter 
Bernstein’s masterful Capital Ideas, a 1992 book that surveyed the achievements 
of academic finance. Although it focusses much more on equities than on bonds 
and currencies, Capital Ideas serves as a great yardstick. Yet, with due humility 
and the benefits of much hindsight, four key concepts seem to be missing:
(1)	 institutional theories of capital markets and savings, including the impor-
tance of national currency seigniorage and Central Bank policy, are not 
covered, and instead the Modigliani and Miller view that (among other 
things) the structure of financing should not matter permeates the book
(2)	 inflation/deflation threats seemingly play no explicit role in asset alloca-
tion decisions
(3)	 the role of the interest rate term structure on asset and liability pricing is 
ignored entirely
(4)	 risk is wrongly equated with asset price volatility alone.

2  Global Money        41
Arguably, each of these four points contains the common themes of 
liability management, duration and Global Liquidity which we put great 
weight upon. The trailblazer here was Marty Leibowitz, who gets a mention 
in Peter Bernstein’s book, but deserves at least a chapter. Henry Kaufman’s 
seminal contribution to flow of funds analysis and his prescient warnings 
about future financial instability need to be added. Practical experience also 
gives a strong hint that geopolitics frequently play a key role in finance, which 
is not surprising since assets are denominated in national currencies, over 
which policy-makers have legal jurisdiction and some control.
Risk matters when liabilities cannot be properly hedged, which, in turn, 
should encourage a greater demand for ‘safe’ assets. We raised the failings of 
volatility as a measure of risk with Peter at the time. He nonetheless felt it 
was the most practical definition and many practitioners would still agree. 
Yet, the subsequent decades have unkindly opened up many more dimen-
sions of risk, most of which arise when liabilities are not properly matched. 
Several subsequent books, and notably Nassim Taleb’s Black Swan and Benoit 
Mandelbrot’s The Mis-Behaviour of Markets, question the use of volatility as a 
risk measure and highlight the implicit absurdity of using the Gaussian ‘nor-
mal’ probability distribution (or bell curve) to model risk events.19
In addition, Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) and the Efficient Market 
Hypothesis (EMH) focus on individual securities, not on the behaviour of 
the investment crowd or of monetary institutions, such as Central Banks. Yet, 
while madness is rare in individuals, the philosopher Nietzsche, among oth-
ers, taught us that it becomes the norm in groups. People go mad in crowds 
and crowds form because uncertainty, or unquantifiable risk, being the dom-
inant feature of financial markets, forces us to fall back on rules of thumb 
and consensual thinking. Crowds with money are particularly unstable and 
they go a long way to explain the roller-coaster swings of financial markets 
between the extremes of greed and fear. Therefore, we argue that, contrary to 
the textbooks, investment is fundamentally about risk, return and liquidity.
Frustratingly, the relative importance of each factor, changes over time. 
For much of the pre-WW2 and immediate post-war years the markets con-
centrated on the return dimension, with investors largely concerned with 
growth, value and dividends. By the 1980s, risk management had come into 
vogue, often paralleling the search for a deeper understanding of what risk 
really means? More recently and, particularly, with deregulation, changing 
demographics, the retreat of inflation and other structural changes to the sav-
ings markets, including Central Bank large-scale asset purchases (LSAP)—
popularly known as quantitative easing (QE)—following the 2007–2008 
Global Financial Crisis (GFC), the emphasis has switched towards liquidity.

42        M. J. Howell
Notes
	 1.	 OTC: over the counter.
	 2.	 Rather than overall, which defines solvency.
	 3.	 Lance Taylor, Notes on Liquidity, New School for Social Research, April 
2008.
	 4.	 See Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009).
	 5.	 See https://www.bis.org/statistics/gli.htm.
	 6.	 BIS estimates, end-March 2019.
	 7.	 Forward guidance refers to setting out a likely future path for policy interest 
rates, such as expressed by the Federal Reserve’s well-known ‘dot plot’ diagram.
	 8.	 William Stanley Jevons, Investigations in Currency and Finance, 1884.
	 9.	 In technical jargon, these are often thought of as the ‘convexity’ of underly-
ing consumer preferences and technical production possibilities, which, say, 
require constant or decreasing returns to scale.
	10.	 Demand, or checking deposits, retail time deposits and money market 
funds.
	11.	 This policy channels liquidity directly to the general population. It is related 
to Modern Monetary Theory (MMT), which explicitly subjugates Central 
Banks to Finance Ministries in order to finance, say, public infrastructure, 
tax cuts and even universal basic incomes.
	12.	 The associated term ‘dark liquidity’ refers to hidden order flow increasingly 
dealt off-exchange via computer-to-computer trades.
	13.	 See https://www.financialresearch.gov/financial-stress-index/.
	14.	 The Canadian Nobel Prize winner Robert Mundell famously identified his 
eponymous trilemma where only two out of three policy choices between 
free capital movements, monetary policy independence and stable exchange 
rates are ever possible.
	15.	 Bengt Holmstrom and Jean Tirole, LAPM: A Liquidity-Based Asset Pricing 
Model, 2001.
	16.	 Morris Copeland, A Study in Moneyflows in the United States, 1952.
	17.	 Henry Kaufman, Interest Rates: The Markets and the New Financial World, 1986.
	18.	 Bloomberg, April 3, 2019.
	19.	 Benoit Mandelbrot and Richard L. Hudson, The Misbehavior of Markets: A 
Fractal View of Financial Turbulence, 2007. Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Black 
Swan, 2008.
References
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2007. Liquidity and Leverage. BIS Annual 
Conference, September.

2  Global Money        43
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir. 2014. Financial Intermediaries and 
the Cross‐Section of Asset Returns. Journal of Finance 69 (6) (December): 
2557–2596.
Alessi, L., and C. Detken. 2011. Quasi Real-Time Early Warning Indicators for 
Costly Asset Price Boom/Bust Cycles: A Role for Global Liquidity. European 
Journal of Political Economy 27 (3): 520–533.
Bank for International Settlements—Committee on the Global Financial System. 
2011. Global Liquidity—Concept, Measurement and Policy Implications. 
CGFS Paper No. 45, November.
Banque de France. 2018. Financial Stability Review No. 2, April.
Baks, K., and C. Kramer. 1999. Global Liquidity and Asset Prices: Measurement, 
Implications and Spillovers. IMF Working Paper No. 99/168.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2008. Liquidity Provision by the Federal Reserve. Speech, Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 13.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler. 1995. Inside the Black Box: The Credit 
Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 
(4) (Autumn): 27–48.
Bierut, Beata. 2013. Global Liquidity as an Early Warning Indicator of Asset Price 
Booms: G5 Versus Broader Measures. DNB Working Paper No. 377, May.
Borio, Claudio, and Anna Zabai. 2016. Unconventional Monetary Policies: A 
Re-appraisal. BIS Working Papers No. 570, July.
Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhou. 2008. Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and 
Monetary Policy: A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism? BIS Working 
Papers No. 268, December 17.
Borio, Claudio, and Philip Lowe. 2002. Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary 
Stability: Exploring the Nexus. BIS Working Papers No. 114, July.
Borio, C., and M. Drehmann. 2009. Assessing the Risk of Banking Crises-
Revisited. BIS Quarterly Review, March, 29–46.
Borio, Claudio, Mathias Drehmann, and Dora Xia. 2019. Predicting Recessions: 
Financial Cycle Versus Term Spread. BIS Working Papers No. 818, October.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2015. Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking 
Channel of Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 71 (April): 119–132.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2009. Market Liquidity and 
Funding Liquidity. The Review of Financial Studies 22 (6) (June): 2201–2238.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov. 2014. A Macroeconomic Model 
with a Financial Sector. American Economic Review 104 (2): 379–421.
Coimbra, Nuno, and Hélène Rey. 2019. Financial Cycles with Heterogeneous 
Intermediaries. NBER Working Paper No. 23245 (Revised).
Copeland, Morris. 1952. A Study of Moneyflows in the United States. NBER.
Detken, C., O. Weeken, L. Alessi, D. Bonfim, M.M. Boucinha, C. Castro, S. 
Frontczak, G. Giordana, J. Giese, N. Jahn, J. Kakes, B. Klaus, J. H. Lang, N. 
Puzanova, and P. Welz. 2014. Operationalizing the Countercyclical Capital 
Buffer. ESRB Occasional Paper No. 5.

44        M. J. Howell
Drehmann, Mathias, Claudio Borio, and Kostas Tsatsaronis. 2011. Anchoring 
Countercyclical Capital Buffers: The Role of Credit Aggregates. BIS Working 
Paper, November.
ECB. 2012. Global Liquidity: Concepts, Measurement and Implications from a 
Monetary Policy Perspective. ECB Monthly Bulletin, October.
Federal Reserve Board. 2012. Shadow Banking After the Financial Crisis, Remarks 
by Daniel K. Tarullo, June.
Galí, Jordi. 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction 
to the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications, 2nd ed. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Gerdesmeier, Dieter, Hans‐Eggert Reimers, and Barbara Roffia. 2010. Asset Price 
Misalignments and the Role of Money and Credit. International Finance 13 (3) 
(December): 377–407.
Gorton, G., S. Lewellen, and A. Metrick. 2012. The Safe Asset Share. American 
Economic Review 102 (3): 101–106.
He, Zhigu, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2012. A Model of Capital and Crises. 
Review of Economic Studies 79 (2): 735–777.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 2001. LAPM: A Liquidity-Based Asset Pricing 
Model. Journal of Finance 56 (3) (October): 1837–1867.
Howell, Michael J. 2017. Further Investigations into the Term Structure of Interest 
Rates. London: University of London.
International Monetary Fund. 2010. Global Liquidity Expansion: Effects on 
‘Receiving’ Economies and Policy Response Options. Global Financial Stability 
Report, April.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, Alan M. Taylor, and Felix Ward. 2018. Global 
Financial Cycles and Risk Premiums. NBER Working Paper No. 24677, June.
Kaufman, Henry. 1986. Interest Rates, the Markets and New Financial World. Time 
Books.
Lombardi, Marco, Madhusudan Mohanty, and Ilhyock Shim. 2017. The Real Effects 
of Household Debt in the Short and Long Run. BIS Working Paper No. 607.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. 2017. How Do Credit Supply Shocks 
Affect the Real Economy? Evidence from the United States in the 1980s. NBER 
Working Paper, August.
Miranda-Agrippino, S., and H. Rey. 2019. US Monetary Policy and the Global 
Financial Cycle, March 28.
Moreira, Alan, and Alexi Savov. 2017. The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking. 
Journal of Finance 72 (6) (December): 2381–2432.
Rey, Hélène. 2013. Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and 
Monetary Policy Independence. Jackson Hole Conference, August 2013.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary 
Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises. 1870–2008, American Economic 
Review 102 (2): 1029–1061.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary 
Policy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
