45
The Economic Earthquake
As the investment World has got bigger, it has become ever more volatile. 
Financial crises seem to strike with an apparent regularity every eight to ten 
years. Igniting this explosive background is a battle for supremacy between 
national capitals, and specifically the intensifying tussle between America 
and China, with fast-moving financial flows the modern equivalent of shock 
troops. But once traditional patterns are broken new Worlds emerge. The 1989 
fall of the Berlin Wall symbolises the great geopolitical shifts that not only 
ended Eastern European Communism, but also effectively reversed the 
polarity of the World financial system by unleashing the new economic 
forces powering waves of Global Liquidity. In giving access to 2–3 billion 
new ‘producers’ (and not the ‘consumers’ that the billboards promised), this 
created a ‘globalisation’ of production through international supply chains,1 
initially led by the US, Germany and Japan, but now increasingly dom-
inated by Chinese manufacturers and logistics companies. Barely a decade 
after the end of Eastern European Communism, the World economy was 
stuck by a second shockwave. On 11 December 2001 China joined the 
World Trade Organisation (WTO). In the next ten years alone, over 200 
million Chinese workers, roughly equivalent in headcount to the entire 
European Union’s labour force, shifted from the countryside into the rap-
idly expanding Eastern coastal cities that dominate China’s export economy. 
For sure, China and the West traded before, but WTO entry saw a huge 
step-up in the scale and depth of their cross-border trade. 2001 was also a 
3
Synopsis: A Bigger, More Volatile World
© The Author(s) 2020 
M. J. Howell, Capital Wars,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39288-8_3

46        M. J. Howell
signal year for China because she won the right to host the 2008 Olympics. 
This confidence-boosting chase towards ceremonial perfection culminating 
that August in Beijing was led by a then little-known Party official, named 
Xi Jinping, since elevated to the Presidency of the People’s Republic of 
China. China had been officially welcomed into the World economy, but, 
as we explain, her path has been first and foremost a story about economic 
‘catch-up’ hampered by uneven financial development.
Rates of return on capital are ultimately equalised across economies by 
capital mobility and the reshuffling of investments. Secular movements in 
real interest rates combine these changes in saving and investment behaviour 
with fluctuations in the safety and liquidity properties of safe assets, such 
as Treasury instruments. We argue that both falling industrial profitability 
and the associated structural shortage of safe assets are key factors behind 
the long downward slide in World interest rates. Finance affects risk premia 
through gross liquidity flows and the financial sector’s overall balance sheet 
size. Three charts highlight the visible effect that China has had on Western 
Capitalism. Figure 3.1 shows the secular declines in the returns from new 
investments for US, Chinese and German industrial capital. The general 
decline in marginal returns is plain, but this slide started earlier for US and 
Ϭ͘Ϭй
Ϯ͘Ϭй
ϰ͘Ϭй
ϲ͘Ϭй
ϴ͘Ϭй
ϭϬ͘Ϭй
ϭϮ͘Ϭй
ϭϰ͘Ϭй
ϭϵϴϰ ϭϵϴϲ ϭϵϴϴ ϭϵϵϬ ϭϵϵϮ ϭϵϵϰ ϭϵϵϲ ϭϵϵϴ ϮϬϬϬ ϮϬϬϮ ϮϬϬϰ ϮϬϬϲ ϮϬϬϴ ϮϬϭϬ ϮϬϭϮ ϮϬϭϰ ϮϬϭϲ ϮϬϭϴ ϮϬϮϬ
'ĞƌŵĂŶǇ
hŶŝƚĞĚ^ƚĂƚĞƐ
ŚŝŶĂ
Fig. 3.1  Real marginal returns on industrial capital—US, Germany and China, 1984–
2019 (percent) (Source CrossBorder Capital )

3  Synopsis: A Bigger, More Volatile World        47
German firms, with Chinese capital alone enjoying a further boost through 
the early 2000s. Thus, the gap between Chinese and US marginal profita-
bility, which stood at a less threatening 2.3% in the year 2000, widened to 
a whopping 8.9% by 2009. As new investment projects became less attrac-
tive, the Western industry flipped into a mode of aggressive cost-cutting 
across their existing capital in order to maintain reported profits. Profits can 
be boosted both by making new investments in high return projects and by 
better managing existing businesses. Incentivised by share option schemes, 
management’s new-found devotion to cost-cutting forced plant closures and 
led to mass job losses, but it raised the average return on American capital, 
as the visible step-up in average returns in Fig. 3.2 confirms. Between 1984–
2001, prior to China’s WTO entry, the return on US capital averaged 3.5% 
in real terms, but through the post-2001 period it topped an average 4.1%. 
The gap between marginal and average returns closed dramatically as the 
effect of Chinese competition pulled down marginal returns, while domestic 
cost-restructuring pushed average returns higher. This narrowing differential 
can explain the collapse in US capital expenditure back to levels that now 
barely cover its wear and tear, as Fig. 3.3 suggests. Cash flows consequently 
rebounded, but corporations either hoarded this cash or spent it on share 
Fig. 3.2  Marginal versus average returns on US industrial capital, 1984–2019 (Source 
CrossBorder Capital )
Ϭ͘Ϭй
ϭ͘Ϭй
Ϯ͘Ϭй
ϯ͘Ϭй
ϰ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϲ͘Ϭй
ϳ͘Ϭй
ϴ͘Ϭй
ϭϵϴϰ ϭϵϴϲ ϭϵϴϴ ϭϵϵϬ ϭϵϵϮ ϭϵϵϰ ϭϵϵϲ ϭϵϵϴ ϮϬϬϬ ϮϬϬϮ ϮϬϬϰ ϮϬϬϲ ϮϬϬϴ ϮϬϭϬ ϮϬϭϮ ϮϬϭϰ ϮϬϭϲ ϮϬϭϴ ϮϬϮϬ
ǀĞƌĂŐĞZĞƚƵƌŶŽŶĂƉŝƚĂůй
DĂƌŐŝŶĂůZĞƚƵƌŶŽŶĂƉŝƚĂůй
ϯ͘ϱйǀĞƌĂŐĞϭϵϴϰͲϮϬϬϭ
ϰ͘ϭйǀĞƌĂŐĞϮϬϬϮͲϭϵ

48        M. J. Howell
buybacks and takeovers, rather than investing it back into the real economy. 
The winners such as Apple Inc.’s treasury now sits on over US$200 billion; 
Microsoft and Google hold circa US$125 billion, while, Facebook, Amazon 
and IBM have close to US$50 billion. These six US corporations alone own 
a nest-egg of more than US$600 billion, or 3% of overall US GDP. So, 
where did all this cash end up?
The Financial Accelerator
As fast as the industrial economy lost out, financial markets won out. Cash 
flooded into wholesale money markets where it was grabbed and repack-
aged by rapacious bankers. The resulting massive redistribution of cash flows 
forced much of World industry to reorganise, both geographically and inter-
nally: trashing investment returns on many new capital projects, leading on 
to both ‘asset-lite’ business models and vast debt accumulations, and encour-
aging the US to run a near-permanently loose monetary policy. Financial 
markets, fuelled by what we later describe as a large and fast-growing shadow 
monetary base, took on a sizeable part of the economic adjustment burden. 
Ͳϰ͘Ϭй
Ͳϯ͘Ϭй
ͲϮ͘Ϭй
Ͳϭ͘Ϭй
Ϭ͘Ϭй
ϭ͘Ϭй
Ϯ͘Ϭй
ϯ͘Ϭй
ϰ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϭϱ͘Ϭ
ϭϳ͘Ϭ
ϭϵ͘Ϭ
Ϯϭ͘Ϭ
Ϯϯ͘Ϭ
Ϯϱ͘Ϭ
Ϯϳ͘Ϭ
ϭϵϴϰ ϭϵϴϲ ϭϵϴϴ ϭϵϵϬ ϭϵϵϮ ϭϵϵϰ ϭϵϵϲ ϭϵϵϴ ϮϬϬϬ ϮϬϬϮ ϮϬϬϰ ϮϬϬϲ ϮϬϬϴ ϮϬϭϬ ϮϬϭϮ ϮϬϭϰ ϮϬϭϲ ϮϬϭϴ
'ƌŽƐƐ&ŝǆĞĚ/ŶǀĞƐƚŵĞŶƚ
DĂƌŐŝŶĂůůĞƐƐǀĞƌĂŐĞZĞƚƵƌŶŽŶĂƉŝƚĂů
Fig. 3.3  The differential between marginal and average returns on US capital 
(percent) and US gross fixed investment spending (% of GDP), 1984–2019 (Source 
CrossBorder Capital )

3  Synopsis: A Bigger, More Volatile World        49
This transmission is explained because the new supply chains restricted cost 
movements and, being largely US dollar based, they also required stable 
cross-exchange rates between the member economies. This globalisation of 
manufacturing industry and major consumer brands effectively put a ceiling 
on wage and price flexibility. It also underpinned structural unemployment 
and growing wealth divisions within Western economies that have ulti-
mately forced economic growth to rely evermore on further dollops of debt 
to sustain consumer spending. Unlike traditional capital investment, much 
of this spending is unproductive and, therefore, not so easily paid back. 
Hence, these swollen debt burdens need to be refinanced. Defaults occur 
not necessarily because of insolvency, but far more frequently because of illi-
quidity. As we will keep stressing, this refinancing pressure makes balance 
sheet size and, hence, inflows of liquidity much more important than the 
level of interest rates. Yet, when this liquidity expansion becomes dependent 
on the uncertain supply of safe assets, sudden stops in funding can heighten 
systemic risks. The fact that the modern financial system has turned from a 
new financing system to a refinancing system that is more than ever depend-
ent on the supply of potentially flaky safe assets to help rollover increasingly 
flaky debts creates a negative feedback that highlights the inherent dangers 
in credit markets.
In a World economy characterised by global supply chains, financial mar-
kets have become an integral part of the economic adjustment mechanism, 
resulting in a heightened Global Liquidity cycle and the death of the tra-
ditional Phillips Curve trade-off between domestic inflation and unemploy-
ment. Think of these Global Liquidity shocks being channelled through 
changes in exchange rates, not interest rates, as the flow diagram in Fig. 3.4 
explains, with private sector liquidity and cross-border flows largely affecting 
>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ^ŚŽĐŬ
dŽZĞĂů
ǆĐŚĂŶŐĞZĂƚĞ
EŽŵŝŶĂů
ǆĐŚĂŶŐĞ
ƐƐĞƚ
WƌŝĐĞ
ĞŶƚƌĂů
ĂŶŬ
WƌŝǀĂƚĞ
^ĞĐƚŽƌ
Fig. 3.4  The transmission of Global Liquidity (schematic)

50        M. J. Howell
the real exchange rate, and with Central Bank liquidity the more important 
influence on the nominal exchange rate.
The loose US monetary policy spilled over through cross-border flows 
into similarly relaxed local monetary conditions across many Emerging 
Market economies and allowed cash to build up in offshore Eurodollar 
funding markets. The financial immaturity of China and several other 
Emerging Markets economies amplified both the domestic and ultimately 
the aggregated international impact of these cross-border flows on Global 
Liquidity. Combined with buoyant savings flows, induced by ageing demo-
graphics and the ‘new rich’, these factors encouraged a structural excess 
demand for (largely US dollar-denominated) ‘safe’ assets. Large-sized CICPs 
(corporate and institutional cash pools) increasingly dominate the recycling 
of the World’s surplus savings and they demand secure, collateral-backed 
short-term instruments. These are provided by fleet-footed wholesale money 
markets, which now frequently outstrip our traditional and overly regu-
lated, banks in providing vital funding. Put another way, institutional repos 
now surpass household bank savings accounts as the most popular financial 
instruments. But the scarcity of good quality collateral, a vital counterpart 
to these repos, induced by recent government austerity policies and tight 
Central Banks, disrupts Global Liquidity and means there is insufficient bal-
ance sheet capacity available to rollover and refinance the World economy’s 
towering US$250 trillion columns of debt. And, by so heightening default 
risks and pushing up the odds of systemic risk, this encourages the hoard-
ing of precious ‘safe’ assets, so further worsening the collateral shortage. See 
Fig. 3.5.
The Wrong Policy Response?
Governments everywhere fail to acknowledge that debt also has a quality 
dimension. Their austerity policies, often put in place to balance quantita-
tive easing (QE) and ultra-low policy interest rates, have deprived markets 
of vital ‘safe’ assets. By reducing Treasury debt issuance, they have forced 
private sector intermediaries to search out new investors and to issue more 
low-quality debt as an inferior collateral substitute, thereby mismatching 
liabilities and requiring more frequent refinancing. In short, austerity pol-
icies that try to avoid ‘crowding-out’ private sector initiatives simply end 
up ‘crowding-in’ poor quality private sector debts. This makes rolling-over 
the World’s huge outstanding stock of debt, shown in Fig. 3.5, both more 

3  Synopsis: A Bigger, More Volatile World        51
difficult and potentially dangerous. Ironically, the key challenge lies not in 
the failure of new investments, but rather in our inability to refinance the 
old ones. It concerns finance, not economics. By expanding the Central 
Bank balance sheet, QE fills an important funding gap. The large-scale 
structural changes over the past three decades, described above, have shifted 
the World’s financial markets from acting as a new capital-raising mechanism 
to serving as a capital distribution and refinancing system. We alternatively 
describe this in terms of a reversal in the polarity of the finance, because 
many former lenders have become borrowers and many previous borrow-
ers have become lenders. This topsy-turvy financial World has consequently 
become more difficult to read.
The beating heart of a refinancing system is a large and flexible balance 
sheet that helps to facilitate debt rollovers. Indeed, this is the very reason 
why the financial system exits! Here the capacity of capital, i.e. liquidity, is 
critical, rather than the cost of capital, i.e. interest rates. For example, when 
maturing home mortgages cannot be easily refinanced, many choose to pay 
higher interest rates to ensure the roll, rather than face eviction. Balance 
Ϭ
ϱϬ
ϭϬϬ
ϭϱϬ
ϮϬϬ
ϮϱϬ
ϯϬϬ
'ůŽďĂů>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ
dŽƚĂůĞďƚ
ϭϵϵϳ
ϮϬϬϳ
ϮϬϭϳ
ϮϬϭϵ
Ϭ
ϱϬ
ϭϬϬ
ϭϱϬ
ϮϬϬ
ϮϱϬ
ϯϬϬ
ϯϯ͘Ϯ
ϴϭ͘ϳ
ϭϮϴ͘ϳ
ϭϮϴ͘ϵ
ϭϵϵϳ
ϮϬϬϳ
ϮϬϭϳ
ϮϬϭϵ
,ŽƵƐĞŚŽůĚƐ
ŽƌƉŽƌĂƟŽŶƐ
&ŝŶĂŶĐĞ
'ŽǀĞƌŶŵĞŶƚ
'ůŽďĂů>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ
Ϭ
ϭϬ
ϮϬ
ϯϬ
ϰϬ
ϱϬ
ϲϬ
ϳϬ
ϴϬ
,ŽƵƐĞŚŽůĚƐ
ŽƌƉŽƌĂƟŽŶƐ
&ŝŶĂŶĐĞ
'ŽǀĞƌŶŵĞŶƚ
ϭϵϵϳ
ϮϬϬϳ
ϮϬϭϳ
ϮϬϭϵ
Ϭ͘ϴϬ
ϭ͘ϬϬ
ϭ͘ϮϬ
ϭ͘ϰϬ
ϭ͘ϲϬ
ϭ͘ϴϬ
Ϯ͘ϬϬ
Ϯ͘ϮϬ
Ϯ͘ϰϬ
ϭϵϵϳ
ϮϬϬϳ
ϮϬϭϳ
ϮϬϭϵ
&ƵŶĚŝŶŐZĂƟŽ
ŽůůĂƚĞƌĂůZĂƟŽ
ŽůůĂƚĞƌĂůsĞůŽĐŝƚǇ
Fig. 3.5  Measures of World debt, Global Liquidity and funding capacity, 1997–2019 
(Source CrossBorder Capital )

52        M. J. Howell
sheet capacity depends upon the existence of sufficient safe assets to act as 
collateral against the required flow of liquidity. Interest rates rarely enter the 
equation. Hence, we seriously question Central Banks’ obsession with tar-
geting the level of interest rates. And, more so, when interest rates get very 
low (even negative) it seems plausible that the supply of new liquidity itself 
actually gets disrupted.
Therefore, in the wake of the 2007–2008 Global Financial Crisis, with 
debt burdens swollen and private sector balance sheet capacity significantly 
lower, it has become even more necessary for Central Banks to grow their 
balance sheets to fill the gap. The resulting substantial jump in liquidity 
provision following bouts of QE programmes worries many. However, it 
must be seen not as a more accommodative monetary policy, but as a nec-
essary bulwark of financial stability policy: after all the well-known Bagehot 
prescription for crisis management, honed during the financial rollercoaster 
years suffered throughout the nineteenth century, is to lend freely against 
good collateral, but always at a high interest rate. Consequently, interest 
rate levels have become much less relevant than the volume of liquidity and 
the size of balance sheets. With the international financial system now more 
procyclical, potentially fragile and with monetary power more concentrated 
in the hands of the US Federal Reserve and People’s Bank of China, finance 
has also been left looking much like its volatile nineteenth-century prede-
cessor. Policy-makers appear not to understand these changes. They have 
been forced to fall back on unconventional policies and inevitably they 
become reactive rather than pre-emptive in their responses to these rising 
tensions.
The four stages in our argument can be traced through the schematic flow 
diagram in Fig. 3.6:
•	 Productivity Catch-Up—The 1989 fall of the Berlin Wall and economic 
enfranchisement of 2–3 billion producers lead to economic ‘catch-up’ of 
Emerging Market economies and greater use of the US dollar
•	 Globalisation of Production—China’s 2001 entry into WTO and supply 
chains push adjustment through financial markets and force a loose US 
monetary policy
•	 Nascent China/ EM Financial Sector—US easing spills over to EM and to 
China—big US dollar users—and fuels the cash demands of CICPs
•	 Lack of Safe Assets—tight US fiscal policy to balance loose monetary pol-
icy restricts the supply of ‘safe assets’, making the World financial system 
evermore procyclical and fragile.

3  Synopsis: A Bigger, More Volatile World        53
Note
1.	 Also known as Global Value Chains (GVCs).
Fall of Berlin Wall 1989
‘Economic catch-up’
China enters WTO 2001
‘Globalisation’
Underdeveloped 
Chinese Finance
‘Amplification’
Austerity policies and 
‘Safe Asset’ shortage
GLOBAL LIQUIDITY
Real 
Exchange 
Rate 
Adjustment
Loose US 
Monetary 
Policy
Cross-
border 
Flows
Corporate & 
institutional 
Cash Pools
1
2
3
4
Productivity Shock
‘Catch-up’
US
China
EM
CICPs
Money
Markets
͚^ĂĨĞ͛ ĂƐƐĞƚƐ
ZĞƉŽƐ
^ĂǀŝŶŐƐ
ZĞĂůǆĐŚĂŶŐĞZĂƚĞ
>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ
DƵůƟƉůŝĞƌ
3
2
4
1
Fig. 3.6  Global Liquidity—schematic showing major issues (Note CICPs refers to 
Corporate and Institutional Cash Pools; SWF denotes Sovereign Wealth Funds, and 
EM is Emerging Market Economies)
