59
The Industrial and Financial Circuits of Money
Traditional economics largely focusses on what John Maynard Keynes in 
his Treatise on Money (1930) describes as the industrial circuit of money. In 
other words, the so-called real economy. While it is important to distinguish 
the financial economy1 from the real economy, we must not permanently 
separate the two. They enjoy a complex interrelationship, with events in 
both affecting one another, but with finance playing the increasingly dom-
inant role. Henry Thornton in his prescient Paper Credit (1802) recognised 
these close links: “The subjects of coin, of paper credit, of the balance of com-
merce, and of exchanges […are] intimately connected to each other ”.
The standard textbook model assumes that interest rates can be divided 
into real and inflation components and into short-term and long-term com-
ponents. The real interest rate is supposedly determined in the real economy 
by the savings-investment gap, while inflation results from excess money 
creation. Imbalances between investment spending (I ) and savings (S ), say 
S > I, are redressed through interest rate movements, where greater capital 
spending is incentivised by lower rates. Short rates are set by the Central 
Banks, which, in turn, can control long-term interest rates with appropri-
ate ‘forward guidance’ policies. Yet, from our market experience almost every 
dimension of this conventional paradigm seems wrong.
Keynes, as we know, argued differently by suggesting that equilibrium 
is restored and not necessarily at a full-employment level, by changing 
incomes, rather than interest rates. In other words, excess savings reduce 
incomes, which, in turn, lower future savings until they match the given rate 
5
Real Exchange Adjustment
© The Author(s) 2020 
M. J. Howell, Capital Wars,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39288-8_5

60        M. J. Howell
of investment spending. Modern macroeconomics can, therefore, be seen, 
perhaps cynically, as a long debate about why the rate of interest fails as an 
adjustment mechanism. First, nominal interest rates are strongly affected by 
risk and term premia, which, in turn, are governed both by future expecta-
tions and current beliefs,2 as well as by access to liquidity, which is a gross 
flow or balance sheet concept. Interest rates, as well as other financial asset 
prices, are determined in financial markets by decisions about gross, rather 
than net, funding. As we showed in Chapter 4, this is because in a mod-
ern capitalist economy, investment depends on the total pool of liquidity 
and not just on savings. In other words, thinking in flow of fund terms, net 
savings (i.e. savings less capital expenditure, S−I ) represents the net acquisition 
of financial assets, and it is only one small component of overall funding, 
i.e. liquidity. The net acquisition of financial assets, in turn, comprises the 
difference between the change in financial asset holdings and the increase 
or decrease in financial liabilities. Plainly, there can be many ways of arriv-
ing at any given net change: by a large increase in assets; a large fall in lia-
bilities; some moderated combination of the two or even by a huge rise in 
financial assets alongside a large but lesser rise in financial liabilities. These 
gross balance sheet changes are independent of the net savings position 
and by implication of what happens in the real economy. They have been 
described elsewhere by Raymond Goldsmith (1985) as ‘financial deepen-
ing’ and they explain his belief that the so-called financial interrelations ratio 
rises over time. Similar observations apply to current account balances and 
the underlying movements in gross capital inflows and gross capital out-
flows. A narrow focus on net imbalances too easily concludes that Emerging 
Markets, being economies that typically enjoy net savings surpluses, drive 
Global Liquidity, e.g. the savings glut story. However, the broader concept 
of gross flows shows that a major force has been the huge increase in foreign 
liabilities of safe assets and credit issued by the major developed economies, 
as when global money centre banks feverishly increased their lending ahead 
of the GFC and investors from Emerging Market economies piled into US 
Treasuries. It also follows that each asset/liability mix likely has a different 
implication for financial asset prices. At the same time, globalisation, and 
particularly our experience of cheap Chinese imports, reinforces the idea 
that inflation is to a large extent driven by costs, rather than by monetary 
factors. Consequently, real interest rates must, by definition, also be affected 
by these same monetary shifts and the implied fluctuations in risk and term 
premia. Financial history tends to show that short-term policy interest rates 
follow rather than lead long-term rates, and, in turn, policy rates typically 
precede inflation3 and, what’s more, they often act in the same direction.

5  Real Exchange Adjustment        61
In contrast to flow of funds data, the more widely used National Income 
Accounts (NIA) report macroeconomic aggregates, such as GDP and con-
sumer spending. These are measures of expenditure that track how money is 
spent, but they do not explain how spending is financed and therefore they 
cannot show whether or not it is sustainable. As we have already argued, in 
Chapter 2, flow of funds statistics give a far more comprehensive picture of 
financing activity by measuring the net acquisition of financial assets by each 
economic sector. Unlike spending flows, which once spent disappear, finan-
cial flows accumulate and they are ultimately reflected in rising stocks of 
financial assets and liabilities in sectoral balance sheets. Such high debt and 
leverage ratios may consequently curtail further new flows. Sustainability 
depends upon future access to liquidity, which today largely reflects financial 
intermediation beyond the traditional banking system.
Because investment spending is determined by liquidity and not just by 
savings. This means that we need to bring in credit, i.e. financial liabili-
ties and financial assets and think more broadly in flow of funds terms. It 
requires adding a financial circuit of money to our economic models and 
considering how the balance between the overall sources and uses of funds 
is maintained and restored? What’s more, it tells us that interest rates and 
other financial asset prices are determined more by gross flows, i.e. the entire 
financial sector balance sheet, and not solely by net flows. While any mon-
etary imbalances will express themselves through fluctuations in the price of 
money, contrary to conventional thinking, this is not the interest rate. Like 
every other ‘price’ it should measure what money can buy: in other words, 
its terms of trade or exchange rate. The interest rate can be better thought 
of as the premium paid on money when it is borrowed, and these premia 
can vary by the time horizon and according to the riskiness of the borrower, 
which again depend on balance sheet factors.
Recognising that liquidity is the sum of savings and credit, there are four 
adjustment outcomes following a positive liquidity shock:
•	 Greater real investment (including both what turn out to be productive as 
well as unproductive schemes)
•	 Rising value of financial assets
•	 Falling value of financial liabilities
•	 Lower national savings.
The first is the most feasible adjustment for an Emerging Market economy 
that enjoys abundant investment opportunities, but suffers a compara-
tive shortage of domestic savings. It is a less likely path for mature Western 

62        M. J. Howell
economies, and more liquidity is likely to inflate asset values in these cases. 
It is possible that this ultimately causes a financial bubble, which may then 
lead, in sequence, to debt write-offs, i.e. lower financial liabilities, and lower 
savings, possibly in the way Keynes foresaw through reduced income and 
employment levels. Nonetheless, not only are these adjustments potentially 
more complex than the traditional narrative suggests because they involve 
financial markets, but it is far from clear that any adjustment will either 
restore balance or act particularly quickly. For example, when liquidity 
exceeds capital spending (L > I ), the private sector can accumulate financial 
assets. Put differently, this likely means that the change in the value of their 
financial assets exceeds the change in the value of their financial liabilities. In 
a World where collateral stands as an important element backing new credit 
supply, this net increase in financial asset values may, in turn, induce a fur-
ther expansion in financial liabilities, i.e. credit. In other words, these finan-
cial imbalances amplify the initial shocks, from which it may take years to 
restore equilibrium.
Looked at another way, the inclusion of the financial circuit complicates 
adjustment largely because liquidity has two dimensions—quantitative and 
qualitative. In Chapter 2, we argued that the qualitative dimension can be 
thought of as ‘moneyness’ and this tends to act procyclically to raise the 
effective quantity of liquidity. In other words, as the cycle extends the effec-
tive supply of liquidity naturally expands as more assets are used as money. 
Similarly, vice versa, so amplifying the initial shocks. This can be seen 
both as the result of improving risk appetite (which permits greater lever-
age) and from the enhanced collateral values (which increase the stock of 
­high-powered money). We show later that high-powered monies are assets 
that can be leveraged, and they include both traditional reserves held at the 
Central Bank, as well as the collateral used to borrow from money markets 
and the extra cash available to borrow from offshore money markets. The 
effective stock of high-powered money consists of traditional Central Bank 
reserve money plus what we have called the shadow monetary base. This, in 
turn, is fed by the Eurodollar markets and by the increasing substitution of 
poorer quality private sector collateral for higher quality government bonds. 
The supply of these genuine ‘safe’ assets has been limited by recent policies 
of fiscal rectitude. Consequently, as a result of this qualitative dimension, the 
volume of Global Liquidity is increasingly procyclical and potentially fragile, 
resulting in an expanding, but at the same time more volatile World finan-
cial system.
Digging deeper into this idea, as additional liquidity is channelled into 
the financial circuit, default4 risks decline, risk premia narrow and the term 
premia associated with ‘safe’ assets increase in size as demand for them 

5  Real Exchange Adjustment        63
drops. This boosts equity markets, so improving the climate for capital-rais-
ing and risk-taking, and through a steepening interest rate yield curve bank 
profit margins expand, which incentivises greater bank lending. The qual-
itative dimension of liquidity again holds the key. Money borrowed in a 
boom or economic upswing, i.e. means of purchase, is qualitatively different 
from money borrowed in a slump or economic downswing, i.e. legal tender 
or means of settlement: the former is used to expand the circuits of money 
the latter to close the circuits. Central Bank money is unique because it can 
always take both forms. Private sector liquidity fluctuates in size, in part, 
because its ‘moneyness’ changes, i.e. its ability to serve as means of settle-
ment. At these times, the overall volume of liquidity may be enhanced by 
more Central Bank money. While this is national legal tender, it is not inter-
national legal tender and the so extra supplies will likely cause the exchange 
rate to devalue.
This helps explain why increases in both private and Central Bank liquid-
ity cause national risk premia to narrow (and, therefore, the antithesis ‘safe’ 
asset premia to notionally widen), whereas differential changes in private 
and Central Bank liquidity cause exchange rates to fluctuate. Thus, strong 
(weak) private sector liquidity and weak (strong) Central Bank liquidity can 
both strengthen (weaken) national currencies. The intuition comes from 
thinking about the return on industrial capital and the policy interest rate. 
Let us assume that private-sector cash flow is positively related to the under-
lying return on industrial capital (say, R ) and Central Bank liquidity is neg-
atively associated with the policy interest rate (say, r ). Then, the yield curve 
slope should be determined by the spread between industrial returns5 and 
short-term interest rates (i.e. R − r ). Similarly, the exchange rate is related 
to the size of the average returns available from industry and money markets 
(i.e. R + r ). This exchange rate channel is worth further study.
The Exchange Rate Channel
Exchange rates are supposed to restore external balance, because an econ-
omy experiencing an appreciating currency should expect to suffer lower 
net exports. In our experience this is rarely so straightforward and particu-
larly in the case of the Emerging Market economies. Rather than dampen-
ing economic activity, periods of strong currency appreciation often coincide 
with similarly strong cross-border capital inflows and buoyant business 
activity. In practice, exchange rates influence economies through both real 
as well as financial channels. A net export channel is embedded in stand-
ard open-economy macro models,6 but exchange rate fluctuations and 

64        M. J. Howell
cross-border capital flows also influence the economy through changes in the 
composition and size of its external balance sheet, or through what has been 
called the valuation channel of adjustment.7 These financial channels work 
alongside the standard trade channel to achieve external balance. Gourinchas 
et al. (2019) find that as much as one-third of adjustment comes from valua-
tion effects alone, compared to 41% coming from trade.
To better understand the financial transmission, we again engage flow of 
funds analysis. Dislocations in the flow of funds ultimately affect the real 
economy through the so-called real exchange rate. The real exchange rate 
expresses real purchasing power. Think of it as being determined by the 
relative productivity performance of two economies. Hence, faster-grow-
ing economies should have stronger real exchange rates. Helped by free 
trade, capital flows and technology transfers, other newly industrialised 
economies, such as China, enjoy relatively faster productivity growth than 
America.8 Over the 1981–2019 period, the US enjoyed real productivity 
growth averaging 1.5% per annum, compared to 1.4% for Japan; 4.3% for 
Korea and 7.3% for China.9 Since 2010, productivity growth has dropped 
everywhere. In the US it averaged 1.0% per annum; in Japan 0.7%; Korea 
2.0% and in China 6.1%. Figure 5.1 highlights the secular decline in the 
ƌĞƩŽŶtŽŽĚƐͬ'ŽůĚǆĐŚĂŶŐĞ
͚Kŝů͛ ǆĐŚĂŶŐĞ
͚ŵĞƌŐŝŶŐDĂƌŬĞƚ͛ ǆĐŚĂŶŐĞ
h^ŽůůĂƌZĞĂůdƌĂĚĞͲtĞŝŐŚƚĞĚǆĐŚĂŶŐĞZĂƚĞ/ŶĚĞǆΘWŽůŝĐǇ
ZĞŐŝŵĞƐ
Fig. 5.1  US dollar real trade-weighted exchange rate index, 10-year trend and policy 
regimes, 1964–2019 (Source BIS and CrossBorder Capital )

5  Real Exchange Adjustment        65
US real trade-weighted exchange rate, as calculated by the BIS (Bank for 
International Settlements). Fitting a trend line to the data prior to 2016, 
shows the real US dollar losing roughly ten index points in value each dec-
ade, or circa 8%. We have added annotations to describe the three periods 
(explained in Chapter 1) when a greater demand for dollars halted this slide 
and allowed the US terms of trade to temporarily improve, sometimes surg-
ing by as much as 20% above its downward trend. Latest data since 2016 
lends weight to an argument that this long downtrend in relative produc-
tivity performance may have ended. While this is possible, the counterargu-
ment notes China’s still yawning absolute productivity gap with America.
The real exchange rate can be calculated by adjusting the nominal 
exchange rate for relative price movements, but what exactly comprises these 
baskets of prices is less straightforward. We take a broad definition that 
includes traded and non-traded goods and service prices, wages, and asset 
prices. The degree of flexibility exhibited by these various price types dif-
fers considerably. It seems plausible that, in a World economy dominated 
by large global businesses, asset prices are among the most flexible and 
traded goods and service prices among the least flexible. There is supporting 
evidence that shows how prices tend to be rigid in the currency in which 
they are invoiced (see Gopinath et al. 2018). This means that the choice of 
invoicing currency determines the response of export and import prices to 
exchange rate movements. Consequently, the more extensive use of the US 
dollar in both trade invoicing and trade settlement alters the sensitivity of 
business activity to changes in the US exchange rate. Global Value Chains 
(GVC) use US dollars extensively to finance their inventories and their US 
dollar needs grow disproportionately as these supply chains lengthen. This 
suggests that the wider role of the dollar in invoicing results in less price 
flexibility and, correspondingly, greater adjustment through profit margins, 
supply and trade volumes. According to Gopinath et al. (2018), a general-
ised 1% US dollar appreciation leads to a 0.6–0.8% decline in the volume 
of total World trade over a one-year period. A corollary is that this deeper 
dollarisation of domestic bank deposits forces the national Central Bank to 
build up precautionary dollar reserves in order to protect the financial sys-
tem from external shocks.
Liquidity shocks, whether coming externally through net capital inflows or 
internally from the effects of faster productivity growth on domestic profits, 
initially impact private sector liquidity and thereby trigger changes to the real 
exchange rate. A favourable liquidity shock tends to increase the flow of private 
sector liquidity, and this, in turn, will cause the real exchange rate to appreci-
ate. The specific division between a change in the nominal exchange rate and 

66        M. J. Howell
a change in relative prices is at this stage unclear, but by simultaneously inject-
ing more or less liquidity policy-makers can affect the split. Put another way, 
if the real exchange rate adjustment is initially channelled through a stronger 
nominal exchange rate, larger cash injections by the Central Bank will slow 
this appreciation and potentially force more adjustment on to goods prices and 
wages. Returning to our previous discussion about the relative responsiveness 
of different price-types, it may follow that this policy action ultimately fuels 
rising financial asset prices, when other prices are sticky.
Indeed, this is our experience from Emerging Market investing. Central 
Bank interventions to suppress upward pressure on their nominal exchange 
rates, usually against the US dollar, often lead to domestic asset booms in 
both real estate and equity markets. Late-1980s Japan provides another 
clear example. Although the Yen rose significantly against the US currency 
through the prior decade, it did not rise sufficiently to eliminate Japan’s 
huge productivity advantage. The resulting build-up of liquidity from 
Japan’s remarkable export success, which became further boosted through 
unregulated and leveraged zaitech financial products, inflated a huge asset 
bubble that finally burst in December 1989. Japan’s financial markets 
slumped and equity prices have ever since failed to regain their former dizzy 
heights.
We believe that under the prevailing globalisation regime, policy-mak-
ers can therefore effectively choose between the level of asset prices and the 
nominal exchange rate. Emerging Market economies and other export-fo-
cussed economies, such as Japan, Germany and China, tend to favour 
exchange rate stability against the US dollar. In contrast, policy-makers from 
economies dominated by large banking sectors and deep financial markets, 
like the US and the UK, instead aim at preserving or even enhancing the 
collateral values of domestic assets and they are consequently more will-
ing to accept nominal exchange rate weakness. This may explain the alac-
rity with which both the UK and US have sacrificed their exchange rates 
in times of trouble? It may also hint at why the traditional Phillips Curve 
trade-off between the unemployment rate and high street inflation no longer 
seems to work? US nominal devaluation policy has a long history, having 
been used successfully to claw out the economy from the 1930s Depression. 
Deliberately devaluing money primarily against commodities, rather than 
assets, in the 1930s can be understood because agriculture was then far more 
important to the US economy than it is today. Nearly a century on, the 
modern credit-based economy has a greater need to maintain the value of 
its collateral. George F. Warren, a key interwar policy advisor, wrote this in a 
letter to President Roosevelt, 24 April 1933:

5  Real Exchange Adjustment        67
There is one and only one way to raise our commodity price level; that is by 
reducing the amount of gold in the dollar. A rise in prices this week of basic 
commodities was directly in proportion to the decline in the value of the dol-
lar in foreign exchange….10
Although the necessity to export dollars to the Rest of the World does not 
automatically force the US to run trade or current account deficits,11 they 
are likely consequences. This may explain the ongoing deindustrialisation of 
American manufacturing12 simply because flows of goods adjust more easily 
to international shocks than services can. The manufacturing sector matters 
to the extent that it is an important source of future productivity growth, 
which implies that a smaller industrial base may feed back to further weaken 
the US real exchange rate. The resulting slide in the real exchange rate may, 
in turn, justify the US authorities’ adoption of a near-permanently loose 
monetary policy to underpin collateral, which it then balances with a tight 
fiscal stance. This policy mix channels adjustment through a weaker nominal 
exchange rate while simultaneously trying to ensure stable domestic finan-
cial markets. However, in the process, the US exports her monetary largesse 
through cross-border flows, which becomes amplified into bigger moves in 
Global Liquidity. In theory, the widespread adoption of floating exchange 
rate regimes should prevent these national liquidity shocks from spreading 
elsewhere, but as Rey (2015) has shown, this tends not to be the case.
Figure 5.2 traces out this financial adjustment mechanism. An initial pos-
itive liquidity shock on the left-hand side of the diagram strengthens private 
sector liquidity, which puts upward pressure on both the nominal exchange 
rate and asset prices. Moving to the right-hand side of the diagram, the pre-
cise division between changes in the exchange rate and asset prices depends 
on the scale of subsequent Central Bank intervention. By changing the size 
>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ^ŚŽĐŬ
dŽZĞĂů
ǆĐŚĂŶŐĞZĂƚĞ
EŽŵŝŶĂů
ǆĐŚĂŶŐĞ
ƐƐĞƚ
WƌŝĐĞ
ĞŶƚƌĂů
ĂŶŬ
WƌŝǀĂƚĞ
^ĞĐƚŽƌ
Fig. 5.2  Schematic diagram showing real exchange rate adjustment

68        M. J. Howell
of their balance sheets, Central Banks can further fuel private sector liquid-
ity, directly through easing funding terms and indirectly through the effect 
that rising collateral values have in boosting the willingness of credit provid-
ers to lend more. The diagram incorporates a number of positive-feedback 
effects that explain the liquidity cycle and asset bubbles.
The precise transmission starts from the left-hand side of the diagram, 
when productivity increases and capital inflows put upward pressure on 
an economy’s real exchange rate. Under a targeted nominal exchange rate 
regime, shown by the diagram’s lower path, and assuming that the price lev-
els of traded goods are set internationally and are, therefore, ‘sticky’, the bulk 
of the economic adjustment comes through movements in service sector 
prices and notably asset prices. Therefore, economies with strong productiv-
ity growth and net capital inflows often enjoy rising asset prices, especially 
when their nominal exchange rates are relatively stable. And, because appre-
ciating capital asset prices tend to attract more investors, these moves can be 
amplified by further capital inflows, thereby, fueling an asset price spiral.
One important nexus can be identified when this diagram is redrawn 
for America alongside a China equivalent. Under this joint schema, a neg-
ative productivity shock to the US—possibly resulting from a shift in mar-
ket share towards Chinese businesses—leads to downward pressure on the 
US real exchange rate. (There is an equivalent upward pressure on the real 
Chinese RMB exchange rate.) This may be met by an easier monetary stance 
from the Federal Reserve in order to ensure that asset prices remain largely 
unaffected and, hence, loan collateral values are maintained. The strength of 
America’s domestic banking lobby could help to explain why? Nonetheless, 
the result is a weaker US dollar. As the US nominal exchange rate devalues, 
surplus liquidity spills over into offshore funding and investment markets. 
In addition, the weaker US dollar itself both encourages more cross-border 
lending and boosts global asset prices. Together, both effects tend to encour-
age still greater cross-border capital flows.
At the same time, the Chinese authorities will likely resist downward pres-
sure on the US dollar nominal exchange rate against the Yuan by monetising 
capital inflows and any new export surpluses. The resulting liquidity injec-
tions underpin rising domestic Chinese asset prices, and may, in turn, spill 
over to affect other similarly positioned Emerging Market economies, which 
then quickly follow suit and monetise the foreign inflows. Thus, the initial 
US monetary policy easing gets quickly amplified Worldwide as a result of 
these contrasting policy objectives.
It follows that understanding the Global Liquidity cycle may simply 
come down to interpreting the motives and actions of the two key Central 
Banks—the US Federal Reserve and the People’s Bank of China—as well as 

5  Real Exchange Adjustment        69
the separate effect that US dollar movements have on boosting cross-border 
capital flows. These two Central Banks also indirectly exercise control over 
these capital flows: first, because nominal US dollar movements depend to a 
large extent on their joint policy actions. And, second, because the ultimate 
direction of cross-border capital flows is itself often dictated by the tempo 
of the Chinese economy (see Chapter 9), which, in turn, is, at one remove, 
determined by PBoC monetary policy. Through this mechanism, ­whenever 
the PBoC matches its actions, the US Fed enjoys huge leverage over 
Global Liquidity conditions.
Testing the Model with Data: US Dollar  
and EM Currencies
The data reported in Fig. 5.3 are sourced from CrossBorder Capital and repre-
sent normalised index measures of the expansion of US Central Bank and US 
private sector liquidity. The index constituents consist of liquidity subcom-
ponents that accord with divisia methods, e.g. separating bank from shadow 
bank credit, and weighted, in part, using principal components. These 
indexes are explained in greater detail in Chapter 13. Whereas it is more com-
mon in monetary analysis to simply treat the entire money stock as an amor-
phous whole, this division allows us to incorporate a quality dimension, for 
many of the reasons given earlier, where more private ­sector liquidity is ‘good’ 
and value-enhancing for the exchange rate, whereas the supply of Central 
Ϭ
ϭϬ
ϮϬ
ϯϬ
ϰϬ
ϱϬ
ϲϬ
ϳϬ
ϴϬ
ϵϬ
ϭϬϬ
&ĞĚĞƌĂůZĞƐĞƌǀĞ>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ/ŶĚĞǆ
WƌŝǀĂƚĞ^ĞĐƚŽƌ>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ/ŶĚĞǆ
Fig. 5.3  US private sector and US Federal Reserve Liquidity Indexes, 2004–2019 
(Source CrossBorder Capital )

70        M. J. Howell
Bank liquidity is ‘bad’ and likely to weaken the currency. Figure 5.3 reports 
these two indexes, while Fig. 5.4 takes their difference (private sector less 
Central Bank liquidity) to create a so-named forex risk index, which is then 
compared to the US trade-weighted, or effective, exchange rate. The forex risk 
index is advanced by 12 months and the US effective exchange rate index is 
shown as percentage deviations away from a trailing three-year trend.
According to the analyses shown in Fig. 5.5 and Table 5.1, the model 
provides a decent predictor of future US currency movements some 
6–12 months ahead, characterised by a high R-squared. The forex risk index 
also appears to be one-way Granger causal13 of future movements in the 
trade-weighted US dollar. Periods of excessive Federal Reserve liquidity sup-
ply, such as followed the 2007–2008 GFC, are associated with subsequent 
US dollar weakness. In contrast, periods of buoyant private sector cash flow, 
such as occurred in the early 2010s when America’s tech giants were strongly 
cash generative, lead on to a rising US dollar. Similar conclusions apply to 
other currencies, even Emerging Market units.
Figure 5.6 shows the same analysis for the JPMorgan Emerging Market 
(US dollar-based) forex index. The chart compares the individual forex risk 
indexes for Emerging Markets and the US. Higher readings for both indexes 
warn of future potential currency weakness based of a deteriorating quality 
mix of liquidity. The two gaps between the series in 2002–2004 and 2012–
2015 indicate, respectively, upcoming periods of Emerging Market currency 
Ϭ
ϭϬ
ϮϬ
ϯϬ
ϰϬ
ϱϬ
ϲϬ
ϳϬ
ϴϬ
ϵϬ
ϭϬϬ
ͲϮϱй
ͲϮϬй
Ͳϭϱй
ͲϭϬй
Ͳϱй
Ϭй
ϱй
ϭϬй
ϭϱй
ϮϬй
dƌĂĚĞͲǁĞŝŐŚƚĞĚh^
&ŽƌĞǆZŝƐŬ/ŶĚĞǆ
Fig. 5.4  US forex risk index (advanced 12-months) and US trade-weighted exchange 
rate (percentage deviations from 3-year trend), 1986–2019 (indexes 0–100) (Source 
CrossBorder Capital )

5  Real Exchange Adjustment        71
strength and weakness. In the first period the Emerging Market forex 
risk component improved significantly (i.e. it fell in the chart), whereas the 
US dollar forex risk component deteriorated (i.e. it rose in the chart). In the 
second period, the reverse situation applied. US forex risk stood at low lev-
els, whereas Emerging Market forex risk began to deteriorate substantially 
through 2012–2013, and largely, as it turns out, through inappropriately 
loose domestic monetary policies.
The resulting exchange rate prediction is reported in Fig. 5.7. This com-
pares the Emerging Market less US forex risk indexes to the JPMorgan 
exchange rate basket index. The JPMorgan index is again drawn as percent-
age deviations from a trailing three-year trend and the EM less US forex 
risk index is again advanced by 12 months. The reported results compare 
ǇсͲϬ͘ϬϬϮϯǆнϬ͘ϭϬϮϯ
ZϸсϬ͘ϯϯϵϴ
ͲϮϱ͘Ϭй
ͲϮϬ͘Ϭй
Ͳϭϱ͘Ϭй
ͲϭϬ͘Ϭй
Ͳϱ͘Ϭй
Ϭ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϭϬ͘Ϭй
ϭϱ͘Ϭй
ϮϬ͘Ϭй
Ϯϱ͘Ϭй
Ϭ
ϭϬ
ϮϬ
ϯϬ
ϰϬ
ϱϬ
ϲϬ
ϳϬ
ϴϬ
ϵϬ
ϭϬϬ
Fig. 5.5  Scatter diagram of US forex risk index (advanced by 12-months) and trade-
weighted US dollar, 1986–2019 (Source CrossBorder Capital )
Table 5.1  Pairwise Granger causality tests between US forex risk (US FXRISK) and 
trade-weighted US dollar (US TW$ %dev)
Source CrossBorder Capital
Sample: 1985M1 2019M12
Lags: 2
Null hypothesis
Obs
F-statistic
Prob.
US TW$ %dev does not Granger cause US FXRISK
477
0.32421
0.7233
US FXRISK does not Granger cause US TW$ %dev
5.91246
0.0029

72        M. J. Howell
well with those for the US dollar. The forex risk data are strongly one-way 
Granger causal, while the R-squared between the forex risk data and future 
12-month ahead movements in the JPMorgan forex basket is sizeable and 
statistically significant (Fig. 5.8). These analyses add weight to our belief that 
forex market movements depend crucially on the quality mix of liquidity 
and capital flows (Table 5.2).
Ϭ
ϭϬ
ϮϬ
ϯϬ
ϰϬ
ϱϬ
ϲϬ
ϳϬ
ϴϬ
ϵϬ
ϭϬϬ
:ĂŶͲϵϳ
:ĂŶͲϵϴ
:ĂŶͲϵϵ
:ĂŶͲϬϬ
:ĂŶͲϬϭ
:ĂŶͲϬϮ
:ĂŶͲϬϯ
:ĂŶͲϬϰ
:ĂŶͲϬϱ
:ĂŶͲϬϲ
:ĂŶͲϬϳ
:ĂŶͲϬϴ
:ĂŶͲϬϵ
:ĂŶͲϭϬ
:ĂŶͲϭϭ
:ĂŶͲϭϮ
:ĂŶͲϭϯ
:ĂŶͲϭϰ
:ĂŶͲϭϱ
:ĂŶͲϭϲ
:ĂŶͲϭϳ
:ĂŶͲϭϴ
:ĂŶͲϭϵ
h^
ůůŵĞƌŐŝŶŐDĂƌŬĞƚƐ
Fig. 5.6  US and Emerging Market forex risk indexes, 1997–2019 (indexes 0–100) 
(Source CrossBorder Capital )
ͲϴϬ
ͲϲϬ
ͲϰϬ
ͲϮϬ
Ϭ
ϮϬ
ϰϬ
ϲϬ
ϴϬ
ͲϮϱй
ͲϮϬй
Ͳϭϱй
ͲϭϬй
Ͳϱй
Ϭй
ϱй
ϭϬй
ϭϱй
:ĂŶͲϵϳ
:ĂŶͲϵϴ
:ĂŶͲϵϵ
:ĂŶͲϬϬ
:ĂŶͲϬϭ
:ĂŶͲϬϮ
:ĂŶͲϬϯ
:ĂŶͲϬϰ
:ĂŶͲϬϱ
:ĂŶͲϬϲ
:ĂŶͲϬϳ
:ĂŶͲϬϴ
:ĂŶͲϬϵ
:ĂŶͲϭϬ
:ĂŶͲϭϭ
:ĂŶͲϭϮ
:ĂŶͲϭϯ
:ĂŶͲϭϰ
:ĂŶͲϭϱ
:ĂŶͲϭϲ
:ĂŶͲϭϳ
:ĂŶͲϭϴ
:ĂŶͲϭϵ
:ĂŶͲϮϬ
:WDD&ŽƌĞǆĂƐŬĞƚ
DůĞƐƐh^&ŽƌĞǆZŝƐŬ
Fig. 5.7  EM less US forex risk indexes (advanced by 12-months) and JPMorgan EM 
forex basket (percentage deviation from 3-year trend), 1997–2019 (indexes −50 to 
+50) (Source CrossBorder Capital )

5  Real Exchange Adjustment        73
Notes
	 1.	 An associated term is the similar concept of the asset economy.
	 2.	 Uncertainty in economics cover both the lack of knowledge about the long-
term future, as well as a lack of knowledge about how other economic agents 
are likely to act in the near term. Hence, we develop ‘rules of thumb’.
	 3.	 See James Bullard, The Seven Faces of the Peril, St Louis Fed, 2010.
	 4.	 Defaults may recognise underlying insolvency, but they are usually triggered 
by illiquidity, i.e. an inability to access sufficient funding.
	 5.	 Industry tends to fund at longer maturities consistent with its investment 
horizon, e.g. 10 years.
	 6.	 This is the so-called Mundell–Fleming approach.
ǇсͲϬ͘ϬϬϭϳǆͲϬ͘Ϭϰϴϱ
ZϸсϬ͘ϯϲϲϵ
ͲϮϱ͘Ϭй
ͲϮϬ͘Ϭй
Ͳϭϱ͘Ϭй
ͲϭϬ͘Ϭй
Ͳϱ͘Ϭй
Ϭ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϭϬ͘Ϭй
ϭϱ͘Ϭй
ͲϴϬ
ͲϲϬ
ͲϰϬ
ͲϮϬ
Ϭ
ϮϬ
ϰϬ
ϲϬ
ϴϬ
Fig. 5.8  Scatter diagram of EM less US forex risk indexes (advanced by 12-months) 
and JPMorgan EM forex basket, 1997–2019 (Source CrossBorder Capital )
Table 5.2  Pairwise Granger causality tests between EM less US forex risk (EM 
FXRISK-US FXRISK) and JP Morgan EM forex basket (JPM FX% dev)
Source CrossBorder Capital
Sample: 1997M1 2019M12
Lags: 2
Null hypothesis
Obs
F-statistic
Prob.
JPM FX %dev does not Granger cause EM FXRISK-US 
FXRISK
309
0.34600
0.7078
EM FXRISK-US FXRISK does not Granger cause JPM FX %dev
4.77197
0.0091

74        M. J. Howell
	 7.	 See Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Helene Rey and Maxime Sauzet, The 
International Monetary and Financial System, LBS Working Paper, April 
2019.
	 8.	 This is, of course, true unless it is not. Thus, an American economic renais-
sance should drive the real US dollar exchange rate higher.
	 9.	 Source IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2019, except China. 
We have estimated productivity directly from Chinese data.
	10.	 Quoted in Bernard F. Stanton, George F. Warren—Farm Economist, Cornell 
University Press, 2007.
	11.	 Alternatively, the US could accumulate more foreign assets.
	12.	 Between 2002 and 2017, the US share of global manufacturing fell from 
28% to just over 18%, with China taking over as the World’s largest sup-
plier in 2010.
	13.	 Granger causality is a widely used statistical test for a specific type of 
causality.
References
Goldsmith, Raymond W. 1985. Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of 
Twenty Countries, 1688–1978. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gopinath, Gita, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2018. Banking, Trade, and the Making of a 
Dominant Currency. NBER Working Paper, March.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Helene Rey, and Maxime Sauzet. 2019. The 
International Monetary and Financial System. LBS Working Paper, April 
(Forthcoming, Annual Review of Economics ).
Keynes, John Maynard. 1930. A Treatise on Money, 2 vols. London: Macmillan.
Rey, Hélène. 2015. IMF Mundell Fleming Lecture.
Thornton, Henry. 1802. An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of 
Great Britain. London.
