141
Dollar Supremacy
International investment is big, procyclical and volatile. Throughout history, 
the internationalisation of finance has frequently paralleled the globalisa-
tion of trade because open economies need to diversify their asset bases more 
widely to hedge against external shocks, such as imported inflation. The large 
volumes of trade invoiced and transacted in US dollars explain why trad-
ing nations hold dollar-denominated assets. Alongside, firms with large dol-
lar-denominated liabilities should invoice their sales in US dollars in order to 
reduce the currency mismatch between their revenues and their out-goings. In 
the memorable words of Watergate informant Deep Throat,1 we ‘follow the 
money’. Recent data show that the rise in Global Liquidity has been paced 
by still faster growth in cross-border capital flows. These have grown rapidly, 
expanding at a notably breathless pace from the early 1990s. In the wake of 
the 2007–2008 GFC, finance suffered from an anti-globalisation backlash 
involving tighter regulations, such as those imposed on international banks. 
At first sight, measured by the ratio of foreign assets to GDP the importance 
of international capital appears undented. However, a more thorough analy-
sis confirms that not only have gross flows slumped since the GFC, but both 
the composition and the direction of cross-border capital movements have 
also markedly changed. China has muscled forward in importance; digital 
cross-border payments have established a foothold; offshore, low-tax financial 
centres, such as the Cayman Islands and Channel Islands have been forced to 
limit their activities, and the more stable and more economically vital flows 
8
Cross-Border Capital Flows
© The Author(s) 2020 
M. J. Howell, Capital Wars,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39288-8_8

142        M. J. Howell
of foreign direct investments (FDI) that help spread latest technologies now 
comprise a larger share of international capital movements.
According to recent data reported in Fig. 8.1, America’s international assets 
have settled at close to 125% of GDP, but they have been higher. Indeed, 
they soared in the period between the Y2K Bubble and the 2007–2008 GFC. 
International assets and liabilities often move closely together with similar 
trends. Yet, America’s liabilities to foreigners have even outpaced the growth 
of her foreign assets, peaking at over 180% of GDP. Drilling into this bal-
ance sheet data, some have even compared America’s international activity 
to the operations of a giant hedge fund that is ‘short’ cash and ‘long’ foreign 
risk assets. This confirms America’s unique position because the dominance 
of the US dollar in World markets allows her to issue predominantly ‘safe’ 
assets in the form of US currency and Treasury securities, which she produces, 
and which are in high demand by foreign official and foreign private sectors. 
Americans then use these inflows to purchase risky international assets, such as 
stocks, foreign bonds and to accumulate FDI though the purchase of foreign 
businesses. The US dollar’s continued dominance may originate from trade 
finance and hedging activity because it is widely used as an invoicing currency 
in international trade. Many Emerging Market economies invoice 70–80% 
of their trade in US dollars, but only export around 10–15% of their trade 
directly to the US. Similarly, around half of Japanese and nearly one-quarter 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
200%
Total assets
Total liabilies
Fig. 8.1  US stock of foreign assets and liabilities, 1971–2018 (percent of US GDP) 
(Source IMF)

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        143
of European trade are US dollar denominated, but direct sales to the US 
make-up under one quarter and less than one tenth of their total exports, 
respectively.2 This ‘first-mover’ advantage for the US unit is reinforced by large 
and still growing network effects that lower its transaction costs. The wide-
spread use of the US dollar in trade invoicing and its dominance in interna-
tional banking and finance are self-reinforcing. A consequence of the dollar’s 
international role in transactions is that the global banking system also runs 
on dollars, making US assets the preferred ‘safe haven’.
America’s ability to issue these ‘safe’ assets spills over into other realms, 
such as the large amounts of private debt issued in US dollars in interna-
tional markets; the large share of trade invoiced in US dollars and the huge 
volumes of foreign exchange intermediated through the US unit. Based 
on the latest triennial survey from the Bank for International Settlements 
(BIS 2019), the US dollar is now involved in 44.2% of all settlements in 
the US$6.6 trillion daily market in foreign exchange, with the Euro the sec-
ond most transacted currency at 16.2%. The dollar is the unit of account 
in debt contracts insofar that cross-border borrowers usually borrow in 
dollars and cross-border lenders frequently lend in dollars, irrespective of 
whether the borrower or lender is a US resident. According to Goldberg 
and Lerman (2019), 63% of global foreign exchange reserves and 40% of 
non-US trade are, respectively, held and invoiced in dollars; 49% of debt 
is issued in dollars and 48% of cross-border claims are dollar denomi-
nated.3 The Bank of England4 recently calculated that the US dollar is the 
currency of choice for more than half of international trade invoices; two-
thirds of Emerging Markets’ external debt is US dollar denominated, and it 
serves as the monetary anchor for economies that make-up a still growing 
70% share of World GDP, with around half of these currency units explic-
itly US dollar-pegged. These facts are summarised in Fig. 8.2. Taken over-
all, somewhere around half of the entire World GDP is directly or indirectly 
dollar denominated. Although the Bretton Woods system officially ended in 
1971 when the link between the US dollar and gold was broken, the US 
unit has remained the undisputed World’s anchor and main reserve currency 
ever since. In fact, despite the falling share of US GDP, the dominance of 
the dollar has increased, not decreased over time. Ironically, many experts, 
were quick to point out the US economy’s secular slide, but they completely 
missed the US currency’s increasing monetary dominance. This dominance 
shapes the transmission of US monetary policy throughout the World econ-
omy by affecting the prices and volumes of World trade; by changing the 
balance sheets, funding and risk-seeking activities of multinational financial 

144        M. J. Howell
institutions, and through the greater synchronisation of Global Liquidity 
and financial cycles.
Yet, the US dollar’s rise has not always been straightforward. We think in 
terms of three development phases: (1) the Gold Exchange Standard (1945–
1971); (2) the Oil Exchange Standard (1974–1989), and (3) the Emerging 
Market Exchange Standard (1990–date). But, in between, the US currency 
sometimes devalued sharply and on occasions through political whim, such 
as following the decision by President Nixon to break the link to gold on 
15 August 1971, and again in the late 1970s when ‘open mouth opera-
tions’ were used by the Carter Administration to talk the dollar down. The 
first development phase is well-described in popular textbooks as the prac-
tical implementation of the 1944 Bretton Woods Agreement following the 
end of WW2. The next phase started around July 1974 when US Treasury 
Secretary William Simon secretly agreed with Saudi Arabia, and later with 
OPEC that, in future, crude oil would be priced solely in US dollars. A cor-
ollary was that Saudi’s subsequent large-scale purchases of US Treasury debt 
went undisclosed. By a stroke of the pen, America had cleverly created a new 
demand for US dollars.
The third phase of US dollar supremacy had less clandestine beginnings. 
The Fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and subsequent break-up of the Soviet 
Empire, together with Chinese Premier Deng Xiaoping’s ongoing reforms 
fostered the rise of the Emerging Market economies. The competition for 
ϲϮ͘Ϯ
Ϯϯ͘ϰ
Ϭ͘Ϭ
Ϯ͘ϰ
ϱϲ͘ϯ
Ϯϯ͘Ϯ
Ϭ͘Ϭ
ϯ͘Ϯ
ϰϯ͘ϲ
ϭϱ͘ϳ
Ϯ͘Ϭ
ϭϬ͘ϯ
ϯϵ͘ϵ
ϯϱ͘ϳ
ϭ͘ϲ
ϯ͘Ϭ
ϲϮ͘ϳ
ϮϬ͘ϭ
ϭ͘Ϯ
ϰ͘ϵ
Ϭ͘Ϭ
ϭϬ͘Ϭ
ϮϬ͘Ϭ
ϯϬ͘Ϭ
ϰϬ͘Ϭ
ϱϬ͘Ϭ
ϲϬ͘Ϭ
ϳϬ͘Ϭ
h^
ƵƌŽ
ZD
zĞŶ
/ŶƚĞƌŶĂƚŝŽŶĂůĞďƚ
/ŶƚĞƌŶĂƚŝŽŶĂů>ŽĂŶƐ
&ŽƌĞǆDĂƌŬĞƚdƵƌŶŽǀĞƌ
'ůŽďĂůWĂǇŵĞŶƚƐ
&ŽƌĞǆZĞƐĞƌǀĞƐ
Fig. 8.2  The dominance of the American dollar in 2018 (percent) (Source ECB, 
CrossBorder Capital )

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        145
international capital among these fast-growing countries encouraged fur-
ther economic reforms, market openness and disciplined currency man-
agement that extended far beyond Eastern Europe into the rest of Asia and 
Latin America. The US dollar was quickly established as the benchmark for-
eign currency of choice, even being used internally within these economies 
when doubts grew about the integrity and sustainability of their ­domestic 
currency units. China’s entry into the WTO in 2001 gave dollar usage yet 
another boost, because the burgeoning Chinese-led supply chains and logis-
tics were nearly always US dollar denominated. The deliberate targeting of 
the US dollar by foreign exchange managers required large US dollar reserve 
holdings. Therefore, possibly more by chance, the US dollar so discovered 
yet another new source of demand. Its influence could even keep grow-
ing: Emerging Market economies already account for some two-thirds of 
World GDP, up from less than one-third in the early 1980s, and look set 
to command a three-quarter share within the next decade. Add to this the 
fall-out from the 2010–2012 Eurozone banking crisis, and the region’s asso-
ciated need for external support from both the IMF and the US Fed. This 
reinforced the US dollar’s dominance by questioning the long-term stabil-
ity of the Euro unit. Research by economic historian Adam Tooze (2018) 
shows that the use of Central Bank swap-lines has made the Federal Reserve  
de facto international lender of the last resort by providing a whopping 
US$10.1 trillion (or US$4.45 trillion on standardised measures) from 
December 2007 to August 2010, with much it cementing fragile European 
banks.
Since the GFC, these US dollar swap lines have become more politi-
cised. Not only has the US historically favoured ‘friendly’ nations with swap 
arrangements, but according to Adam Tooze the decision now rests ultimately 
with who sits in the White House.5 Pointedly, China, the World’s biggest US 
dollar user, and other Emerging Markets are not on this list. This gap matters 
because, although non-US banks can, in theory, tap stable US dollar deposit 
funding through their US subsidiaries, US regulations now confine the use of 
these funds to US-beneficial activities, so they cannot be deployed at a global 
level. Consequently, China is trying to develop its own network of Yuan swap 
lines, possibly to tap into the permanent dollar pool, e.g. the recent RMB 
350 billion (US$50 billion) agreement with the ECB. Other sources of US 
dollar funding, obtained through US bank branches and in international cap-
ital and credit markets, can be deployed outside the US, but these are mostly 
wholesale, short term and, consequently, more volatile, and they face sizable 
refinancing risk, especially in stressful times.

146        M. J. Howell
This key role played by the US dollar in cross-border capital markets 
underscores the importance and power of the US Federal Reserve, but the 
2007–2008 GFC also warns that the US authorities do not always exercise 
full control. Put another way, the monetary base of the US dollar mone-
tary system has, at times, outgrown the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. This 
shadow monetary system, with its focus on collateral and cross-border pools 
of offshore currency, such as Eurodollars, remains an increasingly impor-
tant source of global liquidity, but it has often stood outside official control. 
Essentially, there exists an equivalent shadow monetary base that comprises 
‘safe’ (or leverage-able) assets, that is assets that enjoy low ‘haircuts’ and have 
high rates of re-hypothecation, such as high-quality public and private sec-
tor debts and offshore pools of cash. In the wake of the 2007–2008 GFC, 
the World’s monetary authorities have consequently sought to tighten reg-
ulations on bank capital and liquidity requirements, as well as widening the 
reach of their liquidity operations into these darker shadows.
Global Value Chains
Around 35% of World trade is financed by banks. In turn, some 80% of 
total bank originated trade financing is US dollar denominated, reflecting 
the prevalence of dollar invoicing. Given the widespread use of US dollar 
credit in supporting international trade, factors that influence credit condi-
tions and the supply of dollar lending by banks play a key role in support-
ing supply chain6 activity. Figure 8.3 highlights the recent concentration and 
centralisation of trade and capital around Chinese-led supply chains and 
logistic businesses. Building and sustaining these supply chains are highly 
finance-intensive activities that make heavy demands both on the working 
capital resources of firms and on supplies of short-term bank credit. Global 
value chains (GVCs) incur large financing requirements because the under-
lying businesses need to carry sizeable inventories of intermediate goods and 
maintain ‘accounts receivable’ on their balance sheets when selling to other 
firms along the supply chain. Both have to be financed somehow. As supply 
chains grow longer and the time period between shipments becomes more 
extended, the marginal financing needs grow at an ever-increasing rate, so 
that far-reaching GVCs are only viable if they can access highly elastic fund-
ing sources. Among the many indicators of the availability of dollar-denomi-
nated bank credit, the US dollar exchange rate plays a particularly important 
role as a barometer of the dollar credit conditions faced by firms. Lending 
in dollars tends to grow faster when the US dollar is weak, and lending in 

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        147
Germany
China
USA
Germany
USA
Japan
China
Japan
Year 2000
Year 2020
Fig. 8.3  The changing network structure of global supply chains, 2000 and 2020 (Adapted from Global Value Chain Development 
Report 2019, World Trade Organization)

148        M. J. Howell
dollars is subdued or declines when the US unit is strong. Invoicing can 
also affect trade when the invoice price is sticky in dollar terms. There is a 
striking contrast between rapid bank lending in dollars before the GFC, and 
subdued bank lending in dollars since. When combined with the fact that 
supply chain activity tracks dollar financing conditions, a stronger dollar 
is also associated with subdued GVC activity and, therefore, a lower ratio 
between trade and GDP. In contrast, during periods when the US dollar is 
weak, the trade-to-GDP ratio is high.
The Dollar Cycle
Its dominance of cross-border financial markets means that the US dollar 
plays the central role in generating cycles in World trade and international 
finance, with a weak (strong) US dollar exchange rate acting much like a 
monetary easing (tightening). This may explain why the pass-through from 
US dollar-denominated import prices following currency shocks tends to be 
high, so channelling the adjustment burden from imports through to exports.
Cross-border financial transmissions of US dollar shocks involve three 
main factors:
1.	Emerging Market Policy Response—economies that target the US dollar  
exchange rate will likely respond by monetising capital inflows and so 
amplifying the initial shock through a domestic monetary expansion. 
Similarly, vice versa.
2.	Offshore Borrowing—to the extent that any extra supply of US dollars 
is deposited in offshore wholesale markets, e.g. Eurodollar markets, this 
should improve funding opportunities through loans and swaps
3.	Collateral Effect—a weaker US dollar will improve the value of local cur-
rency collateral and increase funding opportunities.
An international credit channel, embracing the second and third factors, 
operates through the balance sheets of global financial intermediaries (see 
Rey 2013; Bruno and Shin 2015). A tighter US monetary policy reduces 
the availability and raises the cost of funding for those global banks that lend 
cross-border. Fluctuations in the US currency may directly affect the risk 
appetites of both lenders and investors. Borrowing the US currency is more 
attractive when it is devaluing because the repayment cost falls. Similarly, 
when lenders offer US dollar loans collateralised against a local currency 
asset, a weaker US currency improves the collateral value. This also works 

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        149
in reverse, so that a strong US unit decreases the dollar value of the borrow-
er’s local currency-denominated risky assets, thereby reducing collateral and 
causing adverse balance sheet effects. As a result, the international economy 
can suffer weaker credit growth and possibly recession. It follows that the 
cycles in World trade and global finance are in large part dollar cycles. Yet, 
it is also true that the US currency is affected by third-party effects, so as 
Global Liquidity grows so the demand for US dollar safe assets is satisfied by 
other units, and hence the US unit can weaken independent of movements 
in the amount of liquidity supplied by the US Federal Reserve.
A second key feature of this US dollar-led, global financial system is the 
frequent large-sized capital shifts between the US dollar ‘core’ and econo-
mies on the periphery. Admittedly, the economies that define this periph-
ery have changed almost completely since the end of Bretton Woods: In 
the 1970s and 1980s, this fringe was dominated by the other advanced 
G7 economies, such as the UK, Germany and Japan, but from the early 
1990s onwards, the periphery has been increasingly populated by Emerging 
Market economies, and, to the extent that it is still viewed as outside the 
core, most notably by China. China adopted the US currency as a bench-
mark in 1994, making the Yuan convertible in current account transactions 
from 1996. Although she is lately viewed as a competitive threat to the US, 
ironically, China’s demand helps to sustain the US dollar system. China not 
only invoices most of her trade in the US unit, but she has lately been a 
large investor in US government debt securities and a sizeable borrower of 
the US currency, as well as delivering her own timely fiscal and monetary 
policy boosts to support the dollar-oriented World trading system.
The US authorities have long seen international monetary tensions and 
imbalances as being caused by foreigners’ inappropriate exchange rate poli-
cies. Consequently, US policy-makers often seek to put pressure on creditor 
economies, such as Germany, Japan and (now) China, to revalue their cur-
rencies upwards, rather than tackle America’s own domestic savings imbal-
ance directly. The counterparts to a US current account deficit should be 
correctly seen as a domestic savings shortage and a capital account surplus, 
rather than a lack of trade competitiveness per se. Contrary to some views, 
the US is not required to run a permanent current account deficit in order 
to supply the World with more US currency, because she only need accumu-
late long-term international assets against these short-term dollar claims, or, 
in practice, to act much as she does now. Notwithstanding, US ire focuses 
on trade relations and ‘Japan-bashing’ and, more recently, ‘China-bashing’, 
to force these competitors to allow their currency units to appreciate in 
value and to open up their markets to American business, e.g. the Super 

150        M. J. Howell
301 trade initiative aimed at Japan in the late 1980s and the latest rounds of 
US-China trade talks. Through the 1970s and 1980s, Germany and Japan 
were the main creditor economies. The initial break-up of Bretton Woods 
saw the Deutschmark revalued. Arguably, this also spurred the creation of 
the Euro, which by spreading the burden of currency appreciation over 
other European economies, cushioned the negative shock to German com-
petitiveness. Later in the decade, US officials used so-called ‘open mouth 
operations’ to talk-down the US dollar against the Japanese Yen, while 
the forceful 1985 Plaza Accord proved successful in getting the Yen to be 
­revalued higher.
Gross Capital Flows
The US dollar’s importance in the pricing of both World trade and World 
capital means that US dollar shocks are quickly propagated internationally. 
Many Emerging Market economies, most notably China, either fix to or 
at least shadow the US dollar exchange rate, so that US monetary expan-
sions and contractions are often amplified by these economies. Dollar-based 
carry trades—buying currencies with high-interest rates and selling low-in-
terest-rate currencies—can further reinforce the procyclical effects of Global 
Liquidity through cross-border capital flows. These cross-border flows are 
themselves a key component of our estimates of Global Liquidity, and, for 
many economies, they have outsized effects on the domestic liquidity totals. 
Through deliberate exchange rate targeting policies or simply because their 
domestic financial markets are too thinly traded, many Emerging Market 
economies are forced to passively respond to the rapid ebb and flow of 
global capital, so leading to exaggerated swings in domestic liquidity and 
to frequent financial crises. But the larger, developed economies are not 
immune. A major symptom, suffered particularly by European banks during 
the 2000s, has been the divergence between their sluggish domestic deposit 
growth and their more rapid credit growth. This financing gap forced banks 
to raise funds through short-term borrowings on international interbank 
and money markets and by issuing bonds. These shifts in bank funding pat-
terns across Europe and the associated growth in cross-border bank-related 
financial flows highlight a systematic relationship between international 
­capital flows and domestic credit growth.
We earlier evidenced how broader cross-border activities and cap-
ital flows are tied together by a ‘global factor’ operating through liquidity  
conditions and risk appetite. When major Central Banks, such as the US 

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        151
Federal Reserve and the Chinese People’s Bank (PBoC), tighten monetary 
policy, not only do their domestic output, capital spending, consumer con-
fidence, real estate markets and inflation all shrink, but there are significant 
second-round effects on global financial markets. For example, sensitive 
international asset prices plunge, risk spreads widen, cross-border capital 
flows skid lower and leverage shrinks in both offshore wholesale lending 
markets and eventually across global banks. These effects can be spread fur-
ther by global banks borrowing from offshore wholesale markets, in, say, 
London and New York, and lending on to local and regional banks in the 
Emerging Markets. Their loans are likely to be secured against, probably, 
local currency-denominated collateral. Plainly, when borrowings are denom-
inated in US dollars, the potential currency mismatch can heighten risks. 
On the other hand, it can also mean that the US dollar weakness may boost 
the credit-worthiness of local borrowers and so encourage further lever-
age. Rey (2015) terms this a Global Financial Cycle that drives coordinated 
fluctuations in the pace of international financial activity. “[The] Global 
Financial Cycle can be associated with surges and dry outs in capital flows, 
booms and busts in asset prices and crises … The empirical results on capital 
flows, leverage and credit growth are suggestive of an international credit channel 
or risk-taking channel and point towards financial stability issues ”.7
Ironically, the growing World monetary tensions ahead of the GFC were 
missed by the policy-makers, possibly because international economic anal-
ysis focusses too much on the size of current account imbalances and by 
implication on the size of their counterparts, net capital flows, rather than 
drilling deeper into the richer data that comprise the overall foreign bal-
ance sheet. We draw up a notional foreign balance sheet in Fig. 8.4. Capital 
flows are conventionally split between private sector and official flows, with 
private sector flows further broken down into (1) foreign direct invest-
ments (FDI), (2) portfolio investments involving the buying and selling of 
stocks and bonds and (3) flows of bank lending and bank deposits. They 
cover activity by both domestic residents and foreign nationals. Differences 
between total inflows and total outflows are financed by changes in a coun-
try’s holdings of foreign exchange reserves, i.e. official flows. It is also impor-
tant to carefully distinguish what exactly is meant by ‘gross’ because the 
items that are included depend crucially on the level of aggregation. For 
example, a domestic investment fund resident in the US may buy US$100 
million of UK equities and sell US$80 million of German equities, thereby 
adding an incremental US$20 million to US foreign assets. This latter figure 
is what we take as the gross (asset) flow,8 but it plainly disguises the US$180 
million of international equity transactions that were undertaken. At a 

152        M. J. Howell
higher level of aggregation, we may also find that because foreigners simul-
taneously added US$150 million to their US assets, so raising America’s 
foreign liabilities equivalently, the net US international investment position 
deteriorated by a net outflow of US$130 million (i.e. −130 = 20−150).
The chart tries to show that these often-hidden private sector financial 
flows are both active and frequently dwarf in size, as well as in volatility, par-
allel movements in trade flows. An increase in foreign assets describes, say, US 
purchases of European and Asian securities, or international lending by US 
banks. Similarly, a rise in foreign liabilities represents, for example, German or 
Japanese purchases of US stocks and bonds, and real investments by non-res-
idents in the US economy. These movements in asset and liability flows may 
roughly offset one another so that net capital flows become small and insignif-
icant, but gross asset and liability flows could still be large. Moreover, distin-
guishing gross flows by type identifies risk-seeking, entrepreneurial and more 
technology-embedded capital flows, compared to the risk-averse capital in 
search of safety. The former classes are more likely to promote faster economic 
growth. In other words, simply netting out capital flows, as implicitly hap-
pens when discussing trade and current account imbalances, loses a significant 
amount of information. What’s more, these capital flows may actively drive 
the current account, rather than passively accommodating it. For example, a 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Gross Inﬂows
Gross Oulows
Trade Balance
(Net)
US$ Billions
Trade
Bank Lending
FDI
Porolio
Fig. 8.4  Notional gross foreign sector balance sheet (illustrative)

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        153
large expansion in local currency bank lending to foreigners may ultimately 
result in faster domestic export growth. Similarly, an increase in outward 
FDI could itself lead to a step-up in export activity, assuming that the capital 
equipment is domestically manufactured. Another example, could involve a 
simple carry trade where an increase in foreign portfolio investment in, say, 
high-yielding Emerging Market debt, is financed through greater US dollar 
borrowing. A still more convoluted example might involve external US dollar 
funding of local banks. These banks could take on the currency risk and use 
these assets to increase their local currency lending, which, in turn, dissipates 
through outward portfolio flows or faster import growth.
Although all this would seem to show that the financial sector can actively 
initiate monetary shocks through the capital account, according to the tradi-
tional view, financial flows are no more than the accounting counterparts to 
savings and investment decisions. The current account position supposedly 
measures the borrowing needs of the national economy, with exchange rates 
then acting as automatic stabilisers that steer changes in exports and imports 
sufficient to eliminate external imbalances. When a country experiences an 
appreciation of its currency, this is predicted to cause a net export contrac-
tion. Experience, in fact, shows the opposite, since rising exchange rates 
often run in parallel with strong capital inflows and accelerating economic 
activity. For example, in the mid-2000s, the US current account deficit wid-
ened to historical highs and, contrary to many expert predictions, the US 
dollar soared in value. Notwithstanding, several economists still single out 
large current account imbalances as the key factor contributing to the 2007–
2008 GFC. Current account surpluses in several Asian Emerging Market 
economies are said to have fuelled the credit booms and heightened risk-tak-
ing in the Western deficit countries that were at the core of the GFC, both 
by pushing down World interest rates and by directly financing the booms. 
Former US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke (2005) famously 
dubbed this phenomenon the Global Savings Glut.9 However, our previ-
ous discussion challenges these views, because: (1) any country’s cross-bor-
der financing activity cannot be inferred from net capital flows, as opposed 
to gross flows; (2) what defines the ‘border’ that separates the residence of 
investors from the beneficial ownership of assets is critical, and (3) market 
interest rates are determined in broader credit markets and not simply by net 
savings. Thus, it seems more likely that the GFC and the Asian Crisis that 
preceded it were casualties of both the excessive elasticity of the international 
monetary and financial system and the depth offered by Western asset mar-
kets (e.g. New York and London), rather than by the high savings rates of 
Asian households.

154        M. J. Howell
In practice, capital inflows and outflows show high correlations and 
have consequently grown faster in gross than in net terms. Although eco-
nomics, per se, has little to say about gross flows, the greater globalisation 
and deeper integration of trade may explain the relative sluggishness of net 
flows. An alternative reason might come from a drop in the size of relative 
investment returns between countries, but lower relative returns would also 
likely mean a negative not positive correlation between inflows and out-
flows. Consequently, the high correlation in the gross flow data is more 
likely explained by common risk factors, such as a Global Liquidity shock. 
This could, for example, involve a widespread jump in bank borrowing in 
US dollars, as domestic banks tap abundant offshore wholesale markets. 
Figure 8.5 shows a long-term perspective of gross flows for the overall World 
Economy starting from 1990. The anomalous surge in cross-border activity 
to 19.1% of World GDP in 2006, rising to a peak of 22.3% just ahead of 
the GFC can be seen clearly from the chart. This should have been a stark 
warning to policy-makers. By 2018 the pace of global flows had slid back to 
6.6% of World GDP, or roughly around its late 1990s clip.
In practice, gross capital flows command an even larger fraction of activ-
ity between the major advanced economies than for the Emerging Market 
economies. These developed economies are consequently classified as being 
more integrated into global financial markets. Figure 8.6 shows gross and 
net capital flows for the aggregate of six major international investors—the 
US, China, Japan, the UK, Germany and France—measured relative to their 
overall GDP. The gross flow data parallels the widespread international bal-
ance sheet expansion in the years prior to the 2007–2008 GFC, which we 
Ϭ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϭϬ͘Ϭй
ϭϱ͘Ϭй
ϮϬ͘Ϭй
Ϯϱ͘Ϭй
ϭϵϵϬ
ϭϵϵϭ
ϭϵϵϮ
ϭϵϵϯ
ϭϵϵϰ
ϭϵϵϱ
ϭϵϵϲ
ϭϵϵϳ
ϭϵϵϴ
ϭϵϵϵ
ϮϬϬϬ
ϮϬϬϭ
ϮϬϬϮ
ϮϬϬϯ
ϮϬϬϰ
ϮϬϬϱ
ϮϬϬϲ
ϮϬϬϳ
ϮϬϬϴ
ϮϬϬϵ
ϮϬϭϬ
ϮϬϭϭ
ϮϬϭϮ
ϮϬϭϯ
ϮϬϭϰ
ϮϬϭϱ
ϮϬϭϲ
ϮϬϭϳ
ϮϬϭϴ
Fig. 8.5  World gross capital flows (% World GDP), 1990–2018 (Source IMF)

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        155
previously reported for the US in Fig. 8.1. Gross flows peaked at nearly 40% 
of these countries’ overall GDP in 2007 just ahead of the crisis, before skid-
ding to barely 10% of GDP in 2018. Throughout these years, net capital 
flows never rose above low single-digit percentages and consequently failed 
to flash any early warnings about the magnitude of the approaching GFC. 
More comprehensive research conducted by the IMF shows that gross capi-
tal inflows into the Advanced Economies reached a peak of around 26% of 
GDP in 2007, while gross outflows hit 25% of GDP (a combined 51% of 
GDP). At the same time, gross outflows from Emerging Market economies 
touched 6% of their collective GDP, or well below the near-11% peak read-
ing for gross inflows (a joint total of 17% of GDP).
For completeness, we must also consider foreign remittances, which are 
strictly classified as transfers of income. More than three-quarters of total 
cross-border remittances flow from the rich advanced and Middle Eastern 
economies to the Emerging Market economies. These payments prove more 
stable than conventional capital flows because they cannot be suddenly with-
drawn. The World Bank officially estimates that annual remittance flows to 
low- and middle-income countries rose to a record high of US$529 billion 
in 2018, an increase of nearly 10% over the 2017 total, and larger than their 
inward FDI. Global remittances, which include flows to high-income coun-
tries, reached US$689 billion in 2018, up from US$633 billion in 2017. 
Among countries, the top remittance recipients were India with US$79 billion, 
followed by China (US$67 billion), Mexico (US$36 billion), the Philippines 
(US$34 billion) and Egypt (US$29 billion).
Ͳϱ͘Ϭй
Ϭ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϭϬ͘Ϭй
ϭϱ͘Ϭй
ϮϬ͘Ϭй
Ϯϱ͘Ϭй
ϯϬ͘Ϭй
ϯϱ͘Ϭй
ϰϬ͘Ϭй
ϰϱ͘Ϭй
ϮϬϬϱ
ϮϬϬϲ
ϮϬϬϳ
ϮϬϬϴ
ϮϬϬϵ
ϮϬϭϬ
ϮϬϭϭ
ϮϬϭϮ
ϮϬϭϯ
ϮϬϭϰ
ϮϬϭϱ
ϮϬϭϲ
ϮϬϭϳ
ϮϬϭϴ
'ƌŽƐƐ&ůŽǁƐ
EĞƚ&ůŽǁƐ
Fig. 8.6  Gross and net flows of international capital—six major economies, 2005–
2018 (percent of GDP) (Source IMF)

156        M. J. Howell
Policy Concerns
Policy-makers’ concerns about capital flows focus on two features. First, as 
Fig. 8.7 confirms flows tend to be highly procyclical and they can potentially 
amplify the underlying business cycle. A simple regression analysis yields 
an elasticity as high as 2½ times between World GDP growth and the size 
of gross capital flows relative to GDP. Closer examination of the data also 
reveals that both asset and liability flows typically move together indicating 
both large-scale balance sheet cycles and a strong home bias during eco-
nomic downturns, with both foreigners and domestic investors repatriating 
their capital. The widespread procyclical characteristic of these gross flows 
adds to potential global financial instability. A second concern centres on the 
role of banks. The data show that a sizeable portion of cross-border flows is 
intermediated by the banking sector and much of this comprises short-term, 
wholesale funding, which is therefore liable to reverse quickly when finan-
cial conditions deteriorate. In other words, there are high risks of ‘sudden 
stops’. Analysis of the past volatility of these gross flows confirms these fears: 
gross banking inflows and outflows into and out of both the Advanced and 
Emerging Market economies are consistently more volatile than either the 
equivalent FDI and portfolio flows. According to the ECB (2016), banking 
flows typically suffer more than twice the volatility of other broad flow types 
and in financial crises this has jumped to, at least, 4–5 times larger.
Ͳϭ͘Ϭй
ϭ͘Ϭй
ϯ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϳ͘Ϭй
ϵ͘Ϭй
ϭϭ͘Ϭй
ϭϯ͘Ϭй
ϭϱ͘Ϭй
Ϭ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϭϬ͘Ϭй
ϭϱ͘Ϭй
ϮϬ͘Ϭй
Ϯϱ͘Ϭй
ϯϬ͘Ϭй
ϯϱ͘Ϭй
ϰϬ͘Ϭй
ϰϱ͘Ϭй
ϮϬϬϱ ϮϬϬϲ ϮϬϬϳ ϮϬϬϴ ϮϬϬϵ ϮϬϭϬ ϮϬϭϭ ϮϬϭϮ ϮϬϭϯ ϮϬϭϰ ϮϬϭϱ ϮϬϭϲ ϮϬϭϳ ϮϬϭϴ
'ƌŽƐƐ&ůŽǁƐ
'Wй
Fig. 8.7  Gross flows of international capital—six major economies and World real 
GDP growth, 2005–2018 (percent of GDP and annual % change) (Source IMF)

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        157
The economic cost and the threat to domestic banks of too rapid inter-
national financial integration are issues raised by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 
(2008). For example, there is a strong positive relationship between the devel-
opment of local financial systems and the scale of cross-border flows, which 
can adversely feedback on domestic credit growth. In traditional interpreta-
tions, current account imbalances influence real economy macro-variables 
which, in turn, disturb credit markets. Yet, as we have already noted, the cur-
rent account when taken by itself is a misleading indicator, because a finan-
cial channel can still operate and affect credit markets even when the current 
account stands in balance. Shin (2012) emphasises the role of gross capital 
flows between Europe and the US in fuelling America’s mid-2000s credit 
boom. Large gross cross-border financial flows changed the funding environ-
ment and the balance sheet structure of US domestic credit providers. This 
occurred even though the capital flows netted out to zero because European 
banks raised funding in the US to buy their US-based assets. Greater finan-
cial integration allows domestic banks to fund from foreign depositors, for-
eign interbank participants and offshore money markets, as well as through 
international bond issues. Inter-office funding provides a further channel, via 
domestically owned banks with overseas affiliates. Not surprisingly, Lane and 
McQuade (2013) find that, in practice, the data strongly suggest that domes-
tic credit growth is very closely linked with net inflows of debt. The 2008–
2011 Icelandic banking crisis provides a classic example of this.
As Fig. 8.6 suggests, the volume of gross flows serves as a valuable barom-
eter of underlying lending standards. This means it can also be a useful 
cross-check on Global Liquidity. Looked at in this way, the huge US current 
account deficit, sustained over two decades, which persuaded many experts 
ahead of the GFC that the US dollar would slump, actually hid a massive 
build-up of short-term offshore gross US dollar borrowings by foreigners that 
required all too frequent refinancing. These were offset by foreign holdings 
of longer term US ‘safe’ assets, such as US Treasuries. Not surprisingly, the 
unfolding of the GFC was accompanied by a sharp US dollar appreciation, 
as those foreign financial institutions that had also used short-term dollar 
funding to invest in riskier long-term dollar assets were forced to hurriedly 
deleverage. European banks who were large players in the US MBS (mort-
gage-backed securities) market proved prominent casualties. Once the cri-
sis broke, these financial institutions found themselves short of dollars and 
over-leveraged. A staggering US$8.0 trillion of the US$10.1 trillion cash 
offered by the US Fed through the swap lines, noted earlier, was taken up by 
the European Central Bank (ECB) alone. Thus, by attempting to reduce their 
US dollar liabilities, European investors further bid up the value of the dollar.

158        M. J. Howell
Global Financial Centres
Money centres, such as Venice, Amsterdam and Genoa, have long featured 
in World history as concentrations of footloose savings, often willing to 
finance speculative ventures. In the nineteenth century, London dominated. 
According to Walter Bagehot, editor of the Economist newspaper:
Lombard Street … is by far the greatest combination of economical power 
and economical delicacy that the world has even seen. Of the greatness of the 
power there will be no doubt. Money is economical power. Everyone is aware 
that England is the greatest moneyed country in the world; everyone admits 
that it has much more immediately disposable and ready cash than any other 
country. But very few persons are aware how much greater the ready balance — 
the floating loan-fund which can be lent to anyone or for any purpose — is in 
England than it is anywhere else in the world. A very few figures will show how 
large the London loan-fund is, and how much greater it is than any other. The 
known deposits—the deposits of banks which publish their accounts—are, in:
London (31st December, 1872) £120,000,000
Paris (27th February, 1873) £13,000,000
New York (February, 1873) £40,000,000
German Empire (31st January, 1873) £8,000,000
And the unknown deposits—the deposits in banks which do not publish their 
accounts—are in London much greater than those many other of these cities. 
(Walter Bagehot, Lombard Street, 1873)
There is constant debate about whether cross-border flows are the result of 
‘pull’ factors that draw capital into attractive foreign investments, or from 
‘push’ factors that drive surplus capital out from the major financial centres. 
In truth, both apply, but from experience we find that push factors dom-
inate both in terms of their magnitude and macro-finance policy implica-
tions. Changes in both underlying monetary policies and in the risk-seeking 
activities of investors trading from these centres can lead to large outflows 
of cross-border capital. Tax avoidance and lower reporting requirements 
admittedly help to explain the rise of some of the smaller offshore centres. 
According to Zucman10 (2013), 8% of the global financial wealth of house-
holds is held offshore, of which at least 6%, or around US$4–5 trillion, is 
officially unrecorded, but domiciled in these centres.
There has always been a tradition of foreign investments seeking out these 
concentrated savings pools. For example, in the nineteenth century many 

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        159
foreign companies, such as American railroads and imperial plantations, 
listed their securities on the London Stock Exchange to be closer to this sur-
plus capital. Table 8.1 shows the latest GFCI rankings of the World’s major 
financial centres. Although this survey does not directly measure the size of 
these savings pools, it lists the key players. Few would dispute the dominant 
positions of New York and London; Frankfurt appears lower in the table 
than it probably deserves given the capital it controls; Boston with her insur-
ers and investment managers and Chicago with her futures pits both still 
rank highly. The final column of Table 8.1 shows the change from ten years 
ago. There have been only minor changes at the top of the table, but the 
standout fact is the huge jumps seen in the ranking of the Chinese money 
centres, notably Shanghai and Beijing, which together with Shenzhen, as 
well as Hong Kong, highlight the growing sway of Chinese money. Pacific 
Asia’s importance is underlined by the growing status once again of Tokyo, 
and the rise of Dubai, Sydney, Melbourne, San Francisco, Los Angeles and 
Vancouver, all at the expense of East Coast and Mid-West American and 
European money centres.
Table 8.1  GFCI ranking of global financial centres, 2019 data (and change from 2009 
survey)
Source GFCI
Ranking 2019
Ranking 2009
Change
New York
1
2
1
London
2
1
−1
Hong Kong
3
4
1
Singapore
4
3
−1
Shanghai
5
35
30
Tokyo
6
15
9
Toronto
7
11
4
Zurich
8
5
−3
Beijing
9
51
42
Frankfurt
10
8
−2
Sydney
11
16
5
Dubai
12
23
11
Boston
13
9
−4
Shenzhen
14
NA
NA
Melbourne
15
28
13
San Francisco
16
17
1
Los Angeles
17
NA
NA
Montreal
18
26
8
Vancouver
19
25
6
Chicago
20
7
−13

160        M. J. Howell
The Offshore Swap and Eurodollar Markets
This dominant role played by the US unit in cross-border markets makes 
the value of the US dollar a useful gauge of global credit conditions. We 
noted that when an international currency depreciates, there is a tendency 
for foreigners to borrow more in that unit. This often motivates so-called, 
‘carry trades’. A substantial part of international banking flows is made up of 
carry trades, where borrowings in low-cost jurisdictions simultaneously fund 
investments in prospectively higher return markets. For example, investors 
may borrow in Yen and invest in US dollars, or equivalently borrow in US 
dollars and invest in higher yielding Emerging Market bonds. Cross-border 
borrowing often entails a currency mismatch, which can make flows sensi-
tive to exchange rate movements and particularly to the US dollar, which is 
the main borrowed currency. When increased supplies of US dollars lead to 
a depreciation in its value, this can spur additional demand from interna-
tional borrowers who are incentivised to bias their capital issuance towards 
dollar-denominated instruments. In addition, global banks are able to pro-
vide hedging services more cheaply because cross-border US dollar credit is 
abundant, but as the US dollar strengthens, they find it harder to rollover 
these credits. Not surprisingly, periods of heightened currency volatility are 
typically associated with sharp contractions in cross-border activity. In fact, 
over the 2002–2008 period ahead of the GFC, the US dollar fell by around 
one-third in value and cross-border banking flows correspondingly soared in 
size: in 2002, flows from the US to Europe (i.e. banks resident in the US 
with claims on borrowers in Europe) totalled US$462 billion. This figure 
jumped to US$1.54 trillion in 2007, while, according to the BIS, the return 
leg from Europe to the US leapt from US$856 billion in 2002 to over US$2 
trillion in 2007.
A large pool of ‘offshore’ Eurodollars traditionally provides an impor-
tant source of short-term funding for many US-based banks. See Fig. 8.8 
Eurodollars are a generic term for unsecured foreign currency deposits, not 
exclusively US dollars, that are held at banks outside of the currencies’ legal 
jurisdiction, and probably housed in the global financial centres named in the 
preceding section. The US Federal Reserve has chosen since 1990 to impose a 
zero-reserve requirement on Eurodollar deposits, so effectively treating them 
as close substitutes for Fed Funds. In fact, the daily volume of Eurodollar 
funding is around 3–4 times larger than Fed Funds at around US$150 bil-
lion. Although these offshore deposits are now transacted in all major global 
financial centres, the Eurodollar market originally developed in post-WW2 
Europe. It started in the 1960s following contemporary concerns among the 

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        161
former Soviet Bloc countries about the potential safety of their US dollars held 
in the US. Since then, competition has attracted Middle-Eastern oil money 
to London, while more recently many US multinationals hold large offshore 
dollar deposits in these markets. Figure 8.9 highlights the annual growth in 
cross-border lending between banks. The underlying pace of this volatile series 
has plainly slowed since the GFC, mainly through a reduction in the balance 
sheet commitment of European banks,11 following tighter regulation and 
reduced profitability, but also in the wake of US President Trump’s recent tax 
amnesty and moves to separately regulate banks’ subsidiaries.
Money market funds, other institutional investors, corporations and for-
eign central banks are all active lenders in the Eurodollar market. BIS data 
show that the stock of US dollar-denominated debt of non-banks operating 
outside the US currently stands at some US$17 trillion, so easily exceeding 
the volume of domestic US dollar lending by US banks, with interbank lia-
bilities at a similar US$16.9 trillion. Admittedly, this overall pool of debt 
has flatlined since the GFC, although bonds have become more important 
within the total, rising from around 45% of total international credit to 
non-banks in 2000 to over 56% by 2018. The banking data includes both 
US banks and, for example, Chinese banks collecting US dollar deposits in 
London. These pools are large, counted in several trillions of dollars, and 
Ϭ
Ϯ
ϰ
ϲ
ϴ
ϭϬ
ϭϮ
ϭϰ
ϭϲ
ϭϴ
ϮϬϬϬͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϬͲYϰ
ϮϬϬϭͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϮͲYϮ
ϮϬϬϯͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϯͲYϰ
ϮϬϬϰͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϱͲYϮ
ϮϬϬϲͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϲͲYϰ
ϮϬϬϳͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϴͲYϮ
ϮϬϬϵͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϵͲYϰ
ϮϬϭϬͲYϯ
ϮϬϭϭͲYϮ
ϮϬϭϮͲYϭ
ϮϬϭϮͲYϰ
ϮϬϭϯͲYϯ
ϮϬϭϰͲYϮ
ϮϬϭϱͲYϭ
ϮϬϭϱͲYϰ
ϮϬϭϲͲYϯ
ϮϬϭϳͲYϮ
ϮϬϭϴͲYϭ
ϮϬϭϴͲYϰ
dƌŝůůŝŽŶƐ
EŽŶͲŽůůĂƌ
h^ŽůůĂƌ
Fig. 8.8  Cross-border and foreign currency borrowing—banks and non-banks, 2000–
2019 (quarterly, US$ in trillions) (Source BIS)

162        M. J. Howell
tend to be ready sources of wholesale funding. Consequently, they have 
provided an extra means of leveraging and, hence, amplifying the cycle of 
Global Liquidity. Although history shows substantial co-movement in inter-
national lending to banks and non-banks, the stock of cross-border and 
­foreign currency borrowing by non-banks has lately grown faster according 
to Fig. 8.10. It now exceeds its previous 2008 peak of US$15 trillion, with 
US dollar-denominated debts touching nearly 70% of the total.
Cross-border liquidity can also be created through certain derivative 
transactions when they involve new credits, such as currency swaps. These 
transactions, which are growing in popularity, even among the Central 
Banks, occur when two parties exchange funds denominated in different 
currencies, agreeing to later reverse the trade, possibly as long as some years 
later. In contrast to carry trades, which involve forex risk, currency swaps 
entail interest rate risk. With local interest rates across many economies cur-
rently low or negative, domestic investors have been keen to purchase higher 
yielding foreign securities. However, the costs of buying, say, 10-year US 
Treasuries, fully hedged against currency movements, can substantially erode 
the already meagre returns on local currency bonds. In a swap deal, each 
asset earns a period return from money-market interest rates in the currency 
the investors hold and the sellers pay interest on the currency position they 
have sold. A swap’s so-called basis is a shorthand measure for the degree of 
deviation from covered interest rate parity (CIP12). The basis is defined as 
the difference between the cost of borrowing directly in, say, US dollars and 
Ͳϭϱ
ͲϭϬ
Ͳϱ
Ϭ
ϱ
ϭϬ
ϭϱ
ϮϬ
Ϯϱ
ϯϬ
ϯϱ
ϰϬ
ϭϵϳϵͲYϭ
ϭϵϴϬͲYϯ
ϭϵϴϮͲYϭ
ϭϵϴϯͲYϯ
ϭϵϴϱͲYϭ
ϭϵϴϲͲYϯ
ϭϵϴϴͲYϭ
ϭϵϴϵͲYϯ
ϭϵϵϭͲYϭ
ϭϵϵϮͲYϯ
ϭϵϵϰͲYϭ
ϭϵϵϱͲYϯ
ϭϵϵϳͲYϭ
ϭϵϵϴͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϬͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϭͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϯͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϰͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϲͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϳͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϵͲYϭ
ϮϬϭϬͲYϯ
ϮϬϭϮͲYϭ
ϮϬϭϯͲYϯ
ϮϬϭϱͲYϭ
ϮϬϭϲͲYϯ
ϮϬϭϴͲYϭ
ĂŶŬƐ͕ƚŽƚĂů
EŽŶͲďĂŶŬƐ͕ƚŽƚĂů
Fig. 8.9  Annual growth in cross-border lending—banks and non-banks, 1979–2019 
(quarterly, percent) (Source BIS)

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        163
the ‘synthetic’ cost from borrowing in a foreign currency and then swapping 
the foreign currency back into US dollars. The US dollar is frequently the 
borrowed currency and the basis swap spread effectively measures how much 
more a bank has to pay to borrow US dollars by this roundabout route, 
rather than taking a straightforward US dollar loan priced at LIBOR.13 
In other words, the US Treasury basis measures the yield on an actual US 
Treasury note minus the yield on this equivalent synthetic US Treasury secu-
rity constructed from a foreign bond of similar maturity.
The spread is a direct measure of the global scarcity of dollar safe assets. 
A positive (negative) basis means that the US dollar interest rate is higher 
(lower) than the foreign interest rate adjusted for the cost of the swap. 
A positive basis is often wrongly taken to indicate a US dollar ‘shortage’, 
but there is no shortage in reality. Rather, a positive basis signals an excess 
demand for dollars, and the ‘price’ i.e. the basis, adjusts to square the mar-
ket. An average of the spread on the major G-10 currencies is an indica-
tor of the scarcity cost of being without the US currency. CIP theory says 
that these various positions are entirely fungible and, hence, there should be 
no basis, but several times since the 2008 crisis we have seen strong coun-
ter-evidence of a positive basis. Although the persistence of a positive basis 
has raised doubts about market efficiency, the CIP assumption of risk-less 
arbitrage needs to be challenged because there is never complete fungibility. 
The tendency of textbooks to focus only on traditional banks needs to be 
corrected and broadened, while the motivations behind these cross-border 
Ϭ
ϱ
ϭϬ
ϭϱ
ϮϬ
Ϯϱ
ϯϬ
ϯϱ
ϰϬ
ϰϱ
ϭϵϳϴͲYϭ
ϭϵϳϵͲYϯ
ϭϵϴϭͲYϭ
ϭϵϴϮͲYϯ
ϭϵϴϰͲYϭ
ϭϵϴϱͲYϯ
ϭϵϴϳͲYϭ
ϭϵϴϴͲYϯ
ϭϵϵϬͲYϭ
ϭϵϵϭͲYϯ
ϭϵϵϯͲYϭ
ϭϵϵϰͲYϯ
ϭϵϵϲͲYϭ
ϭϵϵϳͲYϯ
ϭϵϵϵͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϬͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϮͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϯͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϱͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϲͲYϯ
ϮϬϬϴͲYϭ
ϮϬϬϵͲYϯ
ϮϬϭϭͲYϭ
ϮϬϭϮͲYϯ
ϮϬϭϰͲYϭ
ϮϬϭϱͲYϯ
ϮϬϭϳͲYϭ
ϮϬϭϴͲYϯ
h^ΨdƌŝůůŝŽŶƐ
ĂŶŬƐ͕ƚŽƚĂů
EŽŶͲďĂŶŬƐ͕ƚŽƚĂů
Fig. 8.10  Non-bank cross-border and foreign currency borrowing by currency 
denomination, 1978–2019 (quarterly, US$ in trillions) (Source BIS)

164        M. J. Howell
transactions could be better understood. We have shown that traditional 
banks are no longer the only market participants and for many investors the 
arbitrage is neither risk-free, nor costless. Not every investor is able to bor-
row at LIBOR, or is prepared to take on the implied credit risk.
LIBOR—London Interbank Offered Rate
It is planned to cease quoting LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rates), USD 
LIBOR, and similar interbank rates by the end of 2021. These rates are expected 
to be replaced with new benchmarks. The ubiquitous LIBOR is a widely-used 
family of benchmark interest rates that has been used for more than 30 years. 
Millions of contracts and financial instruments, estimated as of mid-2018 by the 
Bank for International Settlements to be about US$400 trillion, use some form 
of LIBOR as a reference rate. This includes both wholesale rates, such as float-
ing rate notes (FRNs) and interest rate swaps, and even some residential mort-
gages. LIBOR’s problems stem from the revelations that, at certain key times in 
the past, it was manipulated by certain market participants for their own gain, 
so tarnishing its reputation for fairness. On top, regulatory changes and bank-
ing reforms have also combined to reduce the size of the interbank lending 
market in recent years.
Working groups in several jurisdictions have already identified their pre-
ferred risk-free reference rate alternatives to LIBOR. Unlike LIBOR, these 
choices are based on actual transactions and cover institutions beyond banks. 
They are, however, backwards-looking and they may reference both secured 
or unsecured lending. In the UK the chosen rate is Sterling Overnight Index 
Average (SONIA), an unsecured overnight rate. In the US dollar markets, the 
new reference will be the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR). These are 
published, respectively, by the Bank of England and US Federal Reserve. The 
European Central Bank (ECB) recently announced ESTR as the successor to its 
LIBOR-like Euro overnight index average (EONIA). ESTR is a transactions-based 
unsecured overnight rate that reflects wholesale overnight funding costs of the 
Eurozone banks.
Dollar Risks—A New Triffin Dilemma?
The Triffin Dilemma essentially concerns whether the US can meet its for-
eign liabilities with net assets, be these existing investments or potential 
future cash flows. It was originally associated with: (1) the final days of the 
Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate regime in the late-1960s; (2) America’s 
then rapidly deteriorating current account position and (3) her progressive 
loss of gold reserves. Yet, when looked at in broader terms, it has little to 
do with US current account deficits per se. The Triffin Dilemma is also nei-
ther specifically about a lack of gold-backing for the US dollar, nor about 

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        165
the dangers of excessive US monetary expansion. Rather, it highlights the 
threat of a potential loss of confidence in the value of dollars held interna-
tionally by foreign investors. The problem, consequently, remains relevant 
today even in an international monetary system that lacks a gold anchor. 
Gourinchas and Rey (2007) put this argument well:
Triffin saw that in a world where the fluctuations in gold supply were dictated 
by the vagaries of discoveries in South Africa or the destabilizing schemes of 
Soviet Russia, but in any case unable to grow with world demand for liquid-
ity, the demand for the dollar was bound to eventually exceed the gold 
reserves of the Federal Reserve. This left the door open for a run on the dollar. 
Interestingly, the current situation can be seen in a similar light: in a world 
where the US can supply the international currency at will, and invests it in 
illiquid assets, it still faces a confidence risk. There could be a run on the dollar 
not because investors would fear an abandonment of the gold parity, as in the 
seventies, but because they would fear a plunge in the dollar exchange rate. In 
other words, Triffin’s analysis does not have to rely on the gold-dollar parity to 
be relevant.
Assuming that the demand for US dollar liquidity keeps growing, but the 
relative size of the US economy continues to shrink relative to the Rest of 
the World, a new run on the dollar into one or several alternative reserve 
currencies, such as the Euro, gold and ultimately the Chinese Yuan, remains 
possible. This could parallel the tumultuous and domino-like falls seen dur-
ing Interwar years, when international capital first fled sterling in 1931, 
and, despite a lack of alternatives, then tried to flee from the US dollar in 
1933. Notwithstanding, a break in confidence equivalent in scale to the end 
of Bretton Woods would probably require the US to renege on a large part 
of her foreign obligations. These are predominantly US dollar denominated 
and such a move would seem, for now, unlikely. In fact, more likely, is the 
opposite risk that a lack of sufficient international dollar liquidity and dol-
lar-denominated securities could at the same time derail global financial 
markets. This means that the overall ability of the US to be both a global 
insurer and to act as a global liquidity provider crucially depends on the 
capacity of the economy to issue credible ‘safe’ assets. During recent times of 
global crisis, US Treasuries, and sometimes also German Bunds, have proved 
to be the only large-scale international assets able to provide an effective 
insurance. We know that the demand for ‘safe’ assets lowers domestic bond 
term premia. Gourinchas et al. (2019) estimate the resulting inflation-ad-
justed excess returns from America’s FDI and foreign portfolio investments 

166        M. J. Howell
averages around 2% annually above the yield on US ‘safe’ assets. This pre-
mium potentially allows the US to run larger trade deficits. This so-called14 
‘exorbitant privilege’ represents real economic power for America through 
seigniorage, namely the difference between the face value of its currency and 
the production (or printing) costs. International envy over American sei-
gniorage still runs deep. It motivated Europe to create the Euro currency 
unit as a rival international monetary standard, and arguably now exercises 
China, whose officials are on record as wanting to displace the US dollar in 
Asia.15 Yet, the US dollar may not be easily replaced. Take the British pound 
as a historical benchmark: the US economy overtook Britain in economic 
size in 1870, but it was not until 1955, nearly nine decades later, that the 
US dollar finally surpassed the pound sterling as the main international 
currency.
Warning Signs of Future Crises
In summary, the private sector is often responsible for cross-border spillovers 
of liquidity, because financial institutions frequently span different countries 
and operate across multiple currencies. Even though this globalisation of 
finance should, in theory, promote efficiency and faster growth, it comes at 
the cost of sometimes violent cycles of leveraging and de-leveraging. Rapidly 
moving cross-border flows are themselves affected by the availability and 
cost of US dollars, the main international funding currency. These liquidity 
shocks tend to be closely correlated and procyclical, and they are growing 
in size as World financial markets become both more innovative and more 
deeply integrated. What’s more, they can travel across national borders even 
when net capital flows are themselves small because gross flows will still 
affect the overall balance sheet size of the financial sector. Consequently, we 
need to look beyond economists’ traditional obsession with national current 
account (or net) imbalances by focusing in more detail on these gross flows, 
and by distinguishing between the national and residential decision-making 
better understand currency exposures and risks.
The data reported in Tables 8.2 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, and 8.7 evidence these 
challenges in the detailed international accounts and foreign balance sheets 
of the US, China, Japan, Germany, the UK and France. Taken overall, 
76.4% of America’s foreign asset stock is covered by liabilities of US debt 
and short-term credits, whereas equivalent holdings of foreign debt and 
credits by US residents only comprise 44.6% of foreign assets. This con-
firms the implicit leverage in the US international balance sheet and its 

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        167
Table 8.2  United States—international investment position, 2005–18 (US$ in millions)
Source IMF
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Average Percent 
(%)
Stdev 
(%)
Assets
13,357.0 16,409.9 20,704.5 19,423.4 19,426.5 21,767.8 22,208.9 22,562.2 24,144.8 24,882.9 23,430.6 24,060.6 27,799.1 25,398.6 21,826.9
100.0
17.3
FDI
4047.2
4929.9
5857.9
3707.2
4945.3
5486.4
5214.8
5969.5
7120.7
7242.1
7057.1
7421.9
8910.0
7528.4
6102.7
28.0
24.4
Portfolio
4629.0
6017.1
7262.0
4320.8
6058.6
7160.4
6871.7
7984.0
9206.1
9704.2
9570.2
10,011.4 12,543.8 11,281.1 8044.3
36.9
30.3
Equity
3317.7
4329.0
5248.0
2748.4
3995.3
4900.2
4501.4
5321.9
6472.9
6770.6
6756.2
7146.3
9129.5
7826.2
5604.5
25.7
32.3
Debt
1311.3
1688.1
2014.1
1572.4
2063.3
2260.1
2370.3
2662.1
2733.2
2933.6
2814.0
2865.0
3414.4
3454.9
2439.8
11.2
27.0
Other
4492.8
5243.0
7307.3
11,101.7 8018.8
8632.4
9585.3
8036.3
7369.6
7502.3
6419.7
6220.1
5895.5
6140.0
7283.2
33.4
24.1
Gold & 
forex 
reserves
188.0
219.9
277.2
293.7
403.8
488.7
537.0
572.4
448.3
434.3
383.6
407.2
449.7
449.1
396.6
1.8
28.7
Liabilities
15,214.9 18,218.3 21,984.0 23,418.7 22,054.1 24,279.6 26,664.3 27,080.2 29,513.4 31,828.3 30,892.2 32,242.2 35,524.1 35,115.7 26,716.4
122.4
23.1
FDI
3227.1
3752.6
4134.2
3091.2
3618.6
4099.1
4199.2
4662.4
5814.9
6378.9
6729.2
7596.1
8925.5
8518.4
5339.1
24.5
37.1
Portfolio
7337.8
8843.5
10,327.0 9475.9
10,463.2 11,869.3 12,647.2 13,978.9 15,541.3 16,921.8 16,645.8 17,360.0 19,482.2 18,738.1 13,545.1
62.1
29.1
Equity
2304.0
2791.9
3231.7
2132.4
2917.7
3545.8
3841.9
4545.4
5864.6
6642.5
6209.1
6570.2
7951.9
7453.7
4714.5
21.6
42.6
Debt
5033.8
6051.6
7095.3
7343.4
7545.6
8323.5
8805.3
9433.5
9676.7
10,279.3 10,436.8 10,789.8 11,530.3 11,284.4 8830.7
40.5
22.7
Other
4649.9
5622.2
7522.8
10,851.6 7972.2
8311.3
9817.8
8438.9
8157.2
8527.6
7517.2
7286.1
7116.4
7859.3
7832.2
35.9
19.5
Net assets
−1857.9 −1808.5 −1279.5 −3995.3 −2627.6 −2511.8 −4455.4 −4518.0 −5368.6 −6945.4 −7461.6 −8181.6 −7725.0 −9717.1 −4889.5
−22.4
−55.8
FDI
820.0
1177.3
1723.7
616.0
1326.7
1387.3
1015.6
1307.1
1305.8
863.2
327.9
−174.3
−15.5
−990.0
763.6
3.5
97.7
Portfolio
−2708.9 −2826.4 −3064.9 −5155.1 −4404.7 −4708.9 −5775.5 −5994.9 −6335.1 −7217.5 −7075.7 −7348.6 −6938.4 −7457.0 −5500.8
−25.2
−31.3
Equity
1013.7
1537.1
2016.3
616.0
1077.6
1354.5
659.5
776.5
608.3
128.1
547.1
576.1
1177.6
372.5
890.1
4.1
56.8
Debt
−3722.5 −4363.5 −5081.3 −5771.0 −5482.3 −6063.4 −6435.0 −6771.4 −6943.4 −7345.7 −7622.7 −7924.7 −8116.0 −7829.5 −6390.9
−29.3
−21.5

168        M. J. Howell
Table 8.3  China—international investment position, 2005–18 (US$ in millions)
Source IMF
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Average
Percent 
(%)
Stdev 
(%)
Assets
1223.3
1690.4
2416.2
2956.7
3436.9
4118.9
4734.5
5213.2
5986.1
6438.3
6155.8
6507.0
7148.8
7324.2
4667.9
100.0
43.9
FDI
64.5
90.6
116.0
185.7
245.8
317.2
424.8
531.9
660.5
882.6
1095.9
1357.4
1809.0
1899.0
691.5
14.8
90.8
Portfolio
116.7
265.2
284.6
252.5
242.8
257.1
204.4
240.6
258.5
262.5
261.3
367.0
492.5
498.0
286.0
6.1
36.0
Equity
0.0
1.5
19.6
21.4
54.6
63.0
86.4
129.8
153.0
161.3
162.0
215.2
297.7
270.0
116.8
2.5
83.8
Debt
116.7
263.7
265.0
231.1
188.2
194.1
118.0
110.8
105.5
101.2
99.3
151.8
194.8
227.9
169.2
3.6
36.5
Other
216.4
253.9
468.3
552.3
495.2
630.4
849.5
1052.7
1186.7
1393.8
1392.5
1684.8
1611.4
1759.2
967.7
20.7
56.0
Gold & 
forex 
reserves
825.7
1080.8
1547.3
1966.2
2453.2
2914.2
3255.8
3387.9
3880.4
3899.3
3406.1
3097.8
3235.9
3168.0
2722.8
58.3
36.6
Liabilities
872.0
1174.5
1474.5
1567.0
2149.0
2640.6
3208.9
3538.3
4177.0
4835.6
4483.0
4556.7
5048.1
5194.1
3208.5
68.7
48.3
FDI
471.5
614.4
703.7
915.5
1314.8
1569.6
1906.9
2068.0
2331.2
2599.1
2696.3
2755.1
2725.7
2762.3
1816.7
38.9
48.1
Portfolio
132.6
244.6
392.7
271.5
381.7
433.6
411.3
527.6
573.4
796.2
817.0
811.1
1099.4
1096.4
570.7
12.2
53.8
Equity
119.6
230.4
375.1
254.3
366.4
415.9
374.3
453.4
484.5
651.3
597.1
579.5
762.3
684.2
453.4
9.7
40.9
Debt
13.0
14.2
17.6
17.2
15.2
17.8
37.1
74.2
88.9
144.9
220.0
231.6
337.0
412.2
117.2
2.5
113.6
Other
267.8
315.5
378.1
380.0
452.6
637.3
890.7
942.6
1272.4
1440.2
969.6
990.5
1223.1
1335.4
821.1
17.6
50.2
Net assets
351.3
515.9
941.7
1389.7
1287.9
1478.3
1525.6
1674.9
1809.1
1602.7
1672.8
1950.4
2100.7
2130.1
1459.4
31.3
36.9
FDI
−407.1
−523.8
−587.7
−729.8
−1069.0 −1252.4 −1482.1 −1536.1 −1670.8 −1716.5 −1600.4 −1397.8 −916.6
−863.3
−1125.2
−24.1
−40.5
Portfolio
−15.9
20.6
−108.1
−19.0
−138.9
−176.5
−206.9
−287.0
−314.9
−533.7
−555.7
−444.1
−606.9
−598.4
−284.7
−6.1
−79.8
Equity
−119.6
−228.9
−355.4
−232.9
−311.9
−352.9
−287.8
−323.6
−331.5
−490.0
−435.1
−364.3
−464.7
−414.1
−336.6
−7.2
−29.7
Debt
103.8
249.5
247.3
213.9
173.0
176.4
80.9
36.5
16.6
−43.7
−120.6
−79.8
−142.2
−184.3
51.9
1.1
286.7

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        169
Table 8.4  Japan—international investment position, 2005–18 (US$ in millions)
Source IMF
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Average
Percent 
(%)
Stdev 
(%)
Assets
4294.9
4697.2
5360.1
5731.5
6041.7
6893.1
7502.6
7613.3
7575.3
7811.7
7883.1
8444.1
8967.4
9222.9
7002.8
100.0
22.1
FDI
390.6
454.8
547.5
690.8
753.2
846.2
972.3
1054.1
1133.0
1177.2
1260.2
1360.3
1547.4
1667.2
989.6
14.1
40.1
Portfolio
2114.9
2343.5
2523.6
2376.7
2845.9
3305.2
3379.3
3559.8
3430.7
3398.0
3513.0
3779.3
4104.7
4082.7
3196.9
45.7
20.3
Equity
408.6
510.4
573.5
394.7
594.0
678.5
665.8
687.2
1198.7
1190.1
1274.8
1405.9
1676.8
1655.3
922.5
13.2
49.7
Debt
1706.3
1833.1
1950.1
1982.0
2251.8
2626.7
2713.4
2872.6
2232.0
2207.9
2238.2
2373.4
2427.8
2427.3
2274.5
32.5
14.7
Other
946.4
1004.1
1321.7
1639.4
1388.8
1645.0
1857.7
1734.6
1743.6
1984.0
1877.2
2084.1
2054.1
2207.7
1677.7
24.0
23.2
Gold & 
forex 
reserves
843.0
894.8
967.4
1024.6
1053.9
1096.7
1293.4
1264.8
1268.0
1252.5
1232.8
1220.4
1261.3
1265.3
1138.5
16.3
13.7
Liabilities
2763.1
2889.0
3165.2
3242.1
3125.2
3751.3
4083.4
4155.2
4482.0
4799.3
5068.1
5564.9
6058.4
6120.8
4233.4
60.5
27.3
FDI
104.9
112.9
137.7
213.9
212.4
230.0
242.2
222.2
185.7
196.9
205.6
241.7
252.9
282.2
202.9
2.9
25.7
Portfolio
1542.4
1762.9
1942.9
1541.7
1537.0
1866.8
2026.3
2085.5
2393.2
2363.1
2660.1
2784.4
3345.3
3170.8
2215.9
31.6
26.8
Equity
1126.1
1255.0
1245.9
756.2
829.6
988.8
847.2
965.4
1446.6
1402.1
1551.2
1554.2
1947.2
1616.0
1252.2
17.9
28.1
Debt
416.4
507.9
697.0
785.5
707.4
878.0
1179.1
1120.1
946.7
961.0
1108.9
1230.2
1398.1
1554.7
963.6
13.8
33.9
Other
1115.8
1013.2
1084.6
1486.6
1375.8
1654.4
1814.9
1847.5
1903.1
2239.4
2202.4
2538.8
2460.1
2667.8
1814.6
25.9
30.6
Net assets
1531.8
1808.2
2194.9
2489.4
2916.5
3141.9
3419.2
3458.1
3093.3
3012.4
2815.0
2879.2
2909.1
3102.1
2769.4
39.5
20.6
FDI
285.7
341.9
409.8
477.0
540.8
616.2
730.1
831.9
947.3
980.3
1054.6
1118.6
1294.5
1385.0
786.7
11.2
45.2
Portfolio
572.5
580.6
580.7
835.0
1308.9
1438.4
1353.0
1474.2
1037.5
1035.0
852.9
994.9
759.3
911.9
981.0
14.0
32.0
Equity
−717.5
−744.5
−672.4
−361.5
−235.6
−310.3
−181.3
−278.2
−247.9
−211.9
−276.4
−148.3
−270.4
39.3
−329.8
−4.7
−68.9
Debt
1290.0
1325.1
1253.1
1196.5
1544.4
1748.7
1534.3
1752.5
1285.3
1246.9
1129.3
1143.2
1029.7
872.6
1310.8
18.7
19.5

170        M. J. Howell
Table 8.5  Germany—international investment position, 2005–18 (US$ in millions)
Source IMF
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Average
Percent 
(%)
Stdev 
(%)
Assets
5015.5
6245.7
7676.3
7096.3
7554.1
8739.3
8862.4
9633.5
9581.7
9303.1
8593.4
8709.0
10,035.3
9804.9
8346.5
100.0
17.5
FDI
996.7
1236.0
1545.3
1459.6
1605.3
1634.9
1696.2
1928.8
2092.6
1995.9
1958.4
1973.8
2328.5
2385.6
1774.1
21.3
22.3
Portfolio
1817.9
2266.4
2624.8
2149.2
2507.9
2555.7
2380.4
2760.1
3083.6
3075.7
2905.6
2976.8
3519.0
3298.6
2708.7
32.5
17.4
Equity
771.4
884.2
954.0
589.5
707.1
739.7
647.2
747.4
919.6
939.8
952.0
1009.0
1287.3
1145.7
878.1
10.5
22.0
Debt
1046.5
1382.1
1670.8
1559.6
1800.8
1816.0
1733.2
2012.7
2164.0
2136.0
1953.6
1967.7
2231.6
2152.9
1830.5
21.9
18.3
Other
2099.2
2631.8
3370.0
3349.5
3260.1
4332.2
4547.1
4695.6
4207.3
4038.6
3555.8
3573.2
3987.7
3922.5
3683.6
44.1
19.6
Gold & 
forex 
reserves
101.7
111.6
136.2
138.0
180.8
216.5
238.9
248.9
198.2
192.8
173.7
185.3
200.1
198.2
180.1
2.2
24.5
Liabilities
4654.8
5624.5
6983.1
6449.5
6669.1
7855.2
8051.0
8594.8
8237.5
7853.7
7054.6
7016.7
7896.8
7456.5
7171.3
85.9
15.0
FDI
813.2
1029.9
1246.9
1137.2
1212.4
1210.5
1252.0
1448.0
1599.4
1469.3
1391.4
1404.6
1665.0
1691.1
1326.5
15.9
18.6
Portfolio
2114.0
2508.0
3259.0
2839.7
3042.7
3015.5
3044.9
3359.4
3398.5
3210.3
2867.0
2751.1
3058.6
2682.8
2939.4
35.2
11.9
Equity
445.2
622.9
908.9
472.3
647.3
667.6
565.8
701.6
862.3
761.3
732.0
720.9
889.3
694.2
692.3
8.3
20.2
Debt
1668.9
1885.1
2350.0
2367.5
2395.4
2347.9
2479.1
2657.8
2536.2
2449.0
2134.9
2030.2
2169.3
1988.6
2247.1
26.9
12.4
Other
1727.6
2086.6
2477.2
2472.5
2414.1
3629.1
3754.1
3787.5
3239.6
3174.1
2796.2
2861.0
3173.2
3082.6
2905.4
34.8
21.3
Net assets
360.7
621.3
693.2
646.8
885.0
884.2
811.4
1038.7
1344.3
1449.3
1538.9
1692.3
2138.5
2348.4
1175.2
14.1
50.7
FDI
183.6
206.1
298.3
322.4
392.9
424.4
444.2
480.9
493.3
526.6
566.9
569.2
663.6
694.6
447.6
5.4
34.8
Portfolio
−296.1
−241.6
−634.2
−690.6
−534.8
−459.9
−664.6
−599.2
−314.8
−134.6
38.7
225.6
460.3
615.8
−230.7
−2.8
−183.9
Equity
326.2
261.4
45.1
117.2
59.8
72.1
81.4
45.9
57.4
178.5
220.0
288.1
398.0
451.4
185.9
2.2
75.0
Debt
−622.3
−503.0
−679.3
−807.8
−594.6
−531.9
−745.9
−645.1
−372.2
−313.0
−181.3
−62.5
62.3
164.4
−416.6
−5.0
−74.1

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        171
Table 8.6  United Kingdom—international investment position, 2005–18 (US$ in millions)
Source IMF
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Average Percent 
(%)
Stdev 
(%)
Assets
10,341.9
12,892.6
16,521.0
16,790.1 14,393.7 15,954.7 17,097.1 16,477.4 15,875.2 15,941.5 14,256.4 13,490.3 14,499.7 14,218.4 14,910.7 100.0
12.4
FDI
1642.7
1947.8
2301.1
2097.2
2043.7
2102.4
2108.1
2227.4
2367.2
2165.8
2080.2
1925.4
2127.6
2128.5
2090.4
14.0
8.4
Portfolio
2434.6
3318.8
3803.3
2463.8
2943.4
3025.0
2801.9
3173.9
3389.9
3469.5
3312.3
3026.0
3653.8
3411.8
3159.2
21.2
12.8
Equity
1247.2
1653.4
1871.6
1041.3
1380.3
1499.0
1344.5
1628.1
1899.4
1949.4
1878.9
1805.0
2341.2
2109.3
1689.2
11.3
21.2
Debt
1187.4
1665.5
1931.7
1422.6
1563.2
1526.0
1457.4
1545.9
1490.5
1520.1
1433.5
1221.0
1312.6
1302.5
1470.0
9.9
12.9
Other
6221.4
7581.0
10,363.2
12,176.2 9341.6
10,749.7 12,099.3 10,978.1 10,016.9 10,200.5 8734.4
8404.4
8567.4
8523.3
9568.4
64.2
17.7
Gold & 
forex 
reserves
43.2
45.0
53.5
52.9
65.0
77.6
87.8
98.0
101.2
105.6
129.5
134.6
150.8
154.8
92.8
0.6
41.7
Liabilities
10,397.5
13,118.9
16,762.9
16,566.5 14,785.3 16,144.6 17,385.4 17,237.8 16,398.0 16,577.0 14,821.2 13,549.3 14,736.2 14,543.7 15,216.0 102.0
12.7
FDI
1191.6
1520.1
1578.9
1376.7
1427.1
1484.4
1537.0
1973.9
2083.7
2066.1
2005.4
1908.9
2112.7
2220.5
1749.1
11.7
19.1
Portfolio
2568.5
3410.1
4030.1
2953.7
3912.8
3987.4
4034.1
4352.7
4513.0
4495.2
4374.0
3818.0
4533.0
4475.6
3961.3
26.6
15.3
Equity
1107.8
1495.3
1634.3
841.8
1305.8
1413.6
1376.3
1666.8
1969.9
1909.2
1844.9
1548.5
1990.0
1968.6
1576.6
10.6
22.1
Debt
1460.6
1914.8
2395.8
2111.9
2607.1
2573.9
2657.8
2685.9
2543.1
2586.0
2529.0
2269.5
2543.0
2506.9
2384.7
16.0
14.4
Other
6637.4
8188.7
11,153.8
12,236.2 9445.4
10,672.8 11,814.3 10,911.2 9801.3
10,015.8 8441.9
7822.5
8090.4
7847.6
9505.7
63.8
18.0
Net assets
−55.6
−226.3
−241.8
223.6
−391.6
−189.9
−288.3
−760.4
−522.8
−635.5
−564.8
−59.0
−236.5
−325.3
−305.3
−2.0
−84.7
FDI
451.1
427.7
722.1
720.5
616.6
618.1
571.1
253.4
283.5
99.8
74.8
16.5
14.9
−92.0
341.3
2.3
83.4
Portfolio
−133.8
−91.2
−226.8
−489.8
−969.4
−962.4
−1232.2 −1178.8 −1123.1 −1025.7 −1061.6 −792.0
−879.2
−1063.8 −802.1
−5.4
−49.6
Equity
139.4
158.1
237.3
199.5
74.5
85.5
−31.8
−38.8
−70.5
40.2
33.9
256.5
351.2
140.7
112.5
0.8
108.9
Debt
−273.2
−249.3
−464.1
−689.3
−1043.9 −1047.9 −1200.4 −1140.0 −1052.6 −1065.9 −1095.6 −1048.5 −1230.4 −1204.4 −914.7
−6.1
−37.8

172        M. J. Howell
Table 8.7  France—international investment position, 2005–18 (US$ in millions)
Source IMF
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Average
Percent 
(%)
Stdev 
(%)
Assets
4640.1
5969.1
7347.8
7351.9
7848.1
7692.5
7719.9
8070.0
8078.4
7933.8
7089.8
7081.8
7929.6
7809.4
7325.9
100.0
13.0
FDI
911.9
1143.2
1382.7
1320.4
1504.8
1557.0
1608.5
1709.0
1771.0
1691.7
1632.1
1643.3
1855.2
1887.0
1544.1
21.1
17.7
Portfolio
1873.3
2437.7
2965.0
2605.3
2983.2
2806.2
2413.9
2626.8
2872.9
2752.8
2549.5
2530.4
2928.3
2710.4
2646.8
36.1
11.0
Equity
524.9
716.8
826.9
474.8
646.0
665.8
519.3
652.6
812.3
770.7
748.0
754.6
962.3
796.5
705.1
9.6
19.2
Debt
1348.4
1720.9
2138.1
2130.6
2337.1
2140.4
1894.6
1974.2
2060.6
1982.1
1801.5
1775.8
1966.0
1913.9
1941.7
26.5
12.3
Other
1780.6
2289.9
2884.4
3323.3
3227.1
3163.1
3525.6
3549.7
3289.5
3345.9
2770.0
2761.3
2989.7
3045.4
2996.1
40.9
16.2
Gold & forex 
reserves
74.4
98.2
115.7
102.9
133.1
166.2
171.9
184.5
144.9
143.4
138.2
146.8
156.4
166.6
138.8
1.9
22.6
Liabilities
4674.2
6076.6
7587.0
7720.1
8242.8
7919.1
7920.7
8423.3
8561.7
8341.4
7399.2
7431.9
8483.1
8116.1
7635.5
104.2
14.0
FDI
644.7
813.4
996.3
949.2
1032.3
1014.8
1055.0
1116.9
1206.9
1097.5
1051.3
1068.6
1278.1
1279.7
1043.2
14.2
16.2
Portfolio
2081.9
2585.3
2926.4
2592.3
3299.0
3234.8
3121.1
3482.3
3862.2
3706.3
3359.2
3329.9
3817.1
3318.0
3194.0
43.6
15.8
Equity
690.4
990.3
1060.4
624.8
825.8
774.0
647.7
811.0
1009.2
902.2
853.5
878.6
1077.8
682.7
844.9
11.5
17.9
Debt
1391.4
1594.9
1866.0
1967.5
2473.2
2460.8
2473.4
2671.3
2853.0
2804.1
2505.7
2451.3
2739.3
2635.3
2349.1
32.1
19.6
Other
1947.6
2677.9
3664.3
4178.6
3911.5
3669.5
3744.6
3824.1
3492.6
3537.6
2988.7
3033.5
3387.9
3518.4
3398.4
46.4
16.9
Net assets
−34.1
−107.5
−239.2
−368.2
−394.7
−226.5
−200.9
−353.3
−483.4
−407.6
−309.4
−350.2
−553.5
−306.7
−309.6
−4.2
−45.1
FDI
267.2
329.8
386.4
371.2
472.5
542.3
553.5
592.1
564.1
594.2
580.8
574.8
577.1
607.3
500.9
6.8
22.8
Portfolio
−208.6
−147.5
38.6
13.0
−315.8
−428.6
−707.2
−855.4
−989.3
−953.5
−809.7
–799.4
−888.8
−607.6
−547.1
−7.5
−66.7
Equity
−165.6
−273.5
−233.5
−150.1
−179.7
−108.3
−128.4
−158.3
−196.9
−131.5
−105.4
−124.0
−115.5
113.8
−139.8
−1.9
−62.8
Debt
−43.1
126.0
272.2
163.1
−136.1
−320.4
−578.8
−697.1
−792.4
−822.0
−704.3
−675.5
−773.3
−721.4
−407.4
−5.6
−98.9

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        173
hedge fund-like structure, because it essentially leverages purchases of risk 
assets (e.g. circa 5-times) with short-term ‘safe’ asset liabilities (21.8%). The 
US is the main exporter of risk-seeking capital, while Emerging Markets 
are the main exporter of risk-averse capital. US gross capital flows peaked 
at US$3.76 trillion in 2007, or almost double their 2005 total. We noted 
earlier that this rapid balance sheet growth was ignored at the time, while 
the more closely watched net capital flow figure stayed remarkably stable, 
averaging around US$730 billion over the 2005–2008 period, so inadvert-
ently allaying fears of future trouble ahead of the GFC. Although US gross 
equity flows have since surpassed their 2007 peak in 2014, both gross FDI 
and gross debt flows remain reassuringly well-below this high-water mark. 
Figures 8.11 and 8.12 summarise the broader capital flow evidence across 
the six major economies over the 2005–2018 period. The data in Fig. 8.11 
reports gross capital flows by category: FDI increased from 15% of aggregate 
activity to more than 25%, whereas gross banking flows have dropped from 
their 2007 peak of 52% to under 40%. Within the mix of gross portfolio 
flows, bonds have suffered a similar slide to banking flows, falling from 30% 
in 2005 to under 20% in 2018, while equity flows have climbed in impor-
tance from barely 7% in 2007 to nearly 16% of all gross capital activity in 
2018. Measured by gross flows, FDI represented 28.2% of US capital move-
ments over the 2005–2018 years, according to Fig. 8.12, with debt securities 
Ϭй
ϭϬй
ϮϬй
ϯϬй
ϰϬй
ϱϬй
ϲϬй
ϮϬϬϱ
ϮϬϬϲ
ϮϬϬϳ
ϮϬϬϴ
ϮϬϬϵ
ϮϬϭϬ
ϮϬϭϭ
ϮϬϭϮ
ϮϬϭϯ
ϮϬϭϰ
ϮϬϭϱ
ϮϬϭϲ
ϮϬϭϳ
ϮϬϭϴ
&/
ƋƵŝƚǇ
ŽŶĚƐ
ĂŶŬŝŶŐ
Fig. 8.11  Trends in gross World cross-border flows (major advanced economies), 
2005–2018 (percent of total) (Source IMF)

174        M. J. Howell
making up a further 31.3% and banking flows 28.8%. The most volatile cat-
egories are banking flows, with a standard deviation of 56.1% of their mean 
value, followed by debt flows at 46.2%. The decline in the aggregate share 
taken by the traditionally more volatile banking and debt flows may improve 
the stability of the international financial system.
The dominance of banking and debt flows is plain to see across other 
major economies. These flows directly, or indirectly through collateral, 
drive changes in domestic credit and, hence, in global liquidity. Banking 
flows alone accounted for 58.7% of average UK capital movements over 
the 2005–2018 period; 45.2% of French flows; 41.2% of German flows; 
41.2% of Chinese flows and 34.1% of Japanese flows. The importance of 
banking to the UK is underscored by their 64.2% average share of UK for-
eign assets over the period and the near-equivalent 63.8% of UK foreign 
liabilities. Bonds played a larger role in Germany, accounting for 25.9% 
of gross flows and 26.9% of Germany’s foreign liabilities. FDI made up a 
28.2%
13.6%
31.3%
28.8%
US: Gross Flows
FDI
Equity
Debt
Banking
44.2%
6.8%
8.5%
41.2%
China: Gross Flows
FDI
Equity
Debt
Banking
18.8%
15.7%
31.4%
34.1%
Japan: Gross Flows
FDI
Equity
Debt
Banking
23.4%
8.2%
25.9%
41.2%
Germany: Gross Flows
FDI
Equity
Debt
Banking
14.0%
8.1%
18.2%
58.7%
UK: Gross Flows
FDI
Equity
Debt
Banking
18.1%
9.4%
28.0%
45.2%
France: Gross Flows
FDI
Equity
Debt
Banking
Fig. 8.12  Structure of capital flows—major economies, percentage share by gross 
flow type, average 2005–2018 (Source IMF)

8  Cross-Border Capital Flows        175
sizeable 44.2% of Chinese gross capital flows over this period and 38.9% 
of China’s foreign liabilities. Official gold and forex reserves at 58.3% 
dominate China’s stock of foreign assets, which emphasises the Chinese 
government’s active role in recycling dollars. The private financial sec-
tor plays a small part in recycling, which explains the still minor interna-
tional role played by the Yuan. We note in Chapter 9, the anomaly in the 
Chinese international data. For example, Chinese gross banking activity is 
dominated by Chinese residents borrowing US dollars: lending in Yuan to 
foreigners and foreign purchases of Chinese domestic bonds is to date min-
imal. China is re-exporting US dollars, when she should be exporting Yuan. 
This has to change.
Notes
	 1.	 From the movie All the President’s Men about the Watergate break-in.
	 2.	 See: Gopinath, G, The International Price System, Jackson Hole Economic 
Symposium, 2016.
	 3.	 See also: https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2019/02/the-us-dol-
lars-global-roles-where-do-things-stand.html.
	 4.	 ‘Pull, Push, Pipes’ Speech by Governor Mark Carney, Tokyo, 6 June 2019.
	 5.	 The 2010 Dodd–Frank Act took some powers away from the Federal 
Reserve Board. Certain emerging market economies, such as Mexico and 
Brazil, have previously accessed temporary US dollar swap lines, but these 
have now lapsed.
	 6.	 Also known as global value chains (GVC).
	 7.	 Helene Rey, IMF Mundell Fleming Lecture, 2015.
	 8.	 Gross capital inflows are formally defined as the net acquisition of domestic 
assets by non-residents; gross capital outflows as the net acquisition of for-
eign assets by residents, excluding official reserves; and net capital flows as 
the difference between gross capital inflows and outflows.
	 9.	 It is sometimes called the Asian Savings Glut and the Excess Savings view.
	10.	 Gabriel Zucman, The Missing Wealth of Nations, QJE 128(3), August.
	11.	 Foreign assets comprise around two-thirds of overall European bank assets, 
compared to around one-third for US banks.
	12.	 Under CIP, interest rate differentials between currency pairs are fully 
reflected by their forward exchange rate parity.
	13.	 London Interbank Offered Rate.
	14.	 By French Finance Minister Valery Giscard d’Estaing, 16 February 1965.
	15.	 See the speech by Chinese Major-General Qiao Liang, April, 2015 quoted 
in Chapter 1.

176        M. J. Howell
References
Bank for International Settlements. 2019. Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign 
Exchange and Over-The-Counter (OTC) Derivatives Markets in 2019. https://
www.bis.org/statistics/rpfx19.htm.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account 
Deficit. Federal Reserve Board, Remarks made at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia 
Association of Economists, Richmond, Virginia, March.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2015. Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking 
Channel of Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 71 (April): 119–132.
European Central Bank. 2016. Dealing with Large and Volatile Capital Flows and 
the Role of the IMF. Occasional Paper No. 180, September.
Goldberg, Linda S., and Robert Lerman. 2019. The U.S. Dollar’s Global Roles: 
Where Do Things Stand? Liberty Street Economics, February.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey. 2007. International Financial 
Adjustment. Journal of Political Economy 115 (4) (August): 665–703.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Helene Rey, and Maxime Sauzet. 2019. The 
International Monetary and Financial System. LBS Working Paper, April 
(Forthcoming, Annual Review of Economics ).
Lane, Philip R., and Peter McQuade. 2013. Domestic Credit Growth and 
International Capital Flows. ECB Working Paper No. 1566, July.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2008. The Drivers of Financial 
Globalization. American Economic Review 98 (2): 327–332.
Rey, Hélène. 2013. Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and 
Monetary Policy Independence. Jackson Hole Conference, August 2013.
Rey, Hélène. 2015. IMF Mundell Fleming Lecture.
Shin, Hyun Song. 2012. Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium. IMF 
Economic Review 60: 155–192.
Tooze, Adam. 2018. Crashed. London: Penguin.
Zucman, Gabriel. 2013. The Missing Wealth of Nations. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 128 (3) (August): 1321–1364.
