233
The Financial Cycle
Finance may have evolved through the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
from national pools of surplus funds, but today we have a global banking and 
financial system, made up of private firms acting largely independently of 
their domestic economy’s needs. We argue in Chapter 8 that capital imports 
do not accurately measure another country’s net savings, rather they often 
represent a credit flow from one financial institution outside the country 
to another one inside. For example, although both the UK and the US run 
large and persistent current account deficits, their financial sectors are major 
sources of international credit. Consequently, the 2007–2008 GFC was not 
about unsustainable current account deficits, but largely hinged on unsus-
tainable bank balance sheets, which resulted in a Global Liquidity collapse.
The standard economics and finance paradigms ignore money and liquid-
ity. Markets are assumed to exist everywhere and at all times, and frictionless 
trade is supposed to occur. Yet paradoxically, illiquidity is the ultimate friction 
and without sufficient liquidity there would be a widespread market failure 
and no trade. Illiquidity can occur both when the supply of money and credit 
breaks down, and when heightened uncertainty (again assumed away in the 
standard framework) causes investors to hoard ‘safe’ assets, such as cash, for 
precautionary reasons. In practice, ‘no trade’ rather than ‘trade’ is more likely 
to be the normal state. Hence, fluctuations in the quantity of liquidity matter 
greatly. Put another way, in the real-world imperfect markets and market fail-
ures are commonplace, and the efficient market hypothesis (EMH), the bed-
rock of finance theory, simply does not apply. Financial crises happen.
11
Financial Crises and Safe Assets
© The Author(s) 2020 
M. J. Howell, Capital Wars,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39288-8_11

234        M. J. Howell
Our earlier definition of Global Liquidity is built around the two con-
cepts of: (1) Funding Liquidity—a monetary liquidity measure, defined as 
the ability to convert monetary assets into goods, financial instruments and 
services, domestically and internationally, and (2) Market Liquidity—a meas-
ure of financial market depth, defined as the ease of trading in assets relative 
to trading in money, and reflecting the cost of converting a financial asset 
into money. Although we mainly focus on funding liquidity, it is closely 
connected with market liquidity and the two frequency interact through 
collateral effects. We argued earlier that neither should not be seen in iso-
lation or as independent. We also show how these Global Liquidity flows 
are highly procyclical and how they can quickly evaporate, setting in motion 
self-sustaining and adverse dynamic effects, such as those often seen during 
financial crises.
The dominant players behind Global Liquidity are the US Federal 
Reserve, China’s PBoC and the cross-border funding markets, e.g. 
Eurodollars. China controls her huge retail deposit base largely through the 
management of bank reserves. Alongside, she accumulates US dollars since 
her exports and FDI are largely invoiced in the US unit, but, given the pri-
vate sector’s dominant domestic Yuan liabilities, the Chinese State under-
takes to manage economy-wide forex risk. The asymmetry, as we argued in 
Chapter 9, sees China essentially re-export large quantities of US dollars, 
rather than exporting Yuan. At the same time, US liquidity increasingly 
depends on the wholesale money markets, which receive these Chinese 
and similar US dollar inflows from corporate and institutional cash pools 
(CICPs). However, the wholesale markets are leveraged and collateral-based, 
and they suffer from a structural shortage of high-quality safe asset instru-
ments, which forces demand to spillover into riskier longer maturities and 
flakier credit substitutes. A further amplification mechanism kicks in when, 
encouraged by interest rate and regulatory arbitrage, US dollar wholesale 
deposits head into the offshore Eurodollar markets, where they are typically 
lent back to US and Emerging Market borrowers. In turn, the resulting 
cross-border capital inflows into the Emerging Market economies both serve 
as additional bank collateral and also get multiplied up when local Central 
Banks intervene in their forex markets.
These swings in the liquidity cycle drive risk appetite, which, in turn, 
feedsback positively on to funding liquidity via market liquidity, thereby 
amplifying the cycle. Together market liquidity, funding liquidity and 
risk appetite make up what has been termed by academics the financial 
cycle. This is shown in Fig. 11.1, with these three key components charted 

11  Financial Crises and Safe Assets        235
separately in Fig. 11.2. In the words of Rey1 (2015): “[The] Global Financial 
Cycle can be associated with surges and dry outs in capital flows, booms and 
busts in asset prices and crises … The empirical results on capital flows, leverage 
and credit growth are suggestive of an international credit channel or risk-taking 
channel and point towards financial stability issues ”.
Is Stability Destabilising?
Yet, on paper at least, the World financial system should be more stable, fol-
lowing the changes enacted since the 2007–2008 GFC. For example, there 
is more and, arguably, better official regulation. Banks have greater capital 
buffers since the Basel III regulations, and their funding has become less reli-
ant on wholesale markets. Central Banks are more active and the latest mix 
of cross-border capital flows embraces fewer volatile components. Liquidity 
Coverage Ratios (LCRs) now require 100% of liquidity to be matched, for 
30 days ahead, for each foreign legal subsidiary. It is now harder to access 
deposits across borders, and even if foreign assets are not explicitly penal-
ised, they are far more closely scrutinised. In addition, although regulation is 
still predominantly national, international oversight is more important, such 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Bear Market
World Financial Cycle
Stagflation era & 'Carter' dollar
Volcker's US Monetary Squeeze
Continental Illinois Failure
1987 Stock Market Crash
Japanese Market Collapse
Emerging Markets Bubble
Japanese Deflation
1997-98 Asian Crisis
Y2K Bubble
2007-08 GFC
2010-12 Eurozone Debt/ Banking Crisis
Chinese Monetary Squeeze
G20 'Shanghai Accord'
ECB and US Federal Reserve engage QT
Fig. 11.1  The World financial cycle—hybrid of funding liquidity, market liquidity and 
investors’ risk appetite, 1976–2019 (Index 0–100) (Source CrossBorder Capital )

236        M. J. Howell
as the greater involvement of the IMF and BIS, and the recognition of the 
dangers of regulatory arbitrage between incongruent regimes. This occurred 
ahead of the GFC, when tight regulation of US banks through leverage 
ratios forced them to sell their loans, largely to European banks, who were 
more constrained by their capital ratios. This led to an amplifying feedback 
mechanism, or what was later dubbed a ‘liquidity pump’.
At the same time, it is worth recalling Churchill’s justly famous dictum 
that in the beginning we create our institutions and, in the end, they create 
us. His wisdom frequently applies to finance. For example, many policy-mak-
ers have unquestioningly adopted Wicksell’s view that monetary systems are 
inherently stable and are only destabilised by errant Central Bank actions: “To 
combat depression by a forced credit expansion is to attempt to cure the evil by the 
very means which brought it about; because we are suffering from a misdirection of 
production, we want to create further misdirection – a procedure which can only 
lead to a much more severe crisis as soon as the credit expansion comes to an end ”.2 
On the other hand, according to Kaufman3 (2017), the US Federal Reserve 
still does not fully understand the connections between its monetary policy 
ͲϴϬ
ͲϲϬ
ͲϰϬ
ͲϮϬ
Ϭ
ϮϬ
ϰϬ
ϲϬ
ϴϬ
Ϭ
ϭϬ
ϮϬ
ϯϬ
ϰϬ
ϱϬ
ϲϬ
ϳϬ
ϴϬ
ϵϬ
ϭϬϬ
:ĂŶͲϴϬ
DĂǇͲϴϭ
^ĞƉͲϴϮ
:ĂŶͲϴϰ
DĂǇͲϴϱ
^ĞƉͲϴϲ
:ĂŶͲϴϴ
DĂǇͲϴϵ
^ĞƉͲϵϬ
:ĂŶͲϵϮ
DĂǇͲϵϯ
^ĞƉͲϵϰ
:ĂŶͲϵϲ
DĂǇͲϵϳ
^ĞƉͲϵϴ
:ĂŶͲϬϬ
DĂǇͲϬϭ
^ĞƉͲϬϮ
:ĂŶͲϬϰ
DĂǇͲϬϱ
^ĞƉͲϬϲ
:ĂŶͲϬϴ
DĂǇͲϬϵ
^ĞƉͲϭϬ
:ĂŶͲϭϮ
DĂǇͲϭϯ
^ĞƉͲϭϰ
:ĂŶͲϭϲ
DĂǇͲϭϳ
^ĞƉͲϭϴ
&ƵŶĚŝŶŐ>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ
DĂƌŬĞƚ>ŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇ
ZŝƐŬƉƉĞƟƚĞ
Fig. 11.2  Components of World financial cycle—funding liquidity, market liquidity 
and investors’ risk appetite, 1980–2019 (Index 0–100) (Source CrossBorder Capital )

11  Financial Crises and Safe Assets        237
and the financial markets. Similarly, our concerns focus on policy-makers, 
in general, in: (1) not understanding the need for balance sheet capacity to 
facilitate debt rollovers, and their associated (2) failure to supply sufficient safe 
assets. Put another way, many regulators and policy-makers have never prop-
erly adapted to the evolving financial structure. On top, these same authori-
ties promoted the further concentration of the financial system, but alongside 
they have demonstrated slow and often erratic responses to the growing finan-
cial tensions. Examples include the rapid accumulation of debt Worldwide, as 
well as its progressive slide in quality, as illustrated in the US by the dramatic 
loss in AAA grade borrowing status.4 At the same time, there have been the 
widespread and uncontrolled use of derivatives, maturity and foreign exchange 
mismatches, growing securitisation and off-balance sheet financing. In short, 
a rapacious pace of innovation, while, the GFC itself highlighted the crucial 
delay in tackling the BNP Paribas fund suspension in 2007 and the short-
sighted error made by sanctioning the Lehman bankruptcy.
These were not the only errors. Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan, 
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and his deputy Larry Summers, together pro-
moted the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 that ultimately removed the 1933 
Glass-Stegall Act that, among the other safeguards brought in after the 1929 
Crash and subsequent Depression, had for decades separated US commercial 
and investment banking. This new legislation accelerated the concentration 
among US financial firms and further weakened Federal Reserve control. This 
may help to explain how more than three-quarters of America’s financial assets 
are now controlled by the ten largest financial conglomerates. Yet, as recently 
as 1990, the then ten largest firms controlled barely 10%. This fact voices the 
popular crie-de-coeur of ‘too big to fail’ and forces the US authorities to be still 
more interventionist, so reaching well-beyond their traditional mandates.
Rather than ‘too big to fail’, what should be of more concern is ‘too inter-
connected to fail’. The brilliantly prescient cartoonist David Low sketched 
a hilariously accurate lampoon for the London Evening Standard at the 
depth of the Depression (May 24, 1932). His cartoon, showing the World 
economy adrift on the high seas with the caption: “Phew, that’s a nasty leak. 
Thank goodness it’s not at our end of the boat ”, parodied the foolishness of 
policy-makers’ response to the early 1930s Central European banking crisis. 
Brought up to date, it could easily apply to the recent 2010–2012 Eurozone 
banking crisis. Europe’s banks were subsequently saved by ECB President 
Draghi’s famous three words5—“…whatever it takes ”—that ushered in the 
massive quantitative easing programme. His words echoed the earlier force-
ful determination of “Making sure ‘It’ doesn’t happen here… ” the famous 
anti-deflation speech made by former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke in 

238        M. J. Howell
November 2002. Yet, in its latest iteration, the data shows that global debt is 
now growing fastest among non-financial companies, with government debt 
also expanding, and household debt levels strained and seemingly near to a 
saturation point. A 2019 report by the Robert Triffin International Institute6 
focusses on these cross-border risks and warns about the fragile state of 
funding. The report notes that the US dollar debt of non-banks outside of 
the US stands at record levels, and by drilling deeper it exposes substan-
tial currency mismatches and worryingly high private sector leverage, with 
the newly rising reliance on international bond markets creating additional 
latent risks. Overall, there is a growing unease among practitioners about the 
dominance of the US dollar, and concern over the inadequacy of an interna-
tional financial safety net.
All this surely questions the abilities of the international financial system 
to generate further meaningful increases in credit, and of the Central Banks 
to be able to tighten policy sufficiently when a future need arises, say, from 
higher inflation? We emphasised in earlier chapters how modern finance has 
inevitably geared itself towards refinancing existing debts, rather than con-
tinuing to provide new credit. Thus, while the shadow banks are typically 
involved in two-thirds of funding, e.g. ‘re-packaging’ of existing loans, they 
supply only 15% of new credit, according to IMF estimates. What shadow 
banks essentially do is to transform traditional bank assets and liabilities by 
refinancing them in longer and more complex intermediation chains, e.g. A 
lends to B who lends to C, etc. The fragility of the financial system, evidenced 
so disastrously in the 2007–2008 GFC, is highlighted by this intermediation 
process because when A lends to B, and B lends to C, etc. through to Z, any 
break in this wholesale lending chain can notionally bankrupt an alphabet 
of ‘twenty-six’ firms and not just one. On top, the widespread use of mar-
ket-based collateral introduces a hierarchy into liabilities, making the system 
both more procyclical and more than ever dependent on the interventions 
of Central Banks. This latter dependence can surely only deepen in a future 
World of electronic and digital monies? The ongoing dominance of refinanc-
ing activity over new financing makes access to credit lines more important 
than interest rates and emphasises that QE (quantitative easing) and QT 
(quantitative tightening) are critical policy levers. In the real economy, money 
matters, but in financial markets it is credit and liquidity that really count. 
According to the textbook model, credit is normally created via banks, with 
new liquidity provided by Central Banks and funding backstopped by State 
deposit guarantees. Ahead of the 2007–2008 GFC, securitisation was wide-
spread, new liquidity came from interbank markets and funding was back-
stopped by credit default swaps (CDS). The pre-GFC model clearly failed, 

11  Financial Crises and Safe Assets        239
but in its latest precarious incarnation, featuring dominant wholesale markets, 
new liquidity is provided by CICPs (corporate and institutional cash pools) 
and funding is backstopped by sometimes flaky collateral.
The drive for greater financial elasticity, in turn, has fuelled a jump in 
cross-border flows outside of the realm of US Federal Reserve interest 
rate and regulatory control, so providing an additional source of leverage. 
International integration has consequently jumped. In fact, by so much that 
the velocity of cross-border flows and the scale of the associated financial 
spillovers seriously questions the continuing validity of economist Robert 
Mundell’s famous trilemma, which describes the ability of open economies 
to operate independent monetary policies. In practice, it seems that domes-
tic economies can never be fully insulated from these international monetary 
shocks. This should raise concerns over potential financial instability and go 
a long way to explain the well-known concentration and bunching together 
of recent international financial crises, as noted by Reinhart and Rogoff 
(2009), Schularick and Taylor (2012), and Jordà et al. (2018). Indeed, in 
practice, international financial crises tend to be preceded by build-ups in 
leverage, with the scale of instability almost certainly amplified by govern-
ment austerity policies and by the rise of shadow banks and CICPs. This 
experience appears to confirm Hyman Minsky’s well-documented financial 
instability hypothesis (FIH), which argues that liabilities experience three dif-
ferent financing regimes: (1) hedged, (2) speculative and (3) Ponzi. Whereas 
the hedged regime is stable for both markets and economies, speculative and 
Ponzi are unstable. Speculative schemes need liquidity to allow their debts to 
be rolled over: Ponzi schemes demand both liquidity and rising asset prices. 
Neither can be guaranteed and, according to Minsky “…stability leads to 
instability”, meaning that ultimately the hedged regimes regress through 
time towards the speculative and Ponzi regimes.
With its vast and visible stock-piles of past capital accumulation, modern 
capitalism has to operate a huge refinancing system. This, in turn, demands 
a stable credit instrument that is able to support these debt rollovers. Gold 
is not sufficiently elastic and the supplies of State money and debt are often 
compromised by policy-makers’ concerns over their low inflation mandates 
and a desire to honour the prevailing free market/laissez faire ideology. The 
resulting safe asset supply shortfall encourages private sector initiatives to 
create substitutes, but these by definition frequently lie beyond the realm of 
State regulation and consequently miss out on State support. What’s more, 
these private sector instruments can be highly procyclical, so in downturns 
when liquidity is most needed, it is simply not there. Such nagging ill-disci-
pline makes them poorly suited to serve as ‘safe’ assets.

240        M. J. Howell
Bagehot famously noted7 that ‘money does not manage itself ’. Indeed, the 
story of financial crises is often a story of the failure of these safe assets, 
which may explain why crises can be so wrenching and traumatic. Investors 
are prepared to take losses on their risky investments, but they do not expect 
to take losses on supposedly safe ones. Policy-makers are always trying to 
make the financial system safer by encouraging investors to invest more in 
safe assets. However, by not supplying enough safe assets and then having 
to hastily react and bailout the system, they end-up creating moral hazard 
by making many risky investments safe, while some of the most dangerous 
investments turn out to be those that were once believed to be completely 
safe. Indeed, the ferocity of this long monetary debate over the elasticity and 
safety of means of settlement looks set to escalate, given the rapid evolution 
and deployment of electronic and digital monies, and the likely growing 
emphasis on collateral, as we briefly outlined in Chapter 7.
A Worldwide Shortage of ‘Safe’ Assets?
Every financial crisis, it seems, involves some form of failure of safe assets. 
Keynes put it slightly differently by pointing out that there can be no such 
thing as liquidity for the investment community as a whole: someone has to 
take on risk. We know that, in times of financial stress, the wholesale fund-
ing markets demand higher quality collateral. This usually takes the form of 
long-term US Treasury debt or its international equivalent. However, this is 
currently in scarce supply, which must surely mean that the financial sys-
tem is more vulnerable? Large-scale asset purchases (LSAP) by the Federal 
Reserve and other Central Banks have squeezed the wholesale markets by 
stripping them of the best collateral. Some academic experts have argued 
that because interest is paid on reserves and near-zero yields exist nearly 
everywhere, Central Bank money has become indistinguishable from all 
other financial assets. This is a contentious viewpoint. We have noted how 
‘liquidity’ has two dimensions: low duration and limited credit risk, which 
means that it can be instantly turned into legal tender without discount. We 
can think of a ‘safe’ asset in similar terms, but with the difference that the 
time horizon is adjusted to take into account the timing of the asset owners’ 
future liabilities. A ‘safe’ asset can, therefore, be defined by its ability to cover 
expected liabilities, whereas a non-safe asset may not match expected liabil-
ities, either in their size (a solvency problem) or in the pattern of cash needs 
over time (a liquidity problem). This timing mismatch can be expressed 
through the finance concept of duration, or what can be thought of as the 

11  Financial Crises and Safe Assets        241
effective time horizon of the investment. Like maturity, duration is usually 
measured in years. The yield premium on an asset may partly compensate 
for this timing mismatch (or illiquidity). It is also likely that the longer that 
capital is tied-up, the greater its potential future return. Therefore ‘risky’ 
assets, as defined by their deviation away from some desired duration, 
should earn higher returns. In other words, a ‘safe’ asset has low credit risk 
and will match the duration of the asset owners’ expected future liabilities. 
An excess demand for safe assets, say, government bonds is usually expressed 
through higher bond prices, or, put more accurately, via narrower bond term 
premia. We noted earlier, in Chapters 7 and 10, that the period since the 
2007–2008 GFC, which has been characterised by both quantitative easing 
and the so-called ‘austerity’ policies, has been associated with large swings in 
term premia. In particular, whenever liquidity and/or safe assets are in scare 
(abundant) supply term premia narrow (widen).
Two observations follow: First, the most important price in the global 
financial system is always the price of the dominant economy’s (or econo-
mies’) sovereign debt, which today is made-up of the yield on US Treasuries 
plus the value of the US dollar. Second, the canonical ‘safe’ asset for many 
US domestic and international institutional investors is consequently the 
10-year US Treasury note, because it more closely matches the duration of 
liabilities, such as future pension pay-outs, than, say, cash.8 However, the 
textbooks tend to think in terms of cash, or even sometimes gold bullion, 
as the main safe assets, while the fast-growing corporate and institutional 
cash pools (CICPs) arguably favour a US dollar-denominated instrument of 
somewhat shorter maturity. Asset allocators actively decide the portfolio mix 
between holdings of risky and safe assets. Safe assets are more likely to match 
desired duration, but they will likely offer smaller returns. Although risky 
assets can deliver greater rewards, this may come at the cost of mismatched 
duration. A balance is required. Taking government bonds and cash as ‘safe’ 
assets and equities and corporate debt as risky, the risk/safe asset mix is likely 
to change through the economic cycle, but ultimately it should mean-re-
vert back to a level determined by expected future liabilities, as demon-
strated in Chapter 10. In turn, these liabilities will depend on long-term 
factors such as demographics, taxation, underlying inflation and risk aver-
sion. Figure 11.3 reports the ratio between the value of holdings of all equity 
securities, i.e. risk assets, by US and World investors and their respective 
holdings of safe assets. According to the chart, the value of risk assets hold-
ings compared to ‘safe’ assets currently looks somewhat extended for both 
World (circa 45%) and US (circa 55%) investors, compared to history. This 

242        M. J. Howell
warns of higher risk levels, but admittedly not to the same degree as in either 
year 2000, following the Y2K bubble, or ahead of the 2007–2008 GFC.
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
80.0%
90.0%
Jan-80
Dec-81
Nov-83
Oct-85
Sep-87
Aug-89
Jul-91
Jun-93
May-95
Apr-97
Mar-99
Feb-01
Jan-03
Dec-04
Nov-06
Oct-08
Sep-10
Aug-12
Jul-14
Jun-16
May-18
USA
World
Fig. 11.3  US and World investors’ market value of equity holdings to safe asset ratio 
(all investors), 1980–2019 (Source CrossBorder Capital )
Safe Assets
A ‘safe’ asset can be defined from its ability to cover expected liabilities. Unlike 
a legally defined ‘reserve asset’, a ‘safe’ asset is assessed subjectively. A non-
safe asset may not match expected liabilities, either in their size (a solvency 
problem) or timing (a liquidity problem). The yield premium on an asset may 
partly compensate for these mismatches. Typically, when there is an inad-
equate supply of safe assets, either portfolios are constrained and cannot 
expand in value, or the private sector creates additional elasticity by supplying 
its own ‘safe’ assets.
The IMF (2012) formally defines a ‘safe’ asset as a financial instrument that 
provides (1) low market and credit risks, (2) high market liquidity, (3) limited 
inflation risks, (4) low exchange rate risks and (5) limited idiosyncratic risks.
In practice, the definition of a safe asset often becomes fuzzy because it 
also involves geopolitical and psychological factors, such as trust, and belief. 
A safe asset is ‘safe’ only if others agree. Alongside, the history of safe assets 
shows that they share several properties:
1.	 Safe assets tend to rise in value during bad economic times, whereas riskier 
assets, such as equities and corporate and EM credits perform less well. In 
finance jargon, safe assets have a negative beta to the market.

11  Financial Crises and Safe Assets        243
2.	 Deep and liquid markets characterised by an ability to freely trade in large 
size around prevailing prices. It follows that capital controls can deny safe 
asset status.
3.	 Consistently lower yields than other assets. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2012) estimate that US Treasury yields are around 70 bps lower 
on average because of their better safety and liquidity features.
4.	 Greater fiscal capacity, as measured, say, by the low sensitivity of yields to 
an increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio, and the backing of a powerful, possi-
bly military, State, e.g. USA.
The canonical safe asset is the 10-year US Treasury note, but, in practice, 
the list of safe assets includes any instruments that are used in an informa-
tion-insensitive fashion, See G. Gorton, S. Lewellen, and A. Metrick, The Safe 
Asset Share, American Economic Review 102 (3), 2012; Safe Assets: Financial 
System Cornerstone? IMF Global Financial Stability Report, April 2012, and 
A. Krishnamurthy and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, Aggregate Demand for Treasury 
Debt. Journal of Political Economy, 120: 233–267, 2012.
Part of the reason for this extension in the risk-to-safe asset ratios is that the 
supplies of liquidity and government debt have lately been severely limited 
by austerity policies that restrict the issuance of government securities, and 
by the increasingly tighter regulations placed on traditional deposit-takers, 
such as high street banks, that ultimately limit the growth of their liabil-
ities. These new liquidity rules and collateral requirements have increased 
the need for banks to hold high quality liquid assets, which, reduces their 
availability to support other transactions, including repos. Thus, the lack of 
available high-quality collateral can have a significant impact on liquidity 
in secured markets, especially during periods of financial stress. Even aside 
from official regulations, prudential rules have also materially increased the 
opportunity cost of holding insufficient liquid assets, so further increasing 
the demand for them. Consequently, the lack of collateral has been ampli-
fied by the weakened supply of liquidity, which together create a still greater 
demand for safe assets, so exaggerating the shortfall.
According to the IMF (2012): “…heightened uncertainty, regulatory 
reforms, and crisis-related responses by Central Banks are driving up [safe asset] 
demand. On the supply side, the number of sovereigns whose debt is considered 
safe has fallen, which could remove some US$9 trillion from the supply of safe 
assets … or roughly 16 per cent… Private sector production of safe assets as also 
declined as poor securitization in the US has tainted these securities, while some 
new regulations may impair [supply]… ” This reduced supply of ‘safe’ assets—
here defined as government bonds in developed economies and cash and 

244        M. J. Howell
short-term instruments in Developed and Emerging economies—is shown 
in Fig. 11.4 as a percent of World GDP, alongside the annual growth rate 
of Global Liquidity. The new supply of international safe assets appears to 
have increased at around a 10% clip prior to the 2007–2008 GFC, but has 
since skidded lower to a barely positive pace. Even a decade of such sub-par 
growth would create a sizeable shortfall gap of some 80% compared to the 
pre-crisis trend. What’s more, as the supply of safe assets has dwindled, so 
the expansion of Global Liquidity has similarly faltered, thereby significantly 
reinforcing the degree of excess demand and helping to explain the further 
plunge in Treasury bond term premia.
This shortfall matters because, unlike the traditional bank-based credit 
supply, the prevailing wholesale money market-based system essentially 
depends upon a steady supply of fresh collateral. Although the CICPs pro-
vide sources of new funding, they demand liquid, collateralised savings 
instruments which the financial system provides through repos. The rapid 
growth of CICPs has consequently boosted repo demand and, hence, fur-
thered collateral needs. Structural shortages of Treasury securities have 
forced a large part of this institutional cash into collateralised and often 
‘newly-minted’ private sector instruments. American households, for exam-
ple, were encouraged from the early 2000s, often openly by politicians, 
to extend their mortgage financing. These loans could then be bundled 
-10.0%
-5.0%
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Non-US
US
Global Liquidity
Fig. 11.4  Supply of global ‘safe’ assets (percent of world GDP) and growth of Global 
Liquidity (%yoy), 1998–2020 (Source CrossBorder Capital )

11  Financial Crises and Safe Assets        245
together into higher-graded mortgage-backed securities (MBS). This led 
to banks and shadow banks borrowing more institutional cash from the 
money markets and lending it on to households and other nontraditional 
borrowers, such as Emerging Market corporations. Events then worsened. 
Assured they could easily roll over these positions, in what had by the early 
2000s become deep and liquid wholesale money markets, shadow bank 
lenders borrowed very short-term, often over horizons as slim as 7–14 days 
and often using MBS as collateral, but they simultaneously lent long-term, 
sometimes for 30 years thereby taking on huge maturity risks. The 2007–
2008 GFC proved that the depth and liquidity of the money markets was 
not a reliable constant. The British bank Northern Rock, which held 10% 
of the UK mortgage market, became an early casualty of rapidly evaporat-
ing funding liquidity in August 2007. These tensions came on top of what 
anyway were likely to be higher credit risks, simply because the lenders faced 
new and largely unknown borrowers. Consider the heightened risks faced by 
borrowers when a 30-year security or loan, supported, say, by 14-day bills, 
is required to be refinanced a whopping 778 times up to its maturity. This 
huge refinancing burden provides plenty of opportunities for something to 
go wrong.
In the decade since the GFC, the structural shortage of safe assets has 
been met by the money markets repo’ing high quality collateral, such as 
Treasury notes and high-grade corporate bonds. However, the still limited 
supplies of government securities have added pressure on corporations to 
issue more debt. American capital markets have benefitted, not least because 
US dollar assets are in particular demand, but also because the US has the 
largest and most liquid corporate bond market Worldwide. Consequently, 
US credit spreads have also narrowed and issuance by US corporations has 
risen strongly. Low prevailing capital expenditure needs have meant that 
much of this extra cash has been channelled back into Wall Street equi-
ties through share buy-back programmes, thereby lifting stock prices. The 
close correlation between debt issuance and equity buy-backs is shown in 
Fig. 11.5. Meanwhile, Fig. 11.6 highlights that equity retirements have reg-
ularly averaged a net 1–2% of total US market capitalisation over the past 
decade, so diminishing the available pool of equity.
Yet, all this comes at a cost. A critical fact is that this collateral-based 
mechanism for liquidity creation is highly procyclical because the quantity 
of new liquidity created rests heavily on the quality of available corporate 
debt, which, in turn, depends on the state of the business cycle. This linkage 
warns that widening credit spreads can have outsized effects on the provision 
of liquidity. It is also potentially fragile, because the repo system could itself 

246        M. J. Howell
breakdown if corporate default risks increase, so driving investors into the 
safety of already scarce government bonds. Wall Street’s sharp sell-off though 
December 2018 evidences accompanying jumps in both credit spreads and 
repo rates: between early November and late December 2018, US Single B 
High Yield (option-adjusted) spreads suddenly widened by over 200 bp to 
peak at 5.84%. This echoes the similarly fragile and procyclical system of 
liquidity provision that operated ahead of the 2007–2008 GFC, but which 
ͲϵϬϬϬϬϬ
ͲϴϬϬϬϬϬ
ͲϳϬϬϬϬϬ
ͲϲϬϬϬϬϬ
ͲϱϬϬϬϬϬ
ͲϰϬϬϬϬϬ
ͲϯϬϬϬϬϬ
ͲϮϬϬϬϬϬ
ͲϭϬϬϬϬϬ
Ϭ
ͲϭϬϬϬϬϬ
Ϭ
ϭϬϬϬϬϬ
ϮϬϬϬϬϬ
ϯϬϬϬϬϬ
ϰϬϬϬϬϬ
ϱϬϬϬϬϬ
ϲϬϬϬϬϬ
ϳϬϬϬϬϬ
ŽƌƉŽƌĂƚĞĞďƚ/ƐƐƵĂŶĐĞ
ƋƵŝƚǇZĞƚŝƌĞŵĞŶƚƐ
Fig. 11.5  US corporate debt issuance and net equity retirements, 2012–2019 (US dollars  
in millions) (Source CrossBorder Capital )
ͲϮ͘Ϭй
Ͳϭ͘Ϭй
Ϭ͘Ϭй
ϭ͘Ϭй
Ϯ͘Ϭй
ϯ͘Ϭй
ϰ͘Ϭй
ϱ͘Ϭй
ϲ͘Ϭй
ϳ͘Ϭй
ϴ͘Ϭй
ϮϬϬϬYϭ
ϮϬϬϬYϰ
ϮϬϬϭYϯ
ϮϬϬϮYϮ
ϮϬϬϯYϭ
ϮϬϬϯYϰ
ϮϬϬϰYϯ
ϮϬϬϱYϮ
ϮϬϬϲYϭ
ϮϬϬϲYϰ
ϮϬϬϳYϯ
ϮϬϬϴYϮ
ϮϬϬϵYϭ
ϮϬϬϵYϰ
ϮϬϭϬYϯ
ϮϬϭϭYϮ
ϮϬϭϮYϭ
ϮϬϭϮYϰ
ϮϬϭϯYϯ
ϮϬϭϰYϮ
ϮϬϭϱYϭ
ϮϬϭϱYϰ
ϮϬϭϲYϯ
ϮϬϭϳYϮ
ϮϬϭϴYϭ
ϮϬϭϴYϰ
Fig. 11.6  US net equity retirements (percent of market capitalisation), 2000–2019 
(Source CrossBorder Capital )

11  Financial Crises and Safe Assets        247
then centred on MBS (mortgage-backed securities) and other ABS (asset-
backed securities). In 2007–2008, the deterioration in the US housing mar-
ket proved to be an important trigger in destroying system-wide liquidity.
One solution to the ‘safe’ asset shortage is to force the Treasury to 
issue more long-term debt with, say, 30-year or even 100-year maturities. 
Quantitative easing policies that involve simply replacing government bonds 
with, say, Federal Reserve notes are far less effective because they soak up 
collateral, as Chapter 6 highlighted. Policy-makers must find the motivation 
to increase the overall government balance sheet, i.e. Treasury and Federal 
Reserve liabilities, and invent more innovative methods to free up collateral 
for the wholesale markets.
Notes
1.	 Helene Rey, IMF Mundell Fleming Lecture, 2015.
2.	 Frederick von Hayek, Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle, 1933.
3.	 Henry Kaufman, Tectonic Shifts in Financial Markets, Palgrave, 2017.
4.	 Johnson & Johnson and Microsoft are the only two US companies rat-
ed-AAA the highest credit rating from S&P, down from 98 in 1992.
5.	 See https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html.
6.	 See 
http://www.triffininternational.eu/images/global_liquidity/RTI-CSF_
Report-Global-Liquidity_Dec2019.pdf.
7.	 Walter Bagehot, Lombard Street, 1873.
8.	 G. Gorton, S. Lewellen, and A. Metrick, The Safe Asset Share, American 
Economic Review 102 (3), and Global Financial Stability Report, 
International Monetary Fund, April 2012.
References
International Monetary Fund. 2012. Global Financial Stability Report, April.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, Alan M. Taylor, and Felix Ward. 2018. Global 
Financial Cycles and Risk Premiums. NBER Working Paper No. 24677, June.
Kaufman, Henry. 2017. Tectonic Shifts in Financial Markets. Cham: Palgrave.
Reinhart Carmen, M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight 
Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rey, Hélène. 2015. IMF Mundell Fleming Lecture.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary 
Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises. 1870–2008, American Economic 
Review 102 (2): 1029–1061.
