267
Peak Liquidity: Will Globalisation Be the First 
Victim of the Capital Wars?
The stone wall protecting the Union positions along Cemetery Ridge on 
the Civil War battlefield at Gettysburg has long symbolised the High-Water 
Mark of the Confederacy touched by rebel Americans in 1863. There is no 
such pointer on the trading screens of international finance, but one senses 
that the tide of Global Liquidity may also be going out? Instrumental in this 
shift is the unfolding US policy of no longer fully embracing China, but 
instead explicitly containing China’s economic and geopolitical challenge by, 
among other things, controlling trade, technology transfer and capital flows. 
Equally, China claims she has already adopted a similar policy to thwart US 
dollar hegemony. Although, to date, the retreat from globalisation towards a 
regionalism, based as much on ideology as geography, has centred on trade 
rather than capital flows, could we be reaching the equivalent High-Water 
Mark of Global Liquidity, i.e. ‘Peak Liquidity’? We foresee a deglobalisation 
and new regionalism, with geopolitics dictating the realm of capital, and 
China, at least in the eyes of many in the US, taking on the rebel role.
Trade wars by themselves are not always easy to win. Yet, win or lose, 
there is far more to economic dominance than trade in goods, and there are 
many more ways to hurt an industrial competitor than with tariffs. Flows of 
capital and technology matter at least as much and arguably more than flows 
of goods. Today, the central axis of China/US competition runs through 
leading-edge technologies, such as artificial intelligence (AI), 5G networks, 
14
Conclusion: A High-Water Mark?
© The Author(s) 2020 
M. J. Howell, Capital Wars,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39288-8_14

268        M. J. Howell
digital money and quantum computing, each of which has the potential to 
reshape the geopolitical balance of power in economic, cybersecurity and 
military spheres. Consequently, capital protectionism and limits on tech-
nology transfer likely pose a much greater economic threat to China and 
others than basic trade protection. China needs to import ‘intelligent’ and 
risk-seeking capital to maintain her growth and stability, evidenced by her 
recent removal of a longstanding hurdle to foreign investment and the unso-
licited bid made in September 2019 by the Hong Kong Stock Exchange to 
buy the London Stock Exchange. This would open an important conduit 
for capital to flow Eastwards and it almost certainly appears to be Beijing-
inspired. Only days earlier, the State Administration of Foreign Exchange 
(SAFE) announced that international investors would no longer be limited 
by quotas1 when buying Chinese stocks and bonds, so removing a barrier 
to inward foreign investment that had been in place for almost two decades. 
Capital wars matter.
We began by posing the question that if finance drives the World econ-
omy, then who or what drives finance? We have also seen that Central 
Banks have power, but not always control. Liquidity provision is increas-
ingly a global phenomenon, resting on a potentially wobbly collateral base, 
but largely under America’s and China’s direction. Alongside, and at least 
for now, the US Dollar continues to play a pivotal role, particularly in the 
cross-border markets. In fact, we noted the paradox that in the decades since 
the demise of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system, the World has 
become even more-dollar centric. Put another way, despite the slide in the 
relative size of the American economy, global investors are still dependent on 
decisions made by the US Federal Reserve and US Government. Ironically, 
the politically sensitive US trade deficit is largely explained by the competi-
tiveness of America’s financial markets, rather than by the assumed uncom-
petitiveness of her industry.
We reject the conclusion sometimes made that the World is inevitably 
moving towards a multipolar exchange rate system: a bilateral (or possibly if 
we include the Euro a trilateral) outcome seems the more plausible. An anal-
ogy is often made with the late-nineteenth century, when although Britain 
prima facie oversaw the gold standard, vital support for the system was peri-
odically provided by both France and Germany. In practice, these arrange-
ments seem little different from the current state, where the US dollar sits 
happily alongside other units, such as the Yen, Euro and Sterling. But it does 
not alter the reality that some two-thirds to three-quarters of real and finan-
cial market activity is transacted and settled in the dominant US unit.

14  Conclusion: A High-Water Mark?        269
All these facts ensure that the financial cycle will continue to be highly 
procyclical, sometimes fragile and always unpredictable. They may, in turn, 
explain our central proposition: why, as the investment World gets bigger, 
it also becomes more volatile? Global Liquidity provision has unquestiona-
bly become more erratic in the last three decades. The main supplier of the 
global currency to World markets is a large, low productivity growth econ-
omy, with highly developed financial markets and a capital surplus. The 
major user, increasingly through its GVCs (global value chains), is a large, 
high productivity growth economy, with underdeveloped financial markets 
and a greater need to import risk capital. This stark division characterises 
the growing economic rivalry between America and China: China may now 
enjoy the industrial power, but America remains the financial powerhouse 
with China forced to lean too heavily on the US dollar, which itself repre-
sents a further risk for global markets.
The Financial Silk Road
We have argued that the Fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 symbolised the key 
economic and geopolitical changes: as the shaky two-stroke Trabants2 trun-
dled Westwards, they were overtaken by a surge of Western capital rush-
ing Eastwards, eventually leading to the economic enfranchisement of 2–3 
billion ‘new producers’. These forces also hastened China’s own economic 
reforms that were started by Deng Xiaoping3 just a few years earlier and they 
encouraged similar reform movements across Latin America, led by Mexico’s 
privatisation programme and her negotiations towards NAFTA under 
President Carlos Salinas. The borders between spheres of economic influence 
are being redrawn as a result: China appears to be consolidating her influ-
ence in Asia, while at the same time expanding Westwards via the Belt and 
Road Initiative into Central Asia and ultimately into European and African 
markets. Europe’s own intensions are voiced through German capital, and 
the evidence already shows that Germany is redeploying her capital in the 
East, with Ukraine and Russia as likely future targets, and possibly then 
moving into parts of the Middle-East, including Turkey and Iran. US capital 
is left to expand Southwards into Latin America and to pick-up what scraps 
of influence it can retain in Europe and Asia, such as in Japan, Taiwan, 
Korea, South-East Asia and, possibly, India. It seems that the boundaries 
and many of the institutions of the post-WW2 settlement are finally being 
redrawn.

270        M. J. Howell
Risk capital is forever being pushed out from the large money cen-
tres in cyclical waves, but it is simultaneously being pulled towards faster 
growth economies. Risk capital facilitates economic ‘catch-up’, which many 
acknowledge as the only guaranteed source of growth in the modern indus-
trial era. China’s and other Emerging Markets’ resulting rapid productivity 
growth effectively forced the US, through a convoluted real-exchange adjust-
ment, to run a near-permanently loose monetary policy and for World mar-
kets to suffer the bubble consequences. The still nascent financial systems in 
China and other Emerging Markets have let this loose US money spillover 
via capital inflows and so fuel multiple local credit booms. Alongside, the 
new industrial competition spurred cost-cutting and ate into profit margins 
and economic growth in the West, forcing many firms to trim or even aban-
don new capital spending plans, since marginal returns on capital fell too 
low. Many businesses focussed instead on raising the average return on cap-
ital by slashing operating costs on their existing capital. By sweating on-site 
assets harder, they boosted industrial cash flows, which were channelled 
through wholesale money markets, rather than into high-street banks, or 
into large merger deals, which concentrate global industries, and share-buy-
backs that raise financial leverage. Financial markets were forced to focus 
more on capital distribution and refinancing, rather than serving as tradi-
tional capital-raising mechanisms. This changing role makes balance sheet 
capacity, i.e. the volume of liquidity, far more important in order to meet 
the exhausting and persistent demands for debt rollovers, than the cost of 
capital, i.e. interest rates, to finance the now seemingly less frequent, new 
capital projects. Also, by encouraging the build-up of corporate and institu-
tional cash pools (CICPs) these new forces effectively reversed the polarity 
of the international financial system. The resulting excess demand for ‘safe’ 
assets has reinforced the procyclicality of Global Liquidity and added a wor-
rying element of fragility.
This trend carries with it social and political costs. In the West, as 
cost-cutting ripped through middle-class work forces, it enfranchised top 
management’s valuable share options. By shaking-up employment patterns, 
many routine cognitive and semiskilled manual jobs have since been lost. 
Hours worked have dived and new jobs have largely come in the ‘low-hour’ 
industries and in the gig economy. Hurt by low wage growth, Western 
households were encouraged to borrow and mortgage more in order to keep 
up their rates of consumer spending. As industries turned towards ‘asset-lite’ 
business models, capital spending fell, notably in oil and retailing, and what 
has been left is concentrated in the hi-tech sectors. Debt has multiplied in 
industries like healthcare and technology, largely off-setting the slump in 

14  Conclusion: A High-Water Mark?        271
new debt flows going into more traditional industrial businesses, such as 
energy, autos and chemicals. These changes, reinforced by the prevailing 
negative demographic forces, have weakened underlying economic growth. 
Despite reportedly high aggregate rates of employment, social alienation, 
arising from a lack of job opportunities, has discouraged workers. The result-
ing gaping wealth disparities are destroying the middle ground in politics, 
leading to the so-called popularist policies that are now polarising into left 
and right-wing extremes. Capital matters.
The Rise of the Repo
History shows that as the economic system evolves, integrates and concen-
trates, large entities and vested interests have a tendency to control and limit 
price movements. These sticky prices and wages have forced more adjust-
ment on to quantities and asset prices, and hence on to balance sheets and 
incomes. China’s entry into the WTO in 2001 both furthered the extensive 
growth of regional supply chains and accelerated the intensive use of the US 
dollar within these platforms. This has both underscored and broadened the 
need for national currency stability against the US unit, in turn, leading to 
large increases in the size of forex reserve cushions across many Emerging 
Market economies and the parallel establishment of Sovereign Wealth Funds 
to help manage these cash pools: a period frequently dubbed ‘Bretton Woods 
II’ by commentators. Added to the equally massive pools of US dollar cash 
newly built-up by mature Western industrial corporations, these flows from 
the East account for a large part of the concentrated CICPs that have since 
outgrown the ability of traditional high street banks to provide safe, liquid 
assets. The rise of the repo and the resulting demands for evermore dol-
lars, both to hold as safe assets and to use as means of circulation in supply 
chains, set against the slow official supply, has forced their increasing substi-
tution via private sector provision. This drive for greater financial elasticity, 
in turn, has fuelled a jump in cross-border flows outside of the realm of US 
Federal Reserve interest rate and regulatory control, so providing an addi-
tional source of leverage both directly and indirectly through the Eurodollar 
markets. These offshore pools of footloose capital are ready sources of unreg-
ulated wholesale funding. They carry no national flags, know few bounda-
ries, and can shift rapidly at speeds only limited by the latest communication 
technologies, so amplifying the cycle of Global Liquidity.
It seems, in conclusion, that the financial market volatility that once char-
acterised the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries is back. This long arc 

272        M. J. Howell
of history warns that while capitalism undeniably excels at aggregate wealth 
creation, it does so by collapsing the industrial cost structure and erecting a 
towering financial superstructure. Left unchecked, free markets create high 
street price deflation, but alongside they lead to asset price inflation and 
more market volatility when these asset bubbles burst. Western private sec-
tors need more and more debt to grow, but the greater the flow of debt the 
poorer its quality and the more future balance sheet capacity is, ultimately, 
required to refinance it. Balance sheet capacity is another way of expressing 
financial liquidity. However, this liquidity is built from the same safe asset 
pool that is being adulterated by flaky private sector debts. In this vicious 
spiral, more poor-quality debts are being funded by still more poor-quality 
private sector debts.
The history of money teaches that payment systems require a level of 
liquidity backstopping that no private entity, and often only large States, 
can provide. In other words, these market-based solutions to the safe asset 
shortage can only work up to a point. Yet, the efficacy of the State in con-
trolling the monetary system waxes and wanes. Their relationship is fre-
quently fraught, and it inevitably becomes a struggle between the private 
sector’s quest for greater elasticity and the regulations imposed on them 
through new instruments and stronger authorities in order to restrain the 
growth of debt. Capitalism needs a stable credit instrument that can sup-
port capital accumulation and expansion. Gold is not sufficiently elastic and 
the supply of State money is often at odds with low inflation policies and 
the ‘sound money’ ideology. The US dollar has worked, but it remains to 
be seen whether the US dollar system can withstand another World ­crisis? 
The private sector always innovates to create new substitutes, but these 
tend to be outside State control and support, and highly procyclical. The 
extreme swings in the Global Liquidity cycle owe much to the mechanism 
of private sector provision and particularly to changes in unofficial sources 
of high-powered money, or what we have called the shadow monetary base. 
It follows that in downturns when liquidity is most needed, it simply is not 
there. A more fragile and more procyclical financial system results.
Admittedly, there are positives. The mass financialisation of the US and 
World economies over the past two decades has left many investors far richer 
on paper than they were even at the top of the dot-com bubble in the year 
2000. Behind this paper wealth lies an over-abundant supply of cheap foot-
loose, Global Liquidity, much of it the result of unconventional monetary 
policies. With Central Banks creating new money and policy-makers and 
corporations retiring financial instruments from the general marketplace, 
the pool of available assets (particularly higher quality assets) for the private 

14  Conclusion: A High-Water Mark?        273
sector to buy has shrunk significantly, whereas the amount of money chas-
ing those assets has grown. Excess demand or money power therefore under-
pins these higher asset valuations. Since the late-1990s, when many allege 
that the Greenspan-led, Federal Reserve started to veer fatally towards per-
sistently loose money, nominal US GDP has grown at an average annual 
4–5% clip. But the returns earned by equities, residential and commercial 
real estate, agricultural land, Treasury securities, investment-grade and high-
yield corporate bonds, junk bonds and leveraged loans have all outpaced the 
underlying economy from which they notionally derive their strength. Thus, 
it is easy to see why the possibility of future tighter monetary policies rings 
alarm bells for many investors.
Set against this threat, policy-makers are limited in what they can do even 
when using latest tools to ensure stability. “By sticking to the new orthodoxy 
of monetary policy and pretending that we have made the banking system safe, 
we are sleepwalking towards that crisis ”, warned former Bank of England 
head Mervyn King at the IMF annual meetings in 2019. Latest estimates 
put the natural rate of interest in the US around 2–2½%, or roughly 
where the Federal Reserve’s policy rate has recently hovered. This low ceil-
ing means that when the next crisis hits, US policy-makers will have lim-
ited scope for further reducing nominal interest rates. Rate-cutting remains 
their instinct, and what is true for the Federal Reserve is truer still for other 
major Central Banks, namely the European Central Bank and the Bank of 
Japan. Admittedly, some policy-makers have at times experimented with 
negative interest rates, but this comes at the cost of potentially undermining 
the vital repo mechanism and damaging commercial banks’ profitability. In 
other words, negative or near-negative interest rates may perversely destroy 
liquidity supply.4 Prudent Central Bankers are surely unwise to extend these 
experiments? A major tenet of liquidity theory is that interest rates are not 
the price of money. Rather this is the exchange rate. Low interest rates reflect 
either a poor return on industrial capital and/or a large excess demand for 
‘safe’ assets. By maintaining austerity policies, cutting interest rates and not 
expanding the volume of liquidity in their financial systems, policy-makers 
risk destroying the credit mechanism, much as they did in the early-1930s.
A thoughtful recent study of inflationary and deflationary forces by Rick 
Rieder5 Blackrock’s fixed income head enumerates the immense secular defla-
tionary forces that have reappeared since the 1970s. An active capitalism 
always creates cost deflation. To his list of declining baby boomers, greater 
female labour participation, China, new technologies and the quiescence of 
OPEC, we might also choose to add the effects of increasing returns from 
large-scale production, but the key point here is that ‘money’ is nowhere 

274        M. J. Howell
mentioned as a factor. In fact, set against the scale of these tectonic sup-
ply-side shifts, Central Banks could even stand accused of tiptoeing around. 
For at least two decades, the US Fed has followed a national 2% price infla-
tion target. If high street inflation is no longer—to use the long-cherished 
statement by monetarism’s celebrated high priest Milton Friedman—always 
and everywhere a monetary phenomenon and if the much-loved Phillips Curve 
is dead, they have been wasting their time. But even more than this, they have 
been ignoring the one area where monetary policy does matter namely finan-
cial stability. Targeting low inflation during the deflationary supply shocks, 
caused by globalisation and China’s entry into the WTO, has resulted in 
asset bubbles. Central Banks have seemingly refused to recognise the impli-
cations of this for financial stability. Not surprisingly, the two big debates in 
monetary theory now concern the future roles of digital money and MMT 
(Modern Monetary Theory). Both reflect underlying doubts over the ability 
of the Central Banks to master our Byzantine-like global financial system.
Refinancing Versus New Financing Systems
What comes next? The Central Banks and the Regulators need to re-focus 
on financial stability and specifically the provision of sufficient volumes of 
‘safe’ assets and liquidity, rather than trying to fine-tune high street inflation. 
Inflation is largely a real economy and not purely a monetary phenomenon: 
in short, China’s low costs have proved Milton Friedman wrong! Policy-
makers will be forced to again resort to quantitative easing policies (QE) 
and so expand Central Bank balance sheets, probably significantly, to replace 
the funding capacity permanently lost in the 2007–2008 GFC. Funding 
measures gross, rather than net, credit flows and is essential in facilitating 
much-needed debt rollovers. Think of this as a future QE4, QE5, QE6, 
et al. Policy-makers must ensure that there is adequate liquidity in the sys-
tem, not least because we live in a World where debt refinancing is far more 
important than the funding of new capital. In short, the capacity of capital, 
i.e. the financial sector balance sheet size outweighs the cost of capital, i.e. 
the level of interest rates. This suggests that the entire debate surrounding 
Peoples’ QE and MMT is misdirected because our economic problems and 
low rate of new investment have little to do with the lack of money, per se. 
Central Banks are able to purchase State debt in the secondary markets, but 
they are not supposed (nor, in most cases, legally permitted) to buy primary 
issues. Yet, there is an unambiguous and large appetite for government debt 
as shown, not only by the low prevailing yields, but, more importantly, by 

14  Conclusion: A High-Water Mark?        275
the hugely negative term premia readings. These are predominantly caused 
by an excess demand for ‘safe’ asset Treasuries, which may total the whop-
ping equivalent of a cumulative 80% of World GDP since the GFC.
Understanding this changing financial structure is always a critical factor 
in getting policy right. Some argue persuasively that this dimension is often 
missing (Kaufman 2017). The real issue is not ‘too big to fail’, but ‘too inter-
connected to fail’. Essentially, the modern financial system has become a 
vast refinancing system more than a new financing system. Central Banks, 
the overseers, are monopoly suppliers of currency but only one among 
many providers of credit. They may influence the level of interest rates, but 
as the 2007–2008 financial crisis underscored, they do not set them. On the 
other hand, the credit cycle cannot be either understood or controlled if it is 
not properly monitored. Policy-makers need to re-establish expertise for track-
ing the volume of credit and liquidity. What’s more, there should be a general 
move towards an asset-based framework for control, focussed on credit qual-
ity, rather than today’s much compromised liability-based systems that limit 
funding. A steady supply of safe assets is critical. The bottom line is that tar-
geting interest rates with the (sole) objective of controlling fast disappearing 
consumer price inflation is no longer adequate. A better intermediate objective 
is the encouragement of currency blocs, with greater exchange rate adjustment 
allowed between these blocs than within them, alongside the establishment 
of more efficient tools to quell excessive credit growth within each bloc in 
order to maintain financial stability, including the issuance of longer dura-
tion instruments, e.g. 30, 50 and 100-year government bonds, and by adopt-
ing ways to limit the negative effects of excessive capital flows. But above all, 
avoiding systemic risks means ensuring adequate levels of Global Liquidity.
Coming Decades: The Internationalisation 
of the Yuan
Today, the three most important sources of Global Liquidity come from 
the US Federal Reserve, the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) and cross-bor-
der flows of capital. The latter, in turn, depend greatly on movements 
in the US dollar exchange rate, which are to some degree under the con-
trol of the US Fed and, ironically, also in the hands of the PBoC. Each 
of these three primary sources of liquidity needs to expand. The greatest 
change in the economic and financial landscape in the last two decades 
has unquestionably been the rise of China. China accounted for 5.9% of 
Global Liquidity in the year 2000, but today she commands a whopping 

276        M. J. Howell
27.5% share, besting even America. Being a major dollar user, China has 
historically helped to stabilise the US dollar region by delivering timely 
fiscal boosts whenever her offshore export economy requires. Although 
Chinese industry continues to expand, her financial system remains, in 
many ways, remarkably immature. This explains both why she has had to 
become a heavy dollar-user and why the Chinese Authorities, rather than 
private firms, are forced to re-cycle these dollars. China’s submissive role in 
her choice of currency cannot continue. We ought to recall the earlier quote 
from Chapter 1 that signals China’s aspirations:
…we should promote the Renminbi to be the primary currency of Asia, just 
as the US dollar first became the currency of North America and then the cur-
rency of the World … Every globalisation was initiated by a rising empire … 
As a rising super power, the ‘One Belt, One Road’ strategy is the beginning 
of China’s own globalisation … it is a counter-measure to the US strategy 
of shifting focus to the East. (excepts from a speech by Major-General Qiao 
Liang, Chinese PLA, April 2015)
Although history teaches us that nations often eclipse their industrial rivals 
economically several decades before their currencies come to dominate, this 
still suggests that the next development phase across World financial markets 
will almost certainly feature the rise of the Yuan. The oft-used counterargu-
ment summoned against the Yuan is that trust, being a vital dimension of 
currency adoption, demands a truly democratic State. This claim would not 
have impressed the Romans and plainly did not derail the widespread circu-
lation of the denarii.6 Nor will it hold sway with those regional neighbours 
eager for Chinese investment. With Chinese money already a force, ‘PBoC-
watching’ will become at least as important for investors over coming years 
as the science of ‘Fed-watching’ is today.
How can China rival and ultimately destroy the dominant US dollar 
system? Her obvious strategy will be to broaden the Chinese gross interna-
tional balance sheet, as adumbrated earlier in Chapter 9, by invoicing more 
trade in Yuan; developing a Yuan trade credit markets, which would allow 
Chinese banks to lend more to foreigners, and further opening up the large 
domestic Chinese Yuan-denominated bond market to international capital. 
A major part of this strategy likely involves the establishment and use of a 
digital Chinese Yuan. Allegedly, China is already well-advanced. We think of 
encrypted digital monies as cash substitutes that, unlike existing electronic 
monies, eliminate intermediaries and so allow person-to-person transfers. 
Digital monies, i.e. cryptocurrencies, disintermediate banks because they 
internalise clearing and settlement. They also potentially disintermediate 

14  Conclusion: A High-Water Mark?        277
the US dollar and weaken US financial power. Already dominant Chinese 
payment platforms, such as Alipay and WeChat, could soon have the facil-
ity to accommodate a State-issued digital currency via an e-wallet. There is a 
neat historical symmetry here, because China, the originator of paper money 
more than a millennium ago, may be the first major nation where it is super-
seded by more flexible electronic and digital monies. Developing a captive 
market for Yuan in neighbouring economies, such as Central Asia, and pro-
viding development aid and government loans denominated in Yuan, would 
also help further China’s goal. In addition, China will likely attempt to repo-
sition more of her supply chains onshore. This would reduce imports of man-
ufactured goods, and it would align with her controversial Made in China 
2025 policy.7 As we emphasised earlier, under existing arrangements China 
is, paradoxically, forced to re-export US dollars, when she ideally needs to 
export both electronic and digital Yuan. Not only should we expect to see an 
acceleration of these initiatives in coming years, but we must also question 
whether this rivalry will compromise the ability of global liquidity and pri-
vate sector financial balance sheets to expand, and/or affect the future availa-
bility of the Federal Reserve’s often vital US dollar swap lines?
Yet, the Yuan is unlikely to see a straight-line path to dominance because 
the existentialist threat posed to the US dollar hegemony and the entire 
Western financial system will stir-up countervailing geopolitical forces 
and likely spur attempts to halt the free flows of capital. The vast US dollar 
international payments system, outlined in Chapter 8, stands as a key part 
of American foreign policy, and, given the resulting benefit from lower US 
Treasury funding costs, a vital component of US budgetary policy. Similar 
existential attacks were sometimes successfully fought-off by previous World 
monetary regimes. Arguably, the US dollar has recently held back the chal-
lenge of the Euro, which largely succumbed following the 2010–2012 
European banking crisis. The British pound-gold standard was also once 
challenged by the French-led and silver-backed Latin Monetary Union (1865–
1873). Although ended de facto by the new Kingdom of Italy and France’s 
defeat in the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), the challenge essentially 
failed because the Vatican State persistently cheated (OMG) by issuing sil-
ver coins of lower fineness. But, put into context, these represent the finan-
cial equivalents of military skirmishes. The ultimate battle in this Capital War 
must surely involve a fight for supremacy between, the US dollar, the Chinese 
Yuan and digital/cryptocurrencies, and arguably, as we have suggested, against 
the latter two forces united into one single foe. The ironclad question that 
policy-makers, business leaders and investors need to ask is: could the digital 
Yuan ever become the twenty-first century’s ‘safe’ asset? We must be prepared 
for this next potential stage of Chinese development and power.

278        M. J. Howell
History not economics deserves the final word. The Franco-Prussian 
War was ultimately settled by massive indemnity payments hoisted on 
France by the victorious Germans. Germany threatened to occupy large 
parts of Northern France until these bills, totalling a whopping one quar-
ter of French GDP, were settled. In the event, France paid her debts two 
years early. She handed over her gold reserves to Germany and raised bil-
lions through the new Thiers issue of government bonds. These bonds 
were heavily over-subscribed in France and across Europe. At a stroke, the 
pool of international ‘safe’ assets was sizably enlarged. Previously inert sav-
ings were mobilised, and credit boomed and spread outwards cross-border. 
Admittedly, with hindsight, the scale of the subsequent boom proved too 
great and another financial crisis ultimately followed. The so-called Panic of 
1873 was arguably the first truly World crisis, embracing Britain and main-
land Europe, and touching the shores of America, where it became bet-
ter known through the speculative railroad bubble, the failure of bankers 
Jay Cooke & Co., the US Coinage Act, which demonetised silver and the 
resulting sound money policies of Civil War hero General Ulysses S. Grant’s 
Second Presidential Administration. All-in-all, it emphasises the importance 
of ‘safe’ asset creation and the then adolescent power of Global Liquidity. 
And, it is Global Liquidity, namely flows of savings and credit, that drives 
stocks, bonds and asset markets… NOT the economy.
We offer four conclusions:
•	 As the investment World gets bigger and more interconnected by rapid 
flows of international capital, it becomes more volatile.
•	 This derives from an increasingly procyclical monetary system, dominated 
by private sector credit and debt, featuring global supply chains, based 
around the USD, and driven by fast-moving flows of Global Liquidity.
•	 Policy-makers fail to understand the changing financial structure; the 
reversal of financial polarity; the rise of CICPs and the focus of institu-
tions on refinancing, rather than new money-raising. This results in inap-
propriate and ultimately destabilising monetary policies.
•	 Regionalism, possibly based on digital monies, will consequently replace 
globalisation as capital rivalry limits cross-border trade, technology trans-
fer and the free-flow of risk capital.

14  Conclusion: A High-Water Mark?        279
Notes
1.	 Ironically, only one-third of the US$300 billion QFII (qualified foreign insti-
tutional investor programme) has been taken up.
2.	 Trabants: vehicles manufactured in East Germany by VEB Sachsenring and 
powered by a 2-stroke 500 cc engine, were themselves a sorry symbol of 
Communist technical achievement. Nicknamed the ‘sparkplug with a roof’, 
the Trabant had no fuel gauge, a one-piece steel chassis and featured duroplast 
plastic bodywork made from recycled cotton waste from the Soviet Union.
3.	 Coincidently, Deng announced he was standing down on November 9, 1989, 
the day the Berlin Wall fell.
4.	 See Markus K. Brunnermeier and Yann Koby, The Reversal Interest Rate, 
Princeton, January 2019.
5.	 Blackrock, The Monetary Policy Endgame, September 2019.
6.	 The standard Roman silver coin, originally worth 10 asses.
7.	 Made in China 2025 is China’s official plan to rival US manufacturing by 
focussing on high-technology industries, such as pharmaceuticals, automo-
tive, aerospace, semiconductors, IT and robotics. It targets an increase in the 
Chinese-domestic content of core materials to 40% by 2020 and 70% by 
2025.
Reference
Kaufman, Henry. 2017. Tectonic Shifts in Financial Markets. New York: Palgrave.
