281
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s),  
under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 
M. J. Howell, Capital Wars,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39288-8
Appendix:  
Inflation, Deflation and Valuations
We originally noted in Chapter 2 that inflations and deflations affect asset 
allocation and, by implication, via its effect on the P/M (price-to-money) 
ratio introduced in Chapter 10 it will influence the valuation of assets, such 
as the traditional P/E multiple. These assertions are explained in this section.
The diagram in Fig. A.1 depicts the theoretical P/E multiple and the 
(inverted) government bond yield, both drawn against the annual rate 
of inflation on the bottom axis. The behaviour of real assets is also indi-
cated. Equity valuations include an additional risk premium based on the 
odds of default and of inventory valuation losses during deflationary peri-
ods. Similarly, although these factors likely reverse during periods of infla-
tion, the drag of higher bond yields on equity valuation levels causes the 
relationship between equity P/E multiples and inflation to take-on this 
humped pattern. In contrast, bond valuation (and by implication, con-
tra-wise, the valuation of real assets) display a smooth downward sloping 
valuation curve. The humped relationship implies two features: (1) equities 
enjoy their peak valuation levels when price inflation is low, say, 1–2% at 
an annual rate, and (2) the correlation between movements in equities and 
bonds crucially depends upon the underlying inflation regime. The diagram 
implies that in deflations and in low inflationary periods up to the infla-
tion threshold that defines the equity valuation peak, bonds and equities are 
negatively correlated. Thereafter, at higher inflation rates, the valuations of 
bonds and stocks are positively correlated. In this latter case, it is possible 
that this valuation-based correlation could break-down at the level of asset 
prices, when equity earnings are sufficiently strongly positively affected by 

282        Appendix: Inflation, Deflation and Valuations 
rising inflation. Nonetheless, the underlying argument helps to explain the 
puzzling change in the correlation pattern between bonds and stocks wit-
nessed in recent years.
The Japanese markets provide a clear example of this changing correlation 
structure. During the late-1980s, the correlation coefficient between stocks 
and bonds averaged around 0.6, at a time when Japanese consumer price 
inflation stood close to an annual rate of 2½%. By the late-1990s, Japanese 
annual inflation had turned negative at around minus ½%, causing the cor-
relation between stocks and bonds to collapse to minus 0.4. More recently, 
with inflation on the wake of the 2007–2008 GFC tumbling lower to aver-
age around minus 1% annually, the Japanese stock/ bond correlation has 
tumbled to minus 0.6. In other words, bonds provide a good hedge to equi-
ties during periods of low inflation and price deflation.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
Valuaon Mulple
Inﬂaon Rate
bonds
equies
real assets
Fig. A.1  Theoretical P/E multiple, real assets and bond yields (inverted) versus infla-
tion (Source CrossBorder Capital)

Appendix: Inflation, Deflation and Valuations         283
This analysis emphasizes that asset valuation is conditional on inflation: 
it is not an absolute criterion. High street inflation is a common factor that 
links the valuation of asset markets, and this fact may explain why investors 
often compare the relative valuations of equities and bonds. Asset allocation 
is seriously affected by inflations and deflations, because both can disturb 
future liabilities. In other words, this common factor facilitates an arbitrage 
between the equity and bond markets. It could also explain why relative val-
uation, using, say, an earnings or dividend discount model, has often proved 
a better investment tool than separately comparing bonds, by their yields, 
and equities, by their P/E multiples.
The empirical data reported in Fig. A.2 seem to confirm the other fea-
ture of Fig. A.1, namely the valuation peak coinciding with low inflation. 
Although, the Japanese data also evidence this feature, we spotlight the US 
case, using data extracted from the Shiller database,1 from 1880 onwards. 
The diagram plots the five-years average of the US CAPE (cyclically-adjust-
edP/E) against the five-year average rate of consumer price inflation. We 
have fitted a cubic relationship, which shows a peak CAPE at close to zero 
inflation, although the data also support our proposition that equity valua-
tions are highest at low positive inflation rates. The message is that inflation 
matters hugely to asset allocation decisions.
y = 10866x3 - 2290.8x2 - 3.3686x + 19.19
R² = 0.3135
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Fig. A.2  US CAPE and inflation (rolling 5-year averages), 1881–2019 (Source 
CrossBorder Capital, US Federal Reserve, Shiller)
