287
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s),  
under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 
M. J. Howell, Capital Wars,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39288-8
Further Reading
1.	Inside the Yield Book (1972)—Marty Leibowitz and Sidney Homer	
This book proved ground-breaking. It established bond math and made 
fixed-income investing into a science. Behind the scenes, Marty re-intro-
duced two seminal ideas—the notional of a continuous yield curve that 
could be arbitraged, and Macaulay duration.
2.	A History of Interest Rates (1977)—Sidney Homer
	 Few may have read it from cover-to-cover, but this widely-referenced 
work thoroughly catalogues interest rates from ancient times through 
Medieval Europe to the post-1990 World, including America, Asia, and 
Africa. In the words of Henry Kaufman: ‘No book has its peer’.
3.	Interest Rates, the Markets, and the New Financial World (1986)—
Henry Kaufman
	 This is probably the book that most influenced me when I joined 
Salomon. Its prescience is still remarkable. Henry managed to foresee the 
future instability in credit markets and warned accordingly. Its analysis of 
flow of funds and liquidity was eye-opening, and I often refer back to its 
analysis of the yield curve.
4.	Money in a Theory of Finance (1960)—John Gurley and Edward Shaw
	 Gurley and Shaw pioneered the concept of ‘liquidity’ and credit creation 
by non-bank financial institutions, or what we now dub ‘shadow banks’. 
It’s a heavy-going read, but the idea that traditional banks and money 
were both losing their financial dominance was new.

288        Further Reading
5.	The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936)—John 
Maynard Keynes
	 This widely-known book is either loved or reviled. Keynes was originally 
a Cambridge monetary theorist. Two of his main insights were, first, the 
existence of separate industrial and financial circuits for money and, sec-
ond, the fact that financial sector problems, e.g. a ‘liquidity trap’, could 
disrupt real economic activity and employment.
6.	Das Kapital (Volume 3, 1894)—Karl Marx
	 A controversial choice, but as an economic historian Marx was the best 
chronicler of nineteenth-century capitalism, and here in this posthu-
mously published volume is some of the best granular descriptions of 
money markets and financial crises anywhere, all peppered with cynical 
socialist invective. The alternative choice is Walter Bagehot’s Lombard 
Street, but Marx gets the edge for writing about World financial markets 
and not just London.
