Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets
Author(s): J. Bradford De Long, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, Robert J. Waldmann
Source: The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, No. 4 (Aug., 1990), pp. 703-738
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2937765
Accessed: 02/11/2010 17:00
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=ucpress.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
Journal of Political Economy.
http://www.jstor.org

Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets 
J. Bradford De Long 
Harvard University and National Bureau of Economic Research 
Andrei Shleifer 
University of Chicago and National Bureau of Economic Research 
Lawrence H. Summers 
Harvard University and National Bureau of Economic Research 
Robert J. Waldmann 
European University Institute 
We present a simple overlapping generations model of an asset mar- 
ket in which irrational noise traders with erroneous stochastic beliefs 
both affect prices and earn higher expected returns. The unpredict- 
ability of noise traders' beliefs creates a risk in the price of the asset 
that deters rational arbitrageurs from aggressively betting against 
them. As a result, prices can diverge significantly from fundamental 
values even in the absence of fundamental risk. Moreover, bearing a 
disproportionate amount of risk that they themselves create enables 
noise traders to earn a higher expected return than rational inves- 
tors do. The model sheds light on a number of financial anomalies, 
including the excess volatility of asset prices, the mean reversion of 
stock returns, the underpricing of closed-end mutual funds, and the 
Mehra-Prescott equity premium puzzle. 
We would like to thank the National Science, Russell Sage, and Alfred P. Sloan 
foundations for financial support. We have benefited from comments from Robert 
Barsky, Fischer Black, John Campbell, Andrew Caplin, Peter Diamond, Miles Kimball, 
Bruce Lehmann, Charles Perry, Robert Vishny, Michael Woodford, and especially 
from Kevin M. Murphy and Barry Nalebuff. 
[Journal of Political Economy, 1990, vol. 98, no. 4] 
K 1990 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-3808/90/9804-0004$01.50 
703 

704 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
If the reader interjects that there must surely be large 
profits to be gained . . . in the long run by a skilled 
individual who . .. purchases] investments on the best 
genuine long-term expectation he can frame, he must 
be answered . . . that there are such serious-minded 
individuals and that it makes a vast difference to 
an investment market whether or not they predominate. 
... 
But we must also add that there are several factors 
which jeopardise the predominance of such individuals 
in modern investment markets. Investment based on 
genuine long-term expectation is so difficult .. . as to be 
scarcely practicable. He who attempts it must surely ... 
run greater risks than he who tries to guess better than 
the crowd how the crowd will behave. [KEYNES 1936, p. 
157] 
There is considerable evidence that many investors do not follow 
economists' advice to buy and hold the market portfolio. Individual 
investors typically fail to diversify, holding instead a single stock or a 
small number of stocks (Lewellen, Schlarbaum, and Lease 1974). 
They often pick stocks through their own research or on the advice of 
the likes of Joe Granville or "Wall Street Week." When investors do 
diversify, they entrust their money to stock-picking mutual funds that 
charge them high fees while failing to beat the market (Jensen 1968). 
Black (1986) believes that such investors, with no access to inside 
information, irrationally act on noise as if it were information that 
would give them an edge. Following Kyle (1985), Black calls such 
investors "noise traders." 
Despite the recognition of the abundance of noise traders in the 
market, economists feel safe ignoring them in most discussions of 
asset price formation. The argument against the importance of noise 
traders for price formation has been forcefully made by Friedman 
(1953) and Fama (1965). Both authors point out that irrational inves- 
tors are met in the market by rational arbitrageurs who trade against 
them and in the process drive prices close to fundamental values. 
Moreover, in the course of such trading, those whose judgments of 
asset values are sufficiently mistaken to affect prices lose money to 
arbitrageurs and so eventually disappear from the market. The argu- 
ment "that speculation is . . . destabilizing . .. is largely equivalent to 
saying that speculators lose money, since speculation can be destabiliz- 
ing in general only if speculators on . . . average sell. .. low . . and 
buy . . . high" (Friedman 1953, p. 175). Noise traders thus cannot 
affect prices too much and, even if they can, will not do so for long. 
In this paper we examine these arguments by focusing explicitly on 

NOISE 
TRADER 
RISK 
705 
the limits of arbitrage dedicated to exploiting noise traders' misper- 
ceptions. We recognize that arbitrageurs are likely to be risk averse 
and to have reasonably short horizons. As a result, their willingness to 
take positions against noise traders is limited. One source of risk that 
limits the power of arbitrage-fundamental 
risk-is well understood. 
Figlewski (1979) shows that it might take a very long time for noise 
traders to lose most of their money if arbitrageurs must bear funda- 
mental risk in betting against them and so take limited positions. 
Shiller (1984) and Campbell and Kyle (1987) focus on arbitrageurs' 
aversion to fundamental risk in discussing the effect of noise traders 
on stock market prices. Their results show that aversion to fundamen- 
tal risk can by itself severely limit arbitrage, even when arbitrageurs 
have infinite horizons. 
But there is another important source of risk borne by short- 
horizon investors engaged in arbitrage against noise traders: the risk 
that noise traders' beliefs will not revert to their mean for a long time 
and might in the meantime become even more extreme. If noise 
traders today are pessimistic about an asset and have driven down its 
price, an arbitrageur buying this asset must recognize that in the near 
future noise traders might become even more pessimistic and drive 
the price down even further. If the arbitrageur has to liquidate before 
the price recovers, he suffers a loss. Fear of this loss should limit his 
original arbitrage position. 
Conversely, an arbitrageur selling an asset short when bullish noise 
traders have driven its price up must remember that noise traders 
might become even more bullish tomorrow, and so must take a posi- 
tion that accounts for the risk of a further price rise when he has to 
buy back the stock. This risk of a further change of noise traders' 
opinion away from its mean-which 
we refer to as "noise trader 
risk"-must 
be borne by any arbitrageur with a short time horizon 
and must limit his willingness to bet against noise traders. 
Because the unpredictability of noise traders' future opinions de- 
ters arbitrage, prices can diverge significantly from fundamental 
values even when there is no fundamental risk. Noise traders thus 
create their own space. All the main results of our paper come from 
the observation that arbitrage does not eliminate the effects of noise 
because noise itself creates risk.' 
The risk resulting from stochastic changes in noise traders' opin- 
ions raises the possibility that noise traders who are on average bullish 
1 Our paper is related to other examinations of Friedman's arguments, including 
Hart and Kreps (1986), Ingram (1987), and Stein (1987). Also relevant are Haltiwanger 
and Waldman (1985) and Russell and Thaler (1985). We discuss these papers after 
presenting our model. 

706 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
earn a higher expected return than rational, sophisticated investors 
engaged in arbitrage against noise trading. This result obtains be- 
cause noise trader risk makes assets less attractive to risk-averse arbi- 
trageurs and so drives down prices. If noise traders on average over- 
estimate returns or underestimate risk, they invest more in the risky 
asset on average than sophisticated investors and may earn higher 
average returns. This result is more interesting than the point that if 
noise traders bear more fundamental risk they earn higher returns: 
our point is that noise traders can earn higher expected returns solely 
by bearing more of the risk that they themselves create. Noise traders 
can earn higher expected returns from their own destabilizing in- 
fluence, not because they perform the useful social function of bear- 
ing fundamental risk. 
Our model also has several implications for asset price behavior. 
Because noise trader risk limits the effectiveness of arbitrage, prices 
in our model are excessively volatile. If noise traders' opinions follow 
a stationary process, there is a mean-reverting component in stock 
returns. Our model also shows how assets subject to noise trader risk 
can be underpriced relative to fundamental values. We apply this idea 
to explain the underpricing of closed-end mutual funds, as well as the 
long-run underpricing of stocks known as the Mehra-Prescott (1985) 
puzzle. Finally, our model has several implications for the optimal 
investment strategy of sophisticated investors and for the possible role 
of long-term investors in stabilizing asset prices. 
We develop our two main arguments-that 
bearing noise trader 
risk raises noise traders' returns and that noise trader risk can explain 
several financial anomalies-in 
five sections. Section I presents a 
model of noise trader risk and shows how prices can diverge signifi- 
cantly from fundamental values. Section II calculates the relative ex- 
pected returns of noise traders and of sophisticated investors. Section 
III analyzes the persistence of noise traders in an extended model in 
which successful investors are imitated (as in Denton [1985]). Section 
IV presents qualitative implications of the model for the behavior of 
asset prices and market participants. Section V presents conclusions. 
I. 
Noise Trading as a Source of Risk 
The model contains noise traders and sophisticated investors. Noise 
traders falsely believe that they have special information about the 
future price of the risky asset. They may get their pseudosignals from 
technical analysts, stockbrokers, or economic consultants and irration- 
ally believe that these signals carry information. Or in formulating 
their investment strategies, they may exhibit the fallacy of excessive 
subjective certainty that has been repeatedly demonstrated in experi- 

NOISE 
TRADER 
RISK 
707 
mental contexts since Alpert and Raiffa (1982). Noise traders select 
their portfolios on the basis of such incorrect beliefs. In response to 
noise traders' actions, it is optimal for sophisticated investors to ex- 
ploit noise traders' irrational misperceptions. Sophisticated traders 
buy when noise traders depress prices and sell when noise traders 
push prices up. Such active contrarian investment strategies push 
prices toward fundamentals, but not all the way. 
A. 
The Model 
Our basic model is a stripped-down overlapping generations model 
with two-period-lived agents (Samuelson 1958). For simplicity, there 
is no first-period consumption, no labor supply decision, and no be- 
quest. As a result, the resources agents have to invest are exogenous. 
The only decision agents make is to choose a portfolio when young. 
The economy contains two assets that pay identical dividends. One 
of the assets, the safe asset s, pays a fixed real dividend r. Asset s is in 
perfectly elastic supply: a unit of it can be created out of, and a unit of 
it turned back into, a unit of the consumption good in any period. 
With consumption each period taken as numeraire, the price of the 
safe asset is always fixed at one. The dividend r paid on asset s is thus 
the riskless rate. The other asset, the unsafe asset u, always pays the 
same fixed real dividend r as asset s. But u is not in elastic supply: it is 
in fixed and unchangeable quantity, normalized at one unit. The 
price of u in period t is denoted pt. If the price of each asset were equal 
to the net present value of its future dividends, then assets u and s 
would be perfect substitutes and would sell for the same price of one 
in all periods. But this is not how the price of u is determined in the 
presence of noise traders. 
We usually interpret s as a riskless short-term bond and u as aggre- 
gate equities. It is important for the analysis below that noise trader 
risk be marketwide rather than idiosyncratic. If noise traders' misper- 
ceptions of the returns to individual assets are uncorrelated and if 
each asset is small relative to the market, arbitrageurs would eliminate 
any possible mispricing for the same reasons that idiosyncratic risk is 
not priced in the standard capital asset pricing model. 
There are two types of agents: sophisticated investors (denoted i) 
who have rational expectations and noise traders (denoted n). We 
assume that noise traders are present in the model in measure [u, that 
sophisticated investors are present in measure 1 - 
IL, and that all 
agents of a given type are identical. Both types of agents choose their 
portfolios when young to maximize perceived expected utility given 
their own beliefs about the ex ante mean of the distribution of the 
price of u at t + 1. The representative sophisticated investor young in 

708 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
period t accurately perceives the distribution of returns from holding 
the risky asset, and so maximizes expected utility given that distribu- 
tion. The representative noise trader young in period t misperceives 
the expected price of the risky asset by an independent and identically 
distributed normal random variable Pt: 
pt - N(p*, a) 
(1) 
The mean misperception p* is a measure of the average "bullishness" 
of the noise traders, and a 2 is the variance of noise traders' mispercep- 
tions of the expected return per unit of the risky asset.2 Noise traders 
thus maximize their own expectation of utility given the next-period 
dividend, the one-period variance of pt 1, and their false belief that 
the distribution of the price of u next period has mean Pt above its true 
value. 
Each agent's utility is a constant absolute risk aversion function of 
wealth when old: 
U = -e- 
(2y)w 
(2) 
where y is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion. With normally 
distributed returns to holding a unit of the risky asset, maximizing the 
expected value of (2) is equivalent to maximizing 
Yu 
_ 
w2 
(3) 
where w is the expected final wealth, and (a is the one-period-ahead 
variance of wealth. The sophisticated investor chooses the amount Xt 
of the risky asset u held to maximize 
E(U) = W w- 
= co + XA[r + tpt+I - pt(l + r)] - Y(Xt)2(top1) 
where co is a function of first-period labor income, an anterior sub- 
script denotes the time at which an expectation is taken, and we define 
t2 
2 
= Et[pt+I - Et(pt+1)]2} 
(5) 
to be the one-period variance of pt+ 1. The representative noise trader 
maximizes 
E(U) = W w- 
(6) 
= co + Xt[r + tpt+I - pt(l 
+ r)] - 
y(Xn) (t(opt+) + Xn(pt). 
2 The assumption that noise traders misperceive the expected price hides the fact 
that the expected price is itself a function of the parameters p* and o24. Thus we are 
implicitly assuming that noise traders know how to factor the effect of future price 
volatility into their calculations of values. This assumption is made for simplicity. We 
have also solved a more complicated model that parameterizes noise traders' beliefs by 
their expectations of future prices, not by their misperceptions of future returns. The 
thrust of the results is the same. 

NOISE 
TRADER 
RISK 
709 
The only difference between (4) and (6) is the last term in (6), which 
captures the noise traders' misperception of the expected return from 
holding XA units of the risky asset. 
Given their beliefs, all young agents divide their portfolios between 
u and s. The quantities XA and XA of the risky asset purchased are 
functions of its price pt' of the one-period-ahead distribution of the 
price of u, and (in the case of noise traders) of their misperception Pt 
of the expected price of the risky asset. When old, agents convert 
their holdings of s to the consumption good, sell their holdings of u 
for price pt? 1 to the new young, and consume all their wealth. 
One can think of alternative ways of specifying noise trader de- 
mands.3 There are well-defined mappings between misperceptions of 
returns Pt and (a) noise traders' fixing a price pt at which they will buy 
and sell, (b) noise traders' purchasing a fixed quantity XA of the risky 
asset, or (c) noise traders' mistaking the variance of returns (taking 
them to be au2* instead of U2). The equilibrium in which noise traders 
matter found in our basic model exists regardless of which primitive 
specification of noise traders' behavior is assumed. 
Solving (4) and (6) yields expressions for agents' holdings of u: 
At= 
r + tpt+l - (1 + r)pt 
7 
Atn= r + tpt+l 
(1 + r)pt + 
Pt 
(8) 
Pt+ 
1) 
Pt~o~+ 
1) 
We allow noise traders' and sophisticated investors' demands to be 
negative; they can take short positions at will. Even if investors hold 
only positive amounts of both assets, the fact that returns are un- 
bounded gives each investor a chance of having negative final wealth. 
We use a standard specification of returns at the cost of allowing 
consumption to be negative with positive probability.4 
Under our assumptions on preferences and the distribution of re- 
Let noise traders set 
Pt 
1 - 
C2 + 
p 
+ 
1'(Pt 
- p*) 
t- 
r 
r 
I1+r 
where or2 is the total variance-the 
sum of "fundamental" dividend variance, noise 
trader-generated 
price variance, and any covariance terms-associated 
with holding 
the risky asset u for one period. Alternatively, let noise traders set the quantity of the 
risky asset that they buy-whatever 
its price-as 
X' = 1 + [p,/(2-y)or2] or let the noise 
traders misperceive the variance of returns on the risky asset, taking as the variance 
2* 2= 
y 2 
Pt) 
yo2 
+ Pt 
4 An appendix of our working paper (De Long et al. 1987) presents an example in 
which asset prices and consumption are always positive. 

710 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
turns, the demands for the risky asset are proportional to its per- 
ceived excess return and inversely proportional to its perceived vari- 
ance. The additional term in the demand function of noise traders 
comes from their misperception of the expected return. When noise 
traders overestimate expected returns, they demand more of the 
risky asset than sophisticated investors do; when they underestimate 
the expected return, they demand less. Sophisticated investors exert a 
stabilizing influence in this model since they offset the volatile posi- 
tions of the noise traders. 
The variance of prices appearing in the denominators of the de- 
mand functions is derived solely from noise trader risk. Both noise 
traders and sophisticated investors limit their demand for asset u 
because the price at which they can sell it when old depends on the 
uncertain beliefs of next period's young noise traders. This uncer- 
tainty about the price for which asset u can be sold afflicts all investors, 
no matter what their beliefs about expected returns, and so limits the 
extent to which they are willing to bet against each other. If the price 
next period were certain, then noise traders and sophisticated inves- 
tors would hold with certainty different beliefs about expected re- 
turns; they would therefore try to take infinite bets against each other. 
An equilibrium would not exist. Noise trader risk limits all investors' 
positions and in particular keeps arbitrageurs from driving prices all 
the way to fundamental values. 
B. 
The Pricing Function 
To calculate equilibrium prices, observe that the old sell their hold- 
ings, and so the demands of the young must sum to one in equilib- 
rium. Equations (7) and (8) imply that 
pt = 1 + r [r + tpt+I - 2-y(t(pT) 
+ Apt]. 
(9) 
Equation (9) expresses the risky asset's price in period t as a function 
of period t's misperception by noise traders (Pt), of the technological 
(r) and behavioral (y) parameters of the model, and of the moments 
of the one-period-ahead distribution of p? 1. We consider only steady- 
state equilibria by imposing the requirement that the unconditional 
distribution of pt I be identical to the distribution of pt. The endoge- 
nous one-period-ahead distribution of the price of asset u can then be 
eliminated from (9) by solving recursively:5 
5 The model cannot have stationary bubble equilibria, for the safe asset is formally 
equivalent to a storage technology that pays a rate of return r greater than the growth 
rate of the economy. The number of stationary equilibria in the model does, however, 

NOISE TRADER RISK 
711 
-1 + 
(Pt- 
p*) + 
P* 
_ 
2 
1 + r 
r 
r 
(~~1. 
(0 
Inspection of (10) reveals that only the second term is variable, for 'y, 
p*, and r are all constants, and the one-step-ahead variance of Pt is a 
simple unchanging function of the constant variance of a generation 
of noise traders' misperception Pt: 
2 
= 
2 
- 
IL2(p 
t(Pt+ I= or Pt+= 
(1 + r). 
( 1) 
The final form of the pricing rule for u, in which the price depends 
only on exogenous parameters of the model and on public informa- 
tion about present and future misperception by noise traders, is 
Pt 
+ A(Pt - 
) + pIp 
______ 
(12) 
1 +r 
r 
r(1+ r)2'(2 
C. Interpretation 
The last three terms that appear in (12) and (10) show the impact of 
noise traders on the price of asset u. As the distribution of Pt con- 
verges to a point mass at zero, the equilibrium pricing function (12) 
converges to its fundamental value of one. 
The second term in (12) captures the fluctuations in the price of the 
risky asset u due to the variation of noise traders' misperceptions. 
Even though asset u is not subject to any fundamental uncertainty and 
is so known by a large class of investors, its price varies substantially as 
noise traders' opinions shift. When a generation of noise traders is 
more bullish than the average generation, they bid up the price of u. 
When they are more bearish than average, they bid down the price. 
When they hold their average misperception-when 
Pt = p*-the 
term is zero. As one would expect, the more numerous noise traders 
are relative to sophisticated investors, the more volatile asset prices 
are. 
The third term in (12) captures the deviations of Pt from its funda- 
mental value due to the fact that the average misperception by noise 
traders is not zero. If noise traders are bullish on average, this "price 
pressure" effect makes the price of the risky asset higher than it 
depend on the primitive specification of noise traders' behavior. For example, if noise 
traders randomly pick each period the price pt at which they will buy and sell unlimited 
quantities of the risky asset, then (trivially) there is only one equilibrium. If the noise 
traders randomly pick the quantity XI that they purchase, then the fundamental solu- 
tion in which pt is always equal to one is an equilibrium in addition to the equilibrium in 
which noise traders matter. 

712 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
would otherwise be. Optimistic noise traders bear a greater than aver- 
age share of price risk. Since sophisticated investors bear a smaller 
share of price risk the higher p* is, they require a lower expected 
excess return and so are willing to pay a higher price for asset u. 
The final term in (12) is the heart of the model. Sophisticated 
investors would not hold the risky asset unless compensated for bear- 
ing the risk that noise traders will become bearish and the price of the 
risky asset will fall. Both noise traders and sophisticated investors 
present in period t believe that asset u is mispriced, but because Pt 1I is 
uncertain, neither group is willing to bet too much on this mispricing. 
At the margin, the return from enlarging one's position in an asset 
that everyone agrees is mispriced (but different types think is mis- 
priced in different directions) is offset by the additional price risk that 
must be run. Noise traders thus "create their own space": the uncer- 
tainty over what next period's noise traders will believe makes the 
otherwise riskless asset u risky and drives its price down and its return 
up. This is so despite the fact that both sophisticated investors and 
noise traders always hold portfolios that possess the same amount of 
fundamental risk: zero. Any intuition to the effect that investors in 
the risky asset "ought" to receive higher expected returns because 
they perform the valuable social function of risk bearing neglects to 
consider that noise traders' speculation is the only source of risk. For 
the economy as a whole, there is no risk to be borne. 
The reader might suspect that our results are critically dependent 
on the overlapping generations structure of the model, but this is not 
quite accurate. Equilibrium exists as long as the returns to holding the 
risky asset are always uncertain. In the overlapping generations struc- 
ture, this is assured by the absence of a last period. For if there is a last 
period in which the risky asset pays a nonstochastic dividend and is 
liquidated, then both noise traders and sophisticated investors will 
seek to exploit what they see as riskless arbitrage. If, say, the liq- 
uidation value of the risky asset is 1 + r, previous-period sophis- 
ticated investors will try to trade arbitrarily large amounts of asset u at 
any price other than one, and noise traders will try to trade arbitrarily 
large amounts at any price other than 
Pt 
Pt = 1 + 1 + 
. 
(13) 
The excess demand function for the risky asset will be undefined and 
the model will have no equilibrium. But in a model with fundamental 
dividend risk the assumption that there is no last period and, hence, 
the overlapping generations structure are not necessary. With funda- 
mental dividend risk, no agent is ever subjectively certain what the 
return on the risky asset will be, and so the qualitative properties of 

NOISE 
TRADER 
RISK 
713 
equilibrium in our model are preserved even with a known terminal 
date. The overlapping generations structure is therefore not needed 
when fundamental dividend risk is present. 
The infinitely extended overlapping generations structure of the 
basic model does play another function. It assures that each agent's 
horizon is short. No agent has any opportunity to wait until the price 
of the risky asset recovers before selling. Such an overlapping genera- 
tions structure may be a fruitful way of modeling the effects on prices 
of a number of institutional features, such as frequent evaluations of 
money managers' performance, that may lead rational, long-lived 
market participants to care about short-term rather than long-term 
performance. In our model, the horizon of the typical investor is im- 
portant. If sophisticated investors' horizons are long relative to the 
duration of noise traders' optimism or pessimism toward risky assets, 
then they can buy low, confident that they will be able to sell high 
when prices revert to the mean. As we show below, as the horizon of 
agents becomes longer, arbitrage becomes less risky and prices ap- 
proach fundamental values. Noise trader risk is an important deter- 
rent to arbitrage only when the duration of noise traders' mispercep- 
tions is of the same order of magnitude as or longer than the horizon 
of sophisticated investors. 
II. 
Relative Returns of Noise Traders and 
Sophisticated Investors 
We have demonstrated that noise traders can affect prices even 
though there is no uncertainty about fundamentals. Friedman (1953) 
argues that noise traders who affect prices earn lower returns than 
the sophisticated investors they trade with, and so economic selection 
works to weed them out. In our model, it need not be the case that 
noise traders earn lower returns. Noise traders' collective shifts of 
opinion increase the riskiness of returns to assets. If noise traders' 
portfolios are concentrated in assets subject to noise trader risk, noise 
traders can earn a higher average rate of return on their portfolios 
than sophisticated investors. 
A. Relative Expected Returns 
The conditions under which noise traders earn higher expected re- 
turns than sophisticated investors are easily laid out. All agents earn a 
certain net return of r on their investments in asset s. The difference 
between noise traders' and sophisticated investors' total returns given 
equal initial wealth is the product of the difference in their holdings 
of the risky asset u and of the excess return paid by a unit of the risky 

714 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
asset u. Call this difference in returns to the two types of agents 
ARn -iZ 
ARn-i 
= (XA - _X)[r 
+ pt+I 
- pt(I + r)]. 
(14) 
The difference between noise traders' and sophisticated investors' 
demands for asset u is 
Pt 
_ 
(1 + r)2pt 
At - 
t= 
(2ey)tu2 
= 
(2y)R2o2* 
(15) 
Note that as pu becomes small, (15) becomes large: noise traders and 
sophisticated investors take enormous positions of opposite signs be- 
cause the small amount of noise trader risk makes each group think 
that it has an almost riskless arbitrage opportunity. In the limit in 
which ,u = 0, equilibrium no longer exists (in the absence of funda- 
mental risk) because the two groups try to place infinite bets against 
each other. 
The expected value of the excess return on the risky asset u as of 
time t is 
~~'1 + ~1 - 
2 
_ 
(2,y)1 Y 
t[r + pt+I - pt( 
+ r)] = (2vy)taTpt+, 
- 
pt 
+ 
)2- 
2 
ept 
(16) 
And so 
XARn-i) 
= Pt 
- 
(1 + r)2(Pt)2 
(17) 
(2,y)IJLU 
2 
The expected excess total return of noise traders is positive only if 
both noise traders are optimistic (Pt is positive, which makes [15] posi- 
tive) and the risky asset is priced below its fundamental value (which 
makes [16] positive). 
Taking the global unconditional expectation of (17) yields 
(1 + r)2(p*)2 + (1 + r)2u2 
(2,y)pr 
' 
(18 
Equation (18) makes obvious the requirement that for noise traders to 
earn higher expected returns, the mean misperception p* of returns 
on the risky asset must be positive. The first p* on the right-hand side 
of (18) increases noise traders' expected returns through what might 
be called the "hold more" effect. Noise traders' expected returns rela- 
tive to those of sophisticated investors are increased when noise trad- 
ers on average hold more of the risky asset and earn a larger share of 
the rewards to risk bearing. When p* is negative, noise traders' chang- 
ing misperceptions still make the fundamentally riskless asset u risky 

NOISE TRADER RISK 
715 
and still push up the expected return on asset u, but the rewards to 
risk bearing accrue disproportionately to sophisticated investors, who 
on average hold more of the risky asset than the noise traders do. 
The first term in the numerator in (18) incorporates the "price 
pressure" effect. As noise traders become more bullish, they demand 
more of the risky asset on average and drive up its price. They thus 
reduce the return to risk bearing and, hence, the differential between 
their returns and those of sophisticated investors. 
The second term in the numerator incorporates the buy high-sell 
low or "Friedman" effect. Because noise traders' misperceptions are 
stochastic, they have the worst possible market timing. They buy the 
most of the risky asset u just when other noise traders are buying it, 
which is when they are most likely to suffer a capital loss. The more 
variable noise traders' beliefs are, the more damage their poor market 
timing does to their returns. 
The denominator incorporates the "create space" effect central to 
this model. As the variability of noise traders' beliefs increases, the 
price risk increases. To take advantage of noise traders' mispercep- 
tions, sophisticated investors must bear this greater risk. Since sophis- 
ticated investors are risk averse, they reduce the extent to which they 
bet against noise traders in response to this increased risk. If the 
create space effect is large, then the price pressure and buy high-sell 
low effects inflict less damage on noise traders' average returns rela- 
tive to sophisticated investors' returns. 
Two effects-hold 
more and create space-tend 
to raise noise trad- 
ers' relative expected returns. Two effects-the 
Friedman and price 
pressure effects-tend 
to lower noise traders' relative expected re- 
turns. Neither pair clearly dominates. Noise traders cannot earn 
higher average returns if they are on average bearish, for if p* does 
not exceed zero, there is no hold more effect and (18) must be nega- 
tive. Nor can noise traders earn higher average returns if they are too 
bullish, for as p* gets large the price pressure effect, which increases 
with (p*)2, 
dominates. For intermediate degrees of average bullish- 
ness, noise traders earn higher expected returns. And it is clear from 
(18) that the larger -y is, that is, the more risk averse agents are, the 
larger is the range of p* over which noise traders earn higher average 
returns. 
B. Relative Utility Levels 
The higher expected returns of the noise traders come at the cost of 
holding portfolios with sufficiently higher variance to give noise trad- 
ers lower expected utility (computed using the true distribution of 
wealth when old). Since sophisticated investors maximize true ex- 

716 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
pected utility, any trading strategy alternative to theirs that earns a 
higher mean return must have a variance sufficiently higher to make 
it unattractive. The average amount of asset s that must be given to 
old noise traders to give them the ex ante expected utility of sophis- 
ticated investors can be shown to be 
(I+r) 2 ( 
+ 
2 ) 
(19) 
This amount is decreasing in the variance and increasing in the 
square of the mean of noise traders' misperceptions. The size of their 
mistakes grows with p*, but the risk penalty for attempting to exploit 
noise traders' mistakes grows with u 2. Noise traders receive the same 
average realized utility when p* = x as when p* = -x, but when p* > 
0, they may receive higher average returns. When p* < 0, noise trad- 
ers receive both lower realized utility levels and lower average re- 
turns. 
Sophisticated investors are necessarily better off when noise traders 
are present in this model. In the absence of noise traders, sophis- 
ticated investors' opportunities are limited to investing at the riskless 
rate r. The presence of noise traders gives sophisticated investors a 
larger opportunity set, in that they can still invest all they want at the 
riskless rate r, but they can also trade in the unsafe asset. Access to a 
larger opportunity set clearly raises sophisticated investors' expected 
utility.6 
Noise traders receive higher average consumption than sophis- 
ticated investors, and sophisticated investors receive higher average 
consumption than in fundamental equilibrium. Yet the productive 
resources available to society-its 
labor income per period, its ability 
to create the productive asset s, and the unit amount of asset u yield- 
ing its dividend r per period-are 
unchanged by the presence of 
noise trading. The source of extra returns is made clear by the follow- 
ing thought experiment. Imagine that before some date T there are 
no noise traders. Up until time T, both assets sell at a price of one. At T 
it is unexpectedly announced that in the next generation noise traders 
will appear. The price pT of the asset u drops; those who hold asset u in 
period T suffer a capital loss. This capital loss is the source of the 
excess returns and of the higher consumption in the equilibrium with 
noise. The period T young have more to invest in s because they pay 
less to the old for the stock of asset u. If at time w it became known 
6If the stock of the risky asset is endogenous-if 
there is a nontrivial capital supply 
decision-sophisticated 
investors can be worse off with noise traders present. If noise 
traders make capital riskier and reduce the price of risk, they reduce the opportunity 
set of sophisticated investors and their welfare (De Long et al. 1989). 

NOISE TRADER RISK 
717 
that noise traders had permanently withdrawn, then those who held u 
at time X would capture the present value of what would otherwise 
have been future excess returns as p jumped to one. The same super- 
normal return would also be received by a generation that suddenly 
acquired the opportunity to "bust up" the risky asset by turning it into 
an equivalent quantity of the safe asset. The fact that the generation 
that suffers from the arrival of noise traders is pushed off to negative 
infinity in the model creates the appearance of a free lunch.7 
C. A Comparison with Other Work 
The fact that bullish noise traders can earn higher returns in the 
market than sophisticated traders implies that Friedman's simple 
"market selection" argument is incomplete.8 Since noise traders' 
wealth can increase faster than sophisticated investors', it is not possi- 
ble to make any blanket statement that noise traders lose money and 
eventually become unimportant. One should not overinterpret our 
result. The greater variance of noise traders' returns might give them 
in the long run a high probability of having low wealth and a low 
probability of having very high wealth. Market selection might work 
against such traders even if their expected value of wealth is high 
since they would be poor virtually for certain. A more appropriate 
selection criterion would take this into account, but we have not found 
a tractable way to implement such a selection criterion in a model in 
which noise traders affect prices.9 
At this point we can compare our results with recent discussions of 
Friedman's argument that destabilizing speculation is unprofitable, 
and so profitable speculation must be stabilizing. Hart and Kreps 
(1986) point out that an injection of rational investors able to perform 
profitable intertemporal trade could destabilize prices. In our model, 
rational speculation is always stabilizing, but average returns earned 
by rational speculators need not be as high as those earned by noise 
traders. In Stein (1987), speculators' access to private information 
allows for profitable destabilizing speculation. In our model, arbi- 
trageurs know exactly the way in which noise traders are confused 
today, and noise traders have no private information. The uncer- 
7 In practice, the cost of future noise trader risk in a security will be paid for by 
whoever sells it to the public. In the case of a stock, the cost will be paid by the entre- 
preneur. 
8 The key difference from Friedman's (1953) model is that here the demand curve of 
sophisticated investors shifts in response to the addition of noise traders and the result- 
ing increase in risk. Because of this shift, sophisticated investors' expected returns may 
fall even though their expected utility rises. 
9 De Long et al. (1988) consider the evolution of the wealth distribution in a model in 
which noise traders have no effect on prices. 

718 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
tainty that affects noise traders and sophisticated investors equally 
concerns the behavior of noise traders tomorrow. Haltiwanger and 
Waldman (1985) and Russell and Thaler (1985) study the effects of 
irrational behavior on prices in the presence of externalities and of 
restrictions on trade, respectively. Our model is related to Russell and 
Thaler's, in that the short horizon of arbitrageurs can be interpreted 
as a form of restriction on trade. 
III. 
Imitation of Beliefs 
We have already observed that noise traders earn higher expected 
returns than sophisticated investors. This at least raises the possibility 
that their importance does not diminish over time. Our two-period 
model does not permit us to examine the accumulation of wealth by 
noise traders. As an alternative approach, we consider two rules de- 
scribing the emulative behavior of new generations of traders. While 
it is possible to think of the succession of generations of investors in 
our model as families, a more relevant image of a new investor enter- 
ing the market is that of a pension fund searching for a new money 
manager. Our new investors collect information about the perfor- 
mance of the past generation and decide which strategy to follow. 
The first approach is to postulate that new investors respond only to 
recent returns achieved by different investment strategies and are not 
able to accurately assess the ex ante risks undertaken. For this case, we 
show that noise traders' effects on prices do not inevitably diminish 
over time. In our second approach, new investors select their invest- 
ment strategies on the basis of recent utility levels realized by these 
strategies. For this case, we show that noise traders' influence neces- 
sarily diminishes over time. We stress, however, that even readers 
preferring the second imitation rule should consider the empirical 
implications of our model. Under the P. T. Barnum rule that a noise 
trader is born every minute, a steady supply of new noise traders 
enters the market every period (as in our basic model) even if their 
strategies are not imitated. 
A. A Model of Imitation Based on Realized Returns 
without Fundamental Risk 
Each generation of investors earns exogenous labor income when 
young and consumes all its wealth when old. Each generation has the 
same number of investors following noise trader and sophisticated 
investor strategies as the previous one, except a few investors in each 
generation change type on the basis of the past relative performance 
of the two strategies. If noise traders earn a higher return in any 

NOISE TRADER 
RISK 
719 
period, a fraction of the young who would otherwise have been 
sophisticated investors become noise traders, and vice versa if noise 
traders earn a lower return. Moreover, the higher the difference in 
realized returns in any period, the more people switch. Letting p, be 
the share of the population that are noise traders and R' and RT be the 
realized returns of noise traders and sophisticated investors, we as- 
sume that 
Rt I = max{0, min[1, pt + ;(Rn - R,)]}, 
(20) 
where 4 is the rate at which additional new investors become noise 
traders per unit difference in realized returns.10 
Equation (20) says that success breeds imitation: investment strate- 
gies that made their followers richer win converts. Underlying this 
imitation rule is the idea that new money entering the market is not 
completely sure which investment strategy to pursue. If sophisticated 
investors have earned a high return recently, new investors try to 
allocate their wealth mimicking sophisticated investors, or perhaps 
even entrusting their wealth to sophisticated money managers. If 
noise trader strategies have earned a higher return recently, new 
investors imitate those strategies to a greater extent. One way to inter- 
pret this imitation rule is that some new investors use what Black 
(1986) calls pseudosignals, such as the past return, to decide which 
strategy to follow. 
This model can be easily solved only if 4 is very close to zero. If 4 is 
significantly different from zero at the scale of any one generation, 
then those investing in period t have to calculate the effect of the 
realization of returns on the division of those young in period t + 1 
between noise traders and sophisticated investors. If 4 is sufficiently 
small, then returns can be calculated under the approximation that 
the noise trader share will be unchanged. 
Equation (12), the pricing rule with a constant number of noise 
traders, with ii changed to Rt, gives the limit as 4 converges to zero of 
the pricing rule for the model with imitation: 
+ 
t(Pt- P*) + Rtp* _ 
(2^y) t 
iP1 
Pt 
1 + r 
r 
r(I + r)2 
(21) 
The expected return gap between noise traders and sophisticated 
investors is equation (17) when the proportion of noise traders is fixed 
" An alternative learning rule, studied by Bray (1982), would make the conversion 
parameter t a function of time: At = LoIt. Under this alternative conversion rule, the 
noise trader share would converge to an element of the set {O, 1} in the model without 
fundamental risk and to an element of the set {>L, 1} in the model with fundamental 
risk studied in the following subsection. 

720 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
at Ru. With the proportion R, variable, the limit of the expected return 
gap as 4 converges to zero is given by 
Et(A-R,,-i) = P_ 
(1 + r)2(pt)2 
(22) 
Pt 
(2 y)wo 
(22) 
Over time, R, tends to grow or shrink as (22) is greater or less than 
zero. It is then clear that although there is a value for R, at which 
Et(jt?+ 1) = Ru, this value is unstable. As the share of noise traders 
declines, sophisticated investors' willingness to bet against them rises. 
Sophisticated investors then earn more money from their exploitation 
of noise traders' misperceptions, and the gap between the expected 
returns earned by noise traders and those earned by sophisticated 
investors becomes negative. If the noise trader share pt is below 
(p*2 + U2)(I + r)2 
R* 
- 
p(y) 
)2(23) 
then pt tends to shrink. If R, is greater than R*, noise traders create so 
much price risk as to make sophisticated investors very reluctant to 
speculate against them. Noise traders then earn higher average re- 
turns than sophisticated investors and grow in number. In the long 
run, noise traders dominate the market or effectively disappear, as 
shown in figure 1. 
EIARn- i 
FIG. 1.-Dynamics 
of the noise trader share with no fundamental risk 

NOISE TRADER 
RISK 
7 21 
B. An Extension with Fundamental Risk 
This subsection extends our model of imitation to the case of funda- 
mentally risky returns on the unsafe asset. We show that the long-run 
distribution of the share of noise traders is very different from the 
case without fundamental risk. Specifically, for sufficiently small 
values of A, the expected noise trader share for the steady-state distri- 
bution of pLt is always bounded away-from zero. 
Let asset u pay not a certain dividend r but an uncertain dividend 
r + Et, 
(24) 
where Et is serially independent, normally distributed with zero mean 
and constant variance, and, for simplicity, uncorrelated with noise 
traders' opinions Pt. Asset demands then become 
XI-= r + EpI 
- (1 + r)Pt 
(25) 
P+ 
I 
oE) 
and 
_ 
r + Ept?I 
- (1+ r)pt 
Pt 
(6 
2w(wp+t 
2) 
+ 
2y 
(26) 
instead of (7) and (8). The only change is the appearance in the 
denominators of the asset demand functions of the total risk involved 
from asset u-the 
sum of noise trader price risk and fundamental 
dividend risk-instead 
of simply noise trader-generated 
price risk. 
The pricing function if there is fundamental risk is transformed 
from (21) into 
Pt = 
J 
+ 
iP 
- 
2y [v 
+ (1 
1+ 
1 + p) 
(27) 
r' 
r 
(1 + r)T2I1 
r 
in the limit as 4 converges to zero. The noise trader risk term is 
replaced by the total risk associated with holding u. The difference 
between expected returns of noise traders and those of sophisticated 
investors becomes 
*2 +a2 
A]= 
P 
- 
2 
2 
(28) 
(IL+ r)2 + 
if [u is greater than zero and 
E[ARn- (?)] = P* 
(29) 
While the hold more, average price pressure, and Friedman effects 
are not changed by the addition of fundamental risk, the create space 

722 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
effect-the 
denominator of the second term on the right-hand side of 
(28)-is 
increased. Since holding asset u is now more risky, sophis- 
ticated investors are less willing to trade in order to exploit noise 
traders' mistakes. We continue to assume that 4 = 0 in the calculation 
of prices, so that (27) is the pricing rule for this model and (28) is the 
difference in expected returns. 
Equation (12) shows that, in the absence of fundamental risk, a 
sequence of economies in which ii approaches zero also has E(ARn,-) 
approach negative infinity. By contrast, equation (28) shows that, with 
fundamental risk present, E(ARj~) approaches p* as ii approaches 
zero. There is an intuitive explanation for the substantially different 
dynamics for u 2 = 0 and U2 > 0. If U2 > 0, then noise traders' and 
sophisticated investors' demands remain bounded as ,u approaches 
zero. For a sufficiently small noise trader share, therefore, sophis- 
ticated investors must have positive holdings of the risky asset-the 
very small number of noise traders cannot hold it all-and 
so the 
risky asset must offer an expected return higher than the safe rate in 
equilibrium. If u 2 = 0, then noise traders' and sophisticated investors' 
demands become unbounded as ii approaches zero and the unsafe 
asset loses its risk. Noise traders' positions then lose them arbitrarily 
large amounts each period. 
For parameter values that satisfy both p* > 0 and 
2 
(1 + r)2(p* + U2)2 
16y>p*2 
(30) 
equation (28) has no real roots and noise traders always earn higher 
expected returns. In this case, for sufficiently small values of 4 the 
expected long-run noise trader share is close to one. 
For parameter values such that (30) fails, (28) has two positive real 
roots. If the lower root PL 
< 1, noise traders do not always earn 
higher expected returns and the expected long-run noise trader 
share is not in general close to one. For this case, we have proved the 
following proposition. 
PROPOSITION. Let the pricing rule be given by (27) and the imitation 
rule by (20). Suppose that the equation E[AR(pu)] = 0 has at least one 
real root for ,u E [0, 1]. Consider a sequence of economies indexed by 
n, differing only in their values of the imitation parameter en, such 
that en -*0 
as n -* oo. Then there is a 8 > 0 such that E(Ru) - 
? 8 as 
n -* 
oc, where the expectation is taken over the steady-state distribu- 
tion of 
,t. 
An appendix containing a proof is available from the authors on 
request. 
When imitation is based on realized returns, for some parameter 
values the expected noise trader share of the population approaches 

NOISE TRADER RISK 
723 
FIG. 2.-Dynamics 
of the noise trader share with fundamental risk 
one as 4 approaches zero. The proposition above shows, and figure 2 
illustrates, that if asset u is fundamentally risky, there are no parame- 
ter values for which the expected noise trader share of the population 
approaches zero as 4 becomes small. This result suggests that at least 
one plausible form of dynamics ensures that noise traders matter and 
affect prices in the long run. 
C. Imitation Based on Utility 
The imitation rule (20) is based on the assumption that the rate of 
conversion depends on the difference in realized returns and not on 
the difference in realized utilities. It implicitly assumes that converts 
do not take account of the greater risk that noise traders bear to earn 
higher returns. This form of imitation requires investors to use past 
investors' realized returns as a proxy for success even though their 
own objective is to maximize not wealth but utility. 
An alternative imitation rule is to make the number of new noise 
traders depend on the difference in utilities realized last period from 
sophisticated investor and noise trader strategies. This rule is differ- 
ent from (20): with concave utility, there is more switching away from 
a strategy in response to past low returns than switching toward a 
strategy in response to past high returns. Under this imitation rule, 
the share of noise traders in the economy in fact converges to zero as 4 
approaches zero, in contrast to our result under (20). Since sophis- 
ticated investors maximize true expected utility, on average the real- 
ized utility of a sophisticated investor is higher than the realized utility 
of a noise trader. That is, under this imitation rule the higher vari- 
ance of noise traders' returns costs them in terms of winning converts 

724 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
because it costs them in terms of average utility. For each initial state 
of the system, the noise trader share tends to fall under a utility 
difference-based 
imitation rule until it reaches the neighborhood of 
the reflecting barrier at ii = 0. The expected noise trader share for 
the steady-state distribution of ii is no longer bounded away from 
zero as 4 approaches zero. 
This alternative rule has considerable appeal in that imitation is 
based on the realization of agents' true objectives. Nonetheless, there 
are two reasons to prefer the wealth-based imitation rule (20). First, 
we find it plausible that many investors attribute the higher return of 
an investment strategy to the market timing skills of its practitioners 
and not to its greater risk. This consideration may be particularly 
important when we ask whether individuals change their own invest- 
ment strategies that have just earned them a high return. When peo- 
ple imitate investment strategies, they appear to focus on standard 
metrics such as returns relative to market averages and do not correct 
for ex ante risk. As long as enough investors use the pseudosignal of 
realized returns to choose their own investment strategy, noise trad- 
ers will persist. The second reason to focus on returns-based imitation 
is that Friedman (1953) argued that noise traders must earn lower 
average returns and so become unimportant. He did not argue that 
money-making noise traders would fail to attract imitators because 
potential imitators would attribute their success to luck rather than to 
skill. Our focus on an imitation rule in which higher wealth wins 
converts is closer to Friedman's argument. 
IV. 
Noise Trading and Asset Market Behavior 
This section describes some implications of our model for financial 
markets (see also Black 1986). We show that in the presence of noise 
trader risk, asset returns exhibit the mean reversion documented by a 
great deal of empirical work, asset prices diverge on average from 
fundamental values as suggested by Mehra and Prescott (1985) and 
by the comparison of the portfolio and market values of closed-end 
mutual funds, and long-term investors stabilize prices. Finally, we 
discuss the effects of noise trader risk on corporate finance. 
A. 
Volatility and Mean Reversion in Asset Prices 
In our model with noise traders absent-with 
both p* and u 2 set equal 
to zero-the 
price of u is always equal to its fundamental value of one. 
When noise traders are present, the price of u-identical 
to s in all 
fundamental respects-is 
excessively volatile in the sense that it 
moves more than can be explained on the basis of changes in funda- 

NOISE TRADER 
RISK 
725 
mental values. None of the variance in the price of u can be justified 
by changes in fundamentals: there are no changes in expected future 
dividends in our model or in any fundamental determinant of re- 
quired returns. 
Accumulating evidence suggests that it is difficult to account for all 
the volatility of asset prices in terms of news. Although Shiller's (1981) 
claim that the stock market wildly violated variance bounds imposed 
by the requirement that prices be discounted present values relied on 
controversial statistical procedures (Kleidon 1986), other evidence 
that asset price movements do not all reflect changes in fundamental 
values is more clear-cut. Roll (1984) considers the orange juice futures 
market, where the principal source of relevant news is weather. He 
demonstrates that a substantial share of the movement in prices can- 
not be attributed to news about the weather that bears on fundamen- 
tal values. Campbell and Kyle (1987) conclude that a large fraction of 
market movements cannot be attributed to news about future divi- 
dends and discount rates. 
Such excess volatility becomes even easier to explain if we relax our 
assumption that all market participants are either noise traders or 
sophisticated investors who bet against them. A more reasonable as- 
sumption is that many traders pursue passive strategies, neither re- 
sponding to noise nor betting against noise traders. If a large fraction 
of investors allocate a constant share of their wealth to stocks, then 
even a small measure of noise traders can have a large impact on 
prices. When noise traders try to sell, only a few sophisticated inves- 
tors are willing to hold extra stock, and consequently prices must fall 
considerably for them to do so. The fewer sophisticated investors 
there are relative to the noise traders, the larger is the impact of 
noise. ll 
If asset prices respond to noise and if the errors of noise traders are 
temporary, then asset prices revert to the mean. For example, if noise 
traders' misperceptions follow an AR(1) process, then the serial corre- 
lation in returns decays geometrically as in the "fads" example of 
Summers (1986), who stresses that even with long time series it is 
difficult to detect slowly decaying transitory components in asset 
prices. Since the same problems of identification that plague econo- 
metricians affect speculators, actual market forces are likely to be less 
effective in limiting the effects of noise trading than in our model, 
where rational investors fully understand the process governing the 
behavior of noise traders. 
" A simple example may help to make our point. Suppose that all investors are 
convinced that the market is efficient. They will hold the market portfolio. Now sup- 
pose that one investor decides to commit his wealth disproportionately to a single 
security. Its price will be driven to infinity. 

726 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
Moreover, even if sophisticated investors accurately diagnose the 
process describing the behavior of noise traders, if misperceptions are 
serially correlated, they will not be willing to bet nearly as heavily 
against noise traders: the risk of a capital loss remains and is balanced 
by a smaller expected return since the next-period price is not ex- 
pected to move all the way back to its fundamental value. A high 
unconditional variance of prices can coexist with only a small oppor- 
tunity to exploit noise traders. 
For an example of how rapidly unconditional price variance grows 
as misperceptions become persistent, assume that misperceptions fol- 
low an AR(1) process with innovation At and autoregressive parame- 
ter 4A. In this case the unconditional variance of the price of u is'2 
2(T2 
2(2 
(2 
_ 
~ 
P 
I 
_ 
___31_ 
_ 
P 
[r + (1 - 
)]2 
[r +(1 
4)]2(1 
+2) 
(31) 
Noise traders who earn higher expected returns than sophisticated 
investors can thus cause larger deviations of prices from fundamental 
values if misperceptions are serially correlated. The difference in 
expected returns is given by 
E(ASn-i) 
= P*- 
[r + (1 - 
)]2(p*)2 
_ 
[r + (1 
- 
4>)]2 
(32) 
Highly persistent transitory components in asset prices can be very 
large and still consistent with noise traders' earning higher returns 
than sophisticated investors. 
There is significant evidence that stock prices indeed exhibit mean- 
reverting behavior. Fama and French (1988b) and Poterba and Sum- 
mers (1988) demonstrate that long-horizon stock returns exhibit 
negative serial correlation. The fact that prices revert to the mean also 
implies that measures of scale have predictive power for asset returns: 
when prices are above p*-that 
is, are high relative to their historical 
average multiple of dividends-prices 
are likely to fall in our model. 
In fact, Campbell and Shiller (1987), Fama and French (1988a), and 
other studies find that dividend/price and earnings/price ratios ap- 
pear to contain substantial power for detecting transitory components 
in stock prices. 
Many studies including Mankiw and Summers (1984) and Mankiw 
12 Demand for assets depends not on the unconditional price variances but on the 
conditional one-step-ahead price risk. The variance of the price of u about its one-step- 
ahead anticipated value is 
2 
>2fnIL 
= 
[r + (1 -_)]2 
in the case of serially correlated misperceptions. 

NOISE TRADER 
RISK 
727 
(1986) note that anomalies exactly paralleling the dividend/price ratio 
anomaly are present in the bond market. Long rates have predictive 
power for future short rates, but it is nonetheless the case that when 
long rates exceed short rates, they tend to fall and not to rise as 
predicted by the expectations hypothesis. While convincing stories 
about changing risk factors are yet to be provided, this behavior is 
exactly what one would expect if noise trading distorted long bond 
yields. Specifically, if we think of the short-term bond as asset s and 
the long-term bond as asset u, then the price of u exhibits the mean- 
reverting behavior observed in the data on long-term bonds. 
In a world with mean-reverting noise traders' misperceptions, the 
optimal investment strategy is very different from the buy and hold 
strategy of the standard investment model. The optimal strategy for 
sophisticated investors is a market timing strategy that calls for in- 
creased exposure to stocks after they have fallen and decreased expo- 
sure to stocks after they have risen in price. The strategy of betting 
against noise traders is a contrarian investment strategy: it requires 
investment in the market at times when noise traders are bearish, in 
anticipation that their sentiment will recover. The fundamentalist in- 
vestment strategies of Graham and Dodd (1934) seem to be based on 
largely the same idea, although they are typically described in terms 
of individual stocks. The evidence on mean reversion in stock returns 
suggests that, over the long run, such contrarian strategies pay off. 
As our model shows, successful pursuit of such contrarian invest- 
ment strategies can require a long time horizon, and such strategies 
are by no means safe because of the noise trader risk that must be run 
(see the quotation from Keynes at the beginning of this article). In 
fact, our model shows precisely why apparent anomalies such as the 
high dollar of the mid 1980s and the extraordinary price/earnings 
ratios on Japanese stocks in 1987-89 can persist for so long even 
when many investors recognize these anomalies. Betting against such 
perceived mispricing requires bearing a lot of risk. Even if the price is 
too high now, it can always go higher in the short run, leading to 
the demise of an arbitrageur with limited resources or a short time 
horizon. 
Contrarian investment strategies work because arbitrageurs can 
take advantage of mean reversion in noise traders' beliefs. An alterna- 
tive rational investment strategy would be to gather information 
about future noise trader demand shifts and to trade in anticipation 
of such shifts. Such information can come from examining trading 
volume, price patterns, buy/sell ratios, and other "chartist" indicators. 
Trading based on forecasting the behavior of others is not modeled 
here, but we consider it elsewhere (De Long et al. 1990). With short 
horizons, it may well be more attractive for smart money to pursue 

728 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
these anticipatory strategies than to wait for the reversion of noise 
traders' beliefs to their mean (Shleifer and Vishny 1990). In this case, 
we anticipate that many sophisticated investors will try to "guess bet- 
ter than the crowd how the crowd will behave" rather than pursue 
contrarian long-term arbitrage. 
B. Asset Prices and Fundamental Values: 
Closed-End Mutual Funds 
The efficient markets hypothesis states that assets ought to sell for 
their fundamental values. In most cases, fundamental value is diffi- 
cult to measure, and so this prediction cannot be directly tested. But 
the fundamental value of a closed-end fund is easily assessed: the 
fund pays dividends equal to the sum of the dividends paid by the 
stocks in its portfolio and so should sell for the market price of its 
portfolio. Yet closed-end funds sell and have sold at large and sub- 
stantially fluctuating discounts (Malkiel 1977; Herzfeld 1980), which 
have been relatively small during the bull markets of the late 1960s 
and the 1980s and large during the bear markets of the 1970s. 
Available explanations of discounts on closed-end funds are not 
completely satisfactory. Two of the most prominent explanations rely 
on the agency costs of fund management and on the miscalculation of 
net asset value because of a failure to deduct the fund's capital gains 
tax liability. The agency theory for discounts, however, cannot ex- 
plain how closed-end funds are ever rationally formed since the origi- 
nal investors throw away the present value of future agency costs 
without earning higher returns. The agency explanation is also incon- 
sistent with the evidence that funds with higher transaction costs and 
stock turnover do not sell at higher discounts (Malkiel 1977) and with 
the correlated variability of discounts across funds (Herzfeld 1980). 
With respect to tax-based theories, Brauer (1984) and Brickley and 
Schallheim (1985) find that prices of closed-end funds rise on the 
announcement of open-ending or of liquidation. This result is diffi- 
cult to interpret if the closed-end fund's discount reflects its un- 
realized capital gain tax liability since, if anything, discounts should 
widen when the fund is open-ended and tax payments can no longer 
be deferred. Nor can the capital gains story explain how funds trade 
at a premium when they get started. 
The concept of noise trader risk can explain both the persistent and 
variable discounts on closed-end funds and the creation of such 
funds.'3 Think of the safe asset s in our model as the stocks in the 
closed-end fund and of the unsafe asset u as the fund itself. As in our 
13 It does not explain why such funds are not broken up immediately once a discount 
appears. 

NOISE TRADER RISK 
729 
model, the two securities are perfect substitutes as far as dividends are 
concerned and so should sell at the same price in equilibrium without 
noise traders. Note that it does not matter for our purposes if there is 
noise trading in the stocks themselves and therefore a mispricing of s 
as well. All we need is additional noise trader misperception of re- 
turns on the closed-end fund u that is separate from their mispercep- 
tion of returns on the underlying stocks. Finally, we need to assume 
that noise traders' misperceptions of returns on closed-end funds are 
correlated with other (possibly irrational) sources of systematic risk 
since idiosyncratic noise trader risk is not priced in our model. 
Under these assumptions, the results from our basic model can be 
directly applied to closed-end funds. Noise traders' misperceptions 
about the returns on the funds become a source of risk for any short- 
horizon investor trying to arbitrage the difference between the fund 
and its underlying assets. Thus when an investor buys the fund u and 
sells short the underlying stocks s, he bears the risk that at the time he 
wants to liquidate his position the discount will be wider. Just as in our 
model, noise traders can become more bearish on the fund in the 
future than they are today, and so an arbitrageur will suffer a loss. 
Such risk of changes in noise traders' opinions of closed-end funds 
leads to the market's discounting of their price on average relative to 
the net asset value even if noise traders themselves are neither bullish 
nor bearish on average, that is, p* = 0. The discount arises solely 
because holding the fund entails additional noise trader risk: we do 
not assume that noise traders are on average bearish about closed-end 
funds. 14 
This theory of discounts on closed-end funds makes several accu- 
rate predictions. First, it explains how the funds can get started even 
when on average they will be underpriced. Closed-end funds get 
started when noise traders are unusually optimistic about the returns 
14 One can see how the fact that closed-end fund shares are subject not only to 
fundamental risk (risk affecting the value of the fund's portfolio) but also to noise 
trader risk (risk that the closed-end fund discount might change) affects investment 
decisions in the investment advice given by Malkiel (1973, 1975, 1985, 1989). He 
confidently recommended in 1973 that investors purchase then heavily discounted 
(20-30 percent) closed-end fund shares: such an investor would do better than by 
picking stocks or investing in an open-end fund unless "the discount widened in the 
future." The confidence of Malkiel's recommendation stemmed from his belief that 
"this ... risk is minimized ... [since] discounts [now] ... are about as large as they have 
ever been historically" (1975, p. 263). And the obverse is his belief that the holder of a 
closed-end fund should be prepared to sell if the discount narrowed, not only if the 
discount disappeared, but also if the discount narrowed. The 4th ed. of A Random Walk 
down Wall Street does not recommend the purchase of closed-end fund shares in spite of 
the fact that many closed-end funds still sell at discounts. The noise trader risk that 
discounts may widen again in the future is a disadvantage that apparently weighs 
heavily against the relatively small advantages given by the small then-current discount. 
The 5th ed. once again recommends the purchase of closed-end funds now that the 
discount has widened. 

730 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
on closed-end funds, that is, when ptfor the funds is unusually high. In 
such a case, it would pay entrepreneurs to buy stocks (asset s), repack- 
age them as closed-end funds (asset u), and sell the closed-end funds 
to optimistic noise traders at a premium. This result has the implica- 
tion, which has not yet been tested, that new closed-end funds are 
formed in clusters at the times when other closed-end funds sell at a 
premium. 
The fluctuations in noise trader opinion of the expected return on 
the funds also explain why the discounts fluctuate, widening at some 
times and turning into premiums at others (when the funds get 
started). Fluctuations in discounts are in fact the reason that there 
is an average discount. No other theory of discounts predicts that 
closed-end funds sometimes sell at a premium, that changes in dis- 
counts are correlated across funds, or that new funds are started 
when old closed-end funds sell at a premium. 
Two key assumptions must be made for this theory of closed-end 
fund discounts to be coherent. First, noise trader risk on the funds 
should be systematic and not idiosyncratic. Consistent with this as- 
sumption, discounts on different closed-end funds do seem to fluc- 
tuate together (Herzfeld 1980). Second, investors in the economy 
must have horizons that are with some probability shorter than the 
time to liquidation of the fund. If some investors on the contrary have 
very long horizons, they can buy the closed-end fund and sell short 
the underlying securities, wait until the fund is liquidated, and so lock 
in a capital gain without bearing any risk. Consistent with this obser- 
vation, discounts become much narrower on the announcement of 
the open-ending of a closed-end fund (Brauer 1984). The application 
of our model to closed-end funds illustrates the essential role played 
by the finite horizon of investors. 
C. Asset Prices and Fundamental Values: 
The Mehra-Prescott Puzzle 
In our model, if noise traders earn higher expected returns than 
sophisticated investors, then the average price of u must be below its 
fundamental value. The expected value of pt is 
E(p) = p* = I _+ 
p . 
(33) 
r(1+ 
r)2 
r 
Since noise traders hold more of the risky asset and earn negative 
capital gains on average, they can earn higher expected returns than 
sophisticated investors only if the dividend on the unsafe asset 
amounts to a higher rate of return on average than the same dividend 
on the safe asset. For this to hold, the unsafe asset must sell at an 
average price below its fundamental value of one. 

NOISE TRADER RISK 
731 
The result that noise traders earn a higher expected return when- 
ever the unsafe asset is priced below its fundamental value may shed 
some light on the well-known Mehra-Prescott puzzle. Mehra and 
Prescott (1985) show that the realized average return on U.S. equities 
over the last 60 years has been around 8 percent, and the realized real 
return on safe bonds only around zero. Such a risk premium seems to 
be inconsistent with the standard representative consumer model ap- 
plied to U.S. data unless that consumer has an implausibly large coef- 
ficient of risk aversion. 
If we interpret asset u in our model as the aggregate stock market 
and asset s as short-term bonds, our model can shed light on the 
Mehra-Prescott puzzle. Since noise trader risk drives down the price 
of u, equities yield a higher return in our model than the riskless asset 
does. Moreover, this difference in yields obtains despite the fact that 
aggregate consumption does not vary too much with the expected 
return on equities. The reason is that the consumption of sophis- 
ticated investors satisfies the Euler equation with respect to the true 
distribution of expected returns exactly, but the consumption of noise 
traders does not. In fact, the share of wealth invested (and thus not 
consumed) by noise traders is low when the true expected return is 
high, and high when the true expected return is low. The presence of 
noise traders thus makes aggregate consumption less sensitive to the 
variation of true expected returns than it should be. A large equity 
premium can thus coexist with a low covariance of returns on equities 
with aggregate consumption. Although the mechanics of our model 
are very different from the model in Ingram (1987), this particular 
implication works similarly to her explanation of the equity premium, 
which relies on the insensitivity of the consumption of a group of 
rule-of-thumb agents to expected returns. 
It is important to stress that our model sheds light on the Mehra- 
Prescott puzzle only if equities are underpriced, which is itself a neces- 
sary condition for noise traders to earn higher expected returns. In 
other words, the fact that the Mehra-Prescott equity premium obtains 
in an economy is evidence for the proposition that the expected re- 
turns of noise traders are likely to be higher than those of sophis- 
ticated investors. In the context of our model, the existence of an 
equity premium in the U.S. economy suggests that American noise 
traders are on average bullish on the assets that they disturb and may 
earn higher average returns than American arbitrageurs. 
D. Long Horizons 
Noise trader risk makes coherent a widely held view of the relative 
social merits of "speculation" and "investment" that has found little 
academic sympathy. Many participants in financial markets have ar- 

732 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
gued that the presence of traders who are looking for only short-term 
profits is socially destructive. The standard economist's refutation of 
this argument relies on recursion: If one seeks to buy a stock now to 
sell in an hour, one must calculate its price in an hour. But its price in 
an hour depends on what those who will purchase it think its price will 
be a further hour down the road. Anyone who buys an asset, no 
matter how short the holding period, must perform the same present 
value calculation as someone who intends to hold the asset for 50 
years. Since a linked chain of short-term "traders" performs the same 
assessment of values as a single "investor," the claim that trading is 
bad and investing good cannot be correct. Prices will be unaffected by 
the horizon of the agent as long as the rate of discount and willingness 
to bear risk are unchanged. 
In our model this analysis does not apply. The horizon of agents 
matters. If agents live for more than two periods, the equilibrium is 
closer to the "fundamental" equilibrium than if agents live for two 
periods. As an example, consider an infinitesimal measure of infin- 
itely lived but risk-averse sophisticated traders. Suppose that pt is less 
than one. An infinitely lived agent can sell short a unit of s and buy a 
unit of u. He collects a gain of 1 - pt, and he has incurred no liability 
in any state of the world. The dividend on u will always offset the 
dividend owed on s. The fact that an infinitely lived agent can arbi- 
trage assets s and u without ever facing a settlement date implies that 
any infinitely lived sophisticated investor could push the price of u to 
its fundamental value of one. 
Although arbitrage is not riskless for long but finite-lived agents, 
their asset demands are more responsive to price movements than 
those of two-period-lived agents. There are two reasons for this. First, 
even if an n > 2 period-lived sophisticated investor can liquidate his 
position in asset u only in the last period of his life, he bears the same 
amount of resale price risk as his two-period-lived counterpart but 
gets some insurance from dividends. If, for example, he buys an 
undervalued asset u, he receives a high dividend yield for several 
periods before he sells. Because as the horizon expands so does the 
share of dividends in expected returns, agents with longer horizons 
buy more at the start. Second, a long-lived sophisticated investor has 
in fact many periods to liquidate his position. Since he makes money 
on arbitrage if the price reverts to the mean at any time before his 
death, having several opportunities to liquidate reduces his risk. For 
these two reasons, raising sophisticated investors' horizons makes 
them more aggressive and brings the price of u closer to fundamen- 
tals. 
The embedding of the financial market in an overlapping genera- 
tions model in which agents die after two periods is a device to give 

NOISE TRADER RISK 
733 
rational utility maximizers short horizons. This device may ade- 
quately model institutional features of asset markets-triennial 
per- 
formance evaluations of pension fund money managers, for ex- 
ample-that 
may lead even fully rational agents to have short 
horizons. Realistically, even an agent with a horizon long in terms of 
time may have a horizon "short" in the context of this model. If 
dividend risk is great enough and if noise trader misperceptions are 
persistent, then agents might well find it unattractive to buy stocks 
and hold them for a long time hoping that the market someday recog- 
nizes their value. For in the meantime, during which the assets might 
have to be sold, market prices may deviate even further from funda- 
mental values. The claim that short horizons are bad for the economy 
is both coherent and true in our model. 
E. 
Observations on Corporate Finance 
Throughout this paper, we have focused on the implications of mar- 
ketwide noise trader risk. The reason is that in our model, just as in a 
standard asset valuation model, idiosyncratic risk is unpriced. A num- 
ber of implications of noise trading, however, including those stressed 
by Black (1986), rely on misperceptions of firm-specific returns. To 
allow such idiosyncratic misperceptions to matter, the model must 
include transactions costs that limit the universe of stocks that each 
sophisticated investor holds (Mayshar 1983). Although such a model 
is beyond the scope of this paper, we mention a few issues that idio- 
syncratic risk raises in the context of corporate finance. 
In a model with noise traders the Modigliani-Miller theorem does 
not necessarily apply. To see this, consider the standard homemade 
leverage proof of the theorem. This proof demonstrates that a ra- 
tional investor can undo any effects of firm leverage and maintain the 
same real position regardless of a firm's payout policy. It does not 
suggest that less than rational traders will do so. Given that noise 
traders in general affect prices, it follows that unless they happen to 
trade so as to undo the effects of changes in leverage, the Modigliani- 
Miller theorem will not hold. 
It is plausible to think that noise traders do not get confused about 
the value of assets that have a certain and immediate liquidation 
value. Noise traders are more likely to become confused about assets 
that offer fundamentally risky payouts in the distant future. Assets of 
long duration that promise fundamentally uncertain as opposed to 
immediate and certain cash payouts may thus be subject to an espe- 
cially great amount of noise trader risk. In this case, a firm might 
choose to pay dividends rather than reinvest even if there are tax costs 
to dividends. If dividends make equity look more like a safe short- 

734 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
term bond to noise traders, then paying dividends can reduce the 
total amount of noise trader risk borne by a firm's securities. Paying 
dividends might raise the value of equity if the reduction in the dis- 
count entailed by noise trader risk exceeds additional shareholder tax 
liability. Moreover, dividends are not equivalent to share repurchases 
unless noise traders perceive the two to be complete substitutes. If 
investors believe that future stock repurchases are of uncertain value 
because noise traders disturb the price of equity, then the equity of a 
firm repurchasing shares can be subject to greater undervaluation 
than that of a firm paying dividends. A bird in the hand is truly better 
than one in the bush. 
Jensen (1986) summarizes evidence showing that the more con- 
strained the allocation of the firm's cash flows, the higher its valuation 
by the market. For example, share prices rise when a firm raises 
dividends, swaps debt for equity, or buys back shares. In contrast, 
share prices fall when a firm cuts dividends or issues new shares. 
These results are consistent with our model if making the returns to 
equity more determinate reduces the noise trader risk that it bears. 
Increases in dividends that make equity look safer to noise traders 
may reduce noise trader risk and raise share prices. Swaps of debt for 
equity have the same effect, as do share buybacks. As long as a change 
in capital structure convinces noise traders that a firm's total capital is 
more like asset s and less like asset u than they had previously thought, 
changes in capital structure raise value. 
The discussion above suggests that noise trader risk is a cost that an 
issuer of a security that will be publicly traded must bear. Both traded 
equity and traded long-term debt will be underpriced relative to fun- 
damentals if their prices are subject to the whims of noise traders' 
opinions. Why then are securities traded publicly? Put differently, 
why don't all firms go private to avoid noise trader risk? Presumably 
firms have publicly traded securities if the benefits, such as a broader 
base from which to draw capital, a larger pool to use to diversify 
systematic risk, and liquidity, exceed the costs of the noise trader- 
generated undervaluation. Assets for which these benefits of public 
ownership are the highest relative to the costs of noise trader risk are 
the assets that will be issued into markets with public trading. While 
the issuers of these securities will try to minimize the costs of noise 
trader risk by "packaging" the securities appropriately, they will not 
be able to eliminate such risk entirely. 
V. 
Conclusion 
We have shown that risk created by the unpredictability of unsophis- 
ticated investors' opinions significantly reduces the attractiveness of 

NOISE TRADER RISK 
735 
arbitrage. As long as arbitrageurs have short horizons and so must 
worry about liquidating their investment in a mispriced asset, their 
aggressiveness will be limited even in the absence of fundamental risk. 
In this case noise trading can lead to a large divergence between 
market prices and fundamental values. Moreover, noise traders may 
be compensated for bearing the risk that they themselves create and 
so earn higher returns than sophisticated investors even though they 
distort prices. As we discuss in the paper, this result at the least calls 
for a closer scrutiny of the standard argument that destabilizing 
speculation must be unprofitable and so noise traders will not persist 
in the market. 
This paper has also argued that a number of financial market 
anomalies can be explained by the idea of noise trader risk. These 
anomalies include the excess volatility of and mean reversion in stock 
market prices, the failure of the expectations hypothesis of the term 
structure, the Mehra-Prescott equity premium, the undervaluation of 
closed-end mutual funds, and several others. The essential assump- 
tion we use is that the opinions of noise traders are unpredictable and 
arbitrage requires bearing the risk that their misperceptions become 
even more extreme tomorrow than they are today. Since "unpredicta- 
bility" seems to be a general property of the behavior of irrational 
investors, we believe that our conclusions are not simply a conse- 
quence of a particular parameterization of noise trader actions. 
Our model suggests that much of the behavior of professional ar- 
bitrageurs can be seen as a response to noise trading rather than as 
trading on fundamentals. Many professional arbitrageurs spend their 
resources examining and predicting the pseudosignals noise traders 
follow in order to bet against them more successfully. These pseudo- 
signals include volume and price patterns, sentiment indices, and the 
forecasts of Wall Street gurus. Just as it pays entrepreneurs to build 
casinos to exploit gamblers, it pays rational investors to spend consid- 
erable resources to exploit noise traders. In both cases, private re- 
turns to the activity probably exceed social returns. 
Our focus on irrationality in financial markets departs from that of 
earlier studies of rational but heterogeneously informed investors 
(Grossman and Stiglitz 1980; Townsend 1983; Varian 1986; Stein 
1987). Many of the results in this paper could perhaps be derived 
using a fully rational model with differentially informed investors, 
provided that one gets away from the "no-trade" theorems (Milgrom 
and Stokey 1982). 
Apart from the question of tractability, we have focused on models 
of irrationality for three reasons. First, in the context of fluctuations 
in the aggregate market, we find the idea of privately informed inves- 
tors somewhat implausible. While one can always think of a person's 

736 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
opinion as private information, this seems like playing with words. 
Speaking of the private information of a market timer like Joe Gran- 
ville-who 
himself insists that he has a "system" rather than an infor- 
mational advantage-makes 
little sense to us. Second, given the tradi- 
tional argument that the stock market price aggregates information 
and opinions, it is important to examine the extent to which there is a 
tendency of prices to reflect "good" rather than "bad" opinions. Even 
more than Figlewski's (1979) result that "bad" opinions can influence 
market prices for a long time, our paper suggests skepticism about the 
long-run irrelevance of "bad" opinions. Third, our analysis illustrates 
the point that studying irrational behavior does not always require 
specifying its content. We have shown that something can be learned 
about financial markets simply by looking at the effect of unpredictabil- 
ity of irrational behavior on the opportunities of rational investors. 
The idea of noise trader risk is much more general than our particu- 
lar examples. In future research, it would be valuable to consider 
asset markets with more primitive descriptions of irrationality. One 
advantage of such an approach would be to generate more restrictive 
predictions that are easier to reject. 
References 
Alpert, Marc, and Raiffa, Howard. "A Progress Report on the Training of 
Probability Assessors." In Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, 
edited by Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky. Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982. 
Black, Fischer. "Noise."J. Finance 41 (July 1986): 529-43. 
Brauer, Gregory A. " 'Open-ending' Closed-End Funds."J. Financial Econ. 13 
(December 1984): 491-507. 
Bray, Margaret M. "Learning, Estimation, and the Stability of Rational Ex- 
pectations."J. Econ. Theory 26 (April 1982): 318-39. 
Brickley, James A., and Schallheim, James S. "Lifting the Lid on Closed-End 
Investment Companies: A Case of Abnormal Returns." J. Financial and 
Quantitative Analysis 20 (March 1985): 107-17. 
Campbell, John Y., and Kyle, Albert. "Smart Money, Noise Trading, and 
Stock Price Behavior." Manuscript. Princeton, NJ.: Princeton Univ., 1987. 
Campbell, John Y., and Shiller, Robert J. "Cointegration and Tests of Present 
Value Models." J.P.E 95 (October 1987): 1062-88. 
De Long, J. Bradford; Shleifer, Andrei; Summers, Lawrence H.; and Wald- 
mann, Robert J. "Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets." Working Paper 
no. 2395. Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, October 1987. 
. "The Survival of Noise Traders in Financial Markets." Working Pa- 
per no. 2715. Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, September 1988. 
. "The Size and Incidence of the Losses from Noise Trading." J. Fi- 
nance 44 (July 1989): 681-96. 
. "Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational 
Speculation." J. Finance 45 (June 1990). 

NOISE TRADER RISK 
737 
Denton, Frank T. "The Effect of Professional Advice on the Stability of a 
Speculative Market."J.P.E. 93 (October 1985): 977-93. 
Fama, Eugene F. "The Behavior of Stock Market Prices."J. Bus. 38 (January 
1965): 34-105. 
Fama, Eugene F., and French, Kenneth R. "Dividend Yields and Expected 
Stock Returns." J. Financial Econ. 22 (October 1988): 3-25. (a) 
. "Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock Prices."J.P.E. 96 
(April 1988): 246-73. (b) 
Figlewski, Stephen. "Subjective Information-and Market Efficiency in a Bet- 
ting Market."J.P.E. 87 (February 1979): 75-88. 
Friedman, Milton. "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates." In Essays in Posi- 
tive Economics. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press, 1953. 
Graham, Benjamin, and Dodd, David L. Security Analysis. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1934. 
Grossman, Sanford J., and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "On the Impossibility of Infor- 
mationally Efficient Markets." A.E.R. 70 (June 1980): 393-408. 
Haltiwanger, John C., and Waldman, Michael. "Rational Expectations and 
the Limits of Rationality: An Analysis of Heterogeneity." A.E.R. 75 (June 
1985): 326-40. 
Hart, Oliver D., and Kreps, David M. "Price Destabilizing Speculation."J.P.E. 
94 (October 1986): 927-52. 
Herzfeld, Thomas J. The Investor's Guide to Closed-End Funds: The Herzfeld 
Edge. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980. 
Ingram, Beth Fisher. "Equilibrium Modelling of Asset Prices: Rationality v. 
Rules of Thumb." Manuscript. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ., 1987. 
Jensen, Michael C. "The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945- 
1964."J. Finance 23 (May 1968): 389-416. 
. 'Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Take- 
overs." A.E.R. Papers and Proc. 76 (May 1986): 323-29. 
Keynes, John Maynard. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. 
London: Macmillan, 1936. 
Kleidon, Allan W. "Anomalies in Financial Economics: Blueprint for 
Change?" J. Bus. 59, no. 4, pt. 2 (October 1986): S469-S499. 
Kyle, Albert S. "Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading." Econometrica 53 
(November 1985): 1315-35. 
Lewellen, Wilbur G.; Schlarbaum, Gary E.; and Lease, Ronald C. "The Indi- 
vidual Investor: Attributes and Attitudes."J. Finance 29 (May 1974): 413- 
33. 
Malkiel, Burton G. A Random Walk down Wall Street. New York: Norton, 1973; 
2d ed., 1975; 4th ed., 1985; 5th ed., 1989. 
."The Valuation of Closed-End Investment-Company Shares." J. Fi- 
nance 32 (June 1977): 847-59. 
Mankiw, N. Gregory. "The Term Structure of Interest Rates Revisited." 
Brookings Papers Econ. Activity, no. 1 (1986), pp. 61 -110. 
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Summers, Lawrence H. "Do Long-Term Interest 
Rates Overreact to Short-Term Interest Rates?" Brookings Papers Econ. Ac- 
tivity, no. 1 (1984), pp. 223-42. 
Mayshar, Joram. "On Divergence of Opinion and Imperfections in Capital 
Markets." A.E.R. 73 (March 1983): 114-28. 
Mehra, Rajnish, and Prescott, Edward C. "The Equity Premium: A Puzzle."J. 
Monetary Econ. 15 (March 1985): 145-6 1. 
Milgrom, Paul, and Stokey, Nancy. "Information, Trade and Common 
Knowledge."J. Econ. Theory 26 (February 1982): 17-27. 

738 
JOURNAL 
OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 
Poterba, James M., and Summers, Lawrence H. "Mean Reversion in Stock 
Prices: Evidence and Implications." J. Financial Econ. 22 (October 1988): 
27-59. 
Roll, Richard. "Orange Juice and Weather." A.E.R. 74 (December 1984): 
861-80. 
Russell, Thomas, and Thaler, Richard H. "The Relevance of Quasi Rational- 
ity in Competitive Markets." A.E.R. 75 (December 1985): 1071-82. 
Samuelson, Paul A. "An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or 
without the Social Contrivance of Money." J.P.E. 66 (December 1958): 
467-82. 
Shiller, Robert J. "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by Subse- 
quent Changes in Dividends?" A.E.R. 71 (June 1981): 421-36. 
. "Stock Prices and Social Dynamics." Brookings Papers Econ. Activity, no. 
2 (1984), pp. 457-98. 
Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert. "Equilibrium Short Horizons of Inves- 
tors and Firms." A.E.R. Papers and Proc. 80 (May 1990). 
Stein, Jeremy C. "Informational Externalities and Welfare-reducing Specula- 
tion." J.P.E. 95 (December 1987): 1123-45. 
Summers, Lawrence H. "Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Funda- 
mental Values?"J. Finance 41 (July 1986): 591-601. 
Townsend, Robert M. "Forecasting the Forecasts of Others."J.P.E. 91 (Au- 
gust 1983): 546-88. 
Varian, Hal. "Differences of Opinion and the Volume of Trade." Manuscript. 
Ann Arbor: Univ. Michigan, 1986. 
