Chapter 1
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
Nicholas Barberis and Richard Thaler
1. Introduction
The traditional ﬁnance paradigm, which underlies many of the other arti-
cles in this handbook, seeks to understand ﬁnancial markets using models
in which agents are “rational.” Rationality means two things. First, when
they receive new information, agents update their beliefs correctly, in the
manner described by Bayes’s law. Second, given their beliefs, agents make
choices that are normatively acceptable, in the sense that they are consis-
tent with Savage’s notion of Subjective Expected Utility (SEU).
This traditional framework is appealingly simple, and it would be very
satisfying if its predictions were conﬁrmed in the data. Unfortunately, after
years of effort, it has become clear that basic facts about the aggregate
stock market, the cross-section of average returns and individual trading
behavior are not easily understood in this framework.
Behavioral ﬁnance is a new approach to ﬁnancial markets that has
emerged, at least in part, in response to the difﬁculties faced by the tradi-
tional paradigm. In broad terms, it argues that some ﬁnancial phenomena
can be better understood using models in which some agents are not fully
rational. More speciﬁcally, it analyzes what happens when we relax one, or
both, of the two tenets that underlie individual rationality. In some behav-
ioral ﬁnance models, agents fail to update their beliefs correctly. In other
models, agents apply Bayes’s law properly but make choices that are nor-
matively questionable, in that they are incompatible with SEU.1
We are very grateful to Markus Brunnermeier, George Constantinides, Kent Daniel, Milt Har-
ris, Ming Huang, Owen Lamont, Jay Ritter, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein and Tuomo
Vuolteenaho for extensive comments.
1 It is important to note that most models of asset pricing use the Rational Expectations
Equilibrium framework (REE), which assumes not only individual rationality but also con-
sistent beliefs (Sargent 1993). Consistent beliefs means that agents’ beliefs are correct: the
subjective distribution they use to forecast future realizations of unknown variables is in-
deed the distribution that those realizations are drawn from. This requires not only that
agents process new information correctly, but that they have enough information about the
structure of the economy to be able to figure out the correct distribution for the variables of
interest.

This review essay evaluates recent work in this rapidly growing ﬁeld. In
section 2, we consider the classic objection to behavioral ﬁnance, namely
that even if some agents in the economy are less than fully rational, rational
agents will prevent them from inﬂuencing security prices for very long,
through a process known as arbitrage. One of the biggest successes of be-
havioral ﬁnance is a series of theoretical papers showing that in an econ-
omy where rational and irrational traders interact, irrationality can have a
substantial and long-lived impact on prices. These papers, known as the lit-
erature on “limits to arbitrage,” form one of the two buildings blocks of
behavioral ﬁnance.
To make sharp predictions, behavioral models often need to specify the
form of agents’ irrationality. How exactly do people misapply Bayes’s law
or deviate from SEU? For guidance on this, behavioral economists typi-
cally turn to the extensive experimental evidence compiled by cognitive
psychologists on the biases that arise when people form beliefs, and on
people’s preferences, or on how they make decisions, given their beliefs.
Psychology is therefore the second building block of behavioral ﬁnance,
and we review the psychology most relevant for ﬁnancial economists in
section 3.2
In sections 4–8, we consider speciﬁc applications of behavioral ﬁnance:
to understanding the aggregate stock market, the cross-section of average
returns, and the pricing of closed-end funds in sections 4, 5 and 6 respec-
tively; to understanding how particular groups of investors choose their
portfolios and trade over time in section 7; and to understanding the ﬁ-
nancing and investment decisions of ﬁrms in section 8. Section 9 takes
stock and suggests directions for future research.3
2
BARBERIS AND THALER
Behavioral finance departs from REE by relaxing the assumption of individual rational-
ity. An alternative departure is to retain individual rationality but to relax the consistent
beliefs assumption: while investors apply Bayes’s law correctly, they lack the information
required to know the actual distribution variables are drawn from. This line of research is
sometimes referred to as the literature on bounded rationality, or on structural uncertainty.
For example, a model in which investors do not know the growth rate of an asset’s cash
flows but learn it as best as they can from available data, would fall into this class. Although
the literature we discuss also uses the term bounded rationality, the approach is quite
different.
2 The idea, now widely adopted, that behavioral ﬁnance rests on the two pillars of limits to
arbitrage and investor psychology is originally due to Shleifer and Summers (1990).
3 We draw readers’ attention to two other recent surveys of behavioral ﬁnance. Shleifer
(2000) provides a particularly detailed discussion of the theoretical and empirical work on
limits to arbitrage, which we summarize in section 2. Hirshleifer’s (2001) survey is closer to
ours in terms of material covered, although we devote less space to asset pricing, and more to
corporate ﬁnance and individual investor behavior. We also organize the material somewhat
differently.

2. Limits to Arbitrage
2.1. Market Efﬁciency
In the traditional framework where agents are rational and there are no
frictions, a security’s price equals its “fundamental value.” This is the dis-
counted sum of expected future cash ﬂows, where in forming expectations,
investors correctly process all available information, and where the discount
rate is consistent with a normatively acceptable preference speciﬁcation.
The hypothesis that actual prices reﬂect fundamental values is the Efﬁcient
Markets Hypothesis (EMH). Put simply, under this hypothesis, “prices are
right,” in that they are set by agents who understand Bayes’s law and have
sensible preferences. In an efﬁcient market, there is “no free lunch”: no in-
vestment strategy can earn excess risk-adjusted average returns, or average
returns greater than are warranted for its risk.
Behavioral ﬁnance argues that some features of asset prices are most
plausibly interpreted as deviations from fundamental value, and that these
deviations are brought about by the presence of traders who are not fully
rational. A long-standing objection to this view that goes back to Friedman
(1953) is that rational traders will quickly undo any dislocations caused by
irrational traders. To illustrate the argument, suppose that the fundamental
value of a share of Ford is $20. Imagine that a group of irrational traders
becomes excessively pessimistic about Ford’s future prospects and through
its selling, pushes the price to $15. Defenders of the EMH argue that ra-
tional traders, sensing an attractive opportunity, will buy the security at its
bargain price and at the same time, hedge their bet by shorting a “substi-
tute” security, such as General Motors, that has similar cash ﬂows to Ford
in future states of the world. The buying pressure on Ford shares will then
bring their price back to fundamental value.
Friedman’s line of argument is initially compelling, but it has not sur-
vived careful theoretical scrutiny. In essence, it is based on two assertions.
First, as soon as there is a deviation from fundamental value—in short, a
mispricing—an attractive investment opportunity is created. Second, ra-
tional traders will immediately snap up the opportunity, thereby correcting
the mispricing. Behavioral ﬁnance does not take issue with the second step
in this argument: when attractive investment opportunities come to light, it
is hard to believe that they are not quickly exploited. Rather, it disputes the
ﬁrst step. The argument, which we elaborate on in sections 2.2 and 2.3, is
that even when an asset is wildly mispriced, strategies designed to correct
the mispricing can be both risky and costly, rendering them unattractive. As
a result, the mispricing can remain unchallenged.
It is interesting to think about common ﬁnance terminology in this light.
While irrational traders are often known as “noise traders,” rational traders
are typically referred to as “arbitrageurs.” Strictly speaking, an arbitrage is
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
3

an investment strategy that offers riskless proﬁts at no cost. Presumably, the
rational traders in Friedman’s fable became known as arbitrageurs because
of the belief that a mispriced asset immediately creates an opportunity for
riskless proﬁts. Behavioral ﬁnance argues that this is not true: the strategies
that Friedman would have his rational traders adopt are not necessarily
arbitrages; quite often, they are very risky.
An immediate corollary of this line of thinking is that “prices are right”
and “there is no free lunch” are not equivalent statements. While both are
true in an efﬁcient market, “no free lunch” can also be true in an inefﬁcient
market: just because prices are away from fundamental value does not nec-
essarily mean that there are any excess risk-adjusted average returns for the
taking. In other words,
“prices are right” ⇒“no free lunch”
but
“no free lunch” 
“prices are right”.
This distinction is important for evaluating the ongoing debate on mar-
ket efﬁciency. First, many researchers still point to the inability of profes-
sional money managers to beat the market as strong evidence of market 
efﬁciency (Rubinstein 2001, Ross 2001). Underlying this argument, though,
is the assumption that “no free lunch” implies “prices are right.” If, as we
argue in sections 2.2 and 2.3, this link is broken, the performance of money
managers tells us little about whether prices reﬂect fundamental value.
Second, while some researchers accept that there is a distinction between
“prices are right” and “there is no free lunch,” they believe that the debate
should be more about the latter statement than about the former. We dis-
agree with this emphasis. As economists, our ultimate concern is that capi-
tal be allocated to the most promising investment opportunities. Whether
this is true or not depends much more on whether prices are right than on
whether there are any free lunches for the taking.
2.2 Theory
In the previous section, we emphasized the idea that when a mispricing oc-
curs, strategies designed to correct it can be both risky and costly, thereby
allowing the mispricing to survive. Here we discuss some of the risks and
costs that have been identiﬁed. In our discussion, we return to the example
of Ford, whose fundamental value is $20, but which has been pushed down
to $15 by pessimistic noise traders.
Fundamental Risk.
The most obvious risk an arbitrageur faces if he buys
Ford’s stock at $15 is that a piece of bad news about Ford’s fundamental
value causes the stock to fall further, leading to losses. Of course, arbitrageurs
/⇒
4
BARBERIS AND THALER

are well aware of this risk, which is why they short a substitute security
such as General Motors at the same time that they buy Ford. The problem
is that substitute securities are rarely perfect, and often highly imperfect,
making it impossible to remove all the fundamental risk. Shorting General
Motors protects the arbitrageur somewhat from adverse news about the car
industry as a whole, but still leaves him vulnerable to news that is speciﬁc
to Ford—news about defective tires, say.4
Noise Trader Risk.
Noise trader risk, an idea introduced by De Long et al.
(1990a) and studied further by Shleifer and Vishny (1997), is the risk that
the mispricing being exploited by the arbitrageur worsens in the short run.
Even if General Motors is a perfect substitute security for Ford, the arbi-
trageur still faces the risk that the pessimistic investors causing Ford to be
undervalued in the ﬁrst place become even more pessimistic, lowering its
price even further. Once one has granted the possibility that a security’s
price can be different from its fundamental value, then one must also grant
the possibility that future price movements will increase the divergence.
Noise trader risk matters because it can force arbitrageurs to liquidate
their positions early, bringing them potentially steep losses. To see this, note
that most real-world arbitrageurs—in other words, professional portfolio
managers—are not managing their own money, but rather managing
money for other people. In the words of Shleifer and Vishny (1997), there is
“a separation of brains and capital.”
This agency feature has important consequences. Investors, lacking the
specialized knowledge to evaluate the arbitrageur’s strategy, may simply
evaluate him based on his returns. If a mispricing that the arbitrageur is try-
ing to exploit worsens in the short run, generating negative returns, in-
vestors may decide that he is incompotent, and withdraw their funds. If this
happens, the arbitrageur will be forced to liquidate his position prema-
turely. Fear of such premature liquidation makes him less aggressive in
combating the mispricing in the ﬁrst place.
These problems can be severely exacerbated by creditors. After poor
short-term returns, creditors, seeing the value of their collateral erode, will
call their loans, again triggering premature liquidation.
In these scenarios, the forced liquidation is brought about by the wors-
ening of the mispricing itself. This need not always be the case. For exam-
ple, in their efforts to remove fundamental risk, many arbitrageurs sell
securities short. Should the original owner of the borrowed security want it
back, the arbitrageur may again be forced to close out his position if he can-
not ﬁnd other shares to borrow. The risk that this occurs during a temporary
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
5
4 Another problem is that even if a substitute security exists, it may itself be mispriced. This
can happen in situations involving industry-wide mispricing: in that case, the only stocks with
similar future cash ﬂows to the mispriced one are themselves mispriced.

worsening of the mispricing makes the arbitrageur more cautious from the
start.
Implementation Costs.
Well-understood transaction costs such as commis-
sions, bid–ask spreads and price impact can make it less attractive to exploit
a mispricing. Since shorting is often essential to the arbitrage process, we
also include short-sale constraints in the implementation costs category.
These refer to anything that makes it less attractive to establish a short posi-
tion than a long one. The simplest such constraint is the fee charged for bor-
rowing a stock. In general these fees are small—D’Avolio (2002) ﬁnds that
for most stocks, they range between 10 and 15 basis points—but they can be
much larger; in some cases, arbitrageurs may not be able to ﬁnd shares to
borrow at any price. Other than the fees themselves, there can be legal con-
straints: for a large fraction of money managers—many pension fund and
mutual fund managers in particular—short-selling is simply not allowed.5
We also include in this category the cost of ﬁnding and learning about a
mispricing, as well as the cost of the resources needed to exploit it (Merton
1987). Finding mispricing, in particular, can be a tricky matter. It was once
thought that if noise traders inﬂuenced stock prices to any substantial de-
gree, their actions would quickly show up in the form of predictability in
returns. Shiller (1984) and Summers (1986) demonstrate that this argument
is completely erroneous, with Shiller calling it “one of the most remarkable
errors in the history of economic thought.” They show that even if noise
trader demand is so strong as to cause a large and persistent mispricing, it
may generate so little predictability in returns as to be virtually undetectable.
In contrast, then, to straightforward-sounding textbook arbitrage, real world
arbitrage entails both costs and risks, which under some conditions will
limit arbitrage and allow deviations from fundamental value to persist. To
see what these conditions are, consider two cases.
Suppose ﬁrst that the mispriced security does not have a close substitute.
By deﬁnition then, the arbitrageur is exposed to fundamental risk. In this
case, sufﬁcient conditions for arbitrage to be limited are: (1) that arbitrageurs
are risk averse and (2) that the fundamental risk is systematic, in that it cannot
6
BARBERIS AND THALER
5 The presence of per-period transaction costs like lending fees can expose arbitrageurs to
another kind of risk, horizon risk, which is the risk that the mispricing takes so long to close
that any proﬁts are swamped by the accumulated transaction costs. This applies even when the
arbitrageur is certain that no outside party will force him to liquidate early. Abreu and Brun-
nermeier (2002) study a particular type of horizon risk, which they label synchronization risk.
Suppose that the elimination of a mispricing requires the participation of a sufﬁciently large
number of separate arbitrageurs. Then in the presence of per-period transaction costs, arbi-
trageurs may hesitate to exploit the mispricing because they don’t know how many other arbi-
trageurs have heard about the opportunity, and therefore how long they will have to wait before
prices revert to correct values.

be diversiﬁed by taking many such positions. Condition (1) ensures that the
mispricing will not be wiped out by a single arbitrageur taking a large posi-
tion in the mispriced security. Condition (2) ensures that the mispricing will
not be wiped out by a large number of investors each adding a small position
in the mispriced security to their current holdings. The presence of noise
trader risk or implementation costs will only limit arbitrage further.
Even if a perfect substitute does exist, arbitrage can still be limited. The ex-
istence of the substitute security immunizes the arbitrageur from fundamen-
tal risk. We can go further and assume that there are no implementation
costs, so that only noise trader risk remains. De Long et al. (1990a) show
that noise trader risk is powerful enough, that even with this single form of
risk, arbitrage can sometimes be limited. The sufﬁcient conditions are similar
to those above, with one important difference. Here arbitrage will be limited
if: (1) arbitrageurs are risk averse and have short horizons and (2) the noise
trader risk is systematic. As before, condition (1) ensures that the mispricing
cannot be wiped out by a single, large arbitrageur, while condition (2) pre-
vents a large number of small investors from exploiting the mispricing. The
central contribution of Shleifer and Vishny (1997) is to point out the real-
world relevance of condition (1): the possibility of an early, forced liquida-
tion means that many arbitrageurs effectively have short horizons.
In the presence of certain implementation costs, condition (2) may not
even be necessary. If it is costly to learn about a mispricing, or the resources
required to exploit it are expensive, that may be enough to explain why a
large number of different individuals do not intervene in an attempt to cor-
rect the mispricing.
It is also important to note that for particular types of noise trading, ar-
bitrageurs may prefer to trade in the same direction as the noise traders,
thereby exacerbating the mispricing, rather than against them. For exam-
ple, De Long et al. (1990b) consider an economy with positive feedback
traders, who buy more of an asset this period if it performed well last pe-
riod. If these noise traders push an asset’s price above fundamental value,
arbitrageurs do not sell or short the asset. Rather, they buy it, knowing that
the earlier price rise will attract more feedback traders next period, leading
to still higher prices, at which point the arbitrageurs can exit at a proﬁt.
So far, we have argued that it is not easy for arbitrageurs like hedge funds
to exploit market inefﬁciencies. However, hedge funds are not the only
market participants trying to take advantage of noise traders: ﬁrm man-
agers also play this game. If a manager believes that investors are overvalu-
ing his ﬁrm’s shares, he can beneﬁt the ﬁrm’s existing shareholders by issuing
extra shares at attractive prices. The extra supply this generates could
potentially push prices back to fundamental value.
Unfortunately, this game entails risks and costs for managers, just as it
does for hedge funds. Issuing shares is an expensive process, both in terms
of underwriting fees and time spent by company management. Moreover,
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
7

the manager can rarely be sure that investors are overvaluing his ﬁrm’s
shares. If he issues shares, thinking that they are overvalued when in fact
they are not, he incurs the costs of deviating from his target capital struc-
ture, without getting any beneﬁts in return.
2.3. Evidence
From the theoretical point of view, there is reason to believe that arbitrage
is a risky process and therefore that it is only of limited effectiveness. But is
there any evidence that arbitrage is limited? In principle, any example of
persistent mispricing is immediate evidence of limited arbitrage: if arbitrage
were not limited, the mispricing would quickly disappear. The problem is
that while many pricing phenomena can be interpreted as deviations from
fundamental value, it is only in a few cases that the presence of a mispricing
can be established beyond any reasonable doubt. The reason for this is
what Fama (1970) dubbed the “joint hypothesis problem.” In order to
claim that the price of a security differs from its properly discounted future
cash ﬂows, one needs a model of “proper” discounting. Any test of mispric-
ing is therefore inevitably a joint test of mispricing and of a model of dis-
count rates, making it difﬁcult to provide deﬁnitive evidence of inefﬁciency.
In spite of this difﬁculty, researchers have uncovered a number of ﬁnan-
cial market phenomena that are almost certainly mispricings, and persistent
ones at that. These examples show that arbitrage is indeed limited, and also
serve as interesting illustrations of the risks and costs described earlier.
2.3.1. twin shares
In 1907, Royal Dutch and Shell Transport, at the time completely indepen-
dent companies, agreed to merge their interests on a 60:40 basis while re-
maining separate entities. Shares of Royal Dutch, which are primarily traded
in the United States and in the Netherlands, are a claim to 60 percent of the
total cash ﬂow of the two companies, while Shell, which trades primarily in
the United Kingdom, is a claim to the remaining 40 percent. If prices equal
fundamental value, the market value of Royal Dutch equity should always
be 1.5 times the market value of Shell equity. Remarkably, it isn’t.
Figure 1.1, taken from Froot and Dabora’s (1999) analysis of this case,
shows the ratio of Royal Dutch equity value to Shell equity value relative to
the efﬁcient markets benchmark of 1.5. The picture provides strong evi-
dence of a persistent inefﬁciency. Moreover, the deviations are not small.
Royal Dutch is sometimes 35 percent underpriced relative to parity, and
sometimes 15 percent overpriced.
This evidence of mispricing is simultaneously evidence of limited arbitrage,
and it is not hard to see why arbitrage might be limited in this case. If an ar-
bitrageur wanted to exploit this phenomenon—and several hedge funds,
Long-Term Capital Management included, did try to—he would buy the
8
BARBERIS AND THALER

relatively undervalued share and short the other. Table 1.1 summarizes the
risks facing the arbitrageur. Since one share is a good substitute for the
other, fundamental risk is nicely hedged: news about fundamentals should
affect the two shares equally, leaving the arbitrageur immune. Nor are there
any major implementation costs to speak of: shorting shares of either com-
pany is an easy matter.
The one risk that remains is noise trader risk. Whatever investor senti-
ment is causing one share to be undervalued relative to the other could also
cause that share to become even more undervalued in the short term. The
graph shows that this danger is very real: an arbitrageur buying a 10 per-
cent undervalued Royal Dutch share in March 1983 would have seen it
drop still further in value over the next six months. As discussed earlier,
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
9
  	
	
 



 


	















 


	


 



 
 


	
	


Figure 1.1. Log deviations from Royal Dutch/Shell parity. Source: Froot and
Dabora (1999).
Table 1.1
Arbitrage Costs and Risks That Arise in Exploiting Mispricing
Fundamental 
Noise Trader 
Implementation 
Example
Risk (FR)
Risk (NTR)
Costs (IC)
Royal Dutch/Shell
×
√
×
Index Inclusions
√
√
×
Palm/3Com
×
×
√

when a mispriced security has a perfect substitute, arbitrage can still be lim-
ited if (1) arbitrageurs are risk averse and have short horizons and (2) the
noise trader risk is systematic, or the arbitrage requires specialized skills, or
there are costs to learning about such opportunities. It is very plausible that
both (1) and (2) are true, thereby explaining why the mispricing persisted
for so long. It took until 2001 for the shares to ﬁnally sell at par.
This example also provides a nice illustration of the distinction between
“prices are right” and “no free lunch” discussed in section 2.1. While prices
in this case are clearly not right, there are no easy proﬁts for the taking.
2.3.2. index inclusions
Every so often, one of the companies in the S&P 500 is taken out of the
index because of a merger or bankruptcy, and is replaced by another ﬁrm.
Two early studies of such index inclusions, Harris and Gurel (1986) and
Shleifer (1986), document a remarkable fact: when a stock is added to the
index, it jumps in price by an average of 3.5 percent, and much of this jump
is permanent. In one dramatic illustration of this phenomenon, when Yahoo
was added to the index, its shares jumped by 24 percent in a single day.
The fact that a stock jumps in value upon inclusion is once again clear
evidence of mispricing: the price of the share changes even though its fun-
damental value does not. Standard and Poor’s emphasizes that in selecting
stocks for inclusion, they are simply trying to make their index representa-
tive of the U.S. economy, not to convey any information about the level or
riskiness of a ﬁrm’s future cash ﬂows.6
This example of a deviation from fundamental value is also evidence of
limited arbitrage. When one thinks about the risks involved in trying to ex-
ploit the anomaly, its persistence becomes less surprising. An arbitrageur
needs to short the included security and to buy as good a substitute security
as he can. This entails considerable fundamental risk because individual
stocks rarely have good substitutes. It also carries substantial noise trader
risk: whatever caused the initial jump in price—in all likelihood, buying by
S&P 500 index funds—may continue, and cause the price to rise still fur-
ther in the short run; indeed, Yahoo went from $115 prior to its S&P inclu-
sion announcement to $210 a month later.
Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002) provide additional support for the lim-
ited arbitrage view of S&P 500 inclusions. They hypothesize that the jump
10
BARBERIS AND THALER
6 After the initial studies on index inclusions appeared, some researchers argued that the
price increase might be rationally explained through information or liquidity effects. While
such explanations cannot be completely ruled out, the case for mispricing was considerably
strengthened by Kaul, Mehrotra, and Morck (2000). They consider the case of the TS300
index of Canadian equities, which in 1996 changed the weights of some of its component
stocks to meet an innocuous regulatory requirement. The reweighting was accompanied by
signiﬁcant price effects. Since the affected stocks were already in the index at the time of the
event, information and liquidity explanations for the price jumps are extremely implausible.

upon inclusion should be particularly large for those stocks with the worst
substitute securities, in other words, for those stocks for which the arbi-
trage is riskiest. By constructing the best possible substitute portfolio for
each included stock, they are able to test this, and ﬁnd strong support.
Their analysis also shows just how hard it is to ﬁnd good substitute securi-
ties for individual stocks. For most regressions of included stock returns on
the returns of the best substitute securities, the R2 is below 25 percent.
2.3.3. internet carve-outs
In March 2000, 3Com sold 5 percent of its wholly owned subsidiary Palm
Inc. in an initial public offering, retaining ownership of the remaining
95 percent. After the IPO, a shareholder of 3Com indirectly owned 1.5
shares of Palm. 3Com also announced its intention to spin-off the remain-
der of Palm within nine months, at which time they would give each 3Com
shareholder 1.5 shares of Palm.
At the close of trading on the ﬁrst day after the IPO, Palm shares stood at
$95, putting a lower bound on the value of 3Com at $142. In fact, 3Com’s
price was $81, implying a market valuation of 3Com’s substantial busi-
nesses outside of Palm of about−$60 per share!
This situation surely represents a severe mispricing, and it persisted for
several weeks. To exploit it, an arbitrageur could buy one share of 3Com,
short 1.5 shares of Palm, and wait for the spin-off, thus earning certain
proﬁts at no cost. This strategy entails no fundamental risk and no noise
trader risk. Why, then, is arbitrage limited? Lamont and Thaler (2003),
who analyze this case in detail, argue that implementation costs played a
major role. Many investors who tried to borrow Palm shares to short were
either told by their broker that no shares were available, or else were
quoted a very high borrowing price. This barrier to shorting was not a legal
one, but one that arose endogenously in the marketplace: such was the de-
mand for shorting Palm, that the supply of Palm shorts was unable to meet
it. Arbitrage was therefore limited, and the mispricing persisted.7
Some ﬁnancial economists react to these examples by arguing that they
are simply isolated instances with little broad relevance.8 We think this is an
overly complacent view. The “twin shares” example illustrates that in situ-
ations where arbitrageurs face only one type of risk—noise trader risk—
securities can become mispriced by almost 35 percent. This suggests that if
a typical stock trading on the NYSE or NASDAQ becomes subject to in-
vestor sentiment, the mispricing could be an order of magnitude larger. Not
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
11
7 See also Mitchell, Pulvino, and Stafford (2002) and Ofek and Richardson (2003) for fur-
ther discussion of such “negative stub” situations, in which the market value of a company is
less than the sum of its publicly traded parts.
8 During a discussion of these issues at a University of Chicago seminar, one economist ar-
gued that these examples are “the tip of the iceberg,” to which another retorted that “they are
the iceberg.”

only would arbitrageurs face noise trader risk in trying to correct the mis-
pricing, but fundamental risk as well, not to mention implementation costs.
3. Psychology
The theory of limited arbitrage shows that if irrational traders cause devia-
tions from fundamental value, rational traders will often be powerless to
do anything about it. In order to say more about the structure of these devi-
ations, behavioral models often assume a speciﬁc form of irrationality. For
guidance on this, economists turn to the extensive experimental evidence
compiled by cognitive psychologists on the systematic biases that arise
when people form beliefs, and on people’s preferences.9
In this section, we summarize the psychology that may be of particular
interest to ﬁnancial economists. Our discussion of each ﬁnding is necessar-
ily brief. For a deeper understanding of the phenomena we touch on, we
refer the reader to the surveys of Camerer (1995) and Rabin (1998) and to
the edited volumes of Kahneman, Slovic, and Tversky (1982), Kahneman
and Tversky (2000) and Gilovich, Grifﬁn, and Kahneman (2002).
3.1. Beliefs
A crucial component of any model of ﬁnancial markets is a speciﬁcation of
how agents form expectations. We now summarize what psychologists have
learned about how people appear to form beliefs in practice.
Overconﬁdence.
Extensive evidence shows that people are overconﬁdent
in their judgments. This appears in two guises. First, the conﬁdence inter-
vals people assign to their estimates of quantities—the level of the Dow in a
year, say—are far too narrow. Their 98 percent conﬁdence intervals, for ex-
ample, include the true quantity only about 60 percent of the time (Alpert
and Raiffa 1982). Second, people are poorly calibrated when estimating
probabilities: events they think are certain to occur actually occur only
around 80 percent of the time, and events they deem impossible occur ap-
proximately 20 percent of the time (Fischhoff, Slovic, and Lichtenstein
1977).10
12
BARBERIS AND THALER
9 We emphasize, however, that behavioral models do not need to make extensive psycho-
logical assumptions in order to generate testable predictions. In section 6, we discuss Lee,
Shleifer, and Thaler’s (1991) theory of closed-end fund pricing. That theory makes numerous
crisp predictions using only the assumptions that there are noise traders with correlated senti-
ment in the economy, and that arbitrage is limited.
10 Overconﬁdence may in part stem from two other biases, self-attribution bias and hind-
sight bias. Self-attribution bias refers to people’s tendency to ascribe any success they have in
some activity to their own talents, while blaming failure on bad luck, rather than on their

Optimism and Wishful Thinking.
Most people display unrealistically rosy
views of their abilities and prospects (Weinstein 1980). Typically, over
90 percent of those surveyed think they are above average in such domains
as driving skill, ability to get along with people, and sense of humor. They
also display a systematic planning fallacy: they predict that tasks (such as
writing survey papers) will be completed much sooner than they actually
are (Buehler, Grifﬁn, and Ross 1994).
Representativeness.
Kahneman and Tversky (1974) show that when peo-
ple try to determine the probability that a data set A was generated by a
model B, or that an object A belongs to a class B, they often use the repre-
sentativeness heuristic. This means that they evaluate the probability by the
degree to which A reﬂects the essential characteristics of B.
Much of the time, representativeness is a helpful heuristic, but it can gen-
erate some severe biases. The ﬁrst is base rate neglect. To illustrate, Kahne-
man and Tversky present this description of a person named Linda:
Linda is thirty-one years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. She
majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with is-
sues of discrimination and social justice, and also participated in anti-
nuclear demonstrations.
When asked which of “Linda is a bank teller” (statement A) and “Linda
is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement” (statement B) is
more likely, subjects typically assign greater probability to B. This is, of
course, impossible. Representativeness provides a simple explanation. The
description of Linda sounds like the description of a feminist—it is repre-
sentative of a feminist—leading subjects to pick B. Put differently, while
Bayes’s law says that
people apply the law incorrectly, putting too much weight on p (description 
statement B), which captures representativeness, and too little weight on
the base rate, p (statement B).
Representativeness also leads to another bias, sample-size neglect. When
judging the likelihood that a data set was generated by a particular model,
p
p
p
p
(statement B description)
(description statement B)
(statement B)
(description)
,


=
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
13
ineptitude. Doing this repeatedly will lead people to the pleasing but erroneous conclusion
that they are very talented. For example, investors might become overconﬁdent after several
quarters of investing success (Gervais and Odean 2001). Hindsight bias is the tendency of peo-
ple to believe, after an event has occurred, that they predicted it before it happened. If people
think they predicted the past better than they actually did, they may also believe that they can
predict the future better than they actually can.

people often fail to take the size of the sample into account: after all, a
small sample can be just as representative as a large one. Six tosses of a coin
resulting in three heads and three tails are as representative of a fair coin as
500 heads and 500 tails are in a total of 1,000 tosses. Representativeness
implies that people will ﬁnd the two sets of tosses equally informative
about the fairness of the coin, even though the second set is much more so.
Sample-size neglect means that in cases where people do not initially
know the data-generating process, they will tend to infer it too quickly on
the basis of too few data points. For instance, they will come to believe that
a ﬁnancial analyst with four good stock picks is talented because four suc-
cesses are not representative of a bad or mediocre analyst. It also generates
a “hot hand” phenomenon, whereby sports fans become convinced that a
basketball player who has made three shots in a row is on a hot streak and
will score again, even though there is no evidence of a hot hand in the data
(Gilovich, Vallone, and Tversky 1985). This belief that even small samples
will reﬂect the properties of the parent population is sometimes known as
the “law of small numbers” (Rabin 2002).
In situations where people do know the data-generating process in ad-
vance, the law of small numbers leads to a gambler’s fallacy effect. If a fair
coin generates ﬁve heads in a row, people will say that “tails are due.”
Since they believe that even a short sample should be representative of the
fair coin, there have to be more tails to balance out the large number of
heads.
Conservatism.
While representativeness leads to an underweighting of
base rates, there are situations where base rates are over-emphasized relative
to sample evidence. In an experiment run by Edwards (1968), there are two
urns, one containing 3 blue balls and 7 red ones, and the other containing 7
blue balls and 3 red ones. A random draw of 12 balls, with replacement,
from one of the urns yields 8 reds and 4 blues. What is the probability the
draw was made from the ﬁrst urn? While the correct answer is 0.97, most
people estimate a number around 0.7, apparently overweighting the base
rate of 0.5.
At ﬁrst sight, the evidence of conservatism appears at odds with repre-
sentativeness. However, there may be a natural way in which they ﬁt to-
gether. It appears that if a data sample is representative of an underlying
model, then people overweight the data. However, if the data is not repre-
sentative of any salient model, people react too little to the data and rely
too much on their priors. In Edwards’s experiment, the draw of 8 red and
4 blue balls is not particularly representative of either urn, possibly leading
to an overreliance on prior information.11
14
BARBERIS AND THALER
11 Mullainathan (2001) presents a formal model that neatly reconciles the evidence on un-
derweighting sample information with the evidence on overweighting sample information.

Belief Perseverance.
There is much evidence that once people have formed
an opinion, they cling to it too tightly and for too long (Lord, Ross, and
Lepper 1979). At least two effects appear to be at work. First, people are
reluctant to search for evidence that contradicts their beliefs. Second, even
if they ﬁnd such evidence, they treat it with excessive skepticism. Some
studies have found an even stronger effect, known as conﬁrmation bias,
whereby people misinterpret evidence that goes against their hypothesis as
actually being in their favor. In the context of academic ﬁnance, belief per-
severance predicts that if people start out believing in the Efﬁcient Markets
Hypothesis, they may continue to believe in it long after compelling evi-
dence to the contrary has emerged.
Anchoring.
Kahneman and Tversky (1974) argue that when forming esti-
mates, people often start with some initial, possibly arbitrary value, and
then adjust away from it. Experimental evidence shows that the adjustment
is often insufﬁcient. Put differently, people “anchor” too much on the ini-
tial value.
In one experiment, subjects were asked to estimate the percentage of
United Nations countries that are African. More speciﬁcally, before giving
a percentage, they were asked whether their guess was higher or lower than
a randomly generated number between 0 and 100. Their subsequent esti-
mates were signiﬁcantly affected by the initial random number. Those who
were asked to compare their estimate to 10, subsequently estimated 25 per-
cent, while those who compared to 60, estimated 45 percent.
Availability Biases.
When judging the probability of an event—the likeli-
hood of getting mugged in Chicago, say—people often search their memo-
ries for relevant information. While this is a perfectly sensible procedure, it
can produce biased estimates because not all memories are equally retriev-
able or “available,” in the language of Kahneman and Tversky (1974).
More recent events and more salient events—the mugging of a close friend,
say—will weigh more heavily and distort the estimate.
Economists are sometimes wary of this body of experimental evidence be-
cause they believe (1) that people, through repetition, will learn their way
out of biases; (2) that experts in a ﬁeld, such as traders in an investment
bank, will make fewer errors; and (3) that with more powerful incentives,
the effects will disappear.
While all these factors can attenuate biases to some extent, there is little
evidence that they wipe them out altogether. The effect of learning is
often muted by errors of application: when the bias is explained, people
often understand it, but then immediately proceed to violate it again in
specific applications. Expertise, too, is often a hindrance rather than a
help: experts, armed with their sophisticated models, have been found to
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
15

exhibit more overconfidence than laymen, particularly when they receive
only limited feedback about their predictions. Finally, in a review of
dozens of studies on the topic, Camerer and Hogarth (1999, p. 7) con-
clude that while incentives can sometimes reduce the biases people dis-
play, “no replicated study has made rationality violations disappear
purely by raising incentives.”
3.2. Preferences
3.2.1. prospect theory
An essential ingredient of any model trying to understand asset prices or
trading behavior is an assumption about investor preferences, or about
how investors evaluate risky gambles. The vast majority of models assume
that investors evaluate gambles according to the expected utility frame-
work, EU henceforth. The theoretical motivation for this goes back to von
Neumann and Morgenstern (1944), VNM henceforth, who show that if
preferences satisfy a number of plausible axioms—completeness, transitiv-
ity, continuity, and independence—then they can be represented by the
expectation of a utility function.
Unfortunately, experimental work in the decades after VNM has shown
that people systematically violate EU theory when choosing among risky
gambles. In response to this, there has been an explosion of work on so-
called non-EU theories, all of them trying to do a better job of matching the
experimental evidence. Some of the better known models include weighted-
utility theory (Chew and MacCrimmon 1979, Chew 1983), implicit EU
(Chew 1989, Dekel 1986), disappointment aversion (Gul 1991), regret the-
ory (Bell 1982, Loomes and Sugden 1982), rank-dependent utility theories
(Quiggin 1982; Segal 1987, 1989; Yaari 1987), and prospect theory (Kah-
neman and Tversky 1979, Tversky and Kahneman 1992).
Should ﬁnancial economists be interested in any of these alternatives to
expected utility? It may be that EU theory is a good approximation to how
people evaluate a risky gamble like the stock market, even if it does not ex-
plain attitudes to the kinds of gambles studied in experimental settings. On
the other hand, the difﬁculty the EU approach has encountered in trying to
explain basic facts about the stock market suggests that it may be worth
taking a closer look at the experimental evidence. Indeed, recent work in
behavioral ﬁnance has argued that some of the lessons we learn from viola-
tions of EU are central to understanding a number of ﬁnancial phenomena.
Of all the non-EU theories, prospect theory may be the most promising
for ﬁnancial applications, and we discuss it in detail. The reason we focus
on this theory is, quite simply, that it is the most successful at capturing the
experimental results. In a way, this is not surprising. Most of the other
16
BARBERIS AND THALER

non-EU models are what might be called quasi-normative, in that they try
to capture some of the anomalous experimental evidence by slightly weak-
ening the VNM axioms. The difﬁculty with such models is that in trying to
achieve two goals—normative and descriptive—they end up doing an un-
satisfactory job at both. In contrast, prospect theory has no aspirations as a
normative theory: it simply tries to capture people’s attitudes to risky gam-
bles as parsimoniously as possible. Indeed, Tversky and Kahneman (1986)
argue convincingly that normative approaches are doomed to failure, be-
cause people routinely make choices that are simply impossible to justify on
normative grounds, in that they violate dominance or invariance.
Kahneman and Tversky (1979), KT henceforth, lay out the original ver-
sion of prospect theory, designed for gambles with at most two nonzero
outcomes. They propose that when offered a gamble
(x, p; y, q),
to be read as “get outcome x with probability p, outcome y with probabil-
ity q,” where x ≤0 ≤y or y ≤0 ≤x, people assign it a value of
π(p)υ(x) + π(q)υ(y),
(1)
where υ and π are shown in ﬁgure 1.2. When choosing between different
gambles, they pick the one with the highest value.
This formulation has a number of important features. First, utility is de-
ﬁned over gains and losses rather than over ﬁnal wealth positions, an idea
ﬁrst proposed by Markowitz (1952). This ﬁts naturally with the way gam-
bles are often presented and discussed in everyday life. More generally, it is
consistent with the way people perceive attributes such as brightness, loud-
ness, or temperature relative to earlier levels, rather than in absolute terms.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
17
 

	

 		 
		
 	 π
  
   
 Figure 1.2. The two panels show Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) proposed value
function υ and probability weighting function π.

Kahneman and Tversky (1979) also offer the following violation of EU as
evidence that people focus on gains and losses. Subjects are asked:12
In addition to whatever you own, you have been given 1000. Now choose
between
A = (1000, 0.5)
B = (500, 1).
B was the more popular choice. The same subjects were then asked:
In addition to whatever you own, you have been given 2000. Now choose
between
C = (−1000, 0.5)
D = (−500, 1).
This time, C was more popular.
Note that the two problems are identical in terms of their ﬁnal wealth
positions and yet people choose differently. The subjects are apparently fo-
cusing only on gains and losses. Indeed, when they are not given any infor-
mation about prior winnings, they choose B over A and C over D.
The second important feature is the shape of the value function υ,
namely its concavity in the domain of gains and convexity in the domain of
losses. Put simply, people are risk averse over gains, and risk-seeking over
losses. Simple evidence for this comes from the fact just mentioned, namely
that in the absence of any information about prior winnings13
Β
Α,
C
D.
The υ function also has a kink at the origin, indicating a greater sensitivity
to losses than to gains, a feature known as loss aversion. Loss aversion is
introduced to capture aversion to bets of the form:
It may seem surprising that we need to depart from the expected utility
framework in order to understand attitudes to gambles as simple as E, but
it is nonetheless true. In a remarkable paper, Rabin (2000) shows that if an
expected utility maximizer rejects gamble E at all wealth levels, then he will
also reject
an utterly implausible prediction. The intuition is simple: if a smooth, in-
creasing, and concave utility function deﬁned over ﬁnal wealth has sufﬁcient
(
,
;
, ),
20000000
1000
1
2
1
2
−
E =
−
(
,
;
, ).
110
100
1
2
1
2
f
f
18
BARBERIS AND THALER
12 All the experiments in Kahneman and Tversky (1979) are conducted in terms of Israeli
currency. The authors note that at the time of their research, the median monthly family in-
come was about 3,000 Israeli lira.
13 In this section G1
G2 should be read as “a statistically signiﬁcant fraction of Kahneman
and Tversky’s subjects preferred G1 to G2.”
f

local curvature to reject E over a wide range of wealth levels, it must be an
extraordinarily concave function, making the investor extremely risk averse
over large stakes gambles.
The ﬁnal piece of prospect theory is the nonlinear probability transfor-
mation. Small probabilities are overweighted, so that π (p) > p. This is de-
duced from KT’s ﬁnding that
(5000, 0.001)
(5, 1),
and
(−5, 1)
(−5000, 0.001),
together with the earlier assumption that υ is concave (convex) in the do-
main of gains (losses). Moreover, people are more sensitive to differences in
probabilities at higher probability levels. For example, the following pair of
choices,
(3000, 1)
(4000, 0.8; 0, 0.2),
and
(4000, 0.2; 0, 0.8)
(3000, 0.25),
which violate EU theory, imply
The intuition is that the 20 percent jump in probability from 0.8 to 1 is
more striking to people than the 20 percent jump from 0.2 to 0.25. In par-
ticular, people place much more weight on outcomes that are certain rela-
tive to outcomes that are merely probable, a feature sometimes known as the
“certainty effect.”
Along with capturing experimental evidence, prospect theory also simulta-
neously explains preferences for insurance and for buying lottery tickets.
Although the concavity of υ in the region of gains generally produces risk
aversion, for lotteries which offer a small chance of a large gain, the over-
weighting of small probabilities in ﬁgure 1.2 dominates, leading to risk-
seeking. Along the same lines, while the convexity of υ in the region of losses
typically leads to risk-seeking, the same overweighting of small probabilities
induces risk aversion over gambles which have a small chance of a large loss.
Based on additional evidence, Tversky and Kahneman (1992) propose a
generalization of prospect theory which can be applied to gambles with
more than two outcomes. Speciﬁcally, if a gamble promises outcome xi
with probability pi, Tversky and Kahneman (1992) propose that people as-
sign the gamble the value
(2)
π υ
i
i
i
x
(
),
∑
π
π
π
π
( .
)
( . )
( )
( . ) .
0 25
0 2
1
0 8
<
f
f
f
f
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
19

where
and
Here, Pi (Pi*) is the probability that the gamble will yield an outcome at
least as good as (strictly better than) xi. Tversky and Kahneman (1992) use
experimental evidence to estimate α = 0.88, λ = 2.25, and γ = 0.65. Note
that λ is the coefﬁcient of loss aversion, a measure of the relative sensitivity
to gains and losses. Over a wide range of experimental contexts λ has been
estimated in the neighborhood of 2.
Earlier in this section, we saw how prospect theory could explain why
people made different choices in situations with identical ﬁnal wealth lev-
els. This illustrates an important feature of the theory, namely that it can
accommodate the effects of problem description, or of framing. Such effects
are powerful. There are numerous demonstrations of a 30 to 40 percent
shift in preferences depending on the wording of a problem. No normative
theory of choice can accommodate such behavior since a ﬁrst principle of
rational choice is that choices should be independent of the problem de-
scription or representation.
Framing refers to the way a problem is posed for the decision maker. In
many actual choice contexts the decision maker also has ﬂexibility in how
to think about the problem. For example, suppose that a gambler goes to
the race track and wins $200 in his ﬁrst bet, but then loses $50 on his sec-
ond bet. Does he code the outcome of the second bet as a loss of $50 or as
a reduction in his recently won gain of $200? In other words, is the utility
of the second loss υ(−50) or υ(150) −υ(200)? The process by which peo-
ple formulate such problems for themselves is called mental accounting
(Thaler 2000). Mental accounting matters because in prospect theory, υ is
nonlinear.
One important feature of mental accounting is narrow framing, which
is the tendency to treat individual gambles separately from other por-
tions of wealth. In other words, when offered a gamble, people often
evaluate it as if it is the only gamble they face in the world, rather than
merging it with pre-existing bets to see if the new bet is a worthwhile
addition.
π
γ
γ
γ
γ
i
i
i
w P
w P
w P
P
P
P
=
−
=
+
−
( )
( *),
( )
(
(
) )
.
/
1
1
υ
λ
α
α
=
≥
−
−
<
x
x
x
x
if
(
)
if
0
0
20
BARBERIS AND THALER

Redelmeier and Tversky (1992) provide a simple illustration, based on
the gamble
Subjects in their experiment were asked whether they were willing to take
this bet; 57 percent said they would not. They were then asked whether
they would prefer to play F ﬁve times or six times; 70 percent preferred the
six-fold gamble. Finally they were asked:
Suppose that you have played F ﬁve times but you don’t yet know your
wins and losses. Would you play the gamble a sixth time?
Sixty percent rejected the opportunity to play a sixth time, reversing their
preference from the earlier question. This suggests that some subjects are
framing the sixth gamble narrowly, segregating it from the other gambles.
Indeed, the 60 percent rejection level is very similar to the 57 percent rejec-
tion level for the one-off play of F.
3.2.2. ambiguity aversion
Our discussion so far has centered on understanding how people act when
the outcomes of gambles have known objective probabilities. In reality,
probabilities are rarely objectively known. To handle these situations, Sav-
age (1964) develops a counterpart to expected utility known as subjective
expected utility, SEU henceforth. Under certain axioms, preferences can be
represented by the expectation of a utility function, this time weighted by
the individual’s subjective probability assessment.
Experimental work in the last few decades has been as unkind to SEU as
it was to EU. The violations this time are of a different nature, but they
may be just as relevant for ﬁnancial economists.
The classic experiment was described by Ellsberg (1961). Suppose that
there are two urns, 1 and 2. Urn 2 contains a total of 100 balls, 50 red and
50 blue. Urn 1 also contains 100 balls, again a mix of red and blue, but the
subject does not know the proportion of each.
Subjects are asked to choose one of the following two gambles, each of
which involves a possible payment of $100, depending on the color of a
ball drawn at random from the relevant urn
a1: a ball is drawn from Urn 1,
$100 if red,
$0 if blue,
a2: a ball is drawn from Urn 2,
$100 if red,
$0 if blue.
Subjects are then also asked to choose between the following two gambles:
b1: a ball is drawn from Urn 1,
$100 if blue,
$0 if red,
b2: a ball is drawn from Urn 2,
$100 if blue,
$0 if red.
a2 is typically preferred to a1, while b2 is chosen over b1. These choices are
inconsistent with SEU: the choice of a2 implies a subjective probability that
F =
−
(
,
;
, ).
2000
500
1
2
1
2
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
21

fewer than 50 percent of the balls in Urn 1 are red, while the choice of b2
implies the opposite.
The experiment suggests that people do not like situations where they are
uncertain about the probability distribution of a gamble. Such situations
are known as situations of ambiguity, and the general dislike for them, as
ambiguity aversion.14 SEU does not allow agents to express their degree of
conﬁdence about a probability distribution and therefore cannot capture
such aversion.
Ambiguity aversion appears in a wide variety of contexts. For example, a
researcher might ask a subject for his estimate of the probability that a cer-
tain team will win its upcoming football match, to which the subject might
respond 0.4. The researcher then asks the subject to imagine a chance ma-
chine, which will display 1 with probability 0.4 and 0 otherwise, and asks
whether the subject would prefer to bet on the football game—an ambigu-
ous bet—or on the machine, which offers no ambiguity. In general, people
prefer to bet on the machine, illustrating aversion to ambiguity.
Heath and Tversky (1991) argue that in the real world, ambiguity aver-
sion has much to do with how competent an individual feels he is at as-
sessing the relevant distribution. Ambiguity aversion over a bet can be
strengthened by highlighting subjects’ feelings of incompetence, either by
showing them other bets in which they have more expertise, or by mention-
ing other people who are more qualiﬁed to evaluate the bet (Fox and Tver-
sky 1995).
Further evidence that supports the competence hypothesis is that in situ-
ations where people feel especially competent in evaluating a gamble, the
opposite of ambiguity aversion, namely a “preference for the familiar,” has
been observed. In the example above, people chosen to be especially knowl-
edgeable about football often prefer to bet on the outcome of the game
than on the chance machine. Just as with ambiguity aversion, such behavior
cannot be captured by SEU.
4. Application: The Aggregate Stock Market
Researchers studying the aggregate U.S. stock market have identiﬁed a num-
ber of interesting facts about its behavior. Three of the most striking are:
The Equity Premium.
The stock market has historically earned a high ex-
cess rate of return. For example, using annual data from 1871 to 1993,
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) report that the average log return on the
22
BARBERIS AND THALER
14 An early discussion of this aversion can be found in Knight (1921), who deﬁnes risk as a
gamble with known distribution and uncertainty as a gamble with unknown distribution, and
suggests that people dislike uncertainty more than risk.

S&P 500 index is 3.9 percent higher than the average log return on short-
term commercial paper.
Volatility.
Stock returns and price–dividend ratios are both highly vari-
able. In the same data set, the annual standard deviation of excess log re-
turns on the S&P 500 is 18 percent, while the annual standard deviation of
the log price/dividend ratio is 0.27.
Predictability.
Stock returns are forecastable. Using monthly, real, equal-
weighted NYSE returns from 1941 to 1986, Fama and French (1988) show
that the dividend/price ratio is able to explain 27 percent of the variation of
cumulative stock returns over the subsequent four years.15
All three of these facts can be labelled puzzles. The ﬁrst fact has been
known as the equity premium puzzle since the work of Mehra and Prescott
(1985) (see also Hansen and Singleton 1983). Campbell (1999) calls the
second fact the volatility puzzle and we refer to the third fact as the pre-
dictability puzzle. The reason they are called puzzles is that they are hard to
rationalize in a simple consumption-based model.
To see this, consider the following endowment economy, which we come
back to a number of times in this section. There are an inﬁnite number of iden-
tical investors, and two assets: a risk-free asset in zero net supply, with gross
return Rf,t between time t and t + 1, and a risky asset—the stock market—in
ﬁxed positive supply, with gross return Rt+1 between time t and t + 1. The
stock market is a claim to a perishable stream of dividends {Dt}, where
(3)
and where each period’s dividend can be thought of as one component of a
consumption endowment Ct, where
(4)
and
(5)
ε
η
ω
ω
t
t
N

















0
0
1
1
,
, i.i.d. over time.
C
C
g
t
t
C
C
t
+
+
=
+
1
1
exp[
],
σ η
D
D
g
t
t
D
D
t
+
+
=
+
1
1
exp[
],
σ ε
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
23
15 These three facts are widely agreed on, but they are not completely uncontroversial. A
large literature had debated the statistical signiﬁcance of the time series predictability, while
others have argued that the equity premium is overstated due to survivorship bias (Brown,
Goetzmann and Ross 1995).

Investors choose consumption Ct and an allocation St to the risky asset to
maximize
(6)
subject to the standard budget constraint.16 Using the Euler equation of
optimality,
(7)
it is straightforward to derive expressions for stock returns and prices. The
details are in the Appendix.
We can now examine the model’s quantitative predictions for the param-
eter values in table 1.2. The endowment process parameters are taken from
U.S. data spanning the twentieth century, and are standard in the literature.
It is also standard to start out by considering low values of γ. The reason is
that when one computes, for various values of γ, how much wealth an indi-
vidual would be prepared to give up to avoid a large-scale timeless wealth
gamble, low values of γ match best with introspection as to what the an-
swers should be (Mankiw and Zeldes 1991). We take γ = 1, which corre-
sponds to log utility.
In an economy with these parameter values, the average log return on the
stock market would be just 0.1 percent higher than the risk-free rate, not
the 3.9 percent observed historically. The standard deviation of log stock
returns would be only 12 percent, not 18 percent, and the price/dividend
ratio would be constant (implying, of course, that the dividend/price ratio
has no forecast power for future returns).
It is useful to recall the intuition for these results. In an economy with
power utility preferences, the equity premium is determined by risk aver-
sion γ and by risk, measured as the covariance of stock returns and con-
sumption growth. Since consumption growth is very smooth in the data,
this covariance is very low, thus predicting a very low equity premium.
1
1
1
=












+
−
+
ρ
γ
E
C
C
R
t
t
t
t
,
E
C
t
t
t
0
1
0
1
ρ
γ
γ
−
=
∞
−
∑
,
24
BARBERIS AND THALER
16 For γ = 1, we replace Ct1−γ/1 −γ with log (Ct).
Table 1.2
Parameter Values for a Simple Consumption-based Model
Parameter
gC
σC
gD
σD
ω
γ
ρ
Value
1.84%
3.79%
1.5%
12.0%
0.15
1.0
0.98

Stocks simply do not appear risky to investors with the preferences in Eq. (6)
and with low γ, and therefore do not warrant a large premium. Of course,
the equity premium predicted by the model can be increased by using
higher values of γ. However, other than making counterintuitive predictions
about individuals’ attitudes to large-scale gambles, this would also predict a
counterfactually high risk-free rate, a problem known as the risk-free rate
puzzle (Weil 1989).
To understand the volatility puzzle, note that in the simple economy de-
scribed above, both discount rates and expected dividend growth are con-
stant over time. A direct application of the present value formula implies
that the price/dividend ratio, P/D henceforth, is constant. Since
(8)
it follows that
rt+1 = ∆dt+1 + const. ≡dt+1 −dt + const.,
(9)
where lower case letters indicate log variables. The standard deviation of
log returns will therefore only be as high as the standard deviation of log
dividend growth, namely 12 percent.
The particular volatility puzzle seen here illustrates a more general point,
ﬁrst made by Shiller (1981) and LeRoy and Porter (1981), namely that it is
difﬁcult to explain the historical volatility of stock returns with any model
in which investors are rational and discount rates are constant.
To see the intuition, consider the identity in Eq. (8) again. Since the
volatility of log dividend growth is only 12 percent, the only way for a
model to generate an 18 percent volatility of log returns is to introduce
variation in the P/D ratio. But if discount rates are constant, a quick glance
at a present-value formula shows that the only way to do that is to intro-
duce variation in investors’ forecasts of the dividend growth rate: a higher
forecast raises the P/D ratio, a lower forecast brings it down. There is a
catch here, though: if investors are rational, their expectations for dividend
growth must, on average, be conﬁrmed. In other words, times of higher
(lower) P/D ratios should, on average, be followed by higher (lower) cash-
flow growth. Unfortunately, price/dividend ratios are not reliable forecasters
of dividend growth, neither in the United States nor in most international
markets (see Campbell 1999, for recent evidence).
Shiller and LeRoy and Porter’s results shocked the profession when they
ﬁrst appeared. At the time, most economists felt that discount rates were
close to constant over time, apparently implying that stock market volatil-
ity could only be fully explained by appealing to investor irrationality.
Today, it is well understood that rational variation in discount rates can
R
D
P
P
P
D
P D
D
D
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
+
=
+
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
/
/
,
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
25

help explain the volatility puzzle, although we argue later that models with
irrational beliefs also offer a plausible way of thinking about the data.
Both the rational and behavioral approaches to finance have made
progress in understanding the three puzzles singled out at the start of this
section. The advances on the rational side are well described in other
articles in this handbook. Here, we discuss the behavioral approaches,
starting with the equity premium puzzle and then turning to the volatility
puzzle.
We do not consider the predictability puzzle separately, because in any
model with a stationary P/D ratio, a resolution of the volatility puzzle is si-
multaneously a resolution of the predictability puzzle. To see this, recall
from Eq. (8) that any model which captures the empirical volatility of re-
turns must involve variation in the P/D ratio. Moreover, for a model to be a
satisfactory resolution of the volatility puzzle, it should not make the coun-
terfactual prediction that P/D ratios forecast subsequent dividend growth.
Now suppose that the P/D ratio is higher than average. The only way it can
return to its mean is if cash ﬂows D subsequently go up, or if prices P fall.
Since the P/D ratio is not allowed to forecast cash ﬂows, it must forecast
lower returns, thereby explaining the predictability puzzle.
4.1. The Equity Premium Puzzle
The core of the equity premium puzzle is that even though stocks appear to
be an attractive asset—they have high average returns and a low covariance
with consumption growth—investors appear very unwilling to hold them.
In particular, they appear to demand a substantial risk premium in order to
hold the market supply.
To date, behavioral ﬁnance has pursued two approaches to this puzzle.
Both are based on preferences: one relies on prospect theory, the other on
ambiguity aversion. In essence, both approaches try to understand what it
is that is missing from the popular preference speciﬁcation in Eq. (6) that
makes investors fear stocks so much, leading them to charge a high pre-
mium in equilibrium.
4.1.1. prospect theory
One of the earliest papers to link prospect theory to the equity premium is
Benartzi and Thaler (1995), BT henceforth. They study how an investor
with prospect theory-type preferences allocates his ﬁnancial wealth be-
tween T-Bills and the stock market. Prospect theory argues that when
choosing between gambles, people compute the gains and losses for each
one and select the one with the highest prospective utility. In a ﬁnancial
context, this suggests that people may choose a portfolio allocation by
computing, for each allocation, the potential gains and losses in the value
of their holdings, and then taking the allocation with the highest prospective
26
BARBERIS AND THALER

utility. In other words, they choose ω, the fraction of ﬁnancial wealth in
stocks, to maximize
Eπ υ[(1 −ω)Rf,t+1 + ωRt+1 −1],
(10)
where π and υ are deﬁned in Eq. (2). In particular, υ captures loss aversion,
the experimental ﬁnding that people are more sensitive to losses than to
gains. Rf,t+1 and Rt+1 are the gross returns on T-Bills and the stock market
between t and t + 1, respectively, making the argument of υ the return on
ﬁnancial wealth.
In order to implement this model, BT need to stipulate how often in-
vestors evaluate their portfolios. In other words, how long is the time inter-
val between t and t + 1? To see why this matters, compare two investors:
energetic Nick who calculates the gains and losses in his portfolio every
day, and laid-back Dick who looks at his portfolio only once per decade.
Since, on a daily basis, stocks go down in value almost as often as they go
up, the loss aversion built into υ makes stocks appear unattractive to Nick.
In contrast, loss aversion does not have much effect on Dick’s perception of
stocks since, at ten-year horizons, stocks offer only a small risk of losing
money.
Rather than simply pick an evaluation interval, BT calculate how often
investors would have to evaluate their portfolios to make them indifferent
between stocks and T-Bills: in other words, given historical U.S. data on
stocks and T-Bills, for what evaluation interval would substituting ω = 0
and ω = 1 into Eq. (10) give the same prospective utility? Roughly speak-
ing, this calculation can be thought of as asking what kind of equity pre-
mium might be sustainable in equilibrium: how often would investors need
to evaluate their gains and losses so that even in the face of the large histor-
ical equity premium, they would still be happy to hold the market supply of
T-Bills.
BT ﬁnd that for the parametric forms for π and υ estimated in experi-
mental settings, the answer is one year, and they argue that this is indeed a
natural evaluation period for investors to use. The way people frame gains
and losses is plausibly inﬂuenced by the way information is presented to
them. Since we receive our most comprehensive mutual fund reports once a
year, and do our taxes once a year, it is not unreasonable that gains and
losses might be expressed as annual changes in value.
The BT calculation therefore suggests a simple way of understanding the
high historical equity premium. If investors get utility from annual changes
in ﬁnancial wealth and are loss averse over these changes, their fear of a
major drop in ﬁnancial wealth will lead them to demand a high premium as
compensation. BT call the combination of loss aversion and frequent evalu-
ations myopic loss aversion.
BT’s result is only suggestive of a solution to Mehra and Prescott’s equity
premium puzzle. As emphasized at the start of this section, that puzzle is in
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
27

large part a consumption puzzle: given the low volatility of consumption
growth, why are investors so reluctant to buy a high return asset, stocks,
especially when that asset’s covariance with consumption growth is so low?
Since BT do not consider an intertemporal model with consumption choice,
they cannot address this issue directly.
To see if prospect theory can in fact help with the equity premium puzzle,
Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001), BHS henceforth, make a ﬁrst attempt
at building it into a dynamic equilibrium model of stock returns. A simple
version of their model, an extension of which we consider later, examines
an economy with the same structure as the one described at the start of sec-
tion 4, but in which investors have the preferences
(11)
The investor gets utility from consumption, but over and above that, he
gets utility from changes in the value of his holdings of the risky asset be-
tween t and t + 1, denoted here by Xt+1. Motivated by BT’s ﬁndings, BHS
deﬁne the unit of time to be a year, so that gains and losses are measured
annually.
The utility from these gains and losses is determined by υˆ where
(12)
The 2.25 factor comes from Tversky and Kahneman’s (1992) experimental
study of attitudes to timeless gambles. This functional form is simpler than
the one used by BT, υ. It captures loss aversion, but ignores other elements
of prospect theory, such as the concavity (convexity) over gains (losses) and
the probability transformation. In part this is because it is difﬁcult to incor-
porate all these features into a fully dynamic framework; but also, it is based
on BT’s observation that it is mainly loss aversion that drives their results.17
BHS show that loss aversion can indeed provide a partial explanation of
the high Sharpe ratio on the aggregate stock market. However, how much
of the Sharpe ratio it can explain depends heavily on the importance of the
ˆ( )
.
for
,
.
υ X
X
X
X
X
=
≥
<


2 25
0
0
E
C
b C
X
t
t
t
t
t
0
1
0
1
0
1
ρ
γ
υ
γ
γ
−
+
=
∞
−
+








∑
ˆ(
) .
28
BARBERIS AND THALER
17 The 
coefﬁcient on the loss aversion term is a scaling factor which ensures that risk
premia in the economy remain stationary even as aggregate wealth increases over time. It in-
volves per capita consumption 
which is exogeneous to the investor, and so does not affect
the intuition of the model. The constant b0 controls the importance of the loss aversion term
in the investor’s preferences; setting b0 = 0 reduces the model to the much studied case of
power utility over consumption. As b0→∞, the investor’s decisions are driven primarily by
concern about gains and losses in ﬁnancial wealth, as assumed by Benartzi and Thaler.
Ct
b Ct
0
γ

second source of utility in Eq. (11), or in short, on b0. As a way of thinking
about this parameter, BHS note that when b0 = 0.7, the psychological pain
of losing $100 in the stock market, captured by the second term, is roughly
equal to the consumption-related pain of having to consume $100 less, cap-
tured by the ﬁrst term. For this b0, the Sharpe ratio of the risky asset is
0.11, about a third of its historical value.
BT and BHS are both effectively assuming that investors engage in nar-
row framing, both cross-sectionally and temporally. Even if they have many
forms of wealth, both ﬁnancial and nonﬁnancial, they still get utility from
changes in the value of one speciﬁc component of their total wealth: ﬁnan-
cial wealth in the case of BT, and stock holdings in the case of BHS. And
even if investors have long investment horizons, they still evaluate their
portfolio returns on an annual basis.
The assumption about cross-sectional narrow framing can be motivated
in a number of ways. The simplest possibility is that it captures noncon-
sumption utility, such as regret. Regret is the pain we feel when we realize
that we would be better off if we had not taken a certain action in the past.
If the investor’s stock holdings fall in value, he may regret the speciﬁc deci-
sion he made to invest in stocks. Such feelings are naturally captured by
deﬁning utility directly over changes in the investors’ ﬁnancial wealth or in
the value of his stock holdings.
Another possibility is that while people actually care only about
consumption-related utility, they are boundedly rational. For example, sup-
pose that they are concerned that their consumption might fall below some
habit level. They know that the right thing to do when considering a stock
market investment is to merge the stock market risk with other pre-existing
risks that they face—labor income risk, say—and then to compute the like-
lihood of consumption falling below habit. However, this calculation may
be too complex. As a result, people may simply focus on gains and losses in
stock market wealth alone, rather than on gains and losses in total wealth.
What about temporal narrow framing? We suggested above that the way
information is presented may lead investors to care about annual changes
in ﬁnancial wealth even if they have longer investment horizons. To provide
further evidence for this, Thaler, Tversky, Kahneman, and Schwartz (1997)
provide an experimental test of the idea that the manner in which informa-
tion is presented affects the frame people adopt in their decision making.18
In their experiment, subjects are asked to imagine that they are portfolio
managers for a small college endowment. One group of subjects—Group I,
say—is shown monthly observations on two funds, Fund A and Fund B.
Returns on Fund A (B) are drawn from a normal distribution calibrated to
mimic bond (stock) returns as closely as possible, although subjects are not
given this information. After each monthly observation, subjects are asked
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
29
18 See also Gneezy and Potters (1997) for a similar experiment.

to allocate their portfolio between the two funds over the next month. They
are then shown the realized returns over that month, and asked to allocate
once again.
A second group of investors—Group II—is shown exactly the same series
of returns, except that it is aggregated at the annual level; in other words,
these subjects do not see the monthly fund ﬂuctuations, but only cumula-
tive annual returns. After each annual observation, they are asked to allo-
cate their portfolio between the two funds over the next year.
A ﬁnal group of investors—Group III—is shown exactly the same data,
this time aggregated at the ﬁve-year level, and they too are asked to allocate
their portfolio after each observation.
After going through a total of 200 months worth of observations, each
group is asked to make one ﬁnal portfolio allocation, which is to apply
over the next 400 months. Thaler et al. (1997) ﬁnd that the average ﬁnal al-
location chosen by subjects in Group I is much lower than that chosen by
people in Groups II and III. This result is consistent with the idea that peo-
ple code gains and losses based on how information is presented to them.
Subjects in Group I see monthly observations and hence more frequent
losses. If they adopt the monthly distribution as a frame, they will be more
wary of stocks and will allocate less to them.
4.1.2. ambiguity aversion
In section 3, we presented the Ellsberg paradox as evidence that people dis-
like ambiguity, or situations where they are not sure what the probability
distribution of a gamble is. This is potentially very relevant for ﬁnance, as
investors are often uncertain about the distribution of a stock’s return.
Following the work of Ellsberg, many models of how people react to am-
biguity have been proposed; Camerer and Weber (1992) provide a compre-
hensive review. One of the more popular approaches is to suppose that
when faced with ambiguity, people entertain a range of possible probability
distributions and act to maximize the minimum expected utility under any
candidate distribution. In effect, people behave as if playing a game against
a malevolent opponent who picks the actual distribution of the gamble so
as to leave them as worse off as possible. Such a decision rule was ﬁrst ax-
iomatized by Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989). Epstein and Wang (1994)
showed how such an approach could be incorporated into a dynamic asset-
pricing model, although they did not try to assess the quantitative implica-
tions of ambiguity aversion for asset prices.
Quantitative implications have been derived using a closely related frame-
work known as robust control. In this approach, the agent has a reference
probability distribution in mind, but wants to ensure that his decisions
are good ones even if the reference model is misspecified to some extent.
Here too, the agent essentially tries to guard against a “worst-case” mis-
specification. Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (1998) show how such a
30
BARBERIS AND THALER

framework can be used for portfolio choice and pricing problems, even when
state equations and objective functions are nonlinear.
Maenhout (1999) applies the Anderson et al. framework to the speciﬁc
issue of the equity premium. He shows that if investors are concerned that
their model of stock returns is misspeciﬁed, they will charge a substantially
higher equity premium as compensation for the perceived ambiguity in the
probability distribution. He notes, however, that to explain the full 3.9 per-
cent equity premium requires an unreasonably high concern about misspec-
iﬁcation. At best then, ambiguity aversion is only a partial resolution of the
equity premium puzzle.
4.2. The Volatility Puzzle
Before turning to behavioral work on the volatility puzzle, it is worth
thinking about how rational approaches to this puzzle might proceed.
Since, in the data, the volatility of returns is higher than the volatility of
dividend growth, Eq. (8) makes it clear that we have to make up the gap by
introducing variation in the price/dividend ratio. What are the different
ways we might do this? A useful framework for thinking about this is a ver-
sion of the present value formula originally derived by Campbell and
Shiller (1988). Starting from
(13)
where Pt is the value of the stock market at time t, they use a log-linear ap-
proximation to show that the log price/dividend ratio can be written
(14)
where lower case letters represent log variables—Pt = log Pt, for example—
and where ∆dt+1 = dt+1 −dt.
If the price/dividend ratio is stationary, so that the third term on the right
is zero, this equation shows clearly that there are just two reasons price/div-
idend ratios can move around: changing expectations of future dividend
growth or changing discount rates. Discount rates, in turn, can change be-
cause of changing expectations of future risk-free rates, changing forecasts
of risk or changing risk aversion.
While there appear to be many ways of introducing variation in the P/D
ratio, it has become clear that most of them cannot form the basis of a
rational explanation of the volatility puzzle. We cannot use changing forecasts
p
d
d
r
p
d
t
t
t
t
t
j
j
t
t
t
j
j
t j
j
t j
t j
−
=
−
+
−
+
+ +
=
∞
+ +
=
∞
→∞
+
+
∑
∑
E
E
E
ρ
ρ
ρ
∆
1
0
1
0
lim
(
)
const.,
R
P
D
P
t
t
t
t
+
+
+
=
+
1
1
1 ,
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
31

of dividend growth to drive the P/D ratio: restating the argument of Shiller
(1981) and LeRoy and Porter (1981), if these forecasts are indeed rational,
it must be that P/D ratios predict cash-ﬂow growth in the time series, which
they do not.19 Nor can we use changing forecasts of future risk-free rates:
again, if the forecasts are rational, P/D ratios must predict interest rates in
the time series, which they do not. Even changing forecasts of risk cannot
work, as there is little evidence that P/D ratios predict changes in risk in the
time series. The only story that remains is therefore one about changing
risk aversion, and this is the idea behind the Campbell and Cochrane
(1999) model of aggregate stock market behavior. They propose a habit for-
mation framework in which changes in consumption relative to habit lead
to changes in risk aversion and hence variation in P/D ratios. This variation
helps to plug the gap between the volatility of dividend growth and the
volatility of returns.
Some rational approaches try to introduce variation in the P/D ratio
through the third term on the right in Eq. (14). Since this requires investors
to expect explosive growth in P/D ratios forever, they are known as models
of rational bubbles. The idea is that prices are high today because they are
expected to be higher next period; and they are higher next period because
they are expected to be higher the period after that, and so on, forever.
While such a model might initially seem appealing, a number of papers,
most recently Santos and Woodford (1997), show that the conditions under
which rational bubbles can survive are extremely restrictive.20
We now discuss some of the behavioral approaches to the volatility puz-
zle, grouping them by whether they focus on beliefs or on preferences.
4.2.1. beliefs
One possible story is that investors believe that the mean dividend growth
rate is more variable than it actually is. When they see a surge in dividends,
they are too quick to believe that the mean dividend growth rate has in-
creased. Their exuberance pushes prices up relative to dividends, adding to
the volatility of returns.
A story of this kind can be derived as a direct application of representa-
tiveness and in particular, of the version of representativeness known as the
32
BARBERIS AND THALER
19 There is an important caveat to the statement that changing cash-ﬂow forecasts cannot
be the basis of a satisfactory solution to the volatility puzzle. A large literature on structural
uncertainty and learning, in which investors do not know the parameters of the cash-ﬂow pro-
cess but learn them over time, has had some success in matching the empirical volatility of
returns (Brennan and Xia 2001, Veronesi 1999). In these models, variation in price/dividend
ratios comes precisely from changing forecasts of cash-ﬂow growth. While these forecasts are
not subsequently conﬁrmed in the data, investors are not considered irrational—they simply
don’t have enough data to infer the correct model. In related work, Barsky and De Long
(1993) generate return volatility in an economy where investors forecast cash ﬂows using a
model that is wrong, but not easily rejected with available data.
20 Brunnermeier (2001) provides a comprehensive review of this literature.

law of small numbers, whereby people expect even short samples to reﬂect
the properties of the parent population. If the investor sees many periods of
good earnings, the law of small numbers leads him to believe that earnings
growth has gone up, and hence that earnings will continue to be high in the
future. After all, the earnings growth rate cannot be “average.” If it were,
then according to the law of small numbers, earnings should appear aver-
age, even in short samples: some good earnings news, some bad earnings
news, but not several good pieces of news in a row.
Another belief-based story relies more on private, rather than public in-
formation, and in particular, on overconﬁdence about private information.
Suppose that an investor has seen public information about the economy,
and has formed a prior opinion about future cash-ﬂow growth. He then
does some research on his own and becomes overconﬁdent about the infor-
mation he gathers: he overestimates its accuracy and puts too much weight
on it relative to his prior. If the private information is positive, he will push
prices up too high relative to current dividends, again adding to return
volatility.21
Price/dividend ratios and returns might also be excessively volatile be-
cause investors extrapolate past returns too far into the future when form-
ing expectations of future returns. Such a story might again be based on
representativeness and the law of small numbers. The same argument for
why investors might extrapolate past cash ﬂows too far into the future can
be applied here to explain why they might do the same thing with past
returns.
The reader will have noticed that we do not cite any speciﬁc papers in
connection with these behavioral stories. This is because these ideas were
originally put forward in papers whose primary focus is explaining cross-
sectional anomalies such as the value premium, even though they also apply
here in a natural way. In brief, many of those papers—which we discuss in
detail in section 5—generate certain cross-sectional anomalies by building
excessive time series variation into the price/earnings ratios of individual
stocks. It is therefore not surprising that the mechanisms proposed there
might also explain the substantial time series variation in aggregate-level
price/earnings ratios. In fact, it is perhaps satisfying that these behavioral
theories simultaneously address both aggregate and ﬁrm-level evidence.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
33
21 Campbell (2000), among others, notes that behavioral models based on cash-ﬂow fore-
casts often ignore potentially important interest rate effects. If investors are forecasting exces-
sively high cash-ﬂow growth, pushing up prices, interest rates should also rise, thereby dampening
the price rise. One response is that interest rates are governed by expectations about consump-
tion growth, and in the short run, consumption and dividends can be somewhat delinked:
even if dividend growth is expected to be high, this need not necessarily trigger an immediate
interest rate response. Alternatively, one can try to specify investors’ expectations in such a
way that interest rate effects become less important. Cecchetti, Lam, and Mark (2000) take a
step in this direction.

We close this section with a brief mention of “money illusion,” the con-
fusion between real and nominal values ﬁrst discussed by Fisher (1928),
and more recently investigated by Shaﬁr et al. (1997). In ﬁnancial markets,
Modigliani and Cohn (1979) and more recently, Ritter and Warr (2002),
have argued that part of the variation in P/D ratios and returns may be due
to investors mixing real and nominal quantities when forecasting future
cash ﬂows. The value of the stock market can be determined by discounted
real cash ﬂows at real rates, or nominal cash ﬂows at nominal rates. At
times of especially high or especially low inﬂation though, it is possible that
some investors mistakenly discount real cash ﬂows at nominal rates. If in-
ﬂation increases, so will the nominal discount rate. If investors then dis-
count the same set of cash ﬂows at this higher rate, they will push the value
of the stock market down. Of course, this calculation is incorrect: the same
inﬂation which pushes up the discount rate should also push up future cash
ﬂows. On net, inﬂation should have little effect on market value. Such real
versus nominal confusion may therefore cause excessive variation in P/D
ratios and returns and seems particularly relevant to understanding the low
market valuations during the high inﬂation years of the 1970s, as well as
the high market valuations during the low inﬂation 1990s.
4.2.2. preferences
Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001) show that a straightforward extension
of the version of their model discussed in section 4.1 can explain both the
equity premium and volatility puzzles. To do this, they appeal to experi-
mental evidence about dynamic aspects of loss aversion. This evidence sug-
gests that the degree of loss aversion is not the same in all circumstances
but depends on prior gains and losses. In particular, Thaler and Johnson
(1990) ﬁnd that after prior gains, subjects take on gambles they normally
do not, and that after prior losses, they refuse gambles that they normally
accept. The ﬁrst ﬁnding is sometimes known as the “house money effect,”
reﬂecting gamblers’ increasing willingness to bet when ahead. One interpre-
tation of this evidence is that losses are less painful after prior gains because
they are cushioned by those gains. However, after being burned by a
painful loss, people may become more wary of additional setbacks.22
To capture these ideas, Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001) modify the
utility function in Eq. (11) to
(15)
E
C
b C
X
z
t
t
t
t
t
t
0
1
0
1
0
1
ρ
γ
υ
γ
γ
−
+
=
∞
−
+






∑
˜(
,
) .
34
BARBERIS AND THALER
22 It is important to distinguish Thaler and Johnson’s (1990) evidence from other evidence
presented by Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and discussed in section 3, showing that people
are risk averse over gains and risk-seeking over losses. One set of evidence pertains to one-shot
gambles, the other to sequences of gambles. Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) evidence suggests

Here, zt is a state variable that tracks past gains and losses on the stock
market. For any ﬁxed zt, the function υ˜ is a piecewise linear function similar
in form to υˆ, deﬁned in Eq. (12). However, the investors’ sensitivity to
losses is no longer constant at 2.25, but is determined by zt, in a way that
reﬂects the experimental evidence described above.
A model of this kind can help explain the volatility puzzle. Suppose that
there is some good cash-ﬂow news. This pushes the stock market up, gener-
ating prior gains for investors, who are now less scared of stocks: any losses
will be cushioned by the accumulated gains. They therefore discount future
cash ﬂows at a lower rate, pushing prices up still further relative to current
dividends and adding to return volatility.
5. Application: The Cross-section of Average Returns
While the behavior of the aggregate stock market is not easy to understand
from the rational point of view, promising rational models have nonethe-
less been developed and can be tested against behavioral alternatives. Em-
pirical studies of the behavior of individual stocks have unearthed a set of
facts which is altogether more frustrating for the rational paradigm. Many
of these facts are about the cross-section of average returns: they document
that one group of stocks earns higher average returns than another. These
facts have come to be known as “anomalies” because they cannot be ex-
plained by the simplest and most intuitive model of risk and return in the ﬁ-
nancial economist’s toolkit, the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM).
We now outline some of the more salient ﬁndings in this literature and
then consider some of the rational and behavioral approaches in more detail.
The Size Premium.
This anomaly was ﬁrst documented by Banz (1981).
We report the more recent ﬁndings of Fama and French (1992). Every year
from 1963 to 1990, Fama and French group all stocks traded on the NYSE,
AMEX, and NASDAQ into deciles based on their market capitalization,
and then measure the average return of each decile over the next year. They
ﬁnd that for this sample period, the average return of the smallest stock
decile is 0.74 percent per month higher than the average return of the
largest stock decile. This is certainly an anomaly relative to the CAPM:
while stocks in the smallest decile do have higher betas, the difference in
risk is not enough to explain the difference in average returns.23
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
35
that people are willing to take risks in order to avoid a loss; Thaler and Johnson’s (1990) evi-
dence suggests that if these efforts are unsuccessful and the investor suffers an unpleasant loss,
he will subsequently act in a more risk-averse manner.
23 The last decade of data has served to reduce the size premium considerably. Gompers and
Metrick (2001) argue that this is due to demand pressure for large stocks resulting from the
growth of institutional investors, who prefer such stocks.

Long-term Reversals.
Every three years from 1926 to 1982, De Bondt and
Thaler (1985) rank all stocks traded on the NYSE by their prior three-year
cumulative return and form two portfolios: a “winner” portfolio of the thirty-
five stocks with the best prior record and a “loser” portfolio of the thirty-ﬁve
worst performers. They then measure the average return of these two port-
folios over the three years subsequent to their formation. They ﬁnd that
over the whole sample period, the average annual return of the loser port-
folio is higher than the average return of the winner portfolio by almost 8
percent per year.
The Predictive Power of Scaled-price Ratios.
These anomalies, which are
about the cross-sectional predictive power of variables like the book-to-
market (B/M) and earnings-to-price (E/P) ratios, where some measure of
fundamentals is scaled by price, have a long history in ﬁnance going back at
least to Graham (1949), and more recently Dreman (1977), Basu (1983),
and Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein (1985). We concentrate on Fama and
French’s (1992) more recent evidence.
Every year, from 1963 to 1990, Fama and French group all stocks traded
on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ into deciles based on their book-to-
market ratio, and measure the average return of each decile over the next
year. They ﬁnd that the average return of the highest B/M-ratio decile, con-
taining so called “value” stocks, is 1.53 percent per month higher than the
average return on the lowest B/M-ratio decile, “growth” or “glamour”
stocks, a difference much higher than can be explained through differences
in beta between the two portfolios. Repeating the calculations with the
earnings–price ratio as the ranking measure produces a difference of 0.68
percent per month between the two extreme decile portfolios, again an
anomalous result.24
Momentum.
Every month from January 1963 to December 1989, Je-
gadeesh and Titman (1993) group all stocks traded on the NYSE into
deciles based on their prior six-month return and compute average returns
of each decile over the six months after portfolio formation. They ﬁnd that
the decile of biggest prior winners outperforms the decile of biggest prior
losers by an average of 10 percent on an annual basis.
Comparing this result to De Bondt and Thaler’s (1985) study of prior
winners and losers illustrates the crucial role played by the length of the
prior ranking period. In one case, prior winners continue to win; in the
36
BARBERIS AND THALER
24 Ball (1978) and Berk (1995) point out that the size premium and the scaled-price ratio ef-
fects emerge naturally in any model where investors apply different discount rates to different
stocks: if investors discount a stock’s cash ﬂows at a higher rate, that stock will typically have
a lower market capitalization and a lower price-earnings ratio, but also higher returns. Note,
however, that this view does not shed any light on whether the variation in discount rates is ra-
tionally justiﬁable or not.

other, they perform poorly.25 A challenge to both behavioral and rational
approaches is to explain why extending the formation period switches the
result in this way.
There is some evidence that tax-loss selling creates seasonal variation in the
momentum effect. Stocks with poor performance during the year may later be
subject to selling by investors keen to realize losses that can offset capital
gains elsewhere. This selling pressure means that prior losers continue to lose,
enhancing the momentum effect. At the turn of the year, though, the selling
pressure eases off, allowing prior losers to rebound and weakening the mo-
mentum effect. A careful analysis by Grinblatt and Moskowitz (1999) ﬁnds
that on net, tax-loss selling may explain part of the momentum effect, but by
no means all of it. In any case, while selling a stock for tax purposes is ra-
tional, a model of predictable price movements based on such behavior is not.
Roll (1983) calls such explanations “stupid” since investors would have to be
stupid not to buy in December if prices were going to increase in January.
A number of studies have examined stock returns following important cor-
porate announcements, a type of analysis known as an event study.
Event Studies of Earnings Announcements.
Every quarter from 1974 to
1986, Bernard and Thomas (1989) group all stocks traded on the NYSE and
AMEX into deciles based on the size of the surprise in their most recent
earnings announcement. “Surprise” is measured relative to a simple random
walk model of earnings. They ﬁnd that on average, over the sixty days after
the earnings announcement, the decile of stocks with surprisingly good news
outperforms the decile with surprisingly bad news by an average of about
4 percent, a phenomenon known as post-earnings announcement drift. Once
again, this difference in returns is not explained by differences in beta be-
tween the two portfolios. A later study by Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok
(1996) measures surprise in other ways—relative to analyst expectations, and
by the stock price reaction to the news—and obtains similar results.26
Event Studies of Dividend Initiations and Omissions.
Michaely, Thaler,
and Womack (1995) study ﬁrms that announced initiation or omission of a
dividend payment between 1964 and 1988. They ﬁnd that on average, the
shares of ﬁrms initiating (omitting) dividends signiﬁcantly outperform (un-
derperform) the market portfolio over the year after the announcement.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
37
25 In fact, De Bondt and Thaler (1985) also report that one-year big winners outperform
one-year big losers over the following year, but do not make much of this ﬁnding.
26 Vuolteenaho (2002) combines a clean-surplus accounting version of the present value
formula with Campbell’s (1991) log-linear decomposion of returns to estimate a measure of
cash-ﬂow news that is potentially more accurate than earnings announcements. Analogous to
the post-earnings announcement studies, he ﬁnds that stocks with good cash-ﬂow news subse-
quently have higher average returns than stocks with disappointing cash-ﬂow news.

Event Studies of Stock Repurchases.
Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermae-
len (1995) look at ﬁrms that announced a share repurchase between 1980
and 1990, while Mitchell and Stafford (2001) study ﬁrms which did either
self-tenders or share repurchases between 1960 and 1993. The latter study
ﬁnds that on average, the shares of these ﬁrms outperform a control group
matched on size and B/M by a substantial margin over the four-year period
following the event.
Event Studies of Primary and Secondary Offerings.
Loughran and Ritter
(1995) study firms that undertook primary or secondary equity offerings
between 1970 and 1990. They find that the average return of shares of
these firms over the five-year period after the issuance is markedly below
the average return of shares of non-issuing firms matched to the issuing
firms on size. Brav and Gompers (1997) and Brav, Geczy, and Gompers
(2000) argue that this anomaly may not be distinct from the scaled-price
anomaly listed above: when the returns of event firms are compared to
the returns of firms matched on both size and B/M, there is very little
difference.
Long-term event studies like the last three analyses summarized above raise
some thorny statistical problems. In particular, conducting statistical infer-
ence with long-term buy-and-hold post-event returns is a treacherous busi-
ness. Barber and Lyon (1997), Lyon, Barber, and Tsai (1999), Brav (2000),
Fama (1998), Loughran and Ritter (2000), and Mitchell and Stafford
(2001) are just a few of the papers that discuss this topic. Cross-sectional
correlation is one important issue: if a certain ﬁrm announces a share re-
purchase shortly after another ﬁrm does, their four-year post-event returns
will overlap and cannot be considered independent. Although the problem
is an obvious one, it is not easy to deal with effectively. Some recent at-
tempts to do so, such as Brav (2000), suggest that the anomalous evidence
in the event studies on dividend announcements, repurchase announce-
ments, and equity offerings is statistically weaker than initially thought, al-
though how much weaker remains controversial.
A more general concern with all the above empirical evidence is data-
mining. After all, if we sort and rank stocks in enough different ways, we
are bound to discover striking—but completely spurious—cross-sectional
differences in average returns.
A ﬁrst response to the data-mining critique is to note that the above stud-
ies do not use the kind of obscure ﬁrm characteristics or marginal corporate
announcements that would suggest data-mining. Indeed, it is hard to think
of an important class of corporate announcements that has not been associ-
ated with a claim about anomalous post-event returns. A more direct check
is to perform out-of-sample tests. Interestingly, a good deal of the above ev-
idence has been replicated in other data sets. Fama, French, and Davis (2000)
38
BARBERIS AND THALER

show that there is a value premium in the subsample of U.S. data that pre-
cedes the data set used in Fama and French (1992), while Fama and French
(1998) document a value premium in international stock markets.
Rouwenhorst (1998) shows that the momentum effect is alive and well in
international stock market data.
If the empirical results are taken at face value, then the challenge to the
rational paradigm is to show that the above cross-sectional evidence
emerges naturally from a model with fully rational investors. In special
cases, models of this form reduce to the CAPM, and we know that this does
not explain the evidence. More generally, rational models predict a multi-
factor pricing structure,
(16)
where the factors proxy for marginal utility growth and where the loadings
βi,k come from a time series regression of excess stock returns on excess fac-
tor returns,
ri,t −rf,t = αi + βi,1 (F1,t −rf,t) + . . . + βi,K(FK,t −rf,t) + εi,t.
(17)
To date, it has proved difficult to derive a multifactor model that explains
the cross-sectional evidence, although this remains a major research direc-
tion.
Alternatively, one can skip the step of deriving a factor model, and sim-
ply try a speciﬁc model to see how it does. This is the approach of Fama
and French (1993, 1996). They show that a certain three-factor model does
a good job explaining the average returns of portfolios formed on size and
B/M rankings. Put differently, the αi intercepts in regression (17) are typi-
cally close to zero for these portfolios and for their choice of factors. The
speciﬁc factors they use are the return on the market portfolio, the return
on a portfolio of small stocks minus the return on a portfolio of large
stocks—the “size” factor—and the return on a portfolio of value stocks
minus the return on a portfolio of growth stocks—the “book-to-market”
factor. By constructing these last two factors, Fama and French are isolat-
ing common factors in the returns of small stocks and value stocks, and
their three factor model can be loosely motivated by the idea that this co-
movement is a systematic risk that is priced in equilibrium.
The low αi intercepts obtained by Fama and French (1993, 1996) are not
necessarily cause for celebration. After all, as Roll (1977) emphasizes, in
any speciﬁc sample, it is always possible to mechanically construct a one
factor model that prices average returns exactly.27 This sounds a cautionary
r
r
F
r
F
r
i
f
i
f
i K
K
f
−
=
−
+ ⋅⋅⋅+
−
β
β
,
,
(
)
(
),
1
1
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
39
27 For any sample of observations on individual returns, choose any one of the ex-post
mean-variance efﬁcient portfolios. Roll (1977) shows that there is an exact linear relationship
between the sample mean returns of the individual assets and their betas, computed with re-
spect to the mean-variance efﬁcient portfolio.

note: just because a factor model happens to work well does not necessarily
mean that we are learning anything about the economic drivers of average
returns. To be fair, Fama and French (1996) themselves admit that their re-
sults can only have their full impact once it is explained what it is about in-
vestor preferences and the structure of the economy that leads people to
price assets according to their model.
One general feature of the rational approach is that it is loadings or
betas, and not firm characteristics, that determine average returns. For
example, a risk-based approach would argue that value stocks earn high
returns not because they have high B/M ratios, but because such stocks
happen to have a high loading on the B/M factor. Daniel and Titman (1997)
cast doubt on this speciﬁc prediction by performing double sorts of stocks
on both B/M ratios and loadings on B/M factors, and showing that stocks
with different loadings but the same B/M ratio do not differ in their average
returns. These results appear quite damaging to the rational approach, but
they have also proved controversial. Using a longer data set and a different
methodology, Fama, French, and Davis (2000) claim to reverse Daniel and
Titman’s ﬁndings.
More generally, rational approaches to the cross-sectional evidence face a
number of other obstacles. First, rational models typically measure risk as
the covariance of returns with marginal utility of consumption. Stocks are
risky if they fail to pay out at times of high marginal utility—in “bad”
times—and instead pay out when marginal utility is low—in “good” times.
The problem is that for many of the above ﬁndings, there is little evidence
that the portfolios with anomalously high average returns do poorly in bad
times, whatever plausible measure of bad times is used. For example,
Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994) show that in their 1968 to 1989
sample period, value stocks do well relative to growth stocks even when the
economy is in recession. Similarly, De Bondt and Thaler (1987) ﬁnd that
their loser stocks have higher betas than winners in up markets and lower
betas in down markets—an attractive combination that no one would label
“risky.”
Second, some of the portfolios in the above studies—the decile of stocks
with the lowest B/M ratios for example—earn average returns below the
risk-free rate. It is not easy to explain why a rational investor would willingly
accept a lower return than the T-Bill rate on a volatile portfolio.
Third, Chopra, Lakonishok, and Ritter (1992) and La Porta et al. (1997)
show that a large fraction of the high (low) average returns to prior losers
(winners) documented by De Bondt and Thaler (1985), and of the high
(low) returns to value (growth) stocks, is earned over a very small number
of days around earnings announcements. It is hard to tell a rational story
for why the premia should be concentrated in this way, given that there is
no evidence of changes in systematic risk around earnings announcements.
40
BARBERIS AND THALER

Finally, in some of the examples given above, it is not just that one port-
folio outperforms another on average. In some cases, the outperformance is
present in almost every period of the sample. For example, in Bernard and
Thomas’s (1989) study, ﬁrms with surprisingly good earnings outperform
those with surprisingly poor earnings in 46 out of the 50 quarters studied.
It is not easy to see any risk here that might justify the outperformance.
5.1. Belief-based Models
There are a number of behavioral models which try to explain some of the
above phenomena. We classify them based on whether their mechanism
centers on beliefs or on preferences.
Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), BSV henceforth, argue that much
of the above evidence is the result of systematic errors that investors make
when they use public information to form expectations of future cash
flows. They build a model that incorporates two of the updating biases from
section 3: conservatism, the tendency to underweight new information rela-
tive to priors; and representativeness, and in particular the version of repre-
sentativeness known as the law of small numbers, whereby people expect
even short samples to reﬂect the properties of the parent population.
When a company announces surprisingly good earnings, conservatism
means that investors react insufﬁciently, pushing the price up too little.
Since the price is too low, subsequent returns will be higher on average,
thereby generating both post-earnings announcement drift and momentum.
After a series of good earnings announcements, though, representativeness
causes people to overreact and push the price up too high. The reason is
that after many periods of good earnings, the law of small numbers leads
investors to believe that this is a ﬁrm with particularly high earnings
growth, and hence to forecast high earnings in the future. After all, the ﬁrm
cannot be “average.” If it were, then according to the law of small num-
bers, its earnings should appear average, even in short samples. Since the
price is now too high, subsequent returns are too low on average, thereby
generating long-term reversals and a scaled-price ratio effect.
To capture these ideas mathematically, BSV consider a model with a rep-
resentative risk-neutral investor in which the true earnings process for all
assets is a random walk. Investors, however, do not use the random-walk
model to forecast future earnings. They think that at any time, earnings are
being generated by one of two regimes: a “mean-reverting” regime, in
which earnings are more mean-reverting than in reality, and a “trending”
regime in which earnings trend more than in reality. The investor believes
that the regime generating earnings changes exogenously over time and sees
his task as trying to ﬁgure out which of the two regimes is currently gener-
ating earnings.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
41

This framework offers one way of modeling the updating biases de-
scribed above. Including a “trending” regime in the model captures the ef-
fect of representativeness by allowing investors to put more weight on
trends than they should. Conservatism suggests that people may put too lit-
tle weight on the latest piece of earnings news relative to their prior beliefs.
In other words, when they get a good piece of earnings news, they effec-
tively act as if part of the shock will be reversed in the next period, in other
words, as if they believe in a “mean-reverting” regime. BSV conﬁrm that
for a wide range of parameter values, this model does indeed generate post-
earnings announcement drift, momentum, long-term reversals and cross-
sectional forecasting power for scaled-price ratios.28
Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998, 2001), DHS henceforth,
stress biases in the interpretation of private, rather than public information.
Imagine that the investor does some research on his own to try to deter-
mine a ﬁrm’s future cash ﬂows. DHS assume that he is overconﬁdent about
this information; in particular, they argue that investors are more likely to
be overconﬁdent about private information they have worked hard to gen-
erate than about public information. If the private information is positive,
overconﬁdence means that investors will push prices up too far relative to
fundamentals. Future public information will slowly pull prices back to
their correct value, thus generating long-term reversals and a scaled-price
effect. To get momentum and a post-earnings announcement effect, DHS
assume that the public information alters the investor’s conﬁdence in his
original private information in an asymmetric fashion, a phenomenon
known as self-attribution bias: public news which conﬁrms the investor’s
research strongly increases the confidence he has in that research. Discon-
firming public news, though, is given less attention, and the investor’s
confidence in the private information remains unchanged. This asymmet-
ric response means that initial overconﬁdence is on average followed by
even greater overconﬁdence, generating momentum.
If, as BSV and DHS argue, long-term reversals and the predictive power
of scaled-price ratios are driven by excessive optimism or pessimism about
future cash ﬂows followed by a correction, then most of the correction
should occur at those times when investors ﬁnd out that their initial beliefs
were too extreme, in other words, at earnings announcement dates. The
ﬁndings of Chopra, Lakonishok, and Ritter (1992) and La Porta et al.
(1997), who show that a large fraction of the premia to prior losers and to
value stocks is earned around earnings announcement days, strongly con-
ﬁrm this prediction.
Perhaps the simplest way of capturing much of the cross-sectional evi-
dence is positive feedback trading, where investors buy more of an asset
42
BARBERIS AND THALER
28 Poteshman (2001) ﬁnds evidence of a BSV-type expectations formation process in the op-
tions market. He shows that when pricing options, traders appear to underreact to individual
daily changes in instantaneous variance, while overreacting to longer sequences of increasing
or decreasing changes in instantaneous variance.

that has recently gone up in value (De Long et al. 1990b, Barberis and
Shleifer 2003). If a company’s stock price goes up this period on good earn-
ings, positive feedback traders buy the stock in the following period, caus-
ing a further price rise. On the one hand, this generates momentum and
post-earnings announcement drift. On the other hand, since the price has
now risen above what is justiﬁed by fundamentals, subsequent returns will
on average be too low, generating long-term reversals and a scaled-price
ratio effect.
The simplest way of motivating positive feedback trading is extrapolative
expectations, where investors’ expectations of future returns are based on
past returns. This in turn, may be due to representativeness and to the law
of small numbers in particular. The same argument made by BSV as to why
investors might extrapolate past cash ﬂows too far into the future can be
applied here to explain why they might extrapolate past returns too far into
the future. De Long et al. (1990b) note that institutional features such as
portfolio insurance or margin calls can also generate positive feedback
trading.
Positive feedback trading also plays a central role in the model of Hong
and Stein (1999), although in this case it emerges endogenously from more
primitive assumptions. In this model, two boundedly rational groups of in-
vestors interact, where bounded rationality means that investors are only
able to process a subset of available information. “Newswatchers” make
forecasts based on private information, but do not condition on past prices.
“Momentum traders” condition only on the most recent price change.
Hong and Stein also assume that private information diffuses slowly
through the population of newswatchers. Since these investors are unable
to extract each others’ private information from prices, the slow diffusion
generates momentum. Momentum traders are then added to the mix. Given
what they are allowed to condition on, their optimal strategy is to engage
in positive feedback trading: a price increase last period is a sign that good
private information is diffusing through the economy. By buying, momen-
tum traders hope to proﬁt from the continued diffusion of information.
This behavior preserves momentum, but also generates price reversals:
since momentum traders cannot observe the extent of news diffusion, they
keep buying even after price has reached fundamental value, generating an
overreaction that is only later reversed.
These four models differ most in their explanation of momentum. In two
of the models—BSV, and Hong and Stein (1999)—momentum is due to an
initial underreaction followed by a correction. In De Long et al. (1990b)
and DHS, it is due to an initial overreaction followed by even more overre-
action. Within each pair, the stories are different again.29
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
43
29 In particular, the models make different predictions about how individual investors would
trade following certain sequences of past returns. Armed with transaction-level data, Hvidk-
jaer (2001) exploits this to provide initial evidence that may distinguish the theories.

Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000) present supportive evidence for the view
of Hong and Stein (1999) that momentum is due simply to slow diffusion of
private information through the economy. They argue that the diffusion of
information will be particularly slow among small ﬁrms and among ﬁrms
with low analyst coverage, and that the momentum effect should therefore
be more prominent there, a prediction they conﬁrm in the data. They also
ﬁnd that among ﬁrms with low analyst coverage, momentum is almost en-
tirely driven by prior losers continuing to lose. They argue that this, too, is
consistent with a diffusion story. If a ﬁrm not covered by analysts is sitting
on good news, it will do its best to convey the news to as many people as
possible, and as quickly as possible; bad news, however, will be swept
under the carpet, making its diffusion much slower.
5.2. Belief-based Models with Institutional Frictions
Some authors have argued that models which combine mild assumptions
about investor irrationality with institutional frictions may offer a fruitful
way of thinking about some of the anomalous cross-sectional evidence.
The institutional friction that has attracted the most attention is short-
sale constraints. As mentioned in section 2.2, these can be thought of as
anything which makes investors less willing to establish a short position
than a long one. They include the direct cost of shorting, namely the lend-
ing fee; the risk that the loan is recalled by the lender at an inopportune
moment; as well as legal restrictions: a large fraction of mutual funds are
not allowed to short stocks.
Several papers argue that when investors differ in their beliefs, the exis-
tence of short-sale constraints can generate deviations from fundamental
value and in particular, explain why stocks with high price/earnings ratios
earn lower average returns in the cross-section. The simplest way of moti-
vating the assumption of heterogeneous beliefs is overconﬁdence, which is
why that assumption is often thought of as capturing a mild form of irra-
tionality. In the absence of overconﬁdence, investors’ beliefs converge rap-
idly as they hear each other’s opinions and hence deduce each other’s private
information.
There are at least two mechanisms through which differences of opinion
and short-sale constraints can generate price/earnings ratios that are too
high, and thereby explain why price/earnings ratios predict returns in the
cross-section.
Miller (1977) notes that when investors hold different views about a
stock, those with bullish opinions will, of course, take long positions. Bear-
ish investors, on the other hand, want to short the stock, but being unable
to do so, they sit out of the market. Stock prices therefore reﬂect only the
opinions of the most optimistic investors which, in turn, means that they
are too high and that they will be followed by lower returns.
44
BARBERIS AND THALER

Harrison and Kreps (1978) and Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) argue
that in a dynamic setting, a second, speculation-based mechanism arises.
They show that when there are differences in beliefs, investors will be
happy to buy a stock for more than its fundamental value in anticipation of
being able to sell it later to other investors even more optimistic than them-
selves. Note that short-sale constraints are essential to this story: in their
absence, an investor can proﬁt from another’s greater optimism by simply
shorting the stock. With short-sale constraints, the only way to do so is to
buy the stock ﬁrst, and then sell it on later.
Both types of models make the intriguing prediction that stocks which
investors disagree about more will have higher price/earnings ratios and
lower subsequent returns. Three recent papers test this prediction, each using
a different measure of differences of opinion.
Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002) use IBES data on analyst forecasts
to obtain a direct measure of heterogeneity of opinion. They group stocks
into quintiles based on the level of dispersion in analysts’ forecasts of cur-
rent year earnings and conﬁrm that the highest dispersion portfolio earns
lower average returns than the lowest dispersion portfolio.
Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002) use “breadth of ownership”—deﬁned
roughly as the fraction of mutual funds that hold a particular stock—as a
proxy for divergence of opinion about the stock. The more dispersion in
opinions there is, the more mutual funds will need to sit out the market due
to short sales constraints, leading to lower breadth. Chen et al. predict, and
conﬁrm in the data, that stocks experiencing a decrease in breadth subse-
quently have lower average returns compared to stocks whose breadth in-
creases.
Jones and Lamont (2002) use the cost of short-selling a stock—in other
words, the lending fee—to measure differences of opinion about that stock.
The idea is that if there is a lot of disagreement about a stock’s prospects,
many investors will want to short the stock, thereby pushing up the cost of
doing so. Jones and Lamont conﬁrm that stocks with higher lending fees
have higher price/earnings ratios and earn lower subsequent returns. It is
interesting to note that their data set spans the years from 1926 to 1933. At
that time, there existed a centralized market for borrowing stocks and lend-
ing fees were published daily in The Wall Street Journal. Today, by con-
trast, stock lending is an over-the-counter market, and data on lending fees
is harder to come by.
In other related work, Hong and Stein (2003) show that short-sale con-
straints and differences of opinion also have implications for higher order
moments, in that they can lead to skewness. The intuition is that when a
stock’s price goes down, more information is revealed: by seeing at what
point they enter the market, we learn the valuations of those investors
whose pessimistic views could not initially be reﬂected in the stock price, be-
cause of short-sale constraints. When the stock market goes up, the sidelined
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
45

investors stay out of the market and there is less information revelation.
This increase in volatility after a downturn is the source of the skewness.
One prediction of this idea is that stocks which investors disagree about
more should exhibit greater skewness. Chen, Hong, and Stein (2001) test
this idea using increases in turnover as a sign of investor disagreement.
They show that stocks whose turnover increases subsequently display greater
skewness.
5.3. Preferences
Earlier, we discussed Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001), which tries to ex-
plain aggregate stock market behavior by combining loss aversion and nar-
row framing with an assumption about how the degree of loss aversion
changes over time. Barberis and Huang (2001) show that applying the
same ideas to individual stocks can generate the evidence on long-term re-
versals and on scaled-price ratios. The key idea is that when investors hold
a number of different stocks, narrow framing may induce them to derive
utility from gains and losses in the value of individual stocks. The speciﬁca-
tion of this additional source of utility is exactly the same as in BHS, except
that it is now applied at the individual stock level instead of at the portfolio
level: the investor is loss averse over individual stock ﬂuctuations and the
pain of a loss on a speciﬁc stock depends on that stock’s past performance.
To see how this model generates a value premium, consider a stock
which has had poor returns several periods in a row. Precisely because the
investor focuses on individual stock gains and losses, he ﬁnds this painful
and becomes especially sensitive to the possibility of further losses on the
stock. In effect, he perceives the stock as riskier, and discounts its future
cash ﬂows at a higher rate: this lowers its price/earnings ratio and leads to
higher subsequent returns, generating a value premium. In one sense, this
model is narrower than those in the “beliefs” section, section 5.1, as it does
not claim to address momentum. In another sense, it is broader, in that it
simultaneously explains the equity premium and derives the risk-free rate
endogenously.
The models we describe in sections 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3 focus primarily on mo-
mentum, long-term reversals, the predictive power of scaled-price ratios
and post-earnings announcement drift. What about the other examples of
anomalous evidence with which we began section 5? In section 7, we argue
that the long-run return patterns following equity issuance and repurchases
may be the result of rational managers responding to the kinds of noise
traders analyzed in the preceding behavioral models. In short, if investors
cause prices to swing away from fundamental value, managers may try to
time these cycles, issuing equity when it is overpriced, and repurchasing it
when it is cheap. In such a world, equity issues will indeed be followed by
46
BARBERIS AND THALER

low returns, and repurchases by high returns. The models we have dis-
cussed so far do not, however, shed light on the size anomaly, nor on the
dividend announcement event study.
6. Application: Closed-end Funds and Comovement
6.1. Closed-end Funds
Closed-end funds differ from more familiar open-end funds in that they
only issue a ﬁxed number of shares. These shares are then traded on ex-
changes: an investor who wants to buy a share of a closed-end fund must
go to the exchange and buy it from another investor at the prevailing price.
By contrast, should he want to buy a share of an open-end fund, the fund
would create a new share and sell it to him at its net asset value, or NAV,
the per share market value of its asset holdings.
The central puzzle about closed-end funds is that fund share prices differ
from NAV. The typical fund trades at a discount to NAV of about 10 per-
cent on average, although the difference between price and NAV varies sub-
stantially over time. When closed-end funds are created, the share price is
typically above NAV; when they are terminated, either through liquidation
or open-ending, the gap between price and NAV closes.
A number of rational explanations for the average closed-end fund dis-
count have been proposed. These include expenses, expectations about fu-
ture fund manager performance, and tax liabilities. These factors can go
some way to explaining certain aspects of the closed-end fund puzzle. How-
ever, none of them can satisfactorily explain all aspects of the evidence. For
example, management fees can explain why funds usually sell at discounts,
but not why they typically initially sell at a premium, nor why discounts
tend to vary from week to week.
Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991), LST henceforth, propose a simple be-
havioral view of these closed-end fund puzzles. They argue that some of
the individual investors who are the primary owners of closed-end funds
are noise traders, exhibiting irrational swings in their expectations about
future fund returns. Sometimes they are too optimistic, while at other times,
they are too pessimistic. Changes in their sentiment affect fund share prices
and hence also the difference between prices and net asset values.30
This view provides a clean explanation of all aspects of the closed-end
fund puzzle. Owners of closed-end funds have to contend with two sources
of risk: ﬂuctuations in the value of the funds’ assets, and ﬂuctuations in
noise trader sentiment. If this second risk is systematic—we return to this
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
47
30 For the noise traders to affect the difference between price and NAV rather than just
price, it must be that they are more active traders of closed-end fund shares than they are of
assets owned by the funds. As evidence for this, LST point out that while funds are primarily
owned by individual investors, the funds’ assets are not.

issue shortly—rational investors will demand compensation for it. In other
words, they will require that the fund’s shares trade at a discount to NAV.
This also explains why new closed-end funds are often sold at a pre-
mium. Entrepreneurs will choose to create closed-end funds at times of in-
vestor exuberance, when they know that they can sell fund shares for more
than they are worth. On the other hand, when a closed-end fund is liqui-
dated, rational investors no longer have to worry about changes in noise
trader sentiment because they know that at liquidation, the fund price will
equal NAV. They therefore no longer demand compensation for this risk,
and the fund price rises towards NAV.
An immediate prediction of the LST view is that prices of closed-end
funds should comove strongly, even if the cash-ﬂow fundamentals of the as-
sets held by the funds do not: if noise traders become irrationally pes-
simistic, they will sell closed-end funds across the board, depressing their
prices regardless of cash-ﬂow news. LST conﬁrm in the data that closed-
end fund discounts are highly correlated.
The LST story depends on noise trader risk being systematic. There is
good reason to think that it is. If the noise traders who hold closed-end
funds also hold other assets, then negative changes in sentiment, say, will
drive down the prices of closed-end funds and of their other holdings, mak-
ing the noise trader risk systematic. To check this, LST compute the correla-
tion of closed-end fund discounts with another group of assets primarily
owned by individuals, small stocks. Consistent with the noise trader risk
being systematic, they ﬁnd a signiﬁcant positive correlation.
6.2. Comovement
The LST model illustrates that behavioral models can make interesting pre-
dictions not only about the average level of returns, but also about patterns
of comovement. In particular, it explains why the prices of closed-end funds
comove so strongly, and also why closed-end funds as a class comove with
small stocks. This raises the hope that behavioral models might be able to
explain other puzzling instances of comovement as well.
Before studying this in more detail, it is worth setting out the traditional
view of return comovement. This view, derived from economies without
frictions and with rational investors, holds that comovement in prices re-
ﬂects comovement in fundamental values. Since, in a frictionless economy
with rational investors, price equals fundamental value—an asset’s ration-
ally forecasted cash ﬂows discounted at a rate appropriate for their risk—
any comovement in prices must be due to comovement in fundamentals.
There is little doubt that many instances of return comovement can be ex-
plained by fundamentals: stocks in the automotive industry move together
primarily because their earnings are correlated.
48
BARBERIS AND THALER

The closed-end fund evidence shows that the fundamentals-based view of
comovement is at best, incomplete: in that case, the prices of closed-end
funds comove even though their fundamentals do not.31 Other evidence is
just as puzzling. Froot and Dabora (1999) study “twin stocks,” which are
claims to the same cash-ﬂow stream, but are traded in different locations.
The Royal Dutch/Shell pair, discussed in section 2, is perhaps the best
known example. If return comovement is simply a reﬂection of comove-
ment in fundamentals, these two stocks should be perfectly correlated. In
fact, as Froot and Dabora show, Royal Dutch comoves strongly with the
S&P 500 index of U.S. stocks, while Shell comoves with the FTSE index of
U.K. stocks.
Fama and French (1993) uncover salient common factors in the returns
of small stocks, as well as in the returns of value stocks. In order to test the
rational view of comovement, Fama and French (1995) investigate whether
these strong common factors can be traced to common factors in news
about the earnings of these stocks. While they do uncover a common factor
in the earnings news of small stocks, as well as in the earnings news of
value stocks, these cash-ﬂow factors are weaker than the factors in returns
and there is little evidence that the return factors are driven by the cash-
ﬂow factors. Once again, there appears to be comovement in returns that
has little to do with fundamentals-based comovement.32
In response to this evidence, researchers have begun to posit behavioral
theories of comovement. LST is one such theory. To state their argument
more generally, they start by observing that many investors choose to trade
only a subset of all available securities. As these investors’ risk aversion or
sentiment changes, they alter their exposure to the particular securities they
hold, thereby inducing a common factor in the returns of these securities.
Put differently, this “habitat” view of comovement predicts that there will
be a common factor in the returns of securities that are the primary hold-
ings of a speciﬁc subset of investors, such as individual investors. This story
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
49
31 Bodurtha et al. (1993) and Hardouvelis et al. (1994) provide further interesting examples
of a delinking between fundamentals-based comovement and return comovement in the
closed-end fund market. They study closed-end country funds, whose assets trade in a differ-
ent location from the funds themselves and ﬁnd that the funds comove as much with the na-
tional stock market in the country where they are traded as with the national stock market in
the country where their assets are traded. For example, a closed-end fund invested in German
equities but traded in the United States typically comoves as much with the U.S. stock market
as with the German stock market.
32 In principle, comovement can also be rationally generated through changes in discount
rates. However, changes in interest rates or risk aversion induce a common factor in the re-
turns on all stocks, and do not explain why a particular group of stocks comoves. A common
factor in news about the risk of certain assets may also be a source of comovement for those
assets, but there is little direct evidence to support such a mechanism in the case of small
stocks or value stocks.

seems particularly appropriate for thinking about closed-end funds, and
also for Froot and Dabora’s evidence.
A second behavioral view of comovement was recently proposed by Bar-
beris and Shleifer (2003). They argue that to simplify the portfolio alloca-
tion process, many investors ﬁrst group stocks into categories such as
small-cap stocks or automotive industry stocks, and then allocate funds
across these various categories. If these categories are also adopted by noise
traders, then as these traders move funds from one category to another, the
price pressure from their coordinated demand will induce common factors
in the returns of stocks that happen to be classiﬁed into the same category,
even if those stocks’ cash ﬂows are largely uncorrelated. In particular, this
view predicts that when an asset is added to a category, it should begin to
comove more with that category than before.
Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2001) test this “category” view of co-
movement by taking a sample of stocks that have been added to the S&P
500, and computing the betas of these stocks with the S&P 500 both before
and after inclusion. Based on both univariate and multivariate regressions,
they show that upon inclusion, a stock’s beta with the S&P 500 rises signif-
icantly, as does the fraction of its variance that is explained by the S&P
500, while its beta with stocks outside the index falls.33 This result does not
sit well with the cash-ﬂow view of comovement—addition to the S&P 500
is not intended to carry any information about the covariance of a stock’s
cash ﬂows with other stocks’ cash ﬂows—but emerges naturally from a
model where prices are affected by category-level demand shocks.
7. Application: Investor Behavior
Behavioral finance has also had some success in explaining how certain
groups of investors behave, and in particular, what kinds of portfolios
they choose to hold and how they trade over time. The goal here is less
controversial than in the previous three sections: it is simply to explain
the actions of certain investors, and not necessarily to claim that these ac-
tions also affect prices. Two factors make this type of research increas-
ingly important. First, now that the costs of entering the stock market
have fallen, more and more individuals are investing in equities. Second,
the worldwide trend toward deﬁned contribution retirement savings plans,
and the possibility of individual accounts in social security systems mean
that individuals are more responsible for their own financial well-being in
retirement. It is therefore natural to ask how well they are handling these
tasks.
50
BARBERIS AND THALER
33 Similar results from univariate regressions can also be found in earlier work by Vijh
(1994).

We now describe some of the evidence on the actions of investors and the
behavioral ideas that have been used to explain it.
7.1. Insufﬁcient Diversiﬁcation
A large body of evidence suggests that investors diversify their portfolio
holdings much less than is recommended by normative models of portfolio
choice.
First, investors exhibit a pronounced “home bias.” French and Poterba
(1991) report that investors in the United States, Japan, and the United
Kingdom allocate 94 percent, 98 percent, and 82 percent of their overall
equity investment, respectively, to domestic equities. It has not been easy to
explain this fact on rational grounds (Lewis 1999). Indeed, normative port-
folio choice models that take human capital into account typically advise
investors to short their national stock market, because of its high correla-
tion with their human capital (Baxter and Jermann 1997).
Some studies have found an analog to home bias within countries. Using
an especially detailed data set from Finland, Grinblatt, and Keloharju
(2001) ﬁnd that investors in that country are much more likely to hold and
trade stocks of Finnish ﬁrms which are located close to them geographi-
cally, which use their native tongue in company reports, and whose chief
executive shares their cultural background. Huberman (2001) studies the
geographic distribution of shareholders of U.S. Regional Bell Operating
Companies (RBOCs) and ﬁnds that investors are much more likely to hold
shares in their local RBOC than in out-of-state RBOCs. Finally, studies of
allocation decisions in 401(k) plans ﬁnd a strong bias towards holding own
company stock: over 30 percent of deﬁned contribution plan assets in large
U.S. companies are invested in employer stock, much of this representing
voluntary contributions by employees (Benartzi 2001).
In section 3, we discussed evidence showing that people dislike ambigu-
ous situations, where they feel unable to specify a gamble’s probability dis-
tribution. Often, these are situations where they feel that they have little
competence in evaluating a certain gamble. On the other hand, people
show an excessive liking for familiar situations, where they feel they are in
a better position than others to evaluate a gamble.
Ambiguity and familiarity offer a simple way of understanding the differ-
ent examples of insufﬁcient diversiﬁcation. Investors may ﬁnd their na-
tional stock markets more familiar—or less ambiguous—than foreign stock
indices; they may ﬁnd ﬁrms situated close to them geographically more fa-
miliar than those located further away; and they may ﬁnd their employer’s
stock more familiar than other stocks.34 Since familiar assets are attractive,
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
51
34 Particularly relevant to this last point is survey data showing that people consider their
own company stock less risky than a diversiﬁed index (Driscoll et al. 1995).

people invest heavily in those, and invest little or nothing at all in ambigu-
ous assets. Their portfolios therefore appear undiversiﬁed relative to the
predictions of standard models that ignore the investor’s degree of conﬁ-
dence in the probability distribution of a gamble.
Not all evidence of home bias should be interpreted as a preference for the
familiar. Coval and Moskowitz (1999) show that U.S. mutual fund man-
agers tend to hold stocks whose company headquarters are located close to
their funds’ headquarters. However, Coval and Moskowitz’s (2001) ﬁnding
that these local holdings subsequently perform well suggests that an infor-
mation story is at work here, not a preference for the familiar. It is simply
less costly to research local ﬁrms and so fund managers do indeed focus on
those ﬁrms, picking out the stocks with higher expected returns. There is no
obvious information-based explanation for the results of French and Poterba
(1991), Huberman (2001), or Benartzi (2001), while Grinblatt and Keloharju
(2001) argue against such an interpretation of their ﬁndings.
7.2. Naive Diversiﬁcation
Benartzi and Thaler (2001) ﬁnd that when people do diversify, they do so in
a naive fashion. In particular, they provide evidence that in 401(k) plans,
many people seem to use strategies as simple as allocating 1/n of their sav-
ings to each of the n available investment options, whatever those options
are. Some evidence that people think in this way comes from the labora-
tory. Benartzi and Thaler ask subjects to make an allocation decision in
each of the following three conditions: ﬁrst, between a stock fund and a
bond fund; next, between a stock fund and a balanced fund, which invests
50 percent in stocks and 50 percent in bonds; and ﬁnally, between a bond
fund and a balanced fund. They ﬁnd that in all three cases, a 50:50 split
across the two funds is a popular choice, although of course this leads to very
different effective choices between stocks and bonds: the average allocation
to stocks in the three conditions was 54 percent, 73 percent, and 35 percent,
respectively.
The 1/n diversiﬁcation heuristic and other similar naive diversiﬁcation
strategies predict that in 401(k) plans which offer predominantly stock
funds, investors will allocate more to stocks. Benartzi and Thaler test this in
a sample of 170 large retirement savings plans. They divide the plans into
three groups based on the fraction of funds—low, medium, or high—they
offer that are stock funds. The allocation to stocks increases across the
three groups, from 49 to 60 to 64 percent, conﬁrming the initial prediction.
7.3. Excessive Trading
One of the clearest predictions of rational models of investing is that there
should be very little trading. In a world where rationality is common
52
BARBERIS AND THALER

knowledge, I am reluctant to buy if you are ready to sell. In contrast to this
prediction, the volume of trading on the world’s stock exchanges is very
high. Furthermore, studies of individuals and institutions suggest that both
groups trade more than can be justiﬁed on rational grounds.
Barber and Odean (2000) examine the trading activity from 1991 to
1996 in a large sample of accounts at a national discount brokerage ﬁrm.
They ﬁnd that after taking trading costs into account, the average return of
investors in their sample is well below the return of standard benchmarks.
Put simply, these investors would do a lot better if they traded less. The
underperformance in this sample is largely due to transaction costs. How-
ever, there is also some evidence of poor security selection: in a similar data
set covering the 1987 to 1993 time period, Odean (1999) ﬁnds that the av-
erage gross return of stocks that investors buy, over the year after they buy
them, is lower than the average gross return of stocks that they sell, over
the year after they sell them.
The most prominent behavioral explanation of such excessive trading is
overconﬁdence: people believe that they have information strong enough to
justify a trade, whereas in fact the information is too weak to warrant any
action. This hypothesis immediately predicts that people who are more
overconﬁdent will trade more and, because of transaction costs, earn lower
returns. Consistent with this, Barber and Odean (2000) show that the in-
vestors in their sample who trade the most earn by far the lowest average
returns. Building on evidence that men are more overconﬁdent than
women, and using the same data as in their earlier study, Barber and Odean
(2001) predict and conﬁrm that men trade more and earn lower returns on
average.
Working with the same data again, Barber and Odean (2002a) study the
subsample of individual investors who switch from phone-based to online
trading. They argue that for a number of reasons, the switch should be
accompanied by an increase in overconﬁdence. First, better access to infor-
mation and a greater degree of control—both features of an online trading
environment—have been shown to increase overconﬁdence. Moreover, the
investors who switch have often earned high returns prior to switching,
which may only increase their overconﬁdence further. If this is indeed the
case, they should trade more actively after switching and perform worse.
Barber and Odean conﬁrm these predictions.
7.4. The Selling Decision
Several studies ﬁnd that investors are reluctant to sell assets trading at a
loss relative to the price at which they were purchased, a phenomenon la-
belled the “disposition effect” by Shefrin and Statman (1985). Working
with the same discount brokerage data used in the Odean (1999) study
from above, Odean (1998) ﬁnds that the individual investors in his sample
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
53

are more likely to sell stocks that have gone up in value relative to their
purchase price, rather than stocks that have gone down.
It is hard to explain this behavior on rational grounds. Tax considera-
tions point to the selling of losers, not winners.35 Nor can one argue that in-
vestors rationally sell the winners because of information that their future
performance will be poor. Odean reports that the average performance of
stocks that people sell is better than that of stocks they hold on to.
Two behavioral explanations of these ﬁndings have been suggested. First,
investors may have an irrational belief in mean-reversion. A second possi-
bility relies on prospect theory and narrow framing. We have used these in-
gredients before, but this time it is not loss aversion that is central, but
rather the concavity (convexity) of the value function in the region of gains
(losses).
To see the argument, suppose that a stock that was originally bought at
$50 now sells for $55. Should the investor sell it at this point? Suppose that
the gains and losses of prospect theory refer to the sale price minus the pur-
chase price. In that case, the utility from selling the stock now is υ(5). Alter-
natively, the investor can wait another period, whereupon we suppose that
the stock could go to $50 or $60 with equal probability; in other words, we
abstract from belief-based trading motives by saying that the investor ex-
pects the stock price to stay ﬂat. The expected value of waiting and selling
next period is then υ(0) +
υ(10). Since the value function υ is concave in
the region of gains, the investor sells now. In a different scenario, the stock
may currently be trading at $45. This time, the comparison is between υ(−5)
and υ(−10) +
υ(0), assuming a second period distribution of $40 and $50
with equal probability. Convexity of υ pushes the investor to wait. Intu-
itively, by not selling, he is gambling that the stock will eventually break
even, saving him from having to experience a painful loss.
The disposition effect is not conﬁned to individual stocks. In an innova-
tive study, Genesove and Mayer (2001) ﬁnd evidence of a reluctance to sell
at a loss in the housing market. They show that sellers whose expected sell-
ing price is below their original purchase price, set an asking price that ex-
ceeds the asking price of other sellers with comparable houses. Moreover,
this is not simply wishful thinking on the sellers’ part that is later corrected
by the market: sellers facing a possible loss do actually transact at consider-
ably higher prices than other sellers.
Coval and Shumway (2000) study the behavior of professional traders in
the Treasury Bond futures pit at the CBOT. If the gains and losses of
prospect theory are taken to be daily proﬁts and losses, the curvature of the
value function implies that traders with proﬁts (losses) by the middle of the
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
54
BARBERIS AND THALER
35 Odean (1998) does ﬁnd that in December, investors prefer to sell past losers rather than
past winners, but overall, this effect is swamped by a strong preference for selling past winners
in the remaining eleven months.

trading day will take less (more) risk in their afternoon trading. This pre-
diction is borne out in the data.
Grinblatt and Han (2001) argue that the investor behavior inherent in
the disposition effect may be behind a puzzling feature of the cross-section
of average returns, namely momentum in stock returns. Due to the concav-
ity of the value function in the region of gains, investors will be keen to sell
a stock which has earned them capital gains on paper. The selling pressure
that results may initially depress the stock price, generating higher returns
later. On the other hand, if the holders of a stock are facing capital losses,
convexity in the region of losses means that they will only sell if offered a
price premium; the price is therefore initially inﬂated, generating lower re-
turns later. Grinblatt and Han provide supportive evidence for their story
by regressing, in the cross-section, a stock’s return on its past twelve-month
return as well as on a measure of the capital gain or loss faced by its hold-
ers. This last variable is computed as the current stock price minus in-
vestors’ average cost basis, itself inferred from past volume. They ﬁnd that
the capital gain or loss variable steals a substantial amount of explanatory
power from the past return.
7.5. The Buying Decision
Odean (1999) presents useful information about the stocks the individual
investors in his sample choose to buy. Unlike “sells,” which are mainly
prior winners, “buys” are evenly split between prior winners and losers.
Conditioning on the stock being a prior winner (loser) though, the stock is
a big prior winner (loser). In other words, a good deal of the action is in the
extremes.
Odean argues that the results for stock purchases are in part due to an at-
tention effect. When buying a stock, people do not tend to systematically
sift through the thousands of listed shares until they ﬁnd a good “buy.”
They typically buy a stock that has caught their attention and perhaps the
best attention draw is extreme past performance, whether good or bad.
Among individual investors, attention is less likely to matter for stock
sales because of a fundamental way in which the selling decision differs
from the buying decision. Due to short-sale constraints, when individuals
are looking for a stock to sell, they limit their search to those stocks that
they currently own. When buying stocks, though, people have a much
wider range of possibilities to choose from, and factors related to attention
may enter the decision more.
Using the same discount brokerage data as in their earlier papers, Barber
and Odean (2002b) test the idea that for individual investors, buying deci-
sions are more driven by attention than are selling decisions. On any partic-
ular day, they create portfolios of “attention-getting” stocks using a number
of different criteria: stocks with abnormally high trading volume, stocks
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
55

with abnormally high or low returns, and stocks with news announcements.
They ﬁnd that the individual investors in their sample are more likely, on the
following day, to be purchasers of these high-attention stocks than sellers.
8. Application: Corporate Finance
8.1. Security Issuance, Capital Structure and Investment
An important strand of research in behavioral ﬁnance asks whether irra-
tional investors such as those discussed in earlier sections affect the ﬁnanc-
ing and investment decisions of ﬁrms.
We first address this question theoretically, and ask how a rational
manager interested in maximizing true firm value—in other words, the
stock price that will prevail once any mispricing has worked its way out
of valuations—should act in the face of irrational investors. Stein (1996)
provides a useful framework for thinking about this, as well as about other
issues that arise in this section. He shows that when a ﬁrm’s stock price is
too high, the rational manager should issue more shares so as to take advan-
tage of investor exuberance. Conversely, when the price is too low, the man-
ager should repurchase shares. We refer to this model of security issuance as
the “market timing” view.
What evidence there is to date on security issuance appears remarkably
consistent with this framework. First, at the aggregate level, the share of
new equity issues among total new issues—the “equity share”—is higher
when the overall stock market is more highly valued. In fact, Baker and
Wurgler (2000) show that the equity share is a reliable predictor of future
stock returns: a high share predicts low, and sometimes negative, stock re-
turns. This is consistent with managers timing the market, issuing more
equity at its peaks, just before it sinks back to more realistic valuation
levels.
At the individual ﬁrm level, a number of papers have shown that the B/M
ratio of a ﬁrm is a good cross-sectional predictor of new equity issuance
(see Korajczyk, Lucas, and McDonald 1991; Jung, Kim, and Stulz 1996;
Loughran, Ritter, and Rydqvist 1994; Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales 1998;
Baker and Wurgler 2002a). Firms with high valuations issue more equity
while those with low valuations repurchase their shares. Moreover long-
term stock returns after an IPO or SEO are low (Loughran and Ritter
1995), while long-term returns after the announcement of a repurchase are
high (Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen 1995). Once again, this evi-
dence is consistent with managers timing the market in their own securities.
More support for the market-timing view comes from survey evidence.
Graham and Harvey (2001) report that 67 percent of surveyed CFOs said
that “the amount by which our stock is undervalued or overvalued” was an
important consideration when issuing common stock.
56
BARBERIS AND THALER

The success of the market-timing framework in predicting patterns of eq-
uity issuance offers the hope that it might also be the basis of a successful
theory of capital structure. After all, a ﬁrm’s capital structure simply repre-
sents its cumulative ﬁnancing decisions over time. Consider, for example,
two ﬁrms which are similar in terms of characteristics like ﬁrm size, prof-
itability, fraction of tangible assets, and current B/M ratio, which have tra-
ditionally been thought to affect capital structure. Suppose, however, that
in the past, the B/M ratio of ﬁrm A has reached much higher levels than
that of ﬁrm B. Since, under the market timing theory, managers of ﬁrm A
may have issued more shares at that time to take advantage of possible
overvaluation, ﬁrm A may have more equity in its capital structure today.
In an intriguing recent paper, Baker and Wurgler (2002a) conﬁrm this
prediction. They show that all else equal, a ﬁrm’s weighted-average histori-
cal B/M ratio, where more weight is placed on years in which the ﬁrm made
an issuance of some kind, whether debt or equity, is a good cross-sectional
predictor of the fraction of equity in the ﬁrm’s capital structure today.
There is some evidence, then, that irrational investor sentiment affects ﬁ-
nancing decisions. We now turn to the more critical question of whether
this sentiment affects actual investment decisions. Once again, we consider
the benchmark case in Stein’s (1996) model, in which the manager is both
rational and interested in maximizing the ﬁrm’s true value.
Suppose that a ﬁrm’s stock price is too high. As discussed above, the
manager should issue more equity at this point. More subtly, though, Stein
shows that he should not channel the fresh capital into any actual new in-
vestment, but instead keep it in cash or in another fairly priced capital
market security. While investors’ exuberance means that, in their view, the
ﬁrm has many positive net present value (NPV) projects it could under-
take, the rational manager knows that these projects are not, in fact, posi-
tive NPV and that in the interest of true ﬁrm value, they should be
avoided. Conversely, if the manager thinks that his ﬁrm’s stock price is ir-
rationally low, he should repurchase shares at the advantageously low
price but not scale back actual investment. In short, irrational investors
may affect the timing of security issuance, but they should not affect the
ﬁrm’s investment plans.
Once we move beyond this simple benchmark case, though, there emerge
several channels through which sentiment might affect investment after all.
First, the above argument properly applies only to non-equity dependent
ﬁrms; in other words, to ﬁrms which because of their ample internal funds
and borrowing capacity do not need the equity markets to ﬁnance their
marginal investments.
For equity-dependent ﬁrms, however, investor sentiment and, in particu-
lar, excessive investor pessimism, may distort investment: when investors
are excessively pessimistic, such ﬁrms may have to forgo attractive invest-
ment opportunities because it is too costly to ﬁnance them with undervalued
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
57

equity. This thinking leads to a cross-sectional prediction, namely that the
investment of equity-dependent ﬁrms should be more sensitive to gyrations
in stock price than the investment of non-equity dependent ﬁrms.
Other than this equity-dependence mechanism, there are other channels
through which investor sentiment might distort investment. Consider the
case where investors are excessively optimistic about a ﬁrm’s prospects.
Even if a manager is in principle interested in maximizing true value, he
faces the danger that if he refuses to undertake projects investors perceive
as proﬁtable, they may depress stock prices, exposing him to the risk of a
takeover, or more simply, try to have him ﬁred.36
Even if the manager is rational, this does not mean he will choose to
maximize the ﬁrm’s true value. The agency literature has argued that some
managers may maximize other objectives—the size of their ﬁrm, say—as a
way of enhancing their prestige. This suggests another channel for invest-
ment distortion: managers might use investor exuberance as a cover for
doing negative NPV “empire building” projects.
Finally, investor sentiment can also affect investment if managers put
some weight on investors’ opinions, perhaps because they think investors
know something they do not. Managers may then mistake excessive opti-
mism for well-founded optimism and get drawn into making negative NPV
investments.
An important goal of empirical research, then, is to try to understand
whether sentiment does affect investment, and if so, through which chan-
nel. Early studies produced little evidence of investment distortion. In ag-
gregate data, Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers (1993) ﬁnd that movements
in price apparently unrelated to movements in fundamentals have only
weak forecasting power for future investment: the effects are marginally
statistically signiﬁcant and weak in economic terms. To pick out two partic-
ular historical episodes: the rise in stock prices through the 1920s did not
lead to a commensurate rise in investment, nor did the crash of 1987 slow
investment down appreciably. Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990) reach
similar conclusions using ﬁrm level data, as do Baker and Wurgler (2002a):
in their work on capital structure, they show that not only do ﬁrms with
higher B/M ratios in their past have more equity in their capital structure
today, but also that the equity funds raised are typically used to increase
cash balances and not to ﬁnance new investment.
More recently though, Polk and Sapienza (2001) report stronger evi-
dence of investment distortion. They identify overvalued ﬁrms as ﬁrms with
58
BARBERIS AND THALER
36 Shleifer and Vishny (2003) argue that in a situation such as this, where the manager feels
forced to undertake some kind of investment, the best investment of all may be an acquisition
of a less overvalued ﬁrm, in other words, one more likely to retain its value in the long run.
This observation leads to a parsimonious theory of takeover waves, which predicts, among
other things, an increase in stock-ﬁnanced acquisitions at times of high dispersion in valua-
tions.

high accruals, deﬁned as earnings minus actual cash ﬂow, and as ﬁrms with
high net issuance of equity. Firms with high accruals may become overval-
ued if investors fail to understand that earnings are overstating actual cash
ﬂows, and Chan et al. (2001) conﬁrm that such ﬁrms indeed earn low re-
turns. Overvalued ﬁrms may also be identiﬁed through their opportunistic
issuance of equity, and we have already discussed the evidence that such
ﬁrms earn low long-run returns. Controlling for actual investment opportu-
nities as accurately as possible, Polk and Sapienza ﬁnd that the ﬁrms they
identify as overvalued appear to invest more than other ﬁrms, suggesting
that sentiment does inﬂuence investment.
Further evidence of distortion comes from Baker, Stein, and Wurgler’s
(2003) test of the cross-sectional prediction that equity-dependent ﬁrms
will be more sensitive to stock price gyrations than will non-equity depend-
ent ﬁrms. They identify equity-dependent ﬁrms on the basis of their low
cash balances, among other measures, and ﬁnd that these ﬁrms have an in-
vestment sensitivity to stock prices about three times as high as that of non-
equity dependent ﬁrms. This study therefore provides initial evidence that
for some ﬁrms at least, sentiment may distort investment, and that it does
so through the equity-dependence channel.
8.2. Dividends
A major open question in corporate ﬁnance asks why ﬁrms pay dividends.
Historically, dividends have been taxed at a higher rate than capital gains.
This means that stockholders who pay taxes would always prefer that the
ﬁrm repurchase shares rather than pay a dividend. Since the tax exempt
shareholders would be indifferent between the dividend payment and the
share repurchase, the share repurchase is a Pareto improving action. Why
then, do investors seem perfectly happy to accept a substantial part of their
return in the form of dividends? Or, using behavioral language, why do
ﬁrms choose to frame part of their return as an explicit payment to stock-
holders, and in so doing, apparently make some of their shareholders worse
off?
Shefrin and Statman (1984) propose a number of behavioral explana-
tions for why investors exhibit a preference for dividends. Their ﬁrst idea
relies on the notion of self-control. Many people exhibit self-control prob-
lems. On the one hand, we want to deny ourselves an indulgence, but on
the other hand, we quickly give in to temptation: today, we tell ourselves
that tomorrow we will not overeat, and yet, when tomorrow arrives, we
again eat too much. To deal with self-control problems, people often set
rules, such as “bank the wife’s salary, and only spend from the husband’s
paycheck.” Another very natural rule people might create to prevent them-
selves from overconsuming their wealth is “only consume the dividend, but
don’t touch the portfolio capital.” In other words, people may like dividends
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
59

because dividends help them surmount self-control problems through the
creation of simple rules.
A second rationale for dividends is based on mental accounting: by desig-
nating an explicit dividend payment, ﬁrms make it easier for investors to
segregate gains from losses and hence to increase their utility. To see this,
consider the following example. Over the course of a year, the value of a
ﬁrm has increased by $10 per share. The ﬁrm could choose not to pay a
dividend and return this increase in value to investors as a $10 capital gain.
Alternatively, it could pay a $2 dividend, leaving an $8 capital gain. In the
language of prospect theory, investors will code the ﬁrst option as υ(10).
They may also code the second option as υ(10), but the explicit segregation
performed by the ﬁrm may encourage them to code it as υ(2) + υ(8). This
will, of course, result in a higher perceived utility, due to the concavity of υ
in the domain of gains.
This manipulation is equally useful in the case of losses. A ﬁrm whose
value has declined by $10 per share over the year can offer investors a $10
capital loss or a $12 capital loss combined with a $2 dividend gain. While
the ﬁrst option will be coded as υ(−10), the second is more likely to be
coded as υ(2) + υ(−12), again resulting in a higher perceived utility, this
time because of the convexity of υ in the domain of losses.
The utility enhancing trick in these examples depends on investors segre-
gating the overall gain or loss into different components. The key insight of
Shefrin and Statman is that by paying dividends, ﬁrms make it easier for in-
vestors to perform this segregation.
Finally, Shefrin and Statman argue that by paying dividends, ﬁrms help
investors avoid regret. Regret is a frustration that people feel when they
imagine having taken an action that would have led to a more desirable
outcome. It is stronger for errors of commission—cases where people suffer
because of an action they took—than for errors of omission—where people
suffer because of an action they failed to take.
Consider a company that does not pay a dividend. In order to ﬁnance
consumption, an investor has to sell stock. If the stock subsequently goes
up in value, the investor feels substantial regret because the error is one of
commission: he can readily imagine how not selling the stock would have
left him better off. If the ﬁrm had paid a dividend and the investor was able
to ﬁnance his consumption out of it, a rise in the stock price would not
have caused so much regret. This time, the error would have been one of
omission: to be better off, the investor would have had to reinvest the divi-
dend.
Shefrin and Statman try to explain why ﬁrms pay dividends at all. An-
other question asks how dividend paying ﬁrms decide on the size of their
dividend. The classic paper on this subject is Lintner (1956). His treatment
is based on extensive interviews with executives of large American companies
in which he asked the respondent, often the CFO, how the ﬁrm set dividend
60
BARBERIS AND THALER

policy. Based on these interviews Lintner proposed what we would now call
a behavioral model. In his model, ﬁrms ﬁrst establish a target dividend pay-
out rate based on notions of fairness, in other words, on what portion of
the earnings it is fair to return to shareholders. Then, as earnings increase
and the dividend payout ratio falls below the target level, ﬁrms increase
dividends only when they are conﬁdent that they will not have to reduce
them in the future.
There are several behavioral aspects to this model. First, the ﬁrm is not
setting the dividend to maximize ﬁrm value or shareholder after-tax wealth.
Second, perceptions of fairness are used to set the target payout rate. Third,
the asymmetry between an increase in dividends and a decrease is explicitly
considered. Although fewer ﬁrms now decide to start paying dividends, for
those that do Lintner’s model appears to be valid to this day (Benartzi,
Michaely, and Thaler 1997; Fama and French 2001).
Baker and Wurgler (2004) argue that changes in dividend policy may
also reﬂect changing investor sentiment about dividend-paying ﬁrms rela-
tive to their sentiment about nonpaying ﬁrms. They argue that for some
investors, dividend-paying ﬁrms and nonpaying ﬁrms represent salient cat-
egories and that these investors exhibit changing sentiment about the cate-
gories. For instance, when investors become more risk averse, they may
prefer dividend-paying stocks because of a confused notion that these ﬁrms
are less risky (the well-known “bird in the hand” fallacy). If managers are
interested in maximizing short-run value, perhaps because it is linked to
their compensation, they may be tempted to change their dividend policy in
the direction favored by investors.
Baker and Wurgler ﬁnd some supportive evidence for their theory. They
measure relative investor sentiment about dividend-paying ﬁrms as the log
B/M ratio of paying ﬁrms minus the log B/M ratio of nonpaying ﬁrms, and
ﬁnd that in the time series, a high value of this measure one year predicts
that in the following year, a higher fraction of nonpaying ﬁrms initiate a
dividend and a larger fraction of newly-listed ﬁrms choose to pay one. Sim-
ilar results obtain for other measures of sentiment about dividend-paying
ﬁrms.
8.3. Models of Managerial Irrationality
The theories we have discussed so far interpret the data as reﬂecting actions
taken by rational managers in response to irrationality on the part of in-
vestors. Other papers have argued that some aspects of managerial behav-
ior are the result of irrationality on the part of managers themselves.
Much of section 2 was devoted to thinking about whether rational
agents might be able to correct dislocations caused by irrational traders.
Analogously, before we consider models of irrational managers, we should
ask to what extent rational agents can undo their effects.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
61

On reﬂection, it doesn’t seem any easier to deal with irrational managers
than irrational investors. It is true that many ﬁrms have mechanisms in
place designed to solve agency problems and to keep the manager’s mind
focused on maximizing ﬁrm value: giving him stock options for example,
or saddling him with debt. The problem is that these mechanisms are un-
likely to have much of an effect on irrational managers. These managers
think that they are maximizing ﬁrm value, even if in reality, they are not.
Since they think that they are already doing the right thing, stock options
or debt are unlikely to change their behavior.
In the best known paper on managerial irrationality, Roll (1986) argues
that much of the evidence on takeover activity is consistent with an econ-
omy in which there are no overall gains to takeovers, but in which man-
agers are overconﬁdent, a theory he terms the “hubris hypothesis.” When
managers think about taking over another ﬁrm, they conduct a valuation
analysis of that ﬁrm, taking synergies into account. If managers are over-
conﬁdent about the accuracy of their analysis, they will be too quick to
launch a bid when their valuation exceeds the market price of the target.
Just as overconﬁdence among individual investors may lead to excessive
trading, so overconﬁdence among managers may lead to excessive takeover
activity.
The main predictions of the hubris hypothesis are that there will be a
large amount of takeover activity, but that the total combined gain to bid-
der and target will be zero; and that on the announcement of a bid, the
price of the target will rise and the value of the bidder will fall by a similar
amount. Roll examines the available evidence and concludes that it is im-
possible to reject any of these predictions.
Heaton (2002) analyses the consequences of managerial optimism
whereby managers overestimate the probability that the future perfor-
mance of their ﬁrm will be good. He shows that it can explain pecking
order rules for capital structure: since managers are optimistic relative to
the capital markets, they believe their equity is undervalued, and are there-
fore reluctant to issue it unless they have exhausted internally generated
funds or the debt market. Managerial optimism can also explain the puz-
zlingly high correlation of investment and cash ﬂow: when cash ﬂow is low,
managers’ reluctance to use external markets for ﬁnancing means that they
forgo an unusually large number of projects, lowering investment at the
same time.
Malmendier and Tate (2001) test Heaton’s model by investigating
whether ﬁrms with excessively optimistic CEOs display a greater sensitivity
of investment to cash ﬂow. They detect excessive optimism among CEOs by
examining at what point they exercise their stock options: CEOs who hold
on to their options longer than recommended by normative models of opti-
mal exercise are deemed to have an overly optimistic forecast of their stock’s
future price. Malmendier and Tate ﬁnd that the investment of these CEOs’
62
BARBERIS AND THALER

ﬁrms is indeed more sensitive to cash ﬂow than the investment of other
ﬁrms.37
9. Conclusion
Behavioral ﬁnance is a young ﬁeld, with its formal beginnings in the 1980s.
Much of the research we have discussed was completed in the past decade.
Where do we stand? Substantial progress has been made on numerous fronts.
Empirical Investigation of Apparently Anomalous Facts.
When De Bondt
and Thaler’s (1985) paper was published, many scholars thought that the
best explanation for their ﬁndings was a programming error. Since then their
results have been replicated numerous times by authors both sympathetic
to their view and by those with alternative views. At this stage, we think
that most of the empirical facts are agreed upon by most of the profession,
although the interpretation of those facts is still in dispute. This is progress.
If we all agree that the planets do orbit the sun, we can focus on understand-
ing why.
Limits to Arbitrage.
Twenty years ago, many ﬁnancial economists thought
that the Efﬁcient Markets Hypothesis had to be true because of the forces
of arbitrage. We now understand that this was a naive view, and that the
limits to arbitrage can permit substantial mispricing. It is now also under-
stood by most that the absence of a proﬁtable investment strategy does not
imply the absence of mispricing. Prices can be very wrong without creating
proﬁt opportunities.
Understanding Bounded Rationality.
Thanks largely to the work of cog-
nitive psychologists such as Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, we now
have a long list of robust empirical ﬁndings that catalog some of the ways
in which actual humans form expectations and make choices. There has
also been progress in writing down formal models of these processes, with
prospect theory being the most notable. Economists once thought that be-
havior was either rational or impossible to formalize. We now know that
models of bounded rationality are both possible and also much more accu-
rate descriptions of behavior than purely rational models.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
63
37 Another paper that can be included in the managerial irrationality category is Loughran
and Ritter’s (2002) explanation for why managers issuing shares appear to leave signiﬁcant
amounts of money “on the table,” as evidenced by the high average return of IPOs on their ﬁrst
day of trading. The authors note that the IPOs with good ﬁrst day performance are often those
IPOs in which the price has risen far above its ﬁling range, giving the managers a sizeable
wealth gain. One explanation is therefore that since managers are already enjoying a major
windfall, they do not care too much about the fact that they could have been even wealthier.

Behavioral Finance Theory Building.
In the past few years there has been
a burst of theoretical work modelling ﬁnancial markets with less than fully
rational agents. These papers relax the assumption of individual rationality
either through the belief formation process or through the decision-making
process. Like the work of psychologists discussed above, these papers are
important existence proofs, showing that it is possible to think coherently
about asset pricing while incorporating salient aspects of human behavior.
Investor Behavior.
We have now begun the important job of trying to
document and understand how investors, both amateurs and professionals,
make their portfolio choices. Until recently such research was notably ab-
sent from the repertoire of ﬁnancial economists.
This is a lot of accomplishment in a short period of time, but we are still
much closer to the beginning of the research agenda than we are to the end.
We know enough about the perils of forecasting to realize that most of the
future progress of the ﬁeld is unpredictable. Still, we cannot resist venturing
a few observations on what may be coming next.
First, much of the work we have summarized is narrow. Models typically
capture something about investors’ beliefs, or their preferences, or the lim-
its to arbitrage, but not all three. This comment applies to most research in
economics, and is a natural implication of the fact that researchers are
boundedly rational too. Still, as progress is made, we expect theorists to
begin to incorporate more than one strand into their models.
An example can, perhaps, illustrate the point. The empirical literature re-
peatedly ﬁnds that the asset pricing anomalies are more pronounced in
small- and mid-cap stocks than in the large-cap sector. It seems likely that
this ﬁnding reﬂects limits to arbitrage: the costs of trading smaller stocks
are higher, keeping many potential arbitrageurs uninterested. While this ob-
servation may be an obvious one, it has not found its way into formal mod-
els. We expect investigation of the interplay between limits to arbitrage and
cognitive biases to be an important research area in the coming years.
Second, there are obviously competing behavioral explanations for some
of the empirical facts. Some critics view this as a weakness of the ﬁeld. It is
sometimes said that the long list of cognitive biases summarized in section 3
offer behavioral modelers so many degrees of freedom that anything can be
explained. We concede that there are numerous degrees of freedom, but
note that rational modelers have just as many options to choose from. As
Arrow (1986) has forcefully argued, rationality per se does not yield many
predictions. The predictions in rational models often come from auxiliary
assumptions.
There is really only one scientiﬁc way to compare alternative theories,
behavioral or rational, and that is with empirical tests. One kind of test
64
BARBERIS AND THALER

looks for novel predictions the theory makes. For example, Lee, Shleifer,
and Thaler (1991) test their model’s prediction that small ﬁrm returns will
be correlated with closed-end fund discounts, while Hong, Lim, and Stein
(2000) test the implication of the Hong and Stein (1999) model that mo-
mentum will be stronger among stocks with thinner analyst coverage.
Another sort of test is to look for evidence that agents actually behave
the way a model claims they do. The Odean (1998) and Genesove and
Mayer (2001) investigations of the disposition effect using actual market
behavior fall into this category. Bloomﬁeld and Hales (2002) offers an ex-
perimental test of the behavior theorized by Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998). Of course, such tests are never airtight, but we should be skeptical
of theories based on behavior that is undocumented empirically. Since be-
havioral theories claim to be grounded in realistic assumptions about be-
havior, we hope behavioral ﬁnance researchers will continue to give their
assumptions empirical scrutiny. We would urge the same upon authors of
rational theories.38
We have two predictions about the outcome of direct tests of the assump-
tions of economic models. First, we will ﬁnd that most of our current theo-
ries, both rational and behavioral, are wrong. Second, substantially better
theories will emerge.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
65
38 Directly testing the validity of a model’s assumptions is not common practice in econom-
ics, perhaps because of Milton Friedman’s inﬂuential argument that one should evaluate theo-
ries based on the validity of their predictions rather than the validity of their assumptions.
Whether or not this is sound scientiﬁc practice, we note that much of the debate over the past
twenty years has occurred precisely because the evidence has not been consistent with the the-
ories, so it may be a good time to start worrying about the assumptions. If a theorist wants to
claim that fact X can be explained by behavior Y, it seems prudent to check whether people
actually do Y.

Appendix A
We show that for the economy laid out in Equations (3–6), there is an equi-
librium in which the risk-free rate is constant and given by
(18)
and in which the price/dividend ratio is a constant f, and satisﬁes
(19)
In this equilibrium, returns are therefore given by
(20)
To see this, start from the Euler equations of optimality, obtained
through the usual perturbation arguments,
(21)
(22)
Computing the expectation in Eq. (21) gives Eq. (18). We conjecture that
in this economy, there is an equilibrium in which the price/dividend ratio
is a constant f, so that returns are given by Eq. (20). Substituting this into
Eq. (22) and computing the expectation gives Eq. (19), as required. For given
parameter values, the quantitative implications for P/D ratios and returns
are now easily computed.
1
1
1
=












+
+
−
ρ
γ
Et
t
t
t
R
C
C
.
1
1
=












+
−
ρ
γ
R
C
C
f
t
t
t
E
,
R
D
P
P
P
D
P D
D
D
f
f
g
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
D
D
t
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
+
=
+
⋅
=
+
+
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
/
/
exp[
].
σ ε
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
=
+
−
+
+
−
ρ
γ
σ
γ σ
γσ σ ω
f
f
g
g
D
C
D
C
C
D
exp[
(
)].
R
g
f
C
C
=
−
1
1
2
2
2
ρ
γ
γ σ
exp[
],
66
BARBERIS AND THALER

References
Abreu, D., and M. Brunnermeier, 2002, Synchronization risk and delayed arbitrage,
Journal of Financial Economics 66, 341–60.
Alpert, M., and H. Raiffa, 1982, A progress report on the training of probability as-
sessors, in D. Kahneman, P. Slovic and A. Tversky (eds), Judgment Under Uncer-
tainty: Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge University Press, 294–305.
Anderson, E., L. Hansen, and T. Sargent, 1998, Risk and robustness in equilibrium,
Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Arrow, K., 1986, Rationality of self and others, in R. Hogarth and M. Reder (eds.),
Rational Choice (University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 201–15.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock
returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219–57.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2002, Market timing and capital structure, Journal of
Finance 57, 1–32.
———, 2004, A catering theory of dividends, Journal of Finance 59, 1125–65.
Baker, M., J. Stein, and J. Wurgler, 2003, When does the market matter? Stock
prices and the investment of equity dependent ﬁrms, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 118, 969–1006.
Ball, R., 1978, Anomalies in relations between securities’ yields and yield surro-
gates, Journal of Financial Economics 6, 103–26.
Banz, R., 1981, The relation between return and market value of common stocks,
Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3–18.
Barber, B., and J. Lyon, 1997, Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: the em-
pirical power and speciﬁcation of test statistics, Journal of Financial Economics
43, 341–72.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: the common
stock performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773–806.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: gender, overconﬁdence, and
common stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 141, 261–92.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2002a, Online investors: do the slow die ﬁrst?, Review of
Financial Studies 15, 455–87.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2002b, All that glitters: the effect of attention and news
on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors, Working Paper,
University of California.
Barberis, N., and M. Huang, 2001, Mental accounting, loss aversion and individual
stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 1247–92.
Barberis, N., and A. Shleifer, 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics
68, 161–99.
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, A model of investor sentiment, Jour-
nal of Financial Economics 49, 307–45.
Barberis, N., M. Huang, and T. Santos, 2001, Prospect theory and asset prices,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1–53.
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and J. Wurgler, 2001, Comovement, Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Barsky, R., and B. De Long, 1993, Why does the stock market ﬂuctuate?, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 107, 291–311.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
67

Basu, S., 1983, The relationship between earnings yield, market value and return
for NYSE common stocks: further evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 12,
129–56.
Baxter, M., and U. Jermann, 1997, The international diversiﬁcation puzzle is worse
than you think, American Economic Review 87, 170–80.
Bell, D., 1982, Regret in decision making under uncertainty, Operations Research
30, 961–81.
Benartzi, S., 2001, Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to
company stock, Journal of Finance 56, 1747–64.
Benartzi, S., and R. Thaler, 1995, Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium
puzzle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 75–92.
———, 2001, Naïve diversiﬁcation strategies in deﬁned contribution savings plans,
American Economic Review 91, 79–98.
Benartzi, S., R. Michaely, and R. Thaler, 1997, Do changes in dividends signal the
future or the past?, Journal of Finance 52, 1007–34.
Berk, J., 1995, A critique of size related anomalies, Review of Financial Studies 8,
275–86.
Bernard, V., and J. Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings announcement drift: delayed price
response or risk premium?, Journal of Accounting Research (Supplement), 1–36.
Blanchard, O., C. Rhee, and L. Summers 1993, The stock market, proﬁt, and in-
vestment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 115–36.
Bloomﬁeld, R., and J. Hales, 2002, Predicting the next step of a random walk: ex-
perimental evidence of regime-shifting beliefs, Journal of Financial Economics
65, 397–414.
Bodurtha, J., D. Kim, and C. M. Lee, 1993, Closed-end country funds and U.S.
market sentiment, Review of Financial Studies 8, 879–918.
Brav, A., 2000, Inference in long-horizon event studies, Journal of Finance 55,
1979–2016.
Brav, A., and P. Gompers, 1997, Myth or reality? The long-run underperformance
of initial public offerings: evidence from venture and non-venture-backed compa-
nies, Journal of Finance 52, 1791–1821.
Brav, A., C. Geczy, and P. Gompers, 2000, Is the abnormal return following equity
issuances anomalous?, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 209–49.
Brennan, M., and Y. Xia, 2001, Stock return volatility and the equity premium,
Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 249–83.
Brown, S., W. Goetzmann, and S. Ross, 1995, Survival, Journal of Finance 50,
853–73.
Brunnermeier, M., 2001, Asset Pricing under Asymmetric Information—Bubbles,
Crashes, Technical Analysis, and Herding, Oxford University Press.
Buehler, R., D. Grifﬁn, and M. Ross, 1994, Exploring the planning fallacy: why
people underestimate their task completion times, Journality of Personality and
Social Psychology 67, 366–81.
Camerer, C., 1995, Individual decision making, in J. Kagel and A. Roth (eds.),
Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton University Press.
Camerer, C., and R. Hogarth, 1999, The effects of ﬁnancial incentives in experi-
ments: a review and capital-labor production framework, Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 19, 7–42.
Camerer, C., and M. Weber, 1992, Recent developments in modeling preferences:
uncertainty and ambiguity, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 325–70.
68
BARBERIS AND THALER

Campbell, J. Y. (1991), “A variance decomposition for stock returns,” Economic
Journal 101:157–179.
———, 1999, Asset prices, consumption and the business cycle, in J. Taylor and 
M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier, 1231–1303.
———, 2000, Asset pricing at the millenium, Journal of Finance 55, 1515–67.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: a consumption-based ex-
planation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107,
205–51.
Campbell, J. Y., and R. Shiller, 1988, Stock prices, earnings and expected dividends,
Journal of Finance 43, 661–76.
Cecchetti, S., P. Lam, and N. Mark, 2000, Asset pricing with distorted beliefs:
are equity returns too good to be true?, American Economic Review 90,
787–805.
Chan, K., L. Chan, N. Jegadeesh, and J. Lakonishok, 2001, Earnings quality and
stock returns, Working Paper, University of Illinois.
Chan, L., N. Jegadeesh, and J. Lakonishok, 1996, Momentum strategies, Journal of
Finance 51, 1681–1713.
Chen, J., H. Hong, and J. Stein, 2001, Forecasting crashes: trading volume, past re-
turns and conditional skewness in stock prices, Journal of Financial Economics
61, 345–81.
———, 2002, Breadth of ownership and stock returns, Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 66, 171–205.
Chew, S., 1983, A generalization of the quasilinear mean with applications to the
measurement of income inequality and decision theory resolving the allais para-
dox, Econometrica 51, 1065–92.
———, 1989, Axiomatic utility theories with the betweenness property, Annals of
Operations Research 19, 273–98.
Chew, S., and K. MacCrimmon, 1979, Alpha-nu choice theory: an axiomatization
of expected utility, Working Paper, University of British Columbia.
Chopra, N., J. Lakonishok, and J. Ritter, 1992, Measuring abnormal performance:
do stocks overreact?, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 235–68.
Coval, J., and T. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: local equity preference in
domestic portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 2045–73.
———, 2001, The geography of investment: informed trading and asset prices,
Journal of Political Economy 109, 811–41.
Coval, J., and T. Shumway, 2000, Do behavioral biases affect prices?, Working
Paper, University of Michigan.
Daniel, K., and S. Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross-sectional
variation in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1–33.
Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and
security market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839–85.
———, 2001, Overconﬁdence, arbitrage and equilibrium asset pricing, Journal of
Finance 56, 921–65.
D’Avolio, G., 2002, The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Econom-
ics 66, 271–306.
De Bondt, W., and R. Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?, Journal of Fi-
nance 40, 793–808.
———, 1987, Further evidence on investor overreaction and stock market seasonal-
ity, Journal of Finance 42, 557–81.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
69

De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. Waldmann, 1990a, Noise trader risk
in ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98, 703–38.
———, 1990b, Positive feedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational
speculation, Journal of Finance 45, 375–95.
Dekel, E., 1986, An axiomatic characterization of preferences under uncertainty:
weakening the independence axiom, Journal of Economic Theory 40, 304–18.
Diether, K., C. Malloy, and A. Scherbina, 2002, Stock prices and differences of
opinion: empirical evidence that stock prices reﬂect optimism, Journal of Finance
57, 2113–41.
Dreman, D., 1977, Psychology and the Stock Market: Investment Strategy Beyond
Random Walk, Warner Books.
Driscoll, K., J. Malcolm, M. Sirul, and P. Slotter, 1995, Gallup Survey of Deﬁned
Contribution Plan Participants, John Hancock Financial Services.
Edwards, W., 1968, Conservatism in human information processing, in B. Klein-
mutz (ed.), Formal Representation of Human Judgment, Wiley, 17–52.
Ellsberg, D., 1961, Risk, ambiguity, and the savage axioms, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 75, 643–69.
Epstein, L., and T. Wang, 1994, Intertemporal asset pricing under Knightian uncer-
tainty, Econometrica 62, 283–322.
Fama, E., 1970, Efﬁcient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work,
Journal of Finance 25, 383–417.
———, 1998, Market efﬁciency, long-term returns and behavioral ﬁnance, Journal
of Financial Economics 49, 283–307.
Fama, E., and K. French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock returns, Journal
of Financial Economics 22, 3–25.
———, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 47,
427–65.
———, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns of bonds and stocks, Journal of
Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
———, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns, Journal of
Finance 50, 131–55.
———, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies, Journal of Fi-
nance 51, 55–84.
———, 1998, Value vs. growth: the international evidence, Journal of Finance 53,
1975–99.
———, 2001, Disappearing dividends: changing ﬁrm characteristics or lower
propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3–43.
Fama, E., K. French, and J. Davis, 2000, Characteristics, covariances and average
returns 1929–1997, Journal of Finance 55, 389–406.
Fischhoff, B., P. Slovic, and S. Lichtenstein, 1977, Knowing with certainty: the ap-
propriateness of extreme conﬁdence, Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance 3, 552–64.
Fisher, I., 1928, Money Illusion (Adelphi, New York).
Fox, C., and A. Tversky, 1995, Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 585–603.
French, K., and J. Poterba, 1991, Investor diversiﬁcation and international equity
markets, American Economic Review 81, 222–26.
70
BARBERIS AND THALER

Friedman, M., 1953, The case for ﬂexible exchange rates, in Essays in Positive Eco-
nomics, University of Chicago Press, 157–203.
Froot, K., and E. Dabora, 1999, How are stock prices affected by the location of
trade?, Journal of Financial Economics 53, 189–216.
Genesove, D., and C. Mayer, 2001, Loss aversion and seller behavior: evidence
from the housing market, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1233–60.
Gervais, S., and T. Odean, 2001, Learning to be overconﬁdent, Review of Financial
Studies 14, 1–27.
Gilboa, I., and D. Schmeidler, 1989, Maxmin expected utility with a non-unique
prior, Journal of Mathematical Economics 18, 141–53.
Gilovich, T., R. Vallone, and A. Tversky, 1985, The hot hand in basketball: on the
misperception of random sequences, Cognitive Psychology 17, 295–314.
Gilovich, T., D. Grifﬁn, and D. Kahneman, eds., 2002, Heuristics and Biases: The
Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, Cambridge University Press.
Gneezy, U., and J. Potters, 1997, An experiment on risk taking and evaluation peri-
ods, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 631–45.
Gompers, P., and A. Metrick, 2001, Institutional investors and equity prices, Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 116, 229–59.
Graham, B., 1949, The Intelligent Investor: A Book of Practical Counsel, Harper
and Row.
Graham, J., and C. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate ﬁnance: ev-
idence from the ﬁeld, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187–243.
Grinblatt, M., and B. Han, 2001, The disposition effect and momentum, Working
Paper, University of California, Los Angeles.
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2001, How distance, language, and culture inﬂu-
ence stockholdings and trades, Journal of Finance 56, 1053–73.
Grinblatt, M., and T. Moskowitz, 1999, The cross-section of expected returns and
its relation to past returns, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Gul, F., 1991, A theory of disappointment in decision making under uncertainty,
Econometrica 59, 667–86.
Hansen, L., and K. Singleton, 1983, Stochastic consumption, risk aversion and the
temporal behavior of asset returns, Journal of Political Economy 91, 249–68.
Hardouvelis, G., R. La Porta, and T. Wizman, 1994, What moves the discount on
country equity funds?, in J. Frankel (ed.), The Internationalization of Equity
Markets, University of Chicago Press, 345–97.
Harris, L., and E. Gurel, 1986, Price and volume effects associated with changes in
the S&P 500: new evidence for the existence of price pressure, Journal of Finance
41, 851–60.
Harrison, J. M., and D. Kreps, 1978, Speculative investor behavior in a stock mar-
ket with heterogeneous expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics 92,
323–36.
Heath, C., and A. Tversky, 1991, Preference and belief: ambiguity and competence
in choice under uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4, 5–28.
Heaton, J. B., 2002, Managerial optimism and corporate ﬁnance, Financial Man-
agement (Summer), 33–45.
Hirshleifer, D., 2001, Investor psychology and asset pricing, Journal of Finance 56,
1533–97.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
71

Hong, H., and J. Stein, 1999, A uniﬁed theory of underreaction, momentum trad-
ing, and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143–84.
Hong, H., and J. Stein, 2003, Differences of opinion, short-sale constraints and
market crashes, Review of Financial Studies, 16, 487–525.
Hong, H., T. Lim, and J. Stein, 2000, Bad news travels slowly: size, analyst coverage,
and the proﬁtability of momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 55, 265–95.
Huberman, G., 2001, Familiarity breeds investment, Review of Financial Studies
14, 659–80.
Hvidkjaer, S., 2001, A trade-based analysis of momentum, Working Paper, Univer-
sity of Maryland, College Park.
Ikenberry, D., J. Lakonishok, and T. Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction to
open market share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181–208.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
implications for stock market efﬁciency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Jones, C., and O. Lamont, 2002, Short-sale constraints and stock returns, Journal
of Financial Economics 66, 207–39.
Jung, K., Y. Kim, and R. Stulz, 1996, Timing, investment opportunities, managerial
discretion, and the security issue decision, Journal of Financial Economics 42,
159–85.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky, 1974, Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and
biases, Science 185, 1124–31.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: an analysis of decision
under risk, Econometrica 47, 263–91.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky, eds., 2000, Choices, Values and Frames, Cambridge
University Press.
Kahneman, D., P. Slovic and A. Tversky, eds., 1982, Judgment Under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge University Press.
Kaul, A., V. Mehrotra, and R. Morck, 2000, Demand curves for stocks do slope
down: new evidence from an index weights adjustment, Journal of Finance 55,
893–912.
Knight, F., 1921, Risk, Uncertainty and Proﬁt, Houghton Mifﬂin.
Korajczyk, R., D. Lucas, and R. McDonald, 1991, The effects of information re-
leases on the pricing and timing of equity issues, Review of Financial Studies 4,
685–708.
La Porta, R., J. Lakonishok, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1997, Good news for value
stocks: further evidence on market efﬁciency, Journal of Finance 49, 1541–78.
Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapola-
tion and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541–78.
Lamont, O., and R. Thaler, 2003, Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in
tech stock carve-outs, Journal of Political Economy 111, 227–68.
Lee, C., A. Shleifer, and R. Thaler, 1991, Investor sentiment and the closed-end fund
puzzle, Journal of Finance 46, 75–110.
LeRoy, S., and R. Porter, 1981, The present-value relation: tests based on implied
variance bounds, Econometrica 49, 97–113.
Lewis, K., 1999, Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption, Journal
of Economic Literature 37, 571–608.
Lintner, J., 1956, Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, re-
tained earnings and taxes, American Economic Review 46, 97–113.
72
BARBERIS AND THALER

Loomes, G., and R. Sugden, 1982, Regret theory: an alternative theory of rational
choice under uncertainty, The Economic Journal 92, 805–24.
Lord, C., L. Ross, and M. Lepper, 1979, Biased assimilation and attitude polariza-
tion: the effects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 37, 2098–2109.
Loughran, T., and J. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50,
23–50.
———, 2000, Uniformly least powerful tests of market efﬁciency, Journal of Finan-
cial Economics 55, 361–89.
———, 2002, Why don’t issuers get upset about leaving money on the table?, Re-
view of Financial Studies 15, 413–43.
Loughran, T., J. Ritter, and K. Rydqvist, 1994, Initial public offerings: international
insights, Paciﬁc Basin Finance Journal 2, 165–99.
Lyon, J., B. Barber, and C. Tsai, 1999, Improved methods for tests of long-run ab-
normal stock returns, Journal of Finance 54, 165–201.
Maenhout, P., 1999, Robust portfolio rules and asset pricing, Working Paper (IN-
SEAD, Paris).
Malmendier, U., and G. Tate, 2001, CEO overconﬁdence and corporate investment,
Working Paper (Harvard University).
Mankiw, N.G., and S. Zeldes, 1991, The consumption of stockholders and non-
stockholders, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97–112.
Markowitz, H., 1952, The utility of wealth, Journal of Political Economy 60,
151–58.
Mehra, R., and E. Prescott, 1985, The equity premium: a puzzle, Journal of Mone-
tary Economics 15, 145–61.
Merton, R., 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
information, Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.
Michaely, R., R. Thaler, and K. Womack, 1995, Price reactions to dividend initia-
tions and omissions, Journal of Finance 50, 573–608.
Miller, E., 1977, Risk, uncertainty and divergence of opinion, Journal of Finance
32, 1151–68.
Mitchell, M., and E. Stafford, 2001, Managerial decisions and long-term stock
price performance, Journal of Business 73, 287–329.
Mitchell, M., T. Pulvino, and E. Stafford, 2002, Limited arbitrage in equity mar-
kets, Journal of Finance 57, 551–84.
Modigliani, F., and R. Cohn, 1979, Inﬂation and the stock market, Financial Ana-
lysts Journal 35, 24–44.
Morck, R., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1990, The stock market and investment: is
the market a sideshow?, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 0:157–202.
Mullainathan, S., 2001, Thinking through categories, Working Paper, MIT.
Odean, T., 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, Journal of Finance
53, 1775–98.
———, 1999, Do investors trade too much?, American Economic Review 89,
1279–98.
Ofek, E., and M. Richardson, 2003, Dot-com mania: market inefﬁciency in the in-
ternet sector, Journal of Finance 58, 1113–37.
Pagano, M., F. Panetta, and L. Zingales, 1998, Why do companies go public? An
empirical analysis, Journal of Finance 53, 27–64.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
73

Polk, C., and P. Sapienza, 2001, The real effects of investor sentiment, Working
Paper, Northwestern University.
Poteshman, A., 2001, Underreaction, overreaction and increasing misreaction to in-
formation in the options market, Journal of Finance 56, 851–76.
Quiggin, J., 1982, A theory of anticipated utility, Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization 3, 323–43.
Rabin, M., 1998, Psychology and economics, Journal of Economic Literature 36,
11–46.
———, 2000, Risk aversion and expected utility theory: a calibration theorem,
Econometrica 68, 1281–92.
———, Inference by believers in the law of small numbers, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, 775–816.
Redelmeier, D., and A. Tversky, 1992, On the framing of multiple prospects, Psy-
chological Science 3, 191–93.
Ritter, J., and R. Warr, 2002, The decline of inﬂation and the bull market of 1982 to
1997, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 29–61.
Roll, R., 1977, A critique of the asset pricing theory’s tests: part I, Journal of Finan-
cial Economics 4, 129–74.
———, 1983, Vas ist das?, Journal of Portfolio Management 9, 18–28.
———, 1986, The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers, Journal of Business
59, 197–216.
Rosenberg, B., K. Reid, and R. Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of market inefﬁ-
ciency, Journal of Portfolio Management 11, 9–17.
Ross, S., 2001, Lectures Notes on Market Efﬁciency, MIT.
Rouwenhorst, G., 1998, International momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 53,
267–84.
Rubinstein, M., 2001, Rational markets: yes or no? The afﬁrmative case, Financial
Analysts Journal (May–June), 15–29.
Santos, M., and M. Woodford, 1997, Rational asset pricing bubbles, Econometrica
65, 19–58.
Sargent, T., 1993, Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics, Oxford University
Press.
Savage, L., 1964, The Foundations of Statistics, Wiley.
Scheinkman, J., and W. Xiong, 2003, Overconﬁdence and speculative bubbles,
Journal of Political Economy, 111, 1183–219.
Segal, U., 1987, Some remarks on Quiggin’s anticipated utility, Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization 8, 145–54.
Segal, U., 1989, Anticipated utility: a measure representation approach, Annals of
Operations Research 19, 359–73.
Shaﬁr, E., P. Diamond, and A. Tversky, 1997, Money illusion, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112, 341–74.
Shefrin, H., and M. Statman, 1984, Explaining investor preference for cash divi-
dends, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 253–82.
———, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers too long,
Journal of Finance 40, 777–90.
Shiller, R., 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justiﬁed by subsequent
changes in dividends?, American Economic Review 71, 421–36.
———, 1984, Stock prices and social dynamics, Brookings Papers on Economic Ac-
tivity 2: 457–98.
74
BARBERIS AND THALER

Shleifer, A., 1986, Do demand curves for stocks slope down, Journal of Finance 41,
579–90.
———, 2000, Inefﬁcient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance, Oxford
University Press.
Shleifer, A., and L. Summers, 1990, The noise trader approach to ﬁnance, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 4, 19–33.
Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52,
35–55.
———, 2003, Stock market driven acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics,
70, 295–311.
Stein, J., 1996, Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world, Journal of Busi-
ness 69, 429–55.
Summers, L., 1986, Does the stock market rationally reﬂect fundamental values?,
Journal of Finance 41, 591–601.
Thaler, R., 2000, Mental accounting matters, in: D. Kahneman and A. Tversky
(eds.), Choice Values and Frames, Cambridge University Press, 241–68.
Thaler, R., and E. Johnson, 1990, Gambling with the house money and trying to
break even: the effects of prior outcomes on risky choice, Management Science
36, 643–60.
Thaler, R., A. Tversky, D. Kahneman, and A. Schwartz, 1997, The effect of myopia
and loss aversion on risk-taking: an experimental test, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 112, 647–61.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman, 1986, Rational choice and the framing of decisions,
Journal of Business 59, 251–78.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman, 1992, Advances in prospect theory: cumulative
representation of uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297–323.
Veronesi, P., 1999, Stock market overreaction to bad news in good times: a rational
expectations equilibrium model, Review of Financial Studies 12, 975–1007.
Vijh, A., 1994, S&P 500 trading strategies and stock betas, Review of Financial
Studies 7, 215–51.
von Neumann, J., and O. Morgenstern, 1944, Theory of Games and Economic Be-
havior, Princeton University Press.
Vuolteenaho, T., 2002, What drives ﬁrm-level stock returns?, Journal of Finance 57,
233–64.
Weil, P., 1989, The equity premium puzzle and the risk-free rate puzzle, Journal of
Monetary Economics 24, 401–21.
Weinstein, N., 1980, Unrealistic optimism about future life events, Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology 39, 806–20.
Wurgler, J., and K. Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does arbitrage ﬂatten demand curves for
stocks?, Journal of Business 75, 583–608.
Yaari, M., 1987, The dual theory of choice under risk, Econometrica 55, 95–115.
A SURVEY OF BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
75

This page intentionally left blank
