Chapter 2
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny
One of the fundamental concepts in ﬁnance is arbitrage, deﬁned as “the
simultaneous purchase and sale of the same, or essentially similar, security
in two different markets for advantageously different prices” (Sharpe and
Alexander 1990). Theoretically speaking, such arbitrage requires no capital
and entails no risk. When an arbitrageur buys a cheaper security and sells a
more expensive one, his net future cash ﬂows are zero for sure, and he gets
his proﬁts up front. Arbitrage plays a critical role in the analysis of securi-
ties markets, because its effect is to bring prices to fundamental values and
to keep markets efﬁcient. For this reason, it is extremely important to un-
derstand how well this textbook description of arbitrage approximates re-
ality. This chapter argues that the textbook description does not describe
realistic arbitrage trades, and, moreover, the discrepancies become particu-
larly important when arbitrageurs manage other people’s money.
Even the simplest realistic arbitrages are more complex than the text-
book deﬁnition suggests. Consider the simple case of two Bund futures con-
tracts to deliver DM250,000 in face value of German bonds at time T, one
traded in London on LIFFE and the other in Frankfurt on DTB. Suppose
for the moment, counter factually, that these contracts are exactly the same.
Suppose ﬁnally that at some point in time t the ﬁrst contract sells for
DM240,000 and the second for DM245,000. An arbitrageur in this situa-
tion would sell a futures contract in Frankfurt and buy one in London, rec-
ognizing that at time T he is perfectly hedged. To do so, at time t, he would
have to put up some good faith money, namely DM3,000 in London and
DM3,500 in Frankfurt, leading to a net cash outﬂow of DM6,500. How-
ever, he does not get the DM5,000 difference in contract prices at the time
he puts on the trade. Suppose that prices of the two contracts both con-
verge to DM242,500 just after t, as the market returns to efﬁciency. In this
case, the arbitrageur would immediately collect DM2,500 from each ex-
change, which would simultaneously charge the counter parties for their
losses. The arbitrageur can then close out his position and get back his
Nancy Zimmerman and Gabe Sunshine have helped us to understand arbitrage. We thank
Yacine Aıˇt Sahalia, Douglas Diamond, Oliver Hart, Steve Kaplan, Raghu Rajan, Jésus Saa-
Requejo, Luigi Zingales, Jeff Zwiebel, and especially Matthew Ellman, Gustavo Nombela,
René Stulz, and an anonymous referee (The Journal of Finance) for helpful comments.

good faith money as well. In this near textbook case, the arbitrageur re-
quired only DM6,500 of capital and collected his proﬁts at some point in
time between t and T.
Even in this simplest example, the arbitrageur need not be so lucky. Sup-
pose that soon after t, the price of the futures contract in Frankfurt rises to
DM250,000, thus moving further away from the price in London, which
stays at DM240,000. At this point, the Frankfurt exchange must charge the
arbitrageur DM5,000 to pay to his counter party. Even if eventually the
prices of the two contracts converge and the arbitrageur makes money, in
the short run he loses money and needs more capital. The model of capital-
free arbitrage simply does not apply. If the arbitrageur has deep enough
pockets to always access this capital, he still makes money with probability
one. But if he does not, he may run out of money and have to liquidate his
position at a loss.
In reality, the situation is more complicated since the two Bund contracts
have somewhat different trading hours, settlement dates, and delivery terms.
It may easily happen that the arbitrageur has to ﬁnd the money to buy
bonds so that he can deliver them in Frankfurt at time T. Moreover, if prices
are moving rapidly, the value of bonds he delivers and the value of bonds de-
livered to him may differ, exposing the arbitrageur to additional risks of
losses. Even this simplest trade then becomes a case of what is known as risk
arbitrage. In risk arbitrage, an arbitrageur does not make money with prob-
ability one, and may need substantial amounts of capital to both execute his
trades and cover his losses. Most real world arbitrage trades in bond and eq-
uity markets are examples of risk arbitrage in this sense. Unlike in the text-
book model, such arbitrage is risky and requires capital.
One way around these concerns is to imagine a market with a very large
number of tiny arbitrageurs, each taking an inﬁnitesimal position against
the mispricing in a variety of markets. Because their positions are so small,
capital constraints are not binding and arbitrageurs are effectively risk neu-
tral toward each trade. Their collective actions, however, drive prices toward
fundamental values. This, essentially, is the model of arbitrage implicit in
Fama’s (1965) classic analysis of efﬁcient markets and in models such as
CAPM (Sharpe 1964) and APT (Ross 1976).
The trouble with this approach is that the millions of little traders are
typically not the ones who have the knowledge and information to engage
in arbitrage. More commonly, arbitrage is conducted by relatively few pro-
fessional, highly specialized investors who combine their knowledge with
resources of outside investors to take large positions. The fundamental fea-
ture of such arbitrage is that brains and resources are separated by an
agency relationship. The money comes from wealthy individuals, banks,
endowments, and other investors with only a limited knowledge of individ-
ual markets, and is invested by arbitrageurs with highly specialized knowledge
of these markets. In this chapter, we examine such arbitrage and its effec-
tiveness in achieving market efﬁciency.
80
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY

In particular, the implications of the fact that arbitrage—whether it is ul-
timately risk-free or risky—generally requires capital become extremely
important in the agency context. In models without agency problems, arbi-
trageurs are generally more aggressive when prices move further from fun-
damental values (see Grossman and Miller 1988, De Long et al. 1990,
Campbell and Kyle 1993). In our Bund example above, an arbitrageur
would in general increase his positions if London and Frankfurt contract
prices move further out of line, as long as he has the capital. When the arbi-
trageur manages other people’s money, however, and these people do not
know or understand exactly what he is doing, they will only observe him
losing money when futures prices in London and Frankfurt diverge. They
may therefore infer from this loss that the arbitrageur is not as competent
as they previously thought, refuse to provide him with more capital, and
even withdraw some of the capital—even though the expected return from
the trade has increased.
We refer to the phenomenon of responsiveness of funds under manage-
ment to past returns as performance-based arbitrage. Unlike arbitrageurs
using their own money, who allocate funds based on expected returns from
trades, investors may rationally allocate money based on past returns of ar-
bitrageurs. When arbitrage requires capital, arbitrageurs can become most
constrained when they have the best opportunities, that is, when the mis-
pricing they have bet against gets even worse. Moreover, the fear of this
scenario would make them more cautious when they put on their initial
trades, and hence less effective in bringing about market efﬁciency. This
chapter argues that this feature of arbitrage can signiﬁcantly limit its effec-
tiveness in achieving market efﬁciency.
We show that performance-based arbitrage is particularly ineffective in
extreme circumstances, where prices are signiﬁcantly out of line and arbi-
trageurs are fully invested. In these circumstances, arbitrageurs might bail
out of the market when their participation is most needed. Performance-
based arbitrage, then, is even more limited than arbitrage described in ear-
lier models of inefﬁcient markets, such as Grossman and Miller (1988), De
Long et al. (1990), and Campbell and Kyle (1993).
Ours is obviously not the ﬁrst study of the consequences of delegated
portfolio management. Early articles in this area include Allen (1990) and
Bhattacharya, Pﬂeiderer (1985). Scharfstein and Stein (1990) model herd-
ing by money managers operating on incentive contracts. Lakonishok,
Shleifer, Thaler, and Vishny (1991) and Chevalier and Ellison (1995) con-
sider the possibility that money managers “window dress” their portfolios
to impress investors. In two interesting recent articles, Allen and Gorton
(1993) and Dow and Gorton (1994) show how money managers can churn
assets to mislead their investors, and how such churning can sustain inefﬁcient
asset prices. Unlike this work, our essay does not focus as much on the dis-
tortions in the behavior of arbitrageurs, as on their limited effectiveness in
bringing prices to fundamental values.
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
81

The next section of the chapter presents a very simple model that illus-
trates the mechanics of arbitrage. For simplicity, our model focuses on the
case where mispricing may deepen in the short run, even though there is no
long-run fundamental risk in the trade. We thus focus on a case that is clos-
est to pure arbitrage, as opposed to risk arbitrage. Section II establishes the
main results of the essay, including our results on the effectiveness of arbi-
trage in extreme circumstances when prices are very far from fundamentals.
Section III explores the performance-based arbitrage assumption in more
detail. In section IV, we examine some empirical implications of the model.
In particular, we extend the logic of the model to the more realistic case of
risk arbitrage, rather than the pure arbitrage case modeled in the article.
We ﬁrst ask what are the characteristics of markets in which we expect risk
arbitrage resources to be concentrated. We then analyze return predictabil-
ity and pricing anomalies more generally. Section V concludes.
1. An Agency Model of Limited Arbitrage
The structure of the model follows Shleifer and Vishny (1990). We focus on
the market for a speciﬁc asset, in which we assume there are three types of
participants: noise traders, arbitrageurs, and investors in arbitrage funds
who do not trade on their own. Arbitrageurs specialize in trading only in
this market, whereas investors allocate funds between arbitrageurs operat-
ing in both this and many other markets. The fundamental value of the
asset is V, which arbitrageurs, but not their investors, know. There are
three time periods: 1, 2, and 3. At time 3, the value V becomes known to
arbitrageurs and noise traders, and hence the price is equal to that value.
Since the price is equal to V at t = 3 for sure, there is no long-run funda-
mental risk in this trade (this is not risk arbitrage). For t = 1, 2, the price of
the asset at time t is pt. For concreteness, we only consider pessimistic noise
traders. In each of periods 1 and 2, noise traders may experience a pes-
simism shock St, which generates for them, in the aggregate, the demand
for the asset given by:
QN(t) = [V −St]/pt.
(1)
At time t = 1, the ﬁrst-period noise trader shock, S1, is known to arbi-
trageurs, but the second-period noise trader shock is uncertain. In particu-
lar, there is some chance that S2 > S1, i.e., that noise trader misperceptions
deepen before they correct at t = 3. De Long et al. (1990) stressed the im-
portance of such noise trader risk for the analysis of arbitrage.
Both arbitrageurs and their investors are fully rational. Risk-neutral arbi-
trageurs take positions against the mispricing generated by the noise traders.
Each period, arbitrageurs have cumulative resources under management
(including their borrowing capacity) given by Ft. These resources are limited,
82
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY

for reasons we describe below. We assume that F1 is exogenously given, and
specify the determination of F2 below.
At time t = 2, the price of the asset either recovers to V, or it does not. If
it recovers, arbitrageurs invest in cash. If noise traders continue to be con-
fused, then arbitrageurs want to invest all of F2 in the underpriced asset,
since its price rises to V at t = 3 for sure. In this case, the arbitrageurs’ de-
mand for the asset QA(2) = F2/p2 and, since the aggregate demand for the
asset must equal the unit supply, the price is given by:
p2 = V −S2 + F2.
(2)
We assume that F2 < S2, so the arbitrage resources are not sufﬁcient to
bring the period 2 price to fundamental value, unless of course noise trader
misperceptions have corrected anyway.
In period 1, arbitrageurs do not necessarily want to invest all of F1 in the
asset. They might want to keep some of the money in cash in case the asset
becomes even more underpriced at t = 2, so they could invest more in that
asset. Accordingly, denote by D1 the amount that arbitrageurs invest in the
asset at t = 1. In this case, QA(1) = D1/p1, and
p1 = V −S1 + D1.
(3)
We again assume that, in the range of parameter values we are focusing on,
arbitrage resources are not sufﬁcient to bring prices all the way to funda-
mental values, that is, F1 < S1.
To complete the description of the model, we need to specify the organiz-
ation of the arbitrage industry and the relationship between arbitrageurs
and their investors, which determines F2. Recall that we are focusing on a
particular narrow market segment in which a given set of arbitrageurs spe-
cialize. A “segment” here should be interpreted as a particular arbitrage
strategy. We assume that there are many such segments and that within
each segment there are many arbitrageurs, so that no arbitrageur can affect
asset prices in a segment. For simplicity, we can think of T investors each
with one dollar available for investment with arbitrageurs. We are con-
cerned with the aggregate amount F2 << T that is invested with the arbi-
trageurs in a particular segment.
Arbitrageurs compete in the price they charge for their services. For sim-
plicity, we assume constant marginal cost per dollar invested, such that all
arbitrageurs in all segments have the same marginal cost. We also assume
that each arbitrageur has at least one competitor who is viewed as a perfect
substitute, so that Bertrand competition drives price to marginal cost. Each
of the T risk-neutral investors allocates his $1 investment to maximize ex-
pected consumer surplus, that is, the difference between the expected return
on his dollar and the price charged by the arbitrageur. Investors are Bayesians,
who have prior beliefs about the expected return of each arbitrageur. Since
prices are equal, an investor gives his dollar to the arbitrageur with the
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
83

highest expected return according to his beliefs. Different investors hold
different beliefs about various arbitrageurs’ abilities, so one arbitrageur
does not end up with all the funds. The market share of each arbitrageur is
just the total fraction of investors who believe that he has the highest ex-
pected return. The total share of money allocated to a given segment is just
the sum of these market shares across all arbitrageurs in the segment. Im-
portantly, we assume that arbitrageurs across many segments have, on av-
erage, earned high enough returns to convince investors to invest with them
rather than to index.1
The key remaining question is how investors update their beliefs about
the future expected returns of an arbitrageur. We assume that investors have
no information about the structure of the model-determining asset prices in
any segment. In particular, they do not know the trading strategy employed
by any arbitrageur. This assumption is meant to capture the idea that arbi-
trage strategies are difﬁcult to understand, and a lot of specialized knowledge
is needed for investors to evaluate them. In part, this is because arbitrageurs
do not share all their knowledge with investors, and cultivate secrecy to pro-
tect their knowledge from imitation. Even if the investors were told more
about what arbitrageurs were doing, they would have a difﬁcult time decid-
ing whether what they heard was true. Implicitly, we are assuming that the
underlying structural model is sufﬁciently nonstationary and high dimen-
sional that investors are unable to infer the underlying structure of the model
from past returns data. As a result, they only use simple updating rules based
on past performance. In particular, investors are assumed to form posterior
beliefs about future returns of the arbitrageur based only on their prior and
any observations of his arbitrage returns.
Under these informational assumptions, individual arbitrageurs who ex-
perience relatively poor returns in a given period lose market share to those
with better returns. Moreover, since all arbitrageurs in a given segment are
taking the same positions, they all attract or lose investors simultaneously,
depending on the performance of their common arbitrage strategy. Speciﬁ-
cally, investors’ aggregate supply of funds to the arbitrageurs in a particular
segment at time 2 is an increasing function of arbitrageurs’ gross return be-
tween time 1 and time 2 (call this performance-based arbitrage or PBA).
Denoting this function by G, and recognizing that the return on the asset is
given by p2/p1, the arbitrageurs’ supply of funds at t = 2 is given by:
F2 = F1 ∗G{(D1/F1) ∗(p2/p1) + (F1 −D1)/F1},
with
G(1) = 1, G′ ≥1,
and
G″ ≤0.
(4)
If arbitrageurs do as well as some benchmark given by performance of arbi-
trageurs in other markets, which for simplicity we assume to be zero return,
they neither gain nor lose funds under management. However, they gain
84
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY
1 See Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992) for a description of the agency problems in
the money management industry.

(lose) funds if they outperform (under perform) that benchmark. Because of
the extremely poor quality of investors’ information, past performance of
arbitrageurs completely determines the resources they get to manage, re-
gardless of the actual opportunities available in their market.
The responsiveness of funds under management to past performance (as
measured by G′) is the solution to a signal extraction problem in which in-
vestors are trying to ascribe an arbitrageur’s poor performance to one of
three causes: (1) a random error term (2) a deepening of noise trader senti-
ment (bad luck), and (3) inferior ability. High cross-sectional variation in
ability across arbitrageurs will tend to increase the responsiveness of in-
vested funds to past performance. On the other hand, if the variance of the
noise trader sentiment term is high relative to the variation in (unobserved)
ability, this will tend to decrease the responsiveness to past performance. In
the limit, if ability is known or does not vary across arbitrageurs, poor per-
formance could be ascribed only to a deepening of the noise trader shock
(or a pure noise term), which would only increase the investor’s estimate of
the arbitrageur’s future return. The seemingly perverse behavior of taking
money away from an arbitrageur after noise trader sentiment deepens, that
is, precisely when his expected return is greatest, is a rational response to
the problem of trying to infer the arbitrageur’s (unobserved) ability and fu-
ture opportunities jointly from past returns.
Since our results do not rely on the concavity of the G function, we focus
on a linear G, given by
G(x) = ax + 1 −a,
with
a ≥1,
(5)
where x is arbitrageur’s gross return. In this case, equation (4) becomes:
F2 = a {D1 ∗(p2/p1) + (F1 −D1)} + (1 −a)F1 = F1 −aD1(1 −p2/p1). (6)
With this functional form, if p2 = p1, that is, the arbitrageur earns a zero
net return, he neither gains nor loses funds under management. If p2 > p1,
he gains funds and if p2 < p1, he loses funds. Note also that the higher is a,
the more sensitive are the resources under management to past perfor-
mance. The case of a = 1 corresponds to the arbitrageur not getting any
more money when he loses some, whereas if a > 1, funds are actually with-
drawn in response to poor performance.
One could in principle imagine more complicated incentive contracts
that would allow arbitrageurs to signal their opportunities or abilities and
attract funds based not just on past performance. For example, arbitrageurs
who feel that they have superior investment opportunities might try to offer
investors contracts that pay arbitrageurs a ﬁxed price below marginal cost
and a share of the upside. That is, if, at a particular point of time, arbi-
trageurs believe that they can earn extremely high returns with a high
probability (as happens artiﬁcially at t = 2 in our model), they can try to at-
tract investors by partially insuring them against further losses. We do not
consider such “separating” contracts in our model, since they are unlikely
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
85

to emerge in equilibrium under plausible circumstances. First, with limited
liability or risk aversion, arbitrageurs might be unwilling or unable after
mispricing worsens to completely retain (or increase) funds under manage-
ment by insuring the investor against losses, or pricing below marginal
cost. Second, these contracts are less attractive when the risk-averse arbi-
trageur himself is highly uncertain about his own ability to produce a supe-
rior return. We could model this more realistically by adding some noise
into the third period return. In sum, under plausible conditions, the use of
incentive contracts does not eliminate the effect of past performance on the
market shares of arbitrageurs.2 Empirically, most money managers in the
pension and mutual fund industries work for fees proportional to assets
under management and rarely get a percentage of the upside.3 As docu-
mented by Ippolito (1992) and Warther (1995), for example, mutual fund
managers lose funds under management when they perform poorly. Inter-
estingly, Warther (1995) also shows that fund ﬂows in and out of mutual
funds affect contemporaneous returns of securities these funds hold, consis-
tent with the results established below.
PBA is critical to our model. In conventional arbitrage, capital is allo-
cated to arbitrageurs based on expected returns from their trades. Under
PBA, in contrast, capital is allocated based on past returns, which, in the
model, are low precisely when expected returns are high. At that time, arbi-
trageurs face fund withdrawals, and are not very effective in betting against
the mispricing. Breaking the link between greater mispricing and higher ex-
pected returns perceived by those allocating capital drives our main results.
To complete the model, we need to set up an arbitrageur’s optimization
problem. For simplicity, we assume that the arbitrageur maximizes ex-
pected time 3 proﬁts. Since arbitrageurs are price-takers in the market for
investment services and marginal cost is constant, maximizing expected
time 3 proﬁt is equivalent to maximizing expected time 3 funds under man-
agement. For concreteness, we examine a speciﬁc form of uncertainty about
S2. We assume that, with probability q, S2 = S > S1, that is, noise trader mis-
perceptions deepen. With a complementary probability 1 −q, noise traders
recognize the true value of the asset at t = 2, so S2 = 0 and p2 = V.
86
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY
2 Our research assistant, Matthew Ellman of Harvard University, has solved a model in
which allowing arbitrageurs to offer high-powered incentive contracts does not permit the ar-
bitrageurs with better investment opportunities to separate themselves. The result is driven by
two factors: ﬁrst, limited liability precludes contracts from discouraging imitators through
large penalties for poor performance, which are more likely to be levied against imitators, and,
second, better arbitrageurs have more valuable alternative uses of their time, making it difﬁ-
cult to discourage the imitators by paying only for success since, at the contract necessary to
meet the individual rationality constraint of the better arbitrageurs, the imitators still earn
enough by sheer luck to cover their lower opportunity costs.
3 Hedge fund managers typically do get a large incentive component in their compensation,
but we are not aware of increases in that component, and cuts in fees, to avert withdrawal of
funds.

When S2 = 0, arbitrageurs liquidate their position at a gain at t = 2, and
hold cash until t = 3. In this case, W = a(D1 ∗V/p1 + F1 −D1) + (1 −a)F1.
When S2 = S, in contrast, arbitrageurs third-period funds are given by W =
(V/p2) ∗[a{D1 ∗p2/p1 + F1 −D1} + (1 −a)F1]. Arbitrageurs then maximize:
(7)
2. Performance-Based Arbitrage and Market Efﬁciency
Before analyzing the pattern of prices in our model, we specify what the
benchmarks are. The ﬁrst benchmark is efﬁcient markets, in which arbi-
trageurs have access to all the capital they want. In this case, since noise
trader shocks are immediately counteracted by arbitrageurs, p1 = p2 = V.
An alternative benchmark is one in which arbitrageurs resources are lim-
ited, but PBA is inoperative, that is, arbitrageurs can always raise F1. Even
if they lose money, they can replenish their capital up to F1. In this case,
p1 = V −S1 + F1 and p2 = V −S + F1. Prices fall one for one with noise
trader shocks in each period. This case corresponds most closely to the ear-
lier models of limited arbitrage. There is one ﬁnal interesting benchmark in
this model, namely the case of a = 1. This is the case in which arbitrageurs
cannot replenish the funds they have lost, but do not suffer withdrawals be-
yond what they have lost. We will return to this special case below.
The ﬁrst-order condition to the arbitrageur’s optimization problem is
given by:
(8)
with strict inequality holding if and only if D1 = F1, and equality holding if
D1 < F1. The ﬁrst term of Eq. (8) is an incremental beneﬁt to arbitrageurs
from an extra dollar of investment if the market recovers at t = 2. The sec-
ond term is the incremental loss if the price falls at t = 2 before recovering
at t = 3, and so they have foregone the option of being able to invest more
in that case. Condition (8) holds with a strict equality if the risk of price
deterioration is high enough, and this deterioration is severe enough, that
arbitrageurs choose to hold back some funds for the option to invest more
at time 2. On the other hand, Eq. (8) holds with a strict inequality if q is
low, if p1 is low relative to V (S1 is large), if p2 is not too low relative to p1
(
)
1
1
1
0
1
2
1
2
−
−



+
−




≥
q
V
p
q p
p
V
p
EW
q a D
V
p
F
D
a F
q V
p
a D
p
p
F
D
a F
=
−
+
−



+
−






+




+
−



+
−






(
)
(
)
(
)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
∗
∗
∗
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
87

(S not too large relative to S1). That is to say, the initial displacement must
be very large and prices should be expected to recover with a high probabil-
ity rather than fall further. If they do fall, it cannot be by too much. Under
these circumstances, arbitrageurs choose to be fully invested at t = 1 rather
than hold spare reserves for t = 2. We describe the case in which mispricing
is so severe at t = 1 that arbitrageurs choose to be fully invested as “extreme
circumstances,” and discuss it at some length.
This discussion can be summarized more formally in:
Proposition 1: For a given V, S1, S, F1, and a, there is a q* such that,
for q > q*, D1 < F1, and for q < q*, D1 = F1.
If Eq. (8) holds with equality, the equilibrium is given by Eq. (2), (3), (6),
and (8). If Eq. (8) holds with inequality, then equilibrium is given by
D1 = F1, p1 = V −S1 + F1, as well as Eq. (2) and (6). To illustrate the fact
that both types of equilibria are quite plausible, consider a numerical exam-
ple. Let V = 1, F1 = 0.2, a = 1.2, S1 = 0.3, S2 = 0.4. For this example,
q* = 0.35. If q < 0.35, then arbitrageurs are fully invested and
D1 = F1 = 0.2, so that the ﬁrst-period price is 0.9. In this case, regardless of
the exact value of q, we have F2 = 0.1636 and p2 = 0.7636 if noise trader
sentiment deepens, and F2 = 0.227 and p2 = V = 1 if noise trader sentiment
recovers. On the other hand, if q > 0.35, then arbitrageurs hold back some
of the funds at time 1, with the result that p1 is lower than it would be with
full investment. For example, if q = 0.5, then D1 = 0.1743 and p1 = 0.8743
(arbitrage is less aggressive at t = 1). If noise trader shock deepens, then
F2 = 0.1766, and p2 = 0.7766 (arbitrageurs have preserved more funds to
invest at t = 2), whereas if noise trader sentiment recovers then F2 = 0.23
and price returns to V = 1. This example illustrates that both the corner so-
lution and the interior equilibrium are quite plausible in our model. In fact,
both occur for most parameters we have tried.
In this simple model, we can show that the larger the shocks, the further
the prices are from fundamental values.4
Proposition 2: At the corner solution (D1 = F1), dp1/dS1 < 0, dp2/dS < 0,
and dp1/dS = 0. At the interior solution, dp1/dS1 < 0, dp2/dS < 0, and
dp1/dS < 0.
This proposition captures the simple intuition, common to all noise
trader models, that arbitrageurs’ ability to bear against mispricing is lim-
ited, and larger noise trader shocks lead to less efﬁcient pricing. Moreover,
at the interior solution, arbitrageurs spread out the effect of a deeper period
2 shock by holding more cash at t = 1 and thus allowing prices to fall more
88
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY
4 The proof of this proposition is straightforward, but requires some tedious calculations,
which are omitted.

at t = 1. As a result, they have more funds at t = 2 to counter mispricing at
that time.
A more interesting question is how prices behave as a function of the pa-
rameter a. In particular, we would want to know whether the market be-
comes less efﬁcient when PBA intensiﬁes (a rises). Unfortunately, we do not
believe that general conclusions can be drawn about how ex ante market
efﬁciency (say, as measured by volatility) varies with a. The behavior of
time 1 and time 2 prices with respect to a is very sensitive to the distribu-
tion of noise trader shocks.
In our current model, prices return to fundamentals at time 3 irrespective
of the behavior of arbitrageurs. Also, the noise at time 2 either disappears
or gets worse; it does not adjust part of the way toward fundamentals.
Under these circumstances, we can show that a higher a makes the market
less efﬁcient. As a increases, the equilibrium exhibits the same or lower p1
(if arbitrageurs hold back at time 1), and a strictly lower p2 when the noise
trader shock intensiﬁes. In particular, arbitrage under PBA (a > 0) gives less
efﬁcient prices than limited arbitrage without PBA (a = 0).
On the other hand, if we modify the model to allow prices to adjust more
slowly toward fundamentals, a higher a could actually make prices adjust
more quickly by giving arbitrageurs more funds after a partial reversal of
the noise trader shock. A partial adjustment toward fundamentals would
be self-reinforcing through increased funds allocated to arbitrageurs along
the way. Depending on the distribution of shocks over time, this could be
the dominant effect. In general, we cannot draw any robust conclusions
about ex ante market efﬁciency and the intensity of PBA.
However, we can say more about the effectiveness of arbitrage under ex-
treme circumstances. In particular, we can analyze whether arbitrageurs be-
come more aggressive when mispricing worsens. There are two ways to
measure this. One is to ask whether arbitrageurs invest more total dollars
in the asset at t = 2 than at t = 1, that is, is D1 < F2? The second is whether
arbitrageurs actually hold proportionally more of the asset at t = 2, that is,
is D1/p1 < F2/p2? In principle, it is possible that because p2 < p1, arbi-
trageurs hold more of the asset at t = 2 even though they spend less on it.
Perhaps the clearest evidence of less aggressive arbitrage at t = 2 would be
to show that arbitrageurs actually hold fewer shares at t = 2, and are liqui-
dating their holdings, even though prices have fallen from t = 1. In the rest
of this section, we focus on these liquidation problems.
We focus on a sufﬁcient condition for liquidation at t = 2 when the noise
trader shock deepens, namely, that arbitrageurs are fully invested at t = 1.
Speciﬁcally, we have:
Proposition 3: If arbitrageurs are fully invested at t = 1, and noise trader
misperceptions deepen at t = 2, then, for a > 1, F2 < D1 and F2/p2 <
D1/p1.
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
89

Proposition 3 describes the extreme circumstances in our model, in which
fully invested arbitrageurs experience an adverse price shock, face equity with-
drawals, and therefore liquidate their holdings of the extremely underpriced
asset. Arbitrageurs bail out of the market when opportunities are the best.
Before analyzing this case in more detail, we note that full investment at
t = 1 is a sufﬁcient, but not a necessary condition for liquidation at t = 2. In
general, for q’s in the neighborhood above q*, where F1 −D1 is positive but
small, investors would still liquidate some of their holdings when a > 1. The
reason is that their cash holdings are not high enough to maintain their
holdings of the asset despite equity withdrawals. The cash holdings amelio-
rate these withdrawals, but do not eliminate them. For higher q’s, however,
D1 is high enough that F2/p2 > D1/p1.
We can illustrate this with our numerical example from Section II, with
V = 1, S1 = 0.3, S2 = 0.4, F1 = 0.2, a = 1.2. Recall that in this example, we
had q* = 0.35. One can show for this example that asset liquidations occur
for q < 0.39, that is, when arbitrageurs are fully invested as well as in a
small region where they are not fully invested. For q > 0.39, arbitrageurs
increase their holdings of the asset at t = 2.
For concreteness, it is easier to focus on the case of Proposition 3, when
arbitrageurs are fully invested. In this case, we have that
p2 = [V −S −aF1 + F1]/[1 −aF1/p1],
(9)
as long as aF1 < p1. The condition that aF1 < p1 is a simple stability condi-
tion in this model, which basically says that arbitrageurs do not lose so
much money that in equilibrium they bail out of the market completely. If
aF1 > p1, then at t = 2 the only equilibrium price is p2 = V −S, and arbi-
trageurs bail out of the market completely. In the stable equilibrium, arbi-
trageurs lose funds under management as prices fall, and hence liquidate
some holdings, but they still stay in the market.
For this equilibrium, simple differentiation yields the following result:
Proposition 4: At the fully invested equilibrium, dp2/dS < −1 and d2p2/
dadS < 0.
This proposition shows that when arbitrageurs are fully invested at time 1,
prices fall more than one for one with the noise trader shock at time 2. Pre-
cisely when prices are furthest from fundamental values, arbitrageurs take
the smallest position. Moreover, as PBA intensiﬁes, that is, as a rises, the
price decline per unit increase in S gets greater. If we think of dp2/dS as a
measure of the resiliency of the market (equal to zero for an efﬁcient mar-
ket and to −1 when a = 0 and there is no PBA), then Proposition 4 says that
a market driven by PBA loses its resiliency in extreme circumstances. The
analysis thus shows that the arbitrage process can be quite ineffective in
bringing prices back to fundamental values in extreme circumstances.
90
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY

This result contrasts with the more standard models, in which arbi-
trageurs are most aggressive when prices are furthest away from fundamen-
tals. This point relates to Friedman’s (1953) famous observation that “to
say that arbitrage is destabilizing is equivalent to saying that arbitrageurs
lose money on average,” which is implausible. Our model is consistent with
Friedman in that, on average, arbitrageurs make money and move prices
toward fundamentals. However, the fact that they make money on average
does not mean that they make money always. Our model shows that the
times when they lose money are precisely the times when prices are far
away from fundamentals, and in those times the trading by arbitrageurs
has the weakest stabilizing effect.
These results are closely related to the recent studies of market liquidity
(Shleifer and Vishny 1992, Stein 1995). As in these studies, an asset here is
liquidated involuntarily at a time when the best potential buyers—other ar-
bitrageurs of this asset—have limited funds and external capital is not eas-
ily forthcoming. As a result of such ﬁre sales, the price falls even further
below fundamental value (holding the noise trader shock constant). The
implication of limited resiliency for arbitrage is that arbitrage does not
bring prices close to fundamental values in extreme circumstances.
The problem here may be even more severe than in operating ﬁrms. In
such ﬁrms, the withdrawal/liquidation of assets is limited to the amount of
debt that the ﬁrm has. In the case of arbitrage funds, unless they have a spe-
ciﬁc prohibition against withdrawals, even the equity capital can cash out
because the assets themselves are liquid, as opposed to the hard assets of an
operating ﬁrm. This difference in governance structures makes arbitrage
funds much more susceptible to costly liquidations. In addition, investors
probably understand the structure of industry downturns in operating com-
panies better than they understand why arbitrageurs have lost their money.
From this perspective as well, funds are at a greater risk of forced liquidation.
This analysis has one more interesting implication. The sensitivity to past
returns of funds under management must be higher for young, unseasoned
arbitrage (hedge) funds than for older, more established funds, with a long
reputation for performance. As a result, the established funds will be able
to earn higher returns in the long run, since they have more funds available
when prices have gotten way out of line, which is when the returns to arbi-
trage are the greatest. In contrast, new arbitrageurs lose their funds pre-
cisely when the potential returns are the highest, and hence their average
returns are lower than those of the older funds.
3. Discussion of Performance-Based Arbitrage
In our model, performance-based arbitrage, by delinking the expected re-
turn on the asset and arbitrageurs’ demand for it at t = 2, generates the
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
91

results that arbitrage is very limited. Although it is difﬁcult to deny that
PBA plays some role in the world, the question remains whether its conse-
quences are as signiﬁcant as our model suggests.
For example, one might argue that, even if funds under management de-
cline in response to poor performance, they decline with a lag. For moder-
ate price moves, arbitrageurs may be able to hold out and not liquidate
until the price recovers. Moreover, if arbitrageurs are at least somewhat di-
versiﬁed, not all of their holdings lose money at the same time, suggesting
again that they might be able to avoid forced liquidations.
Despite these objections, we continue to believe that, especially in ex-
treme circumstances, PBA has signiﬁcant consequences for prices. In many
arbitrage funds, investors have the option to withdraw at least some of
their funds at will, and are likely to do so quite rapidly if performance is
poor. To some extent, this problem is mitigated by contractual restrictions
on withdrawals, which are either temporary (as in the case of hedge funds
that do not allow investors to take the money out for one to three years) or
permanent (as in the case of closed-end funds). However, these restrictions
expose investors to being stuck with a bad fund manager for a long time,
which explains why they are not common.5 Moreover, creditors usually de-
mand immediate repayment when the value of the collateral falls below (or
even close to) the debt level, especially if they can get their money back be-
fore equity investors are able to withdraw their capital. Fund withdrawal
by creditors is likely to be as or even more important as that by equity in-
vestors in precipitating liquidations (e.g., Orange County, December 1994).
Last but not least, there may be an agency problem inside an arbitrage or-
ganization. If the boss of the organization is unsure of the ability of the sub-
ordinate taking a position, and the position loses money, the boss may
force a liquidation of the position before the uncertainty works itself out.
All these forces point to the likelihood that liquidations become important
in extreme circumstances.
Our model shows how arbitrageurs might be forced to liquidate their po-
sitions when prices move against them. One effect that our model does not
capture is that risk-averse arbitrageurs might choose to liquidate in this sit-
uation even when they don’t have to, for fear that a possible further adverse
price move will cause a really dramatic outﬂow of funds later on. Such risk
aversion by arbitrageurs, which is not modeled here, would make them
likely to liquidate rather than double-up when prices are far away from
fundamentals, making the problem we are identifying even worse. In this
way, the fear of future withdrawals might have a similar effect as with-
drawals themselves. We therefore expect that, even when arbitrageurs are
92
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY
5 According to the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) Fact Book for 1993, the total dollar
value of U.S. equities held by closed-end funds was only $20.1 billion compared to $617 billion
for (open-end) mutual funds, $1,038 billion for private pension funds (who typically have an
open-end arrangement with their outside managers), and $6,006 billion in total U.S. equities.

not fully invested in a particular arbitrage strategy, signiﬁcant losses in that
strategy will induce voluntary liquidation behavior in extreme circum-
stances that looks very much like the involuntary liquidation behavior of
the model.
The likelihood that risk-averse arbitrageurs voluntarily liquidate their
positions in extreme circumstances is even larger if arbitrageurs are
Bayesians with an imprecise posterior about the true distribution of returns
on the arbitrage strategy. In that case, a sequence of poor returns may cause
an arbitrageur to update his posterior and abandon his original strategy.
The precision of the arbitrageur’s posterior depends on the amount of past
data available to estimate the return on the arbitrage strategy and on how
much extra weight (if any) is placed on the more recent data. If arbitrageurs
(correctly or not) believe that the world is nonstationary, they will use a
shorter time series of data. This will cause their beliefs about the proﬁtabil-
ity of their strategies to be less precise (Heaton 1994), and to change more
in response to the most recent returns. This would further limit the effec-
tiveness of arbitrage in extreme circumstances.
Finally, PBA supposes that all arbitrageurs have the same sensitivity of
funds under management to performance, and that all invest in the mis-
priced asset from the beginning. In fact, arbitrageurs differ. Some may have
access to resources independent of past performance, and as a result might
be able to invest more when prices diverge further from fundamentals. The
introduction of a substantial number of such arbitrageurs can undo the ef-
fects of performance-based liquidations. If the new arbitrageurs reverse the
price decline, the already invested arbitrageurs make money and hence no
longer need to liquidate their holdings. However, after a very large noise
trader shock that we have in the model, most arbitrageurs operating in a
market are likely to ﬁnd themselves fully committed. Even if some of them
have held back initially, at some point most of them entered and even accu-
mulated substantial debts to bet against the mispricing. As the mispricing
gets deeper, withdrawals, as well as feared future withdrawals, cause them to
liquidate. Admittedly, the total amount of capital available for arbitrage is
huge, and perhaps outsiders can come in when insiders liquidate. But in prac-
tice, arbitrage markets are specialized, and arbitrageurs typically lack the ex-
perience and reputations to engage in arbitrage across multiple markets with
other people’s money. For this reason, outside capital does not come in to sta-
bilize a market. In extreme circumstances, then, PBA is likely to be important
and little fresh capital will be available to stabilize the market.
4. Empirical Implications
The model presented in this article deals with the case of pure arbitrage, in
which arbitrageurs do not need to bear any long-run fundamental risk.
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
93

While even such arbitrage must deal with problems of possible interim liqui-
dations, in most real-world situations arbitrageurs also face some long-run
fundamental risk. In other words, their positions pay off only on average,
and not with probability one. Most data that ﬁnancial economists deal with,
such as stock market data, come from markets in which informed investors
at best make advantageous bets. In this section, we describe some possible
implications of the specialized arbitrage approach for ﬁnancial markets in
which arbitrageurs bear some fundamental risk, including both systematic
and idiosyncratic risk. In particular, we show that this approach delivers
different implications than those of noise trader models with many well-
diversiﬁed arbitrageurs, such as DeLong et al. (1990).
A. Which Markets Attract Arbitrage Resources?
Casual empiricism suggests that a great deal of professional arbitrage activ-
ity, such as that of hedge funds, is concentrated in a few markets, such as
the bond market and the foreign exchange market. These also tend to be
the markets where extreme leverage, short-selling, and performance-based
fees are common. In contrast, there is much less evidence of such activity in
the stock market, either in the United States or abroad.6 Why is that so?
Which markets attract arbitrage?
Part of the answer is the ability of arbitrageurs to ascertain value with
some conﬁdence and to be able to realize it quickly. In the bond market,
calculations of relative values of different ﬁxed-income instruments are
doable, since future cash ﬂows of securities are (almost) certain. As a con-
sequence, there is almost no fundamental risk in arbitrage. In foreign
exchange markets, calculations of relative values are more difﬁcult, and
arbitrage becomes riskier. However, arbitrageurs put on their largest
trades, and appear to make the most money, when central banks attempt
to maintain nonmarket exchange rates, so it is possible to tell that prices
are not equal to fundamental values and to make quick proﬁts. In stock
markets, in contrast, both the absolute and the relative values of different
securities are much harder to calculate. As a consequence, arbitrage op-
portunities are harder to identify in stock markets than in bond and for-
eign exchange markets.
The discussion in this chapter suggests a further reason why some markets
are more attractive for arbitrage than others. Unlike the well-diversiﬁed
arbitrageurs of the conventional models, the specialized arbitrageurs of our
model might avoid extremely volatile markets if they are risk averse.
94
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY
6 Some of these activities, such as short-selling and use of leverage, are limited by government
regulations or by fund charters. Many institutions, such as mutual funds, are also restricted in
the degree to which their positions can be concentrated in a small number of securities and in
their ability to keep their positions conﬁdential.

At ﬁrst this claim seems counterintuitive, since high volatility may be as-
sociated with more frequent extreme mispricing, and hence more attractive
opportunities for arbitrage. Assume that all volatility is due to noise trader
sentiment and that the average out-performance of the arbitrageur relative
to the benchmark, typically called alpha, is roughly proportional to the stan-
dard deviation of the noise trader demand shock. This means that if the ar-
bitrageur switches to a market with twice the noise trader volatility, he also
can expect twice the alpha per $1 investment. In such a market, by cutting
his investment in half, the arbitrageur gets the same expected alpha and the
same volatility as in the ﬁrst market. He is indifferent to trading in these
two markets because alpha per unit of risk is the same and he can always
adjust his position to achieve the desired level of risk. This assumes that
outside borrowing by the arbitrageur is limited not by the total dollar value
of the investment, but by the dollar volatility of investment, which also
seems plausible. In this simpliﬁed environment, the volatility of the market
does not matter for the attractiveness of entry by the marginal arbitrageur.
High volatility does, however, make arbitrage less attractive if expected
alpha does not increase in proportion to volatility. This would be true in par-
ticular when fundamental risk is a substantial part of volatility. For example,
increasing one’s equity position in an industry that is perceived to be under-
priced carries substantial fundamental risk, and hence reduces the attractive-
ness of the trade. Another important factor determining the attractiveness of
any arbitrage concerns the horizon over which mispricing is eliminated.
While greater volatility of noise trader sentiment may increase long-run re-
turns to arbitrage, over short horizons the ratio of expected alpha to volatil-
ity may be low. Once again, this may be true for securities like equities where
the resolution of uncertainty is slow and where noise trader sentiment can
push prices a long way away from fundamentals before disconﬁrming evi-
dence becomes available. In this case, the long-run ratio of expected alpha to
volatility may be high, but the ratio over the horizon of a year may be low.
Markets in which fundamental uncertainty is high and slowly resolved are
likely to have a high long-run, but a low short-run ratio of expected alpha to
volatility. For arbitrageurs who care about interim consumption and whose
reputations are permanently affected by their performance over the next year
or two, the ratio of reward to risk over shorter horizons may be more rele-
vant. All else equal, high volatility will deter arbitrage activity.
To specialized arbitrageurs, both systematic and idiosyncratic volatility
matters. In fact, idiosyncratic volatility probably matters more, since it can-
not be hedged and arbitrageurs are not diversiﬁed. Ours is not the ﬁrst arti-
cle to emphasize that idiosyncratic risk matters in a world of information
costs and specialization.7 Merton (1987) suggests that idiosyncratic risk
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
95
7 The importance of idiosyncratic risk in our framework is a consequence of the assumed
specialization, and not of the agency problem per se. The agency problem itself is also a natu-
ral consequence of the returns to specialization.

raises expected returns when security markets are segmented and investors
must incur a ﬁxed cost to become informed and participate in each market.
Our view of risky arbitrage activity is easy to distinguish empirically from
Merton’s view of idiosyncratic risk in segmented markets. In Merton’s
model, there are no noise traders. As a result, stocks with higher idiosyn-
cratic risk are rationally priced to earn a higher expected return. In our
model, in contrast, stocks are not rationally priced, and idiosyncratic risk
deters arbitrage. In particular, some stocks with high idiosyncratic variance
may be overpriced, and this overpricing is not eliminated by arbitrage be-
cause shorting them is risky. These volatile overpriced stocks earn a lower
expected return, unlike in Merton’s model. A good example is so-called
glamour stocks, or stocks of ﬁrms with higher market prices relative to var-
ious measures of fundamentals, such as earnings or book value of assets
(see, for example, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny 1994). Since these
stocks have a higher than average variance of returns, a rational pricing
model with segmented markets would predict higher expected returns for
these stocks. In contrast, if we take the view that these stocks are over-
priced, then their expected returns are lower despite the higher variance.
The evidence supports the latter interpretation.
B. Anomalies
Recent research in ﬁnance has identiﬁed a number of so-called anomalies,
in which particular investment strategies have historically earned higher re-
turns than those justiﬁed by their systematic risk. One such anomaly, already
mentioned, is that value stocks have earned higher returns than glamour
stocks, but there are many others. Our analysis offers a different approach
to understanding these anomalies than does the standard efﬁcient markets
theory.
The efﬁcient markets approach to these anomalies is to argue that higher
returns must be compensation for higher systematic risk, and therefore the
model of asset pricing that made the evidence look anomalous must have
been misspeciﬁed. It must be possible to explain the anomalies away by
ﬁnding a covariance between the returns on the anomalous portfolio and
some fundamental factor from the intertemporal capital asset pricing
model or arbitrage pricing theory.
The efﬁcient markets approach is based on the assumption that most in-
vestors, like the economists, see the available arbitrage opportunities and
take them. Excess returns are eliminated by the action of a large number of
such investors, each with only a limited extra exposure to any one set of se-
curities. Excess returns to particular securities persist only if they are nega-
tively correlated with state variables such as the aggregate marginal utility
of consumption or wealth.
96
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY

As we argue in this article, the theoretical underpinnings of the efﬁcient
markets approach to arbitrage are based on a highly implausible assump-
tion of many diversiﬁed arbitrageurs. In reality, arbitrage resources are
heavily concentrated in the hands of a few investors that are highly spe-
cialized in trading a few assets, and are far from diversiﬁed. As a result,
these investors care about total risk, and not just systematic risk. Since the
equilibrium excess returns are determined by the trading strategies of these
investors, looking for systematic risk as the only potential determinant of
pricing is inappropriate. Idiosyncratic risk as well deters arbitrageurs,
whether it is fundamental or noise trader idiosyncratic risk.
Our essay suggests a different approach to understanding anomalies. The
ﬁrst step is to understand the source of noise trading that might generate
the mispricing in the ﬁrst place. Speciﬁcally, it is essential to examine the de-
mand of the potential noise traders, whether such demand is driven by
sentiment or institutional restrictions on holdings. The second step is to
evaluate the costs of arbitrage in the market, especially the total volatility
of arbitrage returns. For a given noise trading process, volatile securities
will exhibit greater mispricing and a higher average return to arbitrage in
equilibrium. (Other costs of arbitrage, such as transaction costs, are also
important [Pontiff 1996.])
We can illustrate the difference between the two approaches using the
value/glamour anomaly. To justify an efﬁcient markets approach to ex-
plaining this anomaly, Fama and French (1992) argue that the capital asset
pricing model is misspeciﬁed, and that high (low) book-to-market stocks
earn a high (low) return because the former have a high loading on a differ-
ent risk factor than the market. Although they don’t precisely identify a
macroeconomic factor to which the high B/M stocks are particularly ex-
posed, they argue that the portfolio of high B/M stocks is itself a proxy for
such a factor, which they call the distress factor.
Our approach instead would be to identify the pattern of investor senti-
ment responsible for this anomaly, as well as the costs of arbitrage that
would keep it from being eliminated. To begin, the glamour-value evidence
is consistent with some investors extrapolating past earnings growth of
companies and failing to recognize that extreme earnings growth is likely to
revert to the mean (Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny 1994, LaPorta 1996).
With respect to risk, the conventional arbitrage of the glamour-value anom-
aly, that is, simply taking a long position in a diversiﬁed portfolio of value
(high book-to-market) stocks, has been roughly a 60:40 proposition over a
one-year horizon. That is, the odds of outperforming the S&P 500 index
over one year have been only 60 percent, although over 5 years the supe-
rior performance has been much more likely.8 Over a short horizon, then,
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
97
8 The exact odds depend on what sample period and what universe of stocks is used.

arbitrage returns on the value portfolio are volatile. Even though this risk
may be idiosyncratic, it cannot be hedged by arbitrageurs specializing in
this segment of the market. Because of the high volatility of the hedge strat-
egy, and the relatively long horizon it relies on to secure positive returns
with a high probability, it is likely to be shunned by arbitrageurs, particu-
larly those with a short track record.
Our approach further implies that, in extreme situations, arbitrageurs try-
ing to eliminate the glamour/value mispricing might lose enough money that
they have to liquidate their positions. In this case, arbitrageurs may become
the least effective in reducing the mispricing precisely when it is the greatest.
Something along these lines occurred with the stocks of commercial banks
between 1990 and 1991. As the prices of these stocks fell sharply, many tra-
ditional value arbitrageurs invested heavily in these stocks. However, the
prices kept falling, and many value arbitrageurs lost most of their funds
under management. As a consequence, they had to liquidate their positions,
which put further pressure on the prices of banking stocks. After this period,
the returns on banking stocks have been very high, but many value funds
did not last long enough to proﬁt from this recovery.
The glamour/value anomaly is one of several that our approach might
explain. The analysis actually predicts what types of market anomalies can
persist over the long-term. These anomalies must have a high degree of un-
predictability, which makes betting against them risky for specialized arbi-
trageurs. However, unlike in the efﬁcient markets model, this risk need not
be correlated with any macroeconomic factors, and can be purely idiosyn-
cratic fundamental or noise trader risk.
Finally, the specialized arbitrage approach assumes that only a relatively
small number of specialists understand the return anomaly well enough to
exploit it. This may be questionable in the case of anomalies like the value-
glamour anomaly or the small ﬁrm anomaly about which there is now
much published work. As more investors begin to understand an anomaly,
the superior returns to the trading strategy may be diminished by the actions
of a larger number of investors who each tilt their portfolios toward the un-
derpriced assets. Alternatively, investors may become more knowledgeable
about the strategies being used and judge arbitrageurs relative to a more ac-
curate benchmark of their peers (e.g., other value managers or a value index),
thereby diminishing some of the withdrawals when an entire peer group is
performing poorly. The specialized arbitrage approach is clearly more ap-
propriate for difﬁcult-to-understand new arbitrage opportunities than it is
for well-understood anomalies (which should presumably not be anomalies
for long).
We would nonetheless argue that anomalies become understood very
slowly and that investors do not take deﬁnitive action on their information
until long after a phenomenon has been exposed to public scrutiny. The
anomaly is more easily accepted when the pattern of returns is not very
98
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY

noisy and the payoff horizon is short (such as the small ﬁrm effect in Janu-
ary). A “noisy” anomaly like the value-glamour anomaly is accepted only
slowly, even by relatively sophisticated investors.
5. Conclusion
Our chapter describes the workings of markets in which specialized arbi-
trageurs invest the capital of outside investors, and where investors use ar-
bitrageurs’ performance to ascertain their ability to invest proﬁtably. We
show that such specialized performance-based arbitrage may not be fully
effective in bringing security prices to fundamental values, especially in ex-
treme circumstances. More generally, specialized, professional arbitrageurs
may avoid extremely volatile “arbitrage” positions. Although such positions
offer attractive average returns, the volatility also exposes arbitrageurs to
risk of losses and the need to liquidate the portfolio under pressure from
the investors in the fund. The avoidance of volatility by arbitrageurs also
suggests a different approach to understanding persistent excess returns in
security prices. Speciﬁcally, we expect anomalies to reﬂect not some expo-
sure of securities to difﬁcult-to-measure macroeconomic risks, but rather,
high idiosyncratic return volatility of arbitrage trades needed to eliminate
the anomalies. In sum, this more realistic view of arbitrage can shed light
on a variety of observations in securities markets that are difﬁcult to under-
stand in more conventional models.
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
99

References
Allen, Franklin, 1990, The market for information and the origin of ﬁnancial inter-
mediation, Journal of Financial Intermediation 1, 3–30.
Allen, Franklin, and Gary Gorton, 1993, Churning bubbles, Review of Economic
Studies 60, 813–836.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, and Paul Pﬂeiderer, 1985, Delegated portfolio management,
Journal of Economic Theory 36, 1–25.
Campbell, John, and Albert Kyle, 1993, Smart money, noise trading, and stock
price behavior, Review of Economic Studies 60, 1–34.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1995, Risk taking by mutual funds as a re-
sponse to incentives, manuscript.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Robert Waldmann,
1990, Noise trader risk in ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98,
703–38.
Dow, James, and Gary Gorton, 1994, Noise trading, delegated portfolio manage-
ment, and economic welfare, NBER Working paper 4858.
Fama, Eugene, 1965, The behavior of stock market prices, Journal of Business 38,
34–105.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock re-
turns, Journal of Finance 46, 427–66.
Friedman, Milton, 1953, The case for ﬂexible exchange rates, in Essays in Positive
Economics, University of Chicago Press.
Grossman, Sanford, and Merton Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, Jour-
nal of Finance 43, 617–33.
Heaton, John, 1994, Learning and the belief in low-scaled price portfolio strategies,
1940–1993, manuscript, University of Chicago.
Ippolito, Richard, 1992, Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality: evidence
from the mutual fund industry, Journal of Law and Economics 35, 45–70.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, and Robert Vishny, 1991, Win-
dow dressing by pension fund managers, American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 81, 227–31.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1992, The structure and per-
formance of the money management industry, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity: Microeconomics, 339–91.
———, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and risk, Journal of Finance
49, 1541–78.
LaPorta, Rafael, 1996, Expectations and the cross-section of stock returns, Journal
of Finance 51, 1715–42.
Merton, Robert, 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incom-
plete information, Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1996, Costly arbitrage: Evidence from closed-end funds. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111, 1135–52.
Ross, Steven, 1976, The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory 13, 341–60.
Scharfstein, David, and Jeremy Stein, 1990, Herd behavior and investment, Ameri-
can Economic Review 80, 465–89.
100
SHLEIFER AND VISHNY

Sharpe, William, 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
conditions of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425–42.
Sharpe, William, and Gordon Alexander, 1990, Investments, 4th edition, Prentice
Hall.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1990, Equilibrium short horizons of investors
and ﬁrms, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80, 148–53.
———, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium ap-
proach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343–66.
Stein, Jeremy, 1995, Prices and trading volume in the housing market: A model with
downpayment effects, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 379–406.
Warther, Vincent, 1995, Aggregate mutual fund ﬂows and security returns, Journal
of Financial Economics 39, 209–36.
THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
101
