Chapter 6
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION AND THE EQUITY 
PREMIUM PUZZLE
Shlomo Benartzi and Richard H. Thaler
1. Introduction
There is an enormous discrepancy between the returns on stocks and ﬁxed
income securities. Since 1926 the annual real return on stocks has been
about 7 percent, while the real return on treasury bills has been less than 1
percent. As demonstrated by Mehra and Prescott (1985), the combination
of a high equity premium, a low risk-free rate, and smooth consumption is
difﬁcult to explain with plausible levels of investor risk aversion. Mehra
and Prescott estimate that investors would have to have coefﬁcients of rela-
tive risk aversion in excess of 30 to explain the historical equity premium,
whereas previous estimates and theoretical arguments suggest that the ac-
tual ﬁgure is close to 1.0. We are left with a pair of questions: Why is the
equity premium so large, or, Why is anyone willing to hold bonds?
The answer we propose in this chapter is based on two concepts from the
psychology of decision making. The ﬁrst concept is loss aversion. Loss
aversion refers to the tendency for individuals to be more sensitive to reduc-
tions in their levels of well-being than to increases. The concept plays a cen-
tral role in Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) descriptive theory of decision
making under uncertainty, prospect theory.1 In this model, utility is deﬁned
over gains and losses relative to some neutral reference point, such as the
status quo, as opposed to wealth as in expected utility theory. This utility
function has a kink at the origin, with the slope of the loss function steeper
than the gain function. The ratio of these slopes at the origin is a measure
Some of this research was conducted while Thaler was a visiting scholar at the Russell Sage
Foundation. He is grateful for its generous support. While there, he also had numerous helpful
conversations on this topic, especially with Colin Camerer and Daniel Kahneman. Olivier
Blanchard, Kenneth French, Russell Fuller, Robert Libby, Roni Michaely, Andrei Shleifer,
Amos Tversky, Jean-Luc Vila, and the participants in the Russell Sage-NBER behavioral ﬁ-
nance workshop have also provided comments. This research has also been supported by the
National Science Foundation, Grant # SES-9223358. 
1 The notion that people treat gains and losses differently has a long tradition. For example,
Swalm (1966) noted this phenomenon in a study of managerial decision making. See Libby
and Fishburn (1977) for other early references.

of loss aversion. Empirical estimates of loss aversion are typically in the
neighborhood of 2, meaning that the disutility of giving something up is
twice as great as the utility of acquiring it (Tversky and Kahneman 1991,
Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler 1990).
The second behavioral concept we employ is mental accounting (Kahne-
man and Tversky 1984, Thaler 1985). Mental accounting refers to the im-
plicit methods individuals use to code and evaluate ﬁnancial outcomes:
transactions, investments, gambles, etcetera. The aspect of mental accounting
that plays a particularly important role in this research is the dynamic aggre-
gation rules people follow. Because of the presence of loss aversion, these ag-
gregation rules are not neutral. This point can best be illustrated by example.
Consider the problem ﬁrst posed by Samuelson (1963). Samuelson asked
a colleague whether he would be willing to accept the following bet: a 50
percent chance to win $200 and a 50 percent chance to lose $100. The col-
league turned this bet down, but announced that he was happy to accept
100 such bets. This exchange provoked Samuelson into proving a theorem
showing that his colleague was irrational.2 Of more interest here is what
the colleague offered as his rationale for turning down the bet: “I won’t bet
because I would feel the $100 loss more than the $200 gain.” This senti-
ment is the intuition behind the concept of loss aversion. One simple utility
function that would capture this notion is the following:
(1)
where x is a change in wealth relative to the status quo. The role of mental
accounting is illustrated by noting that if Samuelson’s colleague had this
utility function he would turn down one bet but accept two or more as long
as he did not have to watch the bet being played out. The distribution of
outcomes created by the portfolio of two bets ($400, .25; 100, .50; −$200,
.25) yields positive expected utility with the hypothesized utility function,
though of course simple repetitions of the single bet are unattractive if eval-
uated one at a time. As this example illustrates, when decision makers are
loss averse, they will be more willing to take risks if they evaluate their per-
formance (or have their performance evaluated) infrequently.
The relevance of this argument to the equity premium puzzle can be seen
by considering the problem facing an investor with the utility function de-
ﬁned above. Suppose that the investor must choose between a risky asset that
pays an expected 7 percent per year with a standard deviation of 20 percent
U x
x
x
x
x
( )
.
,
=
≥
<
2 5
0
0
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
203
2 Speciﬁcally, the theorem says that if someone is unwilling to accept a single play of a bet
at any wealth level that could occur over the course of some number of repetitions of the 
bet (in this case, the relevant range is the colleague’s current wealth plus $20,000 to current
wealth minus $10,000) then accepting the multiple bet is inconsistent with expected utility
theory.

(like stocks) and a safe asset that pays a sure 1 percent. By the same logic that
applied to Samuelson’s colleague, the attractiveness of the risky asset will de-
pend on the time horizon of the investor. The longer the investor intends to
hold the asset, the more attractive the risky asset will appear, so long the in-
vestment is not evaluated frequently. Put another way, two factors contribute
to an investor being unwilling to bear the risks associated with holding equi-
ties, loss aversion and a short evaluation period. We refer to this combination
as myopic loss aversion.
Can myopic loss aversion explain the equity premium puzzle? Of course,
there is no way of demonstrating that one particular explanation is correct,
so in this chapter we perform various tests to determine whether our hy-
pothesis is plausible. We begin by asking what combination of loss aversion
and evaluation period would be necessary to explain the historical pattern
of returns. For our model of individual decision making, we use the recent
updated version of prospect theory (Tversky and Kahneman 1992) for
which the authors have provided parameters that can be considered as de-
scribing the representative decision maker. We then ask, how often would
an investor with this set of preferences have to evaluate his portfolio in
order to be indifferent between the historical distribution of returns on
stocks and bonds? Although we do this several ways (with both real and
nominal returns, and comparing stocks with both bonds and treasury bills),
the answers we obtain are all in the neighborhood of one year, clearly a
plausible result. We then take the one-year evaluation period as given and
ask what asset allocation (that is, what combination of stocks and bonds)
would be optimal for such an investor. Again we obtain a plausible result:
close to a 50-50 split between stocks and bonds.
2. Is the Equity Premium Puzzle Real?
Before we set out to provide an answer to an alleged puzzle, we should
probably review the evidence about whether there is indeed a puzzle to ex-
plain. We address the question in two ways. First, we ask whether the post-
1926 time period studied by Mehra and Prescott is special. Then we review
the other explanations that have been offered. As any insightful reader
might guess from the fact that we have written this essay, we conclude that
the puzzle is real and that the existing explanations come up short.
The robustness of the equity premium has been addressed by Siegel (1991,
1992) who examines the returns since 1802. He ﬁnds that real equity re-
turns have been remarkably stable. For example, over the three time periods
1802–1870, 1871–1925, and 1926–1990, real compound equity returns
were 5.7, 6.6, and 6.4 percent. However, returns on short-term government
bonds have fallen dramatically, the ﬁgures for the same three time periods
being 5.1, 3.1, and 0.5 percent. Thus, there was no equity premium in the
204
BENARTZI AND THALER

ﬁrst two-thirds of the nineteenth century (because bond returns were high),
but over the last one hundred and twenty years, stocks have had a signiﬁ-
cant edge. The equity premium does not appear to be a recent phenomenon.
The advantage of investing in stocks over the period 1876 to 1990 is doc-
umented in a rather different way by MaCurdy and Shoven (1992). They
look at the historical evidence from the point of view of a faculty member
saving for retirement. They assume that 10 percent of the hypothetical fac-
ulty member’s salary is invested each year, and ask how the faculty members
would have done investing in portfolios of all stocks or all bonds over their
working lifetimes. They ﬁnd that faculty who had allocated all of their funds
to stocks would have done better in virtually every time period, usually by a
large margin. For working lifetimes of only twenty-ﬁve years, all-bond port-
folios occasionally do better (e.g., for those retiring in a few years during the
ﬁrst half of the decades of the 1930s and 1940s) though never by more than
20 percent. In contrast, those in all-stock portfolios often do better by very
large amounts. Also, all twenty-ﬁve-year careers since 1942 would have
been better off in all stocks. For working lifetimes of forty years, there is not
a single case in which the all-bond portfolio wins (though there is a virtual
tie for those retiring in 1942), and for those retiring in the late 1950s and
early 1960s, stock accumulators would have more than seven times more
than bond accumulators. MaCurdy and Shoven conclude from their analysis
that people must be “confused about the relative safety of different invest-
ments over long horizons” (p. 12).
Could the large equity premium be consistent with rational expected utility
maximization models of economic behavior? Mehra and Prescott’s contri-
bution was to show that risk aversion alone is unlikely to yield a satisfac-
tory answer. They found that people would have to have a coefﬁcient of
relative risk aversion over 30 to explain the historical pattern of returns. In
interpreting this number, it is useful to remember that a logarithmic func-
tion has a coefﬁcient of relative risk aversion of 1.0. Also, Mankiw and
Zeldes (1991) provide the following useful calculation. Suppose that an in-
dividual is offered a gamble with a 50 percent chance of consumption of
$100,000 and a 50 percent chance of consumption of $50,000. A person
with a coefﬁcient of relative risk aversion of 30 would be indifferent be-
tween this gamble and a certain consumption of $51,209. Few people can
be this afraid of risk.
Previous efforts to provide alternative explanations for the puzzle have
been, at most, only partly successful. For example, Reitz (1988) argued
that the equity premium might be the rational response to a time-varying
risk of economic catastrophe. While this explanation has the advantage of
being untestable, it does not seem plausible. (See Mehra and Prescott’s
[1988] reply.) First of all, the data since 1926 do contain the crash of 1929,
so the catastrophe in question must be of much greater magnitude than
that. Second, the hypothetical catastrophe must affect stocks and not bonds.
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
205

For example, a bout of hyperinﬂation would presumably hurt bonds more
than stocks.
Another line of research has aimed at relaxing the link between the coef-
ﬁcient of relative risk aversion and the elasticity of intertemporal substitu-
tion, which are inverses of each other in the standard discounted expected
utility framework. For example, Weil (1989) introduces Kreps-Porteus non-
expected utility preferences, but ﬁnds that the equity premium puzzle sim-
ply becomes transformed into a “risk-free rate puzzle.” That is, the puzzle
is no longer why are stock returns so high, but rather why are T-Bill rates
so low. Epstein and Zin (1990) also adopt a nonexpected utility framework
using Yaari’s (1987) “dual” theory of choice. Yaari’s theory shares some
features with the version of prospect theory that we employ below (namely
a rank-dependent approach to probability weights) but does not have loss
aversion or short horizons, the two key components of our explanation.
Epstein and Zin ﬁnd that their model can only explain about one-third of
the observed equity premium. Similarly, Mankiw and Zeldes (1991) investi-
gate whether the homogeneity assumptions necessary to aggregate across
consumers could be the source of the puzzle. They point out that a minority
of Americans hold stock, and their consumption patterns differ from non-
stockholders. However, they conclude that while these differences can ex-
plain a part of the equity premium, a signiﬁcant puzzle remains.
An alternative type of explanation is suggested by Constantinides (1990).
He proposes a habit-formation model in which the utility of consumption
is assumed to depend on past levels of consumption. Speciﬁcally, consumers
are assumed to be averse to reductions in their level of consumption. Con-
stantinides shows that this type of model can explain the equity premium
puzzle. However, Ferson and Constantinides (1991) ﬁnd that while the
habit-formation speciﬁcation improves the ability of the model to explain
the intertemporal dynamics of returns, it does not help the model explain
the differences in average returns across assets.
While Constantinides is on the right track in stressing an asymmetry be-
tween gains and losses, we feel that his model does not quite capture the
right behavioral intuitions. The problem is that the link between stock re-
turns and consumption is quite tenuous. The vast majority of Americans
hold no stocks outside their pension wealth. Furthermore, most pensions
are of the deﬁned beneﬁt variety, meaning that a fall in stock prices is in-
consequential to the pension beneﬁciaries. Indeed, most of the stock market
is owned by three groups of investors: pension funds, endowments, and
very wealthy individuals. It is hard to see why the habit-formation model
should apply to these investors.3
206
BENARTZI AND THALER
3 We stress the word “should” in the previous sentence. Firms may adopt accounting rules
with regard to their pension wealth that create a sensitivity to short-run ﬂuctuations in pen-
sion fund assets, and foundations may have spending rules that produce a similar effect. An in-
vestigation of this issue is presented below.

3. Prospect Theory and Loss Aversion
The problem with the habit-formation explanation is the stress it places on
consumption. The way we incorporate Constantinides’s intuition about be-
havior into preferences is to assume that investors have preferences over re-
turns, per se, rather than over the consumption proﬁle that the returns help
provide. Speciﬁcally, we use Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979, 1992) prospect
theory in which utility is deﬁned over gains and losses (i.e., returns) rather
than levels of wealth. Speciﬁcally, they propose a value function of the fol-
lowing form:
(2)
where λ is the coefﬁcient of loss aversion.4 They have estimated α and β to
be 0.88 and λ to be 2.25. Notice that the notion of loss aversion captures
the same intuition that Constantinides used, namely that reductions are
painful.5
The “prospective utility” of a gamble, G, which pays off xi with proba-
bility pi is given by
(3)
where πi is the decision weight associated assigned to outcome i. In the
original version of prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979), πi is a
simple nonlinear transform of pi. In the cumulative version of the theory
(Tversky and Kahneman 1992), as in other rank-dependent models, one
transforms cumulative rather than individual probabilities. Consequently,
the decision weight πi depends on the cumulative distribution of the gam-
ble, not only on pi. More speciﬁcally, let w denote the nonlinear transform
of the cumulative distribution of G, let Pi be the probability of obtaining an
outcome that is at least as good as xi, and let P*i be the probability of ob-
taining an outcome that is strictly better than xi. Then the decision weight
attached to xi is πi = w(Pi) −w(P*i). (This procedure is applied separately
for gains and losses.)
Tversky and Kahneman have suggested the following one-parameter ap-
proximation:
(4)
w p
p
p
p
( )
(
(
) ) /
=
+
−
γ
γ
γ
γ
1
1
 V G
x
i
i
( )
(
),
= ∑π υ
v x
x
x
x
x
( )
(
)
if
if
,
=
−
−
≥
<
α
β
λ
0
0
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
207
4 Note that since x is a change it is measured as the difference in wealth with respect to the
last time wealth was measured, so the status quo is moving over time.
5 This value of λ is consistent with other measures of loss aversion estimated in very differ-
ent contexts. For example, Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1990) (KKT) investigate the im-
portance of loss aversion in a purely deterministic context. In one experiment half of a group

and estimated γ to be 0.61 in the domain of gains and 0.69 in the domain
of losses.
As discussed in the introduction, the use of prospect theory must be ac-
companied by a speciﬁcation of frequency that returns are evaluated. We
refer to the length of time over which an investor aggregates returns as the
evaluation period. This is not, in any way, to be confused with the planning
horizon of the investor. A young investor, for example, might be saving for
retirement thirty years off in the future, but nevertheless experience the util-
ity associated with the gains and losses of his investment every quarter
when he opens a letter from his mutual fund. In this case his horizon is
thirty years but his evaluation period is three months.
That said, in terms of the model an investor with an evaluation period of
one year behaves very much as if he had a planning horizon of one year. To
see this, compare two investors. Mr. X receives a bonus every year on Janu-
ary 1st and invests the money to spend on a Christmas vacation the follow-
ing year. Both his planning horizon and evaluation period are one year. Ms.
Y has received a bonus and wishes to invest it toward her retirement thirty
years away. She evaluates her portfolio annually. Thus, she has a planning
horizon of thirty years but a one-year evaluation period. Though X and Y
have rather different problems, in terms of the model they will behave ap-
proximately the same way. The reason for this is that in prospect theory,
the carriers of utility are assumed to be changes in wealth, or returns, and
the effect of the level of wealth is assumed to be second order. Therefore,
every year Y will solve her asset allocation problem by choosing the portfo-
lio that maximizes her prospective utility one year away, just as X does.6 In
this sense, when we estimate the evaluation period of investors below, we
are also estimating their implicit time horizons.
Of course, in a model with loss aversion, the more often an investor eval-
uates his portfolio, or the shorter his horizon, the less attractive he will ﬁnd
a high mean, high risk investment such as stocks. This is in contrast to the
well-known results of Merton (1969) and Samuelson (1969). They investi-
gate the following question. Suppose that an investor has to choose between
stocks and bonds over some ﬁxed horizon of length T. How should the al-
location change as the horizon increases? There is a strong intuition that a
rational risk-averse investor would decrease the proportion of his assets in
208
BENARTZI AND THALER
of Cornell students are given a Cornell insignia coffee mug, while the other half of the subjects
are not given a mug. Then, markets are conducted for the mugs in which mug owners can sell
their mug while the nonowners can buy one. KKT found that the reservation prices for two
groups were signiﬁcantly different. Speciﬁcally, the median reservation price of the sellers was
roughly 2.5 times the median reservation price of the buyers.
6 An important potential qualiﬁcation is if recent gains or losses inﬂuence subsequent deci-
sions. For example, Thaler and Johnson (1990) ﬁnd evidence for a “house money effect.”
Namely, people who have just won some money exhibit less loss aversion toward gambles that
do not risk their entire recent winnings.

stocks as he nears retirement and T approaches zero. The intuition comes
from the notion that when T is large, the probability that the return on
stocks will exceed the return on bonds approaches 1.0, while over short
horizons there can be substantial shortfalls from stock investments. How-
ever, Merton and Samuelson show that this intuition is wrong. Speciﬁcally,
they prove that as long as the returns on stocks and bonds are a random
walk,7 a risk-averse investor with utility function that displays constant rel-
ative risk in aversion (e.g., a logarithmic or power function) should choose
the same allocation for any time horizon. An investor who wants mostly
stocks in his portfolio at age thirty-ﬁve should still want the same alloca-
tion at age sixty-four. Without questioning the normative validity of Mer-
ton and Samuelson’s conclusions, we offer a model that can reveal why
most investors ﬁnd this result extremely counterintuitive.
4. How Often Are Portfolios Evaluated?
Mehra and Prescott asked the question, How risk averse would the repre-
sentative investor have to be to explain the historical equity premium? We
ask a different question. If investors have prospect theory preferences, how
often would they have to evaluate their portfolios to explain the equity pre-
mium? We pose the question two ways. First, What evaluation period would
make investors indifferent between holding all their assets in stocks or
bonds? We then take this evaluation period and ask a question with more
theoretical justiﬁcation. For an investor with this evaluation period, what
combination of stocks and bonds would maximize prospective utility?
We use simulations to answer both questions. The method is to draw
samples from the historical (1926–1990) monthly returns on stocks, bonds,
and treasury bills provided by CRSP. For the ﬁrst exercise we then compute
the prospective utility of holding stocks, bonds, and T-Bills for evaluation
periods starting at one month and then increasing one month at a time.
The simulations are conducted as follows. First, distributions of returns
are generated for various time horizons by drawing 100,000 n-month re-
turns (with replacement) from the CRSP time series.8 The returns are then
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
209
7 If stock returns are instead mean reverting, then the intuitive result that stocks are more
attractive to investors with long horizons holds.
8 Our method, by construction, removes any serial correlation in asset price returns. Since
some research does find mean reversion in stock prices over long horizons, some readers
have worried about whether our results are affected by this. This should not be a concern.
The time horizons we investigate in the simulations are relatively short (in the neighborhood
of one year) and at short horizons there is only trivial mean reversion. For example, Fama and
French (1988) regress returns on the value weighted index in year t on returns in year t −1
and estimate the slope coefﬁcient to be −0.03. The fact that there is substantial mean reversion
at longer horizons (the same coefﬁcient at three years is −0.25) only underscores the puzzle of
the equity premium since mean reversion reduces the risk to a long-term investor.

ranked, from best to worst, and the return is computed at twenty intervals
along the cumulative distribution.9 (This is done to accommodate the cu-
mulative or rank-dependent formulation of prospect theory.) Using these
data, it is possible to compute the prospective utility of the given asset for
the speciﬁed holding period.
We have done this simulation four different ways. The CRSP stock index
is compared both with treasury bill returns and with ﬁve-year bond returns,
and these comparisons are done both in real and nominal terms. While we
have done all four simulations for the sake of completeness, and to give the
reader the opportunity to examine the robustness of the method, we feel
that the most weight should be assigned to the comparison between stocks
and bonds in nominal terms. We prefer bonds to T-Bills because we think
that for long-term investors these are the closest substitutes. We prefer
nominal to real for two reasons. First, returns are usually reported in nom-
inal dollars. Even when inﬂation-adjusted returns are calculated, it is the
nominal returns that are given prominence in most annual reports. There-
fore, in a descriptive model, nominal returns should be the assumed units of
account. Second, the simulations reveal that if investors were thinking in
real dollars they would not be willing to hold treasury bills over any evalu-
ation period as they always yield negative prospective utility.10
The results for the stock and bond comparisons are presented in ﬁgure 6.1,
Panels A and B. The lines show the prospective value of the portfolio at dif-
ferent evaluation periods. The point where the curves cross is the evalua-
tion period at which stocks and bonds are equally attractive. For nominal
returns, the equilibrium evaluation period is about thirteen months, while
for real returns it is between ten and eleven months.11
How should these results be interpreted? Obviously, there is no single
evaluation period that applies to every investor. Indeed, even a single in-
vestor may employ a combination of evaluation periods, with casual evalu-
ations every quarter, a more serious evaluation annually, and evaluations
associated with long-term planning every few years. Nevertheless, if one
had to pick a single most plausible length for the evaluation period, one
year might well be it. Individual investors ﬁle taxes annually, receive their
most comprehensive reports from their brokers, mutual funds, and retire-
ment accounts once a year, and institutional investors also take the annual
210
BENARTZI AND THALER
9 We have also tried dividing the outcomes into 100 intervals instead of 20, and the results
are substantially the same.
10 This suggests a solution to the “risk-free rate puzzle” employing a combination of fram-
ing and money illusion. In nominal terms, treasury bills offer the illusion of a sure gain that is
very attractive to prospect theory investors, while in real terms treasury bills offer a combina-
tion of barely positive mean returns and a substantial risk of a loss—not an attractive combi-
nation.
11 The equilibrium evaluation period between stocks and T-Bills is about one month less in
both real and nominal dollars.

reports most seriously. As a possible evaluation period, one year is at least
highly plausible.
There are two reasonable questions to ask about these results. Which as-
pects of prospect theory drive the results, and how sensitive are the results
to alternative speciﬁcations? The answer to the ﬁrst question is that loss
aversion is the main determinant of the outcomes. The speciﬁc functional
forms of the value function and weighting functions are not critical. For ex-
ample, if the weighting function is replaced by actual probabilities, the
evaluation period for which bonds have the same prospective utility as
stocks falls from eleven–twelve months to ten months. Similarly, if actual
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
211
 	 
  	   
    
 



	  
	  

 



    
   
  
  
  
  
 	 
  	   
    
  



	  
	  

 



  
  
  
  
  
  
   
Figure 6.1. Prospective utility as function of the evaluation period.

probabilities are used and the value function is replaced by a piecewise 
linear form with a loss aversion factor of 2.25 (that is, v(x) = x, x ≥0,
v(x) = 2.25 x, x < 0), then the equilibrium evaluation period is eight
months. With this model (piecewise linear value function and linear proba-
bilities) a twelve-month evaluation period is consistent with a loss aversion
factor of 2.77.
The previous results can be criticized on the grounds that investors form
portfolios rather than choose between all bonds or all stocks. Therefore,
we perform a second simulation exercise that is grounded in an underlying 
optimization problem. We use this as a reliability check on the previous 
results. Suppose that an investor is maximizing prospective utility with a
one-year horizon. What mix of stocks and bonds would be optimal? We in-
vestigate this question as follows. We compute the prospective utility of
each portfolio mix between 100 percent bonds and 100 percent stocks, in
10 percent increments. The results are shown in ﬁgure 6.2, using nominal
returns. (Again, the results for real returns are similar.) As the ﬁgure shows,
portfolios between about 30 percent and 55 percent stocks all yield ap-
proximately the same prospective value. Once again, this result is roughly
consistent with observed behavior. For example, Greenwich Associates re-
ports that institutions (primarily pensions funds and endowments) invest,
on average, 47 percent of the assets on bonds and 53 percent in stocks. For
individuals, consider the participants in TIAA-CREF, the deﬁned contribu-
tion retirement plan at many universities, and the largest of its kind in the
United States. The most frequent allocation between CREF (stocks) and
TIAA (mostly bonds) is 50-50, with the average allocation to stocks below
50 percent.12
5. Myopia and the Magnitude of the Equity Premium
According to our theory, the equity premium is produced by a combination
of loss aversion and frequent evaluations. Loss aversion plays the role of
risk aversion in standard models, and can be considered a fact of life (or,
perhaps, a fact of preferences). In contrast, the frequency of evaluations is a
212
BENARTZI AND THALER
12 See MaCurdy and Shoven (1992) for illustrative data. It is interesting to note that aver-
age allocation of new contributions is now and has always been more than half in TIAA, but
the size of the two funds is now about equal because of the higher growth rate of CREF. As
Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) report, the typical TIAA-CREF participant makes one asset
allocation decision and never changes it. This does not seem consistent with any coherent op-
timization. Consider a contributor who has been dividing funds equally between TIAA and
CREF, and now has two-thirds of his assets in CREF because of higher growth. If he likes the
2:1 ratio of stocks to bonds consistent with his asset holdings, why not change the ﬂow of new
funds? But if a 50-50 allocation is optimal, then why not switch some of the existing CREF
holdings into TIAA (which can be done costlessly)?

policy choice that presumably could be altered, at least in principle. Fur-
thermore, as the charts in ﬁgure 6.1 show, stocks become more attractive as
the evaluation period increases. This observation leads to the natural ques-
tion: By how much would the equilibrium equity premium fall if the evalu-
ation period increased?
Figure 6.3 shows the results of an analysis of this issue using real returns
on stocks, and the real returns on ﬁve-year bonds as the comparison asset.
With the parameters we have been using, the actual equity premium in our
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
213
 	 
  	  
  
       	      
  
   
   
  
      
   
 
 Figure 6.2. Prospective utility as function of asset allocation (one-year evaluation
period).
  	
 
 
  
  
 

















Figure 6.3. Implied equity premium as function of the evaluation period.

data (6.5 percent per year) is consistent with an evaluation period of one
year. If the evaluation period were two years, the equity premium would
fall to 4.65 percent. For ﬁve, ten, and twenty-year evaluation periods, the
corresponding ﬁgures are 3.0 percent, 2.0 percent, and 1.4 percent. One
way to think about these results is that for someone with a twenty-year in-
vestment horizon, the psychic costs of evaluating the portfolio annually are
5.1 percent per year! That is, someone with a twenty-year horizon would
be indifferent between stocks and bonds if the equity premium were only
1.4 percent, and the remaining 5.1 percent is potential rents payable to
those who are able to resist the temptation to count their money often. In a
sense, 5.1 percent is the price of excessive vigilance.13
6. Do Organizations Display Myopic Loss Aversion?
There is a possible objection to our explanation in that it has been based on
a model of individual decision making, while the bulk of the assets we are
concerned with are held by organizations, in particular pension funds and
endowments. This is a reasonable concern, and our response should help
indicate the way we interpret our explanation.
As we stressed above, the key components of our explanation are loss
aversion and frequent evaluations. While we have used a speciﬁc parame-
terization of cumulative prospect theory in our simulation tests, we did so
because we felt that it provided a helpful discipline. We did not allow our-
selves the luxury of selecting the parameters that would ﬁt the data best.
That said, it remains true that almost any model with loss aversion and fre-
quent evaluations will go a long way toward explaining the equity pre-
mium puzzle, so the right question to ask about organizations is whether
they display these traits.
A. Pension Funds
Consider ﬁrst the important case of deﬁned beneﬁt pension funds. In this,
this most common type of pension plan, the ﬁrm promises each vested
worker a pension beneﬁt that is typically a function of ﬁnal salary and
years of service. For these plans, the ﬁrm, not the employees, is the residual
claimant. If the assets in the plan earn a high return, the ﬁrm can make
smaller contributions to the fund in future years, whereas if the assets do
not earn a high enough return, the ﬁrm’s contribution rate will have to in-
crease to satisfy funding regulations.
214
BENARTZI AND THALER
13 Blanchard (1993) has recently argued that the equity premium has fallen. If so, then
our interpretation of his result would be that the length of the average evaluation period has
increased.

Although asset allocations vary across ﬁrms, a common allocation is
about 60 percent stocks and 40 percent bonds and treasury bills. Given the
historical equity premium, and the fact that pension funds have essentially
an inﬁnite time horizon, it is a bit puzzling why pension funds do not invest
a higher proportion in stocks.14 We argue that myopic loss aversion offers an
explanation. In this context the myopic loss aversion is produced by an
agency problem.
While the pension fund is indeed likely to exist as long as the company
remains in business (barring a plan termination), the pension fund manager
(often the corporate treasurer, chief ﬁnancial ofﬁcer [CFO], or staff member
who reports to the CFO) does not expect to be in this job forever. He or she
will have to make regular reports on the funding level of the pension plan
and the returns on the funds assets. This short horizon creates a conﬂict of
interest between the pension fund manager and the stockholders.15 This
view appears to be shared by two prominent Wall Street advisors. In Lei-
bowitz and Langetieg (1989) the authors make numerous calculations re-
garding the long-term results of various asset allocation decisions. They
conclude as follows:
If we limit our choice to “stocks” and “bonds” as represented by the
S&P 500 and the BIG Index, then under virtually any reasonable set of
assumptions, stocks will almost surely outperform bonds as the invest-
ment horizon is extended to inﬁnity. Unfortunately, most of us do not
have an inﬁnite period of time to work out near term losses. Most in-
vestors and investment managers set personal investment goals that
must be achieved in time frames of 3 to 5 years.” (p. 14)
Also, when discussing simulation results for twenty-year horizons under so-
called favorable assumptions (e.g., that the historic equity premium and
mean reversion in equity returns will continue) they offer the following re-
marks. “[Our analysis] shows that, under ‘favorable’ assumptions, the
stock/bond [return] ratio will exceed 100% most of the time. However, for
investors who must account for near term losses, these long-run results may
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
215
14 See Black (1980) for a different point of view. He argues that pension funds should be in-
vested entirely in bonds because of a tax arbitrage opportunity. However, his position rests on
the efﬁcient market premise that there is no equity premium puzzle; that is, the return on
stocks is just enough to compensate for the risk.
15 The importance of short horizons in ﬁnancial contexts is stressed by Shleifer and Vishny
(1990). For a good description of the agency problems in deﬁned-beneﬁt pension plans see
Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992). Our agency explanation of myopic loss aversion is
very much in the same spirit of the one they offer to explain a different puzzle: why the portion
of the pension fund that is invested in equities is invested so poorly. The equity component of
pension plans systematically underperforms market benchmarks such as the S&P 500. Al-
though pension fund managers eschew index funds, they often inadvertently achieve an inferior
version of an index fund by diversifying across money managers who employ different styles.
The portfolio of money managers is worse on two counts: lower performance and higher fees.

have little signiﬁcance” (p. 15, emphasis added). In other words, agency
costs produce myopic loss aversion.16
B. Foundation and University Endowments
Another important group of institutional investors is endowment funds
held by universities and foundations. Once again, an even split between
stocks and bonds is common, although the endowment funds are explicitly
treated as perpetuities. In this case, however, there appear to be two causes
for the myopic loss aversion. First, there are agency problems similar to
those for pension plans. Consider a foundation with 50 percent of its assets
invested in stocks. Suppose that the president of the foundation wanted to
increase the allocation to 100 percent, arguing that with an inﬁnite hori-
zon, stocks are almost certain to outperform bonds. Again the president
will face the problem that his horizon is distinctly ﬁnite as are the horizons
of his board members. In fact, there is really no one who represents the in-
terests of the foundation’s potential beneﬁciaries in the twenty-second cen-
tury. This is an agency problem without a principal!
An equally important source of myopic loss aversion comes from the
spending rules used by most universities and foundations. A typical rule
speciﬁes that the organization can spend x percent of an n-year moving av-
erage of the value of the endowment, where n is typically ﬁve or less.17 Al-
though the purpose of such moving averages is to smooth out the impact of
stock market ﬂuctuations, a sudden drop or a long bear market can have a
pronounced effect on spending. The institution is forced to choose between
the competing goals of maximizing the present value of spending over an
inﬁnite horizon, and maintaining a steady operating budget. The fact that
stocks have outperformed bonds over every twenty-year period in history is
cold comfort after a decade of zero nominal returns, an experience most in-
stitutions still remember.
There is an important difference between universities (and operating
foundations) and individuals saving for retirement. For an individual sav-
ing for retirement, it can be argued that the only thing she should care
about is the size of the annuity that can be purchased at retirement, that is,
terminal wealth. Transitory ﬂuctuations impose only psychic costs. For uni-
versities and operating foundations, however, there is both a psychic cost to
seeing the value of the endowment fall and the very real cost of cutting
back programs if there is a cash ﬂow reduction for a period of years. This
in no way diminishes the force of the myopic loss aversion explanation for
the equity premium. If anything, the argument is strengthened by the exis-
216
BENARTZI AND THALER
16 Of course, many observers have accused American ﬁrms of myopia. The pension asset al-
location decision may be a useful domain for measuring ﬁrms’ horizons.
17 Foundations also have minimum spending rules that they have to obey to retain their tax-
free status.

tence of economic factors contributing to loss aversion. Nevertheless, insti-
tutions could probably do better at structuring their spending rules to facil-
itate a higher exposure to risky assets.
7. Conclusions
The equity premium is a puzzle within the standard expected utility-
maximizing paradigm. As Mehra and Prescott forcefully argue, it seems im-
possible to reconcile the high rates of return on stocks with the very low
risk-free rate. How can investors be extremely unwilling to accept varia-
tions in returns, as the equity premium implies, and yet be willing to delay
consumption to earn a measly 1 percent per year? Our solution to the puz-
zle is to combine a high sensitivity to losses with a prudent tendency to fre-
quently monitor one’s wealth. The former tendency shifts the domain of the
utility function from consumption to returns, and the latter makes people
demand a large premium to accept return variability. In our model in-
vestors are unwilling to accept return variability even if the short-run re-
turns have no effect on consumption.
In their reply to Reitz, Mehra, and Prescott (1988) offer the following
guidelines for what they think would constitute a solution to the equity pre-
mium puzzle.
Perhaps the introduction of some other preference structure will do the
job. . . . For such efforts to be successful, though, they must convince
the profession that the proposed alternative preference structure is
more useful than the now-standard one for organizing and interpreting
not only these observations on average asset returns, but also other ob-
servations in growth theory, business cycle theory, labor market behav-
ior, and so on. (p. 134)
While prospect theory has not yet been applied in all the contexts Mehra
and Prescott cite, it has been extensively tested and supported in the study
of decision making under uncertainty, and loss aversion appears to offer
promise as a component of an explanation for unemployment18 and for un-
derstanding the outcomes in many legal contexts.19 For this reason, we be-
lieve that myopic loss aversion deserves consideration as a possible solution
to Mehra and Prescott’s fascinating puzzle.
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
217
18 For example, Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1988) ﬁnd that perceptions of fairness in
labor market contexts are strongly inﬂuenced by whether actions are framed as imposing
losses or reducing gains.
19 See Hovenkamp (1991).

Appendix: Experimental Tests
In our paper on myopic loss aversion reproduced here, we used the concept
to try to “explain” the equity premium puzzle. We did so by estimating the
evaluation period that would make investors indifferent between stocks
and bonds. The answer was one year. In that paper, we did not actually
“test” our explanation other than by asking whether this evaluation period
seemed plausible. Since this paper has been published, researchers have of-
fered several experimental tests of myopic loss aversion, which we summa-
rize in this appendix.
Thaler et al. (1997) explored the separate effects of myopia and loss
aversion in a setting that allows for learning. In particular, they asked eighty
undergraduate students to allocate an endowment between a generic stock
fund and a generic bond fund. The two funds, however, were unlabeled,
and the subjects had to learn about the risk and return proﬁles of the funds
through a simulated twenty-ﬁve-years of experience. The experiment in-
cluded four conditions, and the subjects were randomly assigned to one of
the conditions. In the “monthly” condition, the subjects made two hundred
investment decisions, each corresponding to (approximately) a one-month
period. In the “yearly condition,” the subjects made twenty-ﬁve annual de-
cisions, and in the “ﬁve-yearly” condition, they made ﬁve decisions. There
was also another condition, where losses were eliminated by introducing a
high level of inﬂation. However, the speciﬁc rate of inﬂation was unknown
to the subjects, so they were induced to think in nominal terms. Hereafter,
we refer to this condition as the “inﬂated monthly” condition, since it was
based on the monthly data. At the end of the twenty-ﬁve-years of learning
experience, the subjects made a ﬁnal allocation decision for the following
ﬁfty years.
The results are consistent with myopic behavior. In particular, as the ag-
gregation period lengthens, so does the allocation to stocks. The ﬁnal allo-
cations to stocks in the monthly, yearly, and ﬁve-yearly conditions are 40.9
percent, 69.6 percent, and 66.2 percent, respectively. The small difference
between the yearly and ﬁve-yearly allocations is in the wrong direction and
could be attributed to the limited learning opportunities in the ﬁve-yearly
condition (ﬁve trials). The results are also consistent with loss aversion. The
ﬁnal allocation to stocks in the inﬂated monthly condition is 72.4 percent,
versus 40.9 percent in the noninﬂated monthly condition.
Gneezy and Potters (1997) provided additional tests showing that the
thought of what the aggregate data looks like could by itself reduce myopic
behavior. In particular, they presented eighty-three undergraduate students
with a sequence of three independent lotteries. Each of the lotteries had a
probability of two-thirds to lose the amount invested, and a probability of
218
BENARTZI AND THALER

one-third to win two and half times the amount invested. The subjects were
provided an endowment, and they had to decide how much to invest in the
above lottery. Half of the subjects played twelve individual rounds, whereas
the other half played them in blocks of three. Those playing in blocks of three
were provided feedback at the end of the third, sixth, ninth, and twelve
rounds. The feedback included a side-by-side display of the three individual
outcomes, though the sum of the three amounts was not displayed. Again,
the results are consistent with myopic loss aversion. Those playing the bets
in blocks of three took more risk, and as a result, earned higher returns. The
difference in allocations to the lottery varied between 10 and 20 percent,
depending on the speciﬁc rounds.
We have also conducted several experiments on myopic loss aversion
(Benartzi and Thaler 1999). In one of our tests, we gave thirty-nine under-
graduate students a choice between a certain amount and multiple plays of
a gamble. The subjects were presented with three gambles that had differ-
ent payoffs if played once, but virtually the same distribution of ﬁnal pay-
offs if played repeatedly. The speciﬁc gambles are displayed below and the
certain amount was $3. Whereas a single play of the ﬁrst gamble entails a
loss ﬁfty times greater than that of the third gamble, the ﬁnal distribution
of payoffs at the end of the multiple plays are virtually the same for the
three gambles.
1. 90% chance to win $0.10 
10% chance to lose $0.50 
Played 150 times.
2. 50% chance to win $0.25 
50% chance to lose $0.15 
Played 120 times.
3. 10% chance to win $0.75 
90% chance to lose $0.01 
Played 90 times.
Traditional economic analysis predicts that the attractiveness of the three
gambles is approximately the same, because they all have the same distribu-
tion of ﬁnal payoffs. Myopic loss aversion, however, predicts that the char-
acteristics of the single play of the gambles make a difference. In particular,
myopic loss aversion predicts that the potential loss of the single play has
an important role in decision making. The results are consistent with my-
opic loss aversion. Only 49 percent of the subjects preferred the ﬁrst gam-
ble to the certain amount, in which they faced a potential loss of $0.50 on
each trial. In comparison, 64 percent and 75 percent preferred the second
and third gambles to the certain amount, where the potential loss per trial
was $0.15 and a penny, respectively. We should highlight that loss aversion
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
219

by itself cannot explain the results, since the distribution of ﬁnal payoffs is
virtually the same for the three gambles. It is actually the combination of
loss aversion and myopia that describes the observed behavior.
The subjects were also presented with the explicit distribution of ﬁnal out-
comes that the three gambles entail. Once the subjects viewed the distribution
of ﬁnal outcomes, virtually all of them (95%) preferred the gamble to the cer-
tain amount. Hence, the subjects found the gambles much more attractive
when the data was aggregated on their behalf. This result suggests that, left
alone, the subjects overestimated the likelihood of losing money. We tested
this hypothesis directly, by asking subjects to estimate the probability of los-
ing money after all the one hundred and ﬁfty trials of the ﬁrst gamble were
completed. The average (median) answer was 0.237 (0.150), whereas the cor-
rect answer is 0.003. The gross overstatement of the chances to lose money is
consistent with myopic loss aversion. However, it is in complete contrast to
what Samuelson called “the fallacy of large numbers.” We elaborate on this
issue and discuss new experimental data below.
As you might recall, Samuelson offered his colleague the following bet:
heads you win $200, tails you lose $100. Samuelson’s colleague rejected a
single play of the bet, but expressed a desire to play it 100 times. Samuelson
proved that this combination of responses is inconsistent, and accused his
colleague of the fallacy of large numbers. Speciﬁcally, Samuelson argued
that his colleague did not understand that the variance of ﬁnal outcomes
grows proportionally to the number of plays. If Samuelson’s colleague was
typical, then most people would prefer the series of plays to the single play.
In addition, once the explicit distribution is presented, people are expected
to change their mind and reject the series of bets. We found just the oppo-
site. People tend to accept the single bet, but then reject the series of bets.
Furthermore, once the explicit distribution of the series is presented, virtu-
ally everybody accepts it. We conclude that Samuelson’s colleague is atypi-
cal. Most people, we believe, tend to follow the “fallacy of small numbers.”
Not only do they not understand that the variance of ﬁnal outcomes in-
creases proportionally to the number of plays, they often think it grows
much faster than the number of plays.
We end our tests by turning to an important implication of myopic loss
aversion, which relates to the worldwide trend toward investor autonomy.
In the United States, for instance, people are responsible for managing their
retirement funds through 401(k), among other, deﬁned contribution saving
plans. One interesting question is whether the frequency at which perfor-
mance is evaluated inﬂuences investment choices. In particular, myopic loss
aversion predicts that frequent reporting will accentuate the perceived risk
of stocks, because the likelihood of stocks experiencing a loss in the short-
term is relatively high.
To test the role of myopic loss aversion in retirement saving plans, we
presented USC staff employees with the distribution of either the historical
220
BENARTZI AND THALER

annual returns on stocks and bonds or simulated thirty-year returns on the
same asset classes. The two investment choices, stocks and bonds, were un-
labeled and the subjects were asked to allocate their retirement contribu-
tions between the two funds. The results are consistent with myopic loss
aversion. Those viewing the annual returns allocated, on average, 41 per-
cent to stocks, whereas those viewing the long-term returns allocated 82
percent. The difference in the median allocations was even larger: 40 per-
cent versus 90 percent. It is quite disturbing that alternative presentation
modes of the “same” data could yield dramatic differences in investment
choices. The results raise difﬁcult questions for employers and regulators
about the proper frequency of performance reporting.
In this appendix, we reviewed several tests of myopic loss aversion, all of
which are supportive of the concept. The evidence on myopic loss aversion
is consistent with a more general phenomenon Kahneman and Lovallo
(1993) labeled “narrow framing” (i.e., thinking about gambles or invest-
ments one at a time rather than aggregating them into a portfolio). Put dif-
ferently, aggregation could reduce aggravation. Unfortunately, there is very
little we know about the way people set their evaluation frequency, or more
generally, the way people deﬁne frames. These issues are promising avenues
for future research.
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
221

References
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 1995, Myopic Loss Aversion and the Eq-
uity Premium Puzzle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110.1, 73–92.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 1999, Risk Aversion or Myopia? Choices
in Repeated Gambles and Retirement Investments, Management Science 45.3,
364–81.
Black, Fischer, 1980, The Tax Consequences of Long-Run Pension Policy, Financial
Analysts Journal 36, 21–28.
Blanchard, Olivier, 1993, Movements in the Equity Premium, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 519–43.
Constantinides, George M., 1990, Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity
Premium Puzzle, Journal of Political Economy 98, 519–43.
Epstein, L. G., and S. E. Zin, 1990, ‘First Order’ Risk Aversion and the Equity Pre-
mium Puzzle, Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 387–407.
Ferson, Wayne, and George M. Constantinides, 1991, Habit Persistence and Dura-
bility in Aggregate Consumption: Empirical Tests, Journal of Financial Econom-
ics 39, 199–240.
Gneezy, Uri, and an Potters, 1997, An Experiment on Risk Taking and Evaluation
Periods, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 631–45.
Hovencamp, H., 1991, Legal Policy and the Endowment Effect, Journal of Legal
Studies 20, 225–47.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, 1986, Fairness as a Con-
straint on Proﬁt Seeking: Entitlements in the Market, American Economic Re-
view 76, 728–41.
———, 1990, Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theo-
rem, Journal of Political Economy 98, 1325–48.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Dan Lovallo, 1993, Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A
Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking, Management Science 39, 17–31.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of De-
cision Under Risk, Econometrica 47, 263–91.
———, 1984, Choices Values and Frames, American Psychologist 39, 341–50.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1992, The Structure and
Performance of the Money Management Industry, Brookings Papers: Microeco-
nomics, 339–91.
Leibowitz, M. L., and T. C. Langetieg, 1989, Shortfall Risks and the Asset Alloca-
tion Decision: A Simulation Analysis of Stock and Bond Risk Proﬁles, Salomon
Brothers Research Department.
Libby, Robert, and Peter C. Fishburn, 1977, Behavioral Models of Risk Taking in
Business, Journal of Accounting Research 15, 272–92.
MaCurdy, Thomas, and John Shoven, 1992, Accumulating Pension Wealth with
Stocks and Bonds, Stanford University Working Paper.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and S. P. Zeldes, 1991, The Consumption of Stockholders
and Nonstockholders, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97–112.
Mehra, R., and Edward C. Prescott, 1985, The Equity Premium Puzzle, Journal of
Monetary Economics 15, 145–61.
222
BENARTZI AND THALER

———, 1988, The Equity Premium Puzzle: A Solution? Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics 21,  133–36.
Merton, Robert, 1969, Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The Contin-
uous Time Case, Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247–57.
Pratt, John W., and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 1987, Proper Risk Aversion, Economet-
rica 55, 143–54.
Reitz, Thomas, 1988, The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution? Journal of Monetary
Economics 21, 117–32.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1963, Risk and Uncertainty: A Fallacy of Large Numbers, Sci-
entia 98, 108–13.
———, 1969, Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic Programming,
Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 238–46.
Samuelson, William, and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 1988, Status Quo Bias in Decision
Making, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1, 7–59.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1990, Equilibrium Short Horizons of Investors
and Firms, American Economic Review 80, 148–53.
Siegel, Jeremy J., 1991, The Real Rate of Interest from 1800–1990: A Study of the
U. S. and U. K., Working Paper, Wharton School.
———, 1992, The Equity Premium: Stock and Bond Returns Since 1802, Financial
Analysts Journal 48, 28–38.
Swalm, R. O., 1966, Utility Theory—Insights into Risk Taking, Harvard Business
Review 44, 123–36.
Thaler, Richard H., 1985, Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice, Marketing
Science 4, 199–214.
Thaler, Richard H., Amos Tversky, Daniel Kahneman, and Alan Schwartz, 1997,
The Effect of Myopia and Loss Aversion on Risk Taking: An Experimental Test,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 647–61.
Thaler, Richard H., and Eric J. Johnson, 1990, Gambling with the House Money
and Trying to Break Even: The Effects of Prior Outcomes on Risky Choice, Man-
agement Science 36, 643–60.
Tversky, Amos, and Maya Bar-Hillel, 1983, Risk: The Long Run and the Short,
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning, Memory, and Cognition
9, 713–17.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1991, Loss Aversion and Riskless Choice: A
Reference Dependent Model, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1039–61.
———, 1992, Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of Uncer-
tainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297–323.
Weil, Philippe, 1989, The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-free Rate Puzzle,
Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 401–21.
Yaari, M. E., 1987, The Dual Theory of Choice Under Risk, Econometrica 55,
95–115.
MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION
223
