Chapter 13
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY AND SECURITY MARKET
UNDER- AND OVERREACTION
Kent Daniel, David Hirshleifer,
and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam
In recent years a body of evidence on security returns has presented a
sharp challenge to the traditional view that securities are rationally priced
to reﬂect all publicly available information. Some of the more pervasive
anomalies can be classiﬁed as follows (see Hirshleifer 2001 for a summary
of the relevant literature):
1. Event-based return predictability (public-event-date average stock
returns of the same sign as average subsequent long-run abnormal
performance)
2. Short-term momentum (positive short-term autocorrelation of stock
returns, for individual stocks and the market as a whole)
3. Long-term reversal (negative autocorrelation of short-term returns
separated by long lags, or “overreaction”)
4. High volatility of asset prices relative to fundamentals
5. Short-run post-earnings announcement stock price “drift” in the di-
rection indicated by the earnings surprise, but possible abnormal
stock price performance in the opposite direction of long-term earn-
ings changes.
There remains disagreement over the interpretation of the above evi-
dence of predictability. One possibility is that these anomalies are chance
We thank two anonymous referees (Journal of Finance, volume LIII, Number 2, December
1918–83), the editor (René Stulz), Michael Brennan, Steve Buser, Werner DeBondt, Eugene
Fama, Simon Gervais, Robert Jones, Blake LeBaron, Tim Opler, Canice Prendergast, Andrei
Shleifer, Matt Spiegel, Siew Hong Teoh, and Sheridan Titman for helpful comments and dis-
cussions, Robert Noah for excellent research assistance, and participants in the National Bu-
reau of Economic Research 1996 Asset Pricing and 1997 Behavioral Finance Meetings, the
1997 Western Finance Association Meetings, the 1997 University of Chicago Economics of
Uncertainty Workshop, and ﬁnance workshops at the Securities and Exchange Commission
and the following universities: University of California at Berkeley, University of California at
Los Angeles, Columbia University, University of Florida, University of Houston, University of
Michigan, London Business School, London School of Economics, Northwestern University,
Ohio State University, Stanford University, and Washington University at St. Louis, for helpful
comments. Hirshleifer thanks the Nippon Telephone and Telegraph Program of Asian Finance
and Economics for ﬁnancial support.

deviations to be expected under market efﬁciency (Fama 1998). We believe
the evidence does not accord with this viewpoint because some of the
return patterns are strong and regular. The size, book-to-market, and mo-
mentum effects are present both internationally and in different time peri-
ods. Also, the pattern mentioned in (1) above obtains for the great majority
of event studies.
Alternatively, these patterns could represent variations in rational risk-
premia. However, based on the high Sharpe ratios (relative to the market)
apparently achievable with simple trading strategies (MacKinlay 1995),
any asset pricing model consistent with these patterns would have to have
extremely variable marginal utility across states. Campbell and Cochrane
(1999) ﬁnd that a utility function with extreme habit persistence is required
to explain the predictable variation in market returns. To be consistent with
cross-sectional predictability ﬁndings (on size, B/M, and momentum, for
example), a model would presumably require even more extreme variation
in marginal utilities. Also, the model would require that marginal utilities
covary strongly with the returns on the size, B/M, and momentum portfo-
lios. No such correlation is obvious in examining the data. Given this evi-
dence, it seems reasonable to consider explanations for the observed return
patterns based on imperfect rationality.
Moreover, there are important corporate ﬁnancing and payout patterns
which seem potentially related to market anomalies. Firms tend to issue eq-
uity (rather than debt) after rises in market value, and when the ﬁrm or in-
dustry B/M ratio is low. There are industry-speciﬁc ﬁnancing and repurchase
booms, perhaps designed to exploit industry-level mispricings. Transactions
such as takeovers that often rely on securities ﬁnancing are also prone to in-
dustry booms and quiet periods.
Although it is not obvious how the empirical securities market phenom-
ena can be captured plausibly in a model based on perfect investor rational-
ity, no psychological (“behavioral”) theory for these phenomena has won
general acceptance. Some aspects of the patterns seem contradictory, such
as apparent market underreaction in some contexts and overreaction in
others. While explanations have been offered for particular anomalies, we
have lacked an integrated theory to explain these phenomena, and out-of-
sample empirical implications to test proposed explanations.
A general criticism often raised by economists against psychological the-
ories is that, in a given economic setting, the universe of conceivable irra-
tional behavior patterns is essentially unrestricted. Thus, it is sometimes
claimed that allowing for irrationality opens a Pandora’s box of ad hoc sto-
ries that will have little out-of-sample predictive power. However, DeBondt
and Thaler (1995) argue that a good psychological ﬁnance theory will be
grounded on psychological evidence about how people actually behave. We
concur, and also believe that such a theory should allow for the rational
side of investor decisions. To deserve consideration a theory should be par-
simonious, explain a range of anomalous patterns in different contexts, and
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
461

generate new empirical implications. The goal of this work is to develop
such a theory of security markets.
Our theory is based on investor overconﬁdence, and variations in conﬁ-
dence arising from biased self-attribution. The premise of investor overconﬁ-
dence is derived from a large body of evidence from cognitive psychological
experiments and surveys (summarized in section 1) which shows that individ-
uals overestimate their own abilities in various contexts.
In ﬁnancial markets, analysts and investors generate information for trad-
ing through means, such as interviewing management, verifying rumors, and
analyzing ﬁnancial statements, which can be executed with varying degrees
of skill. If an investor overestimates his ability to generate information, or
to identify the signiﬁcance of existing data that others neglect, he will un-
derestimate his forecast errors. If investors are more overconﬁdent about
signals or assessments with which they have greater personal involvement,
they will tend to be overconﬁdent about the information that they them-
selves have generated but not about public signals. Thus, we deﬁne an over-
conﬁdent investor as one who overestimates the precision of his private
information signal, but not of information signals publicly received by all.
We ﬁnd that the overconﬁdent informed overweigh the private signal rela-
tive to the prior, and their trading pushes the price too far in the direction
of the signal. When noisy public information signals arrive, the inefﬁcient de-
viation of the price is partially corrected, on average. On subsequent dates,
as more public information arrives, the price, on average, moves still closer
to the full-information value. Thus, a central theme of this work is that stock
prices overreact to private information signals and underreact to public sig-
nals. We show that this overreaction-correction pattern is consistent with
long-run negative autocorrelation in stock returns, unconditional excess
volatility (unconditional volatility in excess of that which would obtain with
fully rational investors), and with further implications for volatility condi-
tional on the type of signal.
The market’s tendency to over- or underreact to different types of infor-
mation allows us to address the remarkable pattern that the average an-
nouncement date returns in virtually all event studies are of the same sign as
the average postevent abnormal returns. Suppose that the market observes a
public action taken by an informed party such as the ﬁrm at least partly in
response to market mispricing. For example, a rationally managed ﬁrm may
tend to buy back more of its stock when managers believe their stock is un-
dervalued by the market. In such cases, the corporate event will reﬂect the
manager’s belief about the market valuation error, and will therefore predict
future abnormal returns. In particular, repurchases, reﬂecting undervalua-
tion, will predict positive abnormal returns, while equity offerings will pre-
dict the opposite. More generally, actions taken by any informed party (such
as a manager or analyst) in a fashion responsive to mispricing will predict
future returns. Consistent with this implication, many events studied in the
462
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

empirical literature can reasonably be viewed as being responsive to mispric-
ing, and have the abnormal return pattern discussed above. Subsection 2.B.4
offers several additional implications about the occurrence of and price pat-
terns around corporate events and for corporate policy that are either
untested or have been conﬁrmed only on a few speciﬁc events.
The empirical psychology literature reports not just overconﬁdence, but
that as individuals observe the outcomes of their actions, they update their
conﬁdence in their own ability in a biased manner. According to attribution
theory (Bem 1965), individuals too strongly attribute events that conﬁrm
the validity of their actions to high ability, and events that disconﬁrm the
action to external noise or sabotage. (This relates to the notion of cognitive
dissonance, in which individuals internally suppress information that con-
ﬂicts with past choices.)
If an investor trades based on a private signal, we say that a later public
signal conﬁrms the trade if it has the same sign (good news arrives after a
buy, or bad news after a sell). We assume that when an investor receives con-
ﬁrming public information, his conﬁdence rises, but disconﬁrming informa-
tion causes conﬁdence to fall only modestly, if at all. Thus, if an individual
begins with unbiased beliefs, new public signals on average are viewed as
conﬁrming the private signal. This suggests that public information can trig-
ger further overreaction to a preceding private signal. We show that such
continuing overreaction causes momentum in security prices, but that such
momentum is eventually reversed as further public information gradually
draws the price back toward fundamentals. Thus, biased self-attribution im-
plies short-run momentum and long-term reversals.
The dynamic analysis based on biased self-attribution can also lead to a
lag-dependent response to corporate events. Cash ﬂow or earnings surprises
at ﬁrst tend to reinforce conﬁdence, causing a same-direction average stock
price trend. Later reversal of overreaction can lead to an opposing stock price
trend. Thus, the analysis is consistent with both short-term postannounce-
ment stock price trends in the same same direction as earnings surprises and
later reversals.
In our model, investors are quasi-rational in that they are Bayesian opti-
mizers except for their overassessment of valid private information, and
their biased updating of this precision. A frequent objection to models that
explain price anomalies as market inefﬁciencies is that fully rational in-
vestors should be able to proﬁt by trading against the mispricing. If wealth
ﬂows from quasi-rational to smart traders, eventually the smart traders
may dominate price-setting. However, for several reasons, we do not ﬁnd
this argument to be compelling, as discussed in the conclusion.
Several other papers have modeled overconﬁdence in various contexts.
Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam, and Titman (1994) examined how analyst/
traders who overestimate the probability that they receive information be-
fore others will tend to herd in selecting stocks to study. Kyle and Wang
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
463

(1997), Odean (1998), and Wang (1998) provide speciﬁcations of overcon-
ﬁdence as overestimation of information precision, but do not distinguish
between private and public signals in this regard (see also Caballé and
Sákovics 1996). Odean (1998) examines overconﬁdence about, and conse-
quent overreaction to, a private signal. As a consequence there is excess
volatility and negative return autocorrelation. Because our model assumes
that investors are overconﬁdent only about private signals, we obtain un-
derreaction as well as overreaction effects. Furthermore, because we con-
sider time-varying conﬁdence, there is continuing overreaction to private
signals over time. Thus, in contrast with Odean, we ﬁnd forces toward pos-
itive as well as negative autocorrelation; and we argue that overconﬁdence
can decrease volatility around public news events.1
Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) show that our speciﬁca-
tion of overconﬁdence can help explain several empirical puzzles regarding
cross-sectional patterns of security return predictability and investor behav-
ior. These puzzles include the ability of price-based measures (dividend yield,
earnings/price, B/M, and ﬁrm market value) to predict future stock returns,
possible domination of β as a predictor of returns by price-based variables,
and differences in the relative ability of different price-based measures to
predict returns.
A few other recent studies have addressed both overreaction and underre-
action in an integrated fashion. Shefrin (1997) discusses how base-rate un-
derweighting can shed light on the anomalous behavior of implied volatili-
ties in options markets. In a contemporaneous paper, Barberis, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998) offer an explanation for under- and overreactions based on a
learning model in which actual earnings follow a random walk, but individ-
uals believe that earnings follow either a steady growth trend, or else are
mean-reverting. Since their focus is on learning about the time-series process
of a performance measure such as earnings, they do not address the sporadic
events examined in most event studies. In another recent paper, Hong and
Stein (1999) examine a setting where under- and overreactions arise from
the interaction of momentum traders and news watchers. Momentum
traders make partial use of the information contained in recent price trends,
and ignore fundamental news. Fundamental traders rationally use funda-
mental news but ignore prices. Our work differs in focusing on psychologi-
cal evidence as a basis for assumptions about investor behavior.
The remainder of the chapter is structured as follows. Section 1 describes
psychological evidence of overconﬁdence and self-attribution bias. Section 2
develops the basic model of overconﬁdence. Here, we describe the economic
setting and deﬁne overconﬁdence. We analyze the equilibrium to derive 
implications about stock price reactions to public versus private news,
464
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM
1 A recent revision of Odean’s paper offers a modiﬁed model that allows for underreaction.
This is developed in a static setting with no public signals, and therefore does not address is-
sues such as short-term versus long-term return autocorrelations, and event study anomalies.

short- versus long-term autocorrelations, and volatility. Section 3 examines
time variation in overconﬁdence, to derive implications about the signs of
short-term versus long-term return autocorrelations. Section 4 concludes by
summarizing our ﬁndings, relating our analysis to the literature on exoge-
nous noise trading, and discussing issues related to the survival of overcon-
ﬁdent traders in ﬁnancial markets.
1. Overconﬁdence and Biased Self-Attribution
The model we present in this chapter relies on two psychological regulari-
ties: overconﬁdence and attribution bias. In their summary of the micro-
foundations of behavioral ﬁnance, DeBondt and Thaler (1995) state that
“perhaps the most robust ﬁnding in the psychology of judgment is that
people are overconﬁdent.” Evidence of overconﬁdence has been found in
several contexts. Examples include psychologists, physicians and nurses,
engineers, attorneys, negotiators, entrepreneurs, managers, investment
bankers, and market professionals such as security analysts and economic
forecasters.2 Further, some evidence suggests that experts tend to be more
overconﬁdent than relatively inexperienced individuals (Grifﬁn and Tver-
sky 1992). Psychological evidence also indicates that overconﬁdence is
more severe for diffuse tasks (e.g., making diagnoses of illnesses) that re-
quire judgment than for mechanical tasks (e.g., solving arithmetic prob-
lems); and tasks for which delayed feedback is received, as opposed to
tasks that provide immediate and conclusive outcome feedback, such as
weather forecasting or horse-racing handicapping (see Einhorn 1980).
Fundamental valuation of securities (forecasting long-term cash ﬂows) re-
quires judgement about open-ended issues, and feedback is noisy and de-
ferred. We therefore focus on the implications of overconﬁdence for ﬁnancial
markets.3
Our theory assumes that investors view themselves as more able to value
securities than they actually are, so that they underestimate their forecast
error variance. This is consistent with evidence that people overestimate their
own abilities, and perceive themselves more favorably than they are viewed
by others.4 Several experimental studies ﬁnd that individuals underestimate
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
465
2 See respectively: Oskamp (1965), Christensen-Szalanski and Bushyhead (1981), Bau-
mann, Deber, and Thompson (1991), Kidd (1970), Wagenaar and Keren (1986), Neale and
Bazerman (1990), Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg (1988), Russo and Schoemaker (1992), Stael
von Holstein (1972), Ahlers and Lakonishok (1983), Elton, Gruber, and Gultekin (1984),
Froot and Frankel (1989), DeBondt and Thaler (1990), DeBondt (1991). See Odean (1998)
for a good summary of empirical research on overconﬁdence.
3 Odean (1998) (section 2.D) also makes a good argument for why overconﬁdence should
dominate in ﬁnancial markets.
4 Greenwald (1980), Svenson (1981), Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg (1988), and Taylor
and Brown (1988).

their error variance in making predictions, and overweigh their own forecasts
relative to those of others.5
The second aspect of our theory is biased self-attribution: the conﬁdence
of the investor in our model grows when public information is in agreement
with his information, but it does not fall commensurately when public in-
formation contradicts his private information. The psychological evidence
indicates that people tend to credit themselves for past success, and blame
external factors for failure (Fischoff 1982, Langer and Roth 1975, Miller
and Ross 1975, Taylor and Brown 1988). As Langer and Roth (1975) put it,
“Heads I win, tails it’s chance”; see also the discussion of DeLong, Shleifer,
Summers, and Waldmann (1991).
2. The Basic Model: Constant Conﬁdence
This section develops the model with static conﬁdence. Section 3 considers
time-varying conﬁdence. Each member of a continuous mass of agents is
overconﬁdent in the sense that if he receives a signal, he overestimates its
precision. We refer to those who receive the signal as the informed, I; and
those who do not as the uninformed, U. For tractability, we assume that the
informed are risk neutral, whereas the uninformed are risk averse.
Each individual is endowed with a basket containing security shares, and
a risk-free numeraire that is a claim to one unit of terminal-period wealth.
There are 4 dates. At date 0, individuals begin with their endowments and
identical prior beliefs, and trade solely for optimal risk-transfer purposes.
At date 1, Is receive a common noisy private signal about underlying secu-
rity value and trade with Us.6 At date 2, a noisy public signal arrives, and
further trade occurs. At date 3, conclusive public information arrives, the
security pays a liquidating dividend, and consumption occurs. All random
variables are independent and normally distributed.
The risky security generates a terminal value of θ, which is assumed to be
normally distributed with mean θ– and variance σ 2θ. For most of the work
we set θ– = 0 without loss of generality. The private information signal re-
ceived by Is at date 1 is
s1 = θ + ,
(1)
466
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM
5 See Alpert and Raiffa (1982), Fischhoff, Slovic, and Lichtenstein (1977), Batchelor and
Dua (1992), and the discussions of Lichtenstein, Fischoff, and Phillips (1982), and Yates (1990).
6 Some previous models with common private signals include Grossman and Stiglitz (1980),
Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1988), and Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam, and Titman (1994). If some
analysts and investors use the same information sources to assess security values, and interpret
them in similar ways, the error terms in their signals will be correlated. For simplicity, we as-
sume this correlation is unity; however, similar results would obtain under imperfect (but
nonzero) correlation in signal noise terms.

where   N(0, σ 2) (so the signal precision is 1/σ 2). The Us correctly assess
the error variance, but Is underestimate it to be σ 2C < σ 2. The differing beliefs
about the noise variance are common knowledge to all.7 Similarly, the date
2 public signal is
s2 = θ + η,
(2)
where the noise term η ∼N(0, σ 2p) is independent of θ and . Its variance σ 2p
is correctly estimated by all investors.
Our simplifying assumption that all private information precedes all
public information is not needed for the model’s implications. It is essential
that at least some noisy public information arrives after a private signal.
The model’s implications stand if, more realistically, additional public in-
formation precedes or is contemporaneous with the private signal.
Since prices are set by the risk-neutral informed traders, the formal role
of the uninformed in this work is minimal. The rationale for the assump-
tion of overconﬁdence is that the investor has a personal attachment to his
own signal. This implies some other set of investors who do not receive the
same signal. Also, similar results will hold if both groups of investors are
risk averse, so that both groups inﬂuence price. We have veriﬁed this ana-
lytically in a simpliﬁed version of the model. So long as the uninformed are
not risk-neutral price setters, the overconﬁdent informed will push price
away from fully rational values in the direction described here.
A. Equilibrium Prices and Trades
Since the informed traders are risk neutral, prices at each date satisfy
P1 = EC[θθ + ]
(3)
P2 = EC[θθ + , θ + η],
(4)
where the subscript C denotes the fact that the expectation operator is cal-
culated based on the informed traders’ conﬁdent beliefs. Trivially, P3 = θ.
By standard properties of normal variables (Anderson 1984, chapter 2)
(5)
(6)
where D
C
p
C
p
≡
+
+
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
θ
2
2
2
2
2
(
)
.
P
D
D
D
C
p
p
C
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
=
+
+
+
σ
σ
σ
θ
σ σ
σ σ
η
θ
θ
θ
(
)
,

P
C
1
2
2
2
=
+
+
σ
σ
σ
θ
θ
θ
(
)
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
467
7 It is not crucial for the analysis that the Us correctly assess the private signal variance,
only that they do not underestimate it as much as the informed do. Also, since the uninformed
do not possess a signal to be overconﬁdent about, they could alternatively be interpreted as

B. Implications for Price Behavior
This section examines the implications of static confidence for over- and
underreactions to information and empirical securities returns patterns.
Subsection B.1 examines price reactions to public and private informa-
tion, subsection B.2 examines the implications for price-change autocor-
relations, and subsection B.3 examines implications for event-studies.
Subsection B.4 discusses some as-yet-untested empirical implications of
the model.
B.1 overreaction and underreaction
Figure 13.1 illustrates the average price path following a positive (upper
curve) or negative (lower curve) date 1 private signal (date 3′ of the graph
has not yet been introduced). At this point we focus on the solid lines. The
upper curve, an impulse-response function, shows the expected prices con-
ditional on a private signal of unit magnitude arriving at time 1. The thin
horizontal line shows the fully rational price level.
Overconﬁdence in the private signal θ +  causes the date 1 stock price to
overreact to this new information. At date 2, when noisy public information
signals arrive, the inefﬁcient deviation of the price is partially corrected, on
average. The same is true on subsequent public information arrival dates.
We call the part of the impulse response prior to the peak or trough the
overreaction phase, and the later section the correction phase.
This overreaction and correction implies that the covariance between the
date 1 price change and the date 2 price change, cov(P2 −P1, P1 −P0), is
negative.8 Further, the overreaction to the private signal is partially cor-
rected by the date 2 public signal, and fully corrected upon release of the
date 3 public signal, so that cov(P3 −P1, P1 −P0) < 0. This price change re-
versal arises from the continuing correction to the date 1 overreaction. Fi-
nally, the continuing correction starting at date 2 and ending at date 3
causes price changes at the time of and subsequent to the public signal to be
positively correlated, so that cov(P3 −P2, P2 −P1) > 0. We thus have:
Proposition 1. If investors are overconﬁdent, then:
1. Price moves resulting from private information arrival are on av-
erage partially reversed in the long run.
2. Price moves in reaction to the arrival of public information are
positively correlated with later price changes.
468
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM
fully rational traders who trade to exploit market mispricing. Furthermore, most of the results
will obtain even if investors are symmetrical both in their overconﬁdence and their signals. Re-
sults similar to those we derive would apply in a setting where identical overconﬁdent individ-
uals receive correlated private signals.
8 See appendix A.

The pattern of correlations described in Proposition 1 is potentially testable
by examining whether long-run reversals following days with public news
events are smaller than reversals on days without such events. The price be-
havior around public announcements has implications for corporate event
studies (see subsection B.3).
B.2 unconditional serial correlations and volatility
Return autocorrelations in well-known studies of momentum and reversal
are calculated without conditioning on the arrival of a public information
signal. To calculate a return autocorrelation that does not condition on
whether private versus public information has arrived, consider an experi-
ment where the econometrician picks consecutive dates for price changes
randomly (dates 1 and 2, versus dates 2 and 3). The date 2 and 3 price
changes are positively correlated, but the date 1 and 2 price changes are neg-
atively correlated. Suppose that the econometrician is equally likely to pick
either pair of consecutive dates. Then the overall autocorrelation is negative:
Proposition 2. If investors are overconﬁdent, price changes are uncon-
ditionally negatively autocorrelated at both short and long lags.
Thus, the constant-conﬁdence model accords with long-run reversals (nega-
tive long-lag autocorrelations) but not with short-term momentum (posi-
tive short-lag autocorrelation). However, the short-lag autocorrelation will
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
469
  	



 
	
  
	
  

  


  



Figure 13.1. Average price as a function of time with overconﬁdent investors. This
ﬁgure shows price as a function of time for the dynamic model of section 3 with
(solid line) and without (dashed line) self-attribution bias.

be positive in a setting where the extremum in the impulse response func-
tion is sufﬁciently smooth, because the negative autocovariance of price
changes surrounding a smooth extremum will be low in absolute terms. Such
a setting, based on biased self-attribution and outcome-dependent conﬁ-
dence, is considered in section 3.
Since overconﬁdence causes wider swings at date 1 away from funda-
mentals, it causes excess price volatility around private signals (var(P1 −P0))
as in Odean (1998). Greater overconﬁdence also causes relative underweigh-
ing of the public signal, which tends to reduce date 2 variance. However,
the wide date 1 swings create a greater need for corrective price moves at
dates 2 and 3, so that greater overconﬁdence can either decrease or increase
the volatility around public signals (var(P2 −P1)). (Explicit expressions for
the variances of this section are contained in appendix A.)
Consider again an econometrician who does not condition on the occur-
rence of private or public news arrival. He will calculate price change vari-
ances by placing equal weights on price changes P1 −P0, P2 −P1, and P3 −P2.
The unconditional volatility is therefore just the arithmetic mean of var
(P3 −P2), var(P2 −P1), and var(P1 −P0). Excess volatility is the difference
between the volatility with overconﬁdence and the volatility when σ2C = σ 2.
Let the subscript R denote the volatility if all individuals were rational.
We deﬁne the date t proportional excess volatility as
(7)
Proposition 3
1. Overconﬁdence increases volatility around private signals, can
increase or decrease volatility around public signals, and in-
creases unconditional volatility.
2. The proportional excess volatility is greater around the private
signal than around the public signal.
Thus, consistent with the ﬁndings of Odean (1998), when there are only pri-
vate signals, there is a general tendency for overconﬁdence to create excess
volatility. Excess volatility is not an automatic implication of any model with
imperfect rationality. For example, if investors are underconﬁdent, σ2C > σ2,
then there will be insufﬁcient volatility relative to the rational level. Also, in
contrast with Odean, Proposition 3 implies that in samples broken down by
types of news event, either excess or deﬁcient volatility may be possible.
B.3 event study implications
Many recent studies have investigated abnormal average return performance
or “drift” following public news arrival. As mentioned in the introduction, a
striking regularity in virtually all these studies is that average postevent
V
P
P
P
P
P
P
t
E
t
t
R
t
t
R
t
t
≡
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
var(
)
var (
)
var (
)
.
1
1
1
470
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

abnormal price trends are of the same sign as the average initial event-date
reaction. We now slightly generalize the model to address this event-based re-
turn predictability.
Sophisticated managers or analysts who are not overconﬁdent are likely
to undertake certain visible actions, such as repurchasing shares or making
buy recommendations, selectively when a ﬁrm’s shares are undervalued by
the market. We will show that the nature of the stock price reaction to an
event depends critically on whether or not the event is related to the date 2
mispricing by the market.
We assume that the date 2 signal is no longer public, but is instead re-
ceived privately by the ﬁrm’s manager (or other individual such as an ana-
lyst), and that this individual takes an action (the “event”) that is publicly
observed and fully reveals the signal. Let PC2 (s2) be the valuation that would
be placed on the security by an overconﬁdent investor at date 2 were he to
observe the signal s2 in addition to his signal s1. (Since we examine events
that fully reveal s2, this is in equilibrium just the postevent stock price P2.)
Let PR2(s2) be the comparable valuation that would be set by a fully rational
investor. The date 2 mispricing then is deﬁned as the difference PR2(s2) −
PC2(s2) We deﬁne different kinds of events as follows.
Deﬁnition 1. An event is a random variable that depends only on the
information signals s1 and s2. A nonselective event is an event that is
independent of the date 2 mispricing PR2(s2) −PC2(s2). A selective event
is an event whose occurrence and/or magnitude depends on the date
2 mispricing.
A simple type of non-selective event is a random variable that is linearly re-
lated only to the second signal s2.
Proposition 4. If overconﬁdent investors observe a nonselective event:
1. The true expected postannouncement abnormal price change is
zero.
2. Conditional on the preevent return, the covariance between the
announcement date and the postannouncement price change is
positive: that is, cov(P3 −P2, s2P1 −P0) > 0.
Since a non-selective event is an action that is unrelated to the pricing error
at date 2, it tells us nothing about mean future price movements. Although
the market underreacts to the event, it is equally likely to be underreacting
downward as upward. Part 1 therefore indicates that there will be no sys-
tematic postannouncement drift following events that are unrelated to the
prior market mispricing. Thus, Proposition 4 refutes the conventional inter-
pretation of drift as being equivalent to underreaction to new information.
The lack of event-based predictive power for future returns is surprising
given the positive autocorrelation of event-date and postevent price changes
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
471

(Proposition 1). However, even though the event is unrelated to the prior
mispricing, the more underpriced the security, the more positive on average
will be the stock price reaction to further news. Thus, a favorable event-date
stock price change is associated with a positive future average trend. Clearly,
then, even though the event itself does not predict future returns, the market
is inefﬁcient.
Part 2 of Proposition 4 predicts larger postevent average returns the more
the nonselective event (perhaps a cash ﬂow surprise) and the preevent stock
price runup are in opposition (e.g., positive preevent runup and negative
event).9 Intuitively, holding constant the private signal (as reﬂected in P1), the
higher is the public signal, the more likely that the fundamental θ is high, and
therefore the bigger the average shortfall of the private signal relative to the
fundamental. Thus, a higher public signal is associated with a larger (more
positive) postevent return.
Both parts 1 and 2 of Proposition 4 can be tested using data on speciﬁc
nonselective events. These are presumably events that are not initiated by
an informed party such as a manager with an incentive to take into account
mispricing. Such events might include news about product demand that
emanates from outside of the company (e.g., news about competitors’ ac-
tions), or regulatory and legislative outcomes (e.g., FDA decisions on drugs
proposed by a pharmaceutical company).
We now show that selective public events, that is, events that are corre-
lated with preevent stock mispricing, will forecast future price changes.
Consider a manager who observes P1 (and therefore infers the private sig-
nal s1) and receives his own signal s2 at date 2. The manager can undertake
a debt/equity exchange offering, and the attractiveness of a larger exchange
depends on how high the market price is relative to fundamental value. He
can condition the size of the offering on the mispricing at date 2, which he
knows precisely, since he knows both s1 and s2. It can easily be shown that
in this setting the date 2 pricing error is proportional to the expected error
in the private signal, * ≡E[P1, s2], where the expectation is again taken
with respect to rational beliefs. For tractability, we consider selective events
that are linear functions of the date 2 mispricing.
When * < 0, the manager believes the market has undervalued the ﬁrm,
so the ﬁrm can “proﬁt” by exchanging debt for equity; the more underval-
ued the ﬁrm, the greater the size of the offering. If * > 0, an equity-for-debt
swap would be preferred instead. It is easy to show that
E[P3 −P2* > 0] < 0 < E[P3 −P2* < 0];
(8)
that is, events taken in response to market undervaluation (e.g., repurchase)
are associated with high postevent returns, and events taken in response to
overvaluation (e.g., new issue) with low postevent returns.
472
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM
9 We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting we explore this issue.

Proposition 5. If investors are overconﬁdent, then selective events that
are initiated when the stock is undervalued (overvalued) by the market
will on average be associated with positive (negative) announcement-
date abnormal price changes and will on average be followed by posi-
tive (negative) postannouncement abnormal price changes.
In Proposition 4 there was underreaction to news arrival but no drift.
Here, drift results from the combination of underreaction and event selec-
tion based on market mispricing. Thus, the model offers the new empirical
implication that the phenomenon of abnormal postevent drift will be con-
centrated in events that select for market mispricing. Evidence recently
brought to our attention supports this implication. Cornett, Mehran, and
Tehranian (1998) ﬁnd that “involuntary” issues undertaken by banks to
meet capital requirements are not associated with postevent drift, whereas
“voluntary” bank issues are associated with negative postevent abnormal
performance. Since involuntary issues are likely to be less selective than vol-
untary ones, this evidence is consistent with the model.
If the announcement of an upcoming Initial Public Offering (IPO), like
an Seasoned Equity Offering (SEO) announcement, reﬂects managers’ “bad
news,” then Proposition 5 implies long-run underperformance following
IPOs as well. Since IPO ﬁrms are private prior to the event, we have no
data on the announcement-date reaction to an upcoming IPO. However,
the consistent ﬁndings of negative stock price reactions to seasoned equity
issue announcements, and of inferior post-IPO accounting performance
(Jain and Kini 1994, Mikkelson, Partch, and Shah 1997, Teoh, Wong, and
Rao 1998, Loughran and Ritter 1997), suggest that an IPO announcement
is indeed on average bad news.10 If so, the evidence that IPOs internation-
ally exhibit long-run average underperformance for several years after the
issue (Ritter 1991, and Loughran, Ritter, and Rydqvist 1994) is consistent
with the model.
The event-based return predictability of Proposition 5 is not equivalent
to “underreaction” to corporate events. Underreaction to public signals (as
implied by overconﬁdence) induces positive autocorrelation of returns at
the event date. However, the event realization (in contrast to the event-date
return) may not predict future abnormal returns unless event size/occur-
rence is correlated with prior market mispricing.
We have interpreted the model in terms of ﬁrms buying or selling shares to
proﬁt from mispricing. An alternative interpretation is that a manager with fa-
vorable information (* < 0) would like to signal good news to the market, and
chooses an action (such as a repurchase, dividend, debt for equity swap, or
stock split) to reveal his information. With a continuous signal, such behavior
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
473
10 The initial positive return relative to issue price, “underpricing,” is not an announcement
reaction to the news that an IPO will occur; this news is released earlier.

typically leads to full revelation, consistent with our assumption that * is re-
vealed to the market at the event date.11
Whether the model of this section is consistent with the well-known phe-
nomenon of postearnings announcement “drift” depends on whether earn-
ings announcements are selective events. An earnings report is favorably
selective if managers report higher earnings, ceteris paribus, when the market
undervalues their ﬁrm. A manager has an incentive to do so if he is averse to
low levels of short-term stock price or personal reputation.12 Further, man-
agers have a great deal of discretion over earnings levels both through ac-
counting adjustments (accruals), and by shifting the timing of actual cash
ﬂows. Accounting adjustments seem to reﬂect managers’ inside information,
as evidenced by the announcement effect of accruals on returns (distinct from
the effect of cash ﬂows); see Wilson (1986). There is extensive evidence that
managers use their accounting discretion strategically to achieve their goals,
such as meeting loan covenant requirements, winning proxy ﬁghts, obtaining
earnings-based bonuses, and avoiding taxes; Teoh, Wong, and Rao (1998)
reference about thirty such studies. If managers adjust earnings selectively,
Proposition 5 can account for postearnings drift. The dynamic conﬁdence
setting of section 3 provides a distinct explanation for postearnings an-
nouncement drift that obtains even if earnings are nonselective.
Since the date 1 expected value of * is perfectly positively correlated
with P1 (they both are linearly increasing functions of s1), variables such as
market/book or run-up (P1 −
) are potential measures of mispricing. As
we have assumed that the size of a selective event depends on the size of the
misvaluation, it follows that the size and sign of the selective event varies
with the measures of mispricing. We therefore have:
Proposition 6
1. The expected size of a positive (negative) selective event is in-
creasing (decreasing) in measures of the ﬁrm’s mispricing.
2. The probability that a positive (negative) selective event will occur
increases (decreases) with measures of the ﬁrm’s mispricing.
We tentatively identify mispricing with variables that contain market price
such as market/book ratios. The analysis then predicts that repurchases and
θ
474
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM
11 The model’s event study predictions also apply to events undertaken by outsiders who
have information about the ﬁrm. An example is an analyst’s recommendation to buy or sell
shares of the ﬁrm. Thus, the analysis is consistent with evidence on stock price drift following
analyst buy and sell recommendations, as discussed in Hirshleifer (2001).
12 Either concave utility or risk of dismissal can make a manager averse to a low stock
price; a rising disutility from low price is a common model assumption (see, e.g., Harris and
Raviv 1985). If managers prefer a high short-term stock price but risk incurring a penalty for
over-aggressive reports, then the net beneﬁt from reporting higher earnings may be greater,
ceteris paribus, when the stock is more undervalued.

other favorable events will tend to occur when market, industry, or ﬁrm
market/book or price/earnings ratios are low, and equity issuance and other
adverse selective events when such ratios are high. This is consistent with
evidence that the frequency of IPOs is positively related to the market/book
ratio in the company’s industrial sectors (Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales
1998), and that in many countries the value and number of IPOs is posi-
tively associated with stock market levels (Loughran, Ritter, and Rydqvist
1994, Rees 1996, Ljungqvist 1997).
The analysis also implies that event-date price changes (for a given type
of event) should be positively correlated with postannouncement returns.
This is just underreaction, and follows under the conditions of Proposition
1.13 Also, in the model, because the preevent price run-up maps one-to-one
with market mispricing, better preevent price performance is associated
with worse postevent performance (either including or excluding the event
date). This follows because cov(P3 −P2, P1 −P0) < 0 and cov(P3 −P1, P1 −
P0) < 0. Intuitively, mispricing arises from overreaction to private informa-
tion, ﬁrms select events based on mispricing, and this causes postevent re-
turns to be related to pre-event returns. However, the latter implication is
not robust to reasonable generalization of the assumptions to allow for the
possibility that public information can arrive at date 0 or 1.
Consider, for example, the case of dividend announcements. Firms that
have been performing well enough to generate a lot of cash are more likely
to boost dividends. Thus, a dividend increase will be associated not only
with market undervaluation at date 2 (unfavorable date 1 private signal),
but also with good past performance (favorable date 0 or 1 public signal).
In this scenario, while the event-date and postevent mean abnormal returns
are both positive, the sign of the preevent mean return will be ambiguous.
We have veriﬁed formally that if the event choice (dividend) increases with
both a past (date 1) public signal and the degree of market undervaluation,
then the event may be associated with a positive average run-up, a positive
average event date return, and a positive average postevent return.14
More generally, whether prior runup (or other price-related indicators
such the fundamental/price ratios) is a measure of mispricing depends on
whether the event in question is mainly selective for mispricing, or depends
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
475
13 Proposition 1 is based on a nonselective news event, namely, the arrival of s2. Even
though s2 is private information here, the result is the same because s2 is fully revealed by the
corporate action, so that P2 is identical in all states to what it would be if s2 were made public
directly. Thus, cov(P3 −P2, P2 −P1) is the same in both cases.
14 Fama (1998) argues that our approach implies that mean pre-event abnormal returns will
have the same sign as mean postevent abnormal returns, and that the evidence does not sup-
port this implication. As discussed above, event occurrence is likely to depend on past public
information, in which case the model implies that average pre-event runup can have either the
same or the opposite sign as average postevent abnormal returns. See Propositions 4 and 5 for
model implications for event study returns that are robust with respect to pre-event public in-
formation arrival. The evidence generally supports these predictions.

heavily on past fundamental public performance measures (such as past
earnings). Many events, such as dividends and stock splits, may be selective
owing to a signaling motive. But events in which the ﬁrm trades against the
market, such as exchange offers, repurchases, and new issues, provide an
incentive to earn a trading proﬁt. This provides an incentive to be selective
above and beyond any signaling motive. Thus, runup and price/fundamental
ratios should be better measures of mispricing for such market-exploitation
events than for pure signaling events.
B.4 empirical implications
The model provides the following implications, which are either untested
or have been tested only on a subset of possible events:
1. Average postevent returns of the same sign as average event-date re-
turns for selective events, and zero postevent drift for nonselective
events;
2. A positive correlation between initial event-date stock price reac-
tions and postevent performance for public events;
3. A positive correlation between the size of a selective event (e.g., a
repurchase or the announcement of a toehold stake) and postevent
return, but no such correlation for nonselective events (e.g., news dis-
closed by outside sources, especially if macroeconomic or industry-
wide, such as news about product demand or input prices, production
processes, and regulatory events);
4. Larger postevent average returns the more the nonselective event
and the pre-event stock price run-up are in opposition;
5. Greater average long-term reversal of price moves occurring on
dates when there are no public news events about a ﬁrm reported in
public news media than price moves occurring on public event dates;
6. Greater selective event sizes (e.g., greater repurchases) when mis-
pricing measures (e.g., price/fundamental ratios or past run-up) are
high; and,
7. Greater probability of a good news (bad news) selective event when
the security is more underpriced (overpriced).
The overconﬁdence theory has further implications for managerial policy
related to implications (6) and (7) above. We expect ﬁrms to issue securities
when they believe their stocks are overvalued. If investors are overconﬁdent,
such overvaluation may be measured by recent increases in ﬁrm, industry or
aggregate stock market prices, or with high price/fundamental ratios. Con-
versely, ﬁrms should repurchase after rundowns when the market appears to
undervalue the ﬁrm. Thus, if managers act to exploit mispricing, there will
be both general and industry-speciﬁc ﬁnancing and repurchase booms.
The theory also suggests that when the market undervalues the ﬁrm, there
should be a tilt away from dividends toward repurchase. Further, when a
476
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

stock is underpriced (perhaps after run-downs or when ﬁrm or aggregate
market/book ratios are low), the ﬁrm, acting in current shareholders’ inter-
ests should, ceteris paribus, favor rights over public issues. Similarly, the
ﬁrm should tilt toward debt rather than equity issues to avoid diluting cur-
rent shareholders. Thus, the theory offers a possible solution to what Hov-
akimian, Opler, and Titman (2001) call a major puzzle from the perspective
of optimal capital structure theory, that after a rise in market prices, ﬁrms
tend to issue more equity rather than debt.15
Since these predictions seem quite intuitive, it is easy to forget that the di-
rections would reverse in alternative models of market mispricing. For ex-
ample, in a setting where the market always underreacts, ﬁrms with high
recent runups or low fundamental/price ratios will, ceteris paribus, tend to
be undervalued, so that (inconsistent with the evidence) we would observe
repurchases rather than equity issues in such situations.
3. Outcome-dependent Conﬁdence
The implications described so far are based on a ﬁxed conﬁdence level.
However, psychological evidence and theory suggest that actions and re-
sulting outcomes affect conﬁdence; events that conﬁrm an individual’s be-
liefs and actions tend to boost conﬁdence too much, while disconﬁrming
events weaken conﬁdence too little (see section 1). Taking into account this
psychological pattern leads to implications similar to those in the static sec-
tion, except that there is also short-run momentum in stock prices and
event-based predictability even for nonselective events.
Consider an informed individual who initially is not overconﬁdent, and
who buys or sells a security based on his private information. A public signal
conﬁrms his trade if they have the same sign (“buy” and a positive signal, or
“sell” and a negative signal). We assume that if the later public signal con-
ﬁrms his trade, the individual becomes more conﬁdent, and if it disconﬁrms
his conﬁdence decreases by little or remains constant. This implies that on av-
erage, public information can increases conﬁdence, intensifying overreaction.
The continuing overreaction leads to positive autocorrelation during the ini-
tial overreaction phase. As repeated public information arrival draws the
price back toward fundamentals, the initial overreaction is gradually reversed
in the long run.
The above process yields a hump-shaped impulse response function for a
private signal as illustrated by the dashed lines in ﬁgure 13.1. (The date 0/1
line overlaps the solid lines showing the impulse response for the static
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
477
15 However, Jung, Kim, and Stulz (1996) ﬁnd that ﬁrms often depart from the pecking order
(i.e., the preference of debt over equity) because of agency considerations, and that debt and
equity issuers both have negative average abnormal long-run stock returns that are not statis-
tically different from one another.

model.) The ﬁgure shows two possible date 1 prices, and the paths for ex-
pected price conditional on the date 1 move. It can be seen that with
outcome-dependent conﬁdence, there are smooth overreaction and correc-
tion phases. Pairs of returns drawn from these phases will be positively cor-
related, whereas the pair which straddles the extremum will be negatively
correlated. The overall autocorrelation involving contiguous price changes
will be positive if the extremum-straddling negative correlation is sufﬁ-
ciently small. However, price changes that are separated by long lags are
likely to straddle the extremum of the impulse-response function, and will
therefore exhibit negative autocorrelations. Thus, the pattern of momen-
tum at short lags and reversal at long lags arises naturally from the model.
We present two models with dynamic conﬁdence that capture this intu-
ition. The model presented in subsection A is tractable but highly stylized.
The model presented in subsection B allows us to develop more complex
implications, but can only be solved by simulation.
A. The Simple Model with Outcome Dependent Conﬁdence
We modify the basic model of section 2 as follows. We still allow for, but
no longer require, initial overconﬁdence, so σ 2C ≤σ 2. For tractability, the
public signal is now discrete, with s2 = 1 or −1 released at date 2. We as-
sume that the precision assessed by the investors at date 2 about their ear-
lier private signal depends on the realization of the public signal in the fol-
lowing way. If
sign(θ + ) = sign(s2),
(9)
conﬁdence increases, so investors’ assessment of noise variance decreases to
σ 2C −k, 0 < k < σ 2C. If
sign(θ + ) ≠sign(s2),
(10)
conﬁdence remains constant, so noise variance is still believed to be σ 2C.
The probability of receiving a public signal +1 is denoted by p. For a high
value to be a favorable indicator of value, p must tend to increase with θ.
However, allowing p to vary with θ creates intractable non-normalities. We
therefore examine the limiting case where the signal is virtually pure noise,
so that p is a constant. (Appendix C of Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrah-
manyam [1998] provides a discrete model which derives similar results
using an informative public signal.)
Given normality of all random variables, the date 1 price is
(11)
The date 0 price P0 = 0, the prior mean. If sign (θ + ) ≠sign(s2), then conﬁ-
dence is constant. Since the public signal is virtually uninformative, the


]
(
).
=
+
+
σ
σ
σ
θ
θ
θ
2
2
2
C
P
EC
1 =
+
[θ θ
478
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

price (virtually) does not move at date 2. However, if sign (θ + ) = sign (s2),
then the new price is calculated using the new level of the assessed variance
of . This price, denoted by P2C, is
(12)
A.1 implications of the simple model
It can easily be shown that16
cov(P2 −P1, P1 −P0) > 0.
(13)
Thus, the model shows that the overreaction phase, not just the correction
phase, can contribute positively to short-term momentum. As a result,
cov(P3 −P1, P1 −P0) < 0;
(14)
cov(P3 −P2, P2 −P1) < 0,
(15)
because the dates 1 and 2 overreactions must be reversed in the long-term.
Intuitively, further dates of noisy public information arrival should even-
tually cause the mispricing to be corrected (so long as conﬁdence does not
explode inﬁnitely). This process causes positive autocorrelation during the
correction phase, just as in the basic model of section 2. To examine this, let
us add a date 3′ between dates 2 and 3, where a public signal θ + η is re-
leased. For simplicity, we assume that overconﬁdence is not affected by the
release of the second public signal. As in section 2, η is a zero mean, nor-
mally distributed variable with variance σ 2p, and is independent of all other
random variables. The price at date 3′ when overconﬁdence is not revised
at date 2 is given by equation (6). When overconﬁdence is revised at date 2,
the price at date 3′, denoted by P3′C is given by the same expression as
equation (6), except that σ 2C is replaced by σ 2C −k; that is,
(16)
where 
With the extra date added to the model, it is easy to show that all of the
remaining single-period price change autocorrelations are negative except
for cov(P3 −P3′, P3′ −P2), which is positive. This can be explained as fol-
lows. Date 2 is the extremum of the impulse response function (the “hump”
or “trough” date after which the average correction begins). The single-
period price-change single-lag autocorrelations that fall entirely within 
either the overreaction phase or within the correction phase are positive,
D
k
k
C
p
C
p
≡
−
+
+
−
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
θ
2
2
2
2
2
(
)
(
)
.
P
k
D
D
k
D
C
C
p
p
C
′
=
−
+
+
+
−
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
σ
σ
σ
θ
σ σ
σ
σ
η
θ
θ
θ
(
)
(
) ,

P
k
C
C
2
2
2
2
=
+
−
+
σ
σ
σ
θ
θ
θ
(
).

INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
479
16 Explicit calculations and expressions for covariances for this subsection are in presented
in Appendix D of Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998).

while the single-period price change single-lag autocorrelation that straddles
the extremum is negative.17
Under appropriate parameter assumptions, the negative single-lag auto-
correlation surrounding the extremum will be arbitrarily close to zero. This
will occur if either the extra overreaction or the start of the correction is
weak (or both). The extra overreaction is small if conﬁdence is boosted only
slightly (k > 0 small) when an investor’s trade is conﬁrmed by public news.
The initial correction is slight if the further noisy public signal is not very in-
formative (σ 2η large). When parameter values are such that this straddling
autocorrelation is not too large, it will be outweighed by the positive auto-
correlations during the hearts of the overreaction or correction phases. In
other words, an econometrician calculating autocorrelations uncondition-
ally would ﬁnd, in a large sample, a positive single-lag autocorrelation. In
contrast, longer-lag pairs of price changes that straddle the extremum of the
impulse response function will tend to be opposed, because a price change
drawn from the overreaction phase tends to be negatively correlated with a
price change drawn from the correction phase. Thus, the overconﬁdence
theory provides a joint explanation for both short-term momentum and
long-term reversals.
Proposition 7. If investor conﬁdence changes owing to biased self-
attribution, and if overreaction or correction is sufﬁciently gradual,
then stock price changes will exhibit unconditional short-lag posi-
tive autocorrelation (“momentum”) and long-lag negative autocor-
relation (“reversal”).
According to Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), their momentum evidence is
“consistent with delayed price reactions to ﬁrm-speciﬁc information.”
Proposition 7 offers a very different possible interpretation, namely, that
momentum occurs not because the market is slow to react to news, but be-
cause the market initially overreacts to the news, and later public news trig-
gers further overreaction to the initial private signal. More generally,
Proposition 7 refutes the common casual equating of positive versus nega-
tive autocorrelations with underreaction versus overreaction to new infor-
mation. While negative autocorrelations result from overreaction in the
model, positive autocorrelations also result from continuing overreaction
(followed by underreaction in the correction of this error).
Evidence from the psychological literature suggests that individuals tend
to be more overconﬁdent in settings where feedback on their information
or decisions is slow or inconclusive than where the feedback is clear and
rapid (Einhorn 1980). Thus, mispricing should be stronger in stocks which
480
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM
17 Formally, cov(P2 −P1, P1 −P0) > 0, cov(P3 −P3′, P3′ −P2) > 0, and cov(P3′ −P2, P2 −
P1) < 0. See the appendix of Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998).

require more judgment to evaluate, and where the feedback on this judg-
ment is ambiguous in the short run, such as for growth stocks whose value
is, on average, more strongly tied to hard to value growth options. This
conjecture is consistent with recent work by Daniel and Titman (1999),
which ﬁnds that the momentum effect is strong in growth stocks, but is
weak or nonexistent in value stocks. This line of reasoning also suggests
that momentum should be stronger for stocks that are difﬁcult to value,
such as those with high R&D expenditures or intangible assets.
B. A Dynamic Model of Outcome-dependent Conﬁdence
We now extend this model to an arbitrary number of periods and present
numerical simulations. The analysis implies patterns of security price-
change autocorrelations consistent with the ﬁndings of subsection A. It also
yields further implications for the correlation between public information
announcements (such as managers’ forecasts or ﬁnancial reports of sales,
cash ﬂows or earnings) and future price changes.
B.1 the model
We retain the basic structure considered in earlier sections. We assume that
the investor has a prior on the precision of his private signal, and uses an
updating rule that reﬂects self-attribution bias. As before, the (unobserv-
able) value of a share of the ﬁrm’s stock is ˜θ  (0, σ 2θ). The public noise
variance σ 2θ is common knowledge. At date 1, each informed investor re-
ceives a private signal 
where  ˜  (0, σ 2). At dates 2 through T, 
a public signal  ˜φt is released, 
where ˜ηt is i.i.d and ˜η  (0, σ 2η).
The variance of the noise, σ 2η, is also common knowledge. Let Φt be the av-
erage of all public signals through time t:
(17)
The average public signal Φt is a sufﬁcient statistic for the t −1 public signals,
and  ˜Φt  (θ, σ 2η/(t −1)).
As before, an informed investor forms expectations about value ration-
ally (using Bayesian updating) except for his perceptions of his private in-
formation precision. The error variance σ 2 is incorrectly perceived by the
investor. He estimates σ 2 using an ad hoc rule described below. At time 1,
the investor believes that the precision of his signal, υC,1 = 1/σ 2C,1, is greater
than the true precision υ = 1/σ 2. At every subsequent release of public in-
formation the investor updates his estimate of the noise variance. If the new
public signal (φt) conﬁrms the investor’s private signal s1, and the private
signal is not too far away from the public signal, then the investor becomes
Φt
t
t
t
t
=
−
=
+
−
=
=
∑
∑
1
1
1
1
2
2
(
)
˜
(
)
˜ .
φ
θ
η
τ
τ
τ
τ
˜
˜
˜ ,
φ
θ
η
t
t
=
+
˜
˜
˜
s1 =
+
θ

INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
481

more conﬁdent in his private signal. If the new public signal disconﬁrms his
private signal, the investor revises the estimated precision downwards, but
not by as much. Thus, the speciﬁc updating rule that we implement is:
(18)
where σΦ,t is the standard deviation of Φ at time t. We impose the restriction
that 
The ratio 
is an index of the investor’s attribu-
tion bias.18
B.2 the equilibrium
Since the investor is risk-neutral and the risk-free rate is zero, at each point
in time the stock price is the expectation of its terminal value:
(19)
Deﬁne vθ = 1/σ 2θ, and vη = 1/σ 2η. The price of the security at time t is
given by:
(20)
Recall that the precision of Φt is (t −1)vη.
B.3 simulation results and empirical implications
For the simulation we use the parameters 
σ 2θ = σ 2ε = 1,
and σ 2η = 7.5. We also make the investor’s initial estimate of his precision
equal to the true precision of his private signal. We perform this simulation
50,000 times, each time redrawing the value θ, the private signal s1 = θ + ε,
and the public information set φt, for t = 2, . . . T.
It is useful to ﬁrst illustrate the dynamic price path implied by the model
for speciﬁc realizations of s1 and θ. Figure 13.2 shows the average price path
following a private signal of s = 1 when θ = 0, so that the informed investors’
signal is unduly favorable. The price initially jumps from 0 up to 0.5, a ra-
tional assessment. On average, the price continues moving up, reaching a
maximum of 0.7366 in period 16. The average price then declines, and even-
tually asymptotes to zero. Thus, there is an initial overreaction phase in
k
k
=
=
0 75
0 1
.
,
. ,
 
˜
[ ˜
,
]
(
)
.
,
,
P
E
s
t
v
v
s
v
v
v
t
C
t
t
C t
C t
=
=
−
+
+
+
θ
η
θ
η
 1
1
1
Φ
Φ
P
E
s
E
s
t
C
t
C
t
=
=
[ ˜
,
, . . . ,
]
[ ˜
,
].
θ
φ
φ
θ


1
2
1 Φ
(
)/(
)
1
1
+
−
k
k
k
k
>
> 0.
if
(
)
(
) and
2
then
(
)
otherwise
(
)
,
,
,
,
,
,
sign s
sign
s
v
k v
v
k v
t
t
t
t
t
C t
C t
C t
C t
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
−
=
−
−
=
+
=
−






−
−
−
−
−
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
φ
σ

 <
482
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM
18 Several alternative ad hoc updating rules consistent with this intuition all lead to roughly
equivalent results. For tractability, we assume that the investor forms beliefs as if, at each
point in time, he knows his exact signal precision. Rationally he should allow for the fact that
vC,t is an estimate. We expect that the essential results are not sensitive to this simpliﬁcation.

which the price moves away from the true value as the investor’s attribution
bias causes him to place more weight, on average, on his private information.
Eventually the public information become precise enough that the investor
revises his valuation of the security downward. This is the correction phase.
A similar hump-shaped pattern holds for an investors’ self-perceived preci-
sion (conﬁdence) as a function of time. This changing conﬁdence is the
source of the overreacting average price trend.
Figure 13.3 presents the unconditional average autocorrelations (at lags
between 1 period and 119 periods), where now 
are resampled for
each iteration. This ﬁgure conﬁrms the intuition derived from ﬁgure 13.2
that short-lag price change autocorrelations should be positive and long-lag
autocorrelations should be negative.
Several papers examine “long-horizon” regressions of long period re-
turns on past returns (see, e.g., Fama and French 1988) rather than long-lag
autocorrelations of short-period returns. In our model, it is straightforward
to show that there is a one-to-one mapping between price change autocor-
relations and more standard test statistics such as variance ratios or long-
horizon regression coefﬁcients. In unreported simulations, these coefﬁcients
exhibit behavior similar to that of the autocorrelations. Short-horizon re-
gression coefﬁcients are positive and long-horizon ones are negative, con-
sistent with empirical literature on momentum and reversals.
˜ and ˜
θ
s1
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
483
  	


 







 	







  
	
	 


Figure 13.2. Average price path following private information shock. This ﬁgure
shows average price path calculated using the simulation in Section 3.B.3, following
a private information shock s1 = 1. The price-path is shown for the dynamic model
with (solid line) and without (dashed line) self-attribution bias.

The conclusions of this simulation are summarized as follows:
Result 1. In the biased self-attribution setting of Subsection B, if the
true share value θ = 0 and the initial private signal s1 = 1, then with
sufﬁcient attribution bias the average price at ﬁrst rises and then
gradually declines. This contrasts with a steadily declining price path
if there is no attribution bias. In the biased self-attribution setting,
average self-perceived precision also initially rises and then declines.
Result 2. In the biased self-attribution setting of Subsection B, short-
lag autocorrelations (correlating single-period price changes with
single-period price changes) are positive and long-lag autocorrela-
tions are negative.
Result 3. In the biased self-attribution setting of Subsection B, short-
term autocorrelations are positive and long-horizon autocorrelations
are negative.
Recent research indicates strong and consistent evidence of momentum in
the United States and in European countries, but weak and insigniﬁcant evi-
dence of momentum in Japan (see, e.g., Haugen and Baker 1996, and Daniel,
Titman, and Wei 2001). There is corresponding evidence of a difference in 
484
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM
  	

	
 




 
 

 





	



Figure 13.3. Average price-change autocorrelations. This ﬁgure presents the uncon-
ditional average autocorrelations (at lags between 1 period and 119 periods), calcu-
lated using the simulation described in section 3.B.3.

biased self-attributions in Western versus Asian groups, especially Japan. For
example, Kitayama, Takagi, and Matsumoto (1995) review twenty-three
studies conducted in Japan that ﬁnd essentially no evidence of self-enhancing
biases in attribution. These ﬁndings suggest the more general prediction that
cultures in which there is little or no self-enhancing attribution bias (e.g.,
other Asian countries such as Korea, PRC, and Taiwan; see the references in
Kitayama, Takagi, and Matsumoto 1995) should have weak momentum
effects.
DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990a) have derived secu-
rity return autocorrelations in a model with mechanistic positive feedback
traders. Our approach differs in explicitly modeling the decisions of quasi-
rational individuals. Our model provides one possible psychological foun-
dation for a stochastic tendency for trades to be correlated with past price
movements, which can create an appearance of positive feedback trading.
B.4 correlation of accounting performance 
with subsequent price changes
Finally, we consider the implications of this model for the correlation be-
tween accounting performance and future price changes. Accounting infor-
mation (sales, earnings, etc.) can be thought of as noisy public signals about
θ, so in this subsection we interpret the φs as accounting performance change
measures. Consider the ﬁrst public signal (at t = 2). If this is positive, the ﬁrst
private signal was probably also positive. Based on the momentum results in
this section, this suggests that prices will continue to increase after the arrival
date of the public signal, consistent with empirical evidence on earnings-
based return predictability. Eventually prices will decline as the cumulative
public signal becomes more precise and informed investors put less weight on
their signal. Thus, the analysis of this section suggests that earnings-based re-
turn predictability, like stock-price momentum, may be a phenomenon of
continuing overreaction.19 In the long-run, of course, the security price will
return to its full-information value, implying long-run negative correlations
between accounting performance and future price changes. This conjecture is
consistent with the empirical evidence though, from an empirical standpoint,
statistical power to detect long-lag autocorrelations is limited.
To evaluate the above conjecture, we again calculate average correlations
using our simulation as follows. For each 
(for t = 2, 120) we calculate
the “earnings” surprise, deﬁned as:
(21)
the deviation of φt from its expected value based on all past public signals.
Then, we calculate the set of sample correlations between the ∆et and price
∆
Φ
e
E
t
t
t
t
t
t
=
−
=
−
−
˜
˜
[ ˜
,
, . . . ,
],
φ
φ
φ φ
φ
φ

2
3
1
˜φt
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
485
19 The discussion of event-study implications in subsection B.3 describes conditions under
which postearnings announcement drift could be an underreaction effect.

changes τ periods in the future ∆Pt + τ = Pt + τ −Pt + τ −1. These correlations
are then averaged over the Monte Carlo draws. The average correlations
are plotted in ﬁgure 13.4. This simulation yields:
Result 4. In the biased self-attribution setting of subsection B, short-
lag correlations between single-period stock price changes and past
earnings are positive, and long-lag correlations can be positive or
negative.
To summarize, the analysis suggests that the conclusion from the basic
model that investors overreact to private signals holds in the dynamic
model. While investors underreact on average to public signals, public sig-
nals initially tend to stimulate additional overreaction to a previous pri-
vate signal. Thus, underreaction is mixed with continuing overreaction.
In the model of this section, earnings-based return predictability and mo-
mentum both arise from self-attribution bias. Further, the literature cited in
subsection B.3 suggests that the magnitude of this bias varies systematically
across countries. Based on these observations, the self-attribution model
suggests a positive relationship across international markets between the
strength of the momentum effect and that of the postearnings announce-
ment drift.
486
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM
   	
 

 







	
	 

 	

	
 

		
	





Figure 13.4. Correlation between information changes and future price changes.
This ﬁgure shows the set of average sample correlations between the ∆et and price
changes τ periods in the future ∆Pt + τ = Pt + τ −Pt + τ −1. These are calculated using
the simulated dynamic model of section 3.B.3.

IV. Conclusion
Empirical securities markets research in the last three decades has presented
a body of evidence with systematic patterns that are not easy to explain
with rational asset pricing models. Some studies conclude that the market
underreacts to information, while others ﬁnd evidence of overreaction. We
have lacked a theory to integrate this evidence, and to make predictions
about when over- or underreaction will occur.
This work develops a theory based on investor overconﬁdence and on
changes in conﬁdence resulting from biased self-attribution of investment
outcomes. The theory implies that investors will overreact to private infor-
mation signals and underreact to public information signals. In contrast
with the common correspondence of positive (negative) return autocorrela-
tions with underreaction (overreaction) to new information, we show that
positive return autocorrelations can be a result of continuing overreaction.
This is followed by by long-run correction. Thus, short-run positive auto-
correlations can be consistent with long-run negative autocorrelations.
The theory also offers an explanation for the phenomenon of average
public event stock price reactions of the same sign as postevent long-run ab-
normal returns. This pattern has sometimes been interpreted as market
underreaction to the event. We show that underreaction to new public infor-
mation is neither a necessary nor a sufﬁcient condition for such event-based
predictability. Such predictability can arise from underreaction only if the
event is chosen in response to market mispricing. Alternatively, predictabil-
ity can arise when the public event triggers a continuing overreaction. For
example, postearnings announcement drift may be a continuing overreac-
tion triggered by the earnings announcement to preevent information.
The basic noise trading approach to securities markets (e.g., Grossman
and Stiglitz 1980, Shiller 1984, Kyle 1985, Glosten and Milgrom 1985,
Black 1986, DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann 1990b, and Camp-
bell and Kyle 1993) posits that there is variability in prices arising from un-
predictable trading that seems unrelated to valid information. Our approach
is based on the premise that an important class of mistakes by investors in-
volves the misinterpretation of genuine new private information. Thus, our
model endogenously generates trading mistakes that are correlated with fun-
damentals. Modeling the decision problems of quasi-rational traders im-
poses restrictions on trade distributions that are not obvious if distributions
are imposed exogenously. This structure provides predictions about the dy-
namic behavior of asset prices which depend on the particular cognitive
error that is assumed. For example, underconﬁdence also gives rise to quasi-
rational trading that is correlated with fundamentals, but gives rise to em-
pirical predictions which are the reverse of what the empirical literature
ﬁnds. Speciﬁcally, if informed investors are underconﬁdent (σ 2C > σ 2), there
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
487

will be insufﬁcient volatility relative to the rational level, long-run return
continuation, and negative correlation between selective events such as re-
purchase and postevent returns. Of course, one could arbitrarily specify
whatever pattern of correlated noise is needed to match empirically ob-
served ex post price patterns. Such an exercise would merely be a relabeling
of the puzzle, not a theory. Instead, we examine a form of irrationality con-
sistent with well-documented psychological biases, and our key contribution
is to show that these biases induce several of the anomalous price patterns
documented in the empirical literature.
Some models of exogenous noise trades (e.g., DeLong, Shleifer, Summers,
and Waldmann 1990b, Campbell and Kyle 1993) also imply long-run re-
versals and excess volatility because of the time-varying risk premia induced
by these trades. Our approach additionally reconciles long-run reversals
with short-term momentum, explains event-based return predictability, and
offers several other distinct empirical predictions (see subsections 2.B.1–
2.B.3).
As noted in the introduction, a possible objection to models with imper-
fectly rational traders is that wealth may shift from foolish to rational
traders until price-setting is dominated by rational traders. For example, in
our model the overconﬁdent informed traders lose money on average. This
outcome is similar to the standard result that informed investors cannot
proﬁt from trading with uninformed investors unless there is some “noise”
or “supply shock.” However, recent literature has shown that in the long-
run rational traders may not predominate. DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and
Waldman (1990b, 1991) point out that if traders are risk-averse, a trader
who underestimates risk will allocate more wealth to risky, high expected
return assets. If risk averse traders are overconﬁdent about genuine infor-
mation signals (as in our model), overconﬁdence allows them to exploit in-
formation more effectively. Thus, the expected proﬁts of the overconﬁdent
can be greater than those of the fully rational (see Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam 2001).
Furthermore, owing to biased self-attribution, those who acquire wealth
through successful investment may become more overconﬁdent (see also
Gervais and Odean 2001). Another distinct beneﬁt of overconﬁdence is
that this can act like a commitment to trade aggressively. Since this may in-
timidate competing informed traders, those known to be overconﬁdent
may earn higher returns (see Kyle and Wang 1997, and Benos 1998).
Recent evidence suggests that event-based return predictability varies
across stocks (e.g., Brav and Gompers 1997). Moving beyond the conﬁnes
of the formal model, we expect the effects of overconﬁdence to be more se-
vere in less liquid securities and assets. Suppose that all investors are risk
averse and that prices are not fully revealing (perhaps because of noisy liq-
uidity trading). If rational arbitrageurs face ﬁxed setup costs of learning
about a stock, then large liquid stocks will tend to be better arbitraged
488
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

(more rationally priced) than small stocks, because it is easier to cover the
ﬁxed investigation cost in large, liquid stocks. This suggests greater inefﬁ-
ciencies for small stocks than for large stocks, and for less liquid securities
and assets such as real estate than for stocks. Furthermore, since the model
is based on overconﬁdence about private information, the model predicts
that return predictability will be be strongest in ﬁrms with the greatest in-
formation asymmetries. This also implies greater inefﬁciencies in the stock
prices of small companies. Furthermore, proxies for information asymme-
try such as the adverse selection component of the bid-ask spread should
also be positively related to momentum reversal, and postevent drift.
It is an open question whether the overconﬁdent traders in the model can
be identiﬁed with a speciﬁc category of investor, such as institutions, other
investment professionals, small individual investors, or all three. Even small
individual investors, who presumably have less information, may still be
overconﬁdent. The uninformed investors of the model could be interpreted
as being contrarian-strategy investors (whether institutions or individuals).
(Some smart contrarian investors could be viewed as rational and informed;
including such traders would not change the qualitative nature of the model
predictions.) An identiﬁcation of the conﬁdence characteristics of different
observable investor categories may generate further empirical implications,
and is an avenue for further research.
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
489

Appendix A: Covariance and Variance Calculations 
for the Basic Model
Covariances and Variances of Section 2.B,
and Proof of Proposition 3
The calculations of the covariances and variances presented in Section 2.B,
and the proof of Proposition 3 follow by routine application of the proper-
ties of multivariate normal variables. For details, see Daniel, Hirshleifer,
and Subrahmanyam (1998).
Proofs of Some Claims in Section B.3
Part 1 of Proposition 4: Denote the date 2 mispricing as M2. Suppress-
ing arguments on PR2 (s2) and PC2 (s2), we have that M2 = PR2 −PC2 =
−E[θ −PC2 (s2)s1, s2]. By the properties of normal random variables,
this implies that the variable x = θ −PC2 + M2, which is the residual
from the regression of θ −PC2 on s1 and s2, is orthogonal to s1 and
s2. Suppose we pick a variable y = f(s1, s2) which is orthogonal to
M2. Such a variable will be orthogonal to x, so that we have cov(θ −
PC2 + M2, y) = 0. Since cov(M2, y) = 0 by construction, it follows from
the linearity of the covariance operator that cov(θ −PC2, y) = 0. A con-
verse argument shows that if we pick a variable y′ = g(s1, s2) which is
orthogonal to the post event return θ −PC2 then cov(M2, y′) = 0.
Thus, all functions of s1 and s2 are orthogonal to M2 if and only if
they are orthogonal to the post event return θ −PC2.
For the speciﬁc case when the event depends linearly on s2, by (6),
(A1)
Since s2 ≡θ + η, from the above expression, it immediately follows
that cov(P3 −P2, s2) = 0, thus showing that events that depend only
on s2 are non-selective.
Part 2 of Proposition 4: By standard results for calculating conditional
variances of normal variables (Anderson (1984)),
(A2)
which is positive under overconﬁdence (σ 2C > σ 2).
cov(
,
)
cov(
,
)
(
)
[
(
)
](
)
,
P
P s s
P
P s P
P
p
C
C
p
p
3
2
2
1
3
2
2
1
0
2
4
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
−
=
−
−
=
−
+
+
+


σ σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
σ
σ
θ
θ
θ
θ


P
P
C
p
p
C
C
p
C
p
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
−
=
−
−
+
+
σ σ θ
σ σ
σ σ η
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
θ
θ
θ

(
)
.
490
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

Proposition 5: Using standard normal distribution properties,
* = E[P1, θ + η]
(A3)
It is straightforward to show that the ratio of the date 2 mispricing
to * is
(A4)
which is constant (for a given level of conﬁdence). Thus, selective
events can alternatively be viewed as events that are linearly related
to *.
High values of * signify overpricing and low values underpricing.
The proposition follows by observing that
(A5)
and
(A6)
Since cov(P3 −P2, *) < 0, by the conditioning properties of mean-
zero normal distributions, E[P3 −P2*] can be written in the form
k*, where k < 0 is a constant. Thus, E[P3 −P2*] < 0 if and only
if * > 0. Since this holds for each positive realization of *, E[P3 −
P2* > 0] < 0. By symmetric reasoning, E[P3 −P2* < 0] > 0. The
result for event-date price reactions uses a similar method. Since
cov(P2 −P1, *) < 0, it follows that E[P2 −P1*] < 0 if and only if
* > 0.
Proposition 6: We interpret the “fundamental/price” ratio or “run-up”
as 
For part 1,
(A7)
By our assumption that the selective event is linearly related to *,
the selective event is positively correlated with the mispricing mea-
sure, proving part 1.
cov(
, *)
[
(
)
]
(
)
.
θ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
θ
θ
θ
θ
−
=
+
+
+
+
>
P
p
p
C
p
p
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0



θ −P1.
cov(
, *)
[
(
)
]
(
)[
(
)
]
.
P
P
C
p
p
C
C
p
p
2
1
2
2
4
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2 2
0
−
= −
+
+
+
+
+
<



σ σ σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
cov(
, *)
(
)
(
)
[
(
)
][
(
)
]
P
P
p
C
p
p
C
p
p
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
−
=
+
+
−
+
+
+
+
<




σ σ σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
η
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
σ σ
σ
σ
θ
θ
θ
θ

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
[
(
)
]
(
)
,
C
p
p
p
C
+
+
−
=
+
+
−
+
+
+
σ
σ
σ
θ
σ σ
θ
η
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
θ
θ
θ
θ




2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
.
p
p
p
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
491

For part 2, note that * = k1s1 + k2s2, where
(A8)
(A9)
This implies that the distribution of * conditional on θ +  is nor-
mal with mean
(A10)
and variance
(A11)
The complement of the standardized cumulative normal distribution
function of a normal random variable with nonzero mean and vari-
ance is increasing in its mean. Since E[*θ + ] is proportional to θ + ,
the probability conditional on P1 that * exceeds a given threshold
value (indicating occurrence of the positive event) is increasing in θ + .
The reverse holds for a negative event, proving part (2).
Appendix B: Discrete Model of Outcome-dependent
Overconﬁdence
At time 0, θ has a value of +1 or −1 and an expected value of zero. At time
1, the player receives a signal s1, and, at time 2, a signal s2. s1 may be either
H or L while s2 may be either U or D. After each signal, the player updates
his prior expected value of θ.
Pr(s1 = Hθ = +1) = p = Pr(s1 = Lθ = −1),
(A12)
Pr(s2 = Uθ = +1) = q = Pr(s2 = Dθ = −1).
(A13)
The probabilities that θ = +1, given s1 and s2 are
(A14)
Pr
Pr
Pr
Pr
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
/
/
(
)/
.
θ
θ
θ
= +
=
=
=
= +
= +
=
=
+
−
=
1
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
1


s
H
s
H
s
H
p
p
p
p
[(
)
] (
).
k
k
k
1
2
2
1
2 2
2
2
+
+
+
+
σ
σ
σ
σ
θ
θ
θ



(
)
(
)
k
k
k
1
2
2
1
2
2
2
+
+
+
+
σ
σ
σ
σ
θ
θ
θ



k
C
p
p
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
= −
+
+
σ σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
θ
θ
θ

(
)
.
k
p
C
p
p
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
=
+
+
+
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ σ
θ
θ
θ
 (
)
(
)
,
492
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

When s2 conﬁrms s2 (either s1 = H, s2 = U or s1 = L, s2 = D), the player be-
comes overconﬁdent and acts as if his precision were pC instead of p, so
(A15)
When s2 is informative (q > 1/2), this probability exceeds pC. When s2 does
not conﬁrm s1, the player does not become overconﬁdent, so
(A16)
When evaluated with an informative signal s2 (q > 1/2), this probability is
less than p. With a risk neutral player, the price of the asset with value θ
can be calculated linearly using the above probabilities. The price at time
0 (P0) is, by definition, equal to 0. As θ can take on a value of +1 or −1,
the price is (ρ)(+1) + (1 −ρ)(−1) or, 2ρ −1, where ρ is the probability that
θ is +1.
(A17)
(A18)
(A19)
The price changes are ∆P1 = P1 −P0 = P1 and ∆P2 = P2 −P1. E[P1] = 0, so
cov(∆P1, ∆P2) = E[∆P1∆P2]. The probabilities of the eight possible outcomes
are:
Pr(θ = +1, s1 = H, s2 = U) = Pr(θ = −1, s1 = L, s2 = D) = pq/2
(A20)
Pr(θ = −1, s1 = H, s2 = U) = Pr(θ = +1, s1 = L, s2 = D)
= (1 −p)(1 −q)/2
(A21)
Pr(θ = +1, s1 = H, s2 = D) = Pr(θ = −1, s1 = L, s2 = U) = p(1 −q)/2
(A22)
Pr(θ = −1, s1 = H, s2 = D) = Pr(θ = +1, s1 = L, s2 = U) = (1 −p)q/2.
(A23)
P
P
s
H s
D
p
q
p
q
pq
H s
D
H s
U
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
1
2



s
s
Pr
1
1
,
,
(
,
)
.
=
=
=
=
= −
=
= +
=
=
−
=
−
+
−
θ
P
P
s
H s
U
p
q
p
q
q
H s
U
H s
D
C
C
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
1



s
s
Pr
1
1
,
,
(
,
)
(
)
(
)
=
=
=
=
= −
=
= +
=
=
−
=
+
−
−
+
−
θ
P
P
s
H
p
H
L
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1



s
s
Pr
1
1
(
)
=
=
= −
=
= +
=
−
=
−
θ
Pr
Pr
Pr
Pr
(
,
)
(
,
)
(
)
(
,
)
(
)
(
)
(
) .
θ
θ
θ
= +
=
=
=
=
=
= +
= +
=
=
=
−
−
+
−
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2


s
H s
D
s
H s
D
s
H s
D
p
q
p
q
q
p
Pr
Pr
Pr
Pr
(
,
)
(
,
)
(
)
(
,
)
(
)
(
) .
θ
θ
θ
= +
=
=
=
=
=
= +
= +
=
=
=
−
+
−
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2


s
H s
U
s
H s
U
s
H s
U
p q
p
q
q
C
C
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
493

The product ∆P1∆P2 can only take on two values, based upon the various
signal combinations:
(A24)
(A25)
Combining, E[∆P1∆P2] can be written as (1 −a)X + aY, where a = p + q −
2pq. After some calculation, the two components of this expression become:
(A26)
aY = 2p(2q −1)(2p −1)(p −1).
(A27)
Combining these two terms and a great deal of factoring produces the ﬁnal
result,
(A28)
When there is no overconﬁdence (pC = p) this expression is zero and price
changes are uncorrelated.
A Second Noisy Public Signal
The model so far shows that overreaction can be exaggerated by a possible
rise in conﬁdence triggered by a noisy public signal. We now add a second
noisy public signal to consider whether correction of mispricing is gradual.
Signal s3′ follows s2 and can take on values G or B. The precision of this
signal is as follows:
Pr(s3′ = Gθ = +1) = r = Pr(s3′ = Bθ = −1).
(A29)
This signal does not affect conﬁdence. If the player becomes overconﬁdent
(and replaces p with pC) after s2, then the player will continue to use pC as
his measure of the precision of s1, regardless of whether s3′ conﬁrms s1. As
there are two possible prices after the ﬁrst signal and four possible prices
after the second, there are eight possible prices after observation of the
third signal. As above, by symmetry, only half of these prices need to be cal-
culated. Using the conditional probabilities, the period three prices are:
 
E
P
P
q
p
p
p
q
p
q
q
C
C
[
]
(
)(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
.
∆
∆
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
0
=
−
−
−
−
+
−
>
(
)
(
)(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2 2
1 2
1
2
2
1
1
−
=
−
−
−
+
+
+
−
−
−
+
−
a X
p
pq
p
q
p p
p q
pq
p pq
p
p
q
q
C
C
C
C
 
Y
P
P
P
P
p
p
q
p
q
p
p
s
H s
D
s
L s
U
≡
=
=
−
−
+
−
−
−




=
=
=
=
[
]
[
]
(
)
(
) .
,
,
∆
∆
∆
∆
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
1
X
P
P
P
P
p
p
q
p
q
q
p
s
H s
U
s
L s
D
C
C
≡
=
=
−
+
−
−
+
−
−
−




=
=
=
=
[
]
[
]
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
) .
,
,
∆
∆
∆
∆
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
494
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

(A30)
(A31)
(A32)
(A33)
With two possible values for θ, there are now sixteen possible sets of {θ, s1,
s2, s3′} realizations. Only {s1, s2, s3′} are observed by the player, resulting in
eight sets of possible signal realizations. When calculating the covariances
of price changes, only half of these realizations can result in unique prod-
ucts of price changes, so we deﬁne
Aij ≡∆Pi∆PjH,U,G = ∆Pi∆PjL,D,B;
(A34)
Bij ≡∆Pi∆PjH,U,B = ∆Pi∆PjL,D,G;
(A35)
Cij ≡∆Pi∆PjH,D,G = ∆Pi∆PjL,U,B;
(A36)
Dij ≡∆Pi∆PjH,D,B = ∆Pi∆PjL,U,G.
(A37)
Each of these four possible products must then be weighted by their proba-
bility of occurrence to calculate the expected value of the products of the
price changes (the expected value of each price is zero). The weights for the
Aij component of covariance are:
Pr(H, U, Gθ = +1) + Pr(H, U, Gθ = −1) = pqr/2
+ (1 −p)(1 −q)(1 −r)/2,
(A38)
Pr(L, D, Bθ = −1) + Pr(L, D, Bθ = −1) = pqr/2
+ (1 −p)(1 −q)(1 −r)/2.
(A39)
Proceeding in this manner, the covariances are:
E[∆Pi∆Pj] = [pqr + (1 −p)(1 −q)(1 −r)]Aij + [pq(1 −r)
+ (1 −p)(1 −q)r]Bij
+ [p(1 −q)r + (1 −p)q(1 −r)]Cij + [p(1 −q)(1 −r)
+ (1 −p)qr]Dij.
(A40)
(Earlier calculations of E[∆P1∆P2] had A12 = B12 = X and C12 = D12 = Y,
with the r and 1 −r factors from s3′ summing to one.) To simplify the algebra,
P
p
q
r
p qr
p
q
r
p qr
H s
D s
B
′
=
=
=
′
=
−
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
3
2
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
s1
,
,
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)(
)
(
)
.
P
p
q r
p q
r
p
q r
p q
r
H s
D s
G
′
=
=
=
′
=
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
−
3
2
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
s1
,
,
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)
(
) (
) ;
P
p q
r
p
q r
p q
r
p
q r
H s
U s
B
C
C
C
C
′
=
=
=
′
=
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
−
3
2
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
s1
,
,
(
)
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)(
) ;
P
p qr
p
q
r
p qr
p
q
r
H s
U s
G
C
C
C
C
′
=
=
=
′
=
−
−
−
−
+
−
−
−
3
2
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
s1
,
,
(
)(
)(
)
(
)(
)(
) ;
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
495

temporarily let all signals have the same precision (i.e., q = r = p), with pC
replacing p as the perceived precision of the ﬁrst signal if overconﬁdence
occurs. Direct calculation of the covariances then shows that
(A41)
(A42)
(A43)
By direct comparison, E[∆P1∆P2]r = q = p and E[∆P2∆P3′]r = q = p are related by:
(A44)
so the covariance between the date 2 and 3 price changes is negatively pro-
portional to the covariance of the date 1 and 2 price changes. Consider the
numerator N of the proportionality factor. The ﬁrst three components,
2p(1 −p), are maximized when p = 1/2 while the next two components,
pC(1 −pC), are maximized when pC = 1/2. Since the last two components
satisfy (2p −1)(2pC −1) < 1, the N ≤1/8. In the denominator D, the ex-
pression pC(2p −1) + (1 −p) is minimized when pC = p = 1/2, resulting in a
minimum of 1/2. The second component of D is similarly minimized when
pC = p = 1/2, resulting in a minimum of 1/4. So D ≥1/8. Since N ≤1/8, the
ratio N/D ≤1. Therefore, the negative covariance between date two and
date three price changes must be, in absolute value, less than or equal to the
positive covariance between period one and period two price changes, re-
sulting in an overall one-period covariance that is positive.
When q = r differs from p, direct calculation of covariances shows:
E[∆P1∆P2]r = q > 0;
(A45)
E[∆P1∆P3′]r = q < 0;
(A46)
E[∆P2∆P3′]r = q < 0.
(A47)
Now let the signal s3′ have a precision of r that differs from both preci-
sions of p and q. Proceeding as above, the covariance satisfy
E[∆P1∆P2] > 0;
(A48)
E[∆P1∆P3′] < 0;
(A49)
E
P
P
p
p p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
E
P
P
r
q
p
C
C
C
C
C
r
q
p
[
]
(
)
(
)(
)(
)
[
(
)
(
)][
(
)
(
) ]
[
]
,
∆
∆
∆
∆
2
3
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
1 2
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
′
=
=
=
=
= −
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
−
+
−
E
P
P
p p
p
p
p p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
r
q
p
C
C
C
C
C
C
[
]
(
) (
)(
)(
) (
)
[
(
)
] [
(
)
(
) ]
.
∆
∆
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
4
1
1 2
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
0
′
=
=
=
−
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
−
+
−
<
E
P
P
pp
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p p
p
p
r
q
p
C
C
C
C
C
[
]
(
)(
)(
)(
)
[
(
)
][
(
)
(
) ]
;
∆
∆
1
3
3
2
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
0
′
=
=
=
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
−
+
−
<
E
P
P
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
r
q
p
C
C
[
]
(
)(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
;
∆
∆
1
2
2 1
2
1
2
1
1
0
=
=
=
−
−
−
−
+
−
>
496
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

E[∆P2∆P3′] < 0;
(A50)
E[∆P3′∆P3] > 0;
(A51)
E[∆P1∆P3] < 0,
(A52)
The magnitude of E[∆P2∆P3′] varies nonmonotonically with q. As r rises
(the precision of s3′ is increased), direct calculation shows that E[∆P2∆P3′]
becomes more negative (increases in absolute value). As r →0.5, this co-
variance approaches zero. Thus, when the second noisy public signal is not
very informative, this negative single-lag covariance becomes arbitrarily
small in absolute value.
Conﬁdence increases when s2 conﬁrms s1, but its effects are mitigated as
s2 becomes more informative. Thus, an increase in the precision of s2 has
an ambiguous effect on E[∆P2∆P3′]. This increase results in a greater likeli-
hood of overconﬁdence occurring, yet also places greater, rational, conﬁ-
dence in s2 itself, yielding less leverage to the effects of overconﬁdence. (At
the extreme, a value of q equal to one yields the greatest chances of s2 con-
firming s1 yet results in zero values for all covariances as the perfect infor-
mation of s2 entirely determines all subsequent prices.) Based on simulation,
it appears that the greater information resulting from higher values of q tends
overshadow the increased likelihood of overconﬁdence, resulting in generally
lower absolute values for E[∆P2∆P3′].
Larger values of r, the precision of s3′, result in more negative values of
E[∆P2∆P3′]. In this case, a more informative second noisy public signal can
only place less weight on previous signals and result in a stronger correc-
tion of the previous overreaction. Thus, the ﬁnal one-period covariance is
more negative as the precision of s3′ rises.
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
497

References
Admati, Anat, and Paul Pﬂeiderer, 1988, A theory of intraday patterns: Volume and
price variability, Review of Financial Studies 1, 3–40.
Ahlers, David, and Josef Lakonishok, 1983, A study of economists’ consensus fore-
casts, Management Science 29, 1113–25.
Alpert, Murray, and Howard Raiffa, 1982, A progress report on the training of
probability assessors, in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky (ed.),
Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge University
Press.
Anderson, Thomas W., 1984, An Introduction to Multivariate Statistical Analysis,
Wiley.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor
sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307–43.
Batchelor, Roy, and Parmi Dua, 1992, Conservatism and consensus-seeking among
economic forecasters, Journal of Forecasting 11, 169–81.
Baumann, Andrea O., Raisa B. Deber, and Gail G. Thompson, 1991, Overconﬁ-
dence among physicians and nurses: The micro-certainty, macro-uncertainty phe-
nomenon, Social Science & Medicine 32, 167–74.
Bem, Daryl J., 1965, An experimental analysis of self-persuasion, Journal of Exper-
imental Social Psychology 1, 199–218.
Benos, Alexandros, 1998, Aggressiveness and survival of overconﬁdent traders,
Journal of Financial Markets 1, 353–83.
Black, Fischer, 1986, Noise, Journal of Finance 41, 529–43.
Brav, Alon, and Paul A. Gompers, 1997, Myth or reality? The long-run underper-
formance of initial public offerings: Evidence from venture and nonventure
capital-backed companies, Journal of Finance 52, 1791–1821.
Caballé, Jordi, and József Sákovics, 1996, Overconﬁdent speculation with imperfect
competition, Working Paper, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption
based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Econ-
omy 107, 205–51.
Campbell, John Y., and Albert S. Kyle, 1993, Smart money, noise trading, and stock
price behaviour, Review of Economic Studies 60, 1–34.
Christensen-Szalanski, Jay J., and James B. Bushyhead, 1981, Physicians’ use of
probabilistic information in a real clinical setting, Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Human Perception and Performance 7, 928–35.
Cooper, Arnold C., Carolyn W. Woo, and William C. Dunkelberg, 1988, Entre-
peneurs’ perceived chances for success, Journal of Business Venturing 3, 97–108.
Cornett, Marcia Millon, Hamid Mehran, and Hassann Tehranian, 1998, Are ﬁnan-
cial markets overly optimistic about the prospects of ﬁrms that issue equity? Evi-
dence from voluntary versus involuntary equity issuance by banks, Journal of Fi-
nance 53, 2139–60.
Daniel, Kent D., David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor
psychology and security market under- and over-reactions, Journal of Finance
53, 1839–86.
498
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

———, 2001, Overconﬁdence, arbitrage, and equilibrium asset pricing, Journal of
Finance 56, 921–65.
Daniel, Kent D., and Sheridan Titman, 1999, Market efﬁciency in an irrational
world, Financial Analysts’ Journal 55, 28–40.
———, and John Wei, 2001, Cross-sectional variation in common stock returns in
Japan, Journal of Finance.
DeBondt, Werner F. M., 1991, What do economists know about the stock market?,
Journal of Portfolio Management 17, 84–91.
———, and Richard H. Thaler, 1990, Do security analysts overreact?, American
Economic Review 80, 52–57.
———, 1995, Financial decision-making in markets and ﬁrms: A behavioral per-
spective, in Robert A. Jarrow, Voijslav Maksimovic, and William T. Ziemba (ed.),
Finance, Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science, vol. 9,
385–410, North Holland.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Robert J. Wald-
mann, 1990a, Noise trader risk in ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Political Econ-
omy 98, 703–738.
———, 1990b, Positive feedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational
speculation, Journal of Finance 45, 375–95.
———, 1991, The survival of noise traders in ﬁnancial markets, Journal of Business
64, 1–20.
Einhorn, Hillel J., 1980, Overconﬁdence in judgment, New Directions for Method-
ology of Social and Behavioral Science 4, 1–16.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Mustafa N. Gultekin, 1984, Professional ex-
pectations: Accuracy and diagnosis of errors, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 19, 351–63.
Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market efﬁciency, long-term returns and behavioral ﬁnance,
Journal of Financial Economics 49.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Permanent and temporary compo-
nents of stock prices, Journal of Political Economy 96, 246–73.
Fischhoff, Baruch, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein, 1977, Knowing with certainty:
the appropriateness of extreme conﬁdence, Journal of Experimental Psychology 3,
552–64.
Fischoff, Baruch, 1982, For those condemned to study the past: Heuristics and bi-
ases in hindsight, in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky (ed.),
Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge University Press.
Froot, Kenneth, and Jeffery A. Frankel, 1989, Forward discount bias: Is it an ex-
change risk premium?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 139–61.
Gervais, Simon, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to be overconﬁdent, Review
of Financial Studies 14, 1–27.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices
in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Finan-
cial Economics 14, 71–100.
Greenwald, Anthony G., 1980, The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and revision of
personal history, American Psychologist 3, 603–18.
Grifﬁn, Dale, and Amos Tversky, 1992, The weighing of evidence and the determi-
nants of overconﬁdence, Cognitive Psychology 24, 411–35.
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
499

Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informa-
tionally efﬁcient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408.
Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, 1985, A sequential signalling model of convertible
debt call policy, Journal of Finance 40, 1263–81.
Haugen, Robert A. and Nardin L. Baker, 1996, Commonality in the determinants
of expected stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401–39.
Hirshleifer, David, 2001, Investor psychology and asset pricing, Journal of Finance
64, 1533–97.
Hirshleifer, David, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Sheridan Titman, 1994, Security
analysis and trading patterns when some investors receive information before
others, Journal of Finance 49, 1665–98.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999, A uniﬁed theory of underreaction,
momentum trading and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54,
2143–84.
Hovakimian, Armen, Tim Opler, and Sheridan Titman, 2001, The debt-equity
choice, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36, 1–24.
Jain, Prem C., and Omesh Kini, 1994, The post-issue operating performance of IPO
ﬁrms, Journal of Finance 49, 1699–1726.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and
selling losers: Implications for stock market efﬁciency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Jung, Kooyul, Yong-Cheol Kim, and René M. Stulz, 1996, Timing, investment op-
portunities, managerial discretion, and the security issue decision, Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics 42, 159–85.
Kidd, John B., 1970, The utilization of subjective probabilities in production plan-
ning, Acta Psychologica 34, 338–47.
Kitayama, Shinobu, H. Takagi, and Hisaya Matsumoto, 1995, Causal attribution
of success and failure: Cultural psychology of the Japanese self, Japanese Psycho-
logical Review 38, 247–80.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53,
1315–35.
Kyle, Albert, and F. Albert Wang, 1997, Speculation duopoly with agreement to
disagree: Can overconﬁdence survive the market test?, Journal of Finance 52,
2073–90.
Langer, Ellen J., and Jane Roth, 1975, Heads I win tails it’s chance: The illusion of
control as a function of the sequence of outcomes in a purely chance task, Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology 32, 951–55.
Lichtenstein, Sarah, Baruch Fischoff, and Lawrence Phillips, 1982, Calibration of
probabilities: The state of the art to 1980, in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and
Amos Tversky (ed.), Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, 306–34,
Cambridge University Press.
Ljungqvist, Alexander P., 1997, Pricing initial public offerings: Further evidence
from Germany, European Economic Review 41, 1309–20.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 1997, The operating performance of ﬁrms conduct-
ing seasoned equity offerings, The Journal of Finance 52, 1823–50.
Loughran, Tim, Jay Ritter, and Kristian Rydqvist, 1994, Initial public offerings: In-
ternational insights, Paciﬁc Basin Finance Journal 2, 165–99.
MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1995, Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the
CAPM, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 3–28.
500
DANIEL, HIRSHLEIFER, SUBRAHMANYAM

Mikkelson, W., M. Megan Partch, and Kshiti Shah, 1997, Ownership and operating
performance of companies that go public, Journal of Financial Economics 44,
281–307.
Miller, Dale T., and Michael Ross, 1975, Self-serving bias in attribution of causality:
Fact or ﬁction?, Psychological Bulletin 82, 213–25.
Neale, Margaret, and Max Bazerman, 1990, Cognition and Rationality in Negotia-
tion, Free Press.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Volume, volatility, price and proﬁt when all traders are
above average, Journal of Finance 53, 1887–1934.
Oskamp, Stuart, 1965, Overconﬁdence in case study judgements, Journal of Con-
sulting Psychology 29, 261–65.
Pagano, Marco, Fabio Panetta, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Why do companies go
public? an empirical analysis, Journal of Finance 53, 27–64.
Rees, William P., 1996, The arrival rate of initial public offers in the UK, Working
Paper 96/8, Department of Accounting and Finance, University of Glasgow.
Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The long-run performance of initial public offerings, Journal of
Finance 46, 3–27.
Russo, J. Edward, and Paul J. H. Schoemaker, 1992, Managing overconﬁdence,
Sloan Management Review 33, 7–17.
Shefrin, Hersh, 1997, Behavioral option pricing, Working Paper, Santa Clara Uni-
versity.
Shiller, Robert J., 1984, Stock prices and social dynamics, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity Review 2, 457–98.
Stael von Holstein, C., 1972, Probabilistic forecasting: An experiment related to the
stock market, Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 8, 139–58.
Svenson, Ola, 1981, Are we all less risky and more skillful than our fellow drivers?,
Acta Psychologica 47, 143–48.
Taylor, Shelley E., and Jonathan D. Brown, 1988, Illusion and well-being: A social
psychological perspective on mental health, Psychological Bulletin 103, 193–210.
Teoh, Siew Hong, T. J. Wong, and Gita Rao, 1998, Are accruals during an initial
public offering opportunistic?, Review of Accounting Studies 3, 175–208.
Wagenaar, Willem, and Gideoan Keren, 1986, Does the expert know? The reliabil-
ity of predictions and conﬁdence ratios of experts, in Erik Hollnagel, Giuseppe
Mancini, and David D. Woods (ed.), Intelligent Decision Support in Process En-
vironment, Springer.
Wang, F. Albert, 1998, Strategic trading, asymmetric information and heteroge-
neous prior beliefs, Journal of Financial Markets 1, 321–52.
Wilson, Pete, 1986, The relative information contents of accruals and cash ﬂows:
Combined evidence of the earnings announcement and annual report release
date, Journal of Accounting Research Supplement, 165–200.
Yates, J. Frank, 1990, Judgement and Decision Making, Prentice Hall.
INVESTOR PSYCHOLOGY
501
