Chapter 14
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION,
MOMENTUM TRADING, AND OVERREACTION 
IN ASSET MARKETS
Harrison Hong and Jeremy C. Stein
Over the last several years, a large volume of empirical work has docu-
mented a variety of ways in which asset returns can be predicted based on
publicly available information. Although different studies have used a host
of different predictive variables, many of the results can be thought of as
belonging to one of two broad categories of phenomena. On the one hand,
returns appear to exhibit continuation, or momentum, in the short to
medium run. On the other hand, there is also a tendency toward reversals,
or fundamental reversion, in the long run.
It is becoming increasingly clear that traditional asset-pricing models—
such as the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) of Sharpe (1964) and Lint-
ner (1965), Ross’s (1976) arbitrage pricing theory (APT) or Merton’s (1973)
intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM)—have a hard time ex-
plaining the growing set of stylized facts. In the context of these models, all
of the predictable patterns in asset returns, at both short and long horizons,
must ultimately be traced to differences in loadings on economically mean-
ingful risk factors. And there is little afﬁrmative evidence at this point to
suggest that this can be done.
As an alternative to these traditional models, many are turning to “be-
havioral” theories, where “behavioral” can be broadly construed as involv-
ing some departure from the classical assumptions of strict rationality and
unlimited computational capacity on the part of investors. But the difﬁculty
with this approach is that there are a potentially huge number of such de-
partures that one might entertain, so it is hard to know where to start.
This research is supported by the National Science Foundation and the Finance Research Cen-
ter at MIT. We are grateful to Denis Gromb, René Stulz, an anonymous referee, and seminar
participants at MIT, Michigan, Wharton, Duke, UCLA, Berkeley, Stanford, and Illinois for
helpful comments and suggestions. Thanks also to Melissa Cunniffe for help in preparing the
manuscript. This is a slightly revised version of a paper of the same title that appeared in the
Journal of Finance in December 1999. It also incorporates some material from our joint paper
with Terence Lim “Bad news Travels Slowly: Size, Analyst Coverage, and the Proﬁtability of
Momentum Strategies.”

In order to impose some discipline on the process, it is useful to articulate
the criteria that a new theory should be expected to satisfy. There seems to be
broad agreement that to be successful, any candidate theory should, at a min-
imum: (1) rest on assumptions about investor behavior that are either a priori
plausible or consistent with casual observation; (2) explain the existing evi-
dence in a parsimonious and uniﬁed way; and 3) make a number of further
predictions which can be subject to “out-of sample” testing and which are ul-
timately validated. Fama (1998, p. 284) puts particular emphasis on the lat-
ter two criteria: “Following the standard scientiﬁc rule, market efﬁciency can
only be replaced by a better speciﬁc model of price formation, itself poten-
tially rejectable by empirical tests. Any alternative model has a daunting task.
It must specify biases on information processing that cause the same in-
vestors to under-react to some types of events and over-react to others.”
A couple of recent papers take up this challenge. Both Barberis, Shleifer,
and Vishny (BSV) (1998) and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam
(DHS) (1998) assume that prices are driven by a single representative agent,
and then posit a small number of cognitive biases that this representative
agent might have. They then investigate the extent to which these biases are
sufﬁcient to simultaneously deliver both short-horizon continuation and
long-horizon reversals.1
In this chapter, we pursue the same goal as BSV and DHS, that of build-
ing a uniﬁed behavioral model. However, we adopt a fundamentally differ-
ent approach. Rather than trying to say much about the psychology of the
representative agent, our emphasis is on the interaction between heteroge-
neous agents. To put it loosely, less of the action in our model comes from
particular cognitive biases that we ascribe to individual traders, and more
of it comes from the way these traders interact with one another.
More speciﬁcally, our model features two types of agents, whom we term
“newswatchers” and “momentum traders.” Neither type is fully rational in
the usual sense. Rather, each is boundedly rational, with the bounded ra-
tionality being of a simple form: each type of agent is only able to “pro-
cess” some subset of the available public information.2 The newswatchers
make forecasts based on signals that they privately observe about future
fundamentals; their limitation is that they do not condition on current or
past prices. Momentum traders, in contrast, do condition on past price
changes. However, their limitation is that their forecasts must be “simple”
(i.e., univariate) functions of the history of past prices.3
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
503
1 We have more to say about these and other related papers in section 4 below.
2 Although the model is simpler with just these two types of traders, the results are robust
to the inclusion of a set of risk-averse, fully rational arbitrageurs, as shown in section 2.B.
3 The constraints that we put on traders’ information-processing abilities are arguably not
as well motivated by the experimental psychology literature as the biases in BSV or DHS, and
so may appear to be more ad hoc. However, they generate new and clear-cut asset-pricing pre-
dictions, some of which have already been supported in recent tests. See section 3 below.

In addition to imposing these two constraints on the information-
processing abilities of our traders, we make one further assumption, which
is more orthodox in nature: private information diffuses gradually across
the newswatcher population. All of our conclusions then ﬂow from these
three key assumptions. We begin by showing that when only newswatchers
are active, prices adjust slowly to new information—there is underreaction
but never overreaction. As is made clear later, this result follows naturally
from combining gradual information diffusion with the assumption that
newswatchers do not extract information from prices.
Next, we add the momentum traders. It is tempting to conjecture that be-
cause the momentum traders can condition on past prices, they arbitrage
away any underreaction left behind by the newswatchers; with sufﬁcient
risk tolerance, one might expect that they would force the market to become
approximately efﬁcient. However, it turns out that this intuition is incom-
plete, if momentum traders are limited to simple strategies. For example,
suppose that a momentum trader at time t must base his trade only on the
price change over some prior interval, say from t −2 to t −1. We show that
in this case, momentum traders’ attempts to proﬁt from the underreaction
caused by newswatchers lead to a perverse outcome: The initial reaction of
prices in the direction of fundamentals is indeed accelerated, but this comes
at the expense of creating an eventual overreaction to any news. This is true
even when momentum traders are risk-neutral.
Again, the key to this result is the assumption that momentum traders
use simple strategies—that is, do not condition on all public information.
Continuing with the example, if a momentum trader’s order at time t is re-
stricted to being a function of just the price change from t −2 to t −1, it is
clear that it must be an increasing function. On average, this simple trend-
chasing strategy makes money. But if one could condition on more infor-
mation, it would become apparent that the strategy does better in some
circumstances than in others. In particular, the strategy earns the bulk of
its proﬁts early in the “momentum cycle”—by which we mean shortly
after substantial news has arrived to the newswatchers—and loses money
late in the cycle, by which time prices have already overshot long-run equi-
librium values.
To see this point, suppose that there is a single dose of good news at time
t and no change in fundamentals after that. The newswatchers cause prices
to jump at time t, but not far enough, so that they are still below their long-
run values. At time t + 1 there is a round of momentum purchases, and
those momentum buyers who get in at this time make money. But this
round of momentum trading creates a further price increase, which sets off
more momentum buying, and so on. Later momentum buyers—that is,
those buying at t + i for some i—lose money, because they get in at a price
above the long-run equilibrium.
504
HONG AND STEIN

Thus a crucial insight is that “early” momentum buyers impose a negative
externality on “late” momentum buyers.4 Ideally, one uses a momentum
strategy because a price increase signals that there is good news about fun-
damentals out there that is not yet fully incorporated into prices. But some-
times, a price increase is the result not of news but just of previous rounds of
momentum trade. Because momentum traders cannot directly condition on
whether or not news has recently arrived, they do not know whether they
are early or late in the cycle. Hence they must live with this externality, and
accept the fact that sometimes they buy when earlier rounds of momentum
trading have pushed prices past long-run equilibrium values.
Although we make two distinct bounded-rationality assumptions, our
model can be said to “unify” underreaction and overreaction in the follow-
ing sense. We begin by modeling a tendency for one group of traders to un-
derreact to private information. We then show that when a second group
of traders tries to exploit this underreaction with a simple arbitrage strat-
egy, they only partially eliminate it and, in so doing, create an excessive mo-
mentum in prices that inevitably culminates in overreaction. Thus, the very
existence of underreaction sows the seeds for overreaction, by making it
proﬁtable for momentum traders to enter the market. Or, said differently,
the unity lies in the fact that our model gets both underreaction and over-
reaction out of just one primitive type of shock: gradually diffusing news
about fundamentals. There are no other exogenous shocks to investor sen-
timent and no liquidity-motivated trades.
In what follows, we develop a simple inﬁnite-horizon model that cap-
tures these ideas. In section 1, we present and solve the basic model, and do
a number of comparative statics experiments. Section 2 contains several ex-
tensions. In section 3, we draw out the model’s empirical implications. Sec-
tion 4 discusses related work, and section 5 concludes.
1. The Model
A. Price Formation with Newswatchers Only
As mentioned above, our model features two classes of traders, newswatch-
ers, and momentum traders. We begin by describing how the model works
when only the newswatchers are present. At every time t, the newswatchers
trade claims on a risky asset. This asset pays a single liquidating dividend at
some later time t. The ultimate value of this liquidating dividend can be
written as: DT = D0 + ∑Tj=0 εj, where all the ε’s are independently distrib-
uted, mean-zero normal random variables with variance σ2. Throughout,
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
505
4 As we discuss below, this “momentum externality” is reminiscent of the herding models of
Banerjee (1992), Bikhchadani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992), and Scharfstein and Stein (1990).

we consider the limiting case where t goes to inﬁnity. This simpliﬁes matters
by allowing us to focus on steady-state trading strategies—that is, strategies
that do not depend on how close we are to the terminal date.5
In order to capture the idea that information moves gradually across
the newswatcher population, we divide this population into z equal-sized
groups. We also assume that every dividend innovation εj can be decom-
posed into z independent subinnovations, each with the same variance σ2/z:
εj = ε1j + . . . + εzj. The timing of information release is then as follows. At time
t, news about εt+z−1 begins to spread. Speciﬁcally, at time t, newswatcher
group 1 observes ε1t+z−1, group 2 observes ε2t+z−1, and so forth, through
group z, which observes εzt+z−1. Thus at time t, each subinnovation of εt+z−1
has been seen by a fraction 1/z of the total population.
Next, at time t + 1, the groups “rotate,” so that group 1 now observes
ε2t+z−1, group 2 observes ε3t+z−1, and so forth, through group z, which now
observes ε1t+z−1. Thus at time t + 1 the information has spread further, and
each subinnovation of εt+z−1 has been seen by a fraction 2/z of the total
population. This rotation process continues until time t + z −1, at which
point every one of the z groups has directly observed each of the subinno-
vations that comprise εt+z−1. So εt+z−1 has become totally public by time
t + z −1. Although this formulation may seem unnecessarily awkward, the
rotation feature is useful, because it implies that even as information moves
slowly across the population, everybody is on average equally well-
informed.6 This symmetry makes it transparently simple to solve for prices,
as is seen momentarily.
In this context, the parameter z can be thought of as a proxy for the
(linear) rate of information flow—higher values of z imply slower infor-
mation diffusion. Of course, the notion that information spreads slowly is
more appropriate for some purposes than others. In particular, this con-
struct is fine if our goal is to capture the sort of underreaction that shows
up empirically as unconditional positive correlation in returns at short
horizons. However, if we are also interested in capturing phenomena like
postearnings-announcement drift—where there is apparently underreac-
tion even to data that is made available to everyone simultaneously—we
need to embellish the model. We discuss this embellishment later on; for
now it is easiest to think of the model as only speaking to the uncondi-
tional evidence on underreaction.
506
HONG AND STEIN
5 A somewhat more natural way to generate an inﬁnite-horizon formulation might be to
allow the asset to pay dividends every period. The only reason we push all the dividends out
into the inﬁnite future is for notational simplicity. In particular, when we consider the strategies
of short-lived momentum traders below, our approach allows us to have these strategies depend
only on momentum traders’ forecasts of price changes, and we can ignore their forecasts of
interim dividend payments.
6 Contrast this with a simpler setting where group 1 always sees all of εt+z−1 ﬁrst, then
group 2 sees it second, etc. In this case, group 1 newswatchers are better-informed than their
peers.

All the newswatchers have constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) utility
with the same risk-aversion parameter, and all live until the terminal date T.
The riskless interest rate is normalized to zero, and the supply of the asset is
ﬁxed at Q. So far, all these assumptions are completely orthodox. We now
make two that are less conventional. First, at every time t, newswatchers
formulate their asset demands based on the static-optimization notion that
they buy and hold until the liquidating dividend at time T.7 Second, and
more critically, while newswatchers can condition on the information sets
described above, they do not condition on current or past prices. In other
words, our equilibrium concept is a Walrasian equilibrium with private val-
uations, as opposed to a fully revealing rational expectations equilibrium.
As suggested in the introduction, these two unconventional assumptions
can be motivated based on a simple form of bounded rationality. One can
think of the newswatchers as having their hands full just ﬁguring out the
implications of the ε’s for the terminal dividend DT. This leaves them un-
able to also use current and past market prices to form more sophisticated
forecasts of DT (our second assumption); it also leaves them unable to
make any forecasts of future price changes, and hence unable to implement
dynamic strategies (our ﬁrst assumption).
Given these assumptions, and the symmetry of our setup, the conditional
variance of fundamentals is the same for all newswatchers, and the price at
time t is given by:
Pt = Dt + {(z −1) εt+1 + (z −2) εt+2 + . . . . . + εt+z−1}/z −θQ
(1)
where θ is a function of newswatchers’ risk aversion and the variance of the
ε’s. For simplicity, we normalize the risk aversion so that θ = 1 hereafter. In
words, Eq. (1) says that the new information works its way linearly into the
price over z periods. This implies that there is positive serial correlation of
returns over short horizons (of length less than z). Note also that prices
never overshoot their long-run values, or equivalently, that there is never
any negative serial correlation in returns at any horizon.
Even given the eminently plausible assumption that private information
diffuses gradually across the population of newswatchers, the gradual-price-
adjustment result in equation (1) hinges critically on the further assumption
that newswatchers do not condition on prices. For if they did—and as long
as Q is nonstochastic—the logic of Grossman (1976) would imply a fully
revealing equilibrium, with a price P*t, following a random walk given by
(for θ = 1):8
P*t = Dt+z−1 −Q
(2)
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
507
7 There is an element of time-inconsistency here, since in fact newswatchers may adjust their
positions over time. Ignoring the dynamic nature of newswatcher strategies is more signiﬁcant
when we add momentum traders to the model, so we discuss this issue further in section 1.B.
8 Strictly speaking, this result also requires that there be an initial “date 0” at which every-
body is symmetrically informed.

We should therefore stress that we view the underreaction result embod-
ied in Eq. (1) to be nothing more than a point of departure. As such, it
raises an obvious next question: Even if newswatchers are too busy pro-
cessing fundamental data to incorporate prices into their forecasts, can’t
some other group of traders focus exclusively on price-based forecasting,
and in so doing generate an outcome close to the rational expectations
equilibrium of Eq. (2)? It is to this central question that we turn next, by
adding the momentum traders into the mix.
B. Adding Momentum Traders to the Model
Momentum traders also have CARA utility. Unlike the newswatchers, how-
ever, they have ﬁnite horizons. In particular, at every time t, a new generation
of momentum traders enters the market. Every trader in this generation takes
a position, and then holds this position for j periods—that is, until time t + j.
For modeling purposes, we treat the momentum traders’ horizon j as an ex-
ogenous parameter.
The momentum traders transact with the newswatchers by means of mar-
ket orders. They submit quantity orders, not knowing the price at which
these orders will be executed. The price is then determined by the competition
among the newswatchers, who double as market-makers in this setup. Thus
in deciding the size of their orders, the momentum traders at time t must try
to predict (Pt+j −Pt). To do so, they make forecasts based on past price
changes. We assume that these forecasts take an especially simple form: The
only conditioning variable is the cumulative price change over the past k
periods, that is, (Pt−1 −Pt−k−1).
As it turns out, the exact value of k is not that important, so in what fol-
lows we simplify things by setting k = 1, and using (Pt−1 −Pt−2) ≡∆Pt−1 as
the time-t forecasting variable.9 What is more signiﬁcant is that we restrict
the momentum traders to making univariate forecasts based on past price
changes. If, in contrast, we allow them to make forecasts using n lags of
price changes, giving different weights to each of the n lags, we suspect that
for sufﬁciently large n, many of the results that we present below would go
away. Again, the motivation is a crude notion of bounded rationality: mo-
mentum traders simply do not have the computational horsepower to run
complicated multivariate regressions.
With k = 1, the order ﬂow from generation-t momentum traders, Ft, is of
the form:
Ft = A + ϕ∆Pt−1
(3)
where the constant A and the elasticity parameter ϕ have to be determined
from optimization on the part of the momentum traders. This order ﬂow
508
HONG AND STEIN
9 In the NBER working paper version, we provide a detailed analysis of the comparative
statics properties of the model with respect to k.

must be absorbed by the newswatchers. We assume that the newswatchers
treat the order ﬂow as an uninformative supply shock. This is consistent
with our prior assumption that the newswatchers do not condition on
prices. Given that the order ﬂow is a linear function of past price changes, if
we allowed the newswatchers to extract information from it, we would be
indirectly allowing them to learn from prices.
To streamline things, the order ﬂow from the newswatchers is the only
source of supply variation in the model. Given that there are j generations
of momentum traders in the market at any point in time, the aggregate sup-
ply St absorbed by the newswatchers is given by:
(4)
We continue to assume that, at any time t, the newswatchers act as if
they buy and hold until the liquidating dividend at time T. This implies that
prices are given exactly as in Eq. (1), except that the ﬁxed supply Q is re-
placed by the variable St, yielding:
(5)
In most of the analysis, the constants Q and A play no role, so we disregard
them when it is convenient to do so.
As noted previously, newswatchers’ behavior is time-inconsistent. Although
at time t they base their demands on the premise that they do not retrade, they
violate this to the extent that they are active in later periods. We adopt this
time-inconsistent shortcut because it dramatically simpliﬁes the analysis. Oth-
erwise, we face a complex dynamic programming problem, with newswatcher
demands at time t depending not only on their forecasts of the liquidating div-
idend DT, but also on their predictions for the entire future path of prices.
Two points can be offered in defense of this time-inconsistent simpliﬁca-
tion. First, it ﬁts with the basic spirit of our approach, which is to have the
newswatchers behave in a simple, boundedly rational fashion. Second, we
have no reason to believe that it colors any of our important qualitative
conclusions. Loosely speaking, we are closing down a “frontrunning” ef-
fect, whereby newswatchers buy more aggressively at time t in response to
good news, since they know that the news will kick off a series of momen-
tum trades and thereby drive prices up further over the next several peri-
ods.10 Such frontrunning by newswatchers may speed the response of prices
to information, thereby mitigating underreaction, but in our setup it can
never wholly eliminate either underreaction or overreaction.11
P
D
z
z
z
Q
jA
P
t
t
t
t
t
z
t
i
i
j
=
+
−
+
−
+ ⋅⋅⋅⋅⋅+
−
+
+
+
+
+
−
−
=∑
{(
)
(
)
}/
1
2
1
2
1
1
ε
ε
ε
ϕ∆
S
Q
F
Q
jA
P
t
t
i
i
j
t
i
i
j
=
−
=
−
−
+ −
=
−
=
∑
∑
1
1
1
ϕ∆
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
509
10 This sort of frontrunning effect is at the center of DeLong et al. (1990).
11 See the NBER working paper version for a fuller treatment of this frontrunning issue.

C. The Nature of Equilibrium
With all of the assumptions in place, we are now ready to solve the model.
The only task is to calculate the equilibrium value of ϕ. Disregarding con-
stants, optimization on the part of the momentum traders implies:
ϕ∆Pt−1 = γEM(Pt+j −Pt)/varM(Pt+j −Pt)
(6)
where γ is the aggregate risk tolerance of the momentum traders, and EM
and varM denote the mean and variance given their information, which is
just ∆Pt−1. We can rewrite Eq. (6) as:
ϕ = γcov(Pt+j −Pt, ∆Pt−1)/{var(∆P)varM(Pt+j −Pt)}
(7)
The deﬁnition of equilibrium is a ﬁxed point such that ϕ is given by Eq. (7),
while at the same time price dynamics satisfy equation (5). We restrict our-
selves to studying covariance-stationary equilibria. In the appendix, we
prove that a necessary condition for a conjectured equilibrium process to
be covarian ce stationary is that ϕ < 1. Such an equilibrium may not exist
for arbitrary parameter values, and we are also unable to generically rule
out the possibility of multiple equilibria. However, we prove in the appen-
dix that existence is guaranteed so long as the risk tolerance γ of the
momentum traders is sufﬁciently small, since this in turn ensures that ϕ is
sufﬁciently small. Moreover, detailed experimentation suggests that a unique
covariance-stationary equilibrium does in fact exist for a large range of the
parameter space.12
In general, it is difﬁcult to solve the model in closed form, and we have to
resort to a computational algorithm to ﬁnd the ﬁxed point. For an arbitrary
set of parameter values, we always begin our numerical search for the ﬁxed
point at j = 1. Given this restriction, we can show that the condition ϕ < 1 is
both necessary and sufﬁcient for covariance-stationarity. We also start with a
small value of risk tolerance and an initial guess for ϕ of zero. The solutions
in this region of the parameter space are well-behaved. Using these solutions,
we then move to other regions of the parameter space. This procedure en-
sures that if there are multiple covariance-stationary equilibria, we would al-
ways pick the one with the smallest value of ϕ. We also have a number of
sensible checks for when we have moved outside the covariance-stationary
region of the parameter space. These are described in the appendix.
Even without doing any computations, we can make several observations
about the nature of equilibrium. First, we have:
510
HONG AND STEIN
12 Our experiments suggest that we only run into existence problems when both the risk
tolerance γ and the information-diffusion parameter z simultaneously become very large—
even an inﬁnite value of γ poses no problem so long as z is not too big. The intuition will be-
come clearer when we do the comparative statics, but loosely speaking, the problem is this: as
z gets large, momentum trading becomes more proﬁtable. Combined with high risk tolerance,
this can make momentum traders behave so aggressively that our ϕ < 1 condition is violated.

Lemma 1: In any covariance-stationary equilibrium, ϕ > 0. That is,
momentum traders must rationally behave as trend-chasers.
The lemma is proved in the appendix, but it is trivially easy to see why
ϕ = 0 cannot be an equilibrium. Suppose to the contrary it is. Then prices
are given as in the all-newswatcher case in Eq. (1). And in this case,
cov(Pt+j −Pt, ∆Pt−1) > 0, so that Eq. (7) tells us that ϕ > 0, establishing a
contradiction.
We are now in a position to make some qualitative statements about the
dynamics of prices. First, let us consider the impulse response of prices to
news shocks. The thought experiment here is as follows. At time t, there is a
one-unit positive innovation εt+z−1 that begins to diffuse among newswatch-
ers. There are no further news shocks from that point on. What does the
price path look like?
The answer can be seen by decomposing the price at any time into two
components: that attributable to newswatchers, and that attributable to
momentum traders. Newswatchers’ aggregate estimate of DT rises from
time t to time t + z −1, by which time they have completely incorporated
the news shock into their forecasts. Thus by time t + z −1, the price is just
right in the absence of any order ﬂow from momentum traders. But with
ϕ > 0, any positive news shock must generate an initially positive impulse
to momentum-trader order ﬂow. Moreover, the cumulative order ﬂow must
be increasing until at least time t + j, since none of the momentum trades
stimulated by the shock begin to be unwound until t + j + 1. This sort of
reasoning leads to the following conclusions:
Proposition 1: In any covariance-stationary equilibrium, given a posi-
tive one-unit shock εt+z−1 that ﬁrst begins to diffuse among news-
watchers at time t: (1) there is always overreaction, in the sense that
the cumulative impulse response of prices peaks at a value that is
strictly greater than one; (2) if the momentum traders’ horizon j sat-
isﬁes j ≥z −1, the cumulative impulse response peaks at t + j, and
then begins to decline, eventually converging to one; (3) if j < z −1,
the cumulative impulse response peaks no earlier than t + j, and
eventually converges to one.
In addition to the impulse response function, it is also interesting to con-
sider the autocovariances of prices at various horizons. We can develop
some rough intuition about these autocovariances by considering the limit-
ing case where the risk tolerance of the momentum traders γ goes to inﬁnity.
In this case, Eq. (7) implies that the equilibrium must have the property that
cov(Pt+j −Pt, ∆Pt−1) = 0. Expanding this expression, we can write:
cov(∆Pt+1, ∆Pt−1) + cov(∆Pt+2, ∆Pt−1) + . . . . . + cov(∆Pt+j, ∆Pt−1) = 0
(8)
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
511

Eq. (8) allows us to state the following:
Proposition 2: In any covariance-stationary equilibrium, if price changes
are positively correlated at short horizons (e.g., if cov(∆Pt+1, ∆Pt−1)
> 0), then with risk-neutral momentum traders they are negatively
correlated at a horizon no longer than j + 1—that is, it must be that
cov(∆Pt+i, ∆Pt−1) < 0 for some i ≤j.
It is useful to explore the differences between Propositions 1 and 2 in
some detail, since at ﬁrst glance, it might appear that they are somewhat
contradictory. On the one hand, Proposition 1 says that in response to
good news, there is continued upward momentum in prices for at least j pe-
riods, and possibly more (if j < z −1). On the other hand, Proposition 2
suggests that price changes begin to be reversed within j + 1 periods, and
quite possibly sooner than that.
The two propositions can be reconciled by noting that the former is a con-
ditional statement—that is, it talks about the path of prices from time t
onward, conditional on there having been a news shock at time t. Thus
Proposition 1 implies that if a trader somehow knows for sure that there is a
news shock at time t, he could make a strictly positive expected proﬁt by buy-
ing at this time and holding until time t + j. One might term such a strategy
“buying early in the momentum cycle”—that is, buying immediately on the
heels of news arrival. But of course, such a strategy is not available to the mo-
mentum traders in our model, since they cannot condition directly on the εs.
In contrast, Proposition 2 is an unconditional statement about the auto-
covariance of prices. It ﬂows from the requirement that if a trader buys at
time t in response to an unconditional price increase at time t −1, and then
holds until t + j, he makes zero proﬁts on average. This zero-proﬁt require-
ment in turn must hold when momentum traders are risk-neutral, because
the unconditional strategy is available to them.
There is a simple reason why an unconditional strategy of buying follow-
ing any price increase does not work as well as the conditional strategy of
buying only following directly observed good news: not all price increases
are news-driven. In particular, a trader who buys based on a price increase
observed at time t runs the following risk. It may be “late” in the momen-
tum cycle, in the sense that there has not been any good news for the last
several periods. Say the last good news hit at t −i. If this is the case, the price
increase at time t is just due to a late round of momentum buying. And those
earlier momentum purchases kicked off by the news at t −i will begin to
be unwound in the very near future (speciﬁcally, at t −i + j + 1) causing the
trader to experience losses well before the end of his trading horizon.
This discussion highlights the key spillover effect that drives our results. A
momentum trader who is fortunate enough to buy shortly after the arrival
of good news imposes a negative externality on those that follow him. He
512
HONG AND STEIN

does so by creating a further price increase that the next generation partially
misinterprets as more good news. This causes the next generation to buy, and
so on. At some point, the buying has gone too far, and the price overshoots
the level warranted by the original news. Given the inability of momentum
traders to condition directly on the ε’s, everybody in the chain is behaving as
rationally as possible, but the externality creates an apparently irrational
outcome in the market as a whole.
D. Winners and Losers
A natural question is whether the bounded rationality of either the news-
watchers or the momentum traders causes them to systematically lose
money. In general, both groups can earn positive expected returns as long
as the net supply Q of the asset is positive. Consider ﬁrst the case where
Q = 0. In this case, it can be shown that the momentum traders earn posi-
tive returns, as long as their risk tolerance is ﬁnite. Because with Q = 0, this
is a zero-sum game, it must therefore be that the newswatchers lose money.
The one exception is when momentum traders are risk-neutral, and both
groups break even.13
When Q > 0, the game becomes positive-sum, as there is a return to risk-
sharing that can be divided between the two groups. Thus even though the
newswatchers may effectively lose some money on a trading basis to the
momentum traders, this can be more than offset by their returns from risk-
sharing, and they can make a net proﬁt. Again, in the limit where the mo-
mentum traders become risk-neutral, both groups break even. The logic is
similar to that with Q = 0, because risk-neutrality on the part of momen-
tum traders dissipates all the risk-sharing proﬁts, restoring the zero-sum na-
ture of the game.
E. Numerical Comparative Statics
In order to develop a better feeling for the properties of the model, we per-
form a variety of numerical comparative statics exercises.14 For each set of
parameter values, we calculate the following ﬁve numbers (1) the equilib-
rium value of ϕ; (2) the unconditional standard deviation of monthly re-
turns ∆P; (3) the standard deviation of the pricing error relative to a rational
expectations benchmark, (Pt −P*t); (4) the cumulative impulse response
of prices to a one-unit ε shock; and (5) the autocorrelations of returns. The
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
513
13 This result is related to the fact that newswatchers have time-inconsistent strategies, so
that in formulating their demands they ignore the fact that they will be transacting with mo-
mentum traders who will be trying to take advantage of them. Thus in some sense, the
newswatchers are more irrational than the momentum traders in this model.
14 The appendix brieﬂy discusses our computational methods.

detailed calculations are not shown; rather we use plots of the impulse re-
sponses to convey the broad intuition.
We begin in ﬁgure 14.1 by investigating the effects of changing the mo-
mentum traders’ horizon j. We hold the information-diffusion parameter z
ﬁxed at 12 months, and set the standard deviation of the fundamental ε
shocks equal to 0.5 per month. Finally, we assume that the aggregate risk
tolerance of the momentum traders, γ, equals 1/3.15 We then experiment
with values of j ranging from 6 to 18 months. As a baseline, focus ﬁrst on
the case where j = 12 months. Consistent with Proposition 1, the impulse
response function peaks 12 months after an ε shock, reaching a value of
1.342. In other words, at the peak, prices overshoot the change in long-run
fundamentals by 34.2 percent. After the peak, prices eventually converge
back to 1.00, although not in a monotonic fashion—rather, there are a se-
ries of damped oscillations as the momentum-trading effects gradually
wring themselves out.
Now ask what happens as j is varied. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the
effects on the impulse response function are nonmonotonic. For example,
514
HONG AND STEIN
 

  






 








 

 
 
 
 
 
 



  Figure 14.1. Cumulative impulse response and momentum traders’ horizon. The
momentum traders’ horizon j takes on values of 6, 12, and 18. Base is the cumula-
tive impulse response without momentum trading. The other parameter values are
set as follows: the information diffusion parameter z is 12, the volatility of news
shocks is 0.5 and the risk tolerance gamma is 1/3.
15 Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993) suggest that this value of risk tolerance is about
right for the market as a whole. Of course, for individual stocks, arbitrageurs may be more
risk-tolerant, since they may not have to bear systematic risk. As we demonstrate below, our
results on overreaction tend to become more pronounced when risk tolerance is increased.

with j = 6, the impulse response peaks at 1.265, while with j = 18, the peak
reaches 1.252, neither as high as in the case where j = 12. This nonmonoto-
nicity arises because of two competing effects. On the one hand, an increase
in j means that there are more generations of momentum traders active in
the market at any one time; hence their cumulative effect should be
stronger, all else equal. On the other hand, the momentum traders ration-
ally recognize the dangers of having a longer horizon—there is a greater
risk that they get caught trading late in the momentum cycle. As a result,
they trade less aggressively, so that ϕ is decreasing in j.
A more clear-cut result appears to emerge when we consider the effect of
j on the time pattern of autocorrelations. As suggested by ﬁgure 14.1, the
smaller j is, the faster the autocorrelations begin to turn negative. For ex-
ample, with j = 6, the ﬁrst negative autocorrelation occurs at a lag of 6
months, while with j = 18, the ﬁrst negative autocorrelation occurs at a lag
of 12 months. Thus the intuition from Proposition 2 seems to carry over to
the case of nonzero risk aversion.
In ﬁgure 14.2, we examine the effect of changing momentum traders’ risk
tolerance. (This Experiment can equivalently be thought of as varying the rel-
ative proportions of momentum traders and newswatchers.) We set j = z = 12
months, and allow γ to vary. As risk tolerance increases, momentum traders
respond more aggressively to past price changes—that is, ϕ increases. This
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
515
 

  






 








 

	

	  
	

	  
	

	  
	


  Figure 14.2. Cumulative impulse response and momentum traders’ risk tolerance.
The momentum traders’ risk tolerance gamma takes on values of 1/11, 1/7 and 1/3.
Base is the cumulative impulse response without momentum trading. The other pa-
rameter values are set as follows: the information diffusion parameter z is 12, the
momentum traders’ horizon j is 12 and the volatility of news shock is 0.5.

causes the impulse response function to reach higher peak values. Also, the
unconditional volatility of monthly returns rises monotonically.16 It turns
out, however, that the effect of risk tolerance on the pricing error (Pt −P*t) is
U-shaped: the pricing error ﬁrst falls, and then rises, as risk tolerance is in-
creased. On the one hand, more momentum trading accelerates the reaction
of prices to information, which reduces underreaction and thereby decreases
pricing errors. On the other hand, more momentum trading also exacerbates
overreaction, which increases pricing errors. Evidently, the two effects inter-
act so as to produce a nonmonotonic pattern.17
Finally, in ﬁgure 14.3, we allow the information-diffusion parameter z to
vary. Increasing z has a monotonic effect on the intensity ϕ of momentum
trade: the slower the newswatchers are to ﬁgure things out, the greater the
proﬁt opportunities are for momentum traders. In the range of the parameter
space where j ≥z −1, the induced increase in ϕ in turn has a monotonic effect
on the peak impulse response—more aggressive momentum trade leads to
more pronounced overshooting, and correspondingly, to negative autocorre-
lations that are generally larger in absolute value during the reversal phase.18
2. Extensions of the Basic Model: More Rational Arbitrage
We now consider a few extensions of the basic model. The overall spirit
here is to ask: What happens as we allow for progressively more rational
behavior by arbitrageurs?
A. Contrarian Strategies
A.1. contrarians and momentum traders are two separate groups
We have emphasized repeatedly that our results are attributable to the as-
sumption that momentum traders make “simple” forecasts—that is, they can
only run univariate regressions. But even if one accepts this restriction at face
value, it begs the following question: Why do all traders have to use the same
single forecasting variable? Why not allow for some heterogeneity in trading
styles, with different groups focusing on different predictive variables?
516
HONG AND STEIN
16 Although volatility rises with momentum trading, it is not necessarily (though it may be)
“excessive” relative to a rational expectations benchmark. This is because we are starting
from a point where there is underreaction, which leads to lower volatility than under a ran-
dom walk.
17 The fact that momentum trading can increase both volatility and pricing errors serves as
another counterexample to Friedman’s (1953) famous claim that proﬁtable speculation must
stabilize prices. See also Hart and Kreps (1986), Stein (1987), and DeLong et al. (1990).
18 When j < z −1, there is no longer a monotonic link between ϕ and the degree of over-
shooting. This is because the biggest momentum trades are already being unwound before
newswatchers have fully incorporated a news shock into their forecasts.

Given the existence of the newswatchers and the underreaction that they
create, it is certainly natural to begin an examination of simple arbitrage
strategies with the sort of momentum-trading style that we have considered
thus far. However, once it is understood that the momentum traders must—
if they are the only arbitrageurs active in the market—ultimately cause
prices to overreact, we then ought to think about the effects of second-round
“contrarian” strategies that might be designed to exploit this overreaction.
To incorporate such contrarian strategies into our model, we assume that
there is a total risk tolerance of γ available to engage in arbitrage activity. We
also continue to assume that all arbitrageurs have horizons of j periods. But
there are now two arbitrage styles. A fraction w of the arbitrageurs are mo-
mentum traders, who use ∆Pt−1 to forecast (Pt+j −Pt). The remaining (l −w)
are contrarians, who use ∆Pt−1−c to forecast (Pt+j −Pt). If we choose the lag
length c properly, the contrarians will in equilibrium put negative weight on
∆Pt−1−c in making these forecasts.
Suppose provisionally that one takes the fraction w as ﬁxed. Then the
equilibrium is a natural generalization of that seen above. In particular,
prices will be given by:
(9)
P
D
z
z
z
P
P
t
t
t
t
t
z
M
t i
C
t
c
i
i
j
=
+
−
+
−
+⋅⋅⋅+
+
+
+
+
+
−
−
−−
=∑
{(
)
(
)
}/
(
)
1
2
1
2
1
1
ε
ε
ε
ϕ
ϕ
∆
∆
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
517
 

  






 








 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


  Figure 14.3. Cumulative impulse response and the information diffusion parameter.
The information diffusion parameter z takes on values of 3, 6, 9, and 12. The other
parameter values are set as follows: momentum traders’ horizon j is 12, the volatil-
ity of news shocks is 0.5, and momentum traders’ risk tolerance gamma is 1/3.

where ϕM and ϕC now denote the trading elasticities of the momentum
traders and the contrarians respectively. These elasticities in turn satisfy:
ϕM = wγ cov(Pt+j −Pt, ∆Pt−1)/{var(∆P)varM(Pt+j −Pt)}
(10)
ϕC = (1 −w)γcov(Pt+j −Pt, ∆Pt−1−c)/{var(∆P)varC(Pt+j −Pt)}
(11)
Equilibrium now involves a two-dimensional ﬁxed point in (ϕM, ϕC) such
that prices are given by equation (9), while at the same time (10) and (11)
are satisﬁed. Although this is a more complicated problem than before, it is
still straightforward to solve numerically. Of course, this is no longer the end
of the story, since we still need to endogenize w. This can be done by impos-
ing an indifference condition: In an interior solution where 0 < w < 1, the
utilities of the momentum traders and contrarians must be equalized, so no-
body wants to switch styles. It turns out that the equal-utility condition can
be simply rewritten in terms of either conditional variances or covariances
of prices (see the appendix for a proof). This gives us:
Proposition 3: In an interior solution with 0 < w < 1, it must be that:
1. var(Pt+j −Pt  ∆Pt−1) = var(Pt+j −Pt  ∆Pt−1−c); or equivalently
2. cov((Pt+j −Pt), ∆Pt−1) = cov((Pt+j −Pt), ∆Pt−1−c); or equivalently
3. cov(∆Pt+1, ∆Pt−1) + cov(∆Pt+2, ∆Pt−1) + . . . + cov(∆Pt+j, ∆Pt−1) =
−cov(∆Pt+1, ∆Pt−1−c) −cov(∆Pt+2, ∆Pt−1−c) −. . . −cov(∆Pt+j,∆Pt−1−c).
The essence of the proposition is that in order for contrarians to be active
in equilibrium (that is, to have w < 1) there must be as much proﬁt oppor-
tunity in the contrarian strategy as in the momentum strategy. Loosely
speaking, this amounts to saying that the negative autocorrelations in the
reversal phase must cumulatively be as large in absolute magnitude as the
positive autocorrelations in the initial underreaction phase. Thus adding
the option of a contrarian strategy to the model cannot overturn the basic
result that if there is underreaction in the short run, there must eventually
be overreaction at some later point.
As it turns out, for a large range of parameter values, we can make a much
stronger statement: the contrarian strategy is not used at all, for any choice of
c. Rather, we get a corner solution of w = 1, in which all arbitrageurs endoge-
nously choose to use a momentum strategy. This is in fact the outcome for
every set of parameters that appears in ﬁgures 14.1–14.3. Thus our previous
numerical solutions are wholly unaffected by adding contrarians to the mix.
In order to get contrarian strategies to be adopted in equilibrium, we
have to crank up the aggregate risk tolerance γ to a very high value. This
does two things: ﬁrst, it drives down the expected proﬁts to the momentum
strategy; and second, it causes the degree of overreaction to increase. Both
of these effects raise the relative appeal of being a contrarian to the point
518
HONG AND STEIN

that some arbitrageurs eventually switch over from the momentum strat-
egy. Figure 14.4 illustrates by considering a situation where z = 3, j = 1,
where the contrarians trade at a lag that is c = 2 periods greater than the
momentum traders, and where the risk tolerance takes on the value 1/0.3.
Given these parameter values, w = 0.786. That is, 78.6 percent of traders
opt to play momentum strategies and the remaining 21.4 percent become
contrarians. The contrarians appear to have a modest stabilizing impact—
the impulse response function peaks at 1.197 when there are only momen-
tum traders, and this ﬁgure declines somewhat, to 1.146, when we allow
for contrarian strategies. Nevertheless, price dynamics are still remarkably
similar to what we have seen throughout. This underscores our key point:
Across a wide range of parameter values, allowing for contrarian strategies
need not alter the important qualitative features of our model.
A.2. arbitrageurs can run bivariate regressions
To further relax our assumptions in the direction of rationality, we now ask
what happens if every arbitrageur becomes incrementally smarter, and can
condition on not one, but two lags of past prices. Said differently, instead of
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
519
 

  




 






	

  

  


Figure 14.4. Cumulative impulse response and contrarian trading. Cumulative im-
pulse responses for all-momentum trading equilibrium (w = 1); the equilibrium in
which traders endogenously choose whether to follow either momentum or contrar-
ian strategies (w = 0.786); and the equilibrium in which traders can optimally condi-
tion on both momentum and contrarian variables (“Both”). The other parameter
values are set as follows: the information diffusion parameter z is 3, the momentum
traders’ horizon j is 1, the volatility of news shocks is 1 and risk tolerance gamma is
1/0.3. The contrarians are assumed to trade based on returns from three periods ago.

forcing each arbitrageur to choose whether to play a momentum strategy
(and condition on ∆Pt−1) or a contrarian strategy (and condition on ∆Pt−1−c),
we now allow them all to play an optimal blended strategy.
The results of this experiment are also illustrated in ﬁgure 14.4. Relative
to the previous case of segregated momentum and contrarian trading, al-
lowing for bivariate regression-running arbitrageurs is more stabilizing. For
example, keeping all other parameters the same as before, the impulse re-
sponse function now reaches a peak of only 1.125, as compared to the
value of 1.146 with segregated momentum and contrarian trading. Never-
theless, its qualitative shape continues to remain similar. Thus while in-
creasing the computational power of arbitrageurs obviously attenuates the
results, it does not appear that we are in a knife-edge situation where every-
thing hangs on them being able to run only univariate regressions.
B. Fully Rational Arbitrage
Finally, it is natural to ask whether our basic results are robust to the intro-
duction of a class of fully rational arbitrageurs. To address this question,
we extend the baseline model of section 1 as follows. In addition to the
newswatchers and the momentum traders, we add a third group of traders,
whom we label the “smart money.” To give these smart-money traders the
best shot at making the market efﬁcient, we consider an extreme case where
they can observe and rationally condition on everything in the model that is
observed by any other trader. Thus, at time t, the smart-money traders ob-
serve all the fundamental information that is available to any of the
newswatchers—that is, they see εt+z−1 and all preceding news innovations
in their entirety. They also can use the complete past history of prices in
their forecasts. Like everyone else, the smart money have CARA utility. Fi-
nally, each generation has a one-period horizon.
Unlike in the cases with contrarian trading considered in sections 2.A.1
and 2.A.2 above, it is very difﬁcult to solve explicitly for the equilibrium
with the smart-money traders, either analytically or via numerical methods.
This is because in the context of our inﬁnite-horizon model, the optimal
forecasts of the smart money are a function of an unbounded set of vari-
ables, as they condition on the entire past history of prices. (They really
have to be very smart in this model to implement fully rational behavior.)
Nevertheless, as proven in the appendix, we are able to make the following
strong general statements about the properties of equilibrium:
Proposition 4: Assume that the risk tolerance of the smart-money
traders is ﬁnite. In any covariance-stationary equilibrium, given a
one-unit shock εt+z−1 that begins to diffuse at time t: (1) there is al-
ways underreaction, in the sense that prices rise by less than one at
time t; (2) there is active momentum trading; (3) there is always
520
HONG AND STEIN

overreaction, in the sense that the cumulative impulse response of
prices peaks at a value that is strictly greater than one.
If the risk tolerance of the smart money traders is inﬁnite, prices follow a
random walk, and there is no momentum trading: ϕ = 0.
The proposition formalizes the intuitive point—common to many models
in this genre—that risk-averse fully rational arbitrageurs attenuate, but do
not eliminate, the effects induced by other less-than-rational traders. In our
particular setting, all the key qualitative results about the dynamics of
prices continue to apply.
3. Empirical Implications
We will not belabor the fact that our model delivers the right ﬁrst-order pre-
dictions for asset returns: positive correlations at short horizons, and nega-
tive correlations at longer horizons. After all, it is designed to do just that.
More interesting are the auxiliary implications, which should allow it to be
tested against other candidate theories of underreaction and overreaction.
A. In What Stocks Do Momentum Strategies Work Best?
In our model, short-term return continuation is a consequence of the gradual
diffusion of private information, combined with the failure of newswatchers
to extract this information from prices. This gradual-information-diffusion
story is logically distinct from the mechanism in other models, such as
BSV’s, that emphasizes a conservatism bias (Edwards 1968) with respect to
public information. Moreover, it has testable cross-sectional implications. If
momentum in stock returns does indeed come from gradual information
ﬂow, then momentum strategies of the sort proposed by Jegadeesh and Tit-
man (1993) should be most proﬁtable among those stocks for which infor-
mation moves most slowly across the investing public.
In research conducted subsequent to the development of the model here,
we attempt in Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000), to test this hypothesis. To do so,
we consider two different proxies for the rate of information diffusion. The
ﬁrst is ﬁrm size. It seems plausible that information about small ﬁrms gets
out more slowly; this would happen if, for example, investors face ﬁxed
costs of information acquisition, and choose to devote more effort to learn-
ing about those stocks in which they can take large positions. Of course, one
must be careful in drawing inferences because size may also capture a vari-
ety of other factors, such as cross-stock differences in arbitrage costs.19 In
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
521
19 Consequently, one might argue that virtually any behavioral model would be consistent
with there being more predictability in small stocks.

light of this concern, we use as a second—and hopefully purer—proxy for in-
formation ﬂow a stock’s residual analyst coverage, after controlling for size.20
The basic ﬁndings from Hong, Lim, and Stein are reproduced here as
tables 14.1–14.3, and ﬁgure 14.5. These ﬁndings can be brieﬂy summarized
as follows. With respect to size, we ﬁnd that once one moves past the very
smallest-capitalization stocks (where price discreteness and/or very thin
market-making capacity are issues) the proﬁtability of Jegadeesh-Titman-
style six-month momentum strategies declines sharply with market cap.
With respect to residual analyst coverage, not only are momentum strate-
gies substantially more proﬁtable at a horizon of six months in low-analyst-
coverage stocks, they are also proﬁtable for longer—there is pronounced
positive correlation of returns for up to about two years in these stocks, as
opposed to less than one year in high-coverage stocks. Size and residual
coverage also interact in an interesting and economically plausible fashion:
the marginal impact of analyst coverage is most pronounced in smaller
stocks, which have fewer analysts to begin with. While it may be possible
to come up with alternative interpretations, all these pieces of evidence
would seem to be strongly consistent with our emphasis in this work on
gradual information ﬂow as the root cause of underreaction.
B. Linking Momentum to Overreaction in the Cross Section
There is also a second, more subtle cross-sectional implication of our model
pertaining to the rate of information ﬂow. In ﬁgure 14.3 we saw that not only
does slower information diffusion lead to higher short-run return correla-
tions, but by making stocks more attractive to momentum traders, it also (for
a wide range of parameter values) leads to more pronounced overshooting
and stronger reversals in the longer run. In other words, the same stocks that
we ﬁnd in Hong, Lim, and Stein to be most “momentum-prone”—small
stocks with relatively few analysts—should also be most “reversal-prone.”
Although this prediction has not to our knowledge been subjected to de-
tailed investigation, it is broadly consistent with recent work which ﬁnds
that much of the long-horizon predictability that has been documented in
the stock market is attributable to smaller-cap companies.21 As noted
above, there is the caveat that size may be proxying for a number of other
factors so, as in Hong, Lim, and Stein, it would be desirable to create a
sharper test, perhaps using analyst coverage or some other nonsize measure
of momentum-proneness.
522
HONG AND STEIN
20 Of course, analyst coverage is not an ideal proxy either, as it may be endogenously re-
lated to a number of other stock-speciﬁc factors besides size. So in various sensitivity tests, we
also control for the correlation between analyst coverage and share turnover, industry factors,
beta, and market-to-book.
21 Fama (1998) argues that this evidence is problematic for existing behavioral models, as
they do not clearly predict that overreaction should be concentrated in smaller stocks.

Table 14.1
Momentum Strategies, 1/1980–12/1996: Using Raw Returns and Sorting by Size
This table includes all stocks. The relative momentum portfolios are formed based on six-month lagged raw returns and held for six
months. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of six-month lagged returns. Portfolio P1 is an equally weighted portfolio
of stocks in the worst performing 30%, portfolio P2 includes the middle 40%, and portfolio P3 includes the best performing 30%. This
table reports the average monthly returns of these portfolios and portfolios formed using size-based subsamples of stocks. Using
NYSE/AMEX decile breakpoints, the smallest ﬁrms are in size class 1, the next in 2, and largest in 10. Mean (median) size is in millions.
T-stats are in parentheses.
Size Class (NYSE/AMEX Decile Breakpoints)
PAST
All Stocks
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
P1
0.01043
0.02106
0.00653
0.00231
0.00194
0.00469
0.00573
0.00606
0.01010 0.00922 0.01258
(2.44)
(4.44)
(1.37)
(0.52)
(0.43)
(1.05)
(1.32)
(1.43)
(2.51)
(2.25)
(3.37)
P2
0.01378
0.01662
0.01290
0.01280
0.01244
0.01395
0.01374
0.01375
0.01393 0.01401 0.01355
(4.48)
(4.97)
(3.84)
(3.88)
(3.75)
(4.18)
(4.14)
(4.27)
(4.40)
(4.43)
(4.50)
P3
0.01570
0.01733
0.01507
0.01664
0.01570
0.01655
0.01608
0.01491
0.01436 0.01363 0.01278
(4.35)
(4.40)
(3.89)
(4.35)
(4.05)
(4.26)
(4.26)
(4.13)
(4.04)
(3.96)
(3.84)
P3 −1
0.00527
−0.003740
0.00854
0.01433
0.01376
0.01187
0.01035
0.00885
0.00425 0.00441 0.00021 
(2.61)
(−1.77)
(3.60)
(6.66)
(6.10)
(5.32)
(4.80)
(3.72)
(1.90)
(1.73)
(0.08)
P2 −P1
P3 −P1
—
0.746
0.732
0.763
0.780
0.774
0.869
0.901
1.086
—
Mean Size
7
21
44
79
138
242
437
806
1658
7290
Median Size
7
21
43
78
136
237
430
786
1612
4504
Mean Analyst
0.1
0.5
1.1
2.0
3.2
5.0
7.3
10.6
15.3
21.4
Median Analyst
0.0
0.0
0.7
1.3
2.5
4.4
6.9
10.5
15.7
22.4

C. Differential Dynamics in Response to Public 
versus Private News Shocks?
As we have stressed repeatedly, the most natural interpretation of the εs in
our model is that they represent information that is initially private, and
that gradually diffuses across the population of investors. Thus our primary
contribution is to show that the equilibrium impulse response to such pri-
vate information must be hump-shaped, with underreaction in the short
run giving way to eventual overreaction. But what about the impulse re-
sponse to news that is simultaneously observed by all investors, such as
earnings announcements?
524
HONG AND STEIN
Table 14.2
Momentum Strategies, 1/1980–12/1996: Using Raw Returns and 
Sorting by Residual Analyst Coverage
This table includes only stocks above the NYSE/AMEX 20th percentile. The rela-
tive momentum portfolios are formed based on six-month lagged raw returns and
held for six months. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of six-
month lagged returns. Portfolio P1 is an equally weighted portfolio of stocks in the
worst performing 30%, portfolio P2 includes the middle 40%, and portfolio P3 in-
cludes the best performing 30%. This table reports the average monthly returns of
these portfolios and portfolios formed using an independent sort on analyst cover-
age residuals of log size and a NASDAQ dummy. The least covered ﬁrms are in
Sub1, the medium covered ﬁrms in Sub2, the most covered ﬁrms in Sub3. Mean
(median) size is in millions. T-stats are in parentheses.
Residual Coverage Class
ALL 
Low:
Medium:
High:
SUB1-
PAST
STOCKS
SUB1
SUB2
SUB3
SUB3
P1
0.00622
0.00271
0.00669
0.00974
−0.00703
(1.54)
(0.66)
(1.70)
(2.31)
(−5.16)
P2
0.01367
0.01257
0.01397
0.01439
−0.00182
(4.40)
(4.20)
(4.58)
(4.29)
(−2.11)
P3
0.01562
0.01402
0.01583
0.01690
−0.00288
(4.35)
(3.95)
(4.52)
(4.45)
(−2.80)
P3-1
0.00940
0.01131
0.00915
0.00716
0.00415
(4.89)
(5.46)
(4.64)
(3.74)
(3.50)
Mean Size
962
986
455
Median Size
103
200
180
Mean Analyst
1.5
6.7
9.7
Median Analyst
0.1
3.5
7.6

Table 14.3
Momentum Strategies, 1/1980–12/1996: Using Raw Returns and Sorting by Size and Residual Analyst Coverage
This table includes only stocks above the NYSE/AMEX 20th percentile. The relative momentum portfolios are formed based on six-
month lagged raw returns and held for six months. The stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of six-month lagged returns.
Portfolio P1 is an equally weighted portfolio of stocks in the worst performing 30%, portfolio P2 includes the middle 40%, and portfo-
lio P3 includes the best performing 30%. This table reports the average monthly returns to portfolios formed by sorts on size and analyst
coverage residuals of log size and a NASDAQ dummy. Size is sorted using NYSE/AMEX breakpoints. The least covered ﬁrms are in
Sub1, the medium covered ﬁrms in Sub2, the most covered ﬁrms in Sub3. Mean (median) size is in millions. T-stats are in parentheses.
Size Class:
Residual 
Coverage Class
1:20th–40th Percentile
2:40th–60th Percentile
3:60th–80th Percentile
4:80th–100th Percentile
Low:Sub1
P3 −P1 = .01511 (6.46)
P3 −P1 = .01057 (4.49)
P3 −P1 =.00605.(3.11) 
P3 −P1=.00092 (0.49)
Mean Size = 63 
Mean Size = 199 
Mean Size = 653 
Mean Size = 5056 
Median Size = 59 
Median Size = 183
Median Size = 592 
Median Size = 2363 
Median Coverage = 0.0
Median Coverage = 0.6
Median Coverage = 3.7
Median Coverage = 11.1
Medium:Sub2
P3 −P1 = 0.01389 (5.48) 
P3 −P1 = 0.00975 (4.95)
P3 −P1 = 0.00316 (1.62)
P3 −P1 = 0.00009 (0.05)
Mean Size = 61 
Mean Size = 207 
Mean Size = 678 
Mean Size = 5163 
Median Size = 56 
Median Size = 193 
Median Size = 629 
Median Size = 2853 
Median Coverage = 0.9
Median Coverage = 3.6
Median Coverage = 9.0
Median Coverage = 18.8
High:Sub3
P3 −P1 = 0.01147 (5.10) 
P3 −P1 = 0.00730 (3.60) 
P3 −P1 = 0.00424 (2.02) 
P3 −P1 = 0.00070 (0.33)
Mean Size = 64 
Mean Size = 202 
Mean Size = 663 
Mean Size = 3650 
Median Size = 61 
Median Size = 188 
Median Size = 615 
Median Size = 2511 
Median Coverage = 3.1
Median Coverage = 7.6
Median Coverage = 14.7
Median Coverage = 24.9
Sub1-Sub3
P3 −P1 = 0.00364(2.13)
P3 −P1 = 0.00327 (1.95)
P3 −P1 = 0.00180 (1.18)
P3 −P1 = 0.00023 (.14)

It is easy to embellish our model so that it also generates short-run un-
derreaction to public news. For example, one might argue that although the
news announcement itself (e.g., “earnings are up by 10 percent”) is public,
it requires some other, private, information (e.g., knowledge of the stochas-
tic process governing earnings) to convert this news into a judgement about
value. If this is true, the market’s response to public news involves the ag-
gregation of private signals, and our previous underreaction results con-
tinue to apply.
On the one hand, this sort of patch adds an element of descriptive real-
ism, given the large body of empirical evidence on postevent drift. But the
more interesting and subtle question is this: If we augment the model so as
to deliver short-run underreaction to public news, what does it have to say
about whether there is overreaction in the longer run to this same news? Is
the impulse response function hump-shaped as before, or do prices drift
gradually to the correct level without going too far?
Unlike with private news, the answer is now less clear. This is because the
inference problem for momentum traders is simpliﬁed. Recall from above
that with private news, a momentum trader never knows whether he is buy-
ing early or late in the cycle—that is, he cannot tell if a price increase is the re-
sult of recent news or of past rounds of momentum trade. But if momentum
526
HONG AND STEIN
  
	
 
 

 








	
 
	
 
 



 

 




 
Figure 14.5. Cumulative beta-adjusted returns in event time: Momentum proﬁts for
low and high coverage stocks. We assign stocks to performance categories based on
six months’ prior beta-adjusted returns, and do an independent sort based on the
analyst coverage residuals. We then track the cumulative beta-adjusted momentum-
portfolio returns (P3-P1) on a month-by-month basis, out to thirty-six months for
low coverage (SUB1) and high coverage (SUB3) stocks.

traders can condition on the fact that there was a public news announcement
at some given date t, they can reﬁne their strategies. In particular, they can
make their strategies time-dependent, so that they only trend-chase aggres-
sively in the periods right after public news, and lay low at other times. If they
do this, there need be no overreaction to public news in equilibrium; rather,
the impulse response function may be increasing everywhere.
Of course, it is conceivable that momentum traders are not so sophisti-
cated, and continue to use strategies that do not depend on how recently
public news was released. If so, the impulse response to public news is also
hump-shaped. But the important point is that the logic of our model admits
(even strongly suggests) the possibility that the response to public news
looks different than that to private information. This is clearly a testable
proposition.
D. Trading Horizons and the Pattern of Return Autocorrelations
One novel feature of our model is that it explicitly links momentum traders’
horizons to the time pattern of return autocorrelations. This link is loosely
suggested by Proposition 2, and it emerges clearly in the comparative statics
results of ﬁgure 14.1: the longer the momentum traders’ horizon j, the
longer it takes for the autocorrelations to switch from positive to negative.
The ﬁrst thing to note in this regard is that our model seems to get the av-
erage magnitudes about right. For example, Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)
ﬁnd that autocorrelations for stock portfolios are positive for roughly
twelve months, and then turn systematically negative. According to our cal-
culations (see the appendix), this is what one should expect if j is on the
order of twelve to eighteen months, which sounds like a plausible value for
the horizon of a trading strategy.22
A second observation is that we can make cross-sectional predictions, to the
extent that we can identify exogenous factors that inﬂuence the trading hori-
zon j. One natural candidate for such a factor is trading cost. It seems plausi-
ble to conjecture that as trading costs increase, momentum traders choose to
hold their positions for longer. If so, we would expect stocks with relatively
high bid-ask spreads to have autocorrelations that stay positive for longer pe-
riods of time before turning negative. Or going across assets classes, we would
expect the same thing for assets such as houses, and collectibles, where trad-
ing costs are no doubt signiﬁcantly higher.23 Some evidence on this latter
point is provided by Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1991). They ﬁnd that, in
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
527
22 As a benchmark, turnover on the NYSE has been in the range of 50 to 60 percent in re-
cent years, implying an average holding period of twenty to twenty-four months. Of course,
momentum traders may have shorter horizons than the average investor.
23 Some care should be taken in testing this prediction, since assets with higher trading costs
are likely to have more stale prices, which can induce spuriously positive autocorrelations in
measured returns.

contrast to equities, the autocorrelations for house and farm prices are posi-
tive at lags of up to three years, and for collectibles, at lags of up to two years.
E. Anecdotal Evidence on Professional Investment Strategies
In our model, momentum traders have two key characteristics: (1) aside
from their inability to run multiple regressions, they are rational maximiz-
ers who make money on average; and (2) they impose a negative externality
on others. The latter feature arises because someone entering the market at
any time t does not know how heavily invested momentum traders are in
the aggregate at this time, and hence cannot predict whether or not there
will be large-scale unwinding of momentum positions in the near future.
Anecdotal evidence supports both of these premises. With regard to the
near-rationality of momentum strategies, it should be noted that a number
of large and presumably sophisticated money managers use what are com-
monly described as momentum approaches, that “emphasize accelerating
sales, earnings, or even stock prices . . . and focus less on traditional valua-
tion measures such as price-to-earnings ratios.”24 This contrasts with the
more pejorative view of positive-feedback trading that prevails in prior aca-
demic work such as that of Delong et al. (1990).
With regard to the negative externalities, it seems that other professional
investors do in fact worry a lot about the dangers of momentum traders un-
winding their positions. The following quotes from money managers illus-
trate these concerns: “Before I look at a stock, I take a look at the (SEC) ﬁl-
ings to see who the major shareholders are. If you see a large amount of
momentum money in there, you have to accept that there’s a high risk . . .”;
“If you’re in with managers who are very momentum oriented . . . you
have to be aware that’s a risk going in. They come barreling out of those
stocks, and they’re not patient about it.”25
In addition to these two premises, anecdotal evidence is also consistent
with one of our key predictions: that momentum traders are more active in
small stocks, where analyst coverage is thinner and information diffuses
more slowly. According to a leading pension fund consultant, “most of the
momentum players play in the small and mid-cap stocks.” And a well-
known momentum investor says that he typically focuses on small compa-
nies because “the market is inefﬁcient for smaller companies.”26
528
HONG AND STEIN
24 The quote is from Ip (1997). Among the large investors labeled momentum players are
Nicholes-Applegate Capital Management, Pilgrim Baxter & Associates, Friess Associates, and
Richard Driehaus, who was ranked ﬁrst among 1,200 managers of all styles for the ﬁve years
ending December 1995, by Performance Analytics, a pension advisory ﬁrm (see Rehfeld
1996).
25 See Ip (1997).
26 The consultant is Robert Moseson of Performance Analytics, quoted in Jereski and Lohse
(1996). The momentum investor is Richard Driehaus, quoted in Rehfeld (1996).

More broadly, the extended version of the model with contrarians ﬁts
with the observation that there are a variety of professional money-
management “styles,” each of which emphasizes a different subset of public
information. Such heterogeneity cannot be understood in the context of the
standard rational model, where there is only one “correct” style, that
which processes all available information in an optimal fashion. But it is a
natural feature of our bounded-rationality framework, which allows multi-
ple styles to coexist and earn similar proﬁts.
4. Comparison to Related Work
As noted in the introduction, this work shares the same goal as recent work
by BSV (1997) and DHS (1997)—that is, to construct a plausible model that
delivers a uniﬁed account of asset-price continuations and reversals. How-
ever, the approach taken here is quite different. Both BSV and DHS use rep-
resentative agent models, while our results are driven by the externalities that
arise when heterogeneous traders interact with one another.27 Consequently,
many of the auxiliary empirical implications of our model are distinct.
First, it is impossible for a representative agent model to make predictions
linking trading horizons to the temporal pattern of autocorrelations, as we
do in section 3.D. Second, neither the BSV nor the DHS model would seem
to be able to easily generate our prediction that both continuations and rever-
sals are more pronounced in stocks with thinner analyst coverage (sections
3.A and 3.B). A further difference with BSV is that our model allows for a
differential impulse response to public and private shocks (section 3.C),
while theirs only considers public news.
In its focus on the interaction of different types of traders—including
those who behave in a trend-chasing fashion—this work is closer to earlier
models of positive-feedback trading by DeLong et al. (1990) and Cutler,
Poterba, and Summers (1990). However, there are signiﬁcant differences
with this work as well. For example, in DeLong et al., the positive-feedback
traders are extremely irrational, and get badly exploited by a group of ra-
tional frontrunners.28 In our model, the momentum traders are very nearly
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
529
27 BSV develop a regime-switching learning model, where investors wind up oscillating be-
tween two states: one where they think that earnings shocks are excessively transitory; and
one where they think that earnings shocks are excessively persistent. DHS emphasize the idea
that investors are likely to be overconﬁdent in the precision of their private information, and
that this overconﬁdence will vary over time as they learn about the accuracy of their past pre-
dictions.
28 In Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1990), positive-feedback traders can make money, as
there is background underreaction, like in our model. However, since the feedback behavior is
assumed, rather than derived, their model does not yield many of the predictions discussed in
section 3.

rational, and actually manage to take advantage of the other group of
traders, the newswatchers. This distinction is closely related to the fact that
in DeLong et al, there is never any underreaction. There is short-run posi-
tive correlation of returns, but this reﬂects an initial overreaction, followed
by even more overreaction.29
At a more general level, this chapter revisits several themes that have
been prominent in previous theoretical work. The notion that one group of
optimizing traders might create a negative informational externality, and
thereby destabilize prices even while they are making proﬁts, also shows up
in Stein (1987). Stretching a bit further, there is an interesting analogy here
with the ideas of Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch
(1992) on informational cascades. In these models, agents move sequen-
tially. In equilibrium, each rationally bases his decision on the actions of the
agent before him, even though this inﬂicts a negative informational exter-
nality on those that follow. Very much the same thing could be said of the
generations of momentum traders in this model.
5. Conclusions
At the outset, we argued that any new “behavioral” theory of asset pricing
should be judged according to three criteria: (1) it should rest on assump-
tions about investor behavior that are either a priori plausible or consistent
with casual observation; (2) it should explain the existing evidence in a par-
simonious and uniﬁed way; and (3) it should make a number of further pre-
dictions that can be subject to testing and that are ultimately validated.
How well have we done on these three scores? With respect to the ﬁrst, we
believe that our particular rendition of bounded rationality—as the ability to
process a small subset of the available information in an unbiased way—is
both plausible and intuitively appealing. Moreover, in our framework, this
sort of bounded rationality implies a widespread reliance by arbitrageurs on
simple momentum strategies. As we have discussed, this implication appears
to be strongly consistent with what is observed in the real world.
In terms of the parsimony/unity criterion, it should be emphasized that
everything in our model is driven by just one primitive type of shock:
slowly-diffusing news about future fundamentals. There are no other ex-
ogenous sources of investor sentiment, and no liquidity disturbances. Our
main conceptual contribution is to show that if there is ever any short-run
underreaction to this kind of news on the part of one set of traders, then
530
HONG AND STEIN
29 Also, the model of DeLong et al. (1990) does not rally endogenously deliver reversals.
Rather, prices are just forced back to fundamentals on a terminal date. In our model, the re-
versal phase is more endogenous, corresponding to the unwinding of momentum traders’ posi-
tions. It also involves more complex dynamics, with the sort of damped oscillations seen in the
ﬁgures.

(given the simple nature of arbitrage strategies) there must eventually be
overreaction in the longer run as well.
Finally, our model does deliver several testable auxiliary implications.
Among the most noteworthy are the following:(1) both short-run continua-
tion and long-run reversals should be more pronounced in those (small,
low-analyst-coverage) stocks where information diffuses more slowly; (2)
There may be more long-run overreaction to information that is initially
private than to public news announcements; and (3) there should be a rela-
tionship between momentum traders’ horizons and the pattern of return
autocorrelations. Evidence supportive of the ﬁrst prediction is already emerg-
ing; we hope to explore some of the others in future work.
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
531

Appendix: Proofs
A. ARMA Representation of the Return Process
Let us begin by recalling Eq. (5) from the text (suppressing constants):
(A.1)
It follows that
(A.2)
Assuming that ϕ satisﬁes proper conditions to be speciﬁed, ∆Pt is a cov-
anance stationary process. Let
αk ≡E[∆Pt∆Pt−k]
(i.e., the unconditional autocovariance lagged k periods). When k = 0, we
have the unconditional variance. The autocovariances of this process sat-
isfy the following Yule-Walker equations.
(A.3)
And for k > 0, we have
(A.4)
It is not hard to verify that for k > z −1,
(A.5)
And for k ≤z −1, we have
(A.6)
E
z
P
z
k
z
E
z
P
E
z
P
t
i
i
z
t
k
t
i
i
z
t
k
t
i
i
z
t
k
j
ε
σ
ϕ
ε
ϕ
ε
+
=
−
−
+
=
−
−
+
+
=
−
−
+
+
∑
∑
∑








=
−
+








−








0
1
2
2
0
1
1
0
1
1
∆
∆
∆
(
)
(
)
(
)
E
z
P
t
i
i
z
t
k
ε +
=
−
−
∑







=
1
1
0
∆
.
α
ε
ϕα
ϕα
k
t
i
i
z
t
k
k
k
j
E
z
P
=







+
−
+
=
−
−
−
−
+
∑
0
1
1
1
∆
(
).
α
ε
ϕα
ϕα
0
0
1
1
1
=







+
−
+
=
−
+
∑
E
z
P
t
i
i
z
t
j
∆
.
∆
∆
∆
P
z
P
P
t
t
i
i
z
t
t
j
=
+
−
+
=
−
−
−
+
∑
ε
ϕ
ϕ
0
1
1
1
(
).
P
D
z
z
z
P
t
t
t
t
z
t
i
i
j
=
+
−
+⋅⋅⋅+
+
+
+
−
−
=∑
(
)1
1
1
1
1
ε
ε
ϕ∆
532
HONG AND STEIN

where σ is the standard deviation of the ε’s. Solving the Yule-Walker equa-
tions reduces to solving a system of j + 2 linear equations. Next, the opti-
mal strategies of the momentum traders are given by
(A.7)
where
Pt+j −Pt = ∆Pt+j + . . . + ∆Pt+1.
In equilibrium,
ζM
t = ϕ∆Pt−1.
(A.8)
Finally, it follows that
Cov(∆Pt−1, Pt+j −Pt) = αj+1 + . . . + α2,
and
Var(Pt+j −Pt) = jα0 + 2(j −1)α1 + . . . + 2(j −(j −1)αj−1.
Using these formulas, the problem is reduced to ﬁnding a ﬁxed point in ϕ
that satisﬁes the equilibrium condition (A.8). Given the equilibrium ϕ, we
then need to verify that the resulting equilibrium ARMA process is in fact
covariance stationary (since all of our formulas depend crucially on this as-
sumption).
B. Stationarity
We next provide a characterization for the covariance stationarity of a con-
jectured return process. This condition is just that the roots of
1 −ϕx + ϕxj+1 = 0
(A.9)
lie outside the unit circle (see, e.g., Hamilton 1994).
Lemma A.1. The return process speciﬁed in equation (A.2) is a covari-
ance stationary process only if ϕ < 1.
Proof. Proof is by induction on j. For j = 1, the return process follows
an ARMA(2, z). So, the conditions for covariance stationarity are: 
−2 ϕ < 1; and −1 < ϕ < 1, (see, e.g., Hamilton 1994). The stated re-
sult follows for j = 1. Apply the inductive hypothesis and assume the
result holds for j = k.
ζ
γ
t
M
t
j
t
t
t
j
t
t
E P
P
P
Var P
P
P
=
−
−
+
−
+
−
[
]
[
] ,


∆
∆
1
1
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
533

From Eq. (A.9), it follows that the roots x of
1 −ϕx + ϕxk+1 = 0
must lie outside the unit circle (e.g.,  x  > 1). It follows that
1 −ϕx = ϕxk+1.
(A.10)
Hence, as k increases, it follows that ϕ decreases for equation (A.10) to
hold. The stated result follows for arbitrary j. QED
We use this result to characterize a number of properties of a conjectured
covariance stationary equilibrium.
Proof of Lemma 1. We show that ϕ > 0 in a covariance stationary
equilibrium by contradiction. Suppose it is not, so that ϕ ≤0. It is
easy to verify from equation (A.4) and from Lemma A.I that
αk ≥0
∀k
→α2 + α3 + . . . + αj+1 > 0
implying that ϕ > 0, leading to a contradiction. QED
C. Existence and Numerical Computation
An equilibrium ϕ satisfying the convariance stationary condition in Lemma
A.1 does not exist for arbitrary parameter values. It is easy to verify however
that a covariance stationary equilibrium does exist for sufﬁciently small γ.
Lemma A.2. For γ sufﬁciently small, there exists a covariance station-
ary equilibrium.
Proof. It is easy to show that for γ sufﬁciently small, we can apply
Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem. QED
In general, the equilibrium needs to be solved numerically. For the case of
j = 1, we can always verify the resulting ϕ leads to covariance stationarity.
For arbitrary j, we only have a necessary condition although the calcula-
tions for the autocovariances would likely explode for a ϕ that does not
lead to a covariance stationary process. So, we always begin our calcula-
tions for j = 1 and γ small and use the resulting solutions to bootstrap our
way to other regions in the parameter space. The solutions are gotten easily.
When we move outside the covariance stationary region of the parameter
space, autocovariances take on nonsensible values such as negative values
for the unconditional variance or autocovariances that do not satisfy the
standard property that
αk < α0,
k > 0
534
HONG AND STEIN

in a covariance stationary equilibrium. In general, we have not had much
problem ﬁnding ﬁxed points for wide parameter regions around those ex-
hibited in the text.
D. Remaining Proofs
Proof of Proposition 3
The equilibrium condition to determine w is for the utilities from the
two strategies to be equal. Given our assumptions on the preferences
of the momentum and contrarian investors and the distributions of
the εs, it follows from Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) that this is equiv-
alent to the conditional variance of the j-period returns being equal
across the two strategies. Given that both momentum and contrarian
investors have the same j-period horizon, it follows that this is equiv-
alent to the conditional covariance of the j-period returns being equal
across the two strategies. QED
Proof of Proposition 4
Suppose initially that there are only newswatchers and smart money
investors (i.e., there are no momentum investors). Smart money
investors have finite risk tolerance given by γs and maximize one-
period returns. We conjecture the following equilibrium price
function:
(A.11)
Note that we are once again suppressing all calculations related
to the constant. The holdings of the smart money investors are
given by
(A.12)
At the conjectured equilibrium price given in equation (A.11), we
have that
(A.13)
ζ
β ε
t
S
i
i
i
t
t
z
=
= +
+
−
∑
1
1
.
ζ
γ
ε
ε
ε
ε
t
S
S
t
t
t
t
t
z
t
t
t
t
t
z
E P
P D
Var P
P D
=
−
−
+
+
+
−
+
+
+
−
[
,
, . . . ,
]
[
,
, . . . ,
] .
1
1
1
1
1
1


P
D
z
z
z
t
t
t
t
z
i
t
i
i
z
=
+
−
+⋅⋅⋅+
+
+
+
−
+
=
−
∑
(
)
.
1
1
1
1
1
1
ε
ε
β ε
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
535

Eq. (A.13) then gives the following set of equations that determine
the β’s in equilibrium:
(A.14)
and
(A.15)
Using equations (A.14) and (A.15), it is not hard to show that in a
covariance stationary equilibrium: (1) the returns still exhibit posi-
tive serial correlation for ﬁnite levels of smart money risk tolerance,
γ s < ∞; and (2) when smart money investors are risk neutral, prices
follow a random walk.
Since returns are serially correlated when the risk tolerance of
smart money is ﬁnite, ϕ = 0 cannot be an equilibrium when we add
momentum traders to the model. Since smart money investors have
access to the entire history of past price changes, it follows from the
logic of Eq. (A.11) that the conjectured price function with momen-
tum traders is now
(A.16)
Assuming that a covariance stationary equilibrium exists, the hold-
ing of the smart money is
(A.17)
while the holding of the momentum investors is given by Eq. (A.7).
At the conjectured equilibrium price in Eq. (A.16), we have
(A.18)
for the smart money and Eq. (A.8) for the momentum investors.
ζ
β ε
κ
t
S
i
i
i
t
t
z
i
t
i
i
P
=
+
= +
+
−
−
=
∞
∑
∑
1
1
1
∆
ζ
γ
ε
ε
ε
ε
t
S
S
t
t
t
t
t
z
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
z
t
t
E P
P D
P
P
P
Var P
P D
P
P
P
=
−
−
+
+
+
−
−
−
−∞
+
+
+
−
−
−
−∞
[
,
, . . . ,
,
,
, . . . ,
]
[
,
, . . . ,
,
,
, . . . ,
] .
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
2


∆
∆
∆
∆
∆
∆
P
D
z
z
z
P
P
t
t
t
t
z
i
t
i
i
z
i
t
i
i
t
i
i
j
=
+
−
+ ⋅⋅⋅
+
+
+
+
−
+
=
−
−
=
∞
−
=
+
+∑
∑
∑
(
)
.
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
ε
β ε
κ
ϕ
ε
∆
∆
β
γ
β
β
β
σ
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
=
+
−
+




=
−
−
−
S
i
i
z
z
z
i
z
(
)
,
, . . . ,
.
β
γ
β
β
σ
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
=
−
+




−
S
z
z
z
536
HONG AND STEIN

In general, the βs, κs, and ϕs in Eq. (A.16) have to be determined
numerically as ﬁxed points of equations (A.8) and (A.18) using the
same methodology as described above in section A.3. While solving
for these parameters is computationally difﬁcult, we can character-
ize certain behavior in a covariance stationary equilibrium. Given a
positive one-unit shock that begins to diffuse among newswatchers
at time t, the price underreacts at t for ﬁnite smart money risk toler-
ance, that is,
The price eventually converges to one in a covariance stationary
equilibrium. And in a covariance stationary equilibrium, the price
must also overshoot one. To see this, suppose it does not. Then the
serial correlation in returns would be positive at all horizons. Then
this implies that momentum investors would have ϕ > 0, which by
our previous logic implies that there would be overreaction, thereby
establishing a contradiction.
When the risk tolerance of smart money is inﬁnite, it follows from
the discussion above that without momentum traders prices follow a
random walk. So, the expected return to momentum trading is
zero. Hence, when the risk tolerance of smart money is infinite,
prices following a random walk and no momentum trading is in fact
a covariance-stationary equilibrium. QED
∆P
z
t
z
=
+
<
−
1
1
1
β
.
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
537

References
Banerjee, Abhijit, 1992, A simple model of herd behavior, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107, 797–817.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor
sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics, 49, 307–43.
Bernard, Victor L., 1992, Stock price reactions to earnings announcements, in R.
Thaler, ed., Advances in Behavioral Finance, Russell Sage Foundation.
Bernard, Victor L., and J. Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings announcement drift: De-
layed price response or risk premium?, Journal of Accounting Research, 27,
1–48.
———, 1990, Evidence that stock prices do not fully reﬂect the implications of cur-
rent earnings for future earnings, Journal of Accounting and Economics 13,
305–40.
Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, 1992, A theory of fads,
fashions, custom and cultural change as informational cascades, Journal of Po-
litical Economy 100, 992–1026.
Campbell, John Y., Sanford J. Grossman, and Jiang Wang, 1993, Trading volume
and serial correlation in stock returns, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108,
905–39.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert Shiller, 1988, Stock prices, earnings, and expected
dividends, Journal of Finance 43, 661–76.
Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok, 1996, Momen-
tum strategies, Journal of Finance 51, 1681–1713.
Chopra, Navin, Josef Lakonishok, and Jay R. Ritter, 1992, Measuring abnormal
performance: Do stocks overreact?, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 235–68.
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1991, Speculative
dynamics and the role of feedback traders, American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings 80, 63–68.
———, 1990, Speculative dynamics, Review of Economic Studies 58, 529–46.
Daniel, Kent D., David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, A Theory
of overconﬁdence, self-attribution, and security market under- and over-
reactions, Northwestern University Working Paper, forthcoming in Journal of Fi-
nance.
Daniel, Kent D., and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of
cross-sectional variation in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1–33.
DeBondt, Werner F. M., and Richard H. Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market over-
react? Journal of Finance 40, 793–808.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert Wald-
mann, 1990, Positive feedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational
speculation, Journal of Finance 45, 379–95.
Edwards, W., 1968, Conservatism in human information processing, in B. Klein-
mutz (ed.), Formal Representation of Human Judgment, Wiley.
Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market efﬁciency, long-term returns, and behavioral ﬁ-
nance, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 283–306.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Permanent and temporary compo-
nents of stock prices, Journal of Political Economy 96, 246–73.
538
HONG AND STEIN

———, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 47,
427–65.
———, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of
Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
———, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies, Journal of
Finance 51, 55–84.
———, 1998, Value versus growth: The international evidence, Journal of Finance
53, 1975–99.
Friedman, Milton, 1953, The case for ﬂexible exchange rates, in Essays in Positive
Economics, University of Chicago Press.
Grossman, Sanford J., 1976, On the efﬁciency of competitive stock markets where
traders have diverse information, Journal of Finance 31, 573–85.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informa-
tionally efﬁcient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408.
Hamilton, James D., 1994, Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press.
Hart, Oliver D. and David M. Kreps, 1986, Price destabilizing speculation, Journal
of Political Economy 94, 927–52.
Haugen, Robert A., and Nardin L. Baker, 1996, Commonality in the determinants
of expected stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401–39.
Hong, Harrison, Terence Lim, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, Bad news travels slowly:
Size, analyst coverage, and the proﬁtability of momentum strategies, Journal of
Finance, 55(1), 265–96.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1997, A uniﬁed theory of underreaction, mo-
mentum trading and overreaction in asset markets, NBER Working Paper #6324.
Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreac-
tion to open market share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39,
181–208.
Ip, Greg, 1997, Red ﬂag on wall street: Momentum investors, Wall Street Journal,
February 24.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners
and selling losers: Implications for stock market efﬁciency, Journal of Finance 48,
65–91.
Jereski, Laura, and Deborah Lohse, 1996, Momentum-investing fever is sending
some mutual funds to their sickbeds, Wall Street Journal, July 26.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1994, Contrarian invest-
ment, extrapolation and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541–78.
Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky invest-
ments in stock portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statis-
tics 47, 13–37.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance
50, 23–51.
MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1995, Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the
CAPM, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 3–28.
Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Economet-
rica 41, 867–87.
Michaely, Roni, Richard H. Thaler, and Kent L. Womack, 1995, Price reactions to
dividend initiations and omissions: Overreaction or drift? Journal of Finance 50,
573–608.
A UNIFIED THEORY OF UNDERREACTION
539

Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers, 1988, Mean reversion in stock re-
turns: Evidence and implications, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27–59.
Rehfeld, Barry, 1996, Mutual funds: What goes up, might go up more, New York
Times, February 25.
Ross, Stephen A., 1976, The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of
Economic Theory 13, 341–60.
Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 1998a, International momentum strategies, Yale University
working paper, forthcoming in Journal of Finance.
———, 1998b, Local return factors and turnover in emerging stock markets, Yale
University Working Paper.
Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1990, Herd behavior and investment,
American Economic Review 80, 465–79.
Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital Asset Prices: A theory of market equilibrium
under conditions of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425–42.
Spiess, D. Katherine, and John Afﬂeck-Graves, 1995, Underperformance in long-
run stock returns following seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 38, 241–67.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1987, Informational externalities and welfare-reducing specula-
tion, Journal of Political Economy 95, 1123–45.
Womack, Kent L., 1996, Do brokerage analysts’ recommendations have investment
value?, Journal of Finance 51, 137–68.
540
HONG AND STEIN
