Chapter 17
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING 
IN AN IRRATIONAL WORLD
Jeremy C. Stein
1. Introduction
The last several years have not been good ones for the capital asset pricing
model (CAPM). A large volume of recent empirical research has found that
(1) cross-sectional stock returns bear little or no discernible relationship to
β and (2) a number of other variables besides β have substantial predictive
power for stock returns. For example, one variable that has been shown to
be an important and reliable predictor is the book-to-market ratio: the
higher a ﬁrm’s B/M, the greater its conditional expected return, all else
being equal.1
In light of these empirical results, this work addresses a simple, yet fun-
damental question: What should the academic ﬁnance profession be telling
MBA students and practitioners about how to set hurdle rates for capital
budgeting decisions? Can we still follow the standard textbook treatments
with a clear conscience and a straight face, and march through the mechan-
ics of how to do weighted-average-cost-of-capital or adjusted-present-value
calculations based on the CAPM? Or should we abandon the CAPM for
capital budgeting purposes in favor of alternative models that seem to do a
better job of ﬁtting actual stock-return data?
If one believes that the stock market is efﬁcient and that the predictable
excess returns documented in recent studies are, therefore, just compensa-
tion for risk—risk that is, for some reason, not well captured by β—then
This research is supported by the National Science Foundation and the International Financial
Services Research Center at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Thanks to Maureen O’
Donnell for assistance in preparing the manuscript and to Michael Barclay, Doug Diamond,
Steve Kaplan, Jay Ritter, Dick Thaler, Luigi Zingales, an anonymous referee for the Journal of
Business, and seminar participants at the National Bureau of Economic Research for helpful
comments and suggestions.
1 Early work on the predictive power of variables other than β includes Stattman (1980),
Banz (1981), Basu (1985), Keim (1983), DeBondt and Thaler (1985), Rosenberg, Reid, and
Lanstein (1985), Bhandari (1988), and Jaffe, Keim, and Westerﬁeld (1989). See Fama (1991)
for a detailed survey of this literature. More recent papers that have focused speciﬁcally on
B/M as a predictive variable include Chan, Hamao, and Lakonishok (1991), Fama and French
(1992), Davis (1994), Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994), and Chan, Jegadeesh, and
Lakonishok (1995).

the answer to the question is simple. According to standard ﬁnance logic, in
an efﬁcient market the hurdle rate for an investment in any given asset
should correspond exactly to the prevailing expected return on the stock of
a company that is a pure play in that asset. The only operational question
is, Which regression speciﬁcation gives the best estimates of expected re-
turn? Thus the inevitable conclusion is that one must throw out the CAPM
and in its place use the “new and improved” statistical model to set hurdle
rates. For shorthand, I will label this approach to setting hurdle rates the
NEER approach, for new estimator of expected return.
As an example of the NEER approach, consider a chemical company
that currently has a low B/M ratio, and hence—according to an agreed-
upon regression speciﬁcation—a low expected return. If the company were
considering investing in another chemical plant, this approach would argue
for a relatively low hurdle rate. The implicit economic argument is this: the
low B/M ratio is indicative of the low risk of chemical industry assets.
Given this low risk, it makes sense to set a low hurdle rate. Of course, if the
chemical company’s B/M ratio—and hence its expected return—were to
rise over time, then the hurdle rate for capital budgeting purposes would
have to be adjusted upward.
This NEER approach to capital budgeting is advocated by Fama and
French (1993). Fama and French couch the predictive content of the B/M
ratio and other variables in a linear multifactor-model setting that they
argue can be interpreted as a variant of the arbitrage pricing theory (APT)
or intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM). They then conclude:
“In principle, our results can be used in any application that requires esti-
mates of expected stock returns. This list includes . . . estimating the cost of
capital” (p. 53).
However, it is critical to the Fama-French logic that the return differen-
tials associated with the B/M ratio and other predictive variables be thought
of as compensation for fundamental risk. While there seems to be fairly
widespread agreement that variables such as B/M do indeed have predictive
content, it is much less clear that this reﬂects anything having to do with
risk. Indeed, several recent papers ﬁnd that there is very little afﬁrmative ev-
idence that stocks with high B/M ratios are riskier in any measurable
sense.2
An alternative interpretation of the recent empirical literature is that in-
vestors make systematic errors in forming expectations, so that stocks can
become signiﬁcantly over- or undervalued at particular points in time. As
these valuation errors correct themselves, stock returns will move in a par-
tially predictable fashion. For example, a stock that is overvalued relative to
606
STEIN
2 See, e.g., Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994), Daniel and Titman (1995), and
MacKinlay (1995). The Daniel and Titman paper takes direct issue with the Fama-French
(1993) notion that the B/M effect can be given a multifactor risk interpretation.

fundamentals will tend to have a low B/M ratio. Over time, this overvalua-
tion will work its way out of the stock price, so the low B/M ratio will predict
relatively low future returns.3
In a world where predictable variations in returns are driven by in-
vestors’ expectational errors, it is no longer obvious that one should set
hurdle rates using a NEER approach. The strong classical argument for
such an approach rests in part on the assumption that there is a one-to-one
link between the expected return on a stock and the fundamental economic
risk of the underlying assets. If this assumption is not valid, the problem be-
comes more complicated. Think back to the example of the chemical com-
pany with the low B/M ratio. If the low value of the ratio—and hence the
low expected return—is not indicative of risk, but rather reﬂects the fact
that investors are currently overoptimistic about chemical industry assets,
does it make sense for rational managers to set a low hurdle rate and invest
aggressively in acquiring more such assets?
The key point is that, when the market is inefﬁcient, there can be a mean-
ingful distinction between a NEER approach to hurdle rates, and one that
focuses on a measure of fundamental asset risk—which I will call a FAR
approach. A FAR approach involves looking directly at the variance and
covariance properties of the cash ﬂows on the assets in question. In the
chemical company case, this might mean assigning a high hurdle rate if, for
example, the cash ﬂows from the new plant were highly correlated with the
cash ﬂows on other assets in the economy—irrespective of the company’s
current B/M ratio or the conditional expected return on its stock.
Given this distinction between the NEER and FAR approaches, the main
goal of this work is to assess the relative merits of the two, and to illustrate
how one or the other may be preferred in a given set of circumstances. To
preview the results, I ﬁnd that, loosely speaking, a NEER approach makes
the most sense when either (1) managers are interested in maximizing
short-term stock prices or (2) the ﬁrm faces ﬁnancial constraints (in a sense
which I will make precise). In contrast, a FAR approach is preferable when
managers are interested in maximizing long-run value and the ﬁrm is not ﬁ-
nancially constrained.
The fact that a FAR approach can make sense in some circumstances
leads to an interesting and somewhat counterintuitive conclusion: In spite
of its failure as an empirical description of actual stock returns, the CAPM
(or something quite like it) may still be quite useful from a prescriptive
point of view in capital budgeting decisions. This is because β—if calcu-
lated properly—may continue to be a reasonable measure of the fundamen-
tal economic risk of an asset, even if it has little or no predictive power for
stock returns. However, it must be emphasized that this sort of rationale for
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
607
3 For evidence supporting this interpretation, see Lakonishok et al. (1994) and La Porta et
al. (1994).

using the CAPM does not apply in all circumstances. As noted above, when
managers have short horizons or when the ﬁrm faces ﬁnancial constraints,
the CAPM—or any FAR-based approach—will be inappropriate to the ex-
tent that it does not present an accurate picture of the expected returns on
stocks.
Before proceeding, I should also reiterate that the entire analysis that
follows is based on the premise that the stock market is inefficient. More
precisely, cross-sectional differences in expected returns will be assumed
throughout to be driven in part by expectational errors on the part of in-
vestors. I make this assumption for two reasons. First, it strikes me that,
at the least, there is enough evidence at this point for one to question
market efficiency seriously and to wonder what capital budgeting rules
would look like in its absence. Second, as discussed above, the efficient-
markets case is already well understood and there is little to add. In any
event, however, readers can judge for themselves whether or not they
think the inefficient-markets premise is palatable as a basis for thinking
about capital budgeting.
Of course, this is not the ﬁrst work to raise the general question of whether
and how stock market inefﬁciencies color investment decisions. This ques-
tion dates back at least to Keynes (1936, p. 151), who raises the possibility
that “certain classes of investment are governed by the average expectation
of those who deal on the Stock Exchange as revealed in the price of shares,
rather than by the genuine expectations of the professional enterpreneur.”4
More recent contributions include Bosworth (1975), Fischer and Merton
(1984), DeLong et al. (1989), Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990) and Blan-
chard, Rhee, and Summers (1993). The latter two pieces are particularly
noteworthy in that they stress—as does this chapter—the importance of
managers’ time horizons and ﬁnancing constraints. The contribution of this
chapter relative to these earlier works is twofold: ﬁrst, it provides a simple
analytical framework in which the effects of horizons and ﬁnancing con-
straints can be seen clearly and explicitly, and, second, it focuses on the
question of what are appropriate risk-adjusted hurdle rates, thereby devel-
oping an inefﬁcient-markets analog to textbook treatments of capital bud-
geting under uncertainty.5
The remainder of the chapter is organized as follows. In section 2, I ex-
amine the link between managers’ time horizons and hurdle rates, leaving
aside for simplicity the issue of ﬁnancial constraints. This section estab-
lishes that a FAR approach is more desirable when the time horizon is
longer. In section 3, I introduce the possibility of ﬁnancial constraints and
show how these have an effect similar to shortening the time horizon—that
is, ﬁnancial constraints tend to favor a NEER approach. In section 4, I take
608
STEIN
4 As will become clear, in terms of the language of this article Keynes is effectively express-
ing the concern that managers will adopt a NEER approach to capital budgeting.
5 In contrast, the informal discussion in Blanchard et al. (1993) assumes risk neutrality and,
hence, does not speak to the whole issue of risk-adjusted hurdle rates.

up measurement issues. Speciﬁcally, if one decides to use a FAR approach,
what is the best way to get an empirical handle on fundamental asset risk? To
what extent can one rationalize the use of β—as conventionally calculated—
as an attempt to implement a FAR approach? Section 5 brieﬂy discusses a
number of extensions and variations of the basic framework, and section 6
ﬂeshes out its empirical implications. Section 7 concludes the discussion.
2. Time Horizons and Optimal Hurdle Rates
I consider a simple two-period capital budgeting model that is fairly stan-
dard in most respects. At time 0, the ﬁrm in question is initially all equity ﬁ-
nanced. It already has physical assets in place that will produce a single net
cash ﬂow of F at time 1. From the perspective of time 0, F is a random vari-
able that is normally distributed. The ﬁrm also has the opportunity to in-
vest $1 more at time 0 in identical assets—that is, if it chooses to invest, its
physical assets will yield a total of 2F at time 1. The decision of whether or
not to invest is the only one facing the ﬁrm at time 0. If it does invest, the
investment will be ﬁnanced with riskless debt that is fairly priced in the
marketplace. There is no possibility of issuing or repurchasing shares. (As
will become clear in section 3, allowing the ﬁrm to transact in the equity
market at time 0 may in some circumstances alter the results.) There are
also no taxes.
The manager of the ﬁrm is assumed to have rational expectations. I de-
note the manager’s rational time-0 forecast of F by Fr ≡EF. The ﬁrm’s other
outside shareholders, however, have biased expectations. Their biased fore-
cast of F is given by Fb ≡EF (1 + δ). Thus δ is a measure of the extent to
which outside investors are overoptimistic about the prospects for the
ﬁrm’s physical assets. This bias in assessing the value of physical assets is
the only way in which the model departs from the standard framework.
Outside investors are perfectly rational in all other respects. For example,
they perceive all variances and covariances accurately. Thus the degree of
irrationality that is being ascribed to outside investors is in a sense quite
mild. It would certainly be interesting to entertain alternative models of
such irrationality, but in the absence of clear-cut theoretical guidance, the
simple form considered here seems a natural place to start.
The shares in the ﬁrm are part of a larger market portfolio. The net cash
ﬂow payoff on the market portfolio at time 1 is given by M, which is also
normally distributed. For simplicity, I assume that both the manager of the
ﬁrm and all outside investors have rational expectations about M. Thus I
am effectively assuming that investors make ﬁrm-level mistakes in assessing
cash ﬂows, but that these mistakes wash out across the market as a whole.6
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
609
6 Or, said somewhat more mildly, the manager of the ﬁrm does not disagree with outside in-
vestors’ assessment of M.

I denote the price of the market portfolio at time 0 by PM, and deﬁne
RM ≡M/PM −1 as the realized percentage return on the market.
The ﬁnal assumption is that the price of the ﬁrm’s shares is determined
solely by the expectations of the outside investors. This amounts to saying
that even though the manager may have a different opinion, he is unable or
unwilling to trade in sufﬁcient quantity to affect the market price.
With the assumptions in place, the ﬁrst thing to do is to calculate the ini-
tial market price, P, of the ﬁrm’s shares, before the investment decision has
been made at time 0. This is an easy task. Note that we are operating in a
standard mean-variance framework, with the only exception being that in-
vestors have biased expectations. This bias does not vitiate many of the
classical results that obtain in such a framework. First of all, investors will
all hold the market portfolio, and the market portfolio will be—in their
eyes—mean-variance efﬁcient. Second, the equilibrium return required by
investors in ﬁrm’s equity, k, will be given by
k = r + βr(ERM −r),
(1)
where r is the riskless rate and βr is the usual “rate-of-return β,” deﬁned as
βr ≡cov(F/P, RM)/var(RM).
(2)
Thus, outside investors’ required returns are determined as in the stan-
dard CAPM. Given the cash ﬂow expectations of these investors, the initial
price of the ﬁrm’s shares, P, satisﬁes
P = Fb/(1 + k).
(3)
Eq. (3) is not a completely reduced form, however, because P appears in the
deﬁnition of k and hence is on both sides of the equation. Rearranging terms,
we obtain the following expression for P in terms of primitive parameters:
P = {Fb −βd(ERM −r)}/(1 + r),
(4)
where βd is the “dollar β,” deﬁned as
βd ≡cov(F, RM)/var(RM).
(5)
It is useful to compare Eqs. (1)–(4) with the analogous expressions that
would prevail in a classical setting with rational expectations. Using aster-
isk superscripts to denote these (unobserved) rational expectations values,
we have
k* = r + β*(ERM −r),
(6)
β* ≡cov(F/P*, RM)/var(RM),
(7)
P* = Fr/(1 + k*),
(8)
and
P* = {Fr −βd(ERM −r)}/(1 + r).
(9)
610
STEIN

From a comparison of Eqs. (4) and (9), it can be seen that in the reduced
form, the only difference between P and P* is the bias in the expected cash
ﬂow term.
While outside investors perceive that the ﬁrm’s stock will yield an ex-
pected return of k, that is not the rational expectation of the stock’s perfor-
mance. Rather, the best estimate of conditional expected return, which I
will denote by CER, is
CER = Fr/P −1 = (1 + k)/(1 + δ) −1.
(10)
Thus from the perspective of a rational observer such as the ﬁrm’s manager,
the stock may have a CER that is either greater or less than the CAPM rate
k. In this sense, the model crudely captures that empirical regularity that
there are predictable returns on stocks that are not related to their β’s.
These predictable returns simply reﬂect the biases of the outside investors.
Note that when δ = 0, so that outside investors have no bias, CER = k = k*.
When δ > 0, so that the stock is overpriced, CER < k < k*. And, conversely,
when δ < 0, CER > k > k*.
We are now ready to address the question of the optimal hurdle rate. To do
so, we have to be clear about the objective function that is being maximized.
There are two distinct possibilities. First, one might assume that the man-
ager seeks to maximize the stock price that prevails at time 0, immediately
after the investment decision has been made. This is the same as saying that
the manager tries to maximize outside investors’ perception of value. Alter-
natively, one might posit that the manager seeks to maximize the present
value of the ﬁrm’s future cash ﬂows, as seen from his more rational per-
spective.
In principle, one can think of reasons why managers might tend to favor
either objective. For example, if they are acting on behalf of shareholders
(including themselves) who have to sell their stock in the near future for liq-
uidity reasons, they will be more inclined to maximize current stock prices.
In contrast, if they are acting on behalf of shareholders (including them-
selves) who will be holding for the longer term—for example, due to capital
gains taxes or other frictions—they will be more inclined to maximize the
present value of future cash ﬂows. In what follows, I treat the managerial
time horizon as exogenous, although in a fuller model it would be endoge-
nously determined.7
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
611
7 This distinction between maximizing current stock prices vs. maximizing management’s
perception of long-run value also arises in the literature on investment and ﬁnancing decisions
under asymmetric information. See, e.g., Miller and Rock (1985) and Stein (1989) for a fuller
discussion of the forces that shape the trade-off between the two objectives. One potentially
important factor has to do with agency considerations. Speciﬁcally, shareholders may—in re-
sponse to agency problems—impose on managers an incentive scheme or corporate policies
that have the effect of making the managers behave as if they were more concerned with max-
imizing current stock prices. This issue is discussed in more detail in sec. 5C below.

Let us ﬁrst consider the “short-horizon” case, in which the goal is to maxi-
mize the current stock price. It is easy to see that in this case, the “value” cre-
ated by investing is simply (P −1). Intuitively, as long as the market’s current
valuation of the assets in question exceeds the acquisition cost, the current
stock price will be increased if the assets are purchased. To translate this into
a statement about hurdle rates, note that, from management’s perspective,
the expected cash ﬂow on the investment is Fr. Thus the short-horizon hurdle
rate, deﬁned as hS, has the property that the gross discounted value of the in-
vestment, Fr/(1 + hS), equals P. Using Eq. (10), it follows immediately that
Proposition 1. In the short-horizon case, the manager should discount
his expected cash ﬂow Fr at a hurdle rate hS = CER. In other words,
the manager should take a NEER approach and use the conditional
expected return on the stock as the hurdle rate.
One way to think about Proposition 1 is that, if the manager is interested
in maximizing the current stock price, he must cater to any misperceptions
that investors have. Thus if investors are overly optimistic about the
prospects for the ﬁrm’s assets—thereby leading to a low value of CER—the
manager should be willing to invest very aggressively in these assets and
hence should adopt a low hurdle rate.
Things work quite differently in the “long-horizon” case, in which the
manager seeks to maximize his perception of the present value of future
cash ﬂows. In this case, the “value” created by investment is (P* −1). That
is, the manager should only invest if the rational expectations value of the
assets exceed their acquisition cost. Thus the long-horizon hurdle rate hL
has the property that Fr/(1 + hL) = P*. Using Eq. (8), this leads to
Proposition 2. In the long-horizon case, the manager should discount
his expected cash ﬂow Fr at a hurdle rate hL = k*. In other words,
the manager should take a FAR approach and choose a hurdle rate
that reﬂects the fundamental risk of the assets in question and that is
independent of outside investors’ bias δ.
Proposition 2 suggests that hurdle rates in the long-horizon case should be
set in a “CAPM-like” fashion. This is very close in spirit to the standard text-
book prescription. However, the one major caveat is that, unlike in the text-
book world, one needs to be more careful in the empirical implementation.
According to Eq. (6) and (7), the β* that is needed for this CAPM-like calcu-
lation is the (unobserved) β that would prevail in a rational expectations
world, as this is the correct measure of the fundamental risk borne by
long-horizon investors. And given that the underlying premise throughout
is that the stock market is inefﬁcient, one cannot blithely make the usual
assumption that a β calculated in the traditional way—with a regression of
612
STEIN

the ﬁrm’s stock returns on market returns—will provide an adequate proxy
for the β* that is called for in Proposition 2. Thus there is a nontrivial set of
issues surrounding the best way to measure β*. These issues are taken up in
detail in section 6 below.
3. Financing Considerations and Optimal Hurdle Rates
So far, the analysis has ignored the possibility that the ﬁrm might either
issue or repurchase shares. Given the premise—that the market is inefﬁcient
and that managers know it—this is a potentially important omission. First
of all, there will naturally be circumstances in which managers wish to en-
gage in stock issues or repurchases to take advantage of market inefﬁcien-
cies. Second, and more signiﬁcant for our purposes, there may, in some
cases, be a link between these opportunistic ﬁnancing maneuvers and the
optimal hurdle rate for capital budgeting.
The goal of this section is to explore these links between ﬁnancing consid-
erations and hurdle rates. I begin with a general formulation of the problem.
I then consider a series of special cases that yield particularly crisp results and
that highlight the most important intuition.
A. A General Formulation of the Problem
When a manager chooses an investment-ﬁnancing combination in an inefﬁ-
cient market, there are, in general, three considerations that must be taken
into account: (1) the net present value of the investment; (2) the “market
timing” gains or losses associated with any share issues or repurchases; and
(3) the extent to which the investment-ﬁnancing combination leads to any
costly deviations from the optimal capital structure for the ﬁrm. Thus, in
order to specify an overall objective function, one must spell out each of
these considerations in detail.8
1. the net present value of investment
As will become clear, to the extent that ﬁnancing considerations have any
consequence at all for hurdle rates, it is to effectively shorten managers’
time horizons—that is, to make them behave in more of a NEER fashion.
Therefore, to make the analysis interesting, I assume that absent ﬁnancing
concerns, managers take a FAR approach, and seek to maximize the pres-
ent value of future cash ﬂows.
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
613
8 One possibility that I ignore for the time being is that managers might wish to take advan-
tage of market inefﬁciencies by transacting in the stock of other ﬁrms. This consideration is
taken up in section 5D below, and, as will be seen, need not materially affect the conclusions
of the analysis.

For the purpose of doing a bit of calculus, I generalize slightly from the
previous section, and allow the amount invested at time 0 to be a contin-
uous variable K. The gross expected proceeds at time 1 from this invest-
ment are given by f(K), which is an increasing, concave function. The
relevant FAR-based definition of the net present value of investment is
thus f(K)P*/Fr −K, or equivalently, f(K)/(1 + k*) −K, where k* continues
to be given by Eqs. (6) and (7).
2. market timing gains or losses
Denote by E the dollar amount of equity raised by selling new shares at
time 0. Thus, if E > 0, this should be interpreted as an equity issue by the
ﬁrm; if E < 0, this should be interpreted as a repurchase. If the ﬁrm is able
to transact in its own equity without any price-pressure effects, the market
timing gains from the perspective of the manager are given simply by the
difference between the market’s initial time-0 valuation of the shares and
the manager’s time-0 valuation. For a transaction of size E, this market tim-
ing gain is simply E(1 −P*/P).9
Of course, it is extreme and unrealistic to assume that there are no price-
pressure effects whatsoever, particularly if the implied equity transactions
turn out to be large in absolute magnitude. At the same time, given the
premise of investor irrationality, one does not necessarily want to go to the
other extreme—represented by rational asymmetric information models
such as that of Myers and Majluf (1984)—and assume that the announce-
ment effects of a share issue or repurchase are such that they, on average,
completely eliminate the potential for market timing gains.
As a compromise, I adopt a simple, relatively unstructured formula-
tion in which the net-of-price-pressure market timing gains are given by
E(1 −P*/P) −i(E). Here i(E) captures the price-impact-related losses asso-
ciated with an equity transaction of size E, with i(0) = 0. The only other re-
strictions I impose a priori are, ﬁrst, when E > 0, di/dE ≥0, and, conversely,
when E < 0, di/dE ≤0; second, d2i/dE2 ≥0 everywhere. In words, equity is-
sues tend to knock prices down, while repurchases push prices up, with
larger effects for larger transactions in either direction.
The i(E) function can be interpreted in terms of a couple of different
underlying phenomena. First, it might be that even irrational investors do
update their beliefs somewhat when they see management undertaking an
equity transaction. However, in contrast to rational models based on asym-
metric information, the updating is insufﬁcient to wipe out predictable excess
returns. This interpretation ﬁts with the spirit of recent studies that suggest
that the market underreacts dramatically to the information contained in
614
STEIN
9 As above, I continue to assume that when the ﬁrm issues debt, this debt is fairly priced, so
that there are no market timing gains or losses. This assumption can be relaxed without affect-
ing the qualitative results that follow.

both seasoned equity offerings and repurchases.10 Alternatively, in the
case of share repurchases, i(E) might be thought of as reflecting the pre-
mium that tendering investors require to compensate them for capital
gains taxes.
3. the costs of deviating from optimal capital structure
Finally, one must consider the possibility that a given investment-ﬁnancing
combination will lead to a suboptimal capital structure. For example, if a
ﬁrm decides to invest a great deal and to engage in repurchases to take advan-
tage of a low stock price, leverage may increase to the point where expected
costs of ﬁnancial distress become signiﬁcant. To capture this possibility in a
simple way, I assume that the optimal debt ratio for the ﬁrm is given by D,
and that, prior to the investment and ﬁnancing choices at time 0, the ﬁrm
is exactly at this optimum. Thus, after it has invested an amount K and
raised an amount of new equity E, it will be overleveraged by an amount
L ≡K(1 −D) −E. I assume that this imposes a cost of Z(L).
Again, I do not put too much a priori structure on the Z(L) function.
By definition, things are normalized so that Z(0) = 0. In principle, stray-
ing in either direction from the optimum of 0 can be costly—too little
debt may be a problem as well as too much debt. Moreover, to the extent
that there are costs of straying, these costs are a convex function of the
distance from the optimum. As with the i(E) function, this implies that
dZ/dL ≥0 when L > 0, and, conversely, dZ/dL ≤0 when L < 0; also,
d2Z/dL2 ≥0 everywhere.
4. optimal investment and ﬁnancing decisions
Taking all three considerations together, the manager’s objective function is
max f(K)P*/Fr −K + E(1 −P*/P) −i(E) −Z(L),
(11)
subject to
L ≡K(1 −D) −E.
The ﬁrst-order conditions for this problem are
df/dK −[1 + (1 −D)dZ/dL]Fr/P* = 0,
(12)
(1 −P*/P) −di/dE + dZ/dL = 0.
(13)
A little algebra shows that optimal investment therefore satisﬁes
df/dK = DFr/P* + (1 −D)(Fr/P + di/dE)
= D(1 + k*) + (1 −D)(1 + CER + di/dE).
(14)
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
615
10 See, e.g., Cheng (1995), Loughran and Ritter (1995), and Spiess and Afﬂeck-Graves
(1995) on seasoned equity offerings, and Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995) on
share repurchases.

B. Case-by-Case Analysis
Since the intuition underlying Eq. (14) may not be immediately apparent, it
is useful to go through a series of special cases to build an understanding of
the various forces at work.
1. capital structure is not a binding constraint
The ﬁrst, simplest limiting case to consider is one in which dZ/dL = 0—that
is, there are no marginal costs or beneﬁts to changing leverage, other than
those that come directly from issuing or repurchasing shares at time 0. This
condition would clearly hold in a world with no taxes and no costs of ﬁ-
nancial distress, where, were it not for the mispricing of the ﬁrm’s stock, the
Modigliani-Miller theorem would apply. But more generally, one need not
make such strong assumptions for this case to be (approximately) relevant.
All that is really required is that the Z function be ﬂat in the neighborhood
of the optimal solution. For example, if price-pressure effects are signiﬁ-
cant, and diminishing returns to investment set in quickly, the ﬁrm will
only choose to make small investment and ﬁnancing adjustments, and thus
will never try to push capital structure very far from its initial position of
L = 0. If, in addition, the Z function happens to be ﬂat in this region near
0, the ﬁrm will be left in a position where, for example, incremental in-
creases in leverage would have only a trivial impact on costs of ﬁnancial
distress.
When dZ/dL = 0, Eqs. (12) and (13) tell us that investment and ﬁnancing
decisions are fully separable. Intuitively, this is because capital structure can
at the margin adjust costlessly to take up the slack between the two. The
optimal behavior for the ﬁrm in this case is spelled out in the following
proposition:
Proposition 3. When capital structure is not a binding constraint, and
the manager has long horizons, the optimal policies are always to set
the hurdle rate at the FAR value of k*, as in Proposition 2, and to
issue stock if the CER < k*, but repurchase stock if the CER > k*.
Figure 17.1 illustrates the optimal investment and ﬁnancing policies. As
can be seen, the two are completely decoupled. When the stock price is low
and the CER is high, the ﬁrm repurchases shares. However, because capital
structure is fully ﬂexible, the repurchase does not affect its hurdle rate.
Rather, the ﬁrm adjusts to the repurchase purely by taking on more debt.
Therefore, at the margin, investment should be evaluated vis-à-vis fairly
priced debt ﬁnance, exactly as in section 2 above.
Conversely, when the stock price is high and the CER is low, the ﬁrm is-
sues shares. However, it does not have to plow the proceeds of the share
issue into investment. These proceeds can be used to pay down debt or
616
STEIN

accumulate cash. So there is no reason that the issuance of “cheap stock”
should lower the hurdle rate for investment.
2. binding capital structure constraint,
no price-pressure effects
The next case to examine is one in which the capital structure constraint is
binding, but where price-pressure effects are absent—that is, one in which
dZ/dL ≠0 and di/dE = 0. In this case, Eq. (14) simpliﬁes to
df/dK = D(1 + k*) + (1 −D)(1 + CER).
(15)
Based on Eq. (15), we have:
Proposition 4. When the capital structure constraint is binding and
there are no price-pressure considerations, the optimal hurdle rate
has the following properties: the hurdle rate is between the NEER
and FAR values of CER and k*, respectively; as D approaches 0, the
hurdle rate converges to CER, as in Proposition 1; as D approaches
1, the hurdle rate converges to k*, as in Proposition 2.
The intuition behind Proposition 4 is very simple. When capital structure
imposes a binding constraint, one cannot, in general, separate investment
and ﬁnancing decisions. This is perhaps easiest to see in the case where
δ < 0, so that the stock is undervalued and the ﬁrm would like to repur-
chase shares. For each dollar that is devoted to investment, there is less cash
available to engage in such repurchases, holding the capital structure ﬁxed.
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
617
 
 
  	
   
  
 	



	 

 	
 


	  

Figure 17.1. Investment and ﬁnancing policies when capital structure is not a con-
straint.

Indeed, in the extreme case where D = 0—that is, where the incremental in-
vestment has zero debt capacity—each dollar of investment leaves one full
dollar less available for repurchases. Hence, in this case, the opportunity
cost of investment is simply the expected return on the stock, as in the
NEER approach.
Thus, in the limiting case where D = 0, ﬁnancial constraints force man-
agers who would otherwise take a long-run view into behaving exactly as if
they were interested in maximizing short-term stock prices. This is simply
because, in order to leave capital structure undisturbed, any investment
must be fully funded by an immediate stock issue, so all that matters is the
market’s current assessment of whether the investment is attractive or not.
In the intermediate cases, where 0 < D < 1, investment need only be par-
tially funded by a stock issue. This implies that the hurdle rate moves less
than one-for-one with the CER on the stock. At the other extreme, when
D = 1 and investment can be entirely debt ﬁnanced, the hurdle rate remains
anchored at the FAR value of k*, irrespective of the CER on the stock.11
Figure 17.2 illustrates the relationship between the hurdle rate and the CER
on the stock for different values of D.
3. binding capital structure constraint and price-pressure effects
The ﬁnal case to consider is the most general one where the capital struc-
ture constraint is binding and where there are price-pressure effects. This
case is most usefully attacked by breaking it down into subcases.
618
STEIN
11 Of course, one should not take this limiting case too literally, given that I have also as-
sumed that the ﬁrm can issue fairly priced (i.e., riskless) debt.
 
 
  	
   
  
  
  
  
Figure 17.2. Optimal hurdle rates with binding capital structure constraint and no
price-pressure effects.

Stock is Undervalued: δ < 0.
When δ < 0, it is easy to show that L > 0.
That is, the ﬁrm will choose to be overlevered relative to the static optimal
capital structure of L = 0. However, the sign of E is ambiguous: the ﬁrm
may either issue or repurchase shares. This ambiguity in E arises because
there are two competing effects: on the one hand, the fact that δ < 0 makes
a repurchase attractive from a market timing standpoint; on the other,
given that the ﬁrm is investing, it needs to raise some new equity if it does
not wish to see its capital structure get too far out of line. Depending on
which effect dominates, there can either be a net share repurchase or a
share issue. In the case of share repurchase (E < 0), it is straightforward to
verify:
Proposition 5. When the capital structure constraint is binding, there
are price-pressure considerations, δ < 0 and E < 0, then the optimal
hurdle rate has the following properties: the hurdle rate is always
between the NEER and FAR values; the stronger the price-pressure
effects—that is, the larger is di/dE in absolute magnitude—the lower
the hurdle rate, all else equal, and therefore the closer the hurdle rate
is to the FAR value of k*.
Proposition 5 says that this case represents a well-behaved middle ground
between the two more extreme cases covered in Propositions 3 and 4. When
price-pressure effects are strong, the outcome is closer to that in Proposition
3, where capital structure is not a binding constraint—the hurdle rate is set
more according to a FAR approach. This is because price pressure leads the
ﬁrm to limit the scale of its repurchase activity. Consequently, capital struc-
ture is not much distorted, and there is less inﬂuence of ﬁnancial constraints
on investment. Of course, when price-pressure effects are very weak, we
converge back to the case described in Proposition 4. The outcome with an
equity issue (E > 0) is a bit more counterintuitive:
Proposition 6. When the capital structure constraint is binding, there
are price-pressure considerations, δ < 0 and E > 0, then the optimal
hurdle rate has the following properties: The hurdle rate no longer
necessarily lies between the NEER and FAR values; in particular, it
may exceed them both, though it will never be below the lower of the
two, namely the FAR value of k*. The stronger are price-pressure
effects—that is, the larger di/dE is in absolute magnitude—the higher
the hurdle rate, all else equal.
Thus here is a situation—the ﬁrst we have encountered so far—where the
hurdle rate does not lie between the NEER and FAR values. However, this
result has nothing really to do with the market irrationality that is the focus
of this article. Rather, it is just a variant on the Myers-Majluf (1984) argu-
ment that when investment requires an equity issue, and such an equity
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
619

issue knocks stock prices down, there will typically be underinvestment. In-
deed, the effect is seen most cleanly by assuming that there is no irrationality
whatsoever—that is, that δ = 0—so that the NEER and FAR values coincide.
Inspection of Eq. (14) tells us that optimal investment will satisfy
df/dK = (1 + k*) + (1 −D)di/dE. In other words, the hurdle rate is a markup
over the NEER/FAR value of k*, with the degree of this markup deter-
mined by the magnitude of the price-pressure effect.
Stock is Overvalued:
δ > 0. When δ > 0, there is no ambiguity about the
sign of E. This is because both market timing considerations and the need to
ﬁnance investment now point in the same direction, implying a desire to sell
stock. So E > 0. This gives rise to a result very similar to that seen just above:
Proposition 7. When the capital structure constraint is binding, there
are price-pressure considerations, δ > 0 and E > 0, then the optimal
hurdle rate has the following properties: The hurdle rate no longer
necessarily lies between the NEER and FAR values. In particular, it
may exceed them both, though it will never be below the lower of
the two, namely, the NEER value of CER. The stronger the price-
pressure effects—that is, the larger di/dE is in absolute magnitude—
the higher the hurdle rate, all else equal.
C. Conclusions on the Effects of Financing Considerations
The analysis of this section had shown that ﬁnancing considerations shape
the optimal hurdle rate in three distinct ways. The ﬁrst factor that matters
is the shape of the Z function, which measures the degree to which devia-
tions in capital structure are costly. When such deviations are inconsequen-
tial, this tends to favor a FAR-based approach to setting hurdle rates. In
contrast, when such deviations are costly, the optimal hurdle rate is pushed
in the NEER direction.
The second factor is the debt capacity, D, of the new investment. This
second factor interacts with the ﬁrst. In particular, the lower is D, the more
pronounced an effect capital structure constraints have in terms of driving
the hurdle rate toward the NEER value.
The third factor is the extent to which share issues or repurchases have
price-pressure consequences. In terms of the NEER-FAR dichotomy, the im-
pact of this third factor is somewhat more ambiguous than that of the other
two. One can make a clear-cut statement only in the case where the ﬁrm en-
gages in a stock repurchase; here price-pressure considerations unambigu-
ously move the hurdle rate closer to the FAR value of k*. However, when
the ﬁrm issues equity, all that one can say for sure is that price pressure
exerts an upward inﬂuence on the hurdle rate; it no longer follows that the
hurdle rate is pushed closer to the FAR value.
620
STEIN

The overall message of this section is that, while one can certainly argue
in favor of a FAR-based approach to capital budgeting, the argument is
somewhat more delicate than it might have appeared in section 2, and it
does not apply in all circumstances. In order for a FAR-based approach to
make sense, not only must managers have long horizons, but they must be
relatively unconstrained by their current capital structures.
4. Implementing a FAR-Based Approach: Measuring β*
Part of the appeal of a FAR-based approach to capital budgeting is that it
appears to be very close to the textbook CAPM method. However, as noted
in section 2 above, the one hitch is that, in order to implement a FAR-based
approach, one needs to know β*, which is the value of β that would prevail
in a rational expectations world; that is, the fundamental risk of the assets
in question. And given the underlying premise of the article—that the stock
market is inefﬁcient—one cannot simply assume that a β calculated using
observed stock returns will yield a good estimate of β*. Thus the following
question arises: as a practical matter, how close to β* can one expect to get
using the standard regression methodology for calculating β?
A. Theoretical Considerations
In order to clarify the issues, it is useful to begin with a more detailed ana-
lytical comparison of the value of a β computed from actual stock return
data—which I will continue to denote by βr—versus that of β*. To do so, I
will generalize somewhat from the setting of the previous sections by enter-
taining the possibility that there is mispricing of the market as a whole as
well as mispricing of individual stocks. In addition, and somewhat trivially,
I will allow for more than one period’s worth of stock returns.
Note that in any period t, for any stock i, we can always make the fol-
lowing decomposition:
Rit ≡Rit* + Nit,
(16)
where Rit is the observed return on the stock, Rit* is the return that would
prevail in a rational expectations world—that is, the portion of the observed
return due to “fundamentals”—and Nit is the portion of the observed return
due to “noise.” We can also make a similar decomposition for the observed
return on the market as a whole, RMt:
RMt ≡R*Mt + NMt.
(17)
Clearly, as a general matter, the β calculated from observed stock returns,
βri = cov(Rit, RMt)/var(RMt) will not coincide with β*i = cov(Rit*, R*Mt)/var(R*Mt).
To get a better intuitive handle on the sources of the difference between βri
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
621

and β*i, it is helpful to consider a simple case where both Rit* and Nit are
generated by one-factor processes, as follows:
Rit* = β*iR*Mt + it,
(18)
Nit = θiNMt + µit,
(19)
where cov(it, µit) = 0.12 In this formulation, θi represents the sensitivity of
stock i’s noise component to the noise component on the market as a
whole—that is, θi is a “noise β” for stock i.
It is now easy to calculate βri:
βri = [β*i var(R*M) + θivar(NM) + (β*i + θi)cov(R*M, NM)]/
(20)
[var(R*M) + var(NM) + 2cov(R*M, NM)].
From (20), one can see how various parameters inﬂuence the relative
magnitudes βri and β*i. The most important conclusion for our purposes is
that it is not obvious a priori that one will be systematically larger or
smaller than the other. Indeed, in some circumstances, they will be exactly
equal. For example, if var(NM) = 0, so that all noise is ﬁrm speciﬁc and
washes out at the aggregate level, then βri = β*i . Alternatively, the same re-
sult obtains if there is marketwide noise, but θi = β*i . Although these cases
are clearly special, they do illustrate a more general point: a stock may be
subject to very large absolute pricing errors—in the sense of var(Ni) being
very large—and yet one might in principle be able to retrieve quite reason-
able estimates of β*i from stock price data.13 Whether this is true in practice
is, then, a purely empirical question.
B. Existing Evidence
In order to ascertain whether a β estimated from stock price data does in
fact do a good job of capturing the sort of fundamental risk envisioned in
β*, one needs to develop an empirical analog of β*. A natural, though
somewhat crude, approach would be as follows. Suppose one posits that
the rational expectations value of a stock is the present value of the ex-
pected cash ﬂows to equity, discounted at a constant rate. Suppose further
that cash ﬂows follow a random walk, so today’s level is a sufﬁcient statistic
622
STEIN
12 Note that the two-period model used in sections 2 and 3 above does not quite conform to
this speciﬁcation. This is because all mispricing is assumed to disappear after the ﬁrst period,
which in turn implies that there are not enough degrees of freedom to also assume that cov(it,
µit) = 0. However, the simple speciﬁcation of Eqs. (18) and (19) is merely an expositional device
that allows one to illustrate the important effects more clearly.
13 A second implication of (20) is that if the marketwide noise is stationary, one might be
able to obtain better estimates of β*i by using longer-horizon returns. At sufﬁciently long hori-
zons, the variance of R*M will dominate the other terms in (20), ultimately leading βri to con-
verge to β*i.

for future expectations. In this very simple case, it is easy to show that for
any given stock i:
β*i = cov(∆Fi/Fi, ∆M/M)/var(∆M/M),
(21)
where Fi and M are the cash ﬂows accruing to stock i and the market as a
whole, respectively. This is a quantity that can be readily estimated and
then compared to the corresponding βs estimated from stock prices.
In fact, there is an older literature, beginning with Ball and Brown (1969)
and Beaver, Kettler, and Scholes (1970), that undertakes a very similar com-
parison. In this literature, the basic hypothesis being tested is whether “ac-
counting βs” for either individual stocks or portfolios are correlated with
βs estimated from stock returns.14 In some of this work—notably Beaver
and Manegold (1975)—accounting βs are deﬁned in a way that is very sim-
ilar to (21), with the primary exception being that an accounting net in-
come number is typically used in place of a cash ﬂow.
Subject to this one accounting-related caveat, Beaver and Manegold’s
(1975) results would seem to indicate that there is indeed a fairly close cor-
respondence between stock market β’s and fundamental risk. For example,
with ten-stock portfolios, the Spearman correlation coefﬁcient between ac-
counting and stock-return β’s varies from about .70 to .90, depending on
the exact speciﬁcation used.
The bottom line is that both theoretical considerations and existing em-
pirical evidence suggest that, at the least, it may not be totally unreasonable
to assume simultaneously that stocks are subject to large pricing errors and
that a β estimated from stock returns can provide a good measure of the
fundamental asset risk variable β* needed to implement a FAR-based ap-
proach to capital budgeting.15
5. Extensions and Variations
The analysis in sections 2 and 3 above has made a number of strong simpli-
fying assumptions. In some cases, it is easy to see how the basic framework
could be extended so as to relax these assumptions; in other cases, it is clear
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
623
14 The motivation behind this earlier literature is quite different from that here, however. In
the 1970s work, market efﬁciency is taken for granted, and the question posed is whether ac-
counting measures of risk are informative, in the sense of being related to market-based mea-
sures of risk (which are assumed to be objectively correct). In addition to the papers mentioned
in the text, see also Gonedes (1973, 1975) for further examples of this line of research.
15 Of course, this statement may be reasonable on average and at the same time be more ap-
propriate for some categories of stocks than for others. To take just one example, some
stocks—e.g., those included in the S&P 500—might have more of a tendency to covary exces-
sively with a market index. This would tend to bias measured β’s for these particular stocks to-
ward one and thereby present a misleading picture of their fundamental risk. More empirical
work would clearly be useful here.

that the problem becomes substantially more complex and that more work
is required.
A. Alternative Measures of Fundamental Risk
One assumption that has been maintained until now is that the underlying
structure of the economy is such that β* is the appropriate summary statis-
tic for an asset’s fundamental risk. This need not be the case. One can redo
the entire analysis in a world where there is a multifactor representation of
fundamental risk, such as that which emerges from the APT or the ICAPM.
In either case, the spirit of the conclusions would be unchanged—these alter-
native risk measures would be used instead of β* to determine FAR-based
hurdle rates. Whether or not such FAR-based hurdle rates would actually be
used for capital budgeting purposes—as opposed to NEER-based hurdle
rates—would continue to depend on the same factors identiﬁed above,
namely managers’ time horizons and ﬁnancing constraints.
The harder question this raises is how can one know a priori which is the
right model of fundamental risk. For once one entertains the premise that
the market is inefﬁcient, it may become difﬁcult to use empirical data in a
straightforward fashion to choose between, say, a β* representation of fun-
damental risk and a multifactor APT-type representation. Clearly, one can-
not simply run atheoretical horse races and see which factors better predict
expected returns. For such horse races may tell us more about the nature of
market inefﬁciencies than about the structure of the underlying fundamen-
tal risk. In particular, a B/M “factor”—à la Fama and French (1993)—may
do well in prediction equations, but given the lack of a theroretical model,
it would seem inappropriate to unquestioningly interpret this factor as a
measure of fundamental risk. (Unless, of course, one’s priors are absolute
that the market is efﬁcient, in which case the distinction between NEER
and FAR vanishes, and everything here becomes irrelevant.)
B. Managers Are Not Sure They Are Smarter than the Market
Thus far, the discussion has proceeded as if a manager’s estimate of future
cash ﬂow is always strictly superior to that of outside shareholders. How-
ever, a less restrictive interpretation is also possible. One might suppose
that outside shareholders’ forecast of F, while containing some noise, also
embodies some information not directly available to managers. In this case,
the optimal thing for a rational manager to do would be to put some
weight on his own private information and some weight on outside share-
holders’ forecast. That is, the manager’s rational forecast, Fr, would be the
appropriate Bayesian combination of the manager’s private information
and the market forecast. The analysis would then go forward exactly as be-
fore. So one does not need to interpret FAR-based capital budgeting as
624
STEIN

dictating that managers completely ignore market signals in favor of their
own beliefs; rather it simply implies that they will be less responsive to such
market signals than with NEER-based capital budgeting.
C. Agency Considerations
Suppose we have a ﬁrm that is ﬁnancially unconstrained and whose share-
holders all plan to hold onto their shares indeﬁnitely. The analysis above
might seem to suggest that such a ﬁrm should adopt a FAR-based approach
to capital budgeting. But this conclusion rests in part on the implicit as-
sumption that the manager who makes the cash ﬂow forecasts and carries
out the capital budgeting decisions acts in the interests of shareholders.
More realistically, there may be agency problems, and managers may have a
desire to overinvest relative to what would be optimal. If this is the case, and
if the manager’s forecast Fr is not veriﬁable, shareholders may want to adopt
ex ante capital budgeting policies that constrain investment in some fashion.
One possibility—though not necessarily the optimal one—is for share-
holders simply to impose on managers NEER-based capital budgeting rules.
An advantage of NEER-based capital budgeting in an agency context is that
it brings to bear some information about F that is veriﬁable. Speciﬁcally,
under the assumptions of the model above, shareholders can always observe
whether or not NEER-based capital budgeting is being adhered to simply by
looking at market prices. In contrast, if the manager is left with the discre-
tion to pursue FAR-based capital budgeting, there is always the worry that
he will overinvest and explain it away as a case where the privately observed
Fr is very high relative to the forecast implicit in market prices. Of course, if
shareholders have long horizons, there is also a countervailing cost to im-
posing NEER-based capital budgeting to the extent that market forecasts
contain not only some valid information about F, but biases as well.
This discussion highlights the following limitation of the formal analysis:
while I have been treating managers’ horizons as exogenous, they would, in
a more complete model, be endogeneously determined. Moreover, in such a
setting, managerial horizons might not correspond to those of the share-
holders for whom they are working. If agency considerations are important,
shareholders may choose ex ante to set up corporate policies or incentive
schemes that effectively foreshorten managerial horizons, even when this
distorts investment decisions.16
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
625
16 This is already a very familiar theme in the corporate ﬁnance literature, particularly that
on takeovers. For example, it has been argued that it can be in the interest of shareholders to
remove impediments to takeovers as a way of improving managerial incentives, even when the
resulting foreshortening of managerial horizons leads to distorted investment. See, example,
Laffont and Tirole (1988), Scharfstein (1988), and Stein (1988). Note, however, that these ear-
lier papers make the point without invoking market irrationality, but rather simply appeal to
asymmetries of information between managers and outside shareholders.

D. Portfolio Trading in the Stock of Other Firms
To this point, I have ignored the possibility that managers might wish to
take advantage of market inefﬁciencies by transacting in stocks other than
their own. To see why this possibility might be relevant for capital bud-
geting, consider a manager who perceives that his ﬁrm’s stock is under-
priced, say, because it has a high B/M ratio. On the one hand, as discussed
above, this might lead the manager to engage in repurchases of his own
stock. And to the extent that such repurchases push capital structure away
from its optimum level of L = 0, they will spill over and affect investment
decisions—in this particular case, raising the hurdle rate from its FAR value
in the direction of the higher NEER value.
On the other hand, the capital structure complications associated with
own-stock repurchases lead one to ask whether there are other ways for the
manager to make essentially the same speculative bet. For example, he might
create a zero net-investment portfolio, consisting of long positions in other
high B/M stocks and short positions in low B/M stocks. An apparent advan-
tage of this approach is that it does not alter his own ﬁrm’s capital structure.
For the purposes of this chapter, the bottom line question is whether the
existence of such portfolio trading opportunities changes the basic conclu-
sions offered in section 3 above. The answer is, it depends. In particular, the
pivotal issue is whether the other trading opportunities are sufﬁciently at-
tractive and available that they completely eliminate managers’ desire to
distort capital structure away from the ﬁrst-best of L = 0. If so, capital
structure constraints will become irrelevant for hurdle rates, leading to
strictly FAR-based capital budgeting. If not, the qualitative conclusions
offered in section 3 will continue to hold, with binding capital structure
constraints pushing hurdle rates in the direction of NEER values.
Ultimately, the outcome depends on a number of factors that are not ex-
plicitly modeled above. First, while “smart money” managers can presumably
exploit some simple inefﬁciencies—like the B/M effect—by trading in other
stocks using only easily available public data, it seems plausible that they
can do even better by trading in their own stock. If this is the case, there
will be circumstances in which the existence of other trading opportunities
does not eliminate the desire to transact in own-company stock, and the
basic story sketched in section 3 will still apply. A second unmodeled factor
that is likely to be important is the extent to which ﬁrms exhibit risk aversion
with respect to passive portfolio positions. If such risk aversion is pro-
nounced, it will again be the case that the existence of other trading oppor-
tunities is not a perfect substitute for transactions in own-company stock.17
626
STEIN
17 One can imagine a number of reasons for such risk aversion at the corporate level. For ex-
ample, Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993) develop a model in which capital market imperfec-
tions lead ﬁrms to behave in a risk-averse fashion, particularly with respects to those risks—such
as portfolio trading—that are uncorrelated with their physical investment opportunities.

E. Richer Models of Irrationality
Finally, and perhaps most fundamentally, another area that could use fur-
ther development is the speciﬁcation of investors’ misperceptions about key
parameters. I have adopted the simplest possible approach here, assuming
that all investors are homogeneous and that their only misperception has to
do with the expected value of future ﬁrm cash ﬂows. In reality, there are
likely to be important heterogeneities across outside investors. Moreover, es-
timates of other parameters—such as variances and covariances—may also
be subject to systematic biases. It would be interesting to see how robust the
qualitative conclusions of this work are to these and related extensions.
6. Empirical Implications
Traditional efﬁcient-markets-based models conclude that a ﬁrm’s invest-
ment behavior ought to be closely linked to its stock price. And, indeed, a
substantial body of empirical research provides evidence for such a link.18
At the same time, however, a couple of recent papers have found that once
one controls for fundamentals like proﬁts and sales, the incremental ex-
planatory power of stock prices for corporate investment, while statistically
signiﬁcant, is quite limited in economic terms, both in ﬁrm-level and aggre-
gate data (Morck et al. 1990, Blanchard et al. 1993). Thus it appears that,
relative to these fundamental variables, the stock market may be something
of a sideshow in terms of its inﬂuence on corporate investment.
This sideshow phenomenon is easy to rationalize in the context of the
model presented above. If the market is inefﬁcient, and if managers are for
the most part engaging in FAR-based capital budgeting, one would not ex-
pect investment to track stock prices nearly as closely as in a classical
world. Perhaps more interestingly, however, this chapter’s logic allows one
to go further in terms of empirical implications. Rather than simply saying
the theory is consistent with existing evidence, it is also possible to generate
some novel cross-sectional predictions.
These cross-sectional predictions ﬂow from the observation that not all
ﬁrms should have the same propensity to adopt FAR-based capital bud-
geting practices. In particular, FAR-based capital budgeting should be more
prevalent among either ﬁrms with very strong balance sheets (who, in terms
of the language of the model are presumably operating in a relatively ﬂat re-
gion of the Z function) or those whose assets offer substantial debt capacity.
In contrast, ﬁrms with weak balance sheets and hard-to-collateralize assets—
for example, a cash-strapped software development company—should tend
to follow NEER-based capital budgeting. Thus the testable prediction is
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
627
18 See, e.g., Barro (1990) for an overview and a recent empirical treatment of the relation-
ship between stock prices and investment.

that the cash-strapped software company should have investment that re-
sponds more sensitively to movements in its stock price than, say, an AAA-
related utility with lots of tangible assets.
A similar sort of reasoning can be used to generate predictions for the
patterns of asset sales within and across industries. For concreteness, con-
sider two airlines, one ﬁnancially constrained, the other not. Now suppose
that a negative wave of investor sentiment knocks airline-industry stock
prices down and thereby drives conditional expected returns up. The con-
strained airline, which uses NEER-based capital budgeting, will raise its
hurdle rates, while the unconstrained airline, which uses FAR-based capital
budgeting, will not. This divergence in the way the two airlines value phys-
ical assets might be expected to lead the constrained airline to sell some of
its planes to the unconstrained airline. Conversely, if there is a positive sen-
timent shock, the prediction goes the other way—the constrained airline
will cut its hurdle rates, and become a net buyer of assets.19
7. Conclusions
Is β dead? The answer to this question would seem to depend on the job
that one has in mind for β. If the job is to predict cross-sectional differ-
ences in stock returns, then β may well be dead, as Fama and French
(1992) argue. But if the job is to help in determining hurdle rates for capi-
tal budgeting purposes, then β may be only slightly hobbled. Certainly,
any argument in favor of using β as a capital budgeting tool must be care-
fully qualiﬁed, unlike in the typical textbook treatment. Nonetheless, in
the right circumstances, the textbook CAPM approach to setting hurdle
rates may ultimately be justiﬁable.
This defense of β as a capital budgeting tool rests on three key premises.
First, one must be willing to assume that the cross-sectional patterns in
stock returns that have been documented in recent research—such as the
tendency of high B/M stocks to earn higher returns—reﬂect pricing errors,
rather than compensation for fundamental sources of risk. Second, the ﬁrm
in question must have long horizons and be relatively unconstrained by its
current capital structure. And ﬁnally, it must be the case that even though
there are pricing errors, a β estimated from stock returns is a satisfactory
proxy for the fundamental riskiness of the ﬁrm’s cash ﬂows.
628
STEIN
19 I use the example of airlines because of a very interesting paper by Pulvino (1995), who
documents exactly this sort of pattern of asset sales in the airline industry—ﬁnancially uncon-
strained airlines signiﬁcantly increase their purchases of used aircraft when prices are depressed.
As Shleifer and Vishny (1992) demonstrate, this pattern can arise purely as a consequence of liq-
uidity constraints and thus need not reﬂect any stock market inefﬁciencies. Nonetheless, in terms
of generating economically large effects, such inefﬁciencies are likely to give an added kick to
their story.

This chapter was intended as a ﬁrst cut at the problem of capital budgeting
in an inefﬁcient market, and, as such, it leaves many important questions
unanswered. There are at least three broad areas where further research might
be useful. First, there are the pragmatic risk-measurement issues raised in sec-
tion 4, namely, just how well do stock return β’s actually reﬂect the funda-
mental riskiness of underlying ﬁrm cash ﬂows? Are stock return β’s more
informative about fundamental risk for some classes of companies than for
others? Does lengthening the horizon over which returns are computed
help matters? Here it would clearly be desirable to update and build on
some of the work done in the 1970s.
Second, as discussed in section 5, there is potentially quite a bit more that
can be done in terms of reﬁning and extending the basic conceptual frame-
work. And ﬁnally, as seen in section 6, the theory developed here gives rise
to some new empirical implications, having to do with cross-sectional dif-
ferences in the intensity of the relationship between stock prices and corpo-
rate investment.
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
629

References
Ball, R., and P. Brown, 1969, Portfolio theory and accounting. Journal of Account-
ing Research 7, 300–23.
Banz, Rolf W., 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common
stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3–18.
Barro, Robert J., 1990, The stock market and investment, Review of Financial Stud-
ies 3, 115–31.
Basu, Sanjoy, 1977, Investment performance of common stocks in relation to their
price-earnings ratios: A test of the efﬁcient market hypothesis, Journal of Finance
32, 663–82.
Beaver, William, Paul Kettler, and Myron Scholes, 1970, The association between
market determined and accounting determined risk measures, Accounting Re-
view October, 654–82.
Beaver, William, and James Manegold, 1975, The association between market-
determined and accounting-determined measures of systematic risk: Some further
evidence, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis June, 231–84.
Bhandari, Laxmi Chand, 1988, Debt/equity ratio and expected common stock re-
turns: Empirical evidence, Journal of Finance 43, 507–28.
Blanchard, Olivier, Changyong Rhee, and Lawrence Summers, 1993, The stock
market, proﬁt, and investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 115–36.
Bosworth, Barry, 1975, The stock market and the economy, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 257–300.
Chan, Louis K. C., Y. Hamao, and Josef Lakonishok, 1991, Fundamentals and
stock returns in Japan, Journal of Finance 46, 1739–64.
Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok, 1995, Evaluating
the performance of value versus glamour stocks: The impact of selection bias,
Journal of Financial Economics 38, 269–96.
Cheng, Li-Lan, 1995, The motives, timing and subsequent performance of seasoned
equity issues, Ph.D. diss., MIT, Department of Economics.
Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 1995. Evidence on the characteristics of cross-
sectional variation in stock returns. Working Paper. University of Chicago.
Davis, James L., 1994, The cross-section of realized stock returns: The pre-
COMPUSTAT evidence, Journal of Finance 49, 1579–93.
DeBondt, Werner F., and Richard H. Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overre-
act. Journal of Finance 40, 793–805.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J.
Waldmann, 1989, The size and incidence of the losses from noise trading, Jour-
nal of Finance 44, 681–96.
Fama, Eugene F., 1991, Efﬁcient capital markets: II, Journal of Finance 46, 1575–
1617.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock
returns, Journal of Finance 47, 427–65.
———, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of
Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fischer, Stanley, and Robert Merton, 1984, Macroeconomics and ﬁnance: The role
of the stock market, Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 21,
57–108.
630
STEIN

Froot, Kenneth A., David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1993, Risk manage-
ment: Coordinating corporate investment and ﬁnancing policies, Journal of Fi-
nance 48, 1629–58.
Gonedes, Nicholas J., 1973, Evidence on the information content of accounting
numbers: Accounting-based and market-based estimates of systematic risk, Jour-
nal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis June, 407–43.
———, 1975, A note on accounting-based and market-based estimates of system-
atic risk, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis June, 355–65.
Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreac-
tion to open market share repurchases, Working Paper. N.p.
Jaffe, Jeffrey, Donald B. Keim, and Randolph Westerﬁeld, 1989, Earnings yields,
market values, and stocks returns, Journal of Finance 44, 135–48.
Keim, Donald B., 1983, Size-related anomalies and stock return seasonality, Journal
of Financial Economics 12, 13–32.
Keynes, John Maynard, 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money, Macmillan.
Laffont, Jean Jacques, and Jean Tirole, 1988, Repeated auctions of incentive con-
tracts, investment, and bidding parity with an application to takeovers, Rand
Journal of Economics 19, 516–37.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian invest-
ment, extrapolation, and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541–78.
La Porta, Rafael, Josef Lakonishok; Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1994,
Good news for value stocks: Further evidence on market efﬁciency, Working
Paper, Harvard University.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance
50, 23–51.
MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1995, Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the
CAPM, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 3–28.
Miller, Merton M., and Kevin Rock, 1985, Dividend policy under asymmetric in-
formation, Journal of Finance 40, 1021–52.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1990, The stock market and
investment: Is the market a sideshow?, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
157–215.
Myers, Stewart, and N. Majluf, 1984, Corporate ﬁnancing and investment deci-
sions when ﬁrms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Finan-
cial Economics 13, 187–221.
Pulvino, Todd, 1995, Do asset ﬁre-sales exist? An empirical investigation of com-
mercial aircraft transactions, Working Paper, Harvard University.
Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of
market inefﬁciency, Journal of Portfolio Management 11, 9–17.
Scharfstein, David, 1988, The disciplinary role of takeovers, Review of Economic
Studies 55, 185–99.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A
market equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343–66.
Spiess, D. Katherine, and John Afﬂeck-Graves, 1995, Underperformance in long-
run stock reurns following seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 38, 241–67.
Stattman, Dennis, 1980, Book values and stock returns, Chicago MBA: A Journal
of Selected Papers 4, 25–45.
RATIONAL CAPITAL BUDGETING
631

Stein, Jeremy C., 1988, Takeover threats and managerial myopia, Journal of Politi-
cal Economy 96, 61–80.
———, 1989, Efﬁcient capital markets, inefﬁcient ﬁrms: A model of myopic corpo-
rate behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655–69.
632
STEIN
