Chapter 18
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT TO 
EXCEED THRESHOLDS
François Degeorge, Jayendu Patel,
and Richard Zeckhauser
1. Introduction
Analysts, investors, senior executives, and boards of directors consider
earnings the single most important item in the ﬁnancial reports issued by
publicly held ﬁrms. In the medium to long term (1–10 year intervals), returns
to equities appear to be explained overwhelmingly by the ﬁrm’s cumulative
earnings during the period; other plausible explanations—such as dividends,
cash ﬂows, or capital investments—have marginal correlations close to zero
(Easton, Harris, and Ohlson 1992, Kothari and Sloan 1992). Even for short-
term equity returns, earnings are an important explanatory factor.1
The rewards to a ﬁrm’s senior executives—both employment decisions
and compensation beneﬁts—depend both implicitly and explicitly on the
earnings achieved on their watch (Healy 1985). But such executives have
considerable discretion in determining the ﬁgure printed in the earnings report
for any particular period. Within generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP), executives have considerable ﬂexibility in the choice of inventory
methods, allowance for bad debt, expensing of research and development,
recognition of sales not yet shipped, estimation of pension liabilities, capital-
ization of leases and marketing expenses, delay in maintenance expenditures,
We thank the David Dreman Foundation for funding support; Degeorge also thanks the Fon-
dation Hautes Etudes Commerciales for research support. The data on analysts’ forecasts of
earnings were provided by I/B/E/S International Inc. (post-1984 period) and by Q Prime (pre-
1984). We have beneﬁted from helpful comments by Raj Aggarwal, Shlomo Benartzi, Bengt
Holmstrom, David King, Todd Milbourn, Clyde Stickney, Richard Thaler, Kent Womack, and
a referee. We have also beneﬁted from helpful comments from seminar participants at the Be-
havioral Finance Working Group of the National Bureau of Economic Research; Boston Uni-
versity; the Centre for Economic Policy Research European Summer Symposium in Financial
Markets at Studienzentrum Gerzensee, Switzerland; the European Finance Association meet-
ings, Vienna, 1997; the French Finance Association meetings, Grenoble, 1997; Harvard Uni-
versity; the European Institute of Business Administration (INSEAD); the Q Group; and the
Amos Tuck School, Dartmouth College.
1 Ball and Brown (1968) is the classic early work; see Dechow (1994) and references there
for subsequent research that details the relevance of earnings.

and so on. Moreover, they can defer expenses or boost revenues, say, by
cutting prices. Thus, executives have both the incentive and ability to man-
age earnings. It is hardly surprising that the popular press frequently de-
scribes companies as engaged in earnings management—sometimes referred
to as manipulations.2
This chapter studies earnings management as a response to implicit and
explicit rewards for attaining speciﬁc levels of earnings, such as positive
earnings, an improvement over last year, or the market’s consensus fore-
cast. We label as “earnings management” (EM) the strategic exercise of
managerial discretion in inﬂuencing the earnings ﬁgure reported to external
audiences (see Schipper 1989). It is accomplished principally by timing re-
ported or actual economic events to shift income between periods.
We sketch a model that predicts how executives strategically inﬂuence
the earnings ﬁgures that their ﬁrms report to external audiences and then
examine historical data to conﬁrm such patterns. Our model incorporates
behavioral propensities and a stylized description of the interactions among
executives, investors, directors, and earnings analysts to identify EM pat-
terns that generate speciﬁc discontinuities and distortions in the distribu-
tion of observed earnings.3
We do not determine which components of earnings or of supplementary
disclosures are adjusted. Nor do we attempt to distinguish empirically be-
tween “direct” EM—the strategic timing of investment, sales, expenditures,
or ﬁnancing decisions—and “misreporting”—EM involving merely the dis-
cretionary accounting of decisions and outcomes already realized.4
We identify three thresholds that help drive EM: the ﬁrst is to report
proﬁts—for example, one penny a share. This threshold arises from the
psychologically important distinction between positive numbers and nega-
tive numbers (or zero). The second and third benchmarks rely on perfor-
mance relative to widely reported ﬁrm-speciﬁc values. If the ﬁrm does as
well or better than the benchmark, it is met; otherwise it is failed. The two
benchmarks are performance relative to the prior comparable period and
relative to analysts’ earnings projections. Performance relative to each
benchmark is assessed by examining the sprinkling of quarterly earnings re-
ports in its neighborhood. A big jump in density at the benchmark demon-
strates its importance.
634
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
2 See, e.g., the multipage stories “Excuses Aplenty When Companies Tinker with Their
Proﬁts Reports,” New York Times (June 23, 1996), and “On the Books, More Facts and Less
Fiction,” New York Times (February 16, 1997). A further study—Bruns and Merchant (1996,
p. 25)—concludes that “we have no doubt that short-term earnings are being manipulated in
many, if not all, companies.”
3 DeBondt and Thaler (1995, pp. 385–410) provide a discussion of behaviorally motivated
ﬁnancial decisions by ﬁrms.
4 Foster (1986, p. 224) discusses mechanisms for misreporting transactions or events in ﬁ-
nancial statements.

Burgstahler and Dichev (1997) examine the management of earnings to
meet our ﬁrst two thresholds, though not in relation to analysts’ estimates.5
Their analysis delves more deeply into accounting issues and identiﬁes the
“misreporting” mechanisms—for example, the manipulation of cash ﬂow
from operations, or changes in working capital—that permit earnings to be
moved from negative to positive ranges. We devote considerably more at-
tention to the motivations for EM, consider direct EM (for example, lower-
ing prices to boost sales) in addition to misreporting, provide an optimizing
model on how earnings are managed, and analyze the consequences of
management for future earnings. In addition, we explore EM as the execu-
tive’s (agent’s) response to steep rewards—reaping a bonus or retaining a
job—that depend on meeting a bright threshold.6 Finally, we look at the hi-
erarchy among our thresholds.
Earnings management arises from the game of information disclosure that
executives and outsiders must play. Investors base their decisions on infor-
mation received from analysts—usually indirectly, say, through a broker—
and through published earnings announcements. To bolster investor interest,
executives manage earnings, despite the real earnings sacriﬁce. Other par-
ties, such as boards of directors, analysts, and accountants, participate in this
game as well, but their choices are exogenous to our analysis. For example,
the contingent remuneration actions of boards are known to executives.
Presumably such pay packages are structured to take distorting possibilities
into account and may have been adjusted somewhat to counter EM.7 If so,
ﬁnding evidence of management is more signiﬁcant.
Executives may also distort earnings reports in a self-serving manner, im-
posing an agency loss that reduces the ﬁrm’s value if their incentives are not
fully aligned with those of shareholders. Full alignment is unlikely. First,
while the value of the stock is the present value of dividends stretching to
inﬁnity, the executive’s time horizon is relatively short. Since it is difﬁcult
for boards, shareholders, or the stock market to assess future prospects, ex-
ecutives have an incentive to pump up current earnings at the expense of
the hard-to-perceive future beyond their reign. Accordingly, a major beneﬁt
of stock options is that they extend the time horizon for executives.
Second, an executive’s compensation, including the probability of keep-
ing his job, is likely linked to earnings, stock price performance, or both
(see Healy 1985, Gaver, Gaver, and Austin 1995). If accepting lower earn-
ings today might result in a termination or a lost bonus, substantially
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
635
5 Payne and Robb (1997) show that managers use discretionary accrual to align earnings
with analysts’ expectations.
6 Burgstahler (1997) adds a model in which earnings are manipulated because the marginal
beneﬁt of reporting higher earnings is greatest in some middle range.
7 Dechow, Hudson, and Sloan (1994) document that compensation committees often over-
ride the provisions of incentive plans to avoid providing incentives for executives to behave
opportunistically.

greater earnings tomorrow may not represent a desirable trade-off. When
earnings are near the unacceptable range, executives’ incentives to manage
them upward will be signiﬁcant. However, when bonuses are near maximum,
further earnings increases will be rewarded little, generating an incentive to
rein in today’s earnings—that is, shift them forward—making future
thresholds easier to meet.8 Executives may also be reluctant to report large
gains in earnings because they know their performance target will be ratch-
eted up in the future. Earnings so poor as to put thresholds and bonuses out
of reach may also be shifted to the future; the executive saves for a better
tomorrow.
Earnings can be managed by actually shifting income over time, which
we label “direct management,” or by misreporting. A typical misreport,
failing to mark down “stale” inventory or incurring extraordinary charges
beyond what prudence requires, simply relocates an amount from one year
to another. Such misreports must pass through the hands of accountants,
who are reliable professionals. Accountants’ procedures prevent simple
misreporting of earnings; indeed, only their oversight makes earnings re-
ports meaningful. But accountants are neither omniscient nor disinter-
ested. They can be misled, but only at a cost. The executive may need to
co-opt the auditor, say, with an unneeded consulting contract. Alterna-
tively, he may make his misreporting hard to detect, but that requires
weakening internal control mechanisms, which help the manager in allo-
cating resources or detecting shirking or misappropriation at lower levels
in the ﬁrm.
Direct management of earnings upward—through delaying desirable
training or maintenance expenditures or cutting prices to boost sales—has
real consequences and can impose costs beyond today’s beneﬁts plus im-
puted interest. Earnings delays, perhaps, by accelerating costs to this year
to pave the way for a brighter future—common behavior when a new team
takes over and blames poor initial results on past leadership—are also
costly. Both misreporting and direct earnings management, whether pushing
earnings forward or back, are costly activities. Their marginal cost increases
with scale since cheap transfers are undertaken ﬁrst.
Section 2 of this chapter reports brieﬂy on relevant literature from psychol-
ogy, develops a model of EM around threshold targets, and draws inferences
for real world data. Section 3 reports on empirical explorations relating to
thresholds, studying conditional and unconditional distributions of quar-
terly earnings over the period 1974 to 1996. Section 4 examines whether
636
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
8 Healy (1985, p. 106) reports that “managers are more likely to choose income-decreasing
accruals when their bonus plan’s upper and lower bounds are binding, and income-increasing
accruals when these bounds are not binding.” Holthausen, Larcker, and Sloan (1995) ﬁnd
that managers manipulate earnings downward when they are at the upper bounds of their
bonus contracts. However, they ﬁnd no manipulation downward below their contract’s lower
bounds.

ﬁrms that are more likely to have managed earnings upward to attain a
threshold in a particular year underperform in the subsequent year. Section
5 suggests future directions and concludes.
2. A Threshold Model of Earnings Management
Executives manage earnings to inﬂuence the perceptions of outsiders—such
as investors, banks, and suppliers—and to reap private payoffs.9 In our
stylized model, outsiders utilize thresholds as a standard for judging and re-
warding executives. When executives respond to these thresholds, distribu-
tions of reported earnings get distorted: far too few earnings fall just below
a threshold, too many just above it.
A. Why Thresholds?
Executives focus on thresholds for earnings because the parties concerned
with the ﬁrm’s performance do. Executives may also manipulate earnings
for their own reasons if, for example, they derive personal satisfaction from
making a target; however, the biases of outsiders are our focus.
Beyond boards, investors, and analysts, earnings reports are important to
those people concerned with the ﬁrm’s viability and proﬁtability because they
make ﬁrm-speciﬁc investments, such as customers and suppliers, bankers, and
workers. Many of these outsiders exhibit what we call a “threshold mental-
ity,” for both rational and perceptual reasons. In a range of circumstances,
individuals perceive continuous data in discrete form; indeed “the tendency
to divide the world into categories is a pervasive aspect of human thought”
(Glass and Holyoak 1986, p. 149). For example, we perceive the continu-
ous color spectrum discretely, recognizing seven primary colors. Similarly, if
a diagram shades from dark to light and then remains light, humans per-
ceive a bright line where the shading to light stops (Cornsweet 1974, pp.
276–77). Below we discuss three established demarcations for corporate
earnings. Unlike our vision examples, earnings demarcations draw strongly
on external cues.
The salience of thresholds arises from at least three psychological effects.
First, there is something fundamental about positive and nonpositive
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
637
9 Even if EM is costly, it may be in the interest of shareholders ex ante if it increases the in-
formation available to important parties. In some settings, manipulated earnings may contain
more, not less, information about the ﬁrm’s true prospects. For example, if a ﬁrm’s earnings
barely meet some threshold, it is likely that the ﬁgure has been inﬂated. But this implies that
executives are conﬁdent that the cost of manipulation—reduced proﬁts next year—will not be
so large as to reduce dramatically the prospect that the ﬁrm will meet the threshold next year.
Thus, small manipulated proﬁts may contain more information than small unmanipulated
proﬁts.

numbers in human thought processes.10 Hence, this dividing line carries
over for the threshold on absolute earnings. When looking at the bench-
marks of quarterly earnings a year back and the analysts’ consensus fore-
cast, there is a salient dividing line between meeting and failing to meet the
norm. Meeting the norm is critical, as opposed to beating it by 10 percent
or falling short by 3 percent. Saliency makes the norm itself a focal point,
which reinforces its psychological properties.11
Second, as prospect theory tells us, individuals choosing among risky al-
ternatives behave as if they evaluate outcomes as changes from a reference
point (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). The reference point is usually some
aspect of the decision maker’s current state (for example, wealth), and it
shifts over time, sometimes with how the decision is framed. The amount of
shifting can dramatically affect choices for two reasons: there is a kink in
the utility function at the reference point (zero change); and the overall
curve is S-shaped (that is, it is convex for losses and concave for gains). If
the preferences of executives, the boards that review them, or the investors
who trade the ﬁrm’s stock are consistent with the predictions of prospect
theory, then executives will have a threshold-related reward schedule and
are likely to manage reported earnings in response. The thresholds they will
wish to reach are the reference points in the value functions of the partici-
pants; such points are likely to be perceptually salient.
Third, thresholds come to the fore because people depend on rules of
thumb to reduce transactions costs. The discreteness of actions, whether by
investment analysts recommending sell, hold, or buy, rating agencies giving
letter grades, bankers making or refusing loans, or boards retaining or dis-
missing the CEO promotes the use of thresholds of acceptable performance.12
Banks, for example, may grant loans only to ﬁrms that report positive earn-
ings; that is, banks use a threshold of zero earnings as an initial screen since
judiciously adjusting interest rates in response to differential performance
may be too hard. Earnings management across thresholds can also simplify
executives’ relations with shareholders and boards of directors. A report
to shareholders that earnings have been up six years in a row is cheaply
638
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
10 The symbol for zero came late and with difﬁculty to mathematicians, except in India. For
example, China imported it from India in the eighth century, and “the mathematicians and as-
tronomers of Sumer and Babylon labored for nearly 1500 years before they introduced the no-
tion of a ‘zero’ symbol.” Negative numbers were much harder still, not becoming “generally
recognized as ‘numbers’ until the sixteenth century” (Barrow 1992, pp. 89–90). In contrast,
positive numbers appear to be a more directly grasped concept for humans.
11 Any assessor of earnings will worry about the consistency of his judgment with that of
others, which makes focal points critical. When comparing performance to a yardstick, just
meeting the standard is a spotlighted property. For a seminal analysis of focal points see
Schelling (1960). See Young (1996) for a discussion of conventions.
12 Burgstahler (1997) shows empirically that the net probability of improvements in outside
ratings of both debt and equity are greatest in the neighborhoods of zero earnings and zero
changes in earnings.

communicated. A statement that they have been up ﬁve out of six years, and
only fell by 1 percent in the off year, is less easily understood, so that strug-
gling across the threshold of last year’s earnings becomes worthwhile. When a
ﬁrm falls short of analysts’ earnings projections, the board may think that the
executives did a poor job; bonuses and stock option awards may suffer. Such
doubts are much less likely to arise if the analysts’ earnings are just met.13
Threshold effects may be important even if few participants respond to
them directly. Suppose that only the ﬁrm’s bankers care directly whether the
ﬁrm reaches a speciﬁc performance threshold but all parties know how the
bankers feel. Since analysts and shareholders know that executives cannot
lightly risk raising the bankers’ ire, they will want to know whether the
ﬁrm meets the banker’s performance threshold. Thus, reaching the thresh-
old caters both to the bankers and to other participants’ rational percep-
tions through inference.
In contrast to a world in which all participants care about thresholds,
threshold-regarding (TR) behavior by merely a minority may have a much
more than proportional effect. For example, the level of EM in a world
where 25 percent of boards of directors respond naturally to thresholds
may be much more than 25 percent as great as in a world where all boards
are threshold-driven. Consider an executive threatened with modestly nega-
tive results who does not know how his board will respond. If it is TR, it
will ﬁre him with probability 0.4; otherwise, his job is safe. If he knew he
faced a TR board, he would manage earnings to the positive safe zone. But
even with only a 25 percent chance it is TR, he may do the same thing. A
10 percent probability of being ﬁred may be sufﬁcient stimulus. Signaling
and lemons-type unraveling can also lead to spillovers, for instance, if
higher-quality ﬁrms are more able and likely to manipulate to the safe
range. If so, TR behavior by a modest proportion of boards spills over to
affect potentially the behavior of large numbers of executives.
B. Three Thresholds
Reports in the ﬁnancial press suggest that executives care about three
thresholds when they report earnings:
1. to report positive proﬁts, that is, report earnings that are above zero;
2. to sustain recent performance, that is, make at least last year’s earn-
ings; and
3. to meet analysts’ expectations, particularly the analysts’ consensus
earnings forecast.
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
639
13 President Clinton, recognizing the role of thresholds, announced that he was seeking to
secure 50 percent of the 1996 presidential vote so as to claim a mandate. Not surprisingly, he
struggled hard in the ﬁnal days to get more than 50 percent. (In fact, he won 49.2 percent of
the actual vote.)

The analysts’ consensus estimate, unlike our other thresholds, is endoge-
nous. Although executives try to report earnings that exceed analysts’ fore-
casts, analysts try to anticipate reported earnings.14 A complicated game
ensues, in which analysts predict an earnings number that will then be ma-
nipulated in response to their prediction. Anecdotal evidence suggests that
executives, realizing the importance of meeting or exceeding the analysts’
consensus, actively try to inﬂuence analysts’ expectations downward, espe-
cially when the earnings announcement date draws near.15
C. A Two-period Model with Last Period’s Earnings as Threshold
Using earnings management to reach thresholds affects the distribution of
reported earnings. We study a simple 2-period model where the threshold
to be met is last year’s earnings. In each period t = 1, 2, the ﬁrm gets a ran-
dom, independent, and identically distributed draw of “latent” or true
earnings, Lt. Outsiders cannot observe these latent earnings. They only see
reported earnings, Rt. In period 1, executives can manipulate reported
earnings R1 by choosing an amount M1 (possibly negative) to add to earn-
ings, such that R1 = L1 + M1. The cost of manipulation is paid when there
is full settling up in period 2:
R2 = L2 −k(M1),
where k(0) = 0 and there are positive and increasing marginal costs for
moving away from zero. For simplicity, assume a zero discount rate. Pump-
ing up reported earnings today reduces earnings tomorrow by more than
one dollar. If period 1 manipulation is negative (executives rein in earn-
ings), another dollar reduction boosts next year’s earnings by less than one
dollar.
The executive exits after period 2, and we assume that all is revealed at
that point. This produces the trade-off indicated in ﬁgure 18.1. Point a cor-
responds to M1 = 0, and thus R1 = L1. As shown, the slope of the trade-off
curve at a is −1. (More generally, the slope will be − (1 + r), where r is the
1-period interest rate corresponding to a nonzero time value of money.)
We assume that the executive’s expected reward schedule falls sharply at
one or more thresholds, such as negative earnings, or earnings below last
year. Below such thresholds, he or she might risk termination or at least a
640
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
14 See Abarbanell and Bernard (1992) and references there on possible biases in analysts’
forecasts.
15 See “Learn to Manage Your Earnings, and Wall Street Will Love You,” Fortune (March
31, 1997). This article tells the story of a meeting among Microsoft’s Bill Gates, his chief ﬁ-
nancial ofﬁcer, and ﬁnancial analysts, during which the Microsoft executives paint a particu-
larly bleak picture of the company’s future. At the end of the meeting, Gates and his chief
ﬁnancial ofﬁcer congratulate each other when they realize that their goal of depressing ana-
lysts’ expectations has been achieved.

substantial cut in bonus. For simplicity, we assume that at all earnings lev-
els other than at the thresholds the incentives for better performance are
positive and constant. (In practice, we suspect that they are steep near a
threshold and more tempered at either extreme.)
The self-interested executive manages earnings to maximize his personal
payoff. In each period, he receives a payoff f(Rt, Rt−1), where Rt is the re-
ported earnings performance in period t. If the manager meets or surpasses
the benchmark, he receives a bonus v(Rt, Rt−1).16 Thus, we posit the fol-
lowing form for f:
f(Rt, Rt−1) = βRt + v(Rt, Rt−1),
where
v(Rt, Rt−1) = γ if Rt ≥Rt−1
= 0 otherwise.
The executive’s direct rewards for the current period performance (at a rate
β) are captured by the ﬁrst term. The previous period’s reported earnings
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
641
   
 


	
 
Figure 18.1. Reported earnings in period 2 as a function of those in period 1, hold-
ing L1 and L2 ﬁxed.
16 If effort boosts earnings, incentives should be strongest where earnings outcomes, given
optimal effort, are most likely. Strong incentives cannot be provided across all outcomes be-
cause executives cannot be paid negatively for poor outcomes. Thus, strong incentives will not
be provided for very favorable outcomes either lest executives be overpaid on average. The op-
timal reward schedule will be steeply responsive near the benchmark since such earnings out-
comes are most likely.

serve as a benchmark for a second effect. For period 1, the benchmark is
R0, which is normalized to zero for exposition, and the benchmark is R1
for period 2. Thus the v(Rt, Rt−1) term induces a ratcheting effect.17
Executives are assumed to be risk neutral for convenience; this assump-
tion could easily be relaxed. For our 2-period illustration, the executive se-
lects M1 to maximize the net present value of the expected payoffs in the
two periods, that is, to maximize
f(R1, R0) + δE[f(R2, R1)],
where E denotes expectation and δ is the discount factor.
Managing earnings is an imprecise science, relying on estimates of both
latent earnings and the effects of any attempts to boost earnings. Latent
earnings may well prove higher or lower than expected. We analyze two
cases, depending on whether the executive knows L1 precisely or impre-
cisely when he selects M1.
Case 1.
The executive knows L1 precisely when he selects M1. In this set-
ting, the primary element of the executive’s strategy is intuitively clear. If
L1 < R0, the executive should select M1 to achieve the threshold and reap
the bonus, unless the entailed loss on L2 in expected value terms proves too
costly.
We set R0 equal to zero for convenience. If L1 is slightly below zero, then it
will be worthwhile to select a positive M1—the executive should borrow fu-
ture earnings to make the bonus. While manipulation will sacriﬁce a greater
amount of second-period earnings and raise the hurdle for the second period,
it will allow the executive to earn the bonus for sure now, only sacriﬁcing it
with some chance in period 2. The borrowing will prove well worthwhile,
except in the unlikely case when it turns out to sacriﬁce next period’s bonus.
If L1 is signiﬁcantly below zero, then borrowing to cross the threshold
may be too costly. To determine whether it is, the executive compares two
quantities. The ﬁrst is his expected payoff if he manipulates just enough—
that is, selects M1 so that R1 = 0—to secure the bonus. The second is his
optimal strategy if he forgoes the bonus. For the second, he actually selects
a negative value of M1, lowering the next period’s threshold and pushing
earnings forward thus in two ways. We call this “saving for a better tomor-
row.” Reducing earnings when latent earnings are disappointing is referred
to in the literature as “taking the Big Bath.”
If L1 is above R0, then there is no reason to boost earnings. Indeed, for
L1 > R0, some reining in is desirable since it increases the likelihood that
the executive will earn the next period’s bonus.
642
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
17 Ratcheting of standards is well known in the contexts of worker productivity, procure-
ment, and regulation and is primarily studied for its disincentive effects on ﬁrst-period effort.
See Milgrom and Roberts (1992, pp. 233–36) and Laffont and Tirole (1993, pp. 381–87).

To illustrate, we choose R0 = 0, β = 1, γ = 10, and δ = 1; hence, f(R1) =
R1 + v(R1, 0). Earnings have a normal distribution each period, with mean
of zero and standard deviation of 10.18 The second-period cost from ma-
nipulation is k(M) = eM −1, which is greater than M, implying that any ma-
nipulation is costly on net. (If M < 0, earnings are manipulated downward
in the ﬁrst period and boosted in the second period—but the second-period
boost is smaller than the ﬁrst-period hit.)
Figure 18.2 illustrates the executive’s optimal strategy as a function of la-
tent earnings L1. The initial threshold is achieved where L1 + M1 = R0 = 0.
Our key ﬁnding is that, just below zero, the optimal strategy is to set
M1 = −L1; future earnings are borrowed to meet today’s earnings threshold.
At point Z, the payoff from choosing M1 = −L1 (and therefore a positive
M1, indicating borrowing) just equals the payoff from saving for a better
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
643
  
	
	
  
	 	
 
 
 
 
 
	
  
 
	
 


		
 	





 
 




Figure 18.2. Optimal amount of period 1 manipulation, M1, as a function of latent
period 1 earnings L1. Latent earnings L1 are normally distributed with mean zero
and standard deviation 10. If reported earnings R1 = L1 + M1 reach at least R0 = 0,
the executive reaps a bonus of 10. The period 2 cost of manipulation is k(M1) =
eM −1. The executive knows L1 exactly when choosing the manipulation level M1.
18 We assume stationarity in the latent earnings distribution. This might be considered un-
representative if the real earnings process has a random walk characteristic. If latent earnings
do follow a random walk and we keep the same ratcheting structure in the payoff function,
the manipulation behavior will be identical close to the threshold (M1 = L1). Away from the
threshold, ﬁrms will manipulate by a constant amount regardless of L1: ratcheting combined
with the random walk assumption ensures that the executive’s decision problem is invariant
to L1.

tomorrow (taking the optimal sacriﬁce in earnings). Left of Z, the optimal
bath gives a higher payoff than striving. Right of Z, borrowing gives a
higher 2-period payoff. Hence the discontinuity in the graph.
When L1 is small and positive, it pays to rein in, so that reported earn-
ings just sneak beyond the threshold (recall that in this initial version of the
model, R1 can be targeted perfectly, so there is no risk of missing zero earn-
ings). As L1 becomes larger, reining in becomes less attractive since ratchet-
ing upward makes the benchmark less likely to be attained in period 2 and
the k function is convex. Indeed, for large values of L1 (not shown), reining
in is abandoned since next year’s bonus is unlikely to be reaped in any cir-
cumstance.19
Figure 18.2 identiﬁes three phenomena that arise if executives misreport
earnings. First, for a range of values of L1, a proﬁt just sufﬁcient to meet
the threshold is recorded. Second, EM creates a gap in the earnings distri-
bution just below the threshold (zero in this case). Third, the level of reported
earnings will be a sharply discontinuous function of latent earnings.20
Case 2.
The executive has an imprecise estimate of L1 when he chooses
M1. The executive has a prior probability distribution on L1 centered on its
true value with variance σ2. Now, when the executive sets an M1 > 0 seek-
ing to meet or exceed the threshold, he must choose a value higher than in
Case 1 to be sure the threshold is met. Also, when by chance L1 ends up to-
ward the bottom of its expected range, small negative earnings will be
recorded.
Case 2 incorporates uncertainty, sets σ2 = 1, and uses the same parameter
values employed in our prior example. Figure 18.3 shows the distribution
of reported earnings for 20,000 draws of latent earnings with a bin width
of one unit. The density of reported earnings dips just below zero and piles
up above the threshold. The extreme outcome of zero density just below
zero, which occurs when the executive has perfect knowledge of L1, does
not appear in Case 2. The maximum hump is shifted to the right of zero be-
cause executives hedge against uncertainty by undertaking some positive
EM even when the mean of their prior distribution of L1 is somewhat
above the threshold. This simulated distribution of R1 is the pattern to
644
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
19 Healy (1985, p. 90), who focuses on misreporting (discretionary accruals) and does not
consider ratcheting, provides intuition for a three-component linear schedule. Whereas our
schedule has a jump at the threshold, with a shallow positive slope to either side, Healy as-
sumes a schedule that has a slope over a middle range, with a zero slope to either side. Unlike
Healy, we assume improved performance is rewarded everywhere and that there is a sharp re-
ward at the threshold.
20 This will make reported earnings very difﬁcult to predict. Thus, executives’ manipula-
tions could explain why analysts’ forecasts are often wrong. Roughly 45 percent of analysts’
estimates fall outside a band of 15 percent plus or minus the actual earnings (Dreman and
Berry 1995a, p. 39).

which we compare the empirical distributions below. The dark shaded
areas below the horizontal show shortfalls in the density, if any, relative to
the equidistant bin on the other side of the threshold (which, by construc-
tion, is at the peak of the latent symmetric distribution).
In results not shown, we explored the consequences of changing the pa-
rameter values of the model. We ﬁnd that the changeover point Z (where
L1 is negative and the payoff from borrowing to meet the threshold just
equals the payoff from taking the optimal sacriﬁce) moves to the left as the
discount factor increases since, the higher the executive’s discount rate, the
more valuable it is to get high earnings this period, and the costlier it is to
take a bath.
The more uncertain are second-period earnings, the more the executive
will manipulate to secure the bonus in the ﬁrst period since big borrowings
are less likely to sacriﬁce the second year’s threshold. As the bonus for
crossing the threshold (indicated by γ) falls in importance relative to the re-
wards per unit of reported earnings (indicated by β), EM becomes more
costly and decreases. For any level of L1, as β increases, the optimal M1
moves closer to zero, and the dip below and pile-up above the threshold
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
645
 

      
 






 



 






 

Figure 18.3. Simulated distributing of reported earnings R1. Latent earning L1 are
normally distributed with mean 0 and standard deviation 10. If reported earnings
R1 = L1 + M1 reach at least R0 = 0, the executive reaps a bonus of 10. The period 2
cost of manipulation is k(M1) = eM −1. The executive knows L1 imprecisely when
choosing the manipulation level M1 (he has a probability distribution centered on
L1 with a variance of one). The dark shaded areas below the horizontal show short-
falls relative to the equidistant bin on the other side of the threshold of zero.

both diminish. Where borrowing earnings had been most extreme, the ex-
ecutive saves instead for a better tomorrow.21
The next two sections relate the results of the model to empirical data on
earnings so as to evaluate the evidence of EM. Section 3 examines the distri-
butions (both unconditional and conditional) of reported earnings between
1974 and 1996. Section 4 reports on statistical tests of the hypothesis that fu-
ture earnings are lower when current earnings are likely to have been manip-
ulated upward to attain a threshold.
3. Evidence of Earnings Management to Exceed Thresholds
Theory suggests that simple thresholds will signiﬁcantly inﬂuence execu-
tives’ management of earnings. It is impossible to monitor manipulation,
M, and test the theory directly, so we evaluate the indirect evidence pro-
vided by the values of reported earnings, R.22
Our empirical analyses explore the extent to which managers manage
earnings to attain our three thresholds: (1) to “report proﬁts,” that is, to
achieve 1 cent or more in earnings per share; (2) to “sustain recent perfor-
mance,” that is, to meet or surpass the most recent level of comparable
earnings (which, given seasonal variation, is the corresponding quarter from
the previous year); and (3) to “meet analysts’ expectations,” that is, to meet
or exceed the consensus forecast of analysts. We study the density function
for earnings near each threshold. If managers do indeed manage earnings to
meet a threshold, we expect to observe “too few” earnings reports directly
below it and “too many” at or directly above it. We do not expect ﬁndings
as stark as those our model generates because of numerous additional fac-
tors, including heterogeneity among ﬁrms in both earnings distributions
and EM potential.
Subsection 3A brieﬂy discusses the sample and the construction of vari-
ables. Subsection 3B presents three univariate histograms that provide evi-
dence of EM across the three thresholds. For each histogram, we report the
results of a statistical test that the discontinuity at the conjectured threshold
is signiﬁcant. Details of the test method are discussed in the appendix. Fi-
nally, in subsection 3C, we explore conditional distributions to rank the im-
portance of the three thresholds.
646
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
21 We have extended results to a three-period setting in results not shown. With more than
two periods, there are factors that make saving earnings from the ﬁrst period both more and
less valuable. They would be more valuable because there would be no danger that they would
be “wasted,” that is, more than enough to secure the second-period bonus. They would be less
valuable because executives could always borrow in the second period to make that period’s
bonus.
22 Dechow et al. (1995) address the problems of estimating the level of discretionary accrual
activity.

A. Data and Construction of Variables
Our data set consists of quarterly data on 5,387 ﬁrms providing partial or
complete data over the 1974 to 1996 period. To conveniently align quar-
terly observations, we drop ﬁrms whose ﬁscal years do not end in March,
June, September, or December. While the total number of observations ex-
ceeds 100,000, the number of available observations is much smaller for
many of the analyses. For the 1974 to 1984 period, the sample includes
only the midcapitalization or larger ﬁrms for which Abel-Noser (more re-
cently Q-Prime) provides data on analysts’ forecasts of earnings. The re-
ported earnings per share are from Compustat item no. 8, which excludes
extraordinary items. Our post-1984 sample of more than 83,000 observa-
tions draws from the databases provided by I/B/E/S International Inc. The
I/B/E/S databases contain analysts’ forecasts of quarterly earnings as well as
the reported earnings.
We represent analysts’ expectations by the mean of the analysts’ forecasts
for the contemporaneous quarter. Such forecasts are usually available
around the middle of the last month of the quarter. (The ﬁnancial results for
a quarter are announced by ﬁrms about four weeks into the next quarter—
typically slightly later for the ﬁscal-year-ending quarter and somewhat ear-
lier for the other three quarters.) According to I/B/E/S, analysts’ earnings
forecasts do not include unusual or nonrecurring charges, and so the re-
ported earnings per share (EPS) variable we use excludes extraordinary items.
Thus, any evidence of EM we uncover excludes earnings-shifting strategies
employing extraordinary items.23
In testing our hypotheses, we pool data from ﬁrms that vary widely in
size and share price. For example, the median ﬁrm size in our sample dur-
ing the 1980s, as measured by its average market capitalization, is $128
million; the interquartile range of market capitalization is $353 million.
The corresponding values based on price per share are $12.77 and $11.88,
respectively. We need to address the potential heterogeneity that results
from drawing quarterly results from such a wide range of ﬁrms.
The literature commonly normalizes EPS by deﬂators such as price per
share or assets per share in an attempt to homogenize the distribution from
which the different observations are drawn. However, because EPS is mea-
sured (and reported and forecast) rounded to the closest penny, spurious
patterns can arise in the distribution of such normalized EPS. (This problem
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
647
23 Philbrick and Ricks (1991) argue that analysts fail to account for special items, especially
asset sales, that affect reported earnings. They recommend that the reported earnings before
extraordinary items also be purged of the after-tax effects of asset sales. See also Keane and
Runkle. There are some large outliers in the set of reported earnings recorded by I/B/E/S in the
post-1984 sample that could be corrected by cross-checking with Compustat data. However,
since our analysis focuses on observations in a region far from the tails of the distributions,
this problem of possibly spurious outliers is not signiﬁcant for us. In our analyses, we do not
make adjustments to the EPS numbers coded by I/B/E/S for the post-1985 sample.

appears to have been overlooked previously.)24 For example, exactly zero
EPS (or change in EPS or forecast error) occur with nontrivial probability
because of the rounding (as does any speciﬁc value like one penny). How-
ever, a zero remaps to zero after deﬂation compared to, for instance, a one-
penny EPS that can remap into a relatively large or small number depending
on the deﬂator. Thus, deﬂation can lead to a spurious buildup in the density
at zero, a critical area of interest for our study. In simulations not shown,
this problem proves signiﬁcant under conditions where EPS is rounded off
to the nearest penny (as in practice).
Fortunately, if we exclude the extreme ﬁrms in terms of price, then deﬂa-
tion to correct for possible heterogeneity proves unnecessary for the impor-
tant variables related to EPS that we study. Figure 18.4 shows the medians
(represented by hollow symbols) and interquartile ranges (represented by
corresponding solid symbols which are connected) of the important vari-
ables as a function of centiles of price per share.
648
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
 







   	

  
 
  

	
 	
	
 	
	
 	
 	
 	
 	


 











Figure 18.4. Medians and interquartile ranges for EPS, FERR, and ∆EPS as a func-
tion of centiles of price per share.
24 This problem is analogous to the “aliasing problem” in the literature on the spectral
analysis of time-series data (e.g., see Koopmans 1974, ch. 3). The classic aliasing problem
arises when the spectrum of interest is a continuous-time series but the available sample was
sampled at discrete intervals. In this situation, either lack of prior knowledge of the speciﬁc
bounds of the frequency interval in which the spectrum is concentrated, or an inability to sam-
ple often enough, results in accurate estimates of the sampled process spectrum providing poor
or misleading estimates of the original spectrum. In our setting, the estimate of the probability
density function risks distortion owing to the initial rounding off (discretization) of EPS and
any subsequent renormalization.

The best situation for our study would arise if the measures of location
(median) and dispersion (interquartile range) proved to be homogeneous
across the different centiles. Consider for instance the analysts’ forecast
error (FERR), constructed as the reported EPS minus the mean of the ana-
lysts’ forecasts. In ﬁgure 18.4, FERR’s median and interquartile range are
indicated by squares. These measures are reasonably independent of price per
share if we focus on the middle 80 percent of the sample indicated as the re-
gion between the two vertical lines drawn at 10 percent and 90 percent in
ﬁgure 18.4. Consider the case of the change in earnings per share, denoted
∆EPS, which is simply EPS minus EPS of four quarters ago. The distribu-
tion of ∆EPS, like FERR, appears stable in the middle 80 percent of the
sample given in ﬁgure 18.4. In the analysis that follows, we restrict our
sample to the middle 80 percent of the sample, which delivers reasonable
homogeneity.
We further analyzed the sample for heterogeneity caused by variation
across different time periods. For the culled sample of the middle 80 per-
cent, time variation in the distribution proved not to be a major problem.
However, the situation for the basic EPS series itself is not resolved by re-
stricting our sample to the middle 80 percent. Earnings-per-share medians
as well as interquartile range increase steadily throughout the centiles of
price per share, as is readily seen in ﬁgure 18.4. Therefore, in any analysis
with EPS, we check whether results obtained for our entire sample hold for
each of the quartiles of the middle 80 percent (that is, 11%–30%, 31%–50%,
51%–70%, and 71%–90% from the preculled sample).
B. Historical Evidence of Earnings Management
The hypotheses about threshold-driven EM predict discontinuities in earn-
ings distributions at speciﬁc values. As a ﬁrst cut, we assess empirical his-
tograms, focusing on the region where the discontinuity in density is predicted
for our performance variables. Second, we compute a test statistic, τ, that
indicates whether or not to reject the null hypothesis that the distribution
underlying the histogram is continuous and smooth at the threshold point.
Since traditional statistical tests are not designed to test such hypotheses,
we developed a test statistic, τ, which extrapolates from neighborhood den-
sities to compute expected density at the threshold assuming no unusual be-
havior there. The appendix discusses our testing method.
To construct empirical histograms requires a choice of bin width that
balances the need for a precise density estimate with the need for ﬁne reso-
lution. Silverman (1986) and Scott (1992) recommend a bin width posi-
tively related to the variability of the data and negatively related to the
number of observations; for example, one suggestion calls for a bin width
of 2(IQR)n−1/3, where IQR is the sample interquartile range of the variable
and n is the number of available observations. Given our sample sizes and
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
649

dispersions of variables, such formulas imply a bin width of one penny (the
minimum resolution for our data).
1. “Sustain Recent Performance.” Press reports on corporate earnings
typically compare current results with those from a year ago. Con-
sistent with this practice, we provide evidence that earnings from
one year ago constitute an important threshold for earnings re-
ports, as we posited in our model. The distribution of the change in
earnings, denoted ∆EPS, is simply EPS minus EPS of four quarters
ago. (The appropriate recent available benchmark proves to be the
corresponding quarter from a year ago since earnings exhibit strong
annual seasonal variation.) The distribution of ∆EPS is plotted in
ﬁgure 18.5.
Since corporate earnings tend to grow (surely in nominal terms),
we do not expect the central tendency of the distribution to be close
to zero. Indeed, the median and the mode of the distribution of the
overall sample are 3 cents, while the mean is 0.81 cents. It is all the
more remarkable, then, that we observe a large jump in the distribu-
tion at zero. In the region of small negative changes, the distribution
appears to have been “shaved,” with some density mass transferred
to zero or slightly above. This pattern of ∆EPS is consistent with ex-
ecutives’ managing earnings to come in at or above the comparable
ﬁgure for four quarters ago.25
650
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
 

      


 


 



 


 
	
	






Figure 18.5. Histogram of change in EPS (∆EPS = EPSt −EPSt−4): exploring the
threshold of “sustain recent performance.”
25 A qualitatively similar pattern is reported in Burgstahler and Dichev (1997, ﬁg. 1), al-
though, since they deﬂate earnings, the extreme dip in density just below zero in their distribu-
tion of scaled earnings is most likely spurious (as discussed in 3A above).

The easily discernible pileup of observations at the zero thresh-
old for ∆EPS is conﬁrmed by the τ-statistic of 6.61.26 The value of
6.61 is the largest for all points in the neighborhood as well as
being very signiﬁcant. These ﬁndings are also conﬁrmed with the
subsamples of I/B/E/S and Q-Prime (unreported).
2. “Meet Analysts’ Expectations.” Figure 18.6 plots the empirical dis-
tribution of the forecast error, FERR (equal to EPS minus the ana-
lysts’ consensus EPS forecast) in 1-penny bins in a range around
zero, using quarterly observations over the 1974 to 1996 period.
Consistent with the notion that “making the forecast” is an im-
portant threshold for managers, the distribution of FERR drops
sharply below zero: we observe a smaller mass to the left of zero
compared to the right. (Note that in the histogram, the bin starting
with zero represents observations that are exactly zero.)
There is an extra pileup of observations at zero, although this is
hard to see for a distribution like FERR that is centered on zero it-
self. The pileup is conﬁrmed by the τ-statistic of 5.63, which is very
signiﬁcant.27 This value exceeds the values of τ for all the neighbor-
ing points, none of which exceed 2.0 in absolute value (unreported).
Parallel to ﬁgure 18.3 (which, like FERR, had the latent distribu-
tion centered at the threshold), we show the shortfall in density
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
651
 
 
          









 
 
 
 
 








Figure 18.6. Histogram of forecast error for earnings per share: exploring the
threshold of meeting analysts’ expectations.
26 In this case the likely threshold is not at the peak of the distribution although its neigh-
borhood includes the peak; see elaboration A1 discussed in the appendix.
27 In this case, we compute τ for the case in which the likely threshold is at the peak of the
distribution (see elaboration A2 in the appendix).

below the histogram in ﬁgure 18.6 for the different outcomes—see
the dark shaded areas below the horizontal axis. As predicted by
consideration of earnings management to exceed the threshold of
analysts’ forecasts, we ﬁnd that (1) the region just below zero ex-
hibits a signiﬁcant shortfall owing to “borrowing for a better
today,” and (2) the region of large positive forecast errors shows
some shortfall owing to a combination of reduced density of “rein-
ing in” and excess density at the mirror bins from “saving for a bet-
ter tomorrow.”28
Previous studies on analysts’ forecasts have reported an “opti-
mistic bias”: analysts’ forecasts exceed reported earnings on average.
Optimistic bias in the mean of forecasts works against our con-
tention that executives will manage reported earnings to meet or
exceed analysts’ forecasts. This in turn suggests that a supportive
ﬁnding will be more meaningful.
Fortunately, the two forces that may explain the data in ﬁgure
18.6—EM to attain or exceed the forecast, and a mean optimistic
bias in the forecast—can be reconciled. It is sufﬁcient that most of
the time executives meet or slightly exceed analysts’ forecasts but
that they sometimes fall dramatically short. Given those forces, the
forecast error distribution will be skewed, with a long left tail. This
pattern appears in our sample: the mean of FERR is −5.43 while the
median is zero; the skewness measure computes to −43 (whose 
p-value is near zero under the null hypothesis of a symmetric distri-
bution). This conﬁrms a statistically signiﬁcant left-skewed distribu-
tion of earnings relative to forecast.
3. “Report Positive Proﬁts.” Our third possible important threshold is
probably the most natural: positive earnings. To know whether this
threshold has been reached, investors need no information on the
company’s performance history or the market’s consensus forecast.
This threshold also addresses the most important question for
shareholders: is this ﬁrm proﬁtable? The complication for studying
a distribution of EPS, as discussed previously, is that the distribu-
tion is not homogeneous with respect to price per share. Thus,
while we discuss the results for the overall sample, we conﬁrm that
similar ﬁndings emerge as well as for subsamples based on quartiles
of price per share. In ﬁgure 18.7, we show the distribution of EPS in
a window around zero.
Two patterns emerge. First, similar to ∆EPS, the EPS distribution
appears to be shaved in the negative region, consistent with the hy-
pothesis of loss aversion. Second, the EPS distribution shows a
652
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
28 In results not reported, these ﬁndings are conﬁrmed with the subsamples of I/B/E/S and
Q-Prime.

considerable jump between zero and one (especially the latter); thus
it appears that managers strongly desire to be able to report strictly
positive earnings—as opposed to just breaking even.29 The value of
the τ-statistic (based on the basic test in the appendix—the case in
which the likely threshold is far from the peak of the distribution)
conﬁrms the observable pattern: at 1 cent per share, we obtain a τ
value of 4.36, conﬁrming a discontinuity in the EPS distribution
there.30
Finally, we can also detect an upward kink in the EPS distribu-
tion from −1 cent/share to 0 cents/share, indicating a secondary
threshold at zero, to “avoid red ink.” The τ-value for the secondary
kink, 3.84, also proves signiﬁcant, although our visual impression is
that the threshold at zero is likely smaller than that at 1 cent/share.
In sum, we have established clear thresholds effects in the report-
ing of earnings, both visually and through statistical test results.
The three thresholds affecting the reporting of earnings are to “sus-
tain recent performance,” to “meet analysts’ forecasts,” and to “re-
port proﬁts.”
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
653
29 Note that this ﬁgure reinforces the impression of ﬁgure 1 in Hayn (1995), who, however,
scales EPS by price per share and thus obtains a confounding density estimate at zero (as dis-
cussed above in subsection 3A).
30 Since we have two suspected thresholds adjacent to one another, the neighborhood used
in the τ-tests here always excludes the observation corresponding to the other threshold obser-
vation.
 
 




 
 



 


 




Figure 18.7. Histogram of EPS: exploring the threshold “positive/zero proﬁts”

C. Conditional Distributions: Interaction among Thresholds
If executives pay attention to more than one threshold, as seems likely, is
one threshold more important than another? Is there a discernible hierar-
chy among them?
To investigate interactions between thresholds, an issue that appears to
have been ignored by the literature, we analyze the conditional distributions
of EPS, ∆EPS, and FERR, when each of the other thresholds is met or failed.
For example, suppose that we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant threshold in the EPS distribu-
tion when we condition it on making the analysts’ forecast, as well as when
we condition it on failing to reach the analysts’ forecast; and suppose that we
also ﬁnd that one of the “parallel” distributions of FERR (that is, FERR con-
ditional on EPS > 0, and FERR conditional on EPS < 0) exhibits no threshold
effect: in this hypothetical example, we would conclude that “to report prof-
its” is a more important threshold than “make the analysts’ forecast.”
Twelve conditional distributions are of interest (three individual distri-
butions × conditioning on the other two × two levels). We attend to the
problem that there may be little or no room to meet or fail a threshold
when another threshold is met or failed. For example, if the ∆EPS thresh-
old is met, and analysts have predicted earnings below last year, there is no
possibility of missing the FERR threshold. We thus focus only on samples
where there is at least a 5-cent range within which the threshold could be
failed or met. While this conditioning reduces the available sample size, we
are assured that inferences in the neighborhood of the threshold are valid.
For our positive earnings threshold, we focus on the case of 1 cent in EPS
(though the 0-cent threshold also appears important). Our other two thresh-
olds imply a 0-cent threshold in the distribution of ∆EPS and FERR. Our re-
sults appear in the 12 panels of conditional distributions in ﬁgure 18.8, where
the vertical lines indicate the thresholds.
To illustrate our requirements for inclusion, consider the second panel in
the second row of ﬁgure 18.8 where we examine the ∆EPS threshold condi-
tional on the EPS being positive. Since we want to have a 5-cent range
where the ﬁrm could fall short of the ∆EPS threshold in this subsample, we
consider only cases where lag(EPS) > 5. This provides a range of 1–5 cents/
share where the current EPS can be positive and still fail to attain the ∆EPS
threshold. Each of our 12 cases looks at performance relative to one thresh-
old conditional on another threshold having been failed or met. When the
conditional threshold is failed (met), we preserve a 5-penny range on the up
(down) side.31
654
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
31 The restrictions we impose on included conditions influences the shape of our his-
tograms. Considering the upper-right-hand diagram, for example. Apart from thresholds, it
is unlikely that earnings will be nine cents when the analysts’ forecast (AF) < −4, whereas −9
is not so unlikely even though FERR ≥0. Our statistical test, which only looks at earnings in
a range of 10 cents, mitigates this problem.

EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
655
  	
 
 

 
 


  
    	
 
 
 

 !!

 
 

"#$ 
  "
Figure 18.8. Twelve conditional distributions: exploring the relative importance of
thresholds. Note: the appendix provides motivation and construction details for the
τ and τT=P statistics. Values in excess of 2.0 reliably reject the null hypothesis of no
threshold effect. Whenever the values of the statistics are found to be in excess of
2.0 at the suspected thresholds for the above cases, they also prove to the largest rel-
ative to similar computations for all other points; the last panel reporting a
τT=P = 1.50 also obtains the largest value in its neighborhood.

Possible discontinuity in the histograms is evaluated for each of our 12
conditions employing the τ-test used before for the univariate distributions,
which is discussed in the appendix. The τ-statistics conﬁrm concretely what
we see in ﬁgure 18.8. The EPS threshold is highly robust. Whether either of
our other two thresholds fails or is met, there is a leap upward in density at
our EPS threshold. Our other two thresholds are less robust to the condi-
tioning of whether another threshold is met or failed; that is, under some
conditions, they are not signiﬁcant. Speciﬁcally, in row 1 of column 2 in ﬁg-
ure 18.8, we observe no clear discontinuity when the EPS earnings are neg-
ative. However, a discontinuity in ∆EPS appears in the other three rows of
column 2. We conclude that the threshold of the previous period’s earnings
is “robust” with respect to the threshold of analysts’ forecast but not to
that of positive earnings.
Similarly, in rows 1 and 3 of column 3 in figure 18.8, we observe no
clear discontinuities in the distribution of FERR when EPS < 0 and
∆EPS < 0, respectively. The effect of a FERR threshold reasserts itself when
EPS > 1 or ∆EPS > 0, as seen in rows 2 and 4 of column 3. We conclude
that the threshold of analysts’ forecast matters only if the other thresholds
are met.
Overall, a threshold hierarchy emerges. The positive EPS threshold is the
most important; it prevails regardless of whether or not the other two
thresholds are met. The threshold of previous period’s earnings is second in
importance; it asserts itself only if the positive EPS threshold is met but is
visibly present regardless of whether earnings make the analysts’ forecast.
The threshold of analysts’ forecast is the weakest; it only matters if both the
other thresholds are met.
4. The Effect on Future Earnings from Earnings Management
The previous section showed that executives manage earnings to meet
three thresholds. When they do so, as discussed in section 2, current earn-
ings are raised by “borrowing” from future earnings. From an empirical
perspective, ﬁrms that barely attain a threshold are suspect of having en-
gaged in upward earnings management. This section examines whether the
future performance of ﬁrms barely meeting thresholds is inferior compared
to control groups.
A. The Implication of Earnings Management for Future Earnings
Earnings management to meet thresholds in this period will affect next
period’s earnings. Thus, we investigate whether following a period with
likely EM there is any predictable effect on earnings. Our analysis in this
656
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER

section focuses first on the ∆EPS threshold and then on the positive earn-
ings threshold.32
We examine the performance of the suspect ﬁrms that just meet the
threshold relative to the performance of ﬁrms that just miss the threshold
or easily surpass it. Accordingly, we divide ﬁrms into three groups, depend-
ing on their earnings. Group A fails to meet the threshold, B just meets or
exceeds it, C beats it easily. Each group has a 5-penny range. Group B is
likely to include a number of ﬁrms that managed their earnings upward to
meet the threshold. Group C is less likely to have boosted earnings and may
have reined them in. Denote the average performance of a group by the cor-
responding lower-case letter, and indicate the period of the performance by a
subscript (1 or 2). By assumption, we have c1 > b1 > a1. Normally we would
expect some persistence in both earnings level and in the change in earn-
ings. Thus, absent any earnings management, we would expect c2 > b2 > a2.
How might EM affect these inequalities? Earnings recorded by group B are
suspect of upward manipulation. Hence, b2 would move down relative to
both c2 and a2, giving c2 −b2 > b2 −a2. If EM is substantial, we might even
have a2 > b2; that is, the lower performer in period 1 (those that just fall
short of the threshold) would do better in period 2.
To facilitate comparisons, we add a fourth group D that strongly sur-
passes the threshold. Presumably, manipulation is less prominent for groups
C and D, so their difference in performance in some sense provides a bench-
mark for what we should expect between adjacent groups.
B. Evidence on the “Borrowing” of Future Earnings
Consider ﬁrst the threshold “sustain recent performance” (that is, ∆EPS =
0). We study the ﬁscal-year performance of ﬁrms since we expect ﬁscal-year
effects to be the most powerful ones. We restrict ourselves to the subset of
ﬁrms in which the ﬁscal year ends in December to avoid observations over-
lapping in time. We also restrict consideration to ﬁrms that show an uptick
in the last quarter’s performance since ﬁrms that manage earnings for a
given year are likely to show an uptick in the last quarter’s performance.
(Concerns regarding spurious inferences induced by this artifact of the sam-
ple choice are addressed below.)
A widely accepted stylized fact is that a signiﬁcant component of earn-
ings changes is permanent.33 But if there is signiﬁcant mean reversion in
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
657
32 We exclude the analysts’ forecast threshold from this analysis. Even if a ﬁrm strives to
meet the analysts’ forecast in a given period, it is unlikely that it will ﬁnd it harder to meet it in
the following period, simply because the analysts’ forecast is an endogenous target that will it-
self move according to ﬁrm performance or executives’ announcements.
33 The earnings literature, e.g., Hayn (1995), notes that loss-reporting ﬁrms have different
time-series properties of EPS. However, all our inferences in this section prove robust to condi-
tioning on the sign of EPS.

∆EPS, then we may have difﬁculty discriminating earnings manipulation
from overall behavior. Consider the regression of ∆EPSt+1 = α + β∆EPSt.
We estimated this relationship using ﬁscal-year observations but condition-
ing on ∆EPSt > 5 to exclude contamination of threshold effects. The esti-
mated β proved to be close to zero (−0.05) in our sample; thus, a reasonable
null hypothesis is that the ranking of ﬁrms by ∆EPS over the next year will
be unrelated to this year’s performance. Moreover, in both the cases below,
we ﬁnd that the “strongly surpass threshold” never underperforms the “sur-
pass threshold” group, reﬂecting some persistence in earnings growth in the
neighborhood of interest.
If there is signiﬁcant EM, we expect that the “meet threshold” group—
many of whose members having presumably borrowed earnings—will un-
derperform the groups immediately above (“surpass threshold”) and below
(“miss threshold”). This conjecture assumes that the EM effect exceeds
any normal persistence in performance. This is a sharp and quite unusual
prediction.
Table 18.1 column heads show the deﬁnitions of our four groups. Then it
reports the mean and median of relative performance by group for the year
following the formation of the groups. First note that, in our benchmark
658
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
Table 18.1
Next Year’s Relative Performance by Groups Formed around the No-Change
Threshold of the Formation Quarter’s ∆EPS; Subsample of Firms with ∆EPS ≥0 for
Formation Quarter
Groups by Performance in Formation Year
D.
A.
B.
C.
Strongly 
Annual DEPS
Miss
Meet
Surpass
Surpass
(Cents/Share) in
Threshold
Threshold
Threshold
Threshold
Formation Quarter
−5 to −1
0 to +4
+5 to +9
+10 to +14
No. of Observations
1,143
2,220
3,688
4,049
Performance in
following year:
1. Mean ∆EPS
9.48
7.10
6.53
9.44
2. Median ∆EPS
13
8
9
12
3. Wilcoxon test*
4.02
−.77
−7.54
N.A.
p-values (reporting
column relative to
next column)
.0001
.4389
.0000
Note. N.A. = not applicable.
* The Wilcoxon test compares a group’s performance in the postformation year with that of
the next group. Under the null hypothesis that the distributions of performance of the two
groups being compared are the same, the Wilcoxon test is distributed standard normal
(N(0,1)).

comparison, d2 > c2 as expected if heterogeneity in earnings growth among
ﬁrms outweighs regression toward the mean effects. The salient compar-
isons for our purpose are between B and its neighbors. For both the mean
and median, the performance of group B is worse than either of its neigh-
bors, conﬁrming our conjecture c2 −b2 > b2 −a2. In addition, c2 > b2,
which is not surprising since C ﬁrms did better in period 1. The salient ﬁnd-
ing is that b2 < a2, presumably because of strong EM in the B group. All
these differences prove statistically signiﬁcant under the Wilcoxon test.34
Firms that barely attain the threshold of sustain recent performance ap-
pear to borrow earnings from the next year.35 The U-shaped pattern where
B ﬁrms are outperformed by both A and C ﬁrms will be reinforced if groups
just missing the threshold “save for a better tomorrow” and if those that
surpass it “rein in.”36
We repeat the analysis for the “report proﬁts” threshold. Now groups
are formed based on 4-quarter EPS performance. We divide ﬁrms as before
using 5-cent bins. Since there are relatively few observations in the region
of zero EPS, we do not apply further ﬁlters relating to ﬁscal-year end.
Under the null hypothesis discussed for table 18.1, there is no strongly
expected order across groups for relative performance (that is, annual
∆EPS) in the postformation year, except perhaps because of heterogeneity
in earnings growth potential among ﬁrms, which would predict d2 > c2 > b2
> a2. Summary results are reported in table 18.2.37 The comparisons in
table 18.2 yield one signiﬁcant result. The meet-threshold group signiﬁcantly
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
659
34 The Wilcoxon test (also known as the Mann-Whitney two-sample statistic) is distributed
standard normal under the null hypothesis that the performances of the two groups being
compared have the same distribution. The test assumes independence across observations,
which is surely violated in our samples. This implies that the rejection rates using the tradi-
tional p-values based on the nominal size of our samples will be too high. However, the ob-
served Wilcoxon test statistics for our sample are sufﬁciently large that the indicated U-pattern
of performance is very unlikely to have arisen by chance.
35 The patterns are similar if we use a 10-penny range to deﬁne groups A, B, C and D, as
well as if we use only quarters ending with the ﬁscal year.
36 Might the results in table 18.1 be spuriously induced because we select ﬁrms that have
∆EPS > 0 in the most recent quarter? For instance, consider the miss-threshold group: it
missed the annual threshold despite reporting relatively decent earnings in the latest quarter.
This ﬁrm might be experiencing a rapid upward performance trend (compared to the meet-
threshold group). If so, and given general persistence in earnings changes, the miss-threshold
group would outperform the meet-threshold group in the next year absent earnings manage-
ment. We check for this effect by using selection criterion of ∆EPS > 10 and ∆EPS > 20 for the
most recent quarter. Given the construction of our groups, if the observed results in table 18.1
arise purely owing to the ∆EPS > 0 ﬁlter, then we expect the meet-threshold group to outper-
form the surpass-threshold group with the ∆EPS > 10 ﬁlter and the surpass-threshold group to
outperform the strongly surpass-threshold group with the ∆EPS > 20 ﬁlter. Neither turns out
to be the case in our sample. The only performance reversal is observed between the miss-
threshold group and the meet-threshold group.
37 Given the problems of heterogeneity for EPS identiﬁed in ﬁgure 18.4, we also studied the
subsample of ﬁrms that were in the smallest quartile of price per share. Results (not reported)
are qualitatively similar.

underperforms the miss-threshold group in the sample A as well as B, a re-
sult indicative of strong EM.
However, the lack of signiﬁcant difference between the meet and surpass
thresholds suggests that evidence on earnings borrowings by the meet-
threshold group is less conclusive than for the ∆EPS threshold. While the
meet-threshold group signiﬁcantly underperforms the miss-threshold group,
the meet-threshold group is not reliably outperformed by the surpass-
threshold groups. In this case of the annual EPS threshold, evidence in earn-
ings borrowings by the suspect meet-threshold group is less conclusive than
it is for ∆EPS.
5. Concluding Discussion
Analysts, investors, and boards are keenly interested in ﬁnancial reports of
earnings because earnings provide critical information for investment deci-
sions. Boards of directors charged with monitoring executives’ performance
recognize the importance of earnings to the ﬁrm’s claimants and link mana-
gerial rewards to earnings outcomes. That this nexus of relations generates
660
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
Table 18.2
Next Year’s Relative Performance by Groups Formed around the Zero Threshold
of the Formation Year’s EPS; Observations Are Restricted to ∆EPS > 0 for
Formation Quarter
Groups by Performance in Formation Year
A.
B.
C.
D.
Annual EPS 
Miss
Meet
Surpass
Strongly Surpass
(Cents/Share) in
Threshold
Threshold
Threshold
Threshold
Formation Quarter
−5 to −1
0 to +4
+5 to +9
+10 to +14
No. of Observations
157
231
253
277
Performance over
following year:
1. Mean ∆EPS
37.29
10.89
8.36
21.50
2. Median ∆EPS
35
10
18
18
3. Wilcoxon test*
3.44
−.51
−.784
N.A.
p-values (reporting
column relative to 
next column)
.0006
.6074
.4329
Note. N.A. = not applicable.
* The Wilcoxon test compares a group’s performance in the postformation year with that of
the next group. Under the null hypothesis that the distributions of performance of the two
groups being compared are the same, the Wilcoxon test is distributed standard normal
(N(0,1)).

strong incentives for executives to manage earnings is hardly surprising. This
analysis assesses the importance of thresholds for performance in this arena
and the consequences thresholds have for patterns of reported earnings.
In work-in-progress that takes the threshold-based EM documented in
this study as a given, we study how the equity market accounts for expected
EM in resetting prices on announcement of earnings. Other ongoing inves-
tigation includes whether analysts efﬁciently account for EM in setting and
revising their earnings forecasts, the salience of ﬁscal year thresholds, and
whether different types of ﬁrms—for example, growth and value stocks—
respond to the different incentives to manage earnings that are created be-
cause they suffer different penalties from falling short of thresholds.38
Our model shows how efforts to exceed thresholds induce particular pat-
terns of EM. Earnings falling just short of thresholds will be managed up-
ward. Earnings far from thresholds, whether below or above, will be reined
in, making thresholds more attainable in the future. Our empirical explo-
rations ﬁnd clear support for EM driven by three thresholds: report positive
proﬁts, sustain recent performance, and meet analysts’ expectations. We
observe discontinuities in the earnings distributions that indicate threshold-
based EM. From explorations with conditional distributions, we infer that
the thresholds are hierarchically ordered; it is most important ﬁrst to make
positive proﬁts, second to report quarterly proﬁts at least equal to proﬁts of
four quarters ago, and third to meet analysts’ expectations. We also ﬁnd ev-
idence that the future performances of ﬁrms just meeting thresholds appear
worse than those of control groups that are less suspect.39
Although earnings are a continuous variable, outsiders and insiders use
psychological bright lines such as zero earnings, past earnings, and ana-
lysts’ projected earnings as meaningful thresholds for assessing ﬁrms’ per-
formance. Theory suggests, and data document, that executives manage
earnings in predictable ways to exceed thresholds.
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
661
38 Dreman and Berry (1995b, pp. 23–24) ﬁnd that low price-to-earnings ratio (P/E) (bottom-
quintile) stocks fared better after a negative earnings surprise—actual earnings below the con-
sensus forecast—than did high P/E (top-quintile) stocks. For a 1-year holding period, average
annual market adjusted returns were +5.22% for the low P/E stocks but −4.57% for the high
P/E stocks. The annualized differential for the quarter in which the surprise occurred was
somewhat greater, +7.05% versus −5.69%.
39 In related work not reported in this work, we have explored whether the special saliency
of annual reports creates additional incentives to manipulate earnings. We ﬁnd that the pres-
sure to sustain recent performance at the ﬁscal-year horizon induces extra noisiness in fourth-
quarter earnings that varies predictably with the temptation to “generate” earnings to meet
the threshold.

Appendix
Testing for a Discontinuity in a Univariate Distribution
Let x be the variable of interest, such as the change in earnings per share.
The null hypothesis, H0, conjectures that the probability density function
of x, call it f(x), is smooth at T, a point of interest because it may be a
threshold under the alternative hypothesis, H. Given a random sample of x
of size N, we estimate the density for discrete ordered points x0, x1, . . . ,
xn, and so on.40 Suppose the points are equispaced, and without loss of gen-
erality set the distance between the points to be of length one. Compute the
proportion of the observations that lie in bins covering [x0, x1), [x1, x2), . . . ,
[xn, xn+1), and so on. These proportions, denoted p(x), provide estimates of
f(x) at x0, x1, . . . , xn, etc.41
1. Basic Test
The expectation of ∆p(xn)[≡p(xn) −p(xn−1)] is f ′(xn), and its variance de-
pends on the higher derivatives of f(x) at xn as well as the available sample
size N. Consider a small symmetric region Rn around n of 2r + 1 points
(i.e., Rn = {xi; i ∈(n −r, n + r)}); given the smoothness assumption for f(x)
under H0, the distribution of ∆p(xi) will be approximately homogeneous.42
Use the observations ∆p(xi) from Rn, excluding ∆p(xn), to compute a t-
like test statistic, τ. Speciﬁcally, compute
where mean and s.d. denote the sample mean and standard deviation of {⋅}.
We exclude observations corresponding to i = n in the computation of the
mean and standard deviation to increase power in identifying a discontinu-
ity in f(x) at xn.
Our alternative hypothesis, H1, conjectures a discontinuity in f(x) at a
preidentiﬁed threshold T (i.e., zeros in the distributions of ∆EPS or forecast
errors of earnings, or 1-penny in the distribution of EPS). The distribution
τ n
n
i
R i
n
i
i
R i
n
i
p x
p x
p x
=
−
∈
≠
∈
≠
∆
∆
∆
(
)
mean {
(
)}
s.d. {
(
)}
,
,
,
662
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
40 For our analyses the xs are integers, though nothing in our test approach requires this.
41 Under H0, improved estimates of f(x)are possible using neighborhood bins. However, the
power of tests to reject H0 (especially given our alternative hypotheses discussed below) may
be compromised by such an approach. Fortunately in our case, unambiguous results obtain
with this most simple estimation strategy.
42 For our analysis, we selected r = 5, which creates 11-penny intervals. Brieﬂy, we explored
r = 7 and r = 10 for ∆EPS, and the qualitative ﬁndings remain unchanged.

of τT is likely to be well approximated by the Student’s t-distribution under
H0 if the distribution of ∆p(xi) in RT is approximately Gaussian. In unre-
ported simulations, working with the log transformation of the estimated
density improved the homogeneity of variance (of ∆log{p(x)}) across typical
neighborhoods R—thus, all the tests that we report in the text are based on
∆log{p(x)} rather than on ∆p(x), though the inferences appear similar. In
any case, we do not solely rely on normality. Instead we compare the τT to
other τ-values computed for nearby points.
We examine the rank of τT relative to the other τ’s as well as its relative
magnitudes to assess whether a discontinuity at T can be established. For-
tunately, clear, unambiguous results obtain: using the full sample, the τT
values always prove to be the largest when compared to the other τ values.43
2. Elaborations
The basic test sketched above is satisfactory as long as the point at which
the density being examined for a discontinuity (T) falls signiﬁcantly on one
side of the peak of the probability density distribution. Denote the peak by
P. Now consider the case when the symmetric construction of RT sketched
above would include P. Since points on different sides of P are likely to
have slopes of the density function of opposite signs, the symmetric RT will
no longer be composed of similar points in the sense of similar slopes.
Case A1.
Symmetric neighborhood around T would include peak, P,
though T ≠P. For this case, we construct an asymmetric neighborhood RT
around T. When T < P (T > P), construct RT to be the most symmetric re-
gion possible around T of 2r + 1 points such that all the points lie at or
below (above) P. The intuition for this construction is that by selecting
points on the same side of P we obtain a neighborhood with points that
have similar slopes of the (log) density function. Given such an RT, we com-
pute τT as in the basic test approach above.
Case A2.
Suspected threshold coincides with the peak, that is, T = P. Con-
sider the case of the analysts’ forecast as the threshold, T. In this case, the dis-
tribution of reported earnings is likely centered at this T if analysts forecast
the mode or if the latent distribution of earnings is nearly symmetric and
forecasters minimize the mean squared forecast error or the mean absolute
error. Now, we identify an earnings management effect by testing whether the
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
663
43 Given the 10 neighborhood values to which we compare tT (see n. 3 above), the likeli-
hood of obtaining tT as the largest value by chance is slightly less than 10 percent. Looking at
the magnitudes themselves, the neighborhood t values interestingly always compute to less
than 2 while the tT values always exceed 2.

slope of the density function immediately to the left of T (= P) is signiﬁcantly
different from the corresponding slope (adjusted for sign) to the immediate
right of T after allowing for any general local skew in the distribution.
Deﬁne ∇pj ≡∆log{p(xT+j)} −(−1 × ∆log{p(xT−j)}). As remarked before, log
transformations of the density appear to stabilize variance across nearby j’s
in simulations as well for our samples (not reported). The test for case B2
amounts to examining whether ∇p1 is unusual. We use the observations ∇pj
from a small neighborhood R (j > 1,) to compute an estimate of the mean
of ∇p1 as well as its standard deviation.44 As before, we compute a t-like
test statistic, say τT=P, to assess the “unusualness” of ∇p1.
In simulations that mimic the statistical structure of our sample while as-
suming a Gaussian distribution for the latent earnings, the statistic τT=P
proves to be greater than 2.0 less than 5 percent of the time. Nonetheless,
since the real distribution is unlikely to be as well behaved as Gaussian in
the absence of any discontinuity at T = P, the comparison of τT=P with the
real samples to the reference level of 2.0 is only taken as suggestive of a dis-
continuity. Thus, we also examine the rank of ∇p1 to the corresponding
values at nearby j’s: in our samples, when τT=P proves to be larger than 2.0,
∇p1 is always the largest in the neighborhood.
664
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
44 In the tests reported in the main text of this work the R for computing τT=P spans 10
nearby values, that is, j = 2,3, . . . , 11. Similar results, not shown, obtain with fewer nearby
values.

References
Abarbanell, J., and V. Bernard, 1992, Tests of analysts’ overreaction/underreaction
to earnings information as an explanation for anomalous stock price behavior,
Journal of Finance 47, 1181–1207.
Ball, R., and P. Brown, 1968, An empirical evaluation of accounting income num-
bers, Journal of Accounting Research 6, 231–58.
Barrow, J. D., 1992, Pi in the Sky. Boston: Little, Brown.
Bruns, W., and K. Merchant, 1996, The dangerous morality of managing earnings,
Management Accounting 72, 22–25.
Burgstahler, D., 1997, Incentives to manage earnings to avoid earnings decreases
and losses: Evidence from quarterly earnings, Working Paper, University of
Washington.
Burgstahler, D., and I. Dichev, 1997, Earnings management to avoid earnings de-
creases and losses, Journal of Accounting and Economics 24, 99–126.
Cornsweet, T. C., 1974, Visual Perception, Academic Press.
DeBondt, W., and R. Thaler, 1995, Financial decision-making in markets and ﬁrms:
A behavioral perspective, in R. Jarrow, V. Maksimovic, and W. Ziemba (eds.), Fi-
nance, Vol. 9 of Handbook in Research and Management Science, Elsevier.
Dechow, P., 1994, Accounting earnings and cash ﬂows as measures of ﬁrm perfor-
mance: The role of accounting accruals, Journal of Accounting and Economics
18, 3–42.
Dechow, P., M. Huson, and R. Sloan, 1994, The effect of restructuring charges on
executives’ cash compensation, Accounting Review 69, 138–56.
Dechow, P., R. Sloan, and A. Sweeney, 1995, Detecting earnings management,
Accounting Review 70, 193–225.
Dreman, D. N., and M. A. Berry, 1995a, Analyst forecasting errors and their impli-
cations for security analysis, Financial Analysts Journal 51, 30–41.
———, 1995b, Overreaction, underreaction, and the low-P/E effect, Financial Ana-
lysts Journal 51, 21–30.
Easton, P., T. Harris, and J. Ohlson, 1992, Aggregate accounting earnings can ex-
plain most of security returns: The case of long return intervals, Journal of Ac-
counting and Economics 15, 119–42.
Foster, G., 1986, Financial Statement Analysis, Prentice-Hall.
Gaver, J. J., K. M. Gaver, and J. R. Austin, 1995, Additional evidence on bonus
plans and income management, Journal of Accounting and Economics 19, 3–28.
Glass, A. L., and K. J. Holyoak, 1986, Cognition, Random House.
Hayn, C., 1995, The information content of losses, Journal of Accounting and Eco-
nomics 20, 125–53.
Healy, P., 1985, The effect of bonus schemes on accounting decisions, Journal of
Accounting and Economics 7, 85–107.
Holthausen, R. W., D. F. Larcker, and R. G. Sloan, 1995, Annual bonus schemes and
the manipulation of earnings, Journal of Accounting and Economics 19, 29–74.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
under risk, Econometrica 47, 263–91.
Keane, M. and D. Runkle, 1998, Are ﬁnancial analysts’ forecasts of corporate proﬁts
rational?, Journal of Political Economy 106(4), 768–805.
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
665

Koopmans, L. H., 1974, The Spectral Analysis of Time Series, Academic Press.
Kothari, S. P., and R. G. Sloan, 1992, Information in prices about future earnings:
Implications for earnings response coefﬁcients, Journal of Accounting and Eco-
nomics 15, 143–71.
Laffont, J.-J., and J. Tirole, 1993, The Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Reg-
ulation, MIT Press.
Milgrom, P., and J. Roberts, 1992, Economics, Organization, and Management,
Prentice-Hall.
Payne, J. L., and S. W. Robb, 1997, Earnings management: The effect of ex ante
earnings expectations, Working Paper, University of Mississippi.
Philbrick, D. R., and W. E. Ricks, 1991, Using Value Line and I/B/E/S analyst fore-
casts in accounting research, Journal of Accounting Research 29, 397–417.
Schelling, T., 1960, The Strategy of Conﬂict, Harvard University Press.
Schipper, K., 1989, Earnings management, Accounting Horizons 3, 91–102.
Scott, D. W., 1992, Multivariate Density Estimation: Theory, Practice, and Visual-
ization, Wiley.
Silverman, B. W., 1986, Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis, Chap-
man & Hall.
Young, P., 1996, The economics of convention, Journal of Economic Perspectives
10 105–22.
666
DEGEORGE, PATEL, ZECKHAUSER
