1. Sample bars using the CUSUM filter, where {y

t 
} are absolute returns and h =
0.05.
2. Compute the rolling standard deviation of the sampled bars.
3. Compare this result with the results from exercise 4. What procedure delivered
the least heteroscedastic sample? Why?
References
1. Ané, T. and H. Geman (2000): “Order flow, transaction clock and normality of asset
returns.” Journal of Finance , Vol. 55, pp. 2259–2284.
2. Bailey, David H., and M. López de Prado (2012): “Balanced baskets: A new approach
to trading and hedging risks.” Journal of Investment Strategies (Risk Journals) , Vol.
1, No. 4 (Fall), pp. 21–62.
3. Clark, P. K. (1973): “A subordinated stochastic process model with finite variance for
speculative prices.” Econometrica , Vol. 41, pp. 135–155.
4. Easley, D., M. López de Prado, and M. O'Hara (2011): “The volume clock: Insights
into the high frequency paradigm.” Journal of Portfolio Management , Vol. 37, No. 2,
pp. 118–128.
5. Easley, D., M. López de Prado, and M. O'Hara (2012): “Flow toxicity and liquidity in
a high frequency world.” Review of Financial Studies , Vol. 25, No. 5, pp. 1457–1493.
6. Fama, E. and M. Blume (1966): “Filter rules and stock market trading.” Journal of
Business , Vol. 40, pp. 226–241.
7. Kolanovic, M. and R. Krishnamachari (2017): “Big data and AI strategies: Machine
learning and alternative data approach to investing.” White paper, JP Morgan,
Quantitative and Derivatives Strategy. May 18.
8. Lam, K. and H. Yam (1997): “CUSUM techniques for technical trading in financial
markets.” Financial Engineering and the Japanese Markets , Vol. 4, pp. 257–274.
9. López de Prado, M. and D. Leinweber (2012): “Advances in cointegration and subset
correlation hedging methods.” Journal of Investment Strategies (Risk Journals) , Vol.
1, No. 2 (Spring), pp. 67–115.
10. Mandelbrot, B. and M. Taylor (1967): “On the distribution of stock price differences.”
Operations Research , Vol. 15, No. 5, pp. 1057–1062.
CHAPTER 3
Labeling
3.1 Motivation
In Chapter 2 we discussed how to produce a matrix X of financial features out of an
unstructured dataset. Unsupervised learning algorithms can learn the patterns from that
matrix X , for example whether it contains hierarchical clusters. On the other hand,
supervised learning algorithms require that the rows in X are associated with an array of
labels or values y , so that those labels or values can be predicted on unseen features
samples. In this chapter we will discuss ways to label financial data.
3.2 The Fixed-Time Horizon Method
As it relates to finance, virtually all ML papers label observations using the fixed-time
horizon method. This method can be described as follows. Consider a features matrix X
with I rows, { X

i 
}

i = 1, …,

I 
, drawn from some bars with index t = 1, …, T , where I ≤ T .
Chapter 2, Section 2.5 discussed sampling methods that produce the set of features { X

i 
}

i
= 1, …,

I 
. An observation X

i 
is assigned a label y

i 
∈
{ − 1, 0, 1},
where τ is a pre-defined constant threshold, t

i , 0

is the index of the bar immediately after X
i 
takes place, t

i , 0

+ h is the index of the h -th bar after t

i , 0

, and 
is the price return
over a bar horizon h ,
Because the literature almost always works with time bars, h implies a fixed-time horizon.
The bibliography section lists multiple ML studies, of which Dixon et al. [2016] is a recent
example of this labeling method. Despite its popularity, there are several reasons to avoid
this approach in most cases. First, as we saw in Chapter 2, time bars do not exhibit good
statistical properties. Second, the same threshold τ is applied regardless of the observed
volatility. Suppose that τ = 1 E − 2, where sometimes we label an observation as y

i 
= 1
subject to a realized bar volatility of 
(e.g., during the night session), and
sometimes 
(e.g., around the open). The large majority of labels will be 0,
even if return 
was predictable and statistically significant.
In other words, it is a very common error to label observations according to a fixed
threshold on time bars. Here are a couple of better alternatives. First, label per a varying
threshold 
, estimated using a rolling exponentially weighted standard deviation of
returns. Second, use volume or dollar bars, as their volatilities are much closer to constant
(homoscedasticity). But even these two improvements miss a key flaw of the fixed-time
horizon method: the path followed by prices. Every investment strategy has stop-loss
limits, whether they are self-imposed by the portfolio manager, enforced by the risk
department, or triggered by a margin call. It is simply unrealistic to build a strategy that
profits from positions that would have been stopped-out by the exchange. That virtually no
publication accounts for that when labeling observations tells you something about the
current state of the investment literature.
3.3 Computing Dynamic Thresholds
As argued in the previous section, in practice we want to set profit taking and stop-loss
limits that are a function of the risks involved in a bet. Otherwise, sometimes we will be
aiming too high ( 
), and sometimes too low ( 
), considering the prevailing
volatility.
Snippet 3.1 computes the daily volatility at intraday estimation points, applying a span of
span0
days to an exponentially weighted moving standard deviation. See the pandas
documentation for details on the 
pandas.Series.ewm
function.
SNIPPET 3.1 DAILY VOLATILITY ESTIMATES
We can use the output of this function to set default profit taking and stop-loss limits
throughout the rest of this chapter.
3.4 The Triple-Barrier Method
Here I will introduce an alternative labeling method that I have not found in the literature.
If you are an investment professional, I think you will agree that it makes more sense. I call
it the triple-barrier method because it labels an observation according to the first barrier
touched out of three barriers. First, we set two horizontal barriers and one vertical barrier.
The two horizontal barriers are defined by profit-taking and stop-loss limits, which are a
dynamic function of estimated volatility (whether realized or implied). The third barrier is
defined in terms of number of bars elapsed since the position was taken (an expiration
limit). If the upper barrier is touched first, we label the observation as a 1. If the lower
barrier is touched first, we label the observation as a −1. If the vertical barrier is touched
first, we have two choices: the sign of the return, or a 0. I personally prefer the former as a
matter of realizing a profit or loss within limits, but you should explore whether a 0 works
better in your particular problems.
You may have noticed that the triple-barrier method is path-dependent. In order to label an
observation, we must take into account the entire path spanning [ t

i , 0

, t

i , 0

+ h ], where h
defines the vertical barrier (the expiration limit). We will denote t

i , 1

the time of the first
barrier touch, and the return associated with the observed feature is 
. For the sake of
clarity, t

i , 1

≤ t

i , 0

+ h and the horizontal barriers are not necessarily symmetric.
Snippet 3.2 implements the triple-barrier method. The function receives four arguments:
close
: A pandas series of prices.
events
: A pandas dataframe, with columns,
t1
: The timestamp of vertical barrier. When the value is 
np.nan
, there will not
be a vertical barrier.
trgt
: The unit width of the horizontal barriers.
ptSl
: A list of two non-negative float values:
ptSl[0]
: The factor that multiplies 
trgt
to set the width of the upper barrier. If
0, there will not be an upper barrier.
ptSl[1]
: The factor that multiplies 
trgt
to set the width of the lower barrier. If
0, there will not be a lower barrier.
molecule
: A list with the subset of event indices that will be processed by a single
thread. Its use will become clear later on in the chapter.
SNIPPET 3.2 TRIPLE-BARRIER LABELING METHOD
The output from this function is a pandas dataframe containing the timestamps (if any) at
which each barrier was touched. As you can see from the previous description, the method
considers the possibility that each of the three barriers may be disabled. Let us denote a
barrier configuration by the triplet [ 
pt,sl,t1
], where a 0 means that the barrier is inactive
and a 1 means that the barrier is active. The possible eight configurations are:
Three useful configurations:
[1,1,1]: This is the standard setup, where we define three barrier exit conditions.
We would like to realize a profit, but we have a maximum tolerance for losses
and a holding period.
[0,1,1]: In this setup, we would like to exit after a number of bars, unless we are
stopped-out.
[1,1,0]: Here we would like to take a profit as long as we are not stopped-out.
This is somewhat unrealistic in that we are willing to hold the position for as
long as it takes.
Three less realistic configurations:
[0,0,1]: This is equivalent to the fixed-time horizon method. It may still be useful
when applied to volume-, dollar-, or information-driven bars, and multiple
forecasts are updated within the horizon.
[1,0,1]: A position is held until a profit is made or the maximum holding period
is exceeded, without regard for the intermediate unrealized losses.
[1,0,0]: A position is held until a profit is made. It could mean being locked on a
losing position for years.
Two illogical configurations:
[0,1,0]: This is an aimless configuration, where we hold a position until we are
stopped-out.
[0,0,0]: There are no barriers. The position is locked forever, and no label is
generated.
Figure 3.1 shows two alternative configurations of the triple-barrier method. On the left,
the configuration is [1,1,0], where the first barrier touched is the lower horizontal one. On
the right, the configuration is [1,1,1], where the first barrier touched is the vertical one.
Figure 3.1 Two alternative configurations of the triple-barrier method
...
3.5 Learning Side and Size
In this section we will discuss how to label examples so that an ML algorithm
can learn both the side and the size of a bet. We are interested in learning the
side of a bet when we do not have an underlying model to set the sign of our
position (long or short). Under such circumstance, we cannot differentiate
between a profit-taking barrier and a stop-loss barrier, since that requires
knowledge of the side. Learning the side implies that either there are no
horizontal barriers or that the horizontal barriers must be symmetric.
Snippet 3.3 implements the function 
getEvents
, which finds the time of the
first barrier touch. The function receives the following arguments:
close
: A pandas series of prices.
tEvents
: The pandas timeindex containing the timestamps that will seed
every triple barrier. These are the timestamps selected by the sampling
procedures discussed in Chapter 2, Section 2.5.
ptSl
: A non-negative float that sets the width of the two barriers. A 0
value means that the respective horizontal barrier (profit taking and/or
stop loss) will be disabled.
t1
: A pandas series with the timestamps of the vertical barriers. We pass a
False
when we want to disable vertical barriers.
trgt
: A pandas series of targets, expressed in terms of absolute returns.
minRet
: The minimum target return required for running a triple barrier
search.
numThreads
: The number of threads concurrently used by the function.
SNIPPET 3.3 GETTING THE TIME OF FIRST TOUCH
Suppose that I = 1 E 6 and h = 1 E 3, then the number of conditions to evaluate
is up to one billion on a single instrument. Many ML tasks are computationally
expensive unless you are familiar with multi-threading, and this is one of them.
Here is where parallel computing comes into play. Chapter 20 discusses a few
multiprocessing functions that we will use throughout the book.
Function 
mpPandasObj
calls a multiprocessing engine, which is explained in
depth in Chapter 20. For the moment, you simply need to know that this
function will execute 
applyPtSlOnT1
in parallel. Function 
applyPtSlOnT1
returns the timestamps at which each barrier is touched (if any). Then, the time
of the first touch is the earliest time among the three returned by
applyPtSlOnT1
. Because we must learn the side of the bet, we have passed
ptSl = [ptSl,ptSl]
as argument, and we arbitrarily set the side to be always
long (the horizontal barriers are symmetric, so the side is irrelevant to
determining the time of the first touch). The output from this function is a
pandas dataframe with columns:
t1
: The timestamp at which the first barrier is touched.
trgt
: The target that was used to generate the horizontal barriers.
Snippet 3.4 shows one way to define a vertical barrier. For each index in
tEvents
, it finds the timestamp of the next price bar at or immediately after a
number of days 
numDays
. This vertical barrier can be passed as optional
argument 
t1
in 
getEvents
.
SNIPPET 3.4 ADDING A VERTICAL BARRIER
Finally, we can label the observations using the 
getBins
function defined in
Snippet 3.5. The arguments are the 
events
dataframe we just discussed, and
the 
close
pandas series of prices. The output is a dataframe with columns:
ret
: The return realized at the time of the first touched barrier.
bin
: The label, { − 1, 0, 1}, as a function of the sign of the outcome. The
function can be easily adjusted to label as 0 those events when the vertical
barrier was touched first, which we leave as an exercise.
SNIPPET 3.5 LABELING FOR SIDE AND SIZE
3.6 Meta-Labeling
Suppose that you have a model for setting the side of the bet (long or short).
You just need to learn the size of that bet, which includes the possibility of no
bet at all (zero size). This is a situation that practitioners face regularly. We
often know whether we want to buy or sell a product, and the only remaining
question is how much money we should risk in such a bet. We do not want the
ML algorithm to learn the side, just to tell us what is the appropriate size. At
this point, it probably does not surprise you to hear that no book or paper has
so far discussed this common problem. Thankfully, that misery ends here. I call
this problem meta-labeling because we want to build a secondary ML model
that learns how to use a primary exogenous model.
Rather than writing an entirely new 
getEvents
function, we will make some
adjustments to the previous code, in order to handle meta-labeling. First, we
accept a new 
side
optional argument (with default 
None
), which contains the
side of our bets as decided by the primary model. When 
side
is not 
None
, the
function understands that meta-labeling is in play. Second, because now we
know the side, we can effectively discriminate between profit taking and stop
loss. The horizontal barriers do not need to be symmetric, as in Section 3.5.
Argument 
ptSl
is a list of two non-negative float values, where 
ptSl[0]
is the
factor that multiplies 
trgt
to set the width of the upper barrier, and 
ptSl[1]
is
the factor that multiplies 
trgt
to set the width of the lower barrier. When either
is 0, the respective barrier is disabled. Snippet 3.6 implements these
enhancements.
SNIPPET 3.6 EXPANDING 
GETEVENTS 
TO INCORPORATE META-
LABELING
Likewise, we need to expand the 
getBins
function, so that it handles meta-
labeling. Snippet 3.7 implements the necessary changes.
SNIPPET 3.7 EXPANDING 
GETBINS 
TO INCORPORATE META-
LABELING
Now the possible values for labels in 
out[‘bin’]
are {0,1}, as opposed to the
previous feasible values {−1,0,1}. The ML algorithm will be trained to decide
whether to take the bet or pass, a purely binary prediction. When the predicted
label is 1, we can use the probability of this secondary prediction to derive the
size of the bet, where the side (sign) of the position has been set by the primary
model.
3.7 How to Use Meta-Labeling
Binary classification problems present a trade-off between type-I errors (false
positives) and type-II errors (false negatives). In general, increasing the true
positive rate of a binary classifier will tend to increase its false positive rate.
The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of a binary classifier
measures the cost of increasing the true positive rate, in terms of accepting
higher false positive rates.
Figure 3.2 illustrates the so-called “confusion matrix.” On a set of
observations, there are items that exhibit a condition (positives, left rectangle),
and items that do not exhibit a condition (negative, right rectangle). A binary
classifier predicts that some items exhibit the condition (ellipse), where the TP
area contains the true positives and the TN area contains the true negatives.
This leads to two kinds of errors: false positives (FP) and false negatives (FN).
“Precision” is the ratio between the TP area and the area in the ellipse. “Recall”
is the ratio between the TP area and the area in the left rectangle. This notion of
recall (aka true positive rate) is in the context of classification problems, the
analogous to “power” in the context of hypothesis testing. “Accuracy” is the
sum of the TP and TN areas divided by the overall set of items (square). In
general, decreasing the FP area comes at a cost of increasing the FN area,
because higher precision typically means fewer calls, hence lower recall. Still,
there is some combination of precision and recall that maximizes the overall
efficiency of the classifier. The F1-score measures the efficiency of a classifier
as the harmonic average between precision and recall (more on this in Chapter
14).
Figure 3.2 A visualization of the “confusion matrix”
Meta-labeling is particularly helpful when you want to achieve higher F1-
scores. First, we build a model that achieves high recall, even if the precision is
not particularly high. Second, we correct for the low precision by applying
meta-labeling to the positives predicted by the primary model.
Meta-labeling will increase your F1-score by filtering out the false positives,
where the majority of positives have already been identified by the primary
model. Stated differently, the role of the secondary ML algorithm is to
determine whether a positive from the primary (exogenous) model is true or
false. It is not its purpose to come up with a betting opportunity. Its purpose is
to determine whether we should act or pass on the opportunity that has been
presented.
Meta-labeling is a very powerful tool to have in your arsenal, for four
additional reasons. First, ML algorithms are often criticized as black boxes (see
Chapter 1). Meta-labeling allows you to build an ML system on top of a white
box (like a fundamental model founded on economic theory). This ability to
transform a fundamental model into an ML model should make meta-labeling
particularly useful to “quantamental” firms. Second, the effects of overfitting
are limited when you apply meta-labeling, because ML will not decide the side
of your bet, only the size. Third, by decoupling the side prediction from the
size prediction, meta-labeling enables sophisticated strategy structures. For
instance, consider that the features driving a rally may differ from the features
driving a sell-off. In that case, you may want to develop an ML strategy
exclusively for long positions, based on the buy recommendations of a primary
model, and an ML strategy exclusively for short positions, based on the sell
recommendations of an entirely different primary model. Fourth, achieving
high accuracy on small bets and low accuracy on large bets will ruin you. As
important as identifying good opportunities is to size them properly, so it
makes sense to develop an ML algorithm solely focused on getting that critical
decision (sizing) right. We will retake this fourth point in Chapter 10. In my
experience, meta-labeling ML models can deliver more robust and reliable
outcomes than standard labeling models.
3.8 The Quantamental Way
You may have read in the press that many hedge funds are embracing the
quantamental approach. A simple Google search will show reports that many
hedge funds, including some of the most traditional ones, are investing tens of
millions of dollars in technologies designed to combine human expertise with
quantitative methods. It turns out, meta-labeling is exactly what these people
have been waiting for. Let us see why.
Suppose that you have a series of features that you believe can forecast some
prices, you just do not know how. Since you do not have a model to determine
the side of each bet, you need to learn both side and size. You apply what you
have learned in Section 3.5, and produce some labels based on the triple-barrier
method with symmetric horizontal barriers. Now you are ready to fit your
algorithm on a training set, and evaluate the accuracy of your forecasts on a
testing set. Alternatively, you could do the following:
1. Use your forecasts from the primary model, and generate meta-labels.
Remember, horizontal barriers do not need to be symmetric in this case.
2. Fit your model again on the same training set, but this time using the
meta-labels you just generated.
3. Combine the “sides” from the first ML model with the “sizes” from the
second ML model.
You can always add a meta-labeling layer to any primary model, whether that
is an ML algorithm, an econometric equation, a technical trading rule, a
fundamental analysis, etc. That includes forecasts generated by a human, solely
based on his intuition. In that case, meta-labeling will help us figure out when
we should pursue or dismiss a discretionary PM's call. The features used by
such meta-labeling ML algorithm could range from market information to
biometric statistics to psychological assessments. For example, the meta-
labeling ML algorithm could find that discretionary PMs tend to make
particularly good calls when there is a structural break (Chapter 17), as they
may be quicker to grasp a change in the market regime. Conversely, it may find
that PMs under stress, as evidenced by fewer hours of sleep, fatigue, change in
weight, etc. tend to make inaccurate predictions.

1 
Many professions require
regular psychological exams, and an ML meta-labeling algorithm may find that
those scores are also relevant to assess our current degree of confidence on a
PM's predictions. Perhaps none of these factors affect discretionary PMs, and
their brains operate independently from their emotional being, like cold
calculating machines. My guess is that this is not the case, and therefore meta-
labeling should become an essential ML technique for every discretionary
hedge fund. In the near future, every discretionary hedge fund will become a
quantamental firm, and meta-labeling offers them a clear path to make that
transition.
3.9 Dropping Unnecessary Labels
Some ML classifiers do not perform well when classes are too imbalanced. In
those circumstances, it is preferable to drop extremely rare labels and focus on
the more common outcomes. Snippet 3.8 presents a procedure that recursively
drops observations associated with extremely rare labels. Function 
dropLabels
recursively eliminates those observations associated with classes that appear
less than a fraction 
minPct
of cases, unless there are only two classes left.
SNIPPET 3.8 DROPPING UNDER-POPULATED LABELS
Incidentally, another reason you may want to drop unnecessary labels is this
known sklearn bug: https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/8566 .
This sort of bug is a consequence of very fundamental assumptions in sklearn
implementation, and resolving them is far from trivial. In this particular
instance, the error stems from sklearn's decision to operate with standard
numpy arrays rather than structured arrays or pandas objects. It is unlikely that
there will be a fix by the time you are reading this chapter, or in the near future.
In later chapters, we will study ways to circumvent these sorts of
implementation errors, by building your own classes and expanding sklearn's
functionality.
Exercises
1. 
Form dollar bars for E-mini S&P 500 futures:
1. Apply a symmetric CUSUM filter (Chapter 2, Section 2.5.2.1) where
the threshold is the standard deviation of daily returns (Snippet 3.1).
2. Use Snippet 3.4 on a pandas series 
t1
, where 
numDays = 1
.
3. On those sampled features, apply the triple-barrier method, where
ptSl = [1,1]
and 
t1
is the series you created in point 1.b.
4. Apply 
getBins
to generate the labels.
2. 
From exercise 1, use Snippet 3.8 to drop rare labels.
3. 
Adjust the 
getBins
function (Snippet 3.5) to return a 0
whenever the vertical barrier is the one touched first.
4. 
Develop a trend-following strategy based on a popular technical
analysis statistic (e.g., crossing moving averages). For each
observation, the model suggests a side, but not a size of the bet.
1. Derive meta-labels for 
ptSl = [1,2]
and 
t1
where 
numDays = 1
.
Use as 
trgt
the daily standard deviation as computed by Snippet 3.1.
2. Train a random forest to decide whether to trade or not. Note: The
decision is whether to trade or not, {0,1}, since the underlying model
(the crossing moving average) has decided the side, {−1,1}.
5. 
Develop a mean-reverting strategy based on Bollinger bands.
For each observation, the model suggests a side, but not a size
of the bet.
1. Derive meta-labels for 
ptSl = [0,2]
and 
t1
where 
numDays = 1
.
Use as 
trgt
the daily standard deviation as computed by Snippet 3.1.
2. Train a random forest to decide whether to trade or not. Use as
features: volatility, serial correlation, and the crossing moving
averages from exercise 2.
3. What is the accuracy of predictions from the primary model (i.e., if
the secondary model does not filter the bets)? What are the precision,
recall, and F1-scores?
4. What is the accuracy of predictions from the secondary model? What
are the precision, recall, and F1-scores?
Bibliography
1. Ahmed, N., A. Atiya, N. Gayar, and H. El-Shishiny (2010): “An empirical
comparison of machine learning models for time series forecasting.”
Econometric Reviews , Vol. 29, No. 5–6, pp. 594–621.
2. Ballings, M., D. van den Poel, N. Hespeels, and R. Gryp (2015):
“Evaluating multiple classifiers for stock price direction prediction.”
Expert Systems with Applications , Vol. 42, No. 20, pp. 7046–7056.
3. Bontempi, G., S. Taieb, and Y. Le Borgne (2012): “Machine learning
strategies for time series forecasting.” Lecture Notes in Business
Information Processing , Vol. 138, No. 1, pp. 62–77.
4. Booth, A., E. Gerding and F. McGroarty (2014): “Automated trading with
performance weighted random forests and seasonality.” Expert Systems
with Applications , Vol. 41, No. 8, pp. 3651–3661.
5. Cao, L. and F. Tay (2001): “Financial forecasting using support vector
machines.” Neural Computing & Applications , Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 184–
192.
6. Cao, L., F. Tay and F. Hock (2003): “Support vector machine with
adaptive parameters in financial time series forecasting.” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks , Vol. 14, No. 6, pp. 1506–1518.
7. Cervelló-Royo, R., F. Guijarro, and K. Michniuk (2015): “Stock market
trading rule based on pattern recognition and technical analysis:
Forecasting the DJIA index with intraday data.” Expert Systems with
Applications , Vol. 42, No. 14, pp. 5963–5975.
8. Chang, P., C. Fan and J. Lin (2011): “Trend discovery in financial time
series data using a case-based fuzzy decision tree.” Expert Systems with
Applications , Vol. 38, No. 5, pp. 6070–6080.
9. Kuan, C. and L. Tung (1995): “Forecasting exchange rates using
feedforward and recurrent neural networks.” Journal of Applied
Econometrics , Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 347–364.
10. Creamer, G. and Y. Freund (2007): “A boosting approach for automated
trading.” Journal of Trading , Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 84–96.
11. Creamer, G. and Y. Freund (2010): “Automated trading with boosting and
expert weighting.” Quantitative Finance , Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 401–420.
12. Creamer, G., Y. Ren, Y. Sakamoto, and J. Nickerson (2016): “A textual
analysis algorithm for the equity market: The European case.” Journal of
Investing , Vol. 25, No. 3, pp. 105–116.
13. Dixon, M., D. Klabjan, and J. Bang (2016): “Classification-based
financial markets prediction using deep neural networks.” Algorithmic
Finance , forthcoming (2017). Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2756331 .
14. Dunis, C., and M. Williams (2002): “Modelling and trading the euro/US
dollar exchange rate: Do neural network models perform better?” Journal
of Derivatives & Hedge Funds , Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 211–239.
15. Feuerriegel, S. and H. Prendinger (2016): “News-based trading
strategies.” Decision Support Systems , Vol. 90, pp. 65–74.
16. Hsu, S., J. Hsieh, T. Chih, and K. Hsu (2009): “A two-stage architecture
for stock price forecasting by integrating self-organizing map and support
vector regression.” Expert Systems with Applications , Vol. 36, No. 4, pp.
7947–7951.
17. Huang, W., Y. Nakamori, and S. Wang (2005): “Forecasting stock market
movement direction with support vector machine.” Computers &
Operations Research , Vol. 32, No. 10, pp. 2513–2522.
18. Kara, Y., M. Boyacioglu, and O. Baykan (2011): “Predicting direction of
stock price index movement using artificial neural networks and support
vector machines: The sample of the Istanbul Stock Exchange.” Expert
Systems with Applications , Vol. 38, No. 5, pp. 5311–5319.
19. Kim, K. (2003): “Financial time series forecasting using support vector
machines.” Neurocomputing , Vol. 55, No. 1, pp. 307–319.
20. Krauss, C., X. Do, and N. Huck (2017): “Deep neural networks, gradient-
boosted trees, random forests: Statistical arbitrage on the S&P 500.”
European Journal of Operational Research , Vol. 259, No. 2, pp. 689–
702.
21. Laborda, R. and J. Laborda (2017): “Can tree-structured classifiers add
value to the investor?” Finance Research Letters , Vol. 22 (August), pp.
211–226.
22. Nakamura, E. (2005): “Inflation forecasting using a neural network.”
Economics Letters , Vol. 86, No. 3, pp. 373–378.
23. Olson, D. and C. Mossman (2003): “Neural network forecasts of
Canadian stock returns using accounting ratios.” International Journal of
Forecasting , Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 453–465.
24. Patel, J., S. Sha, P. Thakkar, and K. Kotecha (2015): “Predicting stock and
stock price index movement using trend deterministic data preparation
and machine learning techniques.” Expert Systems with Applications , Vol.
42, No. 1, pp. 259–268.
25. Patel, J., S. Sha, P. Thakkar, and K. Kotecha (2015): “Predicting stock
market index using fusion of machine learning techniques.” Expert
Systems with Applications , Vol. 42, No. 4, pp. 2162–2172.
26. Qin, Q., Q. Wang, J. Li, and S. Shuzhi (2013): “Linear and nonlinear
trading models with gradient boosted random forests and application to
Singapore Stock Market.” Journal of Intelligent Learning Systems and
Applications , Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 1–10.
27. Sorensen, E., K. Miller, and C. Ooi (2000): “The decision tree approach to
stock selection.” Journal of Portfolio Management , Vol. 27, No. 1, pp.
42–52.
28. Theofilatos, K., S. Likothanassis, and A. Karathanasopoulos (2012):
“Modeling and trading the EUR/USD exchange rate using machine
learning techniques.” Engineering, Technology & Applied Science
Research , Vol. 2, No. 5, pp. 269–272.
29. Trafalis, T. and H. Ince (2000): “Support vector machine for regression
and applications to financial forecasting.” Neural Networks , Vol. 6, No. 1,
pp. 348–353.
30. Trippi, R. and D. DeSieno (1992): “Trading equity index futures with a
neural network.” Journal of Portfolio Management , Vol. 19, No. 1, pp.
27–33.
31. Tsai, C. and S. Wang (2009): “Stock price forecasting by hybrid machine
learning techniques.” Proceedings of the International Multi-Conference
of Engineers and Computer Scientists , Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 755–760.
32. Tsai, C., Y. Lin, D. Yen, and Y. Chen (2011): “Predicting stock returns by
classifier ensembles.” Applied Soft Computing , Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 2452–
2459.
33. Wang, J. and S. Chan (2006): “Stock market trading rule discovery using
two-layer bias decision tree.” Expert Systems with Applications , Vol. 30,
No. 4, pp. 605–611.
34. Wang, Q., J. Li, Q. Qin, and S. Ge (2011): “Linear, adaptive and nonlinear
trading models for Singapore Stock Market with random forests.”
Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Conference on Control and
Automation, pp. 726–731.
35. Wei, P. and N. Wang (2016): “Wikipedia and stock return: Wikipedia
usage pattern helps to predict the individual stock movement.”
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference Companion on World
Wide Web, Vol. 1, pp. 591–594.
36. 
bikowski, K. (2015): “Using volume weighted support vector machines
with walk forward testing and feature selection for the purpose of creating
stock trading strategy.” Expert Systems with Applications , Vol. 42, No. 4,
pp. 1797–1805.
37. Zhang, G., B. Patuwo, and M. Hu (1998): “Forecasting with artificial
neural networks: The state of the art.” International Journal of
Forecasting , Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 35–62.
38. Zhu, M., D. Philpotts and M. Stevenson (2012): “The benefits of tree-
based models for stock selection.” Journal of Asset Management , Vol. 13,
No. 6, pp. 437–448.
39. Zhu, M., D. Philpotts, R. Sparks, and J. Stevenson, Maxwell (2011): “A
hybrid approach to combining CART and logistic regression for stock
ranking.” Journal of Portfolio Management , Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 100–109.
Note