9. Praestgaard, J. and J. Wellner (1993): “Exchangeably weighted bootstraps
of the general empirical process.” Annals of Probability , Vol. 21, pp.
2053–2086.
10. Rao, C., P. Pathak and V. Koltchinskii (1997): “Bootstrap by sequential
resampling.” Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference , Vol. 64, No.
2, pp. 257–281.
CHAPTER 5
Fractionally Differentiated Features
5.1 Motivation
It is known that, as a consequence of arbitrage forces, financial series exhibit
low signal-to-noise ratios (López de Prado [2015]). To make matters worse,
standard stationarity transformations, like integer differentiation, further reduce
that signal by removing memory. Price series have memory, because every
value is dependent upon a long history of previous levels. In contrast, integer
differentiated series, like returns, have a memory cut-off, in the sense that
history is disregarded entirely after a finite sample window. Once stationarity
transformations have wiped out all memory from the data, statisticians resort to
complex mathematical techniques to extract whatever residual signal remains.
Not surprisingly, applying these complex techniques on memory-erased series
likely leads to false discoveries. In this chapter we introduce a data
transformation method that ensures the stationarity of the data while preserving
as much memory as possible.
5.2 The Stationarity vs. Memory Dilemma
It is common in finance to find non-stationary time series. What makes these
series non-stationary is the presence of memory, i.e., a long history of previous
levels that shift the series' mean over time. In order to perform inferential
analyses, researchers need to work with invariant processes, such as returns on
prices (or changes in log-prices), changes in yield, or changes in volatility.
These data transformations make the series stationary, at the expense of
removing all memory from the original series (Alexander [2001], chapter 11).
Although stationarity is a necessary property for inferential purposes, it is
rarely the case in signal processing that we wish all memory to be erased, as
that memory is the basis for the model's predictive power. For example,
equilibrium (stationary) models need some memory to assess how far the price
process has drifted away from the long-term expected value in order to
generate a forecast. The dilemma is that returns are stationary, however
memory-less, and prices have memory, however they are non-stationary. The
question arises: What is the minimum amount of differentiation that makes a
price series stationary while preserving as much memory as possible?
Accordingly, we would like to generalize the notion of returns to consider
stationary series where not all memory is erased. Under this framework,
returns are just one kind of (and in most cases suboptimal) price transformation
among many other possibilities.
Part of the importance of cointegration methods is their ability to model series
with memory. But why would the particular case of zero differentiation deliver
best outcomes? Zero differentiation is as arbitrary as 1-step differentiation.
There is a wide region between these two extremes (fully differentiated series
on one hand, and zero differentiated series on the other) that can be explored
through fractional differentiation for the purpose of developing a highly
predictive ML model.
Supervised learning algorithms typically require stationary features. The reason
is that we need to map a previously unseen (unlabeled) observation to a
collection of labeled examples, and infer from them the label of that new
observation. If the features are not stationary, we cannot map the new
observation to a large number of known examples. But stationarity does not
ensure predictive power. Stationarity is a necessary, non-sufficient condition
for the high performance of an ML algorithm. The problem is, there is a trade-
off between stationarity and memory. We can always make a series more
stationary through differentiation, but it will be at the cost of erasing some
memory, which will defeat the forecasting purpose of the ML algorithm. In this
chapter, we will study one way to resolve this dilemma.
5.3 Literature Review
Virtually all the financial time series literature is based on the premise of
making non-stationary series stationary through integer transformation (see
Hamilton [1994] for an example). This raises two questions: (1) Why would
integer 1 differentiation (like the one used for computing returns on log-prices)
be optimal? (2) Is over-differentiation one reason why the literature has been so
biased in favor of the efficient markets hypothesis?
The notion of fractional differentiation applied to the predictive time series
analysis dates back at least to Hosking [1981]. In that paper, a family of
ARIMA processes was generalized by permitting the degree of differencing to
take fractional values. This was useful because fractionally differenced
processes exhibit long-term persistence and antipersistence, hence enhancing
the forecasting power compared to the standard ARIMA approach. In the same
paper, Hosking states: “Apart from a passing reference by Granger (1978),
fractional differencing does not appear to have been previously mentioned in
connection with time series analysis.”
After Hosking's paper, the literature on this subject has been surprisingly
scarce, adding up to eight journal articles written by only nine authors:
Hosking, Johansen, Nielsen, MacKinnon, Jensen, Jones, Popiel, Cavaliere, and
Taylor. See the references for details. Most of those papers relate to technical
matters, such as fast algorithms for the calculation of fractional differentiation
in continuous stochastic processes (e.g., Jensen and Nielsen [2014]).
Differentiating the stochastic process is a computationally expensive operation.
In this chapter we will take a practical, alternative, and novel approach to
recover stationarity: We will generalize the difference operator to non-integer
steps.
5.4 The Method
Consider the backshift operator, B , applied to a matrix of real-valued features
{ 
X

t 
}, where 
B

k 
X

t 
= 
X

t −

k 
for any integer k ≥ 0 . For example, (1 − B 
)

2

= 1 −
2
B + 
B

2

, where 
B

2

X

t 
= 
X

t − 2

, so that (1 − B 
)

2

X

t 
= 
X

t 
− 2 
X

t − 1

+ 
X

t − 2

.
Note that 
, for n a positive
integer. For a real number d , 
, the binomial series.
In a fractional model, the exponent d is allowed to be a real number, with the
following formal binomial series expansion:
5.4.1 Long Memory
Let us see how a real (non-integer) positive d preserves memory. This
arithmetic series consists of a dot product
with weights ω
and values X
When d is a positive integer number, 
, and memory
beyond that point is cancelled. For example, d = 1 is used to compute returns,
where 
, and ω = {1, −1, 0, 0, …}.
5.4.2 Iterative Estimation
Looking at the sequence of weights, ω, we can appreciate that for k = 0, …, ∞,
with ω

0

= 1, the weights can be generated iteratively as:
Figure 5.1 plots the sequence of weights used to compute each value of the
fractionally differentiated series. The legend reports the value of d used to
generate each sequence, the x-axis indicates the value of k , and the y-axis
shows the value of ω

k 
. For example, for d = 0, all weights are 0 except for ω

0
= 1 . That is the case where the differentiated series coincides with the original
one. For d = 1, all weights are 0 except for ω

0

= 1 and ω

1

= −1 . That is the
standard first-order integer differentiation, which is used to derive log-price
returns. Anywhere in between these two cases, all weights after ω

0

= 1 are
negative and greater than −1.
Figure 5.1 ω

k 
(y-axis) as k increases (x-axis). Each line is associated with a
particular value of d 
∈
[0,1], in 0.1 increments.
Figure 5.2 plots the sequence of weights where d 
∈
[1, 2], at increments of 0.1.
For d > 1, we observe ω

1

< −1 and ω

k 
> 0, 
∀
k ≥ 2 .
Figure 5.2 ω

k 
(y-axis) as k increases (x-axis). Each line is associated with a
particular value of d 
∈
[1,2], in 0.1 increments.
Snippet 5.1 lists the code used to generate these plots.
SNIPPET 5.1 WEIGHTING FUNCTION
5.4.3 Convergence
Let us consider the convergence of the weights. From the above result, we can
see that for k > d 
, if ω

k − 1

≠ 0, then

, and ω

k 
= 0
otherwise. Consequently, the weights converge asymptotically to zero, as an
infinite product of factors within the unit circle. Also, for a positive d and k < d
+ 1, we have 
, which makes the initial weights alternate in sign. For
a non-integer d , once k ≥ d + 1, ω

k 
will be negative if int[ d ] is even, and
positive otherwise. Summarizing, 
(converges to zero from the
left) when int[ d ] is even, and 
(converges to zero from the right)
when Int[ d ] is odd. In the special case d 
∈
(0, 1), this means that − 1 < ω

k 
<
0, 
∀
k > 0 . This alternation of weight signs is necessary to make 
stationary, as memory wanes or is offset over the long run.
5.5 Implementation
In this section we will explore two alternative implementations of fractional
differentiation: the standard “expanding window” method, and a new method
that I call “fixed-width window fracdiff” (FFD).
5.5.1 Expanding Window
Let us discuss how to fractionally differentiate a (finite) time series in practice.
Suppose a time series with T real observations, { X

t 
}, t = 1, …, T . Because of
data limitations, the fractionally differentiated value 
cannot be computed on
an infinite series of weights. For instance, the last point 
will use weights {ω
k 
}, k = 0, …, T − 1, and 
will use weights {ω

k 
}, k = 0, …, T − l − 1. This
means that the initial points will have a different amount of memory compared
to the final points. For each l , we can determine the relative weight-loss,
. Given a tolerance level τ 
∈
[0, 1], we can determine the value l
* such that 
and 
. This value l * corresponds to the first results
where the weight-loss is beyond the acceptable threshold, λ

t 
> τ
(e.g., τ = 0.01) .
From our earlier discussion, it is clear that 
depends on the convergence
speed of {ω

k 
}, which in turn depends on d 
∈
[0, 1]. For d = 1, ω

k 
= 0, 
∀
k >
1, and λ

l 
= 0, 
∀
l > 1, hence it suffices to drop 
. As d 
→ 0

+

,
l * increases,
and a larger portion of the initial 
needs to be dropped in order to
keep the weight-loss 
. Figure 5.3 plots the E-mini S&P 500 futures
trade bars of size 1E4, rolled forward, fractionally differentiated, with
parameters ( d = .4, τ = 1) on the top and parameters ( d = .4, τ = 1 E − 2) on
the bottom.
Figure 5.3 Fractional differentiation without controlling for weight loss (top
plot) and after controlling for weight loss with an expanding window (bottom
plot)
The negative drift in both plots is caused by the negative weights that are added
to the initial observations as the window is expanded. When we do not control
for weight loss, the negative drift is extreme, to the point that only that trend is
visible. The negative drift is somewhat more moderate in the right plot, after
controlling for the weight loss, however, it is still substantial, because values
are computed on an expanding window. This problem can be
corrected by a fixed-width window, implemented in Snippet 5.2.
SNIPPET 5.2 STANDARD FRACDIFF (EXPANDING WINDOW)
5.5.2 Fixed-Width Window Fracdiff
Alternatively, fractional differentiation can be computed using a fixed-width
window, that is, dropping the weights after their modulus (|ω

k 
|) falls below a
given threshold value (τ) . This is equivalent to finding the first l * such that
and 
, setting a new variable
and 
, for t = T − l * + 1, …, T . Figure 5.4 plots E-mini S&P
500 futures trade bars of size 1E4, rolled forward, fractionally differentiated ( d
= .4, τ = 1 E − 5).
Figure 5.4 Fractional differentiation after controlling for weight loss with a
fixed-width window
This procedure has the advantage that the same vector of weights is used across
all estimates of 
, hence avoiding the negative drift caused by an
expanding window's added weights. The result is a driftless blend of level plus
noise, as expected. The distribution is no longer Gaussian, as a result of the
skewness and excess kurtosis that comes with memory, however it is
stationary. Snippet 5.3 presents an implementation of this idea.
SNIPPET 5.3 THE NEW FIXED-WIDTH WINDOW FRACDIFF
METHOD
5.6 Stationarity with Maximum Memory Preservation
Consider a series { X

t 
}

t = 1, …,

T 
. Applying the fixed-width window fracdiff
(FFD) method on this series, we can compute the minimum coefficient d *
such that the resulting fractionally differentiated series 
is
stationary. This coefficient d * quantifies the amount of memory that needs to
be removed to achieve stationarity. If 
is already stationary, then d *
= 0 . If 
contains a unit root, then d * < 1 . If 
exhibits
explosive behavior (like in a bubble), then d * > 1 . A case of particular interest
is 0 < d * 
≪
1, when the original series is “mildly non-stationary.” In this case,
although differentiation is needed, a full integer differentiation removes
excessive memory (and predictive power).
Figure 5.5 illustrates this concept. On the right y-axis, it plots the ADF statistic
computed on E-mini S&P 500 futures log-prices, rolled forward using the ETF
trick (see Chapter 2), downsampled to daily frequency, going back to the
contract's inception. On the x-axis, it displays the d value used to generate the
series on which the ADF statistic was computed. The original series has an
ADF statistic of –0.3387, while the returns series has an ADF statistic of –
46.9114. At a 95% confidence level, the test's critical value is –2.8623. The
ADF statistic crosses that threshold in the vicinity of d = 0.35 . The left y-axis
plots the correlation between the original series ( d = 0) and the differentiated
series at various d values. At d = 0.35 the correlation is still very high, at 0.995.
This confirms that the procedure introduced in this chapter has been successful
in achieving stationarity without giving up too much memory. In contrast, the
correlation between the original series and the returns series is only 0.03, hence
showing that the standard integer differentiation wipes out the series’ memory
almost entirely.
Figure 5.5 ADF statistic as a function of d , on E-mini S&P 500 futures log-
prices
Virtually all finance papers attempt to recover stationarity by applying an
integer differentiation d = 1 
≫
0.35, which means that most studies have over-
differentiated the series, that is, they have removed much more memory than
was necessary to satisfy standard econometric assumptions. Snippet 5.4 lists
the code used to produce these results.
SNIPPET 5.4 FINDING THE MINIMUM D VALUE THAT PASSES
THE ADF TEST
The example on E-mini futures is by no means an exception. Table 5.1 shows
the ADF statistics after applying FFD( d ) on various values of d , for 87 of the
most liquid futures worldwide. In all cases, the standard d = 1 used for
computing returns implies over-differentiation. In fact, in all cases stationarity
is achieved with d < 0.6 . In some cases, like orange juice (JO1 Comdty) or live
cattle (LC1 Comdty) no differentiation at all was needed.
Table 5.1 ADF Statistic on FFD( d ) for Some of the Most Liquid Futures
Contracts
5.7 Conclusion
To summarize, most econometric analyses follow one of two paradigms:
1. Box-Jenkins: Returns are stationary, however memory-less.
2. Engle-Granger: Log-prices have memory, however they are non-
stationary. Cointegration is the trick that makes regression work on non-
stationary series, so that memory is preserved. However the number of
cointegrated variables is limited, and the cointegrating vectors are
notoriously unstable.
In contrast, the FFD approach introduced in this chapter shows that there is no
need to give up all of the memory in order to gain stationarity. And there is no
need for the cointegration trick as it relates to ML forecasting. Once you
become familiar with FFD, it will allow you to achieve stationarity without
renouncing to memory (or predictive power).
In practice, I suggest you experiment with the following transformation of your
features: First, compute a cumulative sum of the time series. This guarantees
that some order of differentiation is needed. Second, compute the FFD( d )
series for various d 
∈
[0, 1]. Third, determine the minimum d such that the p-
value of the ADF statistic on FFD( d ) falls below 5%. Fourth, use the FFD( d )
series as your predictive feature.
Exercises
1. 
Generate a time series from an IID Gaussian random process.
This is a memory-less, stationary series:
1. Compute the ADF statistic on this series. What is the p-value?
2. Compute the cumulative sum of the observations. This is a non-
stationary series without memory.
1. What is the order of integration of this cumulative series?
2. Compute the ADF statistic on this series. What is the p-value?
3. Differentiate the series twice. What is the p-value of this over-
differentiated series?
2. 
Generate a time series that follows a sinusoidal function. This is
a stationary series with memory.
1. Compute the ADF statistic on this series. What is the p-value?
2. Shift every observation by the same positive value. Compute the
cumulative sum of the observations. This is a non-stationary series
with memory.
1. Compute the ADF statistic on this series. What is the p-value?
2. Apply an expanding window fracdiff, with τ = 1E − 2. For what
minimum d value do you get a p-value below 5%?
3. Apply FFD, with τ = 1E − 5. For what minimum d value do you
get a p-value below 5%?
3. 
Take the series from exercise 2.b:
1. Fit the series to a sine function. What is the R-squared?
2. Apply FFD(d = 1 ). Fit the series to a sine function. What is the R-
squared?
3. What value of d maximizes the R-squared of a sinusoidal fit on
FFD(d ). Why?
4. 
Take the dollar bar series on E-mini S&P 500 futures. Using the
code in Snippet 5.3, for some d 
∈
[0, 2], compute
fracDiff_FFD(fracDiff_FFD(series,d),-d)
. What do you
get? Why?
5. 
Take the dollar bar series on E-mini S&P 500 futures.
1. Form a new series as a cumulative sum of log-prices.
2. Apply FFD, with τ = 1E − 5. Determine for what minimum d 
∈
[0,
2] the new series is stationary.
3. Compute the correlation of the fracdiff series to the original
(untransformed) series.
4. Apply an Engel-Granger cointegration test on the original and
fracdiff series. Are they cointegrated? Why?
5. Apply a Jarque-Bera normality test on the fracdiff series.
6. 
Take the fracdiff series from exercise 5.
1. Apply a CUSUM filter (Chapter 2), where h is twice the standard
deviation of the series.
2. Use the filtered timestamps to sample a features’ matrix. Use as one
of the features the fracdiff value.
3. Form labels using the triple-barrier method, with symmetric
horizontal barriers of twice the daily standard deviation, and a
vertical barrier of 5 days.
4. Fit a bagging classifier of decision trees where:
1. The observed features are bootstrapped using the sequential
method from Chapter 4.
2. On each bootstrapped sample, sample weights are determined
using the techniques from Chapter 4.
References
1. Alexander, C. (2001): Market Models , 1st edition. John Wiley & Sons.
2. Hamilton, J. (1994): Time Series Analysis , 1st ed. Princeton University
Press.
3. Hosking, J. (1981): “Fractional differencing.” Biometrika , Vol. 68, No. 1,
pp. 165–176.
4. Jensen, A. and M. Nielsen (2014): “A fast fractional difference
algorithm.” Journal of Time Series Analysis , Vol. 35, No. 5, pp. 428–436.
5. López de Prado, M. (2015): “The Future of Empirical Finance.” Journal
of Portfolio Management , Vol. 41, No. 4, pp. 140–144. Available at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2609734 .
Bibliography
1. Cavaliere, G., M. Nielsen, and A. Taylor (2017): “Quasi-maximum
likelihood estimation and bootstrap inference in fractional time series
models with heteroskedasticity of unknown form.” Journal of
Econometrics , Vol. 198, No. 1, pp. 165–188.
2. Johansen, S. and M. Nielsen (2012): “A necessary moment condition for
the fractional functional central limit theorem.” Econometric Theory , Vol.
28, No. 3, pp. 671–679.
3. Johansen, S. and M. Nielsen (2012): “Likelihood inference for a
fractionally cointegrated vector autoregressive model.” Econometrica ,
Vol. 80, No. 6, pp. 2267–2732.
4. Johansen, S. and M. Nielsen (2016): “The role of initial values in
conditional sum-of-squares estimation of nonstationary fractional time
series models.” Econometric Theory , Vol. 32, No. 5, pp. 1095–1139.
5. Jones, M., M. Nielsen and M. Popiel (2015): “A fractionally cointegrated
VAR analysis of economic voting and political support.” Canadian