COMMODITIES  
DEMYSTIFIED
A GUIDE TO TRADING AND THE GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN
SECOND EDITION

Commodities trading – supply of the basic staples that are 
converted into the food we eat, the industrial goods we use, 
and the energy that fuels our transport and heats and lights 
our lives – is one of the oldest forms of economic activity,  
yet it is also one of the most widely misunderstood.
At no time has this been truer than in the last 25 years, with 
the emergence of a group of specialist commodities trading 
and logistics firms operating in a wide range of complex 
markets, from metals and minerals to energy products.
I am pleased to present the second edition of “Commodities 
Demystified”. The first edition of this guide, published in  
2016, was enthusiastically received by a wide range  
of audiences including business partners, financial  
institutions as well as those wishing to familiarise  
themselves with our industry.
This updated guide builds on our attempt to explain the 
functions and modus operandi of these firms, and the way 
they help organise the supply chains that underpin today’s 
globalised world. Drawing on the expertise and experience  
of Trafigura, one of the leading independent trading firms, 
it describes operating principles and techniques that are 
common to the sector as a whole.
We hope you will find it interesting and informative, and that it 
sheds some additional light on a critical global industry that 
deserves to be better understood.
Jeremy Weir, Executive Chairman and CEO  
Trafigura
Disclaimer. This publication has been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only, and does not constitute professional advice. 
You should not act upon the information contained in this publication without obtaining specific professional advice. Whilst reasonable efforts 
have been made to ensure the accuracy of the content of this publication, no warranties or representations (express or implied) are made as to the 
accuracy, currency or comprehensiveness of the information contained in this publication. The information, tools and material presented herein are 
provided for informational purposes only, and are not to be used or considered as an offer or a solicitation to sell or an offer or solicitation to buy 
or subscribe for securities, investment products or other financial instruments. Nothing in this publication shall be deemed to constitute financial 
or other professional advice in any way, and under no circumstances shall Trafigura, its members, employees, or agents be liable for any direct or 
indirect losses, costs or expenses nor for any loss of profit that results from the content of this publication or any material in it or website links or 
references embedded within it. All express or implied warranties or representations are excluded to the fullest extent permissible by law.

A.	 Fundamentals  
of Commodities
1.	 What are physical 
commodities? – p.8
2.	 Development of commodities 
trading – p.14
3.	 The structure of the global 
supply chain – p.22
4.	 Who are commodity traders 
and what do they do? – p.26 
B.	 How Commodity  
Trading Works
5.	 Sourcing commodities: 
working with producers – p.36
6.	 Transporting commodities: 
transformation in space – p.38
7.	 Storing commodities:  
transformation in time – p.44
8.	 Blending commodities: 
transformation in form – p.48
9.	 Delivering commodities:  
meeting customer 
specifications – p.56 
C.	 Commodity Trading, Risk 
and Financial Markets
10.	Managing risk – p.64
11.	Funding commodity  
trading – p.72
Introduction – p.4
Postscript – p.78
Glossary – p.80
Further reading – p.83
Credits. Commodities Demystified was commissioned by Trafigura Group from a team of writers and 
designers, comprising: David Buchan (Lead Writer), Senior Research Fellow, Oxford Institute for Energy 
Studies; former Energy Editor, Financial Times; author, with Malcolm Keay, of “Europe’s long energy journey: 
towards an Energy Union?”; Charlie Errington (Writer/Editor), Owner, Go Tell Communications;  
Group Charlescannon Sarl (Design and Production); and eBoy (cover illustration). This report is the property 
of Trafigura. You are not permitted to copy, adapt, reproduce or use the content of this report for any purpose 
whatsoever without the prior written permission of Trafigura. E-mail: CorporateAffairs@trafigura.com 
COMMODITIES  
DEMYSTIFIED
A GUIDE TO TRADING AND  
THE GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN
3

The story of the modern commodities trading 
industry is part of the history of our time. The 
vast expansion of international trading in fuels, 
minerals and food in recent decades is one of the 
vital building blocks and enablers of globalisation. 
Independent commodity traders have been at the 
centre of key economic events, such as the upheaval 
of global oil markets, since the 1970s. A business 
once controlled by the integrated oil majors is now 
largely open to the forces of supply and demand. 
Traders have harnessed the development of modern 
capital markets to finance trade and of futures 
markets to offset risk. They have helped the world 
cope with seismic and sometimes disruptive shifts 
in production and consumption, and reversals in the 
economic cycle. 
In particular, they have provided logistical and risk 
management services that have enabled the dramatic 
rise of new centres of economic growth - and 
especially the emergence in this millennium of China 
as the world’s premier manufacturing hub. Moving 
the huge volumes of basic materials needed to fuel 
and feed this modern industrial revolution requires 
the services of specialist firms with the appropriate 
logistical and financial capabilities, global scale and 
scope, and expertise in and appetite for risk. 
Industry estimates suggest that around $10 trillion 
of commodities are produced and consumed each 
year around the world. However, commodities are 
rarely produced and consumed in the same place at 
the same time. Production occurs in locations that 
are often far away from the principal consumption 
centres. Commodities traders provide vital support 
for this global model of production and consumption 
in a complex value chain that includes refining, 
processing, storage and shipping. 
This guide sets out to present a thumbnail portrait 
of commodities trading. Taking the dramatic 
integration of the global economy over recent 
decades as a backdrop, it describes the functions and 
practices of modern commodities trading firms: their 
basic economic purpose; the different ways in which 
they provide service to their customers and add 
value; their approach to managing the individual 
components of the supply chain and to mastering 
the many and various risks involved. 
It aims to inform readers about the specialist 
nature of the business and the services it provides, 
and to dispel some of the myths that have grown up 
around trading over the years. It makes clear that, at 
its core, this is a physical and logistical business, and 
not the dematerialised, speculative activity that is 
INTRODUCTION
Section
4
Introduction

sometimes portrayed. It presents a business focused 
on moving commodities from where they are 
produced to where they are needed with efficiency 
and at the lowest possible cost; thus serving the 
interests of both producers and consumers.
Trafigura Group, one of the world’s largest 
independent commodity traders, with a focus on 
oil and petroleum products and metals and minerals, 
is at the centre of the narrative. The company focus 
allows us to provide concrete case studies and 
illustrations. But it also imposes some limitations. 
We do not claim that this is a definitive guide to all 
facets of the industry. Other firms will have their 
own unique characteristics which are not reflected 
here. Deliberately and inevitably, we have focused 
on energy, metals and minerals trading, and 
have made only passing reference to trading 
agricultural products. 
But we have tried as far as possible to capture 
factors that are generic to commodity trading firms 
and their basic functions and techniques. 
The document is divided into three sections. 
Part  A establishes some basic definitions and 
parameters of commodities, the recent history of 
energy and metals markets, and the firms that trade 
them. Part B explores the nuts and bolts of the trading 
business and the links in the supply chain, from 
sourcing the commodities from producers, 
transporting them by land and sea, and storing them 
in terminals, tanks and warehouses, to blending them 
to meet ever varying customer specifications, and 
delivering them to the right places at the right time. 
Part C drills into the more challenging details of risk 
management, price hedging and finance. 
The available literature on this topic elsewhere 
is surprisingly sparse. Its complexities deserve 
to be properly explored by anyone with a serious 
interest in the functioning of the contemporary 
global economy. It is our hope that, however, 
imperfectly, this study adds to the sum of knowledge 
on the subject.
5


Section A
FUNDAMENTALS  
OF COMMODITIES
Chapter 1
What are physical  
commodities?
p.8
Chapter 2
Development of  
commodities trading
p.14
Chapter 3
The structure of the  
global supply chain
p.22
Chapter 4
Who are commodity traders  
and what do they do?
p.26

Chapter 1
WHAT ARE PHYSICAL 
COMMODITIES?
Physical commodities underpin the global economy. They are traded in 
vast quantities across the globe. We depend on them for the basics of 
everyday life – for the electricity we use, the food we eat, the clothes  
we wear, the homes we live in and the transport we rely on.
The trade in physical commodities underpins the 
global economy. These are the fundamental raw 
materials from which we build and power our cities, 
run our transport systems and feed ourselves – the 
basic stuff of life. 
But ask the average person what they think of 
when they hear the word ‘commodity’ and they are 
more likely to talk about financial markets, Wall 
Street and speculation. 
While it is true that commodity markets can be 
volatile, and a certain breed of financial trader will 
always be attracted by that, this conception is a world 
away from the complex, intensely practical business 
of getting resources out of the ground, moving them 
across the globe and turning them into the raw 
materials we use every day. 
This guide tells the story of how physical 
commodities get transformed into things we actually 
need and use, and traders’ role in that. But before 
we can examine how commodities work, we have to 
be clear about what they are.
Commodities are basic products, but not every 
basic product is a commodity. 
So what makes them different? It is important to 
stress their physical nature. Ultimately, 
one way or another, all commodities come 
out of the ground. Fundamentally, these 
are products created by natural forces. 
That has certain implications. The first 
is that every shipment is unique – its 
chemical form depends on exactly when and where 
it originated. There is no such thing as a standard 
physical commodity. To be saleable, commodities 
have to be put into a usable form and moved to 
where they can be used, at the time they are needed. 
These transformations – in space, time and form – are 
key drivers for this business; discussed in detail in 
later chapters. 
Physical 
commodities are 
created by  
natural forces
Section
Chapter
8
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
1. What are physical commodities?

 COMMODITIES FOR HEAT, TRANSPORT, CHEMICAL MANUFACTURING AND ELECTRICITY
PRIMARY
NON RENEWABLES
RENEWABLES
SECONDARY
Key characteristics
Physical commodities come in all shapes and sizes, 
but they also have certain characteristics in common:
•	They are delivered globally, including by sea, 
usually in bulk.
•	Economies of scale favour bulk delivery. The cost 
of transportation makes location a significant 
pricing factor.
•	Commodities with similar physical characteristics 
are exchangeable, but these are not standard 
items. Exchanging them may have an effect on price 
and quality.
•	There is no premium for branded goods. Pricing is 
determined by product quality and availability. 
•	They can be stored for long, in some cases 
unlimited, periods.
It is these characteristics that make commodities 
suitable for trading in global markets.
Main types
Broadly speaking, physical commodities come in 
two forms:
Primary commodities are either extracted or 
captured directly from natural resources. They come 
from farms, mines and wells. As natural products 
that come out of the ground, primary commodities 
are non-standard – their quality and characteristics 
vary widely.
Secondary commodities are produced from 
primary commodities to satisfy specific market 
needs. Crude oil is refined to make gasoline and other 
fuels; concentrates are smelted to produce metals. 
There may be minor variations in quality depending 
on how a secondary commodity is produced.
Bitumen
Condensate
Diesel
Gasoline 
Jet fuel
Fuel oil
Liquefied natural gas (LNG)
Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)
Naphtha
Coals
Crude oil
Natural gas liquids
Natural gas
Biodiesel
Ethanol
Biofuels
9

Agricultural
Commodity trading dates back to agrarian societies. 
Trading agricultural commodities got underway in 
an organised way in the US when the Chicago Board 
of Trade (CBOT) was established in 1848. 
It continued to expand over the 
following century, and then took a leap 
forward in the early 1970s when the 
Soviet Union started to buy massive 
amounts of foreign grain to compensate 
for its failing harvests. At one stage, 
Moscow was buying a quarter of US grain crops, a 
level of demand almost comparable to the impact 
of China on oil and metals markets today. 
Maize 
1,042.4
Milk 
828.6
Wheat 
744.2
Dairy 
products 
421.5
Soybeans 
338.6
Roots/
tubers 
217.4
Sugar 
179.2
Fish 
176.0
Poultry 
118.1
Pigmeat 
118.0
FARM
FLOUR MILL
CONSUMER
 BASIC SUPPLY CHAIN PROCESS FOR WHEAT
There was an 
exponential growth  
in agricultural 
commodities 
trading in the 1970s
Global agricultural commodity production in 2017 (Million tonnes – mt)
Source: OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook (Edition 2017)
By the mid-1970s the global grain trade was five 
times its size in the 1930s, and it continues to 
increase. 
It is significant, in terms of the way the world 
economy is moving, that most of the traditional 
agricultural commodity trading houses such as Cargill 
or Louis Dreyfus have over the years added energy, 
metals and minerals to their portfolios.
The main categories of agricultural commodity 
include grains and oilseeds (corn, soybean, oats, rice, 
wheat), livestock (cattle, pigs, poultry), dairy (milk, 
butter, whey), lumber, textiles (cotton, wool) and 
softs (cocoa, coffee, sugar). 
Section
Chapter
10
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
1. What are physical commodities?

Coal 
3 730.89
Crude oil 
4 390.20 
Natural gas 
3 034.95
Nuclear 
679.65
Hydro 
349.22
Biofuels and 
waste 
1 349.29
Other 
225.63
Energy
After crude oil’s discovery in economic quantities in 
Pennsylvania in 1859, it burst onto the scene as a 
cheap alternative to whale oil in lamps. Petroleum 
products facilitated new possibilities for transportation 
and mechanisation. The trade in primary 
and secondary energy commodities has 
propelled industrialisation and global 
growth ever since. 
In recent decades, global trading firms 
have emerged that specialise in primary 
and secondary energy commodities. 
They have played a central part in globalising the oil 
trade. They have ridden the wave of resource 
WELL
REFINERY
CONSUMER
 BASIC SUPPLY CHAIN PROCESS FOR OIL AND PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
Energy commodities 
have been pivotal in 
the development of 
globalised markets 
World energy production 2016 (Million metric tonnes – mmt)
Source: IEA World Energy Balances 2018 – https://webstore.iea.org/world-energy-balances-2018
Total 
13 759.83 
nationalism to help producing countries’ national oil 
companies sell their output, and they have used 
capital markets to finance trade and futures markets 
to offset risk. They are helping to export the US shale 
revolution by bringing its oil, gas and petrochemical 
feedstock to world markets, and are engaged in the 
pivot of energy markets towards the faster growing 
Asian economies. 
Primary energy commodities such as crude, 
natural gas, natural gas liquids, coal and renewables 
are refined and processed into many different 
petroleum products and fuels, from bitumen to 
gasoline, biodiesel and LNG (liquefied natural gas). 
11

Ni
28
Zn
30
Iron ore 
1,645mmt
Steel making
Aluminium 
64mmt
Transport, 
automotive, 
construction, 
packaging
Copper 
24mmt
Electronics, 
plumbing
Zinc 
12.5mmt
Galvanising iron 
and steel and 
making brass
Lead 
12.7mmt
Batteries, alloys, 
radiation shielding
Nickel 
2.2mmt
Stainless and 
specialty steels
Fe
26
Cu
29
Al
13
Pb
82
Metals and minerals 
Metallurgy goes back to the bronze age. Trading 
metals originated with the Phoenicians and continued 
with the Romans. Modern metal trading can be 
traced back to the mid-19th century, when Britain, 
the first industrialised nation, turned from being a 
net exporter of metals to a net importer as it sought 
to feed its manufacturing base. 
Merchants and financiers in London organised 
and financed the metals trade. This early history 
has left its mark. The three-month contract, 
the main daily-traded futures contract on the London 
Metal Exchange (established in 1877), reflects the 
time it took for ships to transport copper from Chile 
to the UK. 
The pattern of metals and mineral trading 
remained relatively unchanged throughout the 
20th  century. Successive attempts by producers 
to control prices by restricting supply, along OPEC 
lines, proved largely ineffective. Base metals – 
chiefly copper, nickel, zinc, lead and iron ore for 
steel-making – though essential for industry and 
manufacturing, cannot command the rigid, inelastic 
demand enjoyed by oil and other energy suppliers. 
The spectacular industrial rise of China 
in the 21st century transformed the trade 
in minerals and metals. Rapid growth in 
Chinese demand created supply 
bottlenecks, developed new sources of 
production and trade routes, and led to 
unprecedented market volatility.
Initial processing for most metals generally takes 
place at or near the mine to reduce transportation 
costs. Iron ore is left untreated, but mined copper, 
lead, nickel and zinc ores are turned into concentrates, 
while bauxite is turned into alumina. Iron ore, 
concentrates and alumina are traded as primary 
commodities. Smelters process these into refined 
metals and useful alloys such as steel.
MINE
SMELTER
CONSUMER
 BASIC SUPPLY CHAIN PROCESS FOR COPPER
Rapid growth in 
Chinese demand 
changed the 
structure of metals 
and minerals trading 
Source: Trafigura research 2019
Global major metal production in 2018
Section
Chapter
12
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
1. What are physical commodities?

Commodity futures
Commodity futures have evolved alongside 
commodity trading to support price risk 
management. Physical traders use futures to hedge 
against the risk of adverse price movements while 
they are transporting commodities from the producer 
to the consumer.
Rudimentary futures markets existed in 
Mesopotamia and Japan several thousand years ago. 
Farmers needed to protect themselves from the 
vagaries of the weather. They managed that by fixing 
a future price for their crops. This gave them the 
confidence to start sowing the next year’s crop 
before they received any money from the current 
year’s crop. 
A commodity future is a contractual agreement 
to trade a defined commodity on a listed exchange. 
The quantity, quality, delivery location and delivery 
date are all specified. Under the terms of the contract 
the seller is required to deliver the specified physical 
commodity on the delivery date. 
The possibility of physical delivery 
imposes an important price discipline on 
futures markets. It ensures that the price 
of the commodity future and that of the 
underlying physical commodity converge 
as the delivery date approaches. However, 
physical delivery against futures contracts almost 
never happens in practice. Instead, sellers close out 
their positions by buying back the equivalent number 
of contracts at the exchange on or before the 
delivery date.
A futures trade occurs when a buyer and seller 
agree on a price. The exchange acts as the counterparty 
for both buyer and seller so every futures trade 
generates two transactions, a long position for the 
buyer and a short position for the seller. 
Futures traders maintain a cash buffer, or margin, 
for each contract they own. This protects the 
exchange against the risk of a credit default. Profits 
and losses are recalculated daily and the margin 
account is adjusted accordingly. Traders must ensure 
they have sufficient margin in their account at the 
start of each trading session.
A COMMODITY FUTURE IS A CONTRACTUAL 
AGREEMENT TO TRADE A DEFINED 
COMMODITY ON A LISTED EXCHANGE.  
THE QUANTITY, QUALITY, DELIVERY  
LOCATION AND DELIVERY DATE ARE ALL 
SPECIFIED. UNDER THE TERMS OF THE 
CONTRACT THE SELLER IS REQUIRED TO 
DELIVER THE SPECIFIED PHYSICAL COMMODITY 
ON THE DELIVERY DATE.
 
Where, when and what – the fundamentals  
of commodity pricing
End-users buy physical commodities to meet staple 
needs. The commodity has to be fit for purpose and 
it needs to be available. These requirements 
determine the three pillars for pricing: 
•	Where: delivery location
•	When: delivery timing 
•	What: the product quality or grade
Commodity trading firms bridge gaps between 
producers and consumers based on these 
three pillars, through transformations in space, 
time and form.
•	Space: transport the commodity to alter its location;
•	Time: store the commodity to change the timing 
of delivery;
•	Form: blend the commodity to affect its quality 
or grade.
Commodity futures 
prices converge  
with physical 
commodities
Commoditisation
The term ‘commoditisation’ conveys the sense of 
total standardisation. This is misleading when 
applied to commodity trading.
Metals may end up pretty much the same once 
they have been through the homogenising process 
of smelting but raw materials and minerals can be 
very diverse, not only in location but also in 
physical characteristics. Even oil from the same 
well, or indeed coal extracted from the same pit, 
will alter over time as different levels of the 
deposits are exploited.
Both smelters and refineries are optimised to 
process specific grades of a commodity. With over 
150 different grades of crude oil and oil products, 
searching out and matching sellers’ products with 
buyers’ preferences is a core competence for 
commodity traders.
13

Oil and petroleum 
products
OPEC’s (The Organisation of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries) decision to flex the collective 
muscles of its member nations wrested 
monopolistic control from the oil majors – a trend 
that continues to the present day.
At one time, the international oil majors (often 
described as "the Seven Sisters") exerted almost total 
control over the oil industry. They prospected for oil, 
Chapter 2
DEVELOPMENT  
OF COMMODITIES 
TRADING
In both the metals and minerals and the energy sectors, institutionally 
agreed approaches to commodity pricing have been superseded by the 
increased efficiency of market-led mechanisms. 
extracted, transported and priced it, controlled 
refineries and sold oil products to end-users. This 
vertical integration from upstream to downstream 
meant they dominated the market. The Seven Sisters' 
dominance fed concerns that they were operating 
as a cartel. There were calls for increased competition 
from both producers and consumers.
By the 1970s, this monopolistic position eroded. 
Oil-producing nations, especially in the Middle East, 
were asserting national sovereignty over their 
natural resources. 
Edwin Drake becomes the 
first person to successfully 
drill for oil in Titusville, 
Pennsylvania, US
Formal oil-trading exchange 
is established. Mass 
production techniques and 
technologies help oil-trade 
become a large-scale industry
Standard Oil Company of New Jersey 
Standard Oil company of New York (SoCoNY) 
Standard Oil of California (SoCal) 
Texaco 
Royal Dutch Shell 
Anglo-Persian Oil Company 
Gulf Oil
The largest conventional oil 
field in the world, Ghawar 
Field, is discovered in  
Saudi Arabia
1859
Late 1800s
1940s
1948
7 sisters
Section
Chapter
14
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
2. Development of commodities trading

Initially, OPEC members emulated the oil majors 
and set prices directly, but they soon switched to 
market-based methods, affecting price by varying 
production. The 1973 oil embargo was a vivid 
demonstration of the oil producers’ ability 
to exert pressure by constraining supply. 
At the time of the embargo, OPEC 
controlled half of global crude production 
and 80 percent of proven reserves. In a 
market with very low demand elasticity, this allowed 
them to exert a high degree of control. 
Over the course of the 1970s and 1980s many 
oil majors’ upstream concessions were nationalised. 
Producing countries established national oil 
companies (NOCs) to market production. Starved of 
crude to fuel their refineries and petrol stations, the 
majors set up trading operations that could source 
crude from other producers. In time, they developed 
new sources of supply, but the old model of vertical 
integration was gone forever. 
As markets developed, oil futures contracts were 
increasingly used to enable trading along the supply 
chain between producers and consumers. 
Standardised contracts equipped the 
industry with price benchmarks and 
effective tools for hedging price risk. This 
provided an opening for commodity 
traders. They could act as middlemen 
and insure themselves against the 
financial risk of carrying large, valuable cargoes 
around the world. 
As time went on, oil majors reduced their trading 
operations. Mega-mergers at the turn of the century 
consolidated trading operations. ExxonMobil for 
instance now only markets its own oil, but in the late 
1990s Mobil was a very active trading firm.
Vertical disintegration has continued. Higher oil 
prices encouraged the majors to sell off refineries 
and non-core downstream distribution to focus more 
on highly capital-intensive and specialised upstream 
exploration and production. Some commodity 
trading houses seized the opportunity to buy 
refineries, around which to build their trading 
business. Others, like Trafigura, were less interested 
in outright ownership of refining. They saw 
independent refineries as important new customers. 
Independent, specialist operators became 
increasingly influential with the collapse of the old, 
vertically integrated supply chain model. A diffuse, 
actively traded market created more openings for 
independent commodity traders and shippers. 
Before OPEC, the majors owned a third of all 
tankers and chartered another third on long-term 
time charters. The rise of the oil spot market, 
particularly in Rotterdam, in the early 1970s brought 
in more independent charterers of tankers. 
By 2015, the majors owned just 9.4 percent of 
global tanker tonnage. The world’s biggest tanker 
owner, the National Iranian Tanker Company has a 
2.8 percent market share, but sanctions have made 
it very hard for it to put its tonnage to use in recent 
years. BP, Kuwait Oil Tanker Company, Chevron, 
Sonangol, Petrobras, Pertamina and PDVSA retain 
small market shares, but most of the oil industry now 
relies on chartering other people’s tankers. 
In today’s markets, around a third of the world’s 
crude oil – some 30m barrels a day – is traded 
through intermediaries. Trafigura, the second largest 
independent trader, has a five percent share of the 
traded market - that is, volumes that are not handled 
directly between producers and consumers.
OPEC (Organisation of 
Petroleum Exporting 
Countries) founded in 
Baghdad, Iraq
The Arab oil embargo on 
exports to the US causes 
prices to rise from $2.90 to 
$11.65 per barrel
Oil reaches a record high of 
$147.27 per barrel
Oil price falls to $34  
per barrel
Ban of US exports  
of crude oil lifted 
1960
1973
2008
2009
2015
Producing nations 
took back control of 
their oil assets
Active futures 
markets gave 
traders effective risk 
management tools
15

Top ten oil producers and consumers in 2017
(thousand barrels / day)
Source: World Oil and Gas Review 2018, ENI
Producers
United States: 20,188
China: 12,445
India: 4,679
Japan: 3,942
Russia: 3,557
Saudi Arabia: 3,221
Brazil: 3,088
South Korea: 2,654
Germany: 2,504
Canada: 2,414
Consumers
United states: 13,191
Saudi Arabia: 11,964
Russia: 11,357
Canada: 4,816
Iran: 4,707
Iraq: 4,568
China: 3,871
UAE: 3,770
Kuwait: 3,014
Brazil: 2,738
Section
Chapter
16
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
2. Development of commodities trading

Metals and minerals
China’s explosive economic growth has expanded 
trade routes, opened new sources of production 
and enabled the emergence of a globalised, 
competitive marketplace. 
The pattern of the global metals trade has been 
transformed since the start of the millennium. The 
major destination countries for metals have shifted 
from West to East; primarily to China. China’s share 
of metal imports rose from less than 10 percent in 
2002 to 46 percent in 2014. The major source 
countries, meanwhile, have moved from North to 
South. By 2014 almost half of metal exports to China 
came from Australia, Brazil and Chile. Peru is also 
emerging as a significant supplier. 
Before China’s rise, Japan had been the last big 
economy to industrialise with fast growth. During 
the 1970s and 1980s Japanese steel makers 
prioritised predictability over price. They preferred 
to agree prices annually with the iron ore producers 
rather than rely on market forces. During this period 
annual contract prices set the price benchmark for 
the whole sector.
The sheer volume of Chinese demand transformed 
pricing models. The iron ore market is a case in 
point. Chinese steel makers had never cultivated the 
iron ore producers in the way their Japanese 
counterparts had, and they were less precise about 
projected consumption requirements. 
Faced with a shortage of iron ore under 
the annual contract system, the Chinese 
went to the spot market and to India 
(which had never been among the 
suppliers negotiating with the Japanese) 
for extra tonnage. 
In the boom years before the global financial crisis 
of 2008-9, the spot price rose to twice the contract 
price. Some Chinese companies took this opportunity 
to buy contract ore and sell at spot prices to their 
fellow steel makers. As the global financial crisis 
affected output, the spot price rapidly sank below 
the contract price and some of these firms reneged 
on contracts. In the post-crisis period, with China 
leading global growth, the spot-contract price 
relationship reversed again. 
This see-sawing, volatile environment spurred the 
quest for more responsive pricing. And this is what 
the market has provided. Today’s benchmark, The 
Steel Index (TSI) iron ore reference price prepared by 
the Platts price-reporting agency is based on reported 
spot market prices for iron ore at a north China port.
Increased price volatility has benefited commodity 
trading firms. Producers and consumers face greater 
risks in volatile conditions and are less willing to hold 
stocks. They can manage this by forging closer 
relationships with commodity traders, who have 
developed the expertise and resources to manage 
price risks.
Fast growth in 
Chinese demand 
encouraged new 
producers and 
short-term pricing
 EXPONENTIAL GROWTH IN CHINA'S BILATERAL METAL TRADE IMPORTS
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2015, p.47
*The metals included are aluminium, copper, iron ore, lead, nickel, tin, zinc and uranium
Australia
1,043
Brazil
605
Canada
90
million $
Bilateral metal trade 2002
Bilateral metal trade 2014
 2002 vs. 2014
million $
million $
Chile
784
Russia
196
Australia
52,153
Brazil
12,851
Canada
2,496
Chile
15,249
Peru
5,621
2014
88,370
2002
2,718
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
17

The changing nature, as well as the increased volume, 
of China’s imports of copper – the second most 
important base metal by value – had favourable 
implications for commodity traders. 
China used to import vastly more refined copper 
than copper concentrate, but in recent years that 
relationship has changed. In 2015, the proportion 
between the two types was about equal, with the 
proportion of concentrate continuing to increase.
Importing the raw material and processing copper 
at home is more cost-effective for the Chinese. As 
the country has grown its smelting 
capacity there has been a corresponding 
increase in investment around the world 
in concentrate production. 
Global consumption of aluminium and 
of steel have grown significantly in the past 
two decades. China is playing a dual role here too, as both 
producer and importer. It is now the world’s largest 
producer of steel and primary aluminium. Its adoption of 
a cheaper technique for producing nickel pig iron is 
disrupting the global stainless steel market, where it has 
gone from being a substantial importer to a major exporter. 
The increasing focus on importing concentrates 
plays to the strengths of commodity traders.
Feeding China’s growing demand has put a strain 
on world mining resources. In the pursuit of more 
and more quantity, quality has suffered. For instance, 
in the 2000s the copper content in raw ore would 
typically have been around 2-3 percent; the average 
now is less than 1.5 percent. 
With lower quality ore, more is needed and it takes 
more energy to crush and mill it into concentrate with 
20-30 percent pure copper content. Lower quality ore 
frequently has more impurities in it, such as arsenic, but 
variable quality also opens up more trading opportunities.
With fewer big mineral finds, more smaller mines 
are operating. But a small mine producing copper with 
a high arsenic content may find it hard to market itself 
as a sole supplier to a smelter. 
Traders can assist smaller mines by 
providing marketing know-how and 
working capital. They often combine 
concentrate from different sources. From the smelter’s 
perspective, trading firms play a number of useful roles. 
They aggregate smaller mines’ output into larger, more 
cost-effective shipments. Traders with blending 
capacity can also combine output from different 
sources to meet specific smelters’ quality requirements. 
Traders also work with the leading players. Large 
mines want to develop relationships with trading 
firms, as back-up for long-term, institutional sales. 
Buyers of refined metals beyond the smelting stage 
cultivate a range of suppliers in case of a shortage. 
The extraordinary recent surge in China’s appetite 
for metals and minerals created openings for commodity 
traders. One might therefore imagine that the current 
slowdown in China’s economic growth would squeeze 
some traders out of the market. This is unlikely. A key 
legacy of the commodity supercycle is the arrival of 
spot trading in metals and minerals. If an actively traded 
spot market is here to stay, so are commodity traders.
More Chinese 
smelting capacity 
fuels demand for 
concentrates
Traders help 
producers access 
global markets
 CHINA COPPER ORE AND CONCENTRATE IMPORTS (MILLION METRIC TONNES) 
0mmt
5mmt
10mmt
15mmt
20mmt
2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
2012
Source: Trafigura research, 2019
Section
Chapter
18
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
2. Development of commodities trading

Changing patterns  
in global trade
Global markets are replacing vertically integrated 
providers and specialist trading firms are stepping 
into the breach.
China has been the engine for growth in commodity 
trade among its fellow BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, 
India and China) – drawing iron ore from Brazil and 
to a lesser extent from India, and oil and gas from 
Russia. Chinese demand has accelerated development 
in resource-rich, emerging economies in Africa and 
Latin America. 
Global trade in commodities is changing the axes 
on which the world economy turns. Just as commodity 
demand is shifting from west to east, so 
commodity supply is shifting from north 
to south. The rise of China, and now India, 
is fuelling growth in ‘South-South’ trade. 
The high prices generated by the 
commodity supercycle has shifted the 
terms of trade between manufacturers 
and commodity producers decisively, at least for a 
time, in favour of commodity producers. The 
emerging commodity producers of Latin America, 
Africa and south-east Asia are forging trade links 
with Chinese and Indian markets.
The same pivot towards Asia is evident for energy 
commodities. Oil demand is in gradual decline in 
OECD (Organisation of Economic Cooperation and 
Development) countries. Non-OECD oil demand now 
outstrips that in OECD countries and the gap will 
grow. The developing world is consuming two more 
barrels for every one saved in OECD countries. 
Asia already imports as much crude as the Middle 
East is able to export, and its import requirements 
are growing. Some of this can be met by pipelines 
from Russia and Kazakhstan and some from Russia’s 
Pacific ports, but it will also have to import additional 
crude from more distant destinations. 
THE VOLUME OF GLOBAL INTER-REGIONAL 
TRADE IN CRUDE OIL WILL GROW BY  
SOME 7 MILLION BARRELS A DAY (MB/D), 
REACHING JUST OVER 44 MB/D IN 2040, OF 
WHICH TWO-THIRDS, AROUND 29 MB/D, WILL 
BE FLOWING TO ASIAN PORTS (COMPARED  
WITH LESS THAN HALF TODAY). 
International Energy Agency
The volume of oil products being shipped around 
the world has already risen, as super refineries in the 
Middle East and India that focus on export markets 
have replaced smaller refineries in Europe and 
elsewhere near centres of consumption.
As shipping distances lengthen, the International 
Energy Agency (IEA) forecasts that the percentage 
increase in tanker trade (the volume of oil-on-water) 
will be almost twice the increase in the volume 
of crude oil actually traded. 
Commodity trading 
is shifting the focus  
of global trade from 
north to south and 
from west to east
 GLOBAL OIL DEMAND GROWTH IS DRIVEN BY NON-OECD ECONOMIES (MB/D)
Source: Trafigura research, 2016
Other 
non-OECD
0
100
80
60
40
20
2015
2005
2000
OECD
2010
China
19

VERTICALLY INTEGRATED 
INSTITUTIONS
NETWORKED SPECIALIST 
OPERATORS
LONG-TERM PRICING
SPOT MARKETS
FEWER PRODUCERS / 
 FIXED GEOGRAPHIES
MANY PRODUCERS /  
MULTIPLE GEOGRAPHIES
STABLE / INFLEXIBLE
VOLATILE / FLEXIBLE
LIMITED TRADING
ACTIVELY TRADED
PRICE RISKS NOT MANAGED
ACTIVE RISK MANAGEMENT
 FROM THEN TO NOW: THE CHANGING DYNAMICS OF THE GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN
The same regional pattern exists for gas, where 
consumption in non-OECD countries now exceeds 
that in OECD countries. Again, Asia is exerting its 
magnetic pull on the market. China is now the third 
largest gas consumer behind the US and Russia. 
Because of its low density compared to other 
fossil fuels, gas is expensive and difficult to transport. 
Only around 30 percent of global gas is traded 
between major regions of the world, and this is 
unlikely to alter. But what is changing, and in a 
manner very relevant to commodity traders, is the 
method of transport, with relatively less being 
delivered directly by pipeline to geographically tied 
customers, and more in individual LNG cargoes that 
can be shipped and traded between many destinations. 
The biggest gas import markets in the world today 
are buying more LNG. Europe is expected to take 
more LNG from all points to balance pipeline gas 
from Russia, Norway and Algeria, while Japan and 
Korea will remain very substantial LNG importers. 
Although China imports pipeline gas from Russia and 
Turkmenistan, its LNG imports will also rise. 
Market participants have become more adept at managing price risk on futures and options exchanges  
and through OTC transactions.
With markets becoming more active there is more speculative activity.  
Speculation adds to short-term price volatility, but liquid markets are also easier to hedge.
The shift from institutionally-based to market-led trading has fuelled demand  
for benchmark-based spot market pricing.
More transparency and market liquidity have increased efficiency and reduced arbitrage opportunities.
Rapid growth in Chinese demand, new technologies, geopolitical factors and diverse market participants  
have spurred new sources of production.
Oil majors and miners divested trading, processing and downstream units during  
the 2000s commodities super-cycle. There has been a partial return to vertical integration in the years since, 
 but specialist operators, having built capacity, now compete for global volume.
Section
Chapter
20
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
2. Development of commodities trading

Refined copper 
consumers
 
Top copper producers and consumers in 2017
Source: WoodMackenzie 2018
Copper concentrate
producers
21

Chapter 3
THE STRUCTURE  
OF THE GLOBAL  
SUPPLY CHAIN
An efficient supply chain promotes prosperity by ensuring smooth 
transmission of the energy and raw materials that underpin our 
civilisation. The market-based mechanism aligns supply and demand 
highly effectively.
The physical supply chain – upstream, 
midstream and on the water
The physical supply chain is the beating heart of the 
commodity trading business. Global trading firms 
manage transportation and complex logistics to 
source, store, blend and deliver commodities for their 
customers around the globe. 
Trafigura’s traded volumes give a sense of the 
scale of the business. In 2015, it traded 146 million 
metric tonnes of crude, gasoline, fuel oil, middle 
distillates (jet fuel, diesel), naphtha, condensates, 
LPG, LNG and biodiesel. In the same year it traded 
52 million metric tonnes of metal concentrates, 
refined metals, coal and iron ore. Its shipping 
operations transported 95 million metric tonnes of 
oil and petroleum products, and 32 million metric 
tonnes of minerals and metals on 2,744 individual 
ship voyages.
As a leading independent trading firm, its 
involvement in the supply chain runs from the point 
of production through storage and blending to 
shipment and final delivery. The aim is to provide a 
complete service for clients.
Connected markets
Within the global supply chain are numerous, 
interconnected supply chains. 
There is, for instance, no homogeneous, 
global market for crude. Instead, linked 
regional markets co-exist for its many 
different varieties and grades priced off 
regionally based benchmarks. 
Hundreds of types of crude are traded 
worldwide. They are priced off three main benchmarks: 
West Texas Intermediate (WTI), Brent blend and 
Dubai crude. But the extent of pricing differentials 
between these markets is limited. If the differentials 
get too great, it is profitable for traders to blend and 
transport crudes priced in the cheaper markets and 
market them in more expensive markets. And when 
they do this supply and demand pressures reduce 
differentials again.
The global supply 
chain comprises 
numerous 
interconnected 
supply chains.
Section
Chapter
22
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
3. The structure of the global supply chain

SOURCE
STORE / BLEND
DELIVER
CRUDE SUPPLY
DEMAND
DEMAND
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS SUPPLY
DISTRIBUTOR / CONSUMER
SOURCE
TERMINAL
WELL
REFINERY
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT
TERMINAL
DELIVER
COPPER CONCENTRATE SUPPLY
DEMAND
DEMAND
COPPER CATHODE SUPPLY
PROCESSOR  
/ END USER
TERMINAL
DELIVER
SMELTER / REFINER
STORE
DELIVER
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT
SOURCE
SOURCE
STORE / BLEND
TERMINAL
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT
 SUPPLY CHAIN FOR CRUDE OIL & PETROLEUM PRODUCTS 
 SUPPLY CHAIN FOR COPPER
STORE / BLEND
SOURCE
SCRAP / RECYCLE
TRANSPORT
MINE
23

EXTRACTION
Ore  
Less than  
2% copper
Concentrates 
20-30% copper
Adjusting 
concentrate 
quality to suit 
customer  
(i.e. smelter)
99.99% pure 
copper –  
electrical  
grade
Blister copper
99% pure 
copper
Electrical wiring, 
telephones,  
laptops, 
cookware, 
brewing vats
CONCENTRATION
BLENDING
REFINING
SMELTING
CONSUMPTION
 COPPER FROM MINE TO MARKET
 REFINING CRUDE OIL INTO PRODUCTS
SEPARATION
CONVERSION
PURIFICATION
Breaking up the  
carbon chain to get more 
light products
Series of heated distillation 
towers with the bottom 
(heaviest) product in one 
tower fed into top of the 
next tower
Essentially removal  
of sulphur
MINE
USUALLY DONE 
AT MINE
OFTEN  
PERFORMED 
BY  
COMMODITY 
TRADERS
REFINING FURNACE
ELECTROLYTIC 
REFINING
SMELTER
INDUSTRIAL 
COMPANY
Section
Chapter
24
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
3. The structure of the global supply chain

Primary and secondary commodities 
Supply chain connectivity is most direct between 
primary and secondary commodity markets.
Primary commodities, such as crude oil and copper 
concentrate, are extracted from wells and mines. They 
are prepared for transportation at the production site. 
Heavy crude may be blended with distillates or a lighter 
crude to reduce its viscosity and improve pipeline flow. 
Copper ore is crushed and milled into concentrate.
The end-users for primary commodities use them 
as feedstock for processing into secondary 
commodities that can then be sold on to 
manufacturers, utilities and energy users. 
Refineries and smelters act as both consumers 
and producers of commodities. Refineries take crude 
and produce gasoline, distillates, fuel oil, etc. Copper 
smelters acquire concentrate and fuel for their 
furnaces to produce the refined metal. Both require 
precisely specified products. 
Traders act as conduits between producers and 
consumers in both primary and secondary commodity 
markets. They transform and transport commodities to 
meet customers’ timing, delivery and quality requirements.
Links between markets
Economic fundamentals link markets and affect key 
trade routes. For instance, the US shale revolution 
has had a big impact on the pattern of global energy 
trade. It has reduced US net oil imports, increased 
the export of US refined products and required 
traditional US suppliers, like Nigeria, to find alternative 
markets. It has not only made the US self-sufficient 
in gas but transformed it into an exporter of LNG; 
and as US shale gas pushed US coal out of the 
domestic power market, it has created further 
negative repercussions for the international coal 
market. The multi-dimensional consequences 
illustrate the interconnectedness of markets.
Storage promotes market stability
Inelasticity in the supply and demand for commodities 
increases the potential for market volatility. Shutting 
down a mine is very expensive. Once a mine has 
closed it is very difficult to start it up again. Miners 
will therefore often prefer to go on producing, even 
at a loss. In the medium term, this may mean that a 
reduction in demand results in persistent, excess 
supply. Without any kind of circuit breaker prices 
would fall even faster. 
Storage plays a key role in the global supply chain. It 
acts as a shock absorber, reducing overall price volatility. 
When supply is outstripping demand, inventories rise. 
When demand exceeds supply inventories can be drawn 
upon to meet consumers’ requirements.
Trading firms manage global storage inventories 
that help keep markets in equilibrium. They use 
futures markets as a hedge against 
changes in commodity prices. Typically, 
they build up inventory in buyers’ 
markets and reduce inventory in sellers’ 
markets. In doing this, they both profit 
from market volatility and help to reduce 
it by smoothing underlying supply-
demand imbalances. 
"VOLATILE ECONOMIC CONDITIONS INCREASE 
VALUE CREATION OPPORTUNITIES. SUPPLY 
AND DEMAND SHOCKS CAN CAUSE 
GEOGRAPHIC IMBALANCES THAT CREATE 
SPATIAL ARBITRAGE OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
TRADERS. GREATER VOLATILITY ALSO MAKES 
STORAGE MORE VALUABLE, THEREBY 
CREATING INTER-TEMPORAL ARBITRAGE 
OPPORTUNITIES. GREATER ECONOMIC 
VOLATILITY IS ALSO ASSOCIATED WITH 
GREATER VOLATILITY IN RELATIVE PRICES, AND 
IN PARTICULAR TEMPORARY MISPRICINGS 
THAT CREATE TRADING OPPORTUNITIES".1
Professor Craig Pirrong, University of Houston
 
Traders and volatility 
Markets function most effectively when there is deep 
and consistent liquidity. Traders help create liquid 
commodity markets and thereby lower transaction 
costs. They are especially active in volatile markets. 
Traders thrive on volatility and 
commodity markets are often highly volatile. 
But in the same way that traders profit from 
bottlenecks in the logistical supply chain, but 
do not cause them, it does not necessarily 
follow that they encourage volatility. 
Take world oil markets. Oil is a staple in economic 
life. In the short-to-medium term, price movements 
will have relatively little effect on consumption - we all 
need fuel for our cars, so small supply changes can lead 
to big price movements. There are also geopolitical 
forces at play, with some oil producing nations subject 
to sanctions and others riven by internal conflicts. 
Seasonality, government fiscal policy and the 
management of strategic oil stockpiles for countries 
like the US and China all have a big impact.
Commodity traders do not create these general 
conditions; they do not promote volatility. Traders 
are not speculators – their job is to match buyers 
with sellers. They do that through physical arbitrage 
and, from making markets more volatile, arbitrage 
actually helps to re-establish balance and improve 
efficiency and transparency in physical markets. 
Storage acts as a 
market shock 
absorber; rising 
when there is  
excess supply and 
falling when there  
is excess demand
Traders thrive in 
volatile conditions, 
but their actions 
don’t make markets 
more volatile
1 The Economics of Commodity Trading Firms, Craig Pirrong, 2014
25

Chapter 4
WHO ARE COMMODITY 
TRADERS AND  
WHAT DO THEY DO?
Commodity trading firms play a pivotal role in the global supply chain by 
bridging gaps between producers and consumers, and by balancing 
supply and demand both within and between connected markets.
The leading firms
The principal traders in agricultural products have a 
long lineage; Cargill for example started grain trading 
at the end of the American Civil War. In recent years, 
they have also begun to trade in energy and ‘hard’ 
commodities as a subsidiary activity. 
Vitol, Trafigura, Mercuria, Gunvor and Noble are 
leading firms that specialise in energy, metals and 
minerals trading. Glencore started up as a pure trader, 
but is now a major mining company. Several major 
oil and mining companies are also active traders, as 
a sideline to their industrial activity. 
"COMMODITY TRADERS ARE THE  
VISIBLE MANIFESTATION OF ADAM SMITH'S 
'INVISIBLE HAND', DIRECTING RESOURCES  
TO THEIR HIGHEST VALUE IN RESPONSE TO 
PRICE SIGNALS".2
Professor Craig Pirrong, University of Houston
Physical trading
Commodity trading is a bilateral business bringing 
buyers and sellers together in over-the-counter (OTC) 
deals. This cannot be done through centralised 
exchanges, electronic or otherwise, such as the oil 
futures market, because physical commodities vary 
widely in grade, quality and location, and the needs 
of those who use them are very diverse. 
To see why, just look at the Nymex’s WTI contract. 
Like all futures contracts, all the features of the WTI 
contract are standardised, including the notional 
delivery point at Cushing, Oklahoma, except the 
price. Futures are ideal for price discovery. In terms 
of physically allocating oil, futures contracts are 
hopeless; very few people want to take delivery of 
oil in a small town in Oklahoma; but standardisation 
is vital. Standardised futures contracts provide the 
market with benchmarks – such as Brent, WTI and 
Dubai – around which actual physical oil can be 
priced, at a premium or discount, according to quality, 
transport and location. They also allow buyers, sellers 
and traders of physical oil shipments to hedge the 
risks and exposures on OTC contracts.
2 The Economics of Commodity Trading Firms, Craig Pirrong, 2014
Section
Chapter
26
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
4. Who are commodity traders and what do they do?

Company
Founding 
date
Revenues 
2017 ($)
Commodities traded
Corporate status
ENERGY, METALS AND MINERALS
Glencore
Founded as Marc Rich 
and Co AG
1974
205.5 billion
Copper, zinc, lead, nickel, ferroalloys, alumina, aluminium, iron ore, cobalt, 
coal, oil, oil products, wheat, corn, canola, barley, rice, oil seeds, meals, 
edible oils, biofuels, cotton, sugar.
Public limited
Vitol
1966
181 billion
Crude oil, fuel oil, gasoline, middle distillates, naphtha, methanol, ethanol, 
chemicals, LPG, natural gas, LNG, carbon emissions, coal, iron ore, power, 
alumina, base oils, bitumen.
Private
Trafigura
1993
136.4 billion
Crude oil, fuel oil, middle distillates, gasoline, naphtha, LPG, LNG, biodiesel, 
condensates chemicals, coal, iron ore, concentrates and ores (copper, lead, 
zinc, alumina, nickel, tin, cobalt) refined metals (copper, aluminium, zinc, 
blister, nickel, tin, cobalt).
Private
Mercuria
2004
104 billion
Crude oil, fuel oil, middle distillates, gasoline, naphtha, biofuels,  
petrochemicals, natural gas, LNG, power, coal, iron ore, manganese, 
chrome, carbon emissions, base metals, food and feed grains, oil seeds, 
vegetable oils.
Private
Gunvor
2000
63 billion
Crude oil, heavy fuel and feedstock’s, middle distillates, gasoline, naphtha, 
LPG, biofuels, natural gas, LNG, carbon emissions, copper, aluminium, zinc, 
lead, tin, nickel, manganese, steel, coal, coking coal, iron ore, timber.
Private
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS (MAINLY OR WHOLLY)
Cargill
1865
109.7 billion
Crude oil, bunker fuel, fuel oil, distillates, naphtha Gasoline, LPG, power, 
natural gas, cotton, grain and oilseeds, sugar, ethanol, palm oil.
Private
Archer Daniels 
Midland
1902
60.8 billion
Food (acidulates, beverage alcohol, edible beans, fiber, tree nuts, lecithin, 
vitamin e, oils, plant sterols, polyols and gums, proteins, rice, soy 
isoflavones, starches, sweeteners) animal feed, corn, oilseed, ethanol, 
biodiesel, industrials.
Public
Louis Dreyfus 
Company
1851
43 billion
Oilseeds, grains, rice, freight, coffee, cotton, sugar, juice, dairy,  
fertiliser, metals.
Private
Bunge
1818
45.8 billion 
Oilseeds, sugar, bioenergy, edible oils, wheat, corn, rice, fertiliser.
Public
Wilmar  
International
1991
43.9 billion
Palm oil, oilseed, edible oils, sugar, specialty fats, oleo chemicals, biodiesel, 
fertiliser, flour, rice.
Public
Olam 
International
1989
26.3 billion
Cocoa, coffee, edible nuts (cashew, almonds, hazelnuts, peanuts, sesame), 
rice dairy, grains, palm oil, fertiliser, rubber, wood, cotton.
Public
Top commodity trading houses by revenue in 2017
Source: public materials including company websites and annual reports
27

Commodity traders need excellent 
peripheral vision to understand the 
interconnected nature of the global 
economy. Conditions in commodity 
markets can change rapidly and traders 
have to remain alert to many micro and 
macro factors. Economic cycles, 
geopolitical developments and technical 
factors all have an impact.
Oil trading:  
a multidimensional 
discipline
1  Availability of tankage
Supply of oil and petroleum products 
does not come solely from wells and 
refiners. Traders, producers, 
consumers and countries all maintain 
large inventory stocks in oil tanks 
located strategically around the globe. 
Traders keep tabs on tankage to know 
what capacity is available to them 
should they need to store stocks at 
particular locations. They also 
monitor tankage to identify potential 
sources of supply.
2  Geopolitical developments
Conflict in oil-rich areas and 
international sanctions can have a 
major impact on supply. Both fiscal 
and security policy can affect supply 
and demand for oil. The US 
700-million-barrel Strategic 
Petroleum Reserve (SPR) is the world’s 
largest emergency supply. On several 
occasions, the US government has 
bought and released stocks to and 
from the SPR to reduce and 
supplement supply. Traders need to be 
aware of changes in policy.
3  Benchmarks 
The spot market (for immediate 
delivery or receipt) in oil is a small 
fraction of the world oil market,  
but it sets prices for a much larger 
volume of trade. Every shipment has 
specific qualities and each is priced 
individually. Almost always this price 
is expressed as premium or discount 
to a benchmark price. Traders monitor 
the key benchmarks to gain insight 
into both absolute and relative  
price movements.
4  Bottlenecks, peaks  
and troughs
Traders monitor the impact of natural 
cycles, economic trends and global 
events on supply and consumption 
levels in different parts of the world. 
They also need to know about a range 
of technical factors; these might 
include a lack of local infrastructure 
constraining supply or seasonal 
variations in demand.
5  Locations and logistics 
Product can come from multiple 
sources. In a competitive industry, 
many transactions are only doable 
with narrow margins. Traders can 
secure competitive advantage through 
a combination of keen pricing and 
efficient logistics. They need to assess 
the real cost of the product at the 
point of delivery. For instance, 
acquiring oil inland and transporting it 
by barge may be more cost-effective 
than bringing the same shipment to 
port using the road network. 
6  Product specifications
Generally, commodity traders are less 
directly interested in the absolute 
level of commodity prices than in 
geographic or quality price 
differentials between different grades 
of the commodity. They aim to 
identify a price differential that makes 
it profitable to move commodities 
around the world and transform them. 
To do that, they need a solid working 
knowledge of the chemical 
constituents of the commodity.
7  Blending opportunities
Traders may decide to acquire 
commodities with a view to blending 
multiple commodities. They must 
assess the cost and effectiveness of 
combining commodities to create a 
1
5
4
2
3
Section
Chapter
28
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
4. Who are commodity traders and what do they do?

synthetic blend. They also need to 
identify when and where blending can 
take place and know where other 
blending ingredients can be acquired.
8  Cost of financing
Trading firms attract short-term secured 
finance to bridge the time  
lag between buying and selling 
commodities. Finance is more expensive 
when commodity prices and interest 
rates are higher. This is an unavoidable 
cost of doing business, which the trader 
must factor in to determine the 
profitability of a transaction.
9  Futures markets
Futures markets provide valuable 
information about expected future 
supply and demand on which 
producers, consumers and traders  
can act today. As the most actively 
traded market, futures provide the 
most accurate, timely indication of 
changing market sentiment.
10  Contango and backwardation
Traders monitor whether futures are 
trading at a premium (contango) or a 
discount (backwardation) to the spot 
price. This gives an indication of 
whether inventories are rising or 
falling. When markets are in contango 
there may be an opportunity to 
conduct a cash-and-carry arbitrage 
(see page 46).
11  Risk management
Trading teams use futures and options 
to minimise exposure to market 
volatility. Many trading desks include 
specialist risk management teams 
that manage the traders’ overall 
exposure to absolute price risk.
12  Counterparty and  
political risk 
Commodity trades are large-scale 
transactions. Traders try to limit 
credit risk by partnering with financial 
institutions, but they also need to 
calibrate their exposure to specific 
counterparties and be aware of 
sovereign risk.
13  Cost / availability of 
substitute products
The price and availability of substitute 
products can affect the supply and 
demand for a physical commodity. 
Close substitutes, including different 
grades of the same commodity, 
impact on price by changing the 
economics for traders who are 
blending commodities. More indirect 
substitutes affect prices in linked 
markets by affecting the demand for 
related energy products.
14  Existing trade flows
Understanding trade flow 
fundamentals is critical. Traders are 
continually assessing relative and 
absolute pricing levels. Spreads 
between prices often relate to the 
direction of trades. When trade flows 
shift, price differentials change.
15  Cost / availability of freight
The cost of freight varies according to 
the availability of shipping. Dealers in 
physical commodities factor in 
transportation cost when assessing 
the profitability of a trade. They often 
sit alongside freight traders who can 
fix prices for particular journeys in the 
wholesale markets.
8
9
10
13
14
15
6
7
11
12
www.downloads. 
commoditiesdemystified.info
Play the video online
29

Trading and transformation
Commodity traders are essentially logistics 
companies that use financial markets to fund their 
operations and hedge or limit the price 
risk involved. They transport and, in 
several ways, transform, commodities 
across the world. This notion of 
transformation is key. It can involve: 
Transformation 
in 
space. 
Transporting commodities from where they are 
produced to where they are consumed is the most 
visible aspect of the commodity trading business. 
Oilfields and mineral deposits are rarely near urban 
centres of consumption. Commodities are often 
transported across continents. Shipping therefore 
plays a vital part in commodity trading.
Transformation in time. Commodity supply 
and demand are not always in sync. The demand for 
energy products fluctuates with the seasons. Supply 
can be disrupted in the short term by industrial 
action, geopolitical conditions or extreme 
Traders add value  
by transforming 
commodities  
in space, time  
and form 
Space 
transport 
Unlike financial markets, where pricing 
relationships are relatively stable 
because products are basically 
interchangeable, in the physical  
trading world there is a lot more 
disjunction in prices. If there is a 
refinery accident or bad weather and 
there is a sudden need for a product, 
there might be a perfect substitute, but 
not if the substitute is 500 miles away.
See Chapter 6, p.38 
Time
storage 
Forward prices reflect the market's 
expectations about tomorrow given 
the reality of today. When today's oil 
price is lower than prices on the 
forward curve, the oil market is said to 
be in contango. This is when oil storage 
comes into its own, and oil traders 
have profited. 
See Chapter 7, p.44
Form
blending and processing
Most blending-based arbitrage is  
about optimising grades to satisfy 
pools of demand, but arbitrage 
opportunities can also arise out of 
government regulation. Until the end 
of 2015, US regulators prohibited 
exports of unrefined oil products.  
This created a profitable trade in the 
export of lightly refined US oil.
See Chapter 8, p.48
 THE TRINITY OF ARBITRAGE OPPORTUNITIES 
weather. Oversupply or excess demand can persist 
over the medium term, because of the time it takes 
for productive capacity to adjust to changing 
demand conditions.
Firms deal with mismatches in supply and demand 
through temporal transformation. They store 
commodities while supply is unusually high and 
draw down inventories when demand is unusually 
high. Storage reduces volatility by smoothing 
fluctuations in the prices and availability of 
commodities. To do this effectively, commodity 
traders need access to strategically located storage 
facilities and financial credit. 
Transformation in form. With the exception 
of those consumed directly in a power station, all 
commodities undergo some transformation before 
they can be consumed. While commodity traders do 
not usually involve themselves in industrial processes, 
they often blend or mix different grades of refined 
oil or metal products to suit their customers. 
Section
Chapter
30
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
4. Who are commodity traders and what do they do?

 HOW TRADERS ADD VALUE TO COMMODITIES
Physical arbitrage 
What is in this for the commodity traders 
themselves? Their business model is based on 
identifying and acting on market inefficiencies which 
present themselves as excess price differentials 
between untransformed and transformed 
commodities. They act on these pricing signals 
to direct commodities to where they are most 
valued, reducing market mispricing. By doing 
this, they make markets more competitive and in 
exchange earn profit.
Traders focus on spotting any gaps in the market, 
mispricing or dislocation in distribution. They monitor 
relative prices for different grades of a commodity 
(the quality spread), for the same commodity with 
different delivery locations (the geographic spread) 
and for different delivery dates (the forward spread). 
Where they identify a mismatch, they can lock in 
profit by buying in the cheaper market and selling in 
the more expensive market. 
An arbitrage opportunity opens up when the value 
of transformation – the difference between the prices 
of the transformed and untransformed commodity 
– is more than the cost of making that transformation. 
For instance, in a contango market the forward price 
is higher than the spot price. Traders can buy and 
store the commodity today and simultaneously sell 
it at a higher price on the future date (see page 46). 
Arbitrage depends on careful execution of a large 
volume of transactions with generally very thin 
margins. The trader must be able to identify worst-
case revenues and costs from the outset. They can 
only undertake these large-scale, low-margin 
transactions if they have reliable access to funding 
and the expertise to manage risk effectively. 
BUY
COMMODITY 
ADD VALUE
REDUCE COST
Finance
Operational efﬁciency
Infrastructure / logistics
/ volume
LIMIT RISK
Hedging
Insurance
Regulatory compliance
Best practice
Responsibility
TRANSFORM 
COMMODITY
Space
Time
Form
SELL
COMMODITY 
31

Arbitrage: 
how it works
In practice, a commodity 
trading firm will often employ 
more than one arbitrage 
technique in a single 
transaction. The following 
example shows how arbitrage 
techniques may be combined 
to optimise copper 
concentrate trading flows.
Existing trade flows 
Prior to this transaction, Trafigura 
had arranged to source copper 
concentrates via an offtake 
agreement with a Peruvian mine 
(1). It had also agreed to deliver 
copper concentrates to a  
Finnish smelter (2).
Transformation in space: 
geographic arbitrage 
Trafigura subsequently identifies a 
geographic arbitrage opportunity. 
It switches its supply source for 
the Finnish smelter and finds  
a different buyer for the 
Peruvian concentrates. 
Trafigura sources concentrates  
for the Finnish market at a 
Spanish mine (3). It delivers the 
Peruvian concentrates to a 
US smelter (4). These two 
transactions result in much 
shorter deliveryjourneys and yield 
a significant reduction in overall 
freight costs compared with the 
original Peru to Finland route.
Transformation in time:  
time arbitrage 
Trafigura ships concentrates to 
the Finnish smelter according to 
the originally agreed schedule, 
but the US smelter wants delivery 
in six months’ time. 
With the copper market in 
contango, Trafigura now identifies 
a time arbitrage.
The US smelter is prepared to pay 
a premium for forward delivery in 
six months. Trafigura stores the 
Peruvian concentrate safely and 
securely at an Impala Terminals 
warehouse (5).
Transformation in form:  
technical arbitrage 
The US smelter requests a 
particular specification for its 
concentrate. Trafigura can  
meet this requirement 
cost-effectively by blending the 
Peruvian concentrate in its 
warehouse to create the 
required grade synthetically (6). 
This technical arbitrage earns  
it additional margin.
The blended concentrates are 
shipped to the US smelter, 
arriving six months later as 
agreed. The combination of 
arbitrage techniques has 
increased Trafigura’s profitability 
and price competitiveness.
4.	 Sell concentrates 
to US smelter
2.	 Supply agreement with 
Finnish copper smelter
6.	 Blend to North American 
specification
3.	 Buy concentrates from 
Spanish copper mine
Source
Store
Blend
Deliver
5.	 Store concentrates in Impala 
Terminals warehouse
1.	 Offtake agreement with 
Peruvian copper mine
Non-optimised  
trade flow
Section
Chapter
32
A. Fundamentals of Commodities
4. Who are commodity traders and what do they do?

How arbitrage destroys arbitrage 
Physical arbitrage depends on identifying and 
exploiting pricing anomalies, but paradoxically the 
arbitrage transaction itself will cause the anomalies 
to disappear. The mechanism is as follows:
Arbitrage can occur when traders identify relative 
mispricing in connected markets. They buy the 
commodity where it is underpriced, and sell it – 
following transformation in the connected market 
– where it is overpriced. 
This increases demand in the first market, which 
exerts upward pressure on the price. In the second 
market, the increase in supply pushes prices down. 
The net result is to reduce the price differential 
between these two markets. 
Over time, the effect of the arbitrage on supply 
and demand moves the two markets into balance 
and the anomalies disappear. In their pursuit of 
physical arbitrage opportunities, commodity traders 
create increasingly efficient and competitive markets. 
Both producers and end-users are the beneficiaries.
More transparency and increased 
competition
The price anomalies that lead to arbitrage often stem 
from poor information or limited competition. In 
increasingly efficient markets, pricing differentials are 
getting smaller, more transient and harder to identify.
Commodity traders can still generate 
sustained profitable opportunities 
wherever they can develop a competitive 
advantage. Many firms are building 
alliances and developing efficient logistics 
to execute transformations more cost-
effectively than their competitors. 
Increased transparency encourages commodity 
traders to exert control across the whole logistics 
chain, including storage. As markets have become 
more competitive and information has improved, the 
emphasis has shifted towards cost reduction.
Reducing costs with improved logistics 
Trafigura’s approach has been to acquire interests in 
industrial assets where it identifies opportunities to 
strengthen its supply chain. These may include terminals, 
storage and transportation facilities. It sometimes 
acquires assets to address transport bottlenecks and 
sells them on once it has resolved them. 
Patterns of asset ownership by commodity traders 
are diverse, complex and dynamic, which makes 
generalisation difficult. Commodity traders’ involvement 
in industrial assets should also be seen as part of a wider 
trend of ‘backward integration’. Many other players in 
the commodities sector – smelters, refiners, even 
manufacturers – are backing into extractive industries 
with investments that assure security of supply; Arcelor 
Mittal’s acquisition of iron ore mines is just one example. 
Price differentials 
Generally, commodity traders are not interested in 
the absolute level of commodity prices, high or low, 
but in the geographic or technical price differentials 
of commodities that make moving them around the 
world and transforming them profitable. 
Commodity traders might trade the difference in 
value between one grade of gasoline and another 
grade of gasoline, or the difference in value between 
gasoline in New York and the same grade of gasoline 
in Rotterdam, or the difference between one 
concentrate of copper with a high content of gold 
and another with a high content of cyanide.
The concept of price differential sets 
commodity traders apart from many other 
intermediaries in business. Most middlemen 
take a fixed percentage of a financial 
transaction, and therefore have a self-
interest in the value of the transaction being 
as high as possible. In contrast, commodity 
traders – like any trader who buys and sells 
– are less interested in the absolute level of commodity 
prices than in the price differential between purchase 
and sale, and in the degree to which this spread can be 
increased by transforming commodities to suit the 
varying needs of their customers. 
“TRAFIGURA'S ABILITY TO INVEST IN THE 
SUPPLY CHAIN HAS GROWN, BUT THE MODEL 
HAS BEEN CONSISTENT OVER TIME. WE ARE 
AGNOSTIC ON THE PRICE OF COMMODITIES. 
WE WANT TO DELIVER A SERVICE IN ORDER TO 
ADD VALUE. IF YOU ARE JUST BUYING AND 
SELLING THERE IS A LIMIT, AND TO BE A 
LONG-TERM SUCCESS YOU NEED TO PROVIDE 
REAL VALUE-ADDED TO YOUR CUSTOMERS. 
FOR INSTANCE, WE CAN HELP A MINE IN THE 
CONGO WITH ITS ENERGY INPUT, MAKE ITS 
TRUCKING OPERATIONS MORE EFFICIENT, 
ENSURE BETTER RELIABILITY, AND THEN SHIP 
ITS PRODUCTS TO ONE OF OUR IMPALA 
TERMINALS, AND HANDLE ALL THE RISK 
INVOLVED ON A VOYAGE THAT WILL TAKE 
WEEKS ALL THE WAY TO CHINA. SO WE ARE NOT 
JUST AN ARMS-LENGTH BUYER AND SELLER”.
Pierre Lorinet, Director and
former Chief Financial Officer, Trafigura
Physical traders care 
less about market 
prices. They want to 
maximise price 
differentials 
between buyers  
and sellers
More arbitrage  
and increasing 
transparency limit 
anomalies and  
make markets  
more efficient
33


Section B
HOW COMMODITY 
TRADING WORKS
Chapter 5
Sourcing commodities: 
working with producers
p.36
Chapter 6
Transporting commodities: 
transformation in space
p.38
Chapter 7
Storing commodities: 
transformation in time 
p.44
Chapter 8
Blending commodities:  
transformation in form
p.48
Chapter 9
Delivering commodities:  
meeting customer specifications
p.56

Chapter 5
SOURCING 
COMMODITIES:  
WORKING WITH 
PRODUCERS
Trading firms aim to maximise the price differential between the price 
they pay for (untransformed) commodities and the revenue they earn by 
selling (transformed) commodities. Minimising the overall cost of 
acquiring commodities is therefore a priority. They work with producers 
to secure long-term, cost-effective supply.
Reducing overall cost 
Despite changed market dynamics, the majors* 
still control a sizeable proportion of commodity 
supply chains. They operate many of the largest 
mines and oilfields. They have long-term customers 
with processes optimised to meet their output. They 
use tried-and-tested trade routes and invest in 
specialist logistics. It all helps to minimise the total 
cost of delivery.
Most independent traders do not own their own 
sources of production. They search far and wide to 
identify and acquire low-cost, marketable product. 
To do that, they need boots on the 
ground – people who understand the 
local culture, who are able to adapt to 
its priorities. 
Independent traders can incur 
significant costs when they bring new 
producers to market. It is not just about the headline 
price. Lower cost producers may be smaller operations 
with limited access to global markets. The trader has 
the task of making their products globally competitive. 
Trading firms have to deliver shipments at their 
customer’s preferred location and they have to meet 
grading criteria and quality thresholds. If they buy from 
producers in remote, inaccessible locations, transportation 
costs are likely to be high. If they buy from smaller mines, 
it is harder to achieve economies of scale. Traders often 
work with producers to optimise or scale up production.
Focusing on quality
The pace of growth in Chinese demand has forced traders 
to look further afield for supplies and quality has suffered. 
The average copper content in ores has fallen from 2 
percent to less than 0.6 percent over the last two decades. 
With low-quality raw materials, smelters require more 
concentrate to produce the same amount of copper. The 
concentrate may include impurities, arsenic for instance, 
which need to be managed. It all adds to delivery costs. 
Process quality is equally important. There are 
high-quality deposits in Africa’s copperbelt, but trading 
firms need to be careful where they source these. 
Some mines, especially in conflict areas, do not 
conform to international health and safety standards.
Trading firms need 
to factor in 
shipment, 
processing and 
scaling costs
*Mining majors: BHP Billiton, Glencore, Rio Tinto. Oil majors: BP, Chevron, Exxon Mobil, Shell, Total
Section
Chapter
36
B. How Commodity Trading Works
5. Sourcing commodities: working with producers

This matters for the trading firm. In a world that is 
moving towards increased transparency, suppliers that 
source from mines with poor social, environmental and 
production performance run a significant reputational risk.
Improving competitiveness and marketability
Many trading firms develop specialist logistics to 
support multiple, smaller producers. Trafigura is 
investing heavily in Colombian transport infrastructure. 
In Brazil, its state-of-the-art multimodal cargo 
terminal, a joint venture with Mubadala, has direct 
rail links to miners in the country’s iron ore quadrangle. 
Traders can gain a sustained competitive 
advantage by developing advanced logistics in 
countries where there are no viable alternatives. Their 
logistics networks can transform and transport 
commodities at lower cost than their competitors. 
But these are long-term investments and they need 
to work in partnership with local communities.
Firms will also provide technical or financial 
resources to help producers modernise and extend 
production. These are often linked to long-term 
purchase arrangements, known as offtake 
agreements, where the trader agrees in advance to 
buy a minimum percentage of the mine’s output over 
several years.
Securing supply
There are many ways of securing supply, one of which 
is ownership of oil and gas fields and mines. Common 
ownership of the raw material and of all the means 
to process, transport and market it can make sense.
There are several examples of upstream 
integration. Glencore, after its merger with Xstrata, 
has effectively become an integrated mining 
company. Mercuria has upstream oil and coal assets, 
and Vitol owns upstream oil assets. Trafigura owns 
mines in Spain and Peru. 
However, a more usual way to secure 
supply is through long-term offtake 
agreements with producers. Sometimes 
such agreements follow on from a spell 
of asset ownership by the commodity 
trading firm. Trafigura, for example, 
bought a Peruvian mine in 1997 and spent the 
following 16 years improving efficiency and extending 
its life. When it sold the mine in 2013 it signed an 
agreement to take 100 percent of its output. 
Commodity trading firms sometimes combine an 
initial investment (perhaps in the form of a 
joint  venture) with offtake agreements to get 
supply flowing.
Pre-payment agreements
More typically the commodity trading firm makes a 
pre-payment for future supply. This arrangement is 
popular in many resource-rich but cash-poor 
developing countries that might resist outright 
foreign ownership of their natural resources. 
Commodity pre-payments are a useful substitute 
for the loans that emerging economies find 
increasingly hard to get from international banks. 
For commodity traders making the pre-payment 
there is a risk that the commodity to be delivered 
will fall in value. However, there are mechanisms to 
deal with this. The producer can for instance agree 
to make up any fall in commodity value with a cash 
payment or extra supply of the commodity. 
Offtake agreements give producers security of 
demand and commodity traders security of supply. 
Commodity traders are unlikely, in every case, to tie 
a specific volume of crude to a specific agreement 
to supply one particular refinery, or dedicate copper 
concentrate to serve a particular smelter. They 
wouldn’t be traders if they were to forego the 
opportunity of getting the best price for their offtake 
volumes. But the existence of some steady long-term 
supply coming into their commodity portfolios does 
allow traders to sign longer-term supply agreements 
with refiners, smelters and processors. 
WAYS COMMODITY TRADING FIRMS SECURE 
RELIABLE LOW-COST SUPPLIES 
Upstream integration
Joint ventures
Pre-payment and offtake 
agreements
Technical support
1
2
3
4
Offtake agreements 
and upstream 
integration secure 
long-term supply
37

Chapter 6
TRANSPORTING 
COMMODITIES: 
TRANSFORMATION  
IN SPACE
Many producers are found in remote locations, often in emerging 
economies. Traders need to deliver commodities to consumption centres 
on the other side of the world. They can increase their profitability and 
generate more physical arbitrage opportunities by lowering 
transportation costs.
Developing infrastructure
Commodity trading firms rely on efficient logistics 
to transport commodities cost-effectively. Where 
the existing infrastructure is sub-optimal, there are 
strong commercial grounds for investing in midstream 
assets – road, rail or river transportation linked to 
modern ports and terminals – that increase the 
efficiency of their supply chains.
Multimodal logistics 
Trading firms design multimodal logistics systems to 
optimise economies of scale and reduce shipment 
costs. They select the most efficient 
transportation for each stage along the 
supply chain to reduce the overall cost of 
the delivered commodity. Multimodal 
terminals optimise the transfer of 
shipments between different modes of 
Multimodal logistics 
networks optimise 
transportation and 
minimise transferral 
costs at each stage 
of the supply chain 
transport. These may be situated inland or at 
the coast and will usually take advantage of 
automated processes that streamline transferral. For 
instance, small-scale miners in Brazil’s iron ore 
quadrangle transport their cargo on trucks to a local 
collection terminal at an inland railway station. The 
product is transferred directly onto rail freight 
carriages. It then travels by rail to an Atlantic 
terminal, where it is automatically unloaded onto a 
conveyor belt. This conveys the product to a feeder 
system for a bulk dry freight tanker, which is berthed 
and ready for export.
Section
Chapter
38
B. How Commodity Trading Works
6. Transporting commodities: transformation in space

Inland transportation
Getting product from one part of the world to 
another brings many different modes of 
transport into play. The main inland 
modes of transportation include:
Trucks
Delivery by 
road is probably 
the most 
flexible 
mechanism, but 
individual 
shipments are 
not easily 
scalable. Trucks 
are best 
deployed to 
manage 
complex routes 
and difficult 
terrain.
Rail 
Low unit cost, 
large-scale 
shipments. Rail 
also offers 
high-speed 
delivery and the 
ability to build 
direct rail links 
between 
producer and 
ports. It may 
require a high 
initial 
investment. 
Barge
Like rail, this is 
a low unit cost 
transportation 
alternative 
where there is a 
suitable river. 
This will also 
require 
substantial 
initial 
investment. 
Terminals and 
barge fleets are 
needed. The 
ability to 
arrange direct 
river-to-ship 
transfers at 
seaports can be 
advantageous.
Fixed pipeline
Low unit cost, 
but high capital 
costs. Pipelines 
ensure 
continuous 
supply and are 
most suitable 
for traders with 
a steady flow of 
consumer 
orders and 
control of 
substantial 
terminal 
capacity. 
Trafigura reinvents logistics in Colombia
Following the collapse of the state-owned railway 
company in 1990, Colombia’s rail network 
disintegrated. It put immense strain on the  
road system as the only viable means for 
transporting cargo.
It led to a situation where transporting freight 
500km overland by road from Bogotá to the 
country’s main Pacific port at Buenaventura was 
more expensive than shipping that same load the 
15,500 kilometres by sea to China. 
Trafigura has invested over $1 billion to help to 
develop the country’s strategic infrastructure and 
reduce its reliance on an overloaded, inefficient 
road network.
Its ambitious plan is revolutionising  
Colombia’s logistics. Trafigura subsidiary Impala 
Terminals is coordinating an operation to  
connect the Caribbean Sea to the country’s 
hinterland by opening the 1,500-kilometre 
Magdalena River to freighty traffic. 
With its multimodal logistics network in 
Colombia, the trading firm can move product to 
and from Colombia’s interior. A giant oil terminal at 
Barrancabermeja on the Magdalena river is 
exporting and importing crude and naphtha using 
motorised pushers and barges. 
Trafigura’s river transport system is helping 
Colombia to unblock the logjam that has 
constrained its economic development. In return, 
the company gets access to a sizeable new market.
39

OIL TANKERS 
10,000
Product tanker
10,000-60,000 DWT
Panamax
60,000-80,000 DWT
Aframax
80,000-120,000 DWT
Suezmax
120,000-200,000 DWT
Very Large Crude Carrier
200,000-320,000 DWT
Ultra Large Crude Carrier
320,000-550,000 DWT
60,000
80,000
120,000
200,000
320,000
BULK CARRIERS
Handysize 
10,000-35,000 DWT
Supramax 
45,000-59,000 DWT
Panamax
60,000-80,000 DWT
Capesize 
100,000-200,000 DWT
Very Large Bulk Carrier
Over 200,000 DWT
10,000
35,000
45,000
80,000
100,000
200,000
60,000
550,000
SHIP
SHAPES
SIZE IN DEADWEIGHT TONNES (DWT) 
Section
Chapter
40
B. How Commodity Trading Works
6. Transporting commodities: transformation in space

Overseas transportation
Just as commodity trading firms need onshore 
facilities to load, offload, store and blend cargoes, so 
they need ships to carry their cargoes across the 
oceans. However, unlike terminals, commodity 
trading firms do not need to own their own vessels. 
Ships are interchangeable and port facilities are not. 
They may charter wet freight tankers to transport 
oil and petroleum products. Metals and minerals – 
dry freight – are transported in bulk carriers. 
There are two main ways of doing this:
•	A time charter is like renting a car: you pay for the 
daily hire, fuel and any parking fees, while the cost 
of maintenance, insurance and licensing is paid by 
the rental company. 
•	With a voyage charter, the charterer pays a metric 
tonne freight rate for the cargo to be carried from 
point A to point B. The ship’s owner or 
time charterer pays fuel and port charges.
Time chartering is extremely flexible. 
Time chartering a ship – for a month, a 
year or more – gives the charterer full 
commercial control. He pays for fuel and 
port charges. At any time during that 
period he can put it out for re-hire for individual 
voyages or indeed for another time charter. The 
owner retains the technical responsibilities of 
crewing, insuring and maintaining the ship. 
Most trading firms supplement time charters 
with voyage charters to maximise their ability to 
take advantage of short-term and spot market 
trading opportunities.
Shipping and chartering desks 
Commodity trading firms normally operate shipping 
or freight desks. 
They act as service providers to the company’s 
traders, getting them competitive freight rates and 
hedging freight rate risk. 
They will often also trade a portfolio of shipping 
services for third-party customers, booking voyage 
and time charter clients when they have unused 
capacity, and pursuing freight arbitrage opportunities 
for the company. 
Wet and gas freight
In certain markets there is a need for specialist 
carriers and here it can sometimes make sense for 
traders to own their own shipping. LNG, LPG, propane 
and butane are transported in refrigerated carriers 
to keep the gas as a supercooled liquid. Bitumen 
carriers are specially adapted to allow the cargo to 
be heated so it doesn’t solidify. Having its own fleet 
of special purpose carriers helps a firm to avoid the 
risk of chartering vessels in a narrow, illiquid market 
and means it is better able to keep commercially 
sensitive transactions confidential.
Freight market dynamics
Freight specialists aim to minimise transportation 
costs, but supply and demand factors can greatly 
affect operational expenses for particular vessel 
types. With voyage charters, they need to locate a 
vessel with the ability to load their cargo and berth 
at the required locations at the agreed times.
Time chartering provides more flexibility, but to 
be cost-effective, these vessels need to be fully 
utilised across the chartering period. Trading firms 
often have freight desks that make idle time-
chartered vessels available to third parties. Freight 
traders aim to mitigate freight risk by hedging their 
future freight obligations using swaps or forward 
freight agreements (FFAs). Bunker fuel, another major 
cost of chartering, is also subject to market volatility. 
Traders use bunker derivatives to hedge their future 
fuel costs. 
Chartering terms are set out in Contracts of 
Affreightment (COAs). These include Incoterms, 
which specify rights and responsibilities. They also 
specify penalties, such as the demurrage fee payable 
to the owner if the vessel takes longer than agreed 
to load and unload.
Newer, cleaner and more efficient vessels are 
progressively replacing older ships in the current 
global fleet. Many regulators have reduced the 
maximum permissible sulphur content in bunker fuel 
in recent years in response to environmental concerns. 
In the medium term, these dynamics may lead to a 
shortfall in the supply of suitably located and 
equipped vessels, with a consequent increase in 
chartering costs.
Trading firms use 
time charters and 
voyage charters  
for overseas 
transportation  
as needed
41

Top ten importers of gas  
(pipeline and LNG combined) in 2017
(billion cubic metres)
Source: World Oil and Gas Review 2018, ENI
Top ten exporters of gas  
(pipeline and LNG combined) in 2017 
(billion cubic metres) 
Source: World Oil and Gas Review 2018, ENI
Germany 119.50
Japan 117.16
China 89.49
US 83.89
Italy 68.05
Turkey 54.14
South Korea 52.05
France 51.49
Mexico 49.45
UK 48.35
Russia 221.05
Qatar 127.93
Norway 124.27
Canada 84.76
Australia 69.20
Algeria 54.74
Turkmenistan 53.76
Netherlands 47.54
Malaysia 36.79
US 86.85
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) markets
Gas, the greenest of the fossil fuels, is difficult to 
transport globally and that restricts its tradability. 
Russia, the most landlocked of major energy 
producers, delivers most of its gas by pipeline. Pipeline 
gas generally goes straight from the producer to the 
consumer, with no real role for intermediaries. 
But pipelines are impractical where producers and 
consumers are separated by sea. LNG transportation 
provides an effective solution. 
LNG works by cooling natural gas to minus 162 
degrees centigrade. This liquefies the gas and shrinks 
it to 1/600th of its gaseous volume. The liquid 
concentrate is transportable in purpose-built 
refrigerated tankers. 
The technology was developed several decades 
ago and began to be used commercially in the mid-
1960s. Liquefaction and re-gasification capacity 
developed rapidly until the 1980s, then stagnated 
until the mid-1990s, but has picked up since. 
Qatar is the global industry leader, but is now 
being joined by new exporters, chiefly Australia but 
also the US and countries in east Africa. 
Early LNG contracts were long-term arrangements, 
locking producer and consumer into a virtual pipeline 
that did not allow any intermediary trading. 
Commercial arrangements limited sales to a defined 
set of buyers (who in turn would often have 
monopolistic franchise areas). 
As more re-gasification capacity has come on-
stream, particularly on floating barges, international 
LNG trading is opening up, taking on more of the 
characteristics of a standard commodity market. A 
small but growing share of international LNG trade 
is taken by trading firms selling gas from a global 
portfolio and benefiting from arbitrage opportunities 
between the various regional import prices.
An estimated 20 percent of LNG volumes is now 
traded on the spot market (though in this long-term 
business, spot contracts can last up to four years) 
through aggregators and traders. 
The evolution of LNG markets demonstrates that 
a requirement for significant investment in long-term 
capital projects technology is no bar to the 
development of effective traded markets. Craig 
Pirrong has observed that “expensive, durable 
investments in specialised capital [projects] are 
completely compatible with spot market pricing 
complemented by market risk transfer mechanisms. 
In essence, liquid markets create security of supply 
and security of demand3”.
3 Fifty Years of Global LNG, Craig Pirrong, 2014
Section
Chapter
42
B. How Commodity Trading Works
6. Transporting commodities: transformation in space

< TRANSPORTING GAS
VESSEL
vs
PIPELINE
Source: World Gas and Renewables Review 2018, Vol 2, ENI
GLOBAL LNG SHARE OF TRADED GAS
Vessel
Pipeline
21.53%
78.47%
22.52%
77.48%
30.24%
69.74%
31.92%
68.08%
30.56%
69.44%
30.42%
69.58%
31.83%
68.17%
31.25%
68.75%
31.77%
68.23%
32.92%
67.08%
2000
2005
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Bitumen markets
Not too long ago, the bitumen trade was regarded 
as a regional business. The specialised ships required 
to transport the product tended to be relatively small, 
making it difficult to achieve the economies of scale 
needed to make global trade worthwhile. In recent 
years, however, this has started to change. 
Bitumen shipping and trading go hand in hand, 
because the ship is needed to make the trade. And 
bitumen carriers are highly specialised, built with 
containers that continually heat the bitumen at 
150°C so it does not solidify. 
Puma Energy’s bitumen carriers are some of the 
largest in the world. Weighing in at 30,000 tonnes 
each and 40 percent more fuel-efficient than their 
traditional counterparts, these kinds of ships are 
helping to globalise the market. They can transport 
bitumen from the US Gulf to Australia and back again 
without having to stop to refuel. 
Budgets for road construction and maintenance 
– which account for about 85 percent of bitumen 
use globally – are largely tied to government spending. 
Public investment has been lacking since the 2008 
financial crisis in the developed world, but China and 
countries in Africa are major growth markets. 
43

Chapter 7
STORING COMMODITIES: 
TRANSFORMATION  
IN TIME
With inelastic supply and demand in commodity markets, supply and 
demand shocks have the potential to create volatile market conditions. 
Trading firms store commodities to help bridge this gap and keep 
markets in balance. They own and control midstream infrastructure and 
maintain large inventories at strategic locations around the globe. 
Traders earn profits over time by reducing stocks when there is excess 
demand and building up inventory when there is excess supply.
Why trading firms invest in  
midstream infrastructure 
Commodity traders consider the full control of 
midstream facilities that comes with outright 
ownership vital to their trading business. All major 
commodity traders own midstream infrastructure, 
including loading and offloading terminals at ports, 
and storage and blending facilities, which are also 
usually at ports. 
There are considerable positive synergies between 
their core trading function and ownership of this kind 
of logistical infrastructure. 
Temporal specificity 
The economic concept of temporal specificity helps 
to explain why midstream infrastructure is 
strategically important. 
A strike at a mine, political unrest, unseasonal 
temperatures – supply and demand shocks 
in commodity markets can have many different 
causes, and they can occur at any time. What is 
more, both supply and demand are price inelastic. 
Producers cannot easily open or close mines or 
wells; for consumers, commodities are typically 
seen as necessities. 
These conditions can make for highly volatile 
markets. Commodity storage plays a vital 
economic role by helping to dampen 
volatility and bring markets back into 
balance. Market participants can offset 
the effect of market shocks by adjusting 
inventory levels. When demand exceeds 
supply they reduce storage levels. In 
oversupplied markets they can bolster underlying 
demand by increasing inventories. 
Traders want to 
control fixed assets 
to be able to move 
commodities swiftly 
when market 
conditions dictate
Section
Chapter
44
B. How Commodity Trading Works
7. Storing commodities: transformation in time

Trading firms facilitate the process. They earn 
arbitrage profits by releasing or increasing inventories 
while simultaneously creating offsetting positions in 
futures markets.
Trading firms gain a competitive advantage by 
maintaining inventories their own facilities. Arbitrage 
opportunities are, by definition, transient. The cost 
of even a short delay in obtaining goods can be 
considerable. Firms that store their commodities in 
a facility they do not own or control risk not being 
able to exploit such opportunities. 
To execute arbitrage successfully, traders need 
instant access to their assets. Knowing this, facility 
owners may try to charge premium rates by, for 
example instituting delivery delays and enforcing an 
artificially high price for an ‘express’ service. Such 
hold-ups don’t occur if the firm executing the 
arbitrage also owns the storage facility.
As markets become more transparent, arbitrage 
opportunities are increasingly transient. The more 
acute this temporal specificity becomes the greater 
the incentive to invest in midstream infrastructure.
Traders do not face the same risks with floating 
storage facilities. Most commodity traders own 
terminals and storage facilities, but very few have 
their own bulk carriers or tanker fleets. The owners 
of fixed logistic assets face little competition. There 
is little to stop them holding up delivery. However, 
bulk ships and tankers are mobile. If a ship owner 
tried to delay delivery the charterer would simply 
take their business to a competitor. 
Adding value though logistics
As commodity producers have got better access to 
price information and become more sophisticated 
at marketing their products, the profit margin on 
pure trading activities has declined. Trading firms 
increasingly need to add value by offering integrated 
logistical services for their customers. They are better 
equipped to do that if they invest in 
infrastructure. 
Global trading firms with substantial 
throughput are best placed. Trading firms 
that control a substantial fraction of the 
assets at a particular midstream facility 
benefit from the advantages of scale. 
Being able to deliver more efficiently gives 
them a competitive edge in the region. 
Security and optionality
Control of midstream infrastructure also gives traders 
security of supply. This enhances their strategic 
flexibility and improves their ability to deliver globally 
at times that suit their customers. 
Partnerships and trading relationships 
Infrastructure to make exports more competitive is 
welcome in many economies, especially in those that 
do not have the resources or the expertise to do this 
themselves. This kind of investment unlocks new 
markets and opens doors to new suppliers. 
Trafigura subsidiary Impala Terminals’ investment, 
along with Mubadala, at Porto Sudeste in Brazil offers 
smaller independent iron ore miners an export outlet. 
It is also a platform for the company to develop new 
relationships in the region. Its river infrastructure 
programme is strategically vital for Colombia. Its 
involvement is generating goodwill in the country 
and helping it forge crucial long-term partnerships 
with private and public sector concerns.
Ownership and control
All of these factors help to explain the increased asset 
intensity of trading firms in recent years. It also raises 
a question: if midstream infrastructure assets are so 
valuable, why do commodity trading firms sometimes 
choose to sell them? 
It partly comes down to culture. Trading firms 
exist to service the need of producers and consumers 
as such they buy and sell opportunistically. That 
extends to fixed assets, especially when there is a 
capital gain that outweighs the trading advantage 
of holding onto the asset. 
It is also strategic. Unlike Glencore and Noble, the 
four big private commodity trading firms, Vitol, 
Gunvor, Mercuria and Trafigura, cannot raise equity 
finance on stock markets. They need regular capital 
infusions to build up their balance sheets or make 
further infrastructure investments. Asset sales can 
be an important cash-raising tool.
And it is important to remember too that control 
does not necessarily require ownership. A good 
illustration is Trafigura's construction, then partial 
sale, of an oil storage and export facility at Corpus 
Christi, Texas (see page 54). The company sold a 
majority stake to a specialist operator in 2015, but 
before doing so it made sure it retained the rights to 
all future production.
Trading firms 
benefit more from 
investing in 
midstream assets 
where they have 
substantial 
throughput 
45

Impala Terminals 
Trafigura’s wholly owned logistics and 
infrastructure industrial investment Impala 
Terminals manages the group’s metals and  
minerals infrastructure assets. It designs, builds, 
owns and creates multimodal logistics chains that 
link inland ports and deep sea terminals across 
many countries globally.
It has three main areas of operation – South 
America, Africa and the US. 
In Peru, it has expanded a warehousing and 
blending facility at Callao, the country’s main 
commercial port, into one of the country’s largest 
sites for copper, zinc and lead concentrates. In 
Colombia, it is helping to create multimodal (barge, 
truck and rail) transportation across the country. 
The Magdalena river project, once completed, 
will handle 1.5m tonnes of cargo a year. In Brazil, 
Impala’s $2bn joint venture investment with 
Mubadala, the UAE sovereign wealth fund, to 
operate a new port facility at Porto Sudeste is 
giving smaller independent miners a cheaper and 
more convenient outlet to world markets. 
In Africa, Impala is getting copper concentrates 
out of the central copper belt of the DRC and 
Zambia by road and rail to the key southern African 
ports for export. 
In Louisiana, US, Impala has bought and 
expanded the Burnside terminal. It is now the only 
terminal on the Mississippi big enough to load coal, 
bauxite and aluminium between barges and 
ocean-going vessels, and in the future, directly to 
and from rail cars.
Contango and backwardation 
A trader can buy a commodity for delivery on a date 
in the future in one of two ways. He could either 
borrow money now to buy the commodity today, 
and store it until the desired delivery date 
(at which point he repays the borrowing) or he could 
buy a commodity futures contract. 
Since these are different ways of achieving the 
same objective, their relative costs are connected. 
Prices in commodity spot and futures markets are 
linked by arbitrage. When one purchase method 
becomes relatively cheap, traders can arbitrage the 
price differential. They buy in the cheaper market 
while simultaneously selling in the more expensive 
market. This adjusts supply and demand, and 
therefore relative pricing, in the two markets. 
But there are also times when, for technical 
reasons, the markets can move apart. When futures 
prices drift higher than spot prices, markets move 
into contango. The opposite situation, when futures 
Global storage for oil  
and petroleum products
Trafigura stores petroleum products on land and in 
floating storage at strategic facilities around the 
globe at third-party owned terminals, and with its 
midstream and distribution partner Puma Energy. 
Independent audits and regular due diligence 
ensure that all storage facilities meet international 
best practice standards. 
Puma Energy manages close to 8 million m3 of 
storage at modern facilities at over 49 countries 
across the Americas, Europe, Africa, the Middle East 
and Asia-Pacific. These are strategically placed at 
global energy hubs and locations with strong 
multimodal transport links. 
Puma Energy handles many different products, 
including crude, fuel oil, clean refined products, 
bitumen, LPG and petrochemicals. Its high-volume 
bulk-building and bulk-breaking services allow 
traders to split or combine products for resale. It 
also provides access to infrastructure with rail, 
truck, pipeline and discharging services.
fall below the current spot price, is known as 
backwardation.
The period starting in mid-2014 was one of 
extreme volatility in crude. The oil price collapsed 
from over $100 per barrel in June to less than $50 
at the end of the year. And the market moved into 
a contango pricing structure. 
Traders were incentivised to buy physical oil 
in the spot market and increase storage levels. 
In doing this, they were also helping to balance 
supply and demand. 
All the leading traders sought to make the most 
of the situation by taking on additional storage 
capacity. As most of the world's available on-land 
storage tanks filled up, some fixed long leases on 
supertankers to store surplus oil on the high seas for 
periods of up to 15 months. This practice was last 
seen when oil demand collapsed during the 2008 
financial crisis. 
Section
Chapter
46
B. How Commodity Trading Works
7. Storing commodities: transformation in time

Source: Trafigura research, 2017
Source: http://www.tradingeconomics.com/commodity/brent-crude-oil
 BRENT CRUDE OIL SPOT PRICE: MAY 2014 - MARCH 2019
BRENT FUTURES CURVES: MAY 2014 - MAY 2016 
$/barrel
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Mar-19
May-18
May-17
May-16
Nov-15
May-15
May-14
The Brent futures curve moved from 
backwardation in May 2014 to contango in 
May 2015 to super-contango in November 
2015 and back to contango in May 2016
Months to delivery
-15
-12
-9
-6
-3
0
3
6
9
12
15
May-16
Nov-15
May-15
May-14
1
10
20
30
36
$ premium/discount to 
Brent spot rate
47

Chapter 8
BLENDING 
COMMODITIES: 
TRANSFORMATION  
IN FORM
Since commodity producers derive their product from the ground, its 
quality and characteristics are variable. To be fit for purpose, physical 
commodities need to be matched to customer specifications.
Traders and intermediaries bridge the quality gap by 
blending commodities from multiple sources to make 
products that match customer requirements. They 
earn profits by identifying and exploiting market 
inefficiencies in the price / quality relationships 
between different shipments of a physical commodity.
Suppliers provide products that at least meet the 
customer specification, but the complexity of the 
refining process is such that to do this they will 
sometimes present an over-specified product. Traders 
and intermediaries use blending to optimise 
shipments so they can meet customer specifications 
at a competitive price.
Strategic infrastructure
In metals and minerals markets, traders often 
combine materials from two or more mines to create 
commodities with the desired qualities synthetically. 
In concentrates markets – copper in particular but 
also zinc, lead and other metals – they use blending 
techniques to reduce the levels of arsenic, 
phosphorous and other unwanted materials in 
shipments in return for a higher price. In iron ore and 
coal markets, blending is primarily a mechanism for 
enhancing profitability. 
Traders need to be able to store products from 
multiple sources at a strategic location where there 
is the capability to blend at scale. They could in 
theory rent such facilities from third parties, but most 
prefer to control or own their own infrastructure. 
Transaction economics and the concept of temporal 
specificity shed light on the reason for this.
Arbitrage opportunities are fleeting. If a change 
in relative pricing between two grades of a commodity 
creates a blending opportunity the trader must be 
able to react swiftly to exploit that. If its product is 
held in a third-party owned facility the trader's 
interests may not be prioritised. There is a risk that 
the third party may even use the situation to extract 
premium rates. 
Section
Chapter
48
B. How Commodity Trading Works
8. Blending commodities: transformation in form

SELL 
TO CHINESE SMELTER
BLEND 
AT TERMINAL
Blending in copper markets
Chinese copper consumption has grown markedly 
since 2000. In 2002, China had already overtaken 
the US to become the world’s largest copper 
consumer. By 2014, it was consuming 8.7 million 
metric tonnes of refined copper products, 40 percent 
of global demand. 
China processes increasing amounts of its copper 
domestically; it accounts for over a third of global 
smelter production. But with few exploitable 
reserves domestically, it has to source most of its 
copper overseas. 
The quality of concentrate available has suffered 
with the growth in demand. As existing mines get 
depleted, smelters are more reliant on new, sometimes 
arsenic-rich, sites for their concentrate. The 
Toromocho mine in Peru, which came on stream in 
2014, and Codelco’s Ministro Hales project in 
northern Chile, which began production in 2015, are 
significant new sources of copper supply. Both 
produce concentrate with high arsenic content: 
1 percent at Toromocho and around 4 percent at 
Ministro Hales.
These new flows of arsenic-rich copper concentrate 
present fresh challenges for the industry. Concentrate 
containing arsenic poses health and safety risks for 
smelters and China insists on a maximum 0.5 percent 
arsenic content for imports. Although processing 
techniques such as oxidisation can reduce arsenic 
content, these are costly and they also affect copper 
levels. For instance, processing at Toromocho which 
reduces arsenic from 1 percent to 0.7 percent, also 
cuts the copper grade in the concentrate 
from 26 percent to around 22 percent. 
Another solution is to blend the 
concentrate. Mines producing arsenic- 
rich concentrate sell at a discount to 
trading firms, like Trafigura, which also 
have access to cleaner stocks. The traders then blend 
the material with cleaner concentrates before selling 
on to smelters.
Low-quality concentrate requires larger inventories 
and more extensive processing. This is reflected in 
the price. The premiums payable on cleaner 
concentrates vary according to market conditions.
Blending coal for power plants
The rationale for blending coal is purely economic. 
Trading firms source products from multiple locations 
and blend to meet customer specifications in the 
most cost-effective way possible. Utilities running 
coal-fired power plants are important customers. 
Japanese and Korean plants have more exacting 
quality requirements. They typically negotiate long-
term contracts, often direct with producers, to secure 
consistent quality product. 
BUY
COPPER CONCENTRATE 
FROM MINISTRO HALES
 BLENDING PRODUCT TO CHINESE SPECIFICATION 
+
=
ARSENIC
CONTENT
4%
ARSENIC
CONTENT
0.5%
Blending 
concentrates 
reduces toxicity 
7  
'CLEAN'
CONCENTRATE 
UNITS 
49

Power plants in China, which face less exacting 
environmental standards and stretching demand 
conditions, are often more flexible about the grades 
of coal they use. They are also active in spot markets 
and prepared to deal with multiple suppliers. Global 
trading firms sell direct or via intermediaries. They 
blend coal from different sources to supply the right 
quality product as cost-effectively as possible.
Iron ore and steel mills
The steel industry is a major source of demand for 
coal and iron ore. Its market dynamics differ from 
the utility business in one key respect: demand is 
much more volatile. 
Historically, steel mills maintained large iron ore 
inventories, allowing them to respond rapidly to 
shifting demand conditions. But in recent years, as 
it has become more difficult for the steel mills to 
obtain credit, inventories have shrunk from 40 to 10 
days. The mills increasingly rely on steel 
sales to generate cashflow and have 
outsourced storage to trading firms. 
Their lack of inventory contributes to 
a see-sawing iron ore price. Rather than 
consuming iron ore and coal at a constant 
rate, the mills ramp up production when pricing is 
advantageous and slow it down as steel demand falls. 
Trading firms maintain large stocks and supply 
the mills according to need. They buy ore with 
different purity levels from various suppliers and 
blend it according to customer demand.
Iron ore can be supplied as lumps or in a fine-
ground powder (fines) at various grades of purity. 
Mills pay a premium for high-quality lump ore as it 
can be charged directly into the blast furnace. Fines 
first have to be agglomerated into lumps, in a process 
known as sintering, to prevent it smothering the 
furnace. Lower grade ores must go through a series 
of processes before they can be used to make pig 
iron and ultimately steel.
Market forces dictate spreads between lumps and 
fines and for the different grades. Trading firms blend 
accordingly to maximise their margins, aiming to 
source the most economic and supply the most 
popular grades by adjusting combinations of lumps 
and fines. This is a scale business, which is most 
profitable for firms with access to blending terminals 
and multiple sources of supply.
Most traders have cornerstone contracts with key 
customers for the bulk of the ore they supply. They 
build up inventories comprising different grades and 
types of ore to meet their requirements and will 
supplement this by trading on spot markets with 
intermediaries and other steel mills. 
Crude oil benchmarks and characteristics
In its natural, unrefined state, crude oil ranges in 
density and consistency, from a very thin, lightweight 
fluid to a thick, semi-solid oil. There is tremendous 
variation in colour, from golden yellow to very dark 
black. The viscosity, toxicity and volatility (i.e. 
tendency to evaporate) of oils determine how they 
can be used and transported. 
Key measurements for crude include American 
Petroleum Institute (API) gravity (inversely related 
to density) and sulphur content (low sulphur grades, 
known as sweet, are less toxic).
Grades are described by location and specified in 
detail. Benchmark grades are used as pricing indices 
and for hedging.
With over 160 tradeable crude oil products, many 
different refined products and numerous end-users 
with highly specific requirements, blending 
opportunities abound in oil markets.
Steel mills have 
outsourced storage 
to trading firms 
Section
Chapter
50
B. How Commodity Trading Works
8. Blending commodities: transformation in form

 THREE BENCHMARK CRUDES
 CRUDE OIL BENCHMARKS AND
 CHARACTERISTICS
CHARACTERISTICS
UNITS
VALUES
Gravity
ºAPI
>31.1 = light
22.3-31.1 = medium
10-22.3 = heavy
<10 = extra-heavy
Sulphur
WT %
<.5% of mass = sweet 
>1% of mass = sour
Kinematic viscosity 
at 40º C
CST
Varies from light-liquid to 
tar-like, nearly solid
Vanadium
ppm
Useful for classification
Neutralisation 
number
Mg 
KOH/gr
Measure of acidity
Pour point
ºC
Temperature at which a 
liquid becomes semi-solid 
and loses its flow  
characteristics
232.2° C -  
343.3° C
343.3° C -  
426.6° C
157.2° C -  
232.2° C
104.4° C -  
157.2° C
32.2° C -  
104.4° C
 MAIN PETROLEUM PRODUCTS BY DISTILLATION TEMPERATURE
Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas 
Propane
Butane 
Gasoline
Regular gasoline
Premium gasoline
Unleaded 
Premium 
Jet Fuel
Jet A1
Diesel fuel
Home-heating 
fuel
Heavy fuel oil
Normal (4%)
Low sulphur 
content (2%) 
Very low sulphur 
content (1%)
Bitumen
Naphthas 
(petrochemicals) 
Special gasolines 
 White spirit 
 Aviation gasoline
Other 
products
Kerosene 
Light marine 
Diesel
Special fuel oils
Coke
Lubricant base 
stocks 
Paraffins - waxes
426.6°+ C
< 32.2° C
10
20
30
40
50
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
4.0%
Heavy
API Gravity
Light
Sweet
Sulphur content
Sour
Source: Industry reports
West Texas 
Intermediate  
API gravity 39.06,  
sulphur 0.24%
Brent  
API gravity 38.06, 
sulphur 0.37%
Dubai  
API gravity 31, 
sulphur 2%
Source: US Energy Information Administration and IFP
51

Blending oil products
There is no set mechanism for blending. Traders own 
or lease storage or pipeline capacity. They work with 
partners, including the refiners themselves, to modify 
the gasoline blend so that it corresponds closely to 
pockets of demand. They may sell components for 
the fuel to the end-user themselves.
Traders often make synthetic grades 
of crude by blending sourced grades. In 
the Mediterranean, the segregation of 
Basrah crude into light and heavy blends 
has resulted in traders blending heavy 
Basrah with light crude oils to arrive at a 
proxy for the Urals grade. In Louisiana, with precious 
little virgin Light Louisiana Sweet (LLS) crude 
remaining, but with many local plants set up to take 
it, traders have been blending crudes sourced 
elsewhere to make cocktails for the refiners. While 
most blending takes place at energy hubs that enjoy 
strong connectivity with energy transportation 
routes – a typical hub would be near leasable tankage 
and have ocean trade routes accessible – blending 
happens at every stage in the supply chain. It occurs 
at the refiner, at terminals near the plant, at terminals 
near points of consumption and at various points 
along the way.
Sometimes traders do the blending themselves. 
For example, the trader may be able to buy discounted 
barrels from a refiner who is producing too much 
summer-grade gasoline as winter approaches. By 
adding in butane he can create a more cost-effective 
fuel that meets the winter-grade specification. 
On other occasions, knowledge of blending 
requirements informs trading opportunities. Heavy 
and extra-heavy crudes need to be blended with 
light crudes to reduce viscosity and improve 
pipeline transmission. This is typically done at source 
by the producer.
This happens in Canada and also in Colombia 
where state-run producers keen to export their 
diluted crude oil (DCO). To do that it needs to obtain 
naphtha and light crude that can serve as diluent. 
This is a costly and logistically complex exercise, but 
it is willing to engage in this trading to get its supplies 
to major market centres. Traders and intermediaries 
get to participate in the supply of the diluent.
Similarly, downstream, with ethanol and 
biodiesel, two mandatory fuel mix products for US 
gasoline and diesel products, distributors do the 
blending. Traders get to participate by selling them 
the required renewables.
Refiners and optimisation
Plants are constantly optimising their throughput 
processes based on feedstock costs, most profitable 
yields, operational issues and availability. In the US, 
it is common for plants to blend shale oil with heavy 
crude barrels. In the Far East, plants optimise their 
inputs by blending fuel oils with crude when fuel oil 
gets very cheap. Traders are continually looking to 
identify shortages in particular components at 
specific locations so they can source and sell these 
to the refiners.
Blending is widely used to transform 
residual fuel streams that come out of 
refinery units into products for end-users. 
Supplies coming from refineries vary in 
quality due to differences in refining unit 
configuration and feedstock choices. Fuels have to 
meet different regulatory standards depending on 
the use of the product (the quality requirements for 
fuel used for vessels, for instance, differ from those 
at power plants) and they vary across regions. 
Blending is often the cheapest way to bridge the gap 
between demand and supply.
The rise of the super refineries
The rise of the super refinery is changing the dynamics 
of international oil trading. 
Refinery operations are increasingly consolidating 
into regional mega-hubs. The world’s twenty largest 
(often newly-built) super refineries today are located 
in Asia (nine), the US (five), the Middle East (four), 
Latin America (one) and Europe (one). 
Super refineries benefit from economies of scale. 
They have the capacity to meet growing demand 
needs and the flexibility to handle up to 50 types of 
crude oil.
Smaller refineries across the developed world 
– which historically refined its crude locally – 
are closing in many countries, including in 
Australia, Canada and the UK. Former refineries 
are being repurposed. For example, in 2015 
Puma Energy acquired a refinery in the UK, which it 
has converted into a terminal and storage 
facility for refined products.
Modern refineries are better equipped 
to produce a wider range of refined 
products as well as meeting more 
stringent environmental requirements, for 
instance on sulphur. Local oil markets 
today need to be connected to these global super 
refineries. But with fewer refineries available they 
can be thousands of miles away from the ultimate 
market for the refined product.
Traders blend crudes 
to make synthetic 
grades for their 
customers
They blend  
residual fuel  
streams to make 
viable products  
for end-users
Super refineries have 
more throughput, 
accept more types  
of feedstock and 
make more  
diverse products 
Section
Chapter
52
B. How Commodity Trading Works
8. Blending commodities: transformation in form

Products need to be shipped reliably and safely 
over large distances. Efficient hub-and-spoke refinery 
network and global operations offer great flexibility, 
and are highly responsive to changes in demand, 
supply shocks and other market adjustments. 
Transportation and storage are increasingly 
pivotal in today’s global oil market, but blending still 
plays an important role. With the emergence of the 
super refineries, more blending opportunities have 
opened up as plants gain the ability to accept a wider 
range of input. 
The great gasoline giveaway
Refiners try to manipulate ingredients to meet 
market specifications, but they cannot always achieve 
this precisely. Depending on the ingredients available 
and the processes they employ they may arrive at 
an over- or under-specified blend. For the refiner, it 
may make economic sense to deliver an over-
specified blend. It could be that there is a shortage 
of raw materials or perhaps the complexity of 
optimisation outweighs its economic benefits.
Even so, these are market inefficiencies and they 
create profitable opportunities for traders and other 
intermediaries. In oil trading parlance these sub-
optimal blends are known as "giveaways". By 
modifying such blends with other ingredients traders 
are able to supply products that meet market 
specifications more precisely and more 
cost-effectively. 
Giveaways erode refiner margins. 
A 150,000 barrels-per-day refinery may 
forego anything up to $30 million annually 
in giveaways on gasoline, distillate and 
heavy oil sales. For gasoline blending, refiners 
often focus on minimising octane giveaways. 
Other dimensions of giveaways can be more complex 
to manage. 
Volatility in fuel fluctuates according to altitude 
and ambient temperature. Far more than in, say, 
Europe, the US caters for these fluctuations by 
allowing states or regions to specify particular blends 
to reflect climatic differences; not only seasonal, but 
also geographic, such as between the low-lying sub-
tropical Gulf, the high plains near the Rockies, and 
California's Mediterrean-type climate. A refiner 
producing gasoline for multiple US states may have 
to make blends with several different volatilities and 
change the volatility from month to month.
Not surprisingly, given the amount of capital 
involved, optimisation is going on all the time. It is 
not always a case of the traders physically combining 
elements themselves but the aim is always the same: 
to develop a product that meets the specification 
more precisely and therefore more cost-effectively. 
Balkanisation and US gasoline markets
Most of us don’t think twice about the fuel we put 
into our cars, but the convenience of the local service 
station and the ubiquity of this seemingly simple 
product belie the complexity of the markets and 
processes required to deliver it.
It is a common misconception to think of gasoline 
simply as an oil product derived from crude oil 
through the refining process. While straight-run 
gasoline, also called naphtha, is distilled directly from 
crude, gasoline as a product is far more complex. 
The product specification varies according to 
where it is consumed, by whom and for what purpose. 
At the top level, refiners make at least two versions. 
Regular gasoline is blended for standard vehicles. 
Premium grade gasoline is blended for high-
performance vehicles with high-compression engines 
that require high-octane fuel to operate at peak 
efficiency. 
In the US there is a proliferation of standards. 
Several states have regional regulatory requirements. 
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) enforces 
strict environmental controls. Unique fuel regulations 
have created gasoline zones across the country where 
only certain fuels can be sold. This balkanisation of 
the US fuel supply has made it more 
expensive to produce and deliver fuel, but 
it also creates trading opportunities.
Gasoline is a blend of 15 to 20 different 
components. The aim is to produce a 
clean-burning, energy-efficient, cost-
effective grade with low toxicity levels. Achieving 
the 
right 
combination 
is 
a 
complex 
process. Often, adding one ingredient strengthens 
one attribute at the expense of other 
desired characteristics.
Butane for instance is a relatively cheap fuel with 
good burning properties. Gasoline with more butane 
is cheaper to produce and has higher octane levels, 
but butane’s high Reid vapour pressure (RVP) makes 
it prone to rapid evaporation. That limits the extent 
to which it can be incorporated into blends.
Volatility – a gasoline’s tendency to vaporise – is 
the key gasoline characteristic for good driveability. 
Liquids and solids don’t burn; vapours do. Gasoline 
has to vaporise before it can ignite in an engine’s 
combustion chamber. In cold conditions, gasoline 
that vaporises easily helps a cold engine start quickly 
and warm up smoothly. Warm-weather gasoline is 
blended to vaporise less easily to prevent fuel 
Gasoline giveaways 
are profitable for 
traders
There are different 
fuels in different US 
states at different 
times of the year
53

Refiners make BOBs 
that are ready for 
blending
handling problems and control evaporative emissions 
that contribute to air pollution.
Refiners therefore produce blends with lower 
RVPs for use in warmer regions. Gasolines with higher 
RVPs are more suitable for colder climates. 
The US maintains different RVP standards for 
summer and winter to reflect temperature-related 
changes in performance. 
Summer-grade gasoline typically contains just 
2 percent butane. It costs refiners several cents more 
per gallon to produce than the winter-grade gasoline, 
which may contain up to 3.5 percent butane.
As the science has developed, new environmental 
standards have emerged. In the 1980s, scientists 
discovered that adding certain oxygenate compounds, 
including methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) and 
ethanol, made gasoline an easier-to-burn product 
with reduced polluting output. MTBE has since been 
withdrawn, because of other polluting effects, but 
ethanol is widely used. This oxygenated blend is 
known as reformulated gasoline (RFG). 
Environmental legislation in the US requires all 
gasoline to be blended with ethanol or some other 
non-fossil component before it can be sold to 
customers. The Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) has set a 5.9 percent legal minimum level of 
ethanol. Some states have imposed a 10 percent legal 
minimum. Reformulated gasoline is now mandatory 
in many parts of the US, particularly in urban areas 
prone to smog. 
But ethanol has a problem: it attracts water. When 
gasoline mixed with ethanol is pushed through steel 
pipelines or plumbing at oil refineries they become 
much more prone to corrosion. For this reason, 
ethanol blending normally happens at or 
near the point of consumption.
US refiners therefore produce a type 
of gasoline ready for blending with ethanol 
on delivery. CBOB (Conventional 
blendstock for oxygenated blending) and RBOB 
(reformulated blendstock) are the two base gasoline 
stocks. On the adjacent map, all of the colour-coded 
areas require different formulations based on RBOB. 
The white areas use CBOB as the base stock. Other 
BOBs include EuroBOB (refined in Europe for use on 
the US east coast) and CARBOB (a special RBOB 
formula mandated by the state of California). 
The complex nature of the US market creates 
many opportunities for gasoline traders. Operating 
profitably in these markets requires a multi-
disciplinary approach. A successful gasoline trader is 
part-chemist, part-distributor, part-salesperson and 
part-logistics expert. 
Opportunity and optionality at Corpus Christi 
In 2011, Trafigura identified an opportunity at 
Corpus Christi in Texas to provide a faster, cheaper 
outlet than the often congested port of Houston 
for the output of the Eagle Ford shale formation. In 
seizing the opportunity, Trafigura transformed its 
role in the US energy markets from importing 
African crude to handling sizeable quantities of 
domestic crude and exporting naphtha and LPG. 
Trafigura bought out Texas Dock and Rail which 
had a ready-made deep water dock that could 
accommodate big tankers as well as a tank farm. 
The latter particularly needed expanding as the 
highly variable output of Eagle Ford called for a 
terminal with blending facilities. Over the next 
three years, Trafigura invested in a pipeline system 
from Eagle Ford to Corpus Christi, and planned 
two ‘splitter’ mini-refineries, producing refined 
product for export. 
Control of this infrastructure gives Trafigura a 
lot of optionality. It can choose to send crude to its 
splitters and then export the product. It can sell 
crude into foreign markets. It can also sell it 
regionally to be blended with Light Louisiana Sweet. 
And it can export naphtha to Asia, Latin America 
and Europe where this is a popular feedstock. 
This optionality – beloved of commodity 
traders because it enables them to make 
opportunistic arbitrage trades – was preserved  
in 2014 when Trafigura sold 80 percent of its 
Corpus Christi operation to Buckeye Partners for 
$860 million. Trafigura retained a 20 percent  
stake and commercial rights to 100 percent  
of the throughput.
Section
Chapter
54
B. How Commodity Trading Works
8. Blending commodities: transformation in form

 US GASOLINE REQUIREMENTS VARY BOTH REGIONALLY AND SEASONALLY
California
Oxygenated Fuels
CA RFG
CA OXY RFG
AZ CBG
Oxy Fuels/7.8 Summer RVP
Oxy Fuels/7.0 Summer RVP
Conventional
vCHI/MIL RFG w/Ethanol
N RFG w/Ethanol
S RFG w/Ethanol
7.0 Summer RVP
7.8 Summer RVP
7.8 Summer RVP No 1 psi EtOH Allowance
Conv, No 1 psi EtOH Allowance
Source: ExxonMobil, June, 2015. 
This map is not intended to provide legal advice or to be used as guidance for state and / or federal fuel requirements, including but not limited 
to oxy fuel or RFG compliance requirements. ExxonMobil makes no representations or warranties, express or otherwise, as to the accuracy or 
completeness of this map.
55

Chapter 9
DELIVERING 
COMMODITIES:  
MEETING CUSTOMER 
SPECIFICATIONS 
As markets become more efficient, commodity trading is evolving  
into a low-margin service business. Increasingly, traders make their  
living by providing a solidly reliable logistics service between producer 
and consumer.
There is growing emphasis on service in the 
commodity industry. With more intense competition 
and better information, markets are more transparent, 
margins thinner and arbitrage opportunities more 
fleeting. The most successful trading firms are 
focusing on producer and end-user priorities. 
In an industry governed by economies of scale 
and close trading relationships, there is space for 
niche players that cater to specialist markets and 
regions, and for larger global trading firms that 
can afford to invest in logistics and infrastructure 
that benefit their customers. Market conditions 
are much more challenging for medium-sized 
trading firms.
The customers for commodity trading 
firms are often strategic organisations in 
their respective economies, such as 
government agencies, energy-intensive 
manufacturers and utilities. Any disruption in their 
supply chains can have far-reaching consequences.
Reliability is fundamental. If a trading firm wants 
to forge strong trading relationships, it has to be able 
to deliver commodities on spec and on time, every 
time. If it is supplying coal to a power generating 
company, for instance, it needs to deliver its cargo 
in the right volumes, at the right quality, at the agreed 
time and at the agreed place. Should it fail to deliver, 
there is a high price for the end-user, with the risk of 
power outages and even popular unrest.
This is a low-margin business. Trading firms 
typically earn 3 percent or less on a given transaction. 
Given the cost of transportation, insurance and the 
operational risks they take on, this is by no means 
excessive. The trading firms that deliver service 
most efficiently will gain a competitive advantage.
The trading firm’s role is far broader 
than that of a mere broker. It justifies its 
involvement by the high level of service 
it provides to commodity producer and 
consumer alike. Ensuring execution 
progresses smoothly and within 
budgeted parameters is therefore 
critical to business profitability.
Like any other multinational business, commodity 
traders may be operating in places that are blighted 
by geopolitical division, subject to international 
political sanctions, and prone to corruption and 
money laundering. 
Key tenets for 
successful delivery
Trading firms rely on 
high-quality 
operations to 
execute 
transactions 
profitably
Section
Chapter
56
B. How Commodity Trading Works
9. Delivering commodities: meeting customer specifications

While most commodity consumers are in 
industrialised nations and emerging economies, 
mines and wells are scattered across the globe. They 
are usually located away from major urban areas, 
often in developing economies. Trading firms may 
need to create, supplement or enhance local 
infrastructure to make transportation affordable. 
Commodity trades span the globe. They can 
involve counterparties that may not know each other, 
let alone trust each other. One way that trading firms 
add value is by building up trusting relationships with 
their counterparties. They set up detailed protocols 
for trading and delivery to minimise risk and maximise 
certainty. These need to be followed to the letter. 
Large trading firms manage significant numbers 
of transactions. They must consider all aspects of 
operational risk, put systems in place, take out 
insurance and audit the delivery process. A company 
like Trafigura takes on more than 2,000 ship voyages 
a year. The sheer volume of activity makes it hard to 
monitor each and every risk on a given flow of 
business without a clear system and well-understood, 
carefully thought through procedures. 
Commodity trading firms employ a 
relatively small number of people to 
handle numerous high-volume, high-
value transactions. They put protocols in 
place to supervise and monitor processes 
so they can identify and pre-empt any 
problems or issues that may arise.
Once the trader concludes the deal, 
he hands the execution to an operator. The operator 
coordinates logistics to make sure all the right 
resources are in place for the right dates. That means 
working with the contracts department and the 
shipping department, appointing inspectors to 
measure the quantity and quality of what’s in the 
tanker, appointing vessel brokers and agents, dealing 
with those responsible for loading and discharge, the 
terminal operator and, of course, maintaining 
relations with the customer. The operator also has 
to keep the deals desk up to date with any information 
that could affect hedging strategy or the profitability 
of the trade.
Operations teams focus in depth on cargo 
certification. They assess whether the quantity and 
quality of the cargo needs to be certified by an 
independent inspector. This may be specified as a 
requirement in an accompanying letter of credit. 
Trading firms will normally appoint agents to act as 
their representatives, certify cargo and manage 
delivery of shipments.
They appoint 
specialists and 
independent 
inspectors to 
manage processes 
on the ground
They strengthen 
supply chains by 
supporting their 
customers
Joint ventures
Financial support
Technical support
Long-term supply contracts
2
3
4
5
Downstream integration
1
WAYS COMMODITY TRADING FIRMS SECURE 
RELIABLE CONSUMPTION OUTLETS
All documentation needs to be accurate and up 
to date. The firm’s trade finance department ensures 
that the documents accompanying a letter of credit 
are in order. Before the ship carrying its cargo can 
embark its master needs to sign a bill of lading, a 
standard form document that confirms the title 
holder of a cargo shipment and obliges the carrier to 
release it to them on arrival at the destination port. 
Insurance provision needs to be in place.
It takes great care and skill to execute deals 
precisely, managing continuing operational risks 
while preserving corporate reputations. Companies 
not disciplined enough to fulfil their various 
obligations and responsibilities may find themselves 
taking on large risk exposures quite unintentionally.
As competition has intensified, 
alliances between trading firms and other 
market participants – based on shared 
interests, complementary capabilities 
and mutual benefit – have become 
increasingly common.
For consumers, long-term arrangements increase 
certainty and reduce volatility. The trading firms gain 
from having consistency of supply.
57

US
A
Pol
an
d
Ge
rm
an
y
S. 
Ko
rea
Za
mb
ia
Ind
ia
Rus
sia
Chi
le
Jap
an
Chi
na
2.
71
%
2.
75
%
3.
04
%
3.
18
%
4.
07
%
4.
42
%
4.
47
%
7.
26
%
7.
88
%
37
.9
1
%
Top ten copper smelter 
producers in 2017
In 2017, world copper smelter 
production reached over 
19 million tonnes. Asia’s share  
of world copper smelter output 
more than doubled from 
27 percent in 1990 to 56 percent 
in 2017 as smelter production in 
China expanded rapidly. Primary 
smelters use mine concentrates 
as their main source of feed. 
Secondary copper smelters use 
copper scrap as their feed. 
Source: Wood Mackenzie 2018
Section
Chapter
58
B. How Commodity Trading Works
9. Delivering commodities: meeting customer specifications

Trading is a volume business. By locking in long-
term trading patterns they are better able to invest 
in infrastructure, improve economies of scale and 
gain competitive advantage. 
But they cannot achieve this simply by providing 
goods at the lowest price. They have to engage 
with customer problems and demonstrate how they 
add value. 
As arbitrage becomes more fleeting, there 
are greater incentives to acquire assets and 
integrate downstream.
Developing new marketing outlets is a core part 
of the trading firm’s business model. They pursue 
various strategies to strengthen consistency of supply. 
They provide technical expertise and infrastructure 
support. For instance, where utility companies are 
migrating from coal to cleaner fuels, trading firms 
work with them to adapt their facilities to new fuel 
types. In LNG markets, trading firms are working 
with consumers to internationalise the gas business 
by encouraging take-up of FSRUs (floating storage 
and re-gasification units).
In other cases, financial support can help forge 
closer links and open a new chapter. In 2015, Trafigura 
took a minority stake in Nyrstar, Europe’s largest zinc 
mine and smelter group, becoming the 
largest shareholder of the company and 
the majority owner of its operating 
business. The two companies announced 
that Trafigura would market its high-
quality lead, zinc and specialty metals products to 
Nyrstar’s smelting business.
A notable development in energy markets in 
recent years is the integration of some large 
trading firms into downstream distribution in 
emerging markets. 
There is a strong economic case for the integration 
of midstream and downstream functions in emerging 
markets. These markets are typically relatively small 
with underdeveloped infrastructure requiring 
additional investment. In many cases they were 
previously controlled by vertically integrated oil 
majors. When the majors exited these markets to 
focus on their upstream activities, trading firms, 
which can supply downstream markets in emerging 
economies very efficiently, were natural buyers.
Puma Energy, originally a wholly owned subsidiary 
of Trafigura, has acquired significant midstream and 
downstream capacity. It owns and operates fuel 
storage and marketing businesses over 49 countries. 
Trafigura retains a substantial minority interest in 
the business and remains its most important fuel 
supplier, as it is in turn Trafigura's largest customer 
(see box below). 
Puma Energy
Puma Energy is Trafigura’s industrial go-between in 
the oil sector. Founded in 1997, it has grown from 
modest roots retailing petrol in Argentina into one 
of the largest independent global downstream 
companies, operating over 49 countries. 
Trafigura took majority control in 2000 and 
made it the vehicle for acquiring fixed assets in the 
oil sector. In order to assist Puma Energy’s growth, 
Trafigura has subsequently opened up the capital to 
outside investors, and in 2018 held 49.3 percent of 
the company's shares.
Puma Energy provides logistics and services to 
third parties as well as Trafigura from its midstream 
assets, such as bulk storage depots and offshore 
mooring systems. 
In its downstream business supplying petrol 
stations, mining companies, airlines, shipping 
companies and so on, Trafigura is Puma Energy’s 
preferred source of supply. 
It has storage facilities in the major hubs of 
Singapore and Rotterdam-Antwerp. But it has 
focused its growth in countries from where the oil 
majors have retreated, where markets are opening 
up and where oil demand remains strong. 
It invests in territories where there is a logistical 
bottleneck in the market. In Namibia, for example, 
it bought up BP’s downstream business then rebuilt 
its outdated storage facility. In Australia, it has 
bought a large network of retail service stations 
and is building new terminals to accommodate big 
ships from international hub ports. 
They extend supply 
chains by acquiring 
downstream assets
59

1
2
3
1  Loading and discharge
Every day a vessel remains in dock 
or at sea waiting to load or 
discharge results in both 
opportunity costs and actual costs 
for the trading firm. The contract 
between the charterer and the 
shipowner specifies agreed time 
for loading and unloading 
(laytime). The operations team 
needs to coordinate chartering 
dates, arrival and loading, and 
destination and discharge 
schedules to minimise lost time.
2  Demurrage
Trading in the physical world 
doesn’t always go according to 
plan. Ships develop faults, and 
weather systems affect shipping 
speeds, fuel consumption and 
trade routes. Charterers that 
exceed the agreed rental period 
must pay a demurrage fee. The 
operations team monitors 
demurrage risks and notifies 
trading teams when schedules 
come under pressure.
3  Vessel brokers and agents 
Global trading firms undertake 
numerous high-volume, high-value 
transactions involving thousands 
of journeys each year. They liaise 
with brokers to charter vessels. 
They use agents to manage 
logistics and represent their 
interests while their ships are in 
port. They oversee administrative 
tasks, supervise loading and 
unloading of cargo, and are 
responsible for arranging pilot  
and tug-boat services.
4  Appointing inspectors
Both the volume and the quality 
of commodity shipments can 
change while in transit. 
Sometimes, this is anticipated 
– with crude oil shipments for 
instance, there is always some 
residue left in the tanker. In other 
cases, the cargo may have been 
stored incorrectly, its chemical 
properties may have changed, or 
there is a discrepancy in volumes 
loaded and unloaded at various 
stages. To prevent the expense and 
disruption of disagreements 
Managing efficient 
execution
In commodity trading firms, 
the trading operation is at 
the hub of the company. 
It controls the commodity 
inventory and has overall 
responsibility for managing 
the supply chain activities 
required to transform 
transactions into profit for 
the company and value for 
its customers. From the 
moment the deal is closed 
until ultimate delivery, the 
operations team is 
responsible for execution of 
the myriad processes 
required to achieve this 
objective.
Executing 
the trade: 
operations 
in action
Structuring and maintaining an 
efficient operating model is at the 
heart of profitable commodity 
trading. The operations team of 
any commodity trader has an 
important role in helping to define 
and refine protocols that allow  
the trading firm minimise risk  
and reduce costs.
Section
Chapter
60
B. How Commodity Trading Works
9. Delivering commodities: meeting customer specifications

4
5
6
8
between buyers, sellers and 
logistics providers, trading firms 
appoint independent inspectors to 
certify the quality and the 
quantity of cargo.
5  Accounting for  
physical flows
Profit and loss (P&L) can be 
affected by many known or 
unknown factors. Effective and 
vigilant contract management is 
mandatory. The operations team 
will keep the trading back office  
up to date with the latest news 
while monitoring the life cycle  
of the trade. This includes  
tracking payments and receipts  
for known costs such as port fees, 
agency fees, inspection costs, 
warehousing rental and chartering 
costs as well as for the material 
itself via suppliers and receivers. 
Financing arrangements are put in 
place (e.g. letter of credit) and if 
applicable an operator tracks and 
controls the pricings of cargo  
and allocates them to shipments 
for invoicing purposes, while 
monitoring exposures. There  
will also be unknown or 
unpredictable factors, such as 
force majeure by a supplier, bad 
weather or engine failure, which 
may result in P&L impact.
6  Insurance
The operations team checks that 
insurance provides adequate 
coverage. Trading firms maintain 
separate insurance programmes 
for property, liability, political  
risk and trade credit general 
insurance. The shipper may cover  
a specific cargo with its own 
policy. If not, the trading firm  
may take out special marine 
policies to cover shipment.
7  Troubleshooting
Most transactions work like 
clockwork, but when things get 
more complex the operations 
team has to negotiate the best 
remedial action. Who is at fault if 
a correctly loaded cargo arrives 
off-spec or the quantities can't be 
reconciled? Does the trader sue 
the inspector, claim insurance or 
accept the loss? And what is the 
best strategy to recover value on 
distressed cargo?
8  Auditing
Most operations go to plan but 
where this does not happen it is 
the job of the operations team to 
work out who is at fault and 
establish how best to recoup 
money for the firm. With a 
complex supply chain, issues can 
arise during storage, blending and 
transportation. The operations 
team will reconcile volumes and 
qualities at every stage in the 
process to pinpoint discrepancies.
7
www.downloads.
commoditiesdemystified.info
Play the video online
61


Section C
COMMODITY 
TRADING, RISK  
AND FINANCIAL  
MARKETS
Chapter 10
Managing risk
p.64 
Chapter 11
Funding commodity trading 
p.72

Chapter 10
MANAGING RISK
Risk management is a core competence for trading firms. They store  
and transport physical assets across the globe and earn slim margins  
on high-value, high-volume transactions. They use sophisticated  
risk management techniques to link revenues to costs and operate 
effectively in volatile markets.
Major traders have annual turnover that dwarfs their 
own capital resources and puts them firmly in the 
ranks of the world’s largest companies. They rely on 
sizeable infusions of short-term capital to 
buy the commodities they need to trade. 
This would not be available to them were 
they not able to demonstrate to financial 
institutions the sustainability of their 
business models. 
Managing financial risk effectively is therefore an 
absolute priority for trading firms. They use derivative 
markets to hedge against absolute price (also known 
as flat price) risk. They also take out commercial 
credit risk and political risk policies in the insurance 
market. 
Diversification and integration reduce risk 
Global trading firms handle a variety of commodities 
and manage processes across the supply chain. 
As diversified operations they enjoy limited 
natural protection from commodity price changes. 
Different price pressures in various commodity 
markets will be offset by the breadth of their 
activities. Most are trading both primary and 
secondary commodities and will usually have their 
own storage facilities.
The integrated nature of their operations provides 
another natural hedge within the overall business. 
In the copper market, for instance, a decline in end-
demand for the refined metal may or may not lead 
to reduced smelter production and lower demand 
for concentrate. It all depends on market dynamics. 
Either way, the demand for storage (either of 
concentrates or refined copper) is likely to increase.
In an integrated trading operation, lower demand 
for shipping a commodity is offset by increased 
demand for storing it. 
But diversification and integration provide little 
protection in the event of a systemic change in 
market sentiment. Both the global financial crisis and 
the economic slowdown in China would have been 
catastrophic for any trading company that took no 
additional steps to hedge its activities.
 
Trading firms can 
only stay in business 
as competitive, 
low-risk operations
Section
Chapter
64
C. Commodity Trading, Risk and Financial Markets
10. Managing risk

Managing flat price risk 
The practice of hedging is fundamental to commodity 
trading. Trading firms like Trafigura systematically 
eliminate their flat price exposure – the risk of a 
change in the benchmark price for a barrel of oil or 
a tonne of copper concentrate. 
In a typical transaction, a trader will agree 
purchase and sale prices with two different 
counterparties to lock in a profit margin. The 
transaction is agreed before shipment and the 
convention is that final prices are not fixed until the 
commodity is delivered. So on the transaction date, 
the parties agree both trades at fixed margins against 
a benchmark index price. For crude, for instance, the 
purchase price might be set in advance at 50 basis 
points over the Brent index on the day the trader 
takes delivery and the sale price at 150 basis points 
over Brent when the shipment is delivered. 
Left like this the transaction leaves the trading 
firm exposed to fluctuations in the actual price of 
Brent crude. It clearly has to take delivery of the 
crude before it can ship it, so if the Brent price is 
higher on the earlier date it could make a 
substantial loss.
It can avoid this by simultaneously taking out 
futures contracts against both parts of the transaction. 
It fixes the purchase price in advance by buying 
futures on the transaction date and selling them back 
when it collects the shipment. At the same time, it 
fixes the sale price by selling futures on the transaction 
date and buying them back when the crude has 
shipped. The simplified example above illustrates how 
traders use futures to remove flat price risk when 
selling a physical commodity.
Hedging flat price risk does not eliminate price 
risk altogether because physical price and futures 
prices don’t stay completely aligned, but it does leave 
the trading firm with a smaller, much more 
manageable market risk. This is known as basis risk.
 HEDGING AGAINST FLAT PRICE RISK FROM THE SALE OF CRUDE
DELIVERY DATE 
(IN 3 MONTHS)
TRANSACTION DATE
TIMELINE
TRADES
HEDGES
Sell Brent futures 
at $60 / contract
Agree to sell crude in 
3 months  
at Brent + $1.50
Buy Brent futures 
at $55 / contract
Realised profit = $5 
Deliver crude –  
receive  
$56.50 / barrel
Net revenue $61.50  
($56.50 + $5)
Brent crude = $55
Brent crude = $60
65

Managing basis risk
Basis describes the difference in the price behaviour 
of the physical commodity and its underlying 
hedging instrument. Managing basis risk is core to 
the trader’s skill set. Understanding the dynamics of 
basis behaviour is the source of profitable 
trading opportunities.
Basis risk arises because, in practice, 
the price behaviour of a hedging 
instrument will never exactly correspond 
to that of the physical commodity. 
Traders typically use futures contracts 
to hedge physical transactions. These are notional, 
standardised commodities with specific delivery 
dates, delivery locations and quality characteristics. 
Standardisation makes futures much more tradeable, 
which reduces transaction costs and execution risks 
associated with hedging, but also differentiates them 
from physical commodities.
When trading firms buy and sell physical 
commodities they are acquiring specific assets at 
particular locations on precise dates. The physical 
nature of the asset makes it unique. A Brent futures 
contract, based on a notional specification of light 
North Sea oil delivered at a precise location, will 
never be an exact match for, say, a cargo of heavy 
Middle East crude. Both prices move roughly in 
tandem so basis risk is considerably lower than flat 
price risk. But because they are priced in linked but 
distinct markets, technical factors and supply and 
demand differences result in fluctuations in the 
differential between their prices.
Global trading firms take advantage 
of these fluctuations to maximise their 
profit margins. With around half of all 
international crude priced off the Brent 
benchmark contract, there is ample 
opportunity to take advantage of these 
changing differentials. The global nature 
of the crude oil market makes global 
arbitrage, with oil cargoes circling the world seeking 
the best price, a profitable activity for traders. 
But not every market enjoys the global pricing, 
internationally agreed benchmarks and active 
derivative sector used by crude oil traders. Gas markets, 
for instance, are still linked to regional pricing factors. 
In East Asia, gas prices are indexed to oil or oil products. 
In Europe, Russian pipeline gas is still nominally linked 
to the oil price, although this link is rapidly weakening 
as gas-on-gas competition increases in fast-developing 
trading hubs in the European Union. And in North 
America, it is simply the interaction between the 
supply and demand for gas that determines prices. 
As LNG develops, gas may be traded internationally 
in sufficient volumes to offset regional price 
differences, but a global gas price has not happened 
yet. For now, LNG traders have more limited arbitrage 
opportunities. In practice, they must decide on the 
final destination for their LNG on the transaction 
date and establish the relevant regional hedge. 
Physical markets and financial markets
The futures market provides valuable information 
about expected future supply and demand on which 
producers, consumers and traders can act today. The 
market is reflecting today’s environment, with a 
futures contract priced according to the opportunity 
cost of storing the physical commodity until its 
delivery date. 
Events change perceptions, so futures should not 
be seen as an accurate guide to changes in the 
physical market. However, over time the price of a 
futures contract will always converge with the 
physical market price. This is because on the day the 
future contract expires it becomes physically 
deliverable. Physical delivery almost never happens 
in practice, but the fact that it is possible imposes a 
price discipline on futures contracts. 
So, for example, the closing price for a monthly 
futures contract for Brent crude for delivery in June 
is the same as the spot Brent price in the physical 
market in June. If the prices differed, traders would 
buy in the cheaper market and sell in the market with 
the higher price. Supply and demand would quickly 
eliminate this arbitrage opening.
The possibility of delivery or receipt is an essential 
feature of almost all futures contracts, and most 
stipulate a specific geographic delivery 
point. For WTI crude, the delivery point 
is a small town in Oklahoma (Cushing), 
for US natural gas it is Henry Hub which 
is, notionally at least, at a small town in 
Louisiana (Erath). Brent crude is deliverable 
at various locations around the North Sea 
(amalgamated in what is called the Brent-
Forties-Oseberg-Ekofisk or BFOE basket). Metals 
contracts at the London Metal Exchange (LME) are 
deliverable at any of the 650 LME-accredited 
warehouses around the world. 
Where physical delivery is not practical, a cash 
alternative is specified. Steel is not easily deliverable, 
because delivery involves storage, and steel, unlike 
other base metals, rusts over time. It therefore cannot 
be stored for extended periods. Shipping freight is 
also cash deliverable as this is a service not a 
physically deliverable good. 
In global 
commodities 
markets, basis 
relationships 
provide profitable 
trading 
opportunities 
The possibility of 
physical delivery 
imposes a price 
discipline on 
financial markets 
because of the 
threat of arbitrage
There is no such 
thing as the perfect 
hedge
Section
Chapter
66
C. Commodity Trading, Risk and Financial Markets
10. Managing risk

This raises the question of how the market 
determines reference prices in the physical markets 
for energy and metals. In the main, the market relies 
on prices published by two Price Reporting Agencies. 
Platts and Argus are private companies that perform 
a vital public role. They report daily on a vast array 
of markets trading different physical commodities 
as well as some specially tailored derivative contracts. 
The development of oil spot markets, in parallel 
with that of the futures markets, created a need for 
price assessments, first as a contribution to 
transparency but gradually for use in trade. The spot 
market in oil is still a small fraction of the world oil 
market, but it sets prices for a much larger volume 
of trade. Most energy trade is still conducted on a 
long-term basis, but often at prices in contracts that 
are set at an agreed differential to a Platts or Argus 
benchmark. This in turn is based on the prevailing 
spot market price.
Hedging an aluminium transaction  
on the LME
Trading firms use futures to protect themselves 
against the risk of adverse market movements. 
To hedge aluminium sales, they will often use 
LME futures.
By way of example, take a physical transaction 
where a trader contracts to sell 10,000 tonnes of 
aluminium a month to a manufacturing counterparty. 
The two parties agree to trade at the prevailing LME 
Official Settlement Price at the end of each month. 
At the time the physical transaction is agreed, the 
price of aluminium is $1,500 a tonne. The trader 
hedges his exposure with an LME ‘monthly average’ 
futures contract. He places an order with his broker 
to open futures contracts to sell 10,000 tonnes of 
aluminium a month at $1,500 a tonne. 
The LME requires margin payments on all futures 
contracts to minimise its risk in the event of default. 
On opening the futures contract, the broker lodges 
initial margin, underwriting the trader’s ability and 
willingness to honour the contract. In normal trading 
times on the LME, this initial margin is around 5-8 
percent of the underlying physical transaction (higher 
at times of high volatility). This is usually funded with 
a credit line from a bank. 
Variation margin payments are also required 
to reflect the daily fluctuations of the aluminium 
price. At the end of each trading day the futures 
position is marked to market, with profits posted 
to the broker’s account and losses met with 
additional funds. For instance, if the price drops 
by $50 to $1,450, the trader, as the party that is 
short on aluminium, would post a variation margin 
of $50 a tonne. 
The trader can now make physical deliveries of 
aluminium each month, with changes in the market 
price having no effect on its net cash flow. If prices 
go above $1,500 a tonne its gains in the physical 
market are offset by equal losses on the financial 
transaction. If prices fall, the opposite occurs. 
Size
1,000 barrels
Light
Low
1,000 barrels
Light
Low
1,000 barrels
Medium
Medium
1,000 barrels
Medium
Medium
Density
Sulphur content
Physical spot market prices
Relationship 
between futures  
and physical prices
Daily assessments of spot markets by Price Reporting Agencies ­–  
chiefly Platts and Argus.
Oil contracts can be priced according to a premium / discount to either Platts  
or Argus spot prices or to the futures benchmark prices. But hedging can usually  
only be done by taking out one of the futures contracts. Futures and spot prices 
will tend to move up or down together, and will converge when futures contracts 
become deliverable.
 FUTURES CONTRACTS, SPOT PRICES AND THE LINK BETWEEN THEM
Crude oil futures
WTI
Brent
Shanghai (planned)
Dubai
67

Hedging freight 
Traders cannot just look at their gross margin on 
trades (the difference between the sale price and the 
purchase price of the commodity). They must also 
consider the cost of sourcing, transforming and 
transporting the commodity to meet 
the purchaser’s specifications. Where 
commodities need to be shipped 
overseas, the cost of chartering a 
suitable vessel is a key contributor in 
determining trade profitability. The 
lower the gross margin, the more 
material this becomes.
Charterers pay freight rates according to supply 
and demand conditions at the time. Depending on 
the commodity being shipped, the quantity, timings 
and locations, freight prices can vary markedly. 
Traders will generally fix chartering costs in advance 
to protect against the risk of a rise in freight costs. 
This is normally done through freight forward 
agreements (FFAs). Commodity trading firms are 
charterers and are therefore natural buyers of FFAs. 
They use FFAs to protect themselves against rising 
future freight rates. Ship owners are natural sellers. 
They seek to protect themselves against lower freight 
rates in the future. 
If a commodity trader who wants to charter a 
tanker in 15 days to carry his cargo of crude for 30 
days to a certain destination fears that shipping rates 
will rise, he buys an FFA locking in the current freight 
rate of $19,000 a day. 
Suppose his fears prove justified and the average 
rate over that following month is $22,000 a day, then 
this is what he pays the ship owner. However, the 
FFA comes to his rescue. In this example, the FFA 
contract settles above the agreed price and the FFA 
buyer is paid the price difference, multiplied by the 
length of the contract. The FFA buyer receives:
$22,000 - $19,000 = $3,000 x 30 days = $90,000. 
For the charterer, the FFA has offset the rise in 
the freight rate he had to pay. For the counterparty 
on this contract, probably a ship owner, the exact 
opposite has occurred – a gain on the physical freight 
rate is negated by a loss on the FFA. But neither party 
is worse (or better) off. The derivative stabilises the 
cash flow of both parties. Changes in the other main 
cost of shipping – that of the price of bunker ship 
fuel – can also be hedged. 
Assessing risk and evaluating  
trade profitability
Hedging allows traders to fix flat price risk in advance, 
mainly through futures contracts. They can also control 
the cost of transporting the commodity, using FFAs to 
fix the chartering cost. The cost of financing the 
purchase of the commodity and of any variation margin 
on their futures positions can be estimated in advance. 
However, any trade will involve taking on basis risk as 
well as credit, political and operational risks. 
They must also consider the 
opportunity cost of any trade. Ultimately, 
trading firms’ logistical resources and 
access to capital are limited. They will 
also have global risk management rules 
in place that limit their exposure to 
particular markets and regions as well as overall 
restrictions imposed by the size of the balance sheet.
By using hedging tools, they can determine which 
trades are likely to be most profitable no matter what 
happens to price, and lock into that profitability. 
Hedging a crude oil transaction priced off 
different benchmarks 
There are hundreds of grades of crude oil. The physical 
characteristics and the location of each shipment 
will determine its pricing. Prices are set against three 
main benchmarks, depending in part on the location 
of the shipment and in part on the type of crude 
being traded. WTI is used in North America; Brent is 
the benchmark for Europe and the Dubai benchmark 
is popular in the Middle East and Asia. This can mean 
that traders buy and sell crude against different 
benchmark prices depending on where the product 
is acquired and shipped. The trading firm can still 
hedge the transaction so long as there are financial 
instruments for each benchmark. 
In the example on the next page, Trafigura is 
analysing whether to buy two million barrels of 
Ghanaian oil for sale to a customer in China. It 
estimates its delivery costs, including freight, ship-
to-ship transfer cost and losses due to water and 
sediment in the cargo, will be $1 per barrel. It estimates 
its hedge financing costs, covering hedge finance, 
insurance and trade credit, will be 35 cents per barrel.
This transaction earns Trafigura a gross profit of $3 
million, which equates to a gross margin of $1.50 per 
barrel. But after taking in to account its financing and 
transportation costs, its net margin is 15 cents per barrel 
($1.50 - $1 - $0.35), a net profit of $300,000. It will 
undertake the transaction if it decides that the projected 
profit outweighs the associated operational and 
financial risks, in particular basis and demurrage risk.
The price of freight 
varies according to 
the supply and 
demand for 
shipping. Traders 
use FFAs to fix their 
costs in advance
There has to be 
enough profit in a 
trade to justify the 
risks and the capital 
it employs
Section
Chapter
68
C. Commodity Trading, Risk and Financial Markets
10. Managing risk

PROFIT / LOSS
HEDGES
TRADES
TIMELINE
 MANAGING PRICE RISK
Trafigura buys 2m barrels 
of Ghanaian crude for 
delivery in Europe in 30 
days’ time at a $2/barrel 
discount to the price of 
Brent crude. 
Trafigura pays $136m to 
buy crude ($68 x 2m)
Trafigura sells 2m barrels of 
Ghanaian crude for 
delivery in China in 75 
days’ time at a $2/barrel 
premium to the price of 
Dubai crude.
Trafigura earns $154m  
from the sale of crude  
($77 x 2m)
Trafigura realises a 
gross profit of $9  
per barrel on the 
physical trades
($77 - $68)
Selling back Brent 
futures realises a $20m 
profit [($70 - $60) x 2m] 
Equivalent to 
$10 per barrel.
Trafigura sells 
2,000 Dubai futures  
at $57.50 per barrel
Buying back Dubai futures 
realises a $35m loss 
[($57.50 - $75) x 2m]
Equivalent to 
$17.50 per barrel.
Trafigura realises a 
loss of $7.50 per 
barrel on its hedges
($10 - $17.50)
Total cost $116m  
($136m - $20m)
Total revenue $119m  
($154m - $35m)
Gross profit $3m
($119m - $116m)
DAY 75
DAY 30
Brent crude = $70
Dubai crude = $75
Trafigura buys  
2,000 Brent futures  
at $60 per barrel
DAY 1
Brent crude = $60
Dubai crude = $57.50
69

Volumes and trading profitability
Commodity traders are largely indifferent as to 
whether markets go up or down. Successful hedging 
removes most of the risk and reward of changes in 
absolute prices. What they do care about is the 
margin between their purchase and sale prices. A 
trade is only profitable when this margin is greater 
than the unit cost of doing the business. Net margin 
is the critical metric for profitability. 
For trading firms, volumes, not prices, 
are the key factor for profitability. 
Professor Craig Pirrong highlights “the 
danger of confusing the riskiness of 
commodity prices with the riskiness of 
commodity trading”. He points out that the metric 
to judge riskiness in commodity trading operations 
should be the level of commodity shipments, not 
commodity prices.
While it is the case that large trading firms have 
more at stake by virtue of the large volumes they 
ship, they also have more opportunities to reduce 
risk through flexible management of their trading 
system. Larger businesses tend to be more diversified 
and therefore their risks are less concentrated.
It is true too that margins and volumes tend to 
rise and fall together, because both reflect demand 
for the transformation services that commodity 
merchants provide. Net margins also increase as 
volumes increase, because this is an industry with 
substantial economies of scale. The unit cost of 
delivery can fall dramatically as volumes grow, 
because of logistics savings. 
The link between margins, volumes and prices is 
more indirect. There is a correlation between margins 
and price volatility. Managing price risk is not a core 
competence for producers and consumers. In volatile 
markets, the value added by traders is more evident 
and their services are in demand. This is reflected in 
the higher margins that are generally available in 
more volatile market conditions.
As it happens, the surge in oil and metals prices 
until 2014 was also good for margins and volumes. 
But when prices collapse, margins and volumes do 
not always follow. The sharp fall in oil prices between 
2014 and 2016 did not stem from a fall in oil demand. 
It was simply that more was being produced than 
being consumed. Price rather than demand took the 
hit from an excess of production over consumption 
and unused supply was placed in storage. Inventories 
cannot rise forever though. As the saying goes, 'the 
cure for low oil prices is low oil prices'. This proved 
the case in 2016. OPEC reintroduced quotas and shale 
suppliers pared back production; this helped to set a 
floor on prices.
Managing operational risk 
Global trading firms encounter many different kinds 
of risk. They are active around the world. They 
operate in multiple jurisdictions. Their counterparties 
include governments, state agencies, banks, and 
private and public limited companies. 
One liability that looms large for any company 
transporting, loading and offloading big volumes of 
oil and petroleum products is the danger of an oil 
spill. Oil, by definition, is a hazardous chemical. 
There is the potential for injuries, fatalities and 
extensive environmental damage; and rightly, 
as Exxon, Total and BP have all discovered in 
recent decades, that brings massive financial 
penalties and huge reputational damage. Trading 
firms mitigate this risk through best practice 
operations in their own procedures and 
by ensuring their commercial partners 
comply with similarly high standards. For 
instance, when chartering ships, most 
insist on double-hulled, certified tankers. 
Many also impose an age limit on the 
ships they charter. 
More generally, operational effectiveness is a 
critical business attribute – and not just to avoid the 
potentially calamitous liability incurred through an 
industrial accident. 
Global traders depend on forging strong, 
sustainable trading relationships. They themselves 
are under scrutiny as many of their commercial 
partners have their own reporting and regulatory 
requirements. To do business with these 
organisations, they need, as a minimum, to be 
meeting internationally accepted health, safety and 
environmental standards. 
Traders focus on 
margins not market 
prices
Trading firms  
apply best practice 
and invest in  
modern equipment 
to manage 
operational risk
Section
Chapter
70
C. Commodity Trading, Risk and Financial Markets
10. Managing risk

Responsibility and reputational risk 
Minimising harm to people and the environment is 
a basic tenet for any responsible business. For 
commodity traders, this is a critical area of focus. 
The reputational fallout should anything go wrong 
would be very damaging. They store toxic, flammable 
and hazardous materials and transport them by land 
and sea across large distances. They are active in 
remote parts of the world with widely varying levels 
of governance. 
Responsibility is a commercial imperative for 
commodity trading firms in their day-to-day 
activities, not least because of their reliance on strong 
banking relationships. Trading firms typically earn 
slim margins on high-volume transactions. Their 
profitability relies on continuing access to low-cost 
capital. Banks provide much of this in the form of 
short-term, collateralised facilities. 
Society and stakeholder activists monitor 
international banks’ activities closely. Their 
lending and investing decisions have to meet 
high ethical standards. Accordingly, banks’ 
due-diligence teams assess counterparties against 
responsibility as well as commercial criteria. 
Trading firms have to meet their responsibility 
thresholds to retain access to funding.
Trading responsibly is not just about avoiding 
accidents. Firms need to make a positive socio-
economic contribution to maintain their social 
licence to operate. This is especially true in remote 
regions and underdeveloped economies.
There is continuing debate about the scope of a 
trading firm’s responsibility. Traders collaborate with 
many partners in a highly complex supply chain. This 
necessarily restricts their ability to control systems 
and influence behaviour. Yet they are still expected 
to mitigate the negative consequences of all of their 
activities, even when these arise indirectly. They must 
tread a fine line.
Credit risk and political risk
Trading firms take numerous steps to protect 
themselves from credit risk (i.e. non-payment by 
companies) and political or country risk (i.e. action 
by governments to block payment or seize assets). 
But not every risk can be managed directly. 
Insurance is a critical business enabler. 
Traders cannot afford not to insure their 
operations. The loss of a single cargo, 
quite apart from the social and / or 
environmental cost, could cost tens or 
even hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Having insurance allows trading firms to 
deal with a range of counterparties, operate in 
challenging environments and compete more 
effectively worldwide.
If trading firms cannot satisfy themselves, through 
their own internal checking process, of the 
creditworthiness of a counterparty, then they can 
usually take out a guarantee or insurance on 
the counterparty from a bank. This transfers the 
credit risk to the bank, though this comes at a cost 
to the trading firm. 
Insurance against political risk, as well as credit 
risk, can be taken out on the Lloyds market in London. 
One widely used policy known as CEND provides 
cover against confiscation, expropriation, 
nationalisation and deprivation. 
Some commodity traders, notably those with 
global operations, spend a lot of money on political 
and credit risk insurance. For the largest firms, 
self-insuring most of their operations through a 
captive insurer is a viable alternative. A captive 
insurance company takes on the risk of each 
transaction, but just like an external insurer it spreads 
the cost across multiple transactions. The largest 
traders have sufficient volume to make this possible 
internally, with the captive insurer using the 
reinsurance market to protect the business against 
worst-case outcomes. 
They take out 
insurance to cover 
business risks they 
cannot manage 
internally
71

Chapter 11
FUNDING  
COMMODITY  
TRADING 
Trading firms buy and sell commodities with an aggregate value 
that far exceeds their own capital resources. They achieve this by 
attracting funding from financial institutions. Banks are willing to 
lend because their loans are secured against commodities.
Financial institutions are critically important 
stakeholders for commodity trading firms. Trading 
firms are significant short-term borrowers; they 
depend on substantial and continuing financial 
support to sustain and grow their businesses.
Traders' activities require substantial capital 
resources. They source, store, blend and deliver 
commodities around the globe. They may invest 
in terminals, logistics and physical infrastructure 
to improve the operational efficiency of their 
trading operations. 
They need funding models that will help them to 
operate effectively in all market conditions. Larger 
trading firms, like Trafigura, typically diversify both 
the sources and the structure of their financing, 
raising capital in different regions with a range of 
repayment schedules.
Financing trade
Traders rely on short-term secured lending facilities 
to support their commodity purchasing activities. 
Commodity traders are heavy users of traditional 
trade finance tied to specific commodity transactions. 
Banks provide short-term credit facilities secured 
by the commodity in the form of letters of credit, 
which are made available to the seller. These facilities 
are self-liquidating in the sense that debt is repaid 
immediately from the proceeds of the sale of the 
commodity being financed. 
Repayment of the debt comes from the transaction 
itself, and is therefore not dependent on the 
creditworthiness or cash flow of the trading firm as 
intermediary or that of the final buyer of the 
commodity. Banks providing trade finance know that 
in the event of any default, they can use the underlying 
commodity as collateral to ensure they get repaid. 
The size of the facility is marked to market at least 
weekly to keep it aligned with the value of the 
underlying commodity.
Section
Chapter
72
C. Commodity Trading, Risk and Financial Markets
11. Funding commodity trading 

SELLER
BUYER
Traditional trade 
finance uses letters 
of credit (LCs) with 
bills of lading as 
collateral 
Banks facilitate a trade by providing a letter of 
credit (LC) to the seller on the buyer’s behalf. This 
document is a bank-backed guarantee that the seller 
will receive payment in full so long as certain delivery 
conditions are met. The seller has the 
assurance that should the buyer be unable 
to make payment on the purchase, the 
bank will cover the outstanding amount. 
In some emerging markets, sellers are 
legally required to demand letters of 
credit from buyers to register sales and make 
transactions more transparent. 
One of the conditions that must be satisfied for 
the LC to be honoured, and payment made, is 
presentation of a bill of lading (BL). The BL is a formal 
document that confers title of ownership to goods 
in transit to the holder. It acts as receipt that the 
goods have been loaded on board and delivered to 
the buyer. 
Bilateral trade finance
•	Step One. The trader or trader’s bank issues an LC 
to the seller via the seller’s bank. The precise 
sequence of events is that the seller puts the 
goods on a ship. When these have been checked 
by the carrier, the seller receives a BL, which he 
then presents to his bank to get paid. So the 
seller does not rely for payment on the 
creditworthiness of the trader, but on that of his 
own bank, which in turn relies on the creditworthiness 
of the trader’s bank. 
•	Step Two. A copy of the BL passes to the trader, 
giving him title to the cargo in question. 
•	Step Three. The buyer issues a LC to the trader. 
This gives the trader the security that the buyer is 
able and willing to pay. The trader presents the BL 
to the buyer’s bank and gets paid. 
This system works well. It suits the seller. 
He knows he will get paid once the BL is presented 
and he does not have to depend on the 
creditworthiness of either the trading firm or the 
importer. It also allows commodity trading firms to 
hold far more bank debt on their balance sheet than 
a normal company could, because this trade finance 
debt is dependent on another counterparty. But 
arranging this kind of bilateral finance for individual 
cargoes with LCs and BLs is very labour-intensive. So 
trading firms also use other techniques to fund 
commodity trades. 
BUYER
SELLER
CONSUMER
TRADER
 ISSUING LETTERS OF CREDIT (LC)
BUYER'S BANK
TRADER'S BANK
SELLER'S BANK
LC = Letter of credit    BL = Bill of lading    Purchase price = 1 barrel for $100    Sale price = 1 barrel for $101
1 BARREL 
OIL + BL
1 BARREL  
OIL + BL
LC FOR 
$100
LC FOR 
$101
LC FOR 
$100
$100
LC FOR 
$101
$1 
PROFIT FOR 
TRADER
PRODUCER
73

Pooled collateral
In regions where they do sizeable and regular trades, 
some trading firms, including Trafigura, have 
established a borrowing base. At regular intervals, 
the trading firm provides a bank or banks with an 
overview of all its inventory and receivables, against 
which it negotiates a line of credit. Trafigura has one 
such arrangement with a number of banks 
in Mexico, where it buys and stores a lot 
of copper, lead and zinc concentrates, and 
operates similar borrowing bases in other 
parts of the world.
Repurchase agreements 
Repurchase agreements involve the trading firm 
selling a commodity to a bank, and simultaneously 
agreeing to buy it back a week later. The operation, 
usually involving LME-grade metals, is repeated week 
after week, because the banks find it more attractive 
(in terms of the return on equity) to own the material 
rather than to finance it. This is because banks' 
regulatory capital requirement for asset ownership 
is lower than that for lending activities.
Syndicated pre-payment deals 
Once trading firms have negotiated pre-payment 
deals, they will often go to the wholesale market and 
offer this as security to negotiate a syndicated lending 
agreement with a group of international banks. There 
has been a general retrenchment in the wake of the 
2008 global financial crisis. Many banks have ceased 
direct lending to emerging market countries, but they 
remain comfortable to do so indirectly, with a 
commodity trading firm acting as intermediary. 
Financing hedging costs 
Since the global financial crisis, regulators have 
become much more alert to the credit risk associated 
with derivatives. They have introduced stricter capital 
requirements to guard against systemic breakdown 
led by derivatives trading. This has increased the cost 
of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. 
This has helped to fuel a global trend in favour of 
trading on regulated exchanges. 
As a result, hedging, even of freight derivatives, 
is increasingly conducted on cleared markets. With 
this kind of hedge, a clearing house stands between 
the counterparties to every trade on the market. This 
ensures that even if one party to a transaction 
defaults, the transaction will go through.
Hedging via the big electronic exchanges with 
heavily-traded futures contracts is an efficient, 
low-risk mechanism for managing flat price risk, 
but it comes at a cost. 
Clearing houses need to ensure 
they have sufficient collateral to 
protect themselves against the cost of 
default. They manage this by requiring 
anyone with an open position to post 
margin, which can be drawn on in the 
event of a default. 
Traders are required to post an initial margin on 
opening the trade. At the end of each trading session 
all positions are marked to market and profits and 
losses from that day’s trading are transferred between 
counterparties. Those with loss-making positions 
must place additional funds, known as variation 
margin, before the start of the next trading session 
to avoid an automatic default.
Clearing houses 
require traders to 
post daily margin on 
loss-making futures 
positions 
Trading firms use a 
range of techniques 
to finance 
commodity trades
Section
Chapter
74
C. Commodity Trading, Risk and Financial Markets
11. Funding commodity trading 

Commodity trading firms must maintain variation 
margins to prevent their accounts being closed, and 
their physical transactions becoming unhedged. In 
volatile market conditions, these variation payments 
can run into hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Since these are hedging profits and 
losses, they are ultimately offset by 
payments and receipts from their 
associated physical transactions. But 
there can be a mismatch in the timing of 
cash flows from the physical and financial 
positions, which may have to be financed. 
Ironically, this mismatch is most acute when the value 
of their underlying physical assets are increasing.
For example, if a trader buys an oil shipment and 
the oil price rises, the cargo rises in value, but that 
additional value is not realised until the end of the 
voyage. The trader will have already hedged his 
position by selling oil at a fixed price using the futures 
market. This futures position incurs daily losses as 
the oil price rises. Every day the futures position 
suffers a loss, the trading firm must make a variation 
margin payment. 
To cover these sudden liquidity needs, trading 
firms maintain sizeable credit lines from their bankers. 
Many of the largest traders negotiate short-term 
syndicated facilities to meet this requirement. 
It is vital that these facilities include substantial 
headroom. The greatest potential hedging costs will 
be incurred at times of greatest volatility. Traders 
must be able to operate successfully in all market 
conditions if they are to maintain the confidence of 
their financial backers.
Corporate finance 
Transactional trade finance provides commodity 
traders with the financial fuel for their daily bread-
and-butter business of buying, shipping and selling 
commodities around the world. But this is short-term 
credit and it does not put banks under any ongoing 
obligation to continue to lend. 
Trading firms are capital-intensive operations; 
they need the assurance that they will have access 
to capital across the longer term. They want the 
flexibility to cope with sudden liquidity crunches so 
they can keep trading in difficult market conditions. 
They may also want the financial headroom to 
expand their logistics base by, say, buying or building 
a new port facility.
For those commodity trading 
companies that have gone public or are 
prepared to do so, long-term finance can 
come in the form of equity. But most of 
the big trading firms prefer to remain 
private partnerships. They therefore have 
to consider other ways of attracting 
longer-term financial support.
Trading firms may 
need to borrow 
funds to cover 
timing mismatches 
on hedged positions
Access to long-term 
finance supports 
investment in 
infrastructure  
and provides 
protection in case of 
a liquidity crunch
75

	 Trader purchases oil from 
producer, payment terms = 
30 days after bill of lading
	 Bank issues letter of credit to 
producer and makes payments as 
per agreed payment terms
	 Once the bank makes payment 
on letter of credit, a bilateral loan 
is created
	 Trader agrees to sell oil to 
customer and issues an invoice 
on 30-day payment terms 
creating a trade receivable
	 Trader sells encumbered trade 
receivable to SPV
	 SPV repays bilateral loan
	 Customer pays the invoice 
directly to an SPV account
1
2
3
4
6
TRANSPORT
BANK
PRODUCER
CUSTOMER
7
 UTILISING SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLES FOR SECURITISATION FINANCE 
SPECIAL PURPOSE 
VEHICLE
TRADER
5
1
3
5
2
4
6
7
Section
Chapter
76
C. Commodity Trading, Risk and Financial Markets
11. Funding commodity trading 

Securitisation
Several trading firms have set up special purpose 
vehicles (SPVs) that issue long-term bond facilities 
backed by trade receivables. Institutional investors 
acquire these asset-backed securities. This in a sense 
is a hybrid between a capital market operation and 
trade finance. It works in the following way. 
When a trading firm sells a cargo, it gets an invoice 
promising to pay it in, say, 30-60 days. Instead of 
waiting that long for payment, the trading firm sells 
the invoice immediately to its securitisation vehicle. 
The special purpose company uses the funds raised 
from its bond facility to acquire these receivables. In 
turn, these receivables support a revolving bond 
facility giving the trading firm longer term credit. 
The mechanism shortens the trading firm’s liquidity 
cycle, enabling it to trade more. 
Some trading firms have become active in the 
corporate syndicated bank market and in the capital 
markets, and have issued bonds of up to five years. 
However, the price for soliciting investors in the bond 
market is the regulatory requirement for greater 
transparency of private commodity trading firms’ 
finances. Trafigura passed a milestone in 2013 
when it issued a perpetual bond, which has no 
repayment date and is classed under generally 
accepted accounting rules as equity. The company 
was only allowed to issue this type of bond after a 
binding commitment to issue financial statements 
twice a year. 
Asset sales
In today's more competitive landscape, the 
profitability of arbitrage-led transactions has 
declined. Commodity trading firms 
depend increasingly on strategic assets 
that lower their overall cost of delivery, 
reduce storage costs, enhance channels 
of distribution or provide preferential 
access to sources of production.
Control of such assets confers long-
term competitive advantage, which can be extremely 
valuable for a trading firm. Trafigura, for example, 
has invested over a billion dollars to improve 
Colombia’s transportation infrastructure. It has built 
a new terminal by the country’s main river and 
developed a fluvial transportation system. With 
improved logistics it will be able to transport goods 
far more cost-effectively than its competitors. The 
expected larger share of the country’s international 
trade coming from this competitively advantageous 
position will more than outweigh this substantial 
initial investment.
Control does not necessarily imply ownership. 
Trafigura has a track record of buying underperforming 
assets, developing them and then divesting without 
relinquishing control. For instance, it acquired an oil 
terminal complex in Corpus Christi, Texas in 2011 
just as shale production was gathering momentum. 
Three years later, with Trafigura having developed 
the complex, Corpus Christi had become a major hub 
for oil products. It sold a majority interest to a 
professional terminal operator. Critically, it retained 
a minority stake and exclusive commercial rights to 
use of the terminal. The sale released over $800 
million for reinvestment. 
Another popular mechanism for trading firms 
wanting to extend control over strategic assets is 
through participation in joint ventures. Many firms 
have strategic partnerships with asset-rich 
institutions, such as sovereign wealth organisations. 
Typically, trading firms contribute a share of the 
financial resources and manage operational issues in 
return for shared ownership. 
Balance sheet management
Ultimately, the quality of the trading firm’s balance 
sheet will dictate its ability to compete effectively. 
Concerns about leverage increase yields on its bond 
debt, impacting its ability to borrow in capital 
markets. The cost of insuring its debt is also likely 
to rise. 
More immediately, maintaining its 
debt within investment grade parameters 
determines whether it is able to continue 
to trade competitively. Trading firms 
depend on a strong credit profile to access 
the funding essential for the shipment of 
millions of tonnes of oil and metal. 
They need to 
maintain a strong 
credit rating to 
trade effectively
Trading firms don’t 
have to own assets 
to benefit from 
controlling logistics
77

The story presented in these pages has two 
main strands. 
First, it documents the role played by massive 
flows of raw materials in enabling the global economic 
integration of recent decades. The scale of 
commodities on the move across the world since the 
turn of millennium has been without precedent in 
human history. Achieving that required a new type 
of organisation able to deploy a combination of 
logistical, financial and risk management skills to 
connect centres of production, processing and 
consumption. Without these organisations or 
something like them, the modern industrial revolution 
and emergence of China and other Asian countries 
as centres of manufacturing and consumption would 
simply not have been possible. 
Second, it illustrates the utter supremacy of 
market forces in today’s global economy. The history 
of modern commodities trading shows sectors that 
had previously been dominated by vertically-
integrated oligolopies opening up to competition and 
disintermediated trading based on various forms of 
market pricing. Whether in oil as a result of resource 
nationalism and the rise of OPEC, or in metals and 
mining under the impact of Chinese demand, or more 
recently in LNG in the face of a surge of tradeable 
product, supply chains that had once been tightly-
knit have fractured, creating space into which 
independent commodity traders could move.
In fact, the trading firms have been both 
beneficiaries and catalysts of this trend. As markets 
become cheaper to use, transactions that used to 
take place within vertically integrated firms can be 
undertaken in markets instead, and the upstream 
and downstream parts of the firm can be separated. 
By facilitating liquid, competitive markets – for 
example in crude oil and refined products – 
commodity trading firms have made it more 
economical and efficient to use them. 
Similar logic applies in newer traded markets, 
including iron ore and LNG, where traded supplies 
are seen as an attractive alternative to pipeline gas 
from such sources as Russia. In effect, the vertical 
structures that used to be seen as essential to secure 
reliable flows of commodities from producers to 
consumers are being found wanting. In their place, 
free-market trading has become the guarantor of 
security of supply.
These are reasons to suppose that the commodities 
trading growth of recent decades is not a transient 
phenomenon, but that the extension of trading from 
the ‘soft’ commodities of agriculture to the ‘hard’ 
commodities of energy, minerals and metals is here 
to stay. 
What issues are the leading commodities trading 
firms going to have to confront in order to ensure 
this is so? 
POSTSCRIPT
Section
78
Postscript

Recent history suggests three principal challenges. 
The first relates to finance and financial markets. The 
success of commodities trading firms is inextricably 
entwined with the existence of a banking sector with 
an appetite to finance trade and of deep and liquid 
derivatives markets in which they can lay off their 
price risks. Without both of these elements and the 
financial confidence underpinning them, the trading 
business would dry up. 
Sustaining that access requires commodities 
trading firms to continue to manage their financial 
risks carefully on the one hand, and governments 
around the world to maintain a conducive regulatory 
system on the other. The latter cannot be taken for 
granted. There is a constant risk that regulators, in 
their understandable concern to limit systemic 
financial risk of the kind that nearly brought the 
global banking industry down in the financial crisis 
of 2008, will adopt measures that create unintended 
negative consequences for trading. It is not hard to 
imagine circumstances in which regulation could 
diminish banks’ appetite to provide trade finance or 
impose capital or hedging constraints on the trading 
business itself. It is in the interest of the global 
economy that such unintended consequences 
be avoided.
The second challenge concerns sustainable 
business models. Today’s global commodities markets 
are more competitive and transparent than ever, and 
profit margins for the firms that operate in them are 
wafer-thin. That makes trading a scale business, 
demanding that firms invest heavily in state-of-the-
art systems, processes and technology. Sustainable 
success also requires firms to protect their licence 
to operate by becoming more transparent about their 
activities and demonstrating a commitment to 
acting responsibly. 
Third is the need for firms to stay nimble and 
fleet-of-foot as the trading industry consolidates and 
matures. Trading firms have thrived and prospered 
through the years by surfing the waves of economic 
change and market volatility. They will fail if they 
become complacent or miss the waves of change to 
come – whether in the form of new competitors, 
opportunities for partnership, political upheavals or 
shifts in global trade flows. If change created the 
modern trading industry, being alive to continuing 
change will ensure its survival.
79

A
Alumina Aluminium oxide, also called 
alumina, is the raw material required to 
produce primary aluminium. It is a white 
powder produced by the refining of bauxite.
Arbitrage The simultaneous purchase and 
sale of an asset to profit from a difference in 
the price. It is a trade that profits by 
exploiting the price differences of identical 
or similar financial instruments on different 
markets or in different forms.
B
Backwardation Situation where early 
periods in a price curve are valued at a 
premium to later periods. This can be a 
result of short supply or a peak in demand 
in the short term.
Basis risk The risk that the value of a 
derivatives-based hedge will not move in 
line with its underlying exposure.
Bauxite The main raw material for 
aluminium metal production. Bauxite 
deposits are mainly found in a wide belt 
around the equator.
Benchmark (crude) A crude oil 
specification that serves as a reference  
price for buyers and sellers. There are  
three primary benchmarks, West Texas 
Intermediate (WTI), Brent Blend, and  
Dubai Crude.
Benchmark (metals) A benchmark is  
a measurement of the price per unit of 
quantity of the underlying commodity 
traded in the international marketplace. It is 
set periodically by the country or through 
negotiation between the major producer 
and consumer organisations that 
consistently sell or buy large quantities of 
the commodity in a marketplace, and is 
used to serve as a point of reference against 
which sectors can be evaluated.
Bid / offer A market maker quotes a 
two-way price for a commodity with  
the bid price lower than the offer price. 
Customers can sell to the market maker  
at his bid price and buy from him at  
his offer price. 
Bill of lading (BL) A document issued by 
the master of a ship when loading is 
completed. This acts as receipt for the 
goods, document of title to the goods and 
evidence of the contract of carriage. The 
rightful receiver of the cargo presents the 
BL to claim it at the discharge port.
Blister copper An impure form of copper 
produced in a furnace. 
Bunkers The fuel used by ships. The term 
for fuelling a ship is bunkering.
C
Call option A call option gives its owner 
the right but not the obligation to buy a 
specific quantity of a given commodity at a 
defined price up until a certain point in 
time, in return for a premium.
Charter party (CP) A contract to charter  
a vessel.
Charterer A company in the charter party 
that hires a ship and its crew for a single 
voyage or for a fixed period. 
Collateral Security pledged in exchange  
for a loan.
Concentrate The tradable commodity 
created by initial processing of lead, zinc  
or copper ore. Concentrates are used as  
raw materials by smelters to produce 
refined metals.
Condensate An ultralight oil found in  
huge quantities in shale deposits. When 
underground it is mostly in gaseous form. 
It condenses into a liquid when pumped  
to the surface.
Contango A market environment where 
early periods in a price curve are valued  
at a discount to later periods. It can be  
the result of over-supply or lack of demand 
in the present. This is normally a  
temporary phenomenon.
Copper cathode A 99 percent pure form of 
copper – the primary raw material for 
copper wire and cable.
Counterparty The opposite party in a 
contract or financial transaction.
GLOSSARY
Glossary
80

D
Deadweight tonnage (DWT) The 
cargo-carrying capacity of a vessel, in 
metric tonnes, plus the weight of bunkers, 
stores, lubes, fresh water, etc. It does not 
include the weight of the ship.
Demurrage The compensation paid by 
charterers to the owners of a vessel for 
extra time used at the port, beyond what 
has been granted under the charter.
E
Exposure The portion of a trader’s position 
that is subject to the risk of price 
movement.
F
Flat position Having no outright position 
– either because nothing is held or because 
long and short positions net off.
Flat price risk Exposure to a change in 
absolute prices in a particular market.
Futures Contracts for commodities to be 
delivered in the future. The product, quality, 
delivery and quantity is specified. These are 
traded on exchanges and there is no 
counterparty-based credit risk. The only 
variable is price. Contracts are marked to 
market daily. 
G
Geographic spread The price differential 
between commodities with the same 
quality and grade characteristics deliverable 
on the same date but at different locations.
Giveaways Refined petroleum  
products, especially gasoline, that  
exceed a required specification.
H
Hedge A position taken to counteract  
an exposed position intended to minimise 
or remove price risk. This is usually  
achieved using futures contracts and  
other derivatives.
I
Incoterms International commercial terms 
are trade terms published by the 
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). 
They are commonly used to ease domestic 
and international trade by helping traders to 
understand one another.
Initial margin The per contract financial 
guarantee required by a clearing house to be 
able to trade on its exchange.
L
Laytime The amount of time in port 
granted by the owners of the vessel, as 
stated in the charter party, for the loading 
and discharging of cargo.
Letter of credit (LC) A document from a 
bank guaranteeing that the seller will 
receive payment in full, as long as certain 
delivery conditions have been met.
Letter of indemnity (LOI)  
A guarantee that losses will not be suffered 
should certain provisions of a contract not 
be met. If a BL is not available, then a letter 
of indemnity is submitted to the owners for 
the delivery of the goods instead.
London Metals Exchange (LME)  
A commodities exchange in London, 
England, that deals in metal futures. 
Contracts on the exchange include 
aluminium, copper and zinc. The LME  
is a non-ferrous exchange, which  
means that iron and steel are not  
traded on the exchange. 
Long position The net position of a trader 
holding / owning a commodity  
in the market.
M
Mark-to-market An accounting mechanism 
that revalues trading positions against 
current market prices. Profits and losses are 
realised at each revaluation.
Middle distillates The range of refined 
products situated between lighter fractions, 
such as gasoline, and heavier products, such 
as fuel oil. They include jet fuel, kerosene 
and diesel.
Multimodal Infrastructure that provides 
alternative transportation modalities for 
commodities, e.g. road, rail and river.
N
Naphtha A flammable liquid made from 
distilling petroleum. It is used as a diluent to 
help move heavy oil through pipelines and 
as a solvent.
National oil company (NOC) An oil 
company fully or in the majority owned by 
a national government.
O
Offtake agreement A long-term supply 
agreement where a trader agrees to buy a 
fixed quantity or proportion of a resource 
producer’s future output at a specified price.
Optionality A strategy that may have 
limited short-term benefits, but confers 
considerable longer-term value by extending 
choice and improving contingent outcomes. 
Over-the-counter (OTC) A security or 
financial transaction conducted away from 
a formal, centralised exchange. 
81

P
Posted pricing A posted price is set by a 
government or national company where the 
price is set for a fixed period of time and 
only reviewed by that price-setting body.
Premium / discount Applied to 
benchmarks, being the addition or 
subtraction in price over or under a 
reference price negotiated between physical 
trading partners for a specific product, 
delivery location and date.
Put option A contract providing the owner 
with the right but not the obligation to sell 
a volume of a given commodity at a certain 
price up until a certain point in time, in 
return for a premium.
Q
Quality spread The difference in price 
between different grades of a commodity 
deliverable on the same date at the same 
location. The higher grade commodity will 
normally trade at a premium. 
R
Reid vapour pressure (RVP) is a common 
measure of the volatility of gasoline. It is 
defined as the absolute vapour pressure 
exerted by a liquid at 37.8 °C (100 °F) as 
determined by the test method 
ASTM-D-323.
Repurchase agreement (REPO)  
A contract that operates like a secured loan. 
The seller of a security simultaneously 
agrees to repurchase it from the buyer on a 
specified future date at an agreed price.
S
Short position The net position of a trader 
owing a commodity in the market, often 
associated with futures markets. They have 
undertaken to sell a commodity and will 
need to buy back or cover that position by 
the delivery date.
Splitter A restricted refining process that 
splits condensate into various products, 
including naphtha and distillates.
Spot price The current market price at 
which a commodity is bought or sold for 
immediate payment and delivery.
T
Time charter Hiring a vessel for a fixed 
period. The owner manages the vessel but 
the charterer specifies journeys, fuel, port 
charges, etc.
Time spread The difference in price 
between a commodity delivered on a 
particular date and the identical commodity 
deliverable on a different date. Also known 
as calendar spread.
Treatment charge (TC) and Refining 
charge (RC) TC / RC are amounts designed 
to cover the cost incurred by the smelter 
during the smelting and refining process, 
whereby the treatment costs occur during 
the smelting process to extract metal from 
the ore and the refining costs occur during 
further purification to pure metal where all 
undesirable by products are removed. They 
are negotiated fees that may be linked to 
metal prices as well as market supply and 
demand, and in the concentrates business 
are usually paid by the seller to the buyer. 
The Steel Index (TSI) The steel index is a 
specialist provider of price information for 
key steel, iron ore, ferrous scrap and coking 
coal products around the world, based on 
spot market transaction data.
V
Variation margin Futures contracts are 
marked to market at the end of each trading 
session. Variation margin refers to the 
top-up payment required of those holding 
loss-making positions before the start of 
each trading session.
Vertical integration The combination in 
one company of two or more stages of the 
supply chain that would normally be 
operated by separate, specialist firms.
Viscosity Oil's resistance to flow. Higher 
viscosity crude oil is much more difficult to 
pump from the ground, transport and refine.
Volatility (oil) The speed at which 
evaporation occurs. More volatile oils have 
better burning properties, particularly in 
cold climates, but they also require more 
active temperature regulation and sealing 
procedures to protect the environment and 
minimise oil losses.
Volatility (price) The degree of variation in 
a trading price series over time as measured 
by standard deviation.
Voyage charter Hiring a vessel for a 
specific voyage between a load port and a 
discharge port. The charterer pays the 
vessel owner on a per-tonne or lump-sum 
basis. The owner pays port costs, excluding 
loading and unloading, as well as fuel and 
crew costs.
82
Glossary

TRADING AND COMMODITIES
The Economics of Commodity Trading 
Firms by Craig Pirrong (Trafigura, 2014) 
http://www.trafigura.com/research/
Fifty Years of Global LNG  
by Craig Pirrong (Trafigura, 2014) 
http://www.trafigura.com/research/
Not Too Big to Fail by Craig Pirrong 
(Trafigura, 2015)  
http://www.trafigura.com/research/
Living in a Material World: the 
Commodity Connection by Kevin 
Morrison (John Wiley, 2008)
Mastering Derivatives Markets by 
Francesca Taylor (FT Prentice Hall,  
4th edition, 2011)
The Secret Club that Runs the World: 
Inside the Fraternity of Commodities 
Traders by Kate Kelly (Portfolio, 2014)
Traders And Merchants by  
Philippe Chalmin (Routledge, 1987)
Trafigura Annual Reports 
http://www.trafigura.com/financials/
CME Group  
http://www.cmegroup.com/education/
getting-started.html
Investopedia 
http://www.investopedia.com/
OIL AND ENERGY
Annual Energy Outlook (US Energy 
Information Administration)
BP Energy Outlook
BP Statistical review of World Energy
The King of Oil: The Secret Lives of 
Marc Rich by Daniel Ammann  
(St Martin's Press, 2010)
Energy Trading and Risk Management: 
A Practical Approach to Hedging, 
Trading and Portfolio Diversification 
by Iris Marie Mac (Wiley, 2014)
International Energy Agency World 
Energy Outlook
Oil 101 by Morgan Downey  
(Wooden Table Press, 2009)
Petroleum Refining in Nontechnical 
Language, Fourth Edition by William 
Leffler (PennWell Corp, 2008)
The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, 
Money and Power by Daniel Yergin  
(Simon & Schuster, 1992)
The Quest: Energy, Security and the 
Remaking of the Modern World by 
Daniel Yergin (Simon & Schuster, 2011)
Energy sector infographics 
http://www.planete-energies.com/en/
results/medias/infographics
Natural gas 
http://www.naturalgas.org/
OECD data  
https://data.oecd.org/energy.htm
US Energy Information Administration  
http://www.eia.gov/
METALS AND MINERALS
Economics of the International Coal 
Trade: the Renaissance of Steam Coal 
by Lars Schernikau (Springer, 2010)
Metal Bulletin's Guide to the LME by 
Trevor Tarring (Metal Bulletin Books Ltd; 
7th edition, 2009)
The Remaking of the Mining Industry 
by David Humphreys  
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2015)
European Copper Institute 
http://copperalliance.eu/about-copper
London Metal Exchange website  
http://www.lme.com/
World Coal Association 
http://www.worldcoal.org/
World Steel Association 
https://www.worldsteel.org/
FURTHER  
READING

TH/0244.2e
Second edition 2019
www.commoditiesdemystified.info
www.trafigura.com
