 
 
 
 
 
DrKW Macro research 
Global Equity | Strategy 
 
  
2 February 2006 
Global Equity Strategy 
Behaving badly 
 
 
Online research: 
www.drkwresearch.com 
 
Bloomberg: 
DRKW<GO> 
Please refer to the Disclosure Appendix for all relevant disclosures and our 
disclaimer. In respect of any compendium report covering six or more
companies, 
all 
relevant 
disclosures 
are 
available 
on 
our 
website 
www.drkwresearch.com/disclosures
or by contacting the DrKW Research 
Department at the address below. 
 
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited, Authorised and regulated by the Financial Services Authority and a Member Firm of the 
London Stock Exchange PO Box 560, 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  Telephone: +44 20 7623 8000 Telex: 916486 Registered in 
England No. 1767419 Registered Office: 20 Fenchurch Street, London EC3P 3DB.  A Member of the Dresdner Bank Group. 
 
James Montier 
+44 (0)20 7475 6821 
james.montier@drkw.com 
 
Global Investment Strategy 
Research Analysts 
Global Asset Allocation 
Albert Edwards 
+44 (0)20 7475 2429 
albert.edwards@drkw.com 
Global Equity Strategy 
James Montier 
+44 (0)20 7475 6821 
james.montier@drkw.com 
Global Sector Strategy 
Philip Isherwood 
+44 (0)20 7475 2435 
philip.isherwood@drkw.com 
European & UK Strategy 
Karen Olney, CFA 
+44 (0)20 7475 2651 
karen.olney@drkw.com 
 
None of us are immune to behavioural biases. Those who have attended my 
teach-ins on the subject have had a short test inflicted upon them. This note 
provides both a copy of the test (for you to try) and an analysis of the results from 
our sample of 300 fund managers. I will say no more to avoid influencing your 
answers. But my faith in behavioural finance is stronger than ever!   
 
 

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
2 
 
Behaving badly 
Before you go any further, if you haven’t already suffered at my hands, have a go at the 
17 questions below. Spend no more than 10 minutes on them. 
The test 
1) Please write down the last four digits of your telephone number: 
2) Is the number of physicians in London higher or lower than this number? 
3) What is your best guess as to the number of physicians in London? 
4) A bat and a ball together cost $1.10. The bat costs $1.00 more than the ball. How 
much does the ball cost? 
5) A health survey was conducted in a sample of adult males in New Jersey, of all ages 
and occupations. Please give your best estimates of the following values: 
 What percentage of the men surveyed have had one or more heart attacks? 
 What percentage of the men surveyed are both over 55 and have had one or more heart 
attacks?  
6) Are you above average at your job?  
7) Imagine these are four playing cards laid out in front of you. Each one has a letter on 
one side and a number on the other. If a card has an E, it should have a 4. Which cards 
do you need to turn over in order to see if I am telling the truth?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8) Suppose an unbiased coin is flipped three times, and each time the coin lands on 
heads. If you had to bet $1000 on the next toss, what side would choose? Heads, tails or 
no preference?  
9) If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how long would it take 100 
machines to make 100 widgets?  
10) If John can drink one barrel of water in 6 days and Mary can drink one barrel of water 
in 12 days, how long would it take them to drink one barrel of water together?  
11) Imagine that the UK is preparing for the outbreak of an unusual disease, which is 
expected to kill 600 people. Two alternative programs to combat the disease have been 
proposed. Assume the exact scientific estimates of the consequences of the programs 
are as follows: 
If program A is adopted 200 people will be saved.  
If program B is adopted there is a 1/3 probability that 600 people will be saved, and a 2/3 
probability that no one will be saved.  
Which program do you choose?  
 
E 
4
K
7

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
3 
 
12) You are offered the following bet. On the toss of a fair coin, if you lose you must pay 
£100, what is the minimum amount that you need to win in order to make this bet 
attractive to you?  
13) In a lake, there is a patch of lily pads. Everyday, the patch doubles in size. If it takes 
48 days for the patch to cover the entire lake, how long would it take for the patch to 
cover half the lake?  
14) The same disease from question 11 is back. Only this time the two programs now 
have the following payoffs:  
If program C is adopted 400 people will die.  
If program D is adopted there is a 1/3 probability that nobody will die, and a 2/3 
probability that 600 people will die.  
Which program do you support?  
15) A student at a university has a Grade Point Average (GPA) of 3.8 in her first 
semester. The average GPA at the university is 3.1. What will be her GPA percentile 
when she graduates as a senior? (The better she does the higher the percentile...i.e. 100 
would be the top people in the year).  
16) You are on a game show. You are offered a choice of one of three doors. Behind two 
of the doors there is a goat. Behind one the doors there is a car. Upon you announcing 
which door you chose, the host of the show opens one of the two doors not selected by 
you, and reveals a goat. After he has done this, he offers you the opportunity to switch 
your choice. What should you stick or switch?  
17) You are now going to play a game against the others sitting in this room. The game is 
simply this. Pick a number between 0 and 100. The winner of the game will be the person 
who guesses the number closest to two thirds of the average number picked. Your guess 
is: 
The results 
Nearly 300 professional fund managers have submitted themselves to the unpleasant 
task of trying to answer these questions. My victims have come from all areas of the 
globe. I’ve had the opportunity to administer this test to investors from the UK, US, Asia 
and Europe. Interestingly, the results I’ve found don’t show any geographic distinguishing 
features; Americans were no more likely to be over-optimistic than the Brits, for instance. 
I have also been able to test managers at both large and small institutions, and across a 
variety of asset classes and investment styles. However, there were few discernable 
differences across different groups. So I will aggregate the answers to provide an 
overview of the most common biases displayed by professional fund managers.  
Over-optimism  
The most common bias we come across is over-optimism. That is people’s tendency to 
exaggerate their own abilities. That is particularly likely when people suffer the illusion of 
control (they think they can influence the outcome) or the illusion of knowledge (they 
think they know more than everyone else). Both of these illusions seem to be writ large in 
financial markets. Question 6 was obviously an attempt to see just how over-optimistic 
fund managers were. The results show that some 74% of our sample thought 
themselves above average at their jobs. Many wrote comments along the lines of “I 
know everyone says they are, but I really am”! Of the remaining 26% most thought they 
were average, but very few, if any, said they were below average!  
 

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
4 
 
When presenting on behavioural finance I regularly ask the audience whether they are 
above average drivers. However, the best response rate comes from the question as to 
whether or not people are above average lovers. You can always count on one male 
member of the audience putting up both arms and jumping up and down. Indeed, so far I 
have found only one person who thinks he is a below average lover!  
The illusion of control: the % of fund managers who believe they are... 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Above average
Equal to or Below average
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
Confirmatory bias 
An amazing 95% of those who took the test failed one question. It was question 7, 
the four cards (E, 4, K, and 7) with each card having a number on one side and a letter 
on the other. You are told if the card has an E it should have a four on the reverse, so 
which card or cards do you need to turn over to see if you were told the truth or not?  
The two most common answers are E and 4. However, the correct answer is that you 
need to turn over the E and 7. The E is pretty obvious, since if you turn it over and there 
isn’t a 4 on the reverse it is pretty obvious you were being told a lie. If you turn the 7 over 
and it has an E on the back you have also proved you were lied to. However, 4 can’t tell 
you anything. The rubric for the question states that an E should have a 4, not that a 4 
should have an E. So turning the 4 over can’t tell you anything at all.  
The habit of turning the 4 over is an example of confirmatory bias – the tendency to look 
for information that agrees with us. When Karl Popper wrote his philosophy of science he 
argued that the only way of testing a hypothesis was to form the view and then spend the 
rest of the day looking for the evidence that proves you to be wrong. But that isn’t the 
way we work, instead we form our views and then spend all the rest of the day finding all 
the information that agrees with our view.  
So instead of having meetings with those who agree with us, we should actually sit down 
with those who disagree with us most. Not so we change our minds because the odds on 
changing a mind through straight conversation are essentially zero, but rather so we are 
aware of the opposite point of view. If we can’t identify the logical flaw in their argument 
then we shouldn’t be so sure about out own view at all.  
Representativeness 
One of the other common heuristics (rules of thumb) is judging things by how they 
appear rather than how statistically likely they are. The classic example comes from the 
seminal paper by Tversky and Kahneman1. It concerns Linda, a 31 year old who is 
                                            
1 Tversky and Kahneman (1983) Extension versus intuitive reasoning: the conjunction fallacy in 
probability judgement, Psychological Review, 90 

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
5 
 
single, outspoken and very bright. She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was 
deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and equality.  
Which is more likely?  
1) Linda works in a bank 
2) Linda works in a bank and is active in the feminist movement 
An alarming high percentage of people go for the second option. However, it can’t 
possibly be true, as it represents a conjunction fallacy. That is there must always be more 
people who work in banks than there are who work in banks and are active in the feminist 
movement.  
So why do so many people get this question wrong? The answer seems to be that the 
description is biased, it sounds like someone who might plausibly be involved in the 
feminist movement. People are driven by the narrative of the description rather than by 
the logic of the analysis.  
Our test contained several examples of various elements of representativeness. The first 
was question 5. The question concerned estimating the percentage of men in New 
Jersey who had one or more heart attacks, followed by the percentage of men over 55 
who had one or more heart attacks. The second part of the question is a conjunction 
fallacy in the same way as the Linda problem. There are always going to be more men 
who had one or more heart attacks than there are men over 55 and one or more heart 
attacks.  
However, across our 300 fund managers the estimated average percentage of men 
suffering one or more heart attacks was 12.5%, whilst the estimated percentage of men 
over 55 and suffering one or more heart attacks was 16%.  
Of course, averages can hide all sorts of things, so looking at the full data set reveals that 
40% of the sample suffered from representativeness in as much as they had higher 
estimates of the latter part of the question compared to the first section answer! 
Two other questions also relate to the representativeness heuristic. The first was 
question 8, the fair coin that has landed on heads for three successive times. You have 
to bet $1000 on the next toss, what would you call?  
The good news is that 81% of the survey correctly said they had no preference. 12.5% 
displayed the gamblers fallacy – betting on a reversal when clearly the coin has no 
memory so each outcome is equally likely. Presumably, these are the same people who 
stand at roulette tables carefully watching the reds and blacks and betting against the 
runs of random events. 6.5% suffered the hot hand fallacy. That is they saw the 
sequence and took it as evidence that the coin was ‘hot’ and would thus keep coming up 
heads.  
The other question that is designed to tease out the representativeness heuristic is 
question 15. This was a highly unpopular question; around 60% of people either couldn’t 
or wouldn’t answer the question. It concerns the percentile prediction of a student when 
she finally graduates using information from her first semester.  
In fact, the performance of a student in the first semester is totally uncorrelated with the 
outcome of a degree course nearly three years later. Given the information available - 
that the student was above average in the first semester, but nothing else - the optimal 
prediction is that she will simply perform in an average fashion at the end of her degree, 
so a 50th percentile forecast would have been rational.  

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
6 
 
Of the 40% of the fund managers who answered this question 86% displayed some form 
of extreme prediction. That is to say they had a forecast of over 50. In fact the average 
forecast was for a 74th percentile ranking. This is again a form of the representativeness 
heuristic, since answers such as these represent the extrapolation of a single 
(meaningless) data point into the indefinite future!  
The Cognitive Reflection Task (CRT) 
Questions 4, 9 and 13 collectively form the cognitive reflection task (CRT). This test was 
designed by Shane Frederick2 of MIT. As regular readers will know, I often talk of the 
brain having two different systems. Using the labels of Lieberman et al3 we refer to these 
as the X-system and the C-system. The X-system is the default option. It is an effortless, 
fast, parallel processing system. The C-system requires a deliberate effort to use and is 
slow but logical. The CRT was designed to see how easy people find it to interrupt their 
X-system style automatic responses.  
Each of the three questions has an obvious but incorrect answer and a less obvious but 
correct response. For instance, in the bat and the ball question the answer that leaps to 
mind is 10c. However, even a moments reflection reveals that the difference between 
$1:00 and 10c is only 90c, not $1 as the question states.  
The correct answer is, of course, 5c. Just writing down the problem should make this 
transparent: 
Bat + ball = 1.10 
Bat - ball = 1 
2 Bat = 2.10 
Bat = 1.05 therefore ball = 0.05 
The answer to question 9 is 5 minutes, but 100 minutes is the oft cited incorrect answer. 
And the correct answer to question 13 is 47 days, not 24 days. The idea that the CRT 
problems generate incorrect ‘intuitive’ answers is supported by the dominance of a 
standard set of incorrect answers (i.e. the most common incorrect answers are 10c, 100 
mins and 24 days).  
Further support comes from Frederick’s observation that “Those who answered 10 cents 
to the “bat and ball” problem estimated that 92 percent of people would correctly solve it, 
whereas those who answered “5 cents” estimated that “only” 62 percent would”.  
The table below shows a selection of the results that Frederick uncovered when 
administering the CRT. I have also shown the overall average (including a long list of 
studies not reported here) from Frederick’s work, plus the comparative line for our 
sample of professional fund managers. Of the 300 hundred fund managers who have 
taken the test only 40% managed to get all three questions right. Thus only a minority 
managed to get the maximum score.  
 
 
 
 
                                            
2 Frederick, Shane (2005) Cognitive reflection and decision making, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
Volume 19, No 4. My thanks to Daniel Read of Durham University for bringing Shanes’ work to my 
attention.  
3 Lieberman, Gaunt, Gilbert and Trope (2002) Reflexion and reflection: a social cognitive neuroscience 
approach to attributional inference, in Zanna, Advances in experimental social psychology, Vol 34 

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
7 
 
CRT scores 
Location/institution 
Mean CRT score
0 (%)
1 (%) 
2 (%)
3 (%)
MIT 
2.18
7
16 
30
48
Princeton 
1.63
18
27 
28
26
Boston fireworks display 
1.53
24
24 
26
26
Carnegie Mellon University 
1.51
25
25 
25
25
Harvard University 
1.43
20
37 
24
20
Overall 
1.24
33
28 
23
17
Professional fund managers 
1.99
10
21 
29
40
Source: Frederick (2005), and DrKW Macro research 
This performance puts professional fund managers above Princeton students, but below 
the best performing group – the MIT students. 10% of our sample didn’t manage to get 
any of the CRT questions right. In terms of the individual questions 58% got question 4 
correct, 68% correctly answered question 9 and 74% managed to figure out question 14.  
Frederick finds that the number of the CRT questions passed is highly correlated with 
several behavioural traits. Specifically he finds that those with a high CRT score are more 
patient. For example consider the following choice: you can either have $3400 this month 
or $3800 next month, which do you choose?  
Of those who scored zero on the CRT, 65% went for the near term lower payout (which 
implies an annual discount rate of 280%!). In contrast, of those with the highest CRT 
score, 60% went for the further out higher payout.  
A similar finding resulted from asking people how much they would be willing to pay for 
overnight shipping of a chosen book. Those with a zero CRT score were willing to pay an 
average $4.54, whilst those with the maximum score were willing to pay $2.18.  
Frederick also found that the CRT was positively correlated with people’s attitudes to risk. 
The table below shows the results when people were presented with various gambles. 
When the gamble was framed in terms of gains, those with a high CRT score were far 
more likely to select the riskier option. However, when framed in terms of losses, the high 
CRT group were markedly less loss averse and selected to take the certain loss rather 
than gamble.  
Risk attitudes and the CRT 
                                    Percentage choosing riskier option
Gamble 
Low CRT Score 
High CRT Score
$100 for sure or a 75% chance of $250 
19 
38
Lose $100 for sure or a 75% chance to lose $250 
54 
31
$100 for sure or a 3% chance of $7000 
8 
21
Lose $100 for sure or a 3% chance to lose $7000 
63 
28
Source: Frederick (2005) 
In many of the behaviour patterns we observe there is a marked difference between the 
performance of those with high and low scores on the CRT. So in the sections below I 
will show the average/overall results and then show the results obtained for the various 
CRT groups.  
Anchoring 
The very first set of questions were designed to see if fund managers displayed any 
tendency towards anchoring. Remember that anchoring is our tendency to grab hold of 
irrelevant and often subliminal inputs in the face of uncertainty. The idea behind the 
question is to see if people use their phone numbers as an input when trying to estimate 
the number of Doctors in London.  
Of course, if people were rational then there would be no difference between those who 
happened to have high telephone numbers and those with low telephone numbers. 
Unfortunately, as the chart below shows, those with telephone numbers above 7000 

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
8 
 
believe there are on average just over 8000 doctors. Those with telephone numbers 
below 3000 think they are around 4000 doctors. This represents a very clear difference of 
opinion driven by the fact that investors are using their telephone numbers, albeit 
subconsciously, as inputs into their forecast.  
From the perspective of the CRT, all the groups except those with the maximum CRT 
score exhibit noticeable anchoring effects. We don’t have that many managers in the 
zero category (thankfully!) so we can’t be sure (statistically speaking) that there is a 
meaningful difference, but in the other cases we certainly can.   
Anchoring: Telephone numbers as an input 
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
>7000
<3000
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
Anchoring: by CRT group 
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
0
1
2
3
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
Framing 
Framing refers to a situation whereby we fail to see through the way in which information 
is provided to us. In the test I essentially presented one question twice. Once framed in 
terms of saving lives and once in terms of killing people (questions 11 and 14). Now there 
is no attempt at trickery here – question 14 even refers to question 11. If people were 
rational then it should make no difference whether the question is put in terms of saving 
200 people or 400 people dying.  
However, as the chart below shows, when the question is framed in terms of saving lives, 
nearly 80% of respondents choose the certain option. However, when it is framed in 
terms of people dying only 56% of people chose the certain option. This is a serious 
preference reversal – a major problem for economics which claims that people’s 
preferences should be stable.  

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
9 
 
Equally as worrying from our perspective 20% of the population were indifferent between 
options a and b or options c and d. This shows an alarming lack of understanding about 
risk. Option A results in 200 lives saved for sure, whereas option B only has an expected 
value of 200 lives saved. A certain value should always be preferred to an exactly equal 
expected payoff! After all it is only expected whereas the certain value is guaranteed. The 
indifference expressed means that the respondents fail to take into account the risk 
involved. This lack of understanding of risk is slightly unsettling given our industry is 
meant to be vaguely aware of the concept!  
Framing: clear evidence of a preference reversal (%) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
11
14
Certain
Risky
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
This represents a large preference reversal with 22% of people appearing to change their 
minds between the two presentations of the problem – a far cry from rationality. 
The chart below shows the percentage of participants showing a preference reversal 
sorted into CRT groups. The scale of preference reversals is monotonically declining as 
the success at the CRT increases. So nearly 40% of those who didn’t get any of the CRT 
questions correct exhibited a preference switch. This drops to 16.5% by the time we work 
our way up to the group with the highest CRT score.  
Framing effects drop as CRT score rises (%) 
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
1
2
3
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
Loss aversion 
Loss aversion refers to our tendency to dislike losses far more than we like gains. 
Question 12 represents a quick and easy way of measuring the scale of loss aversion. 
On the toss of a fair coin, if you lose you have to pay me £100. What is the minimum you 
need to win to make that bet attractive?  

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
10 
 
The chart below shows the frequency of choices. The average is £190! That fits pretty 
well with the vast majority of studies which show that generally people dislike losses 
somewhere around 2-2½ times as much as they enjoy gains.  
It is slightly worrying that we got answers below £100! Even I could make money out of 
these guys.  
Fund managers are just about as loss averse as everyone else (frequency %) 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
51
60
66
100
100
101
105
110
120
150
200
200
210
250
300
400
500
600
1000
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
The scale of reward needed to persuade people to accept the bet is also closely related 
to the CRT. For instance, those who got only one of the CRT questions correct required 
an average of £275, those with two CRT questions correct £229, those with the 
maximum CRT score asked for only £165.  
Those with zero score on the CRT only asked for £158 pounds. However, 60% of them 
didn’t answer the question. It remains unclear whether they didn’t understand the 
question (which seems unlikely) or whether they simply won’t bet at all (i.e. an infinite 
required payoff). So I don’t read much into the low requested amount from the zeros.  
Amount needed to play the gamble by CRT score (£) 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
1
2
3
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
Keynes’ beauty contest 
When Keynes wrote the General Theory in Chapter 12 he likened professional investing 
to a newspaper beauty contest. He opined: 
The actual, private object of the most skilled investment to-day is “to beat the 
gun”, to outwit the crowd, and to pass the bad, or depreciating, half-crown to 
the other fellow. 

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
11 
 
This battle of wits to anticipate the basis of conventional valuation a few 
months hence, rather than the prospective yield of an investment over a long 
term of years, does not even require gulls amongst the public to feed the 
maws of the professional; — it can be played by professionals amongst 
themselves. Nor is it necessary that anyone should keep his simple faith in 
the conventional basis of valuation having any genuine long-term validity. For 
it is, so to speak, a game of Snap, of Old Maid, of Musical Chairs — a 
pastime in which he is victor who says Snap neither too soon nor too late, 
who passes the Old Maid to his neighbour before the game is over, who 
secures a chair for himself when the music stops. These games can be 
played with zest and enjoyment, though all the players know that it is the Old 
Maid which is circulating, or that when the music stops some of the players 
will find themselves unseated. 
Or, to change the metaphor slightly, professional investment may be likened 
to those newspaper competitions in which the competitors have to pick out 
the six prettiest faces from a hundred photographs, the prize being awarded 
to the competitor whose choice most nearly corresponds to the average 
preferences of the competitors as a whole; so that each competitor has to 
pick, not those faces which he himself finds prettiest, but those which he 
thinks likeliest to catch the fancy of the other competitors, all of whom are 
looking at the problem from the same point of view. It is not a case of 
choosing those which, to the best of one’s judgment, are really the prettiest, 
nor even those which average opinion genuinely thinks the prettiest. We have 
reached the third degree where we devote our intelligences to anticipating 
what average opinion expects the average opinion to be. And there are 
some, I believe, who practise the fourth, fifth and higher degrees. 
John Maynard Keynes, General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money 
(1936) p155-156 
I have played this game before. Indeed for an in-depth discussion on the subject see 
Global Equity Strategy, 17 February 2004. Question 17 represents a mathematical 
version of the game. The aim of the task is to pick a number between 0 and 100, the 
winner being the person who picks the number closest to 2/3rds of the average number 
picked.  
The game itself should be a simple one under the standard assumptions of economics. 
i.e. rationality and common knowledge. Since all players want to choose 2/3rds of the 
average, there is only one number that satisfies the equation x = 2/3*x, zero. So the only 
equilibrium4 answer to this question is zero (as many of you pointed out).  
The game can be solved by a process known as “iterated dominance”. A dominated 
strategy is one that yields a lower payoff than another, regardless of what other players 
are doing. For example, choosing a number greater than 67 is a dominated strategy 
because the highest possible solution to the game is 67 (i.e. if everyone else picks the 
maximum number 100). However, if no-one violates dominance by choosing a number 
above 67, then the highest outcome is 2/3rds of 67 and so on. Deleting dominated 
strategies in this fashion will eventually lead you to zero5.  
Of course, this only works under the assumption that everyone you are playing against is 
rational, and they know that you are rational as well. As soon as we start to see that at 
                                            
4 Technically, zero is the only fixed point Nash equilibrium 
5 This process is also known as backward induction 

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
12 
 
least some of the market is not fully rational then the problem becomes more and more 
complex.  
I originally played this game to show how hard it was to be just one step ahead of 
everyone else. The findings from playing it again show that this is still a very valid 
conclusion. The chart below shows the frequency of answers from our 300 fund 
managers.  
The average number picked was 30 giving a 2/3rds average of 20.  Rather than using the 
iterated dominance strategies outlined earlier, most players assume that the starting 
point should be 50, i.e. the mean from a random draw. Hence level zero players chose 
50 (15% of our total sample). Level one players chose the best reaction to the level zero 
players i.e. they picked 2/3rds of 50, providing a spike at 33 (14% of our sample). Level 
two players “best react” to a 33, yielding the massive spike at 22 (7% of our sample). 
Level three players end up with 15 as their pick (2% of the sample). Once past level two 
or three reasoning, players frequently slide down the slippery slope towards the infinite 
iterations that produce zero (11% of our sample).  
Keynes’ beauty contest (frequency, %) 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
It is easy to measure the number of steps of strategic thinking that are being carried out 
by the following formula (for choices less than 50) ln(x/50)/ln(2/3). So with an average of 
30, the average level of thinking comes out at 1.3 steps!  
People’s performance on the CRT was related to the degrees of thinking they displayed 
when it came to the beauty contest game. Those with a zero score on the CRT selected 
an average number of 47 in the beauty contest, whereas those with a score of 3 on the 
CRT had an average selection of 22.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
13 
 
Keynes’ beauty contest average choice by CRT group 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
1
2
3
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
Monty Hall Problem 
The final element examined by our test is the Monty Hall problem. This is one of the most 
divisive problems that I have ever come across. It regularly leaves professors of maths 
purple in the face from arguing about it. It is question 16, the game show with the three 
doors, behind which are two goats and one car. I am assuming that you want to win the 
car, as I played this with one person who was Greek and said he wanted to win the 
goats!  
You pick a door, then I will open one of the other doors and reveal a goat. I then offer you 
the chance to switch from the door you chose to the other unopened door. Should you 
switch?  
% choosing each option in the Monty Hall problem 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Stick
Switch
No preference
 
Source: DrKW Macro research 
47% said they would stick with the door they original chose. 43% said they would switch 
and 11% said they had no preference. The correct answer is that you should switch. Now 
why? 
Well consider the pictures below. Each row represents a version of the game. Let us 
assume that you always choose door one (purely for pedagogical reasons). In the first 
row I can then open either door 2 or 3, and if you switch you lose. However, in the other 
two games switch is the optimal strategy. In row two you pick door one, and I will open 
door three, if you switch you win. In row three you pick door one, and I will open door 
two, if you switch you win. The hidden piece of information is that I am never going to 
reveal the car. So the only time you win by sticking is when you pick the car straight off – 
a one in three chance.  

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An alternative way of thinking about it is to do the following. The door you pick obviously 
has a 1/3 chance of being the correct door. When I open the door it very clearly has a 
zero probability attached to it. Thus the other door must have a probability of 2/3. This 
can be proved via Bayes’ Theorem but I will omit the proof for the sake of readability.  
Conclusions 
The purpose of this note was to illustrate that professional fund managers aren’t a breed 
apart. They are just as likely as everyone else to suffer behaviour biases. The objective is 
not to laugh at how foolish others are, but rather to show just how hard it is to avoid 
falling into cognitive pitfalls.  
Even those with the maximum CRT score still appeared to generate exaggerated 
opinions of themselves, and to have a tendency to look for information that agreed with 
them.  
The challenge facing all of us is to learn to be more reflective rather than reflexive. Of 
course, learning isn’t easy. So designing a framework that is relatively robust to 
behavioural biases may actually be the easy path – I started down that road with the 
Seven Sins of Fund Management (November 2005). Keep an eye out for more in this 
vein a little later in the year.       
 

 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006
 
15 
[12064 : 110515]
 
Disclosure appendix  
Disclosures under US regulations 
 
The relevant research analyst(s), as named on the front cover of this report, certify that (a) all of the views expressed in 
this research report accurately reflect their personal views about the securities and companies mentioned in this report; 
and (b) no part of their compensation was, is, or will be directly or indirectly related to the specific recommendation(s) or 
views expressed by them contained in this report. 
Any forecasts or price targets shown for companies and/or securities discussed in this report may not be achieved due to 
multiple risk factors including without limitation market volatility, sector volatility, corporate actions, the unavailability of 
complete and accurate information and/or the subsequent transpiration that underlying assumptions made by DrKW or by 
other sources relied upon in the report were inapposite. 
Recommendation history charts 
Past performance is not an indicator of future performance. 
 
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Research – Recommendation definition 
(Except as otherwise noted, expected performance over next 12 months) 
Buy: 
10% or greater increase in share price 
 
Sell: 
10% or more decrease in share price 
Add: 
5-10% increase in share price 
 
Reduce: 
5-10% decrease in share price 
Hold: 
+5%/-5% variation in share price 
 
 
 
 
Distribution of DrKW equity recommendations as of 31 Dec 2005 
 
All covered companies
Companies where a DrKW company has provided 
investment banking services (in the last 12 months)
Buy/Add 
297
53%
45
15%
Hold 
186
33%
19
10%
Sell/Reduce 
81
14%
10
12%
Total 
564
74
Source: DrKW 
Additional disclosures under other non-US regulations 
The disclosures under US regulations above should be read together with these additional disclosures. 
 
Recipients should note that DrKW may have submitted a draft of this report (with recommendation/rating, price 
target/spread and summary of conclusions removed) to the relevant issuer(s) for factual review and that amendments 
may have been made following that review. 
In respect of any compendium report covering six or more listed companies, please refer to the following website for all 
relevant disclosures: www.drkwresearch.com/disclosures/ 
 
Disclaimer 
This report has been prepared by Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein, by the specific legal entity named on the cover or 
inside cover page. 
 
United Kingdom: This report is a communication made, or approved for communication in the UK, by Dresdner Kleinwort 
Wasserstein Securities Limited (authorised and regulated by the Financial Services Authority and a Member Firm of the 
London Stock Exchange). It is directed exclusively to market counterparties and intermediate customers. It is not directed 
at private customers and any investments or services to which the report may relate are not available to private 
customers. No persons other than a market counterparty or an intermediate customer should read or rely on any 
information in this report. Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited does not deal for, or advise or otherwise 
offer any investment services to private customers. 
European Economic Area: Where this report has been produced by a legal entity outside of the EEA, the report has been 
re-issued by Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited and Dresdner Bank AG London Branch for distribution 
into the EEA. Dresdner Bank AG is authorised and regulated by the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority ('BaFin') by 
the laws of Germany. 
United States: Where this report has been approved for distribution in the US, such distribution is by either: (i) Dresdner 
Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities LLC (DrKWS LLC); or (ii) other Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein companies to US 
Institutional Investors and Major US Institutional Investors only ; or (iii) if the report relates to non-US exchange traded 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Global Equity Strategy 
2 February 2006 
 
16 
[12064 : 110515]
futures, Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Limited (DrKWL). DrKWS LLC, or in case (iii) DrKWL, accepts responsibility for 
this report in the US. Any US persons wishing to effect a transaction through Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein (a) in any 
security mentioned in this report may only do so through DrKWS LLC, telephone: (+1 212) 429 2000; or (b) in a non-US 
exchange traded future may only do so through DrKWL, telephone: (+ 11 44) 20 7623 8000; or (c) in a banking product 
may only do so through Dresdner Bank AG New York Branch, telephone (+1 212) 969 2700. 
Singapore: This research report is being distributed for Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein ("DrKW") in Singapore by 
Dresdner Bank AG, Singapore Branch, purely as a resource and for general informational purposes only, and is intended 
for general circulation. Accordingly, this research report does not take into account the specific investment objectives, 
financial situation, or needs of any particular person and is exempted from the same by Regulation 34 of the Financial 
Advisers Regulations ("FAR") (as required under Section 27 of the Financial Advisers Act (Cap. 110) of Singapore 
("FAA")). 
Hong Kong:  This report is being distributed for Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein in Hong Kong by Dresdner Kleinwort 
Wasserstein Securities Limited.  Unless permitted to do so by the securities laws of Hong Kong, no person may issue or 
have in its possession for the purposes of issue this report, whether in Hong Kong or elsewhere, which is directed at, or 
the contents of which are likely to be accessed or read by, the public in Hong Kong, other than with respect to the 
securities referred to in this report which are or are intended to be disposed of only to persons outside Hong Kong or only 
to "professional investors" within the meaning of the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap.571) of Hong Kong and any 
rules made thereunder, and to persons whose ordinary business is to buy and sell shares or debentures. 
Japan: Where this report is being distributed in Japan, such distribution is by either (i) Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein 
(Japan) Limited Tokyo Branch (DrKWJ, registered and regulated by the Financial Services Agency and General Trading 
Participant of TSE, Regular Transaction Participant and Transaction Participant in Futures Transaction of OSE, 
Participant of JASDAQ) to Japanese investors excluding private customers or (ii) other Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein 
companies, to entities falling within Article 2, Paragraph 1 of the Enforcement Order for Law Concerning Foreign 
Securities Firms act. Any Japanese persons not falling within (ii) wishing to effect a transaction through Dresdner 
Kleinwort Wasserstein in any security mentioned in this report may only do so through DrKWJ, telephone: (+ 813) 6230 
6000. 
Australia: Neither Dresdner Bank AG ("DBAG") nor Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited ("DrKWSL") holds 
an Australian financial services licence.  This report is being distributed in Australia to wholesale customers pursuant to an 
Australian financial services licence exemption for DBAG under Class Order 04/1313 or for DrKWSL under Class Order 
03/1099.  DBAG is regulated by BaFin under the laws of Germany and DrKWSL is regulated by the Financial Services 
Authority under the laws of the United Kingdom, both of which differ from Australian laws. 
This report contains general information only, does not take account of the specific circumstances of any recipient and 
should not be relied upon as authoritative or taken in substitution for the exercise of judgment by any recipient. Each 
recipient should consider the appropriateness of any investment decision having regard to their own circumstances, the 
full range of information available and appropriate professional advice. The information and opinions in this report 
constitute judgment as at the date of this report, have been compiled or arrived at from sources believed to be reliable and 
in good faith (but no representation or warranty, express or implied, is made as to their accuracy, completeness or 
correctness) and are subject to change without notice. DrKW may amend, supplement or update the contents of this 
report in such form and in such timescales as DrKW deems appropriate. Recommendations and opinions herein reflect 
DrKW's expectations over the 12 month period following publication from the perspective of long-only investment clients. 
DrKW reserves the right to express different or contrary recommendations and opinions for different timescales or for 
other types of investment client. This report does not constitute or form part of, and should not be construed as, any offer 
for sale or subscription of, or any invitation to offer to buy or subscribe for, any securities, nor should it or any part of it 
form the basis of, or be relied on in any connection with, any contract or commitment whatsoever. DrKW accepts no 
liability whatsoever for any loss or damage arising from any use of this report or its contents. Whilst DrKW may provide 
hyperlinks to websites of entities mentioned in this report, the inclusion of a link does not imply that DrKW endorses, 
recommends or approves any material on the linked page or accessible from it. DrKW accepts no responsibility 
whatsoever for any such material, nor for any consequences of its use. This report is for the use of the addressees only, is 
supplied to you solely in your capacity as an investment professional or knowledgeable and experienced investor for your 
information and may not be reproduced, redistributed or passed on to any other person or published, in whole or in part, 
for any purpose, without the prior, written consent of DrKW. DrKW may distribute reports such as this in hard copy, 
electronically or by Voiceblast. DrKW and/or any of its clients may undertake or have undertaken transactions for their 
own account in the securities mentioned in this report or any related investments prior to your receipt of it. DrKW 
specifically draws recipients attention to the disclosures contained in the Disclosure Appendix but notes that, excluding (i) 
DrKWS LLC and (ii) the research analyst(s) responsible for this report unless specifically addressed in the "Disclosures 
under US regulations": (a) DrKW and its directors, officers, representatives and employees may have positions in or 
options on the securities mentioned in this report or any related investments or may buy, sell or offer to buy or sell such 
securities or any related investments as principal or agent on the open market or otherwise; and (b) DrKW may conduct, 
solicit and/or engage in other investment and/or commercial banking business (including without limitation loans, debt 
securities and/or derivative, currency and commodity transactions) with the issuers or relating to the securities mentioned 
in this report. Accordingly, information may be available to DrKW, which is not reflected in this report or the disclosures. In 
this notice “DrKW” means Dresdner Bank AG and/or Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited and any of their 
affiliated or associated companies and their directors, officers, representatives or employees and/or any persons 
connected with them.  Additional information on the contents of this report is available at www.drkwresearch.com 
and on request.  
© Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities Limited 2006 
