I
CHAPTER 1
KNOW YOURSELF
Good traders are introspective and self-aware
n trading, the enemy is not bad luck. It’s not other traders, or the market.
The enemy is not the algos or the central banks or the goldbugs or sales or
your manager or the HODLers or Dave Portnoy or QE. When it comes to
trading, enemy number one is you.
Know the enemy and know yourself.
SUN TZU
I like that Sun Tzu quote for Chapter One of a book about trading
because it has a cool circularity. In trading, the enemy and the self are one.
You will not succeed in trading without self-awareness and discipline.
The biggest challenge in trading is not choosing what asset class to
trade, or when to buy and sell, or what percentage of your capital to risk on
each trade. The biggest challenge in trading is to manage your self. You are
a bundle of emotions, memories, history, knowledge, and bias. You can be
smart and do stupid things. You can make a hard job impossible by making
irrational and compulsive decisions.
The first step toward becoming a better trader is to get a firm handle on
who you are right now. Therefore, before we delve into what makes a
successful trader, I want you to complete a quick quiz. It will help you set a
personal baseline and take an inventory of your attributes. It will give you a
snapshot of how you see yourself as a trader before we jump in.
DO THE QUIZ NOW! Don’t be lazy. It will take you five minutes or
less.
Instructions
Rate yourself in each category of the trader assessment below by putting
an X in the appropriate box in each row. Be honest. Don’t think about your
best or worst moments. Your answers should reflect how you see yourself
as a trader on an average day. Do the test privately without any chance of
your boss or coworkers seeing. Otherwise, you may be tempted to stretch
the truth or exaggerate your positive traits.
If you have never traded before, that’s fine. Most people have a pretty
good idea of their likely strengths and weaknesses even before they start
trading, so just fill out how you see yourself, or how you think you will act
as a trader. Don’t think about your ideal self; just record the current reality.
Sure, there will be some bias and uncertainty and subjectivity and probably
overconfidence as you complete the grid. That’s fine. Just do your best.
You may have noticed something when filling out the quiz: The traits
are arranged in a specific way. Each of the four sections has its own logic.
Here is how the groups are arranged:
Group 1 (A to D): These traits are on a continuum where both
extremes are bad. You need a lot—but not too much—of many traits
to succeed in trading. For example, an Alpha Trader must be risk
seeking 
but 
not 
reckless. 
She 
must 
be 
confident 
but 
not
overconfident. She must be nimble but not constantly changing her
mind. An independent thinker but not a reflexive contrarian.
Finding the fine balance is part of what makes trading so hard. Too careful
and you’ll never make any money. Not careful enough, you’ll blow up. It is
hard for many to find the middle ground on the continuum of particular
attributes.
Group 2 (E to L): Successful traders tend to score on the high end
(right hand side) of this scale.
Group 3 (M to V): Successful traders tend to score on the low end
(left hand side) of this scale.
Group 4 (W to Z): These traits influence you as a trader but there is
no strictly better place to land on the scale.
Now let’s look at the ideal trader. Keep in mind, this ideal trader does
not exist. This is an abstraction to help you see where you are vs. the ideal.
Also keep in mind that I am not the holder of absolute truth on this topic. I
have decades of experience and I have done extensive research on this topic
but it is possible for reasonable people to disagree about the importance of
many of these personality traits as they pertain to trading success. The
research is not conclusive; in fact, it’s often contradictory.
For example, the research on the importance of gut feel in trading is all
over the place. Much of it uses experiments with small sample sizes to
make general but unconvincing conclusions. Some of it uses methodology
that I find uninspired. The fact that the research on gut feel in trading is
mixed probably tells you something about the relative importance of gut
feel. Unlike rational thinking, which all research deems to be critically
important, gut feel is less clearly an important part of trading success.
In fact, relying on your gut can often be detrimental. Intuition can be the
aggregation of data and patterns processed at a subconscious level to reach
useful conclusions, or it can be a bunch of sloppy heuristics and emotion
that produces biased, irrational decisions.
After working on various trading floors for many years and studying the
research on trader success and failure, here are my best estimates for the
ideal characteristics of the Alpha Trader:
How do your scores match up to the Alpha Trader? Where do your
scores diverge? Does this divergence concern you or does it make perfect
sense? Some divergences might be worrisome, and some might just identify
how you are unique. Remember, this is a thought experiment not a math
problem.
Each trait will be discussed more fully later on, so I will not take a lot of
time explaining them here. I’ll give you just enough to satisfy your curiosity
since I’m sure you’re wondering about a few of my answers.
A: Risk seeking is a natural fit for trading, but too much leads to
recklessness and ruin.
B: Confidence is good, but overconfidence is kryptonite.
C: “Strong opinions, weakly held.” If you don’t know this concept,
don’t worry. We’ll cover it in Chapter 5.
D: You need to think for yourself but not reflexively go against the
crowd. The crowd is correct more often, and for longer, than many
contrarians expect.
E: Rational, high-quality thinking is the #1 characteristic of an Alpha
Trader.
F: Trading is stressful. Can you handle it?
G: Self-control and willpower are critical. Making rules is easy.
Sticking to them is hard.
H: Trading is a quantitative game full of estimated probability, hidden
mathematics, 
and 
incomplete 
information. 
Math 
and 
statistics
knowledge are a huge edge.
I: Trading is hard. Simply doing the work is a big advantage in a
world where even professional traders can sometimes be lazy.
J: A passion for trading is the motivation that will lead you to success:
not a passion for money. Trading is too hard and too grueling to do
just for the money.
K: Logic trumps gut feel most of the time.
L: Losing streaks and big losses hurt. A positive attitude helps you
bounce back when you inevitably hit a rough patch. A negative
outlook 
can 
pull 
you 
into 
a 
downward 
spiral 
when 
markets
inevitably fail to cooperate.
M: Good traders seem to be luckier than bad traders. Hmmm.
N: Trading is a marathon. You need endurance to keep running.
O: One edge in markets is to look at the world differently than others.
But if you are extremely creative, you may find that trading is not a
good enough outlet for that creativity.
P: The Trading Gods are not pushing the market against you. The
more you believe that you are in control of your life, the better
your odds of trading success.
Q: Traders need to be decisive, but extreme decisiveness may border
on 
impulsiveness 
and 
that 
can 
lead 
to 
overconfidence 
and
overtrading.
R: Adapt or die. Markets are always changing. Can you keep up? S:
Trading in the zone requires focus. But you need to be able to
multi-task a bit as well. Singular focus is not usually possible in
trading 
as 
you 
must 
toggle 
between 
various 
markets, 
reading
research, monitoring Twitter, and actual trading activity.
T: 
Curiosity 
leads 
to 
learning. 
Learning 
makes 
you 
more
knowledgeable. Superior knowledge is an edge.
U: An organized trader has a clear process. She collects data and
approaches the task of trading methodically. That’s a good thing!
V: Nothing beats experience. If you never make the same mistake
twice, you won’t make many mistakes after 20 years.
W: Emotion is not a good or bad thing in trading. All kinds of
emotional types can succeed in finance. That said, emotion and
irrational behavior tend to go together so if you’re emotional you
need to be unusually self-aware, too.
X: There are some advantages to having a network of contacts but a
trader can easily succeed completely on his own.
Y: A wide body of research shows women perform better at trading
than men. This is mostly because men trade more than women due
to overconfidence.
Z: Extroverts and introverts might have different styles but neither
one is better or worse at trading.
Your scores on the quiz should take you one small or perhaps medium-
sized step closer to self-awareness. Self-knowledge comes from experience
and from data, but it can also come from focused introspection.
Keep 
in 
mind 
that 
you 
are 
probably 
overconfident 
in 
your 
self-
assessment. Whatever grades you gave yourself are probably somewhat
inflated 
relative 
to 
reality 
because 
human 
beings 
pretty 
much 
always
overrate themselves. In a survey I conducted in 2016, for example (see
figure 1.1), 70% of traders said they were better than average while just 5%
rated themselves worse than average. Not possible! You are almost certainly
not quite as good as you think you are.
Men are especially prone to overconfidence. But even if you overrated
yourself on every positive variable in this quiz, the relative distinctions you
make between traits (not the absolute numbers you assign) are the most
important thing. This will reveal your strengths, expose some weaknesses,
and help you find avenues for continuous improvement.
The harsh reality of trading is that it is insanely difficult (but not
impossible!) to succeed. If you have been trading for a while, you have a
good sense of the enormous challenge presented by trading. If you are new
here, I want to give you a realistic view of the success rate.
Success in trading is only possible for a small group of individuals, but
those 
individuals 
are 
rewarded 
with 
an 
incredible 
adventure 
and
extraordinary financial upside. The more worthwhile and lucrative a goal is
in this world, the harder the achievement of the goal is likely to be. Trading
certainly fits that relationship. It is a business with an extremely high level
of difficulty but massive reward potential.
Now that you have taken a few minutes to think about your trader
personality, let’s head to Chapter 2 and look at just how difficult it is to
achieve persistent trading success.