T
CHAPTER 2
IF IT WAS EASY, IT WOULDN’T PAY
SO WELL
Research shows success in trading is hard to achieve and harder to
sustain
rading for a living is like becoming a pro athlete or a famous author or
a professional poker player. There are few barriers to entry and no
specific credentials are required. And the financial rewards are potentially
astronomical. Anyone can dream of making it big in these fields. But only a
tiny fraction of those who go after the dream will succeed at any point. An
even smaller fraction will achieve sustained success over many decades.
The goal of this book is to help you become one of the very few who
thrives—and survives.
Intelligence and drive are the keys to success in most business pursuits,
but this is not strictly true in trading. Intelligence and drive are necessary,
but not sufficient conditions for trading success.
Many people think of trading as a zero-sum game and that makes them
feel optimistic. Since almost everyone believes themselves to be better than
average in almost all pursuits, the thought is that if something is a zero-sum
game, all you have to do is be better than the next guy to win. Wrong.
Trading is a negative sum game.
When I was day trading equities, most traders were gross positive and
net negative in most periods. They could take money out of the market, but
not enough to cover their brokerage, bid/offer spread and other slippage.
Transaction costs and slippage are a significant drag for traders at every
level.
Therefore, you need a significant edge to not only make money, but also
to make enough money to exceed execution, technology, and operational
costs. Further, grinding out tiny profits still isn’t enough. There is so much
risk and uncertainty involved in trading that for it to make any sense, you
need to significantly exceed the income you could make in a lower risk
profession. The bar for success in trading is high.
WHAT PERCENTAGE OF TRADERS SUCCEED?
The word “succeed” can mean many things, but based on various
metrics, my conclusion from the research and my own observation over the
years is that the success rate for independent day traders is probably
between 3% and 5%. For institutional traders, the success rate is much,
much higher because:
• there are many barriers to entry that one must overcome before
earning a role on an institutional trading desk so the pool of entrants
is 
much 
more 
highly 
qualified 
and 
well-vetted 
than 
a 
random
selection of independent traders;
• traders at a bank receive significant training and are surrounded by
experienced mentors; and
• market making has a built-in edge which gives new traders at a bank
more runway.
In my experience, of all the individuals who manage to get one of the
few trading seats available at a bank, about 50% succeed as traders. I define
“succeed” as: still employed and profitable three years after starting.
For traders at a hedge fund, the success rate is higher than retail but
lower than bank traders. Most hedge funds don’t have elaborate training
programs or the edge from market making that banks do, but most traders
hired by hedge funds already have substantial experience, so the sample is
biased. You are usually already successful by the time you get a job at a
hedge fund.
Cory Mitchell of day trading firm Vantage Point Trading wrote a nice
blog post on this topic
1
. He defined success as “producing consistent profits
for 
multiple 
years” 
and 
after 
studying 
a 
meaningful 
sample 
size 
he
estimated the observed success rate at Vantage Point was between 3.5% and
4.5%.
When I worked as a day trader in Toronto in the late 1990s, the success
rate was about the same. I sat on a trading floor that held 50 people and
almost the entire floor turned over three times in the three years I was there.
Anyone that lasted, I got to know well because we spent so much time
together in the office.
Of the ~150 traders that came and went, 8 made money consistently for
two years or more. Most bombed out in three to six months and the
remainder struggled for one or two years but could never grind out enough
money to call it a job. 8 out of 150 is 5.3%, and that low success rate came
despite a mandatory (and excellent) 2-week training course.
The low success rate makes sense and is roughly consistent with success
rates in other sought-after skill-based professions with low barriers to entry
such as fiction writing and pro sports. About 2.6% of published books sell
more than 5,000 copies
2
. 3% to 7% of high school athletes make the NCAA
in most sports while about 2% of NCAA athletes go pro
3
.
If you’re new to trading, you need to understand going in that the
success rate is low. You will need a ton of innate skill, the energy to work
hard every single day and rare levels of perseverance to have any chance
whatsoever. It’s not a matter of flicking through a few charts, drawing a
couple of trendlines or using some automated Charty McChart Chart
POWERIndicator™.
Brad Barber, Yi-Sung Lee, Terrence Odean, Ke Zhang and Yu-Jane Liu
studied this topic in a 2017 research paper: “Do individual day traders make
money? Evidence from Taiwan.” Day trading was extremely popular in
Taiwan in the late 1990s (as it was in many other countries). 20% of all
trading 
volume 
in 
Taiwanese 
stocks 
at 
that 
time 
was 
attributable 
to
individual day traders.
Here are the takeaways from their study:
One percent of individual investors accounted for half of day trading
volume in Taiwan.
Heavy day traders made gross profits but not enough to cover
transaction costs and thus they were net negative P&L.
Over any particular 6-month period, 8 out of 10 day traders lost
money.
A small group of day traders had persistent ability to generate net
profit, in excess of transaction costs.
Many traders sustained losses for long periods before quitting.
About 1% of traders generated consistent profits through skill.
This quote from an article about the study captures the long odds of
success they uncovered
4
:
The vast, vast majority of day traders were losing money. Unless you
really had a strong reason to think that your ability to day trade was much
greater than that of most people, it made no sense to start day trading in
the first place. It’d be like, to some extent, going into a casino and saying
I’m really good at roulette; even though I know everyone else loses
money at roulette, I’m going to win.
For the record, professional investors have a very low success rate too.
Here’s a typical stat, from a January 2020 Financial Times article
5
: “Just 28
per cent of US equity fund managers investing in large companies managed
to beat the US stock market last year, and over the past decade a mere 11
per cent managed to do so, according to Bank of America.” This result
emerges in study after study.
A random group of unskilled investors should beat the market 50% of
the time. Yet a significant majority of investors consistently underperform a
simple index or benchmark. Solving for how to generate alpha in highly-
efficient markets is one of the toughest puzzles on earth.
Markets are extremely (but not perfectly) efficient.
Knowing that success in trading is rare, let’s look at how to achieve it.
The next chapter is twenty pages or so. It’s a short discussion of the
research on success in general. Then, in Chapter 4, we will apply these
lessons about achievement in general to the more specific subject of trading
success.
1. 
https://vantagepointtrading.com/whats-the-day-trading-success-rate-the-thorough-
answer/
2. 
https://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/columns-and-blogs/soapbox/article/6153-
a-bookselling-tail.html
3. 
http://www.ncaa.org/about/resources/research/estimated-probability-competing-college-
athletics
4. https://www.aaii.com/journal/article/trading-more-frequently-leads-to-worse-returns
5. https://www.ft.com/content/a7e20d96-318c-11ea-9703-eea0cae3f0de