T
CHAPTER 3
UNDERSTANDING SUCCESS
Success and high performance in the world outside of trading
his 
short 
chapter 
will 
give 
you 
some 
background 
on 
the 
main
determinants of success in the world in general, outside of trading.
Since trading is both a business and a skilled pursuit, it is worth doing a
quick review of what leads to success in similar fields, before we zoom in
on trading more specifically in Chapter 4.
Success is a squishy noun that can mean different things to different
people. Most research frames success in terms of one or more of the
following:
Income
Educational achievement
Ranking or achievement in sport
Happiness, health, and longevity
Avoidance of negative outcomes like criminality, addiction, and
divorce
We’ll focus on the first three since those are the outcomes that relate
most closely to trading. Let’s look at some measures and characteristics of
personality and how they relate to success.
This and next two images courtesy of Jonatan Pallesen https://jsmp.dk/posts/2019-06-16-
talebiq/
IQ (Intelligence Quotient)
IQ is a controversial topic in the world of psychology and there is
heated debate over what exactly it measures. This quote captures a few of
the shortcomings of IQ, in simple language:
Just to clear the air, let’s note first that whatever an intelligence test
measures 
it 
is 
not 
quite 
the 
same 
thing 
as 
we 
usually 
mean 
by
intelligence. It neglects such important things as leadership and creative
imagination. It takes no account of social judgement or musical or artistic
or other aptitudes, to say nothing of such personality matters as diligence
and emotional balance.
DARRELL HUFF, How to Lie with Statistics
There is plenty of controversy when researchers try to correlate IQ with
various measures of success. It is hard to control for all the other factors
that go into whatever form of success one is trying to measure. That said,
most research finds some link between IQ and success. For example, an
excellent paper by Jay Zagorsky of Boston University
6
comes to this
conclusion:
… results confirm other researchers’ findings that IQ test scores and
income are related. Depending on the method of analysis used and
specific factors held constant, each point increase in IQ test scores is
associated with $202 to $616 more income per year. This means the
average income difference between a person with an IQ score in the
normal range (100) and someone in the top 2% of society (130) is
currently between $6,000 and $18,500 per year.
Figure 3.1 from data blogger Jonatan Pallesen shows the relationship
between IQ and income using 10 years of data.
You can see the relationship slopes up and to the right and the very high
incomes are much more common in the top right quadrant than in the top
left quadrant. If we are defining success as income, IQ is an important
predictor.
Figure 3.2 offers a nice clear visual. Pallesen breaks IQ into three
groups (low, middle, high) to show how the median and right tails of the
income distribution relate to IQ:
Source: https://jsmp.dk/posts/2019-06-16-talebiq/
IQ also correlates with most other measures of success like mortality,
longevity, crime and (somewhat obviously) academic grades:
I included a chart of academic grades vs. IQ (Figure 3.3) so you can see
that even a measure of success directly connected to IQ (doing well in
school) still
Source: https://jsmp.dk/posts/2019-06-16-talebiq/
has significant volatility around the trend line. There are plenty of high
IQ students with poor grades and low IQ students with good grades.
Academic success depends on far more than intelligence.
After IQ, the next big driver of success is personality. There is so much
research on the connections between personality and life outcomes that no
individual could process it all in one lifetime. In the next few pages, I will
do my best to succinctly summarize some of the key relationships between
personality and success.
The Big Five
Most studies of personality and its impact on life outcomes use the Big
Five Personality Traits
7
. These are the five personality traits that dominate
the 
literature 
on 
personality. 
The 
five 
traits 
use 
common 
language
descriptors to classify people on five key domains. These five domains
incorporate nearly all aspects of human personality, and extensive research
shows that these five factors explain the majority of human character. The
model is sometimes known as OCEAN because the five traits are:
Openness to experience (inventive/curious vs. consistent/cautious)
Conscientiousness (efficient/organized vs. easy-going/careless)
Extraversion (outgoing/energetic vs. solitary/reserved)
Agreeableness (friendly/compassionate vs. challenging/detached)
Neuroticism (sensitive/nervous vs. secure/confident)
The Big Five is better than Myers-Briggs (MBTI) according to nearly
all researchers and psychologists because it is scientific and repeatable. In
contrast, Myers-Briggs was created in the 1920s by non-experts without any
scientific process or empirical inputs. MBTI often yields two different
results for the same person, even if the person takes the test twice in a short
span of time.
MBTI is fun and may have some practical applications, but it has no
empirical or scientific basis. As Wharton psychology professor Adam Grant
says in his Psychology Today article, Goodbye to MBTI, the fad that won’t
die
8
:
If we’re going to divide people into categories, those categories ought to
be 
meaningful. 
In 
social 
science, 
we 
use 
four 
standards: 
Are 
the
categories 
reliable, 
valid, 
independent, 
and 
comprehensive? 
For 
the
MBTI, the evidence says: Not very, no, no, and not really.
Scientists and experts strongly prefer the Big Five to MBTI so that is
what we’ll use here.
Each Big Five trait runs on a continuum. The five traits capture most or
all aspects of human personality, and there are many facets or more specific
traits that fall under each heading. Some of these traits are more relevant to
us than others. For example, I want to highlight grit and self-control as
critical facets under the heading of conscientiousness, because those are
important in trading.
Grit captures characteristics like perseverance, resilience, ambition, and
the pursuit of long-term goals. Multiple studies show that grit is highly
correlated with conscientiousness
9 
so it falls under that heading, but I think
it is specifically important to trading and thus worth mentioning separately.
Same 
story 
with 
self-control, 
which 
has 
a 
lower 
correlation 
with
conscientiousness than grit, but still falls in the same bucket
10
. We will
discuss these more later.
Most research shows that the Big Five traits are fairly stable over a
person’s lifetime. There is just one trait that changes significantly over the
lifetime of an average person: conscientiousness. There is a steady and
meaningful rise in conscientiousness as we age. Figure 3.4, made with data
provided by Christopher Soto, paints the picture
11
.
Remember 
though, 
this 
is 
an 
average. 
Averages 
camouflage 
the
substantial variance within a sample. Conscientiousness evolves differently
in specific individuals over time. Some people will massively increase their
conscientiousness as they grow. Some will flatline their entire life or even
become less conscientious.
Image: Donnelly, data provided by Christopher Soto
Untangling the connections between the Big Five traits and future
success is incredibly complex because of the need to control for so many
other factors (parental income, birthplace, sex, education, cross-correlation
between the traits themselves, etc.) but the multitude of studies on the Big
Five converge on some consistent conclusions
12
.
THE BIG FIVE AND FINANCIAL SUCCESS
Income has a strong positive correlation with conscientiousness and
extraversion. It has a weak negative relationship with agreeableness and
neuroticism. Openness results look inconclusive to me as they have a
negative coefficient in some studies and a positive coefficient in others.
Figure 3.5, an excellent diagram from Miriam Gensowski’s 2014 paper,
shows how she found the Big Five influenced men’s incomes, by age.
As 
one 
might 
expect, 
neuroticism 
correlates 
with 
many 
negative
outcomes including lower income and higher incidence of mental disorder
and general health problems. Note that the negative impact of neuroticism
on income is not large.
Agreeableness, perhaps surprisingly, shows up in more than a half-
dozen research papers as a negative influence on income. It consistently
reduces average earnings by 2%-6%
13
. Being nice doesn’t pay!
Besides the simple linear relationship between personality and income,
the fit between a job and the personality of the employee also matters.
Linear regression gives a brute force look at how personality influences
income, but a more nuanced approach is to match a worker’s personality to
an expert’s views on what personality traits are necessary in that person’s
job. Research shows that a good fit between a person and their job leads to
higher income for the worker
14
.
This 
last 
observation 
is 
important 
when 
we 
think 
about 
trading.
Knowing that job / personality fit is an important driver of income, we will
spend some time in Chapter 4 looking at how the Big Five relate to trading
success. This will help you understand if your personality is a good fit with
trading 
and 
where 
you 
might 
need 
to 
monitor 
a 
potential 
personality
mismatch.
To summarize, here is how the Big Five personality traits relate to income:
Trait
Correlation with income
Openness
None
Conscientiousness
Strong positive
Extraversion
Small positive
Agreeableness
Moderate negative
Neuroticism
Small negative
Obviously, income is just one way to measure success. Let’s look at two
others.
Success in sports
Athletic competition is similar to trading in many ways. Sports and
trading both present fast-moving, high-pressure environments with quick
decision-making 
and 
(usually) 
incomplete 
information. They 
present 
a
competitive 
atmosphere 
with 
well-defined 
rules, 
objective 
numerical
feedback, and clear winners and losers.
In sport, the trait that consistently correlates with high performance is,
once 
again, 
conscientiousness. 
This 
finding 
is 
consistent 
across 
many
papers
15
and pushes conscientiousness to the top of the charts in terms of
our 
best 
guess 
of 
what 
might 
matter 
for 
trading 
at 
this 
point. 
If
conscientiousness leads to higher income and better performance in sports,
it is logical to think it matters for trading too.
Academic success
Academic environments also have some similarity to trading. School
and 
trading 
both 
generally 
present 
intellectually 
challenging, 
problem-
solving 
environments 
where 
feedback 
is 
immediate 
and 
objective
(academic grades = P&L
16
). Once again, the number one trait that correlates
with 
academic 
performance 
is 
conscientiousness. 
And 
once 
again,
neuroticism correlates negatively.
It is worth mentioning here that academic grades and test scores are a
better predictor of career and social success than IQ
17
. This is because
outcomes 
like 
grades 
and 
test 
scores 
are 
a 
combination 
of 
not 
just
intelligence, but also hard work, conscientiousness, grit, self-control, and
perseverance. Intelligence is a necessary but not sufficient condition for
good grades, high test scores and future success. IQ by itself is not enough.
While the Big Five also have some predictive power when it comes to
happiness, health, mortality, divorce, criminality and other facets of life,
those realms are not measures of success that are as relevant to trading. We
know how the Big Five predict income, sports performance, and academic
success, three outcomes that I believe are correlated to trading success. The
overall results are clear:
Conscientiousness is the most important positive predictor of success.
IQ is also an important positive predictor.
Neuroticism is a less important, negative predictor of success.
Of course, we have only looked at innate traits so far. Another way of
looking at success is to isolate effort or hard work. Most research on
performance breaks down success into some combination of talent, skill,
and effort. You can’t just be smart and talented, you need to do the work.
We will go into that concept later but for now we can file “effort” under
“conscientiousness”.
Another important variable when it comes to success is environment.
Kids that grow up in supportive environments, like athletes with world-
class coaches, perform better. This is relevant to trading too, and we will
discuss the importance of a healthy trading environment later on. I have
been 
in 
both 
the 
right 
trading 
environment 
and 
the 
wrong 
trading
environment at various points in my career, and my belief is that trading is
so difficult that it becomes almost impossible if you are not in a supportive
setting.
Finally, luck is an extremely important contributor to success in any
specific activity and in life overall. Many successful people do not fully
appreciate or acknowledge the significant role luck played in their success.
As E. B. White put it: “Luck is not something you can mention in the
presence of self-made men.”
Some examples of how luck influences success:
More than 50% of the difference in income between any human being
on earth is determined by where they were born
18
. As Warren Buffett
put it:
“Through dumb luck, Charlie and I were born in the United States, and we
are forever grateful for the staggering advantages this accident of birth
has given us.”
WARREN BUFFETT’S 2014 Shareholder Letter
People born in June and July are significantly less likely to become
CEOs due to the relative age effect
19
. Schools group children together
by age, regardless of their birth month, and the cutoff for most schools
is July 31. Therefore, children born in June and July are disadvantaged
through life because they are younger than their classmates born in
other months and are perceived to be less mature, less intelligent, and
lower potential than their peers.
How about this completely insane true story from the early days of
FedEx
20
:
By mid-July our funds were so meager that on Friday we were down to
about $5,000 in the checking account, while we needed $24,000 for the
jet fuel payment… When I arrived back in Memphis on Monday morning,
much to my surprise, the bank balance stood at nearly $32,000. I asked
Fred where the funds had come from, and he responded, “The meeting
with the General Dynamics board was a bust and I knew we needed
money for Monday, so I took a plane to Las Vegas and won $27,000
(playing blackjack).” I said, “You mean you took our last $5,000 —how
could you do that?” He shrugged his shoulders and said, “What difference
does it make? Without the funds for the fuel companies, we couldn’t have
flown anyway.”
People born earlier in the year outperform those born later in the year
in almost every sport where this has been studied. The foreground bars
in Figure 3.6 show month of birth distribution for elite youth soccer
players in Europe, with overall month of birth data for the entire
population as the background bars.
Many simulations and studies show that luck plays an enormous role in
success, especially in cases of extreme success. While moderate success can
often be explained mostly by skill, effort and talent, extreme success
usually also requires significant good luck.
While you cannot control luck, remember that effort and skill determine
the slope of your life’s path, even if luck determines the starting point and
variance around that path. As Abraham Lincoln said: “The harder I work,
the luckier I get.” We will discuss this more in Chapter 15 and you will see
that some of what we tend to call luck is more just a matter of being
observant and seizing on opportunities that present themselves.
Image by Chemical287 via Creative Commons
Fortunately, most varieties of luck are short-term and mean-reverting.
The larger the sample, the more luck disappears and the true nature of a
phenomenon is revealed. A coin might come up heads 10 times in a row but
it’s not going to come up heads 500,000 times in a row. A bad trader might
make money 3 days in a row but she is unlikely to be profitable in any
given year. A weak poker player might beat a professional in a one-hour
session but he will go bust in a marathon cash game.
This discussion is important because luck plays a major role in trading.
It operates through multiple channels like short-term variance and path
dependence. In the Flash Crash story at the start of this book, there were
multiple instances where the trader got lucky and if you re-ran that Flash
Crash 
USD- 
JPY 
scenario 
a 
million 
times, 
there 
would 
be 
plenty 
of
instances where the trader came out deep in the red.
What seems like luck in life is often just careful observation and the
ability to capitalize on opportunity. Richard Wiseman, who has spent years
researching luck, set up a variety of interesting experiments to show that
luck is not really luck. In one experiment, he placed a $20-dollar bill on the
ground in the path of students and found that those that self-identified as
lucky were much more likely to notice and pick up the $20 bill than the
others.
In another study, Wiseman gave volunteers a newspaper and told them
to count the number of photos inside. On the second page, in large font,
there was a box that said: “Stop counting—there are 43 photographs in this
newspaper.” Another box halfway through the paper read: “Stop counting,
tell 
the 
experimenter 
you 
have 
seen 
this 
and 
win 
$250.” Those 
who
identified as lucky took just seconds to return their answer while those who
viewed themselves as unlucky spent more than two minutes counting all the
photos. Other studies reveal the same thing: What we perceive as luck is
often just a combination of good observation skill and the ability to seize
unexpected opportunities.
It is crucial that you understand the way luck influences trading, and
how you can manage and reduce the negative impact of various forms of
luck. This is discussed in Chapter 11.
Conscientiousness and neuroticism
Before we move on to Chapter 4, I want to talk a bit more about
conscientiousness and neuroticism because they are most correlated to
success, in arenas related to trading.
Neuroticism leads to many negative outcomes. It can be broken down
into these facets:
Irritability
Insecurity
Anxiety
Hostility
Depression
Self-consciousness
Impulsiveness
Vulnerability
If you score high in any of those traits (they are all sub-traits of
neuroticism), think about how you can reduce their presence or impact.
Work on these negative traits using meditation, mindfulness, reframing,
yoga, 
professional 
therapy, 
self-reflection, 
and 
other 
techniques.
Neuroticism will make it harder for you to achieve your goals.
If neuroticism is kryptonite, conscientiousness is a superpower. Here is
a breakdown of the facets or sub-traits that psychologists consider part of
conscientiousness
21
:
Orderliness / order / tidiness
Industriousness / hard work / energy
Reliability / responsibility
Impulse control / self-control
Decisiveness (opposite of procrastination)
Persistence / perseverance
With the knowledge that these facets of conscientiousness are major
predictors of life success, think about how you can improve in one or more
of these areas. This will help you not just as a trader, but as a human being.
This is especially true if you are young, because conscientiousness is the
trait that can most easily be boosted over time.
My conscientiousness score is OK but not great. I am in the 60
th
percentile. That said, I have put a lot of work into trying to be more
organized, reliable, and persistent. Over the years, I slowly learned that
personality 
traits 
are 
not 
fixed, 
they 
can 
be 
molded 
and 
improved. 
I
probably scored closer to 35 on conscientiousness when I was in my 20s.
My self-control has never been great, and it is still not amazing. I accept
this and try to work around it. Here are a few ways you can boost your
conscientiousness:
1. Don’t say things like: “I’m just like that” or “I’m really disorganized”
or “That’s just who I am” when it comes to conscientiousness. Being
organized or on time or proactive is a choice. Think of your mind as
plastic, not fixed.
2. Read the book: “Willpower: Rediscovering the Greatest Human
Strength”, by Roy Baumeister and John Tierney. It is packed with
research 
and 
anecdotes 
about 
how 
to 
improve 
not 
just 
your
willpower, but your organizational skills and your metacognition. I
learned a ton of immediately applicable information from that book,
including how to keep my inbox empty. It also taught me how we
have a finite supply of willpower each day and thus willpower often
runs low, especially at night. And the book taught me the importance
of Zeigarnik Loops
22
.
3. Acknowledge your willpower is not perfect and create systems to
protect yourself from this weakness. Create friction in places where
you engage in activities you should not. An example of friction is
when people turn off their phone while at dinner to avoid checking it.
By making it a hassle, you are less likely to perform the habitual or
addictive behavior. On the other hand, reduce friction to reinforce
desirable habits. For example, if you want to get in shape, don’t
make yourself decide whether to work out or not each day. Work out
every day. And go to bed in your workout gear so you have one less
step to take in the morning before working out. When the decision is
already made, there is less friction. In trading this means you need to
build systems and install processes that protect you from unwanted
behaviors 
like 
overtrading 
while 
working 
to 
automate 
desirable
behaviors like stop loss discipline.
4. Set specific and realistic short-term action goals. Instead of saying:
“Man, I need to get in shape.” Say: “This month, I’m going to eat
zero potato chips and work out 15 times.”
5. Break long-term or difficult tasks into smaller chunks and focus on
doing one chunk at a time. Writing a book is daunting. Writing a few
pages is not. If you focus on writing a few pages each day, a few
months later you magically have the rough draft of a book. Same
thing in trading. Try not to focus on your YTD P&L too much. Come
in each day and do your best. Each year is only around 250 trading
days. Take them one at a time and do your very best each day. Let the
YTD P&L take care of itself.
6. Make lists. Do not expect yourself to remember everything, even if
you have an excellent memory. Outsource your memory to a notes
app or a piece of paper.
7. Be on time. Even if you don’t care about punctuality, many people
do. It is rude to show up late for meetings, events, or dinner. It is
sloppy and unprofessional to submit work after a deadline. Even if it
doesn’t bother you when others are late, forget about your own
preferences. Your values around this topic are not the most important
thing. 
Understand 
that 
punctuality 
is 
part 
of 
becoming 
a 
more
considerate, thoughtful, and conscientious person. It is not OK to say
“that’s just who I am.”
8. Adopt a continuous improvement mindset. You don’t need to make
huge changes all the time. Instead, be on the constant lookout for tiny
improvements you can make that don’t require Herculean effort. I try
to do this with my daily newsletter, AM/FX. I will look at my charts
and see if there is a way to display them a bit more clearly. I will
think of new features that might appeal to different readers. I will ask
my readers what they like and don’t like and try to keep evolving the
product through subtle improvements.
9. Learn about inbox zero. It sounds impossible at first, but it’s not.
Don’t be one of those people with 1,431 unread messages who I have
to contact three times before I get a reply. That is not good!
10. Turn off notifications for desktop e-mail and turn off nearly all
notifications on your phone. You should check your e-mail once per
hour or less. It is not that urgent. Each pop-up every time you get an
e-mail is a pointless distraction and will take you out of the zone
when you are trading. Access your technology when it makes sense
to do so; don’t be a puppet controlled by your apps.
Remember that most of your traits are not fixed. You can improve and
evolve. You can increase your conscientiousness over time.
Conclusion
This 
chapter 
looked 
at 
research 
where 
success 
is 
defined 
as 
high
income, exceptional sports performance, or high academic achievement. On
these three measures, all of which have parallels to trading, the formula is:
Success = conscientiousness + IQ +
talent/skill + luck - neuroticism
Everybody’s story is different but that’s the general formula for the
overall population. The weighting of each factor varies by individual and
over time. Now let’s move on to Chapter 4 and see how closely success in
the broader world parallels success in trading.
6. Jay Zagorsky, “Do you have to be smart to be rich?” (Elsevier, 2007)
7. You can take a free Big Five test here: https://openpsychometrics.org/tests/IPIP-BFFM/. It
is not an adware or promotional site, it’s just the test. There is another slightly different
one here: https://projects.fivethir-tyeight.com/personality-quiz/.
8. 
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/give-and-take/201309/goodbye-mbti-the-fad-
won-t-die
9. For example, Rimfeld et. al 2016 shows the proportion of variance that grit and
conscientiousness 
share 
due 
to 
genetic 
causes 
is 
0.86
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4981570/
10. See: Deborah Cobb-Clark et al., “Self-Control: Determinants, Life Outcomes and
Intergenerational Implications”, IZA Discussion Paper Series 2019 and Kaitlin Werner et
al., “Grit, Self-Control and Conscientiousness”, (2020)
11. Christopher Soto et al., “Age Differences in Personality Traits from 10 to 65”, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology (2011). Thank you, Chris, for generously sharing your
data.
12. Miriam Gensowski, “Personality, IQ and lifetime earnings” (2014).
13. Braakmann 2009; Denissen, Bleidorn and Hennecke 2018; Heineck 2007; Nandi and
Nikoletti 2014; Mueller and Plug 2006; Judge, Livingston, and Hurst 2012; Nyhus and
Pons 2005.
14. Jaap Denissen et al., “Uncovering the power of personality to shape income” (2017).
15. Examples: Tran 2012, which looked at American football rankings vs. the Big Five; Allen,
et al 2011, which looked at athlete coping and performance vs. the Big Five; and Fasold
et 
al. 
2019 
which 
showed 
a 
relationship 
between 
conscientiousness 
and 
handball
goalkeeper performance.
16. P&L stands for profit and loss, the ultimate measure of trading success.
17. 
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/personality-iq-success-wealth-factors-
determining-prospects-intelligence-careers-james-heckman-a7880376.html
18. Branco Milanovic, “Global Inequality of Opportunity: How much of our income is
determined by where we live?”, (2015).
19. Du, Gao and Levi, “The Relative Age Effect and Career Success: Evidence from
Corporate CEOs” (2012).
20. Robert Frock, “Changing how the world does business” (2006).
21. MacCann, Duckworth and Roberts. “Empirical identification of the major facets of
Conscientiousness,” (2009).
22. Google it when you have time. Zeigarnik loops are interesting.