A
CHAPTER 4
SO YOU’RE SAYING THERE’S A
CHANCE?
Why some traders succeed but most fail
You don’t need to be a rocket scientist. Investing is
not a game where the guy with the 160 IQ beats the
guy with a 130 IQ. Rationality is essential.
23
WARREN BUFFETT
s you will see in this chapter, that Buffett quote applies to trading too.
There is a surprisingly large body of academic literature on trading.
It is a profession that is of interest not just to those in finance, but also to
psychologists, economists, statisticians, and sociologists. I spent weeks
going through all this literature in an effort to find why some traders
succeed but most fail.
This is not a formal review of the academic literature on trading
success; it is my best effort to boil a ton of research down to a few key
conclusions.
I don’t want to bore you with superfluous information so I am going to
jump straight to the conclusion and then explain it. After poring through all
the research on trading success, two critical traits jump out:
1. Rationality is the human trait that best predicts trading success.
People who are rational and do not jump to quick conclusions using
mental shortcuts (heuristics) are more successful in trading. This
characteristic can be measured as Rationality Quotient.
2. Overconfidence is the human trait that best predicts trading failure.
People who overestimate their ability to outsmart the market perform
worst.
Are you rational?
It makes a ton of sense that rational traders outperform those who are
not. Good traders study behavioral finance because humans, as a group, act
in predictably irrational ways and this predictable irrationality can be
exploited for profit. So, by extension it seems reasonable to say that those
who do not exhibit this irrationality will outperform.
Rationality can be measured with a simple three-question test called the
Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT). More sophisticated tests of rationality are
in 
development 
as 
well, 
such 
as 
Keith 
Stanovich’s 
Comprehensive
Assessment of Rational Thinking (CART)
24
. While IQ is meant to measure
intelligence and EQ (Emotional Quotient) is meant to measure emotional
intelligence, RQ (Rationality Quotient) measures how rational a person is.
RQ and IQ are correlated, but they are not the same thing. A nuanced
understanding of probability along with the ability to avoid jumping to the
first, 
most 
obvious 
conclusion 
are 
critical 
mental 
skills 
possessed 
by
someone with high RQ but not necessarily by someone with high IQ.
Keith Stanovich is at the forefront of rationality research and he puts it
this way:
It is a profound historical irony of the behavioral sciences that the Nobel
Prize 
was 
awarded 
for 
studies 
of 
cognitive 
characteristics 
(rational
thinking skills) that are entirely missing from the most wellknown mental
assessment device in the behavioral sciences – the intelligence test.
Intelligence tests measure important things, but not these – they do not
assess the extent of rational thought. This might not be such an omission
if it were the case that intelligence was an exceptionally strong predictor
of rational thinking. However, research has found that it is a moderate
predictor at best and that some rational thinking skills can be quite
dissociated from intelligence
25
.
Stanovich and others have conducted a great deal of research on how
rationality and intelligence relate and while the two are correlated, there are
areas 
where 
particular 
types 
of 
rationality 
are 
totally 
uncorrelated 
to
intelligence. 
For 
example, 
highly 
intelligent 
people 
suffer 
more 
from
confirmation bias than less intelligent people. This is why experts often
underperform 
laymen 
in 
tasks 
where 
one 
would 
expect 
the 
expert 
to
outperform. Confident experts have trouble taking in new information if it
contradicts their existing view of the world.
Here is more from an excerpt of an interview with Stanovich
26
:
… the correlations between measures of intelligence and various tasks
from 
the 
cognitive 
psychology 
literature 
that 
measure 
aspects 
of
rationality are surprisingly low. We use the term “surprisingly” here,
because for many years it has been known that virtually all cognitive
ability tasks correlate with each other. Indeed, many show quite high
correlations. So, being psychologists, the surprise is in the context of this
wide and vast cognitive ability literature, which has the technical name
“Spearman’s positive manifold.” This positive manifold—that performance
on cognitive tasks tends to correlate, and often quite highly—is more than
100 years old.
…Indeed, in restricted samples of educated adults this correlation can be
virtually zero on certain tasks in the literature. Most often the correlation is
positive, but, again, in light of 100 years of correlations between cognitive
ability tasks, the correlations are often surprisingly low.
Of course, one of the implications of this is that it will not be uncommon to
find people whose intelligence and rationality are dissociated. That is, it
will not be uncommon to find people with high levels of intelligence and
low levels of rationality, and, to some extent, the converse.
There are entire books written about rationality and I will cover many
specific forms of bias in Chapter 7, but for now we will review a few
important ways that rational thinking differs from irrational thought.
System 1 vs. System 2 thinking
The two systems concept was developed by Daniel Kahneman and is a
major topic in his book “Thinking Fast and Slow”.
System 1 (thinking fast) executes quickly without much thought. It is
your lizard brain. It tends to be biased because it relies on speed, shortcuts,
and heuristics. Speed sacrifices accuracy.
System 2 (thinking slow) requires conscious effort and thought and is
less biased. System 2 is more rational than System 1.
Rational thinkers use System 2 more than System 1; they substitute
methodical assessment for gut feel. If they use System 1, they follow up and
double-check with System 2 afterwards before acting. System 1 is the crazy
kid inside you. System 2 is the adult in the room.
Numeracy
Rational thinkers understand numbers.
Rational thinkers understand probability. Irrational thinkers
overestimate the chance of low probability events and underestimate
the likelihood of high probability events.
Irrational thinkers are often fooled by randomness and do not
understand the human bias toward seeing patterns where none exist
(apophenia).
Rational thinkers are not influenced by how a problem is framed. If
someone tells you there is a 1% chance you will die if you go
skydiving, or they tell you there is a 99% chance you will live, you
should feel the same about skydiving. In reality, the framing of the
information matters and people are more likely to avoid the 1% chance
of death and give the thumbs up to the 99% chance of living.
Logic
Rational thinkers act logically and consistently.
Rational thinking shows consistent preferences. If you like A better
than B and B better than C, you should like A better than C. There are
many real-world examples where people don’t follow this logic.
Experiments show that many people do not have consistent
preferences and will say they like (for example) bacon more than
Skittles and Skittles more than Doritos but will then say they like
Doritos more than bacon. This is not rational.
Biased, irrational thinkers overweight short-term gains and overreact
to recent or intense stimuli. When trading news, be aware of recency
bias and don’t overweight some random news item just because it’s
yelling at you in RED ALL CAPS on Bloomberg.
Rational thinkers seek to understand alternative hypotheses, not just
their own hypothesis. They accept evidence that contradicts their view.
Irrational thinkers overweight confirming evidence and ignore
contradictory evidence.
Rational thinkers are not overconfident. They understand why it is
funny that 80% of drivers think they are above average.
This is a short list of some of the differences between rational and
irrational thought. There are hundreds of examples, enough to fill many
books. We will go in depth on many of these forms of bias later. Now that
you have a sense of rational vs. irrational thought patterns and methods,
let’s look at how to measure rationality.
Testing for rationality
The Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT) measures rationality using just
three questions. It is a fairly new test, invented in 2005 by Shane Frederick.
Here is one of the three questions
27
(the other two questions appear later in
this book):
QUESTION: If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how long
would it take 100 machines to make 100 widgets?
_____ minutes
Did you answer 100 minutes?
The correct answer is five minutes. Each machine makes one widget
every five minutes. Therefore 100 machines can make 100 widgets in five
minutes. Those who answer quickly use a shortcut to jump to the answer of
100 minutes. Those that use System 2 (slow down!) calculate the correct
answer: Five minutes.
There are other, more in-depth rational thinking questionnaires. The
CRT is valid and reliable but the three questions in the CRT have become
somewhat well-known and if you already know about what is essentially a
trick question, you are unlikely to answer it incorrectly the second time.
The best explanation for many of the deviations between efficient
markets and reality come from the irrational behavior of the human beings
interacting 
in 
markets. 
Therefore, 
one 
might 
reasonably 
assume 
a
connection between rationality and trading.
Now, let’s look at highlights from some of the most interesting research
on success in trading.
Research Paper 1
“What Makes a Good Trader? On the Role of Quant Skills, Behavioral Biases and Intuition
on Trader Performance” (2015)
BRICE CORGNET, MARK DESANTIS, AND DAVID PORTER
This paper studied individual trader performance in an experimental
setting. It then compared performance to participants’ measures of financial
literacy, cognitive skill, behavioral bias, and theory of mind. They conclude
that 
behavioral 
bias 
(particularly 
overconfidence 
and 
the 
failure 
to
understand 
random 
sampling) 
explains 
trader 
earnings 
while 
standard
cognitive and theory of mind skills are of marginal importance.
Those that scored high on the CRT and exhibited less behavioral bias
earned significantly more than those who did not. Standard intelligence and
theory of mind ability were not important.
Rationality Quotient (RQ) is more important than IQ.
Here are a few quotes of interest from the paper, along with my
thoughts:
A common thread running through each of these [behavioral] biases is the
individual’s inability to refrain from using automatic responses and simple
heuristics.
Bad traders think fast. Good traders think (a bit) slower. The paradox
here is that sometimes you need to think fast when you are trading because
speed can be an edge. If an important announcement hits the wires, you
can’t always sit around waiting for System 2 to deliver a verdict. If you
don’t hit the buttons right away, someone else will. In other words, some
short-term trading requires a “Ready, Shoot, Aim” thinking style. That’s
OK.
If you are trading headlines, events, and quick reaction time trades, you
can overcome the heuristic / fast thinking problem by trading in two steps.
Step 1: When you see a headline or something that makes you want to
act… Go ahead and act. Go to market and get set on your position.
Step 2: Once you have the position on, take a step back and analyze
your actions using System 2. Is this logical? Or is this a dumb idea? You
need to have the force of mind to take a trade off right away, usually at a
small loss, if your System 2 analysis says that your System 1 idea was
wrong. This is hard because we tend to have trouble selling at a small loss
and we tend to overvalue assets (or positions) we already own.
Note that if you enter trades using System 1 (reacting quickly to
headlines, for example) then subsequently evaluate them more fully using
System 2, you need to overcome both the endowment effect and anchoring
bias in order to get out of bad trades quickly. If your System 2 analysis says
“this is a bad trade”, don’t wait for the price to get back to break even. Cut
the position and move on. Good short-term trading involves taking many
small losses.
The endowment effect (a.k.a., divestiture aversion) says that when we
own something, we value it more highly than if we did not already own it.
Anchoring bias says we will attach importance to the price at which we
entered a trade, even though that price is irrelevant once we have the trade
on. We will talk about both these forms of trader bias (and many others) in
Chapter 7.
Side note: Here’s a funny-because-it’s-true anecdote on the endowment
effect from a 2019 blog post by Michael Batnick:
Years ago when I was trading, probably 2010 or 2011, I had some fun
trading weekly options around earnings releases. I was gambling, which
is not something I only recently came to terms with. I knew it at the time
which is why I never put a lot of money at risk. During one of these
wagers I meant to buy calls, but by accident I bought puts. In that moment
a funny thing happened. It wouldn’t have been much trouble to unwind
this trade, but instead I rationalized why puts were the right decision. “I
guess I’m bearish now,” I thought. My actions influenced my mindset. I
was owned by my possessions.
The next quote of interest from the paper is:
Individuals 
tend 
to 
mistakenly 
believe 
that 
they 
observe 
predictable
patterns in randomly generated data.
This is the failure to understand random sampling. Randomly generated
data creates all sorts of patterns. Human beings are hard-wired to see
patterns. 
We 
see 
faces 
in 
sockets, 
animals 
in 
the 
clouds, 
patterns 
in
randomly-generated stock charts, and Jesus Christ on toast
28
. Humans see
patterns even where there is often only randomness. This is why I tend to
view technical analysis
29
with great skepticism—technical analysis pushes
us toward pattern-seeking behavior when we should instead be fighting our
bias to see patterns everywhere.
Our studies show that people who are immune to commonly-known
behavioral biases perform the best in experimental asset markets.
This is the conclusion of many studies. RQ is more important than IQ
30
.
You are either part of the unbiased, efficient markets or you are creating
exploitable inefficiency with your biased, irrational actions.
Research Paper 2
“Mental Capabilities, Trading Styles, and Asset
Market Bubbles: Theory and Experiment” (2016)
ANDREAS HEFTI, STEVE HEINKE AND FRÉDÉRIC SCHNEIDER
These 
researchers 
first 
did 
a 
series 
of 
experiments 
to 
evaluate
participants on two dimensions, analyzing and mentalizing
31
. Then, they ran
a typical asset market / trading experiment to see how different individuals
would behave and perform. The core idea is that different actors behave
differently in the market and if we split individuals into groups we might
see a pattern emerge in terms of trading success.
Analytical 
skill 
was 
measured 
as 
successful 
performance 
in
mathematics, logic, and probability while mentalizing was defined as the
ability to understand the mental states of others and predict their behavior.
The traders were broken into four quadrants:
And here are the trading results:
Mathematics, logic and understanding of probability win. The ability to
analyze the behavior of others has some power, but only if you have the
rational and probabilistic thinking first. Analytical, rational thinking is
necessary 
and 
sufficient 
to 
earn 
a 
profit, 
but 
the 
more 
well-rounded
individual earns much more in this experiment.
Research Paper 3
“Good Thinking or Gut Feeling? Cognitive Reflection and Intuition in Traders, Bankers and
Financial Non-Experts” (2015)
VOLKER THOMA, ELLIOTT WHITE, ASHA PANIGRAHI, VANESSA STROWGER, AND
IRINA ANDERSON
This 
paper 
looks 
directly 
at 
CRT 
vs. 
intuition 
and 
comes 
to 
an
unambiguous conclusion. Traders score higher on the CRT and favor the
avoidance of mental shortcuts compared to non-traders. They rely more on
System 2 than non-traders. Furthermore, the study found that traders do not
rely 
on 
intuition 
any 
more 
than 
non-traders. 
To 
quote 
the 
study’s
conclusion:
While traders are apparently no different in their use of ‘intuition’ or ‘gut
feeling’ to other people, the majority of them are markedly improved in
their propensity to engage in reflective thinking and less susceptible to
‘cognitive impulsivity’.
The study also says that some would argue that high CRT scores could
be equivalent to elevated numeracy. While there is overlap between high
CRT scores, rationality and strong numeracy, other studies have shown that
numeracy and CRT performance are not the same thing
32
.
Research Paper 4
“Trader Personality and Trader Performance:
A Framework and Financial Market Experiment” (2008)
ARJEN VAN WITTELOOSTUIJN AND KATRIN MUEHLFELD
This paper involves an asset market trading experiment where results
are 
compared 
to 
six 
personality 
traits: 
Locus 
of 
control, 
maximizing
tendency, regret disposition, self-monitoring, sensation seeking and type
A/type B behavior.
The primary conclusion of the paper is that those who trade less and
those who work limit orders (i.e., act like market makers, not price takers)
outperform those who trade more frequently and cross more spreads using
market orders. The findings are consistent with many other papers and
investigations which show that overtrading leads to worse performance
33
.
The main driver of the underperformance from trading too much is
transaction costs, but even in experiments where there are no transaction
costs, the subjects that trade most perform worst. Good traders wait for
outsized opportunities, they don’t trade frenetically, reacting to every bit of
flickering price action.
I say this as someone who must fight not to react to every bit of
flickering price action.
While high CRT was a consistent variable in predicting the earnings of
traders in many studies
34
, the results of experiments and research on softer
skills like Theory of Mind are mixed. For every research paper that found a
positive connection between mentalizing or Theory of Mind and trader
earnings, there was one that suggested the opposite
35
.
My conclusion is that it is absolutely clear from the research that
rational thinking is the number one trait of a successful trader. High
intelligence, numeracy and financial literacy are also important. Trading
with 
gut 
feel, 
intuition 
and 
similar 
soft 
skills 
is 
less 
important, 
and
sometimes counterproductive.
Yes, gut and intuition can be the subconscious processing of reams of
information, 
an 
amalgamation 
of 
disparate 
data 
and 
knowledge. 
It 
is
common for people to know something without knowing how they know it.
Then again, gut and intuition are often just the way fear, bias and other bad
influences make their way into our thinking and behavior.
You may have seen breathless media reports in the mid-2010s with
headlines like “Gut Instinct: Do Traders Have a Sixth Sense?
36
” trumpeting
a few small studies that seemed to suggest trader intuition is of great
importance. I read those studies. They generally had tiny sample sizes (10
to 20 traders) and were unconvincing, in my opinion.
Distilling all the research down to one formula, I get this new equation:
Trading success = rational thinking + IQ +
self-control - overconfidence
Recall 
from 
Chapter 
3, 
the 
formula 
for 
general 
success 
(money,
academic grades, and sports) was:
Success = conscientiousness + IQ +
talent/skill + luck - neuroticism
Combining it all together, we get this final equation:
Alpha Trader = rational + intelligent + skilled +
conscientious + calibrated confidence
Note my equation for trading success excludes some traits that are
important but not critical to trading success. I did not include risk appetite,
for example. People at each end of the risk-taking continuum (extremely
risk averse or highly risk seeking) might underperform those in the middle,
but risk appetite is not an important character trait in the literature on
trading performance.
Furthermore, risk tolerance can be dialed up or down fairly easily with a
simple set of rules. I have seen traders at every point on the risk-taking
spectrum succeed.
Note that before the year 2000 or so, IQ was less important in trading
because trading was more skill-based and less quantitative. Now, a higher
level of intelligence is required although I would argue that Wall Street
currently overvalues IQ and academics, and does not focus enough on grit,
street smarts and fire in the belly.
My equation leaves out many positive attributes that most certainly
make for better traders. It does not include positive attitude or ability to
handle stress, for example. These are useful but not critical attributes when
it comes to trading success. There are plenty of grumpy, stressed out traders
that still make money. Sure, that’s not ideal (and certainly does not meet my
personal definition of success), but only the indispensable traits are in the
equation. Many other attributes will help you succeed in trading but the
formula I laid out is the mashed potatoes—everything else is gravy.
That concludes this chapter and our look into the research on trading
success. I highlighted some specific papers because they capture the gist of
the broader literature, but please note that I went through piles of research
before I reached my conclusions. This chapter just shared a few highlights.
This is the end of Part One and our look at why some traders succeed
but most fail.
In Part Two, we go deeper. We look at rationality, conscientiousness,
and overconfidence in more detail, plus dig into many other important
trader attributes to help you learn, evolve, adapt, and improve.
23. Janet Lowe, Warren Buffett Speaks, (Wiley 2007).
24. Keith Stanovich, “The Comprehensive Assessment of Rational Thinking,” (2013)
25. https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-27/edition-2/what-intelligence-tests-miss
26. https://jamiehalesblog.blogspot.com/2010/10/dysrationalia-intelligent-people.html
27. Shane Frederick. “Cognitive Reflection and Decision Making”. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. (2005).
28. See, for example: Liu, et al. “Seeing Jesus in toast: Neural and behavioral correlates of
face pareidolia,” (2014).
29. Technical analysis is the study of financial markets using charts and patterns. This is a
massive subject area that fills hundreds of books. There is even a designation one can
earn as a certified technical analyst: Chartered Market Technician (CMT).
30. IQ is still important, though. There is plenty of research showing high-IQ investors
outperform low-IQ investors. See, for example Grinblatt, Keloharju and Linnainmaa, “IQ
and Stock Market Participation,” (2011)
31. Mentalizing is a psychology term that relates to an individual’s ability to think about and
understand their own thoughts and the thoughts of others. It is conceptually similar
(though not identical to) empathy or Theory of Mind. It essentially measures whether you
can put yourself in someone else’s shoes or see the world through their eyes.
32. Jordana Liberali et al., “Individual Differences in Numeracy and Cognitive Reflection,
with Implications for Biases and Fallacies in Probability Judgment,” (2011)
33. See, for example: Brad Barber and Terrance Odean, “Trading is Hazardous to Your
Wealth,” (2000) and “Boys Will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence and Common Stock
Investment,” (2001).
34. See also: Brice Corgnet et al., “The Effect of Earned vs. House Money on Price Bubble
Formation in Experimental Asset Markets”, (2013), and Noussair, Tucker and Xu: “A
Futures Market Reduces Bubbles but Allows Greater Profit for More Sophisticated
Traders”, (2014)
35. De Martino et al. “In the mind of the market: Theory of Mind biases value computation
during financial bubbles” (2013)
36. https://www.cnbc.com/2016/09/20/gut-instinct-do-traders-have-a-sixth-sense.html
P
PART TWO
THE ALPHA TRADER MINDSET
art Two is a deeper look at the winning traits and negative attributes
that combine to lead to trading riches or ruin. It is also an exploration
of what it means to be rational and unbiased, a state of mind that can never
be perfectly attained but which is always the goal.
Remember, nobody embodies every positive trait or is free from every
negative aspect. The goal is to be brutally honest about your strengths and
weaknesses and then work hard to boost positives, tame weaknesses, and
plug leaks.
As you read the next three chapters, think about your own assets and
limitations. Take notes. And never focus exclusively on fixing weaknesses.
Awareness of your strengths, and the ability to build on those strengths, is
just as important as the ability to identify and address weakness.
Part Two is divided into three chapters:
Chapter 5: Strengths and positive traits
Chapter 6: Weaknesses and leaks
Chapter 7: Rational, unbiased trading
Let’s start with specific positive character traits that increase a trader’s
probability of success.