T
CHAPTER 5
LEVEL UP
The traits and habits you need to succeed
here is no single x-factor in trading. Successful trading combines a
variety of disparate skills and characteristics. Remember the formula
from Chapter 4:
Alpha Trader = rational + intelligent + skilled +
conscientious + calibrated confidence
As we unpack the essential traits, a broader list emerges. Let’s go
beyond the equation and dig into more detail to identify particular traits that
I believe lead to success in trading. Here is my complete list of positive
trader attributes:
That’s a huge list!
Cognitive 
traits 
rely 
on 
intellectual 
effort, 
conscious 
thought, 
and
reasoning. Most cognitive skills can be built up over time. Non-cognitive
traits 
can 
be 
static 
or 
changeable
37
. 
As 
I 
showed 
in 
Chapter 
3,
conscientiousness generally increases with age, so take advantage of this
and work especially hard on skills that come under that umbrella like
organization, self-control, focus and preparedness.
Even if you cannot change some parts of who you are, understanding
your fixed, innate characteristics can help you manage yourself better and
avoid putting yourself in a position to fail. Whether you are a new trader or
a wily veteran, the point of this section is to get you thinking about your
own profile and areas where you can improve.
Nobody has every skill and characteristic in abundance. Many of the
skills can be built, and weaknesses can be managed. Your goal is to know
yourself well enough that you can take the actions needed to excel. Work on
your weaknesses and level up your strengths using the methods and ideas in
the chapters that follow.
I will discuss these traits individually but I won’t waste time defining
them, as I know that you know what all those words mean! This chapter
will tell you what each trait means for trading and most importantly, give
you specific ideas and tips on how you can level up in each area.
COGNITIVE TRAITS
Let’s start with the cognitive traits (the first two columns of the table).
Rational
We talked a bit about rationality in the last chapter. Chapter 7 is a deep
dive into all the ways humans act irrationally so I will leave the topic alone
for now. Suffice it to say: Alpha traders think and act rationally. After
analyzing heaps of research, thinking about all the traders I have worked
with over many years, and studying my own best and worst trading periods,
I feel strongly that the best way to describe the Alpha Trader in one word is:
Rational.
Intelligent, knowledgeable, informed
Medium to high intelligence, especially as it relates to numbers, is
important in trading. You need to do calculations on the fly, understand
expected value and probability, know basic economics (micro and macro),
solve puzzles, interpret stories, and understand or filter often conflicting
and incomplete information. It’s not rocket science… But it’s also not shape
sorting.
IQ 
is 
somewhat 
fixed, 
but 
knowledge 
and 
information 
can 
be
accumulated over time to increase your edge.
Here are some ways to level up your knowledge:
Think about areas you are weak and take courses online. For example,
take a course or read a book about macroeconomics, options trading,
technical analysis, financial history, or trading psychology. Branch out.
Play the long game. Whether you are 25 or 50, keep learning. Don’t
just focus on your weaknesses. If you are strong in derivatives, keep
getting better. Go deep into the topics you love but also explore areas
where you lack familiarity. Become expert or near expert in as many
domains as possible.
Read more. The Economist, FT, WSJ, books & blogs (see
recommendations in Appendix A). This is such a simple piece of
advice but many people in finance say they are distracted at the desk
all the time or it’s too hard to find the time to read. If you read more
than everyone else, you will be better informed than everyone else.
And it’s cumulative. You can up your efficiency by scanning a wider
range of relevant blogs and news feeds. Even if you don’t read every
single word of every article, you capture the zeitgeist by scanning
more sources.
Think of a market adjacent to what you trade and learn about it. If you
trade the Canadian dollar, study the oil market. If you trade S&P
futures, read a book about SPX options. If you trade gold, read a book
about platinum.
E-mail or message someone who knows more than you do about a
topic. If you read a blog and find it interesting, email the writer with a
followup question. If you just read a book about markets, reach out to
the author on LinkedIn and ask a specific question. If you trade
USDJPY at a bank, walk over and talk to the person who trades 10-
year bonds.
Read financial history.
Be thoughtful about your information sources and reduce redundancy.
There is a major surplus of finance information and analysis out there.
When I went to work at a hedge fund after my employer (Lehman
Brothers) went under, I had 20 banks covering me at first. There was
so much redundancy and useless information, I quickly narrowed my
list down to five banks and found that was much more manageable.
How many overnight summaries does one person need? There is
plenty of good research on Wall Street, but there is also plenty of fluff.
Get to know the strategists and researchers out there, read the best, and
filter the rest.
Thirty to fifty good Twitter follows are better than 350. You will find
as you expand your media consumption, you get more and more
redundant information, nonsense, and cut and paste headlines that just
waste your time. If you work at a fund or institution, my estimate is
you hit diminishing returns at about 3 to 5 coverage banks. After that,
the duplication is probably not worth the odd bit of unique analysis
that squeaks through.
The philosophy: Be curious, keep learning and build knowledge for the
long run.
Quantitative
Many trading roles require in-depth knowledge of statistics and the
ability to code or program (usually in Python). Even a trader in the most
vanilla discretionary or short-term trading seat benefits from quantitative
sophistication.
I will lump numeracy under this heading as well, because the ability to
intuitively understand numbers helps traders enormously. For example,
many market making roles require quick calculations (converting yen to
dollars when a salesperson asks for a price in a fast market, for example).
Traders that can do quick mental math have a small advantage over those
that cannot.
How to level up your quantitative skills:
Learn about expected value (EV) and decision trees. These are
especially useful when trading economic or market events with
discrete outcomes. For example:
You think the Fed will cut rates today and the market has it priced as
80%/20%, in favor of a rate cut. A professional rates trader would say
that 20 out of 25 basis points are priced in. You decide to risk $200,000
on the trade; you will make $50,000 if you are correct and the Fed
cuts. If they don’t cut, you lose your $200,000.
Many people will see this negative leverage as bad (risking 200 to
make just 50) but it is not inherently good or bad
38
. It depends on the
probabilities you assign to each outcome.
The tricky thing with market probabilities is that unlike probabilities in
gambling, they are not known or measurable. You have to estimate
them. Accurately estimating probabilities is a skill that gives you an
edge in trading. Incomplete information is one of the challenging
hallmarks of markets as an exercise in probability.
Back to our example. Let’s say you think there is a 95% chance the
Fed will cut rates. Here is the expected value of a $200,000 wager on
this event:
So even though you are risking $200k to make $50k, this is an
excellent trade idea. Clearly, though, your confidence in that 95%
figure is key to making this bet. If you think it’s more like 70% or
80%… Then stay away. Your view is about the same as the market.
I assume that most people reading this book have a pretty clear
understanding of EV, but if you are new to the game or you were
sick the day this was taught in university statistics… Brush up! Go
online and take a short course or do some reading about expected
value. Good traders work comfortably with EV both explicitly and
subconsciously.
Learn Python. This is rapidly becoming the standard for data analysis
in finance. Excel is fine but not as good as Python. Not even close.
Take a course in statistics, probability, or data visualization.
Read academic research papers about the assets you trade. Freely
available academic research is a hugely underutilized resource. Most
research can be found and read online. Go to Google Scholar and type
in a topic you find interesting (e.g., stock market inefficiencies, trading
psychology, currency valuation or high-frequency trading). If you find
a good paper, go to the bibliography and read some of the papers cited.
Learn about Bayes Theorem and Bayesian updating. There are many,
many good websites on the topic (e.g., towardsdatascience.com). The
basic idea of Bayesian updating is that good forecasters start with a
prior probability and then update it as new information comes in. This
is in contrast to people that form an opinion and then ignore new
information. Good thinking and good forecasting are not possible
without Bayesian updating.
A simple example:
Your name is Bob. You are in high school and you
estimate there is a 60% chance that Phoebe will go out
on a date with you (once you finally get the guts to ask
her). The next day, you say “Hi” to Phoebe as you both
enter chem class. She says: “Hey, Tim!” and floats
toward her desk, leaving a sweet cloud of vanilla scent
in her wake. Using Bayesian updating, you take the new
information (she doesn’t know your name) and update
your prior 60% estimate to 25%.
In contrast, someone who does not use Bayesian methods might
ignore the new information because it does not fit his prior belief.
This is known as confirmation bias, which we will discuss later in
Chapter 7. He might lie to himself and say “Oh it’s fine… There was
probably someone named Tim behind me and she was talking to
him” even though there is nobody named Tim in chemistry class.
This is how confirmation bias works. We trick ourselves and ignore
information that doesn’t fit our priors.
UPDATE: Oh no! Phoebe just blew a kiss to Bad Boy
Eric Cooper at the back of the class! You revise your
probability that she will go on a date with you down to
0.84%.
One side benefit of using Bayes Theory, Bayesian updating and
terms like “prior probability” and “updating your priors”… It makes
you sound super smart. :]
Read Superforecasting by Phil Tetlock and Dan Gardner. This is one of
the best books on statistics and forecasting, and it has tons of
applications both to the real world and to trading. The book also does
an excellent job of explaining Bayes so you kill two bullet points with
one stone if you read it. I would say Superforecasting is one of the
books that has most influenced my quantitative thinking style (along
with Fooled by Randomness by Nassim Taleb, Risk by Dan Gardner,
and Thinking in Bets by Annie Duke). A full list of book
recommendations appears in Appendix A.
Backtest your ideas. If you notice that stocks tend to fall every
Monday and rally every Tuesday, backtest it. If it feels like oil rallies
every day from 2PM to 3PM, check it out. Is it true or false? Whenever
a hypothesis appears in your head, dig in and figure out if it’s true.
Playing with ideas and data like this can inspire new ideas and a better
understanding of the inner workings of the markets you trade. If you
don’t know how to backtest, just open Excel and start messing around.
This is the kind of thing you can teach yourself with a bit of effort.
Calibrated confidence
Given 
the 
critical 
importance 
of 
confidence 
and 
(especially)
overconfidence in trading, we will dig more deeply into this topic in
Chapter 7. For now, I will just say that high confidence is required for
trading but overconfidence is the worst leak.
Independent thinker
Important: An independent thinker is not someone who is contrarian all
the time, disagrees with everyone, or loves playing devil’s advocate. That is
not independent thinking; that is reflexive opposition. That is not good!
Independent thinking means that you analyze information using your
own framework and come to logical conclusions. You develop your own
beliefs, incorporating as much information as possible. “Information” can
include the curated beliefs of others.
Sometimes your conclusions agree with the crowd and you hop on the
trend. Sometimes you are on the other side of consensus, so you take a
contrarian view.
Many human beings are hardwired to conform. In a famous 1951
experiment by Solomon Asch, eight “subjects” were placed in a room.
Seven were actors and the eighth was the true subject of the experiment.
They were all shown the two cards in Figure 5.1 and asked to answer out
loud which line (A, B, or C) was the same length as the line on the card on
the left. The true subject was seated so that he or she would answer last.
by Fred the Oyster, Creative Commons 4.0 (CC BY-SA 4.0)
In the test where the first seven in the group answer correctly, the
subject answered correctly 99% of the time. On the other hand, when the
group of actors all responded with the same wrong answer, the test subject
gave the correct response only 63.2% of the time.
This result is surprising and unintuitive. You might say “Meh, that’s
dumb, I would never do that.” Don’t be so sure! This experiment has been
replicated many times, and you have the benefit of being an outsider with
complete 
information. 
Other 
experiments 
show 
that 
almost 
everyone
conforms to social influence to a high degree.
When humans have incomplete knowledge, their instinct is to follow the
group. Many people in the Asch experiment did not follow the group, but
the 
experiment 
involved 
an 
easy 
question 
with 
an 
obvious 
answer.
Everyone should have answered correctly yet almost 37% of people did not.
Google 
“Stanford 
Prison 
Experiments” 
for 
another 
example 
of 
the
astonishing levels of conformity observed in experimental settings.
In markets, where incomplete information and group behavior are an
intrinsic part of the game, you need to make sure you are always thinking
for yourself. Don’t get caught up in the CNBC (bullish) or Twitter (bearish)
hype or get sucked in by what the “smart guy at the big hedge fund” wrote
in his opinion piece in the FT.
Think for yourself.
Also note that if your reaction when reading about the Asch experiment
was: “I would never pick the wrong line in that experiment,” you are just
like almost everyone else who believes that bias is something that happens
to everyone else, but not to them. Groupthink and conformity bias are real
and impact smart people and dumb people alike! 
39
When it comes to independent thinking, Peter Thiel nails it with this
quote:
The most contrarian thing of all is not to oppose the crowd but to think for
yourself.
Flexible and open-minded
The cure for many forms of bias in trading (and in life) is to be flexible
and open-minded. This is captured by the concept of “strong opinions,
weakly held”, a framework for thinking developed by technology forecaster
and Stanford Scholar Paul Saffo. Here is his description of how to think
40
:
Allow your intuition to guide you to a conclusion, no matter how imperfect
— this is the “strong opinion” part. Then – and this is the “weakly held”
part – prove yourself wrong. Engage in creative doubt.
Look for information that doesn’t fit, or indicators that point in an entirely
different 
direction. 
Eventually 
your 
intuition 
will 
kick 
in 
and 
a 
new
hypothesis will emerge out of the rubble, ready to be ruthlessly torn apart
once again. You will be surprised by how quickly the sequence of faulty
forecasts will deliver you to a useful result.
This sounds a lot like Bayesian updating, right? Start with a prior and
update it as you get more information. It also sounds a lot like my
discussion earlier of how to trade headlines with a “Ready, Shoot, Aim”
approach. You react, using your System 1 or gut instinct, then you quickly
analyze 
your 
action 
and 
look 
for 
confirming 
or 
(most 
critically)
contradictory evidence. You look not just at your chosen hypothesis, but
other competing ones.
I write a daily macro newsletter called AM/FX that goes out to a
sizeable 
list 
of 
hedge 
fund 
and 
real 
money 
portfolio 
managers 
and
strategists. One of the great benefits of sending out AM/FX is that when I
publish my hypothesis, I have a few thousand people out there vetting it and
consciously or unconsciously looking for alternatives. The e-mail responses
I get make me aware of alternative ways of looking at the world that I might
not have considered.
You can replicate this process by getting your hypothesis out there. If
you have a strong view, share it with your coworkers and see what comes
back. Drop it on Twitter (if you are thick-skinned enough to withstand the
corrosive 
“SOMEBODY 
IS 
WRONG 
ON 
THE 
INTERNET!” 
culture
there). Send an e-mail to a few traders you respect with your thesis laid out
in one or two paragraphs.
If you are an introvert, don’t feel like you have to remain an introvert
forever. Push yourself to make new connections. I was a shy kid and pretty
insecure in high school. I never liked meeting new people and I would
consider myself an introvert by nature. I changed over time, though, as I
saw the benefits of reaching out to people and making new connections and
moving out of my comfort zone.
When you send your thesis out into the wild, the responses will inform
you, not just by their content, but also by their tone. If you get a series of
agitated replies with a bunch of rebuttals you can easily bat away, you are
probably onto a good trade idea. Strong pushback indicates that people are
positioned the other way. If you can easily refute their arguments, then
happy days. On the other hand, sometimes you might get a bunch of well-
reasoned replies that highlight facts you omitted from your analysis. Then
it’s time to reassess.
Exploring alternative hypotheses is
the bedrock of good thinking.
Start with a strong view and then try to step outside yourself as much as
possible to look at alternative scenarios. This is part of why expected value
and decision tree calculations (among many other forms of good thinking)
add value. They force you to look at all the possible paths. You take
multiple possible outcomes and attempt to weight them according to their
probabilities. You don’t just take a view and stick with it regardless of
incoming or alternative information.
The book Psychology of Intelligence Analysis by Richards J. Heuer, Jr.
is the best elucidation of good thinking I have read. The author worked for
the 
CIA 
for 
45 
years 
in 
various 
roles 
including 
operations,
counterintelligence, 
and 
intelligence 
analysis. 
The 
book 
explains 
how
human bias impedes clear thinking. Much of it applies directly to trading.
The book is out of print but fortunately it is freely available on the
CIA’s website. Of particular relevance is “Part Two: Tools for Thinking”,
especially “Chapter 8: Analysis of Competing Hypotheses”. If you want
access to the full buffet of information, I suggest you read the whole book:
it’s less than 200 pages and it is not boring! If you want the quick meal, at
least read Chapter 8. For now, here’s an appetizer… My synopsis of
Heuer’s summary of Chapter 8
41
.
STEP-BY-STEP OUTLINE OF ANALYSIS OF COMPETING HYPOTHESES
1. Identify the possible hypotheses to be considered. Use a group of
analysts with different perspectives to brainstorm the possibilities.
2. Make a list of significant evidence and arguments for and against
each hypothesis.
3. Prepare a matrix with hypotheses across the top and evidence down
the side. Analyze the “diagnosticity” of the evidence and arguments
— that is, identify which items are most helpful in judging the
relative likelihood of the hypotheses.
4. Refine the matrix. Reconsider the hypotheses and delete evidence and
arguments that have no diagnostic value.
5. Draw tentative conclusions about the relative likelihood of each
hypothesis. Proceed by trying to disprove the hypotheses rather than
prove them.
6. Analyze how sensitive your conclusion is to a few critical items of
evidence. 
Consider 
the 
consequences 
for 
your 
analysis 
if 
that
evidence 
were 
wrong, 
misleading, 
or 
subject 
to 
a 
different
interpretation.
7. 
Report 
conclusions. 
Discuss 
the 
relative 
likelihood 
of 
all 
the
hypotheses, not just the most likely one.
8. Identify milestones for future observation that may indicate events
are taking a different course than expected.
Be thoughtful and look at alternative hypotheses with an open mind.
Lay out the arguments against your view and see how you feel about them.
Do they make sense? Are they easily refuted?
Be aware that when you are in a position, you are not objective. You are
under the influence of bias when you are in a trade. You own something
(the trade and the view that led to it) and people don’t like giving up what
they own. Therefore, if you are feeling uncomfortable about a position, the
best bet is to take it off. Then, once you’re flat, you can analyze with an
open, unbiased mind.
As I state in my first book
42
:
Rule #7 of FX Trading: Flat is the strongest position. When in doubt: Get
out.
It is easier to honestly evaluate competing hypotheses when you are flat,
open-minded, and flexible.
Creative
People 
outside 
Wall 
Street 
don’t 
generally 
associate 
the 
world 
of
finance 
with 
creativity, 
but 
they 
should. 
Orthodox, 
follow-the-crowd
thinking does not work in trading. Most of the legends of finance had some
creative insight that took them to another level. Examples include Milken’s
idea for high yield “junk” bonds, Paul Tudor Jones and Peter Borish’s idea
to overlay past and present chart patterns to predict the crash of 1987,
George Soros’ idea of reflexivity, and Ray Dalio’s idea for the All-Weather
portfolio which came to be known as Risk Parity.
Creative thinking does not have to mean you come up with ideas that
completely revolutionize finance. Can you slice and dice data in a new and
interesting way and thus create more accurate short-term market forecasts?
Can you think outside the box to discover new variables that will help guide
you through the noise?
For example, in 2006, it was fairly well-known that copper and gold
prices could be used as predictors for the Australian dollar because those
two commodities are significant Australian exports. Similarly, it was known
that crude oil was a driver of the Canadian dollar because Canada exports
huge amounts of crude. But there was no such variable for the New Zealand
dollar for some reason, and my job at Lehman Brothers in those days was
trading the AUD, CAD, and NZD.
So I Googled: “What are the major exports of New Zealand?” and the
answer is: Milk products. Milk, butter, and cheese account for 25% of NZ
exports and milk prices are an important marginal driver of NZ GDP
43
. So I
overlaid a chart of dairy futures with the New Zealand dollar and DING!
There was a pretty good fit. Correlation / causation yadda, yadda but when
two things overlay and there is a logical connection between them in the
real economy, you are probably onto something.
When I first published the overlay in 2006, I got a few hahaha emails in
response. But eventually, the idea caught on and now it’s a common
variable for people to look at when assessing the fair value of the NZD.
Recently, someone sent me a chart overlaying “Norwegian Spot Salmon
Price” with the Norwegian Krona (NOK) and I was suitably impressed.
There is still room for innovation in trading!
Try your best to think creatively about problems in finance. It is not
always a brute force quantitative solution that is needed. To be creative does
not mean you have to paint or write poems. It means you come at problems
with imagination, and develop original ideas.
Circling back to Heuer
44
:
…[Think] of information in memory as somehow interconnected like a
massive, multidimensional spider web. It is possible to connect any point
within this web to any other point. When analysts connect the same
points frequently, they form a path that makes it easier to take that route
in the future. Once they start thinking along certain channels, they tend to
continue thinking the same way and the path may become a rut. The path
seems like the obvious and natural way to go.
Information and concepts located near that path are readily available, so
the same images keep coming up. Information not located near that path
is less likely to come to mind. Talking about breaking mind-sets, or
creativity, or even just openness to new information is really talking about
spinning new links and new paths through the web of memory.
These are links among facts and concepts, or between schemata for
organizing facts or concepts, that were not directly connected or only
weakly connected before. New ideas result from the association of old
elements in new combinations. Previously remote elements of thought
suddenly become associated in a new and useful combination. When the
linkage is made, the light dawns. This ability to bring previously unrelated
information and ideas together in meaningful ways is what marks the
open-minded, imaginative, creative analyst.
How to be more creative in trading
1. Study other asset markets or businesses with linkages to your market.
The more you understand the iron ore market, the better you can
trade 
the Australian 
dollar. The 
more 
you 
understand American
Airlines, the better you can trade the airlines ETF: JETS. Drill into
the principal factors that drive your market and learn about them in
detail.
2. Read about random and varied topics. It seems so obvious but I never
really understood this until recently. If you read voraciously, you
load new information into your mind and that information can then
cross-pollenate with old information and spark new ideas.
Most ideas come from combining two forms of disparate knowledge.
If you read about art, or outer space or fractals or whatever… Cool
finance-related ideas may pop into your head from time to time
thanks to the stimulation.
3. Go for a walk. Sitting at your desk staring at numbers going up and
down will drop you into a rut at some point. Get up and go outside
for a few minutes. I have had many moments of clarity on the way to
the bathroom or on my way to pick up Panera for lunch.
4. Talk to people in your network. New ideas come from contact with
new streams of thought. Don’t be a taker, though. Offer ideas to your
network. Don’t be the guy that just emails ten people saying, “What
you thinking?” To form a strong network, you need to both offer and
receive information and ideas.
5. Be curious and develop interests outside finance. Learn some history.
Listen to British rap music. Exercise your brain like it’s a muscle.
Curious
Curious people are more interesting. Curiosity makes you smarter. It
helps you learn. Some people are naturally more curious than others, but
anyone can become more intentionally curious. It’s not hard.
As one might expect, there is a direct link between curiosity and
academic performance
45
. Curious kids learn more and perform better
46
. But
research 
shows 
that 
information-seeking
47

and 
curiosity
48

also 
exert 
a
positive influence on adult learning and job performance.
The simplest way to be curious is to simply ask “Why?” as much as
possible. Back in the day, when everyone knew that apples fell from trees,
Newton was the one to ask: “Why don’t apples fall sideways? Why don’t
they fall upwards?”
When 
you 
see 
a 
phenomenon 
in 
the 
markets, 
ask 
why. 
This 
is
particularly 
true 
when 
backtesting. 
When 
you 
discover 
a 
pattern 
that
backtests successfully, can you explain why it works? If you can, there is a
much greater probability that what you discovered will work out of sample.
Much of what you find sifting through data is just data snooping or data
mining. But when you find patterns and can explain them logically, you
have something much more powerful.
Part of being curious is also just not being lazy. When you see a term
that you don’t fully understand in a news article… Investigate. A few years
ago, there was a headline saying the ECB might open up its OMT program,
and a trader on another desk said out loud: “Huh… I wonder what OMT is,”
then went back to eating his sandwich. That’s not good!
A curious trader would hear the announcement and then go off and do
some research on OMT. That might lead them to the history of monetary
financing and something epic like Fiat Money in France
49
. If you read that
footnote, you are on the right track. You are showing intentional curiosity.
To be curious and conscientious is to be the kind of person that reads the
footnotes. If you didn’t read that last footnote, go and read it now. And then
go download Fiat Money in France for free from the Mises Institute (the
book is public domain). It is scary and entertaining stuff. France circa 1780
parallels the current era of infinite money printing, big time.
The Growth Mindset
If you have kids, you may be familiar with the idea of the growth
mindset because it is a trendy topic in education right now. The idea was
popularized by American psychologist Carol Dweck. Here is how she
defines it in a 2012 interview:
In a fixed mindset, students believe their basic abilities, their intelligence,
their talents, are just fixed traits. They have a certain amount and that’s
that, and then their goal becomes to look smart all the time and never
look dumb. In a growth mindset, students understand that their talents
and 
abilities 
can 
be 
developed 
through 
effort, 
good 
teaching 
and
persistence. They don’t necessarily think everyone’s the same or anyone
can be Einstein, but they believe everyone can get smarter if they work at
it.
When you reflect on particular negative traits you possess and think
“that’s just who I am” or “that’s just me”, you cannot grow. Instead,
embrace the surprising plasticity of the human brain and keep learning,
evolving, and improving.
This concept is similar to the Japanese concept of Kaizen or “good
change” which was a key ingredient in the superior quality and productivity
of the Japanese automakers as they eclipsed North American car makers in
the 1980s. With Kaizen or Growth Mindset (aka, continuous improvement),
you always look to make incremental positive changes and continue to
grow.
Without a growth mindset, this book is not going to help you much
because you will wrongly believe that many of the traits, strengths, and
weaknesses you possess are fixed or too difficult to change. That’s not the
right 
attitude. 
Pick 
a 
weakness, 
and 
work 
on 
it. 
You 
will 
notice
improvement over time.
When someone says, “I’m not a people person” or “I’m not very good
at math”, that’s a fixed mindset. Clearly people are predisposed a certain
way by genetics, personality, and environment. That is your starting hand. A
growth mindset says that you can overcome your starting hand by playing
well, and thereby outperform your baseline or starting point.
Here’s a quick summary of how the two mindsets contrast:
Even if you were the most disorganized kid in high school, all over the
place in university and live like a pig now, you can still become an
organized person. You have to drop the idea that you are a certain way and
embrace positive change. You don’t need to take radical action; make
continuous small changes. Start small and keep improving every day.
Another hot topic in the world of education is grit.
Grit, perseverance, mental endurance
If you have kids, you have probably been bombarded with articles and
parent coffees and TED Talks about building grit in your children. Fail early
and fail fast and fail often and the marshmallow test and all that.
Here is how Angela Duckworth, who popularized the term “grit”,
defines it
50
:
Grit is passion and perseverance for long-term goals. One way to think
about grit is to consider what grit isn’t. Grit isn’t talent. Grit isn’t luck. Grit
isn’t how intensely, for the moment, you want something.
Instead, grit is about having what some researchers call an “ultimate
concern”—a goal you care about so much that it organizes and gives
meaning to almost everything you do. And grit is holding steadfast to that
goal. Even when you fall down. Even when you screw up. Even when
progress toward that goal is halting or slow.
Alpha traders have grit.
Duckworth’s book: Grit: The Power of Passion and Perseverance is on
every high-performing parent’s bookshelf. Building grit in our kids is a
strategy to combat the worry that helicopter parents have sheltered kids too
much in recent years. The idea is that showering kids with praise and
participation trophies instead of preparing them for the harsh realities of the
cruel, cruel world makes them weaker, not stronger.
While my feeling is that grit has been overplayed and somewhat beaten
to death as a trendy simple fix in educational circles, that does not mean it
is not a valid and important topic. Grit is important in life and critically
important in trading. One thing that many people fail to appreciate is just
how grueling and demoralizing trading can be, even if you’re good at it.
For example, I have been collecting data on my trading since 2006 and I
make money almost exactly 50% of all days. Some years it’s 52%, some
years it’s 49% but my win percentage is surprisingly stable. The variable
that determines my yearly P&L is the magnitude of my up days relative to
the magnitude of my down days.
Let’s say you are a day trader that works 200 days per year. You are net
profitable 50% of those days. If your average up day is $6,000 and your
average down day is $2,800 (these stats are not unrealistic) … Here is how
much you make that year:
OK, that’s a pretty good income (depending on your location and
lifestyle) but think about the emotional trajectory of that year. You lost
money on 100 separate days, and losing days usually feel pretty bad. Forget
about losing days, how about losing streaks? I just created a simulator in
Excel that generates a series of 200 coin tosses which would be the same
win/loss profile as a trader with a 50% win rate.
Almost every string of 200 coin tosses has a streak of at least 7 tails.
Some of them have strings of 10 or even 15 tails in a row! That’s a great
deal of psychic pain to withstand, even if you are supremely confident that
your win rate is truly 50%. If you have only been trading for three years and
you think your win rate is 50%, then you hit 10 losing days in a row… Will
you still be sure your win rate is 50%? Or will you start to worry you might
have lost your edge… Or the market has changed… Or???
This is where grit and mental endurance come in. Sure, winning at
trading is fun, but losing at trading is even more unfun. It is widely-
accepted that humans will pay about twice as much to avoid a loss as they
will pay for a gain. We will discuss this more in the section on bias.
Check out how the s-curve in Figure 5.2 deviates from the x-axis and
you can see the pain of losses is twice as negative as the positive effect of
same-sized gains. Knowing that this is the case, you need grit and mental
endurance to withstand all the pain of all those losing days. I have come to
terms with the distribution of probabilities at this stage of my career so now
after a losing day, it is easier for me to move on than it used to be.
When I was in my 30’s, there were a few bad days when I walked out of
Lehman Brothers totally numb. One day was so bad I got on the subway
going the wrong way and ended up in Kew Gardens before I realized what
was going on. Now, I find it easier to say to myself something like: “Hills
and valleys, buddy. Hills and valleys. Flush your mind and start fresh
tomorrow.”
That said, when I lose money nine days in a row (which still happens!) I
can’t help but get a little itchy and red-faced. In the middle of the ninth
consecutive day I still might fantasize about turning my keyboard sideways
and smashing it over the front edge of my desk.
“Loss Aversion” by Laurenrosenberger, Creative Commons 4.0 (CC BY-SA 4.0)
But I don’t do that, because I know it wouldn’t help.
If you have ever played poker in a casino, you understand the concept
of mental endurance. Sometimes (just like in trading) you have to sit there
for hours and fold every hand because there is nothing to play. Then you
finally get a good hand (AA) and play it perfectly only to lose to the drunk
guy who hit trip 7’s on the river. Can you internalize the fact that the other
player got lucky and find strength in your own belief in process, not
outcome? If you’re good, you can.
Grit is about playing the long game.
Obviously there is overlap between grit and some of the other qualities
and traits we have talked about. I wanted to single out grit because it’s easy
to understand and it captures so much in one 4-letter word
51
.
Organized
Conscientious people are organized. This does not mean they were born
organized. I struggled with organization and executive functioning right
into my 30’s and when I would miss a meeting or screw something up due
to disorganization or bad planning I would just say “Well, that’s how I am.
Sorry.” Then, at some point, I found that wasn’t good enough. When you
have a family, it becomes more difficult to just shrug and say “whoops”.
Once you abandon the concept of “that’s just the way I am” on any
particular 
trait, 
you 
have 
taken 
a 
huge 
step 
towards 
evolution 
and
improvement. Adopt the growth mindset: the belief that talent and character
are not fixed. Science supports this idea. The human brain exhibits much
more plasticity than we once thought. A growth mindset, instead of a fixed
mindset opens up all sorts of upside for you as a person. Including…
Becoming more organized.
The Baumeister and Gardner book on willpower that I referenced earlier
is a good start if you want to become more organized. Also useful:
The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen Covey.
Written in 1989 but still popular for a reason.
The Checklist Manifesto by Atul Gawande. Pretty much exactly what it
sounds like. Many interesting examples.
The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg. Almost everything about
staying organized comes down to habit.
Note that these books can be boiled down into bullet points that will
give you 80% of the benefit in 20% of the time. You can get summaries of
most major books by googling “Summary, BOOK NAME”, or by going to
Goodreads, Blinkist and other websites. I find the distilled version of many
nonfiction books is enough to get the point.
Another 
efficiency 
trick 
for 
non-fiction 
books: 
when 
you 
start 
an
audiobook, set it to 2X normal speed and listen for two minutes. Then, set it
to 1.5X normal speed, and it will sound normal. Efficiency!
Here is what being organized means in trading:
1. Have a plan each day
An excellent way to lose money consistently is to sit down at your
computer and start hitting the BUY and SELL buttons with no plan. My
plan comes together as I write AM/FX each day. For most of my career I
have worked at a bank, so writing each day is a natural part of my job.
When I went to a hedge fund for a few years in the early 2010s, there
was no reason to write (I had no one to write for) and I found my trading
was sloppier and more random at first. Writing a quick plan in the morning
anchors you and forces you to stop and think, before you start trading.
You don’t have to write anything elaborate. It can be two sentences you
send to your co-worker or it can be a detailed trade plan before each and
every trade. The format is not the thing, the doing it is the thing.
A nice way to approach your plan for the day is to have a simple list that
you check off each morning before you start trading. It can have 5 or 6
quick entries, for example:
1. Data and events today
2. Strong views
3. Big levels (sift through whatever charts and technical analysis you
like and narrow it down to the big levels that might hit today)
4. My plan for the day. This does not have to be super-detailed. For an
equity day trader, it might look something like:
a. Buy 500 MSFT at 9:28 a.m. with a stop at $149.80 and re-evaluate
at 3PM.
b. Trade headlines with max risk of $4,000.
c. Buy AAPL on break of $247.00, stop loss $244.80 and take profit at
$249.99.
d. Call Mom at 1:15 p.m.
e. Workout 2 p.m. to 3 p.m. (biceps and back)
5. $ at risk (if you use a daily stop loss, how much are you risking
today?)
6. Side projects (stuff you can do when the market is dead—reading,
research, spreadsheet building, Python, etc.). Having a few of these
at the ready will help you stay productive instead of sitting there
when it’s quiet going, “Hmm, what should I do?” or flicking through
The Daily Mail. If you do your daily plan in Excel, you can carry
over whatever side projects you did not complete yesterday into
today’s Daily Plan.
Try not to trade until all items on your Daily Plan have been filled in.
Be ready for the day before you start trading. Don’t be the guy who doesn’t
realize 
an 
economic 
number 
is 
coming 
out 
and 
yells, 
“Whoa! 
What
happened!” when markets freak out at 10:00:00 a.m. Be prepared.
And 
don’t 
watch 
any 
sports 
highlights 
until 
after 
11 
a.m. 
That’s
unprofessional. :]
2. Collect data
The best way to learn about and improve your trading is to collect data.
What are your trading statistics? There will be a more complete discussion
of what data to collect and how to analyze it in Chapter 11. For now, just
know that good traders collect data and analyze it creatively.
3. Build and optimize your information network
Be thoughtful about what information you consume and how you
connect with peers and mentors. Narrow down what you read regularly and
cut out the garbage. There are a few analysts that I read religiously. On the
other hand, when I find myself reading the super-smart analysis of someone
who has been consistently bearish stocks since 2005, I know I am wasting
my time.
Try to understand the motivations and bias behind anything you read.
This is particularly important in the era of clickbait and markets-are-gonna-
crash bear porn. I have spoken to good journalists who admit that they feel
forced to sensationalize headlines and even entire stories in order to satisfy
the institutionalized prioritization of clicks over quality.
If you read a story on Bloomberg or the WSJ that includes the phrase
“unnamed sources”, that is your first clue that the article could well be
trash. A journalist can publish any sort of nonsense on the internet and there
is very little consequence if it turns out to be inaccurate. The news cycle
moves on and nobody goes back and rates reporters on their past accuracy.
The #1 thing they get rated on is: number of clicks.
When 
you 
read 
stories 
and 
analysis 
about 
financial 
markets, 
it 
is
important to know who wrote what you are reading. Finance stories are
sometimes 
written 
by 
junior 
journalists 
with 
very 
little 
knowledge 
of
financial 
markets. 
Many 
bank 
analysts 
and 
economists 
have 
strong
worldviews and are committed to a directional bias. If an analyst is bullish,
first ask: Is this analyst always bullish? Question the details and sources
when reading news articles.
The unsourced and rumor-filled stories run by the major outlets during
the China/US Trade War in 2018 and 2019 were particularly notable for
their inaccuracy. After a while, the market caught on and stopped reacting to
the nonstop, poorly-sourced stories with headlines like “Sources Say Trade
Talks Hit Snag”. Every news outlet publishes unsourced or poorly-sourced
articles with headlines full of exaggeration at times. Be skeptical and weed
them out as much as possible. If you react to a headline, read the actual
story as quickly as possible afterwards because there might be less there
than you think.
Just to be clear, there are plenty of excellent journalists in finance. My
point is simply that you need to pay attention to who wrote whatever you
are reading, and the more you know about their track record and biases, the
clearer the lens you are reading through.
Next, think about your personal information network. Be thoughtful and
efficient about who you talk to, what websites you read, who you follow on
Twitter, and who you interact with. Can you prune the network a bit and get
rid of some of the time-sucking or negative-value-add channels?
For example, I find reading tweets from a list of about 25 to 50 handles
is a productive and useful way to acquire timely information. On the other
hand, I know to refrain from reading replies and reactions to tweets; that is
an incredible waste of time. And I try my best never to read or reply to
political or trolling tweets.
Don’t get sucked into the time-wasting negativity vortex of comments
sections on social media or the web. They are time-sucking garbage dumps
often representing the lowest form of humanity—the worst possible place to
spend your limited and precious time. Twitter and Zerohedge, for example
can be useful sources of information; just be sure to filter properly and
avoid pointless time spent in the comments section rabbit hole.
4. Write it down, or type it out
Thoughts are abstract and fuzzy. Writing (with a pen or on a computer)
is solid and concrete. If you think, “I’m going to cut my AAPL short at
$285”, that is completely different from writing CUT AAPL 285 on a piece
of paper and having those words stare up at you as the stock rallies from
$282.50 to $284.75.
The same goes for any plans or ideas you have. There is so much noise
in your head, so many competing voices vying for airtime. Don’t assume
you can formulate a plan in there and then execute it successfully without
writing anything down. Again, this doesn’t have to mean anything more
than scratching a few notes down on a piece of paper or recording some
thoughts in a spreadsheet.
Research shows that when you write down
a goal, you are more likely to achieve it.
When you write something down, it solidifies. It transforms from
abstract into concrete. All the sludge falls away and only the important
information is left. When you write something down, you have made a
choice 
to 
select 
that 
particular 
information, 
goal, 
or 
action 
as 
more
important than all the others. This highlights it for your brain. When you
write something down, you signal to your brain “THIS IS IMPORTANT”.
Your brain records it as such.
The pathways and connections developed in your brain are different
when you write something down because the encoding process is different.
The encoding is stronger, more robust, and information is recalled more
easily. If you want something to happen, write it down.
Another benefit of writing down stop losses, take profits, ideas and
goals is that it is harder to wiggle out of them when they are staring right at
you. You can’t convince yourself that you never really were going to stop
out at $285 absolutely for sure if you have a huge note on your desk that
says CUT AAPL @ 285!!! It is your past self sending a message to your
future self. Unambiguously. In black Sharpie.
5. Keep a trading journal.
A trading journal is the best way to keep track of your progress,
especially early in your career. It can be a detailed record of every single
trade you do, or it can be a few paragraphs you write at the end of the day.
A trading journal can take whatever form you like. Record a few thoughts
each day, or record the specifics of each trade you do. Either way, a journal
will 
enhance 
your 
ability 
to 
analyze 
performance, 
and 
improve 
your
process. You will start to notice repeated mistakes. You will identify bias in
your views. “Hmmm, I’m always short bonds and never long. That’s
probably not good. I need to be more flexible.”
Your journal entries should focus on your decision-making and process.
What triggered the idea? How strongly did you feel about it? Was it all
logic, or partly gut? Describe the specifics of the process and the route you
took to develop, execute, and exit the trade.
To enforce the habit of journaling, I send an email to one of my peers on
the desk at the end of each day. I call it 12-12, meaning 12 hours back and
12 hours forward. The 12 back part is a quick summary of how my day
went, whether I stuck to the plan, whether I overtraded and so on. The 12
forward part is my overnight and next day trading plan including stop
losses, dollars at risk and maximum position size.
Those are the five parts of what it means to be organized in trading.
Now let’s move to the next positive trait that leads to trading success.
Process oriented
There is a wide body of literature covering process vs. outcome. As a
rule, you should view your trading P&L as a semi-random output of your
process. You control the process, but you do not control the short-term
outcome in trading. The sooner you understand this, the better. There is a
tremendous amount of variance in trading and one of the best ways to
handle this is to focus on your process. If the process is good, the results
will eventually follow.
Think deeply about your process. Where do your trade ideas come
from? Are 
you 
just 
flicking 
through 
a 
few 
charts 
and 
drawing 
some
trendlines and expecting that to give you an edge? Or are you doing the
heavy 
lifting 
by 
digging 
deep 
into 
the 
drivers, 
participants, 
and
idiosyncrasies of your market, and uncovering unique insights that are
likely not already in the price?
The best book that I have read on the topic of Process vs. Outcome is
Thinking in Bets by Annie Duke. Duke used to be a professional poker
player and while the book talks poker a fair bit, most of her insights also
apply 
directly 
to 
trading. 
The 
book 
is 
about 
decision 
making 
with
incomplete information, and that is the essence of trading.
Trading 
is 
like 
poker 
in 
that 
each 
decision 
relies 
on 
incomplete
information and each outcome or trial is strongly influenced by luck. But
like poker, in the long run, the luck evens out
52
. We will talk more about
luck and variance in Chapter 11, but for now I just want you to understand
that if you have a strong process, you will not be as worried about bad luck.
Your goals should mostly focus on process, not outcome. If you need to
get to a particular outcome (say a $7,000,000 trading revenue budget), work
backwards from there to set goals that are primarily related to process. Here
are some examples of rules that might be part of a solid trading process:
Complete 6-point Daily Plan every day before executing any trades.
Maximum 10 trades per day.
If I stop out of a trade, don’t do the same trade again for 24 hours (and
don’t move stops to avoid triggering this rule!)
Backtest and build a new trading system for the NASDAQ open.
Contact three traders or other peers each day to share ideas or
dialogue.
When you are confident in your process, you can ride out the inevitable
losing streaks because you understand that outcomes are partially dictated
by randomness in the short term. Obviously, in the end, it’s the outcome
that matters but when you focus on process, the outcome “magically”
takes care of itself.
When evaluating trades, traders, and trading strategies, always refer to
this matrix:
Let’s look at an example of bad decision / good outcome and see how
traders with good thinking and bad thinking might respond.
Oil just dropped from $42 to $40 in ten minutes. Jimmy is caught long
oil futures and the price is more than $1 through his original stop loss of
$41. The market is in freefall but he has convinced himself to give it just a
little bit more room because there is a big chart point right here that he
hadn’t noticed earlier when he first chose his stop loss.
Jimmy was originally long at $42 with a stop at $41 and a take profit at
$43.80, risking $1.00 to make $1.80. This was a decent set up because he
thought the odds of either side of the trade hitting were about 50/50. Fifty
percent probability with a 1.8 : 1 payout = high expected value.
Now, he’s down $2.00 on the trade and can’t bring himself to cut it. The
logical part of his brain says: “Dude, you’re way through your stop. Follow
your own rules and get out.” But there is another voice in his head saying:
“Jimmy-Boi… You know it’s going higher; You just need to hold on just a
little bit longer. This is the low, baby. Just hold on. You know you can do
it…” Then, before Jimmy has a chance to decide which voice to listen to, a
headline hits:
*SAUDI ARABIA TO CUT OIL PRODUCTION 1M BBL/DAY AS ASIAN
DEMAND FALLS
Boom! Oil spikes back up to $42 and Jimmy cuts the position at flat. He
logs out of his trading software and starts scrolling through Facebook
memes. Needless to say, crude rallies to $44 in a straight line afterwards as
the Saudi news triggers a reassessment of the supply/demand equation.
Jimmy thinks: “I am so glad I held on and ignored my stop loss. That
saved me a lot of money.”
He does not understand bad process / bad decision / good outcome.
A good trader thinks: “Not only did I not follow my process, I failed to
update my view when the headline came out. Instead of following a good
process, I did everything wrong. Sure, I broke even but in the long run I am
going to blow up or bleed out if I keep doing this.
“First, I need to automate my stop losses. My broker has a stop loss
function that works perfectly fine. Second, when news comes out I need to
analyze how it impacts my prior hypothesis, not just get out of the trade
because it’s back to flat. That’s just dumb old reference dependence or
anchoring bias. All I cared about was the level I got into the trade and my
intraday P&L.
I should be making trading decisions based on market factors, not based
on how I feel about my P&L or random, meaningless chart points. I don’t
deserve to be flat on this trade; I deserve to be down a cartload. I will count
my blessings, reduce my risk for a day or two and spend some time working
on my process.” On the flipside, if you do a bunch of analysis on a trade,
execute according to your plan, then get blown out of the water by a
random headline… Don’t feel bad. That’s just trading. Every trade has a
probability of success and failure and unless you are Bobby Axelrod, the
probability of success on a trade is never going to be 100%. As long as you
stick to the plan and manage your risk appropriately, don’t worry about
losing trades. Losing trades are part of the game.
Think forward. Think forward. Think forward.
Spend most of your time thinking about the future path of markets and
how you can predict and capitalize on that path. Spend as little time as
possible thinking about trades that happened earlier today or yesterday or
six weeks ago. The time to look back is when you are consciously in
process-analysis 
mode, 
looking 
thoughtfully 
back 
on 
your 
trades 
and
trading patterns in recent weeks or months. Otherwise, think forward.
Alpha Traders are future-oriented and don’t spend much time on regret.
There is nothing more tedious than a trader that constantly talks about what
he was going to do, or should have done or was DEFINITELY going to do
but then didn’t because his phone rang or he got faked out by the price
action or blah blah blah…
Hindsight Harry is annoying. Nobody likes Hindsight Harry. He bothers
the heck out of the people he talks to because he has a negative mindset that
emphasizes past outcomes when he should be focused on process and the
future. Clear your mind of past trades and focus on the next opportunity.
Good traders thoughtfully review their decisions in quiet moments, long
after the fact. Bad traders say “woulda”, “coulda”, and “shoulda”.
As Don Meredith, the American football announcer and player for the
Dallas Cowboys once said:
If ifs and buts were candy and nuts, we’d all have a Merry Christmas.
53
Healthy skeptic
Healthy skepticism is the ability to question the wisdom of the crowd,
common knowledge, and experts while still maintaining the ability to
incorporate information from respected sources. People sometimes confuse
cynic with skeptic and it is important to know the difference.
The modern definition of cynicism is someone who is bitter, motivated
by 
self-interest 
and/or 
distrustful 
of 
humanity 
in 
general. 
This 
is 
an
unhealthy approach for markets as it leads to a persistently negative,
inflexible, and bearish worldview.
Skeptic comes from the ancient Greek skeptikós, meaning thoughtful,
inquiring or “I consider”. It means someone who requires strong evidence
before accepting a belief or claim. Skepticism is good.
If someone tweets “Stocks are up 11 Mondays in a row!”, the healthy
skeptic reads that tweet, wonders if it’s true, gathers the data and verifies
the claim. Through this investigation, the trader might also discover other
patterns 
in 
the 
data. 
Tuesdays 
are 
up 
even 
more, 
Fridays 
are 
quiet,
Thursdays are busy, etc. A less independent and skeptical thinker retweets
the original (possibly wrong) information and plans to buy stocks at 8 a.m.
on Monday.
When you receive information, greet it with healthy skepticism. Is the
information 
accurate? 
Is 
the 
person 
or 
organization 
disseminating 
the
information biased? Are they always bearish, or frequently too optimistic?
Are they trying to inform their readers, or generate clicks? Alpha traders are
healthy skeptics. They require strong evidence before accepting a claim.
Don’t 
believe 
the 
hype 
on 
CNBC. 
Ignore 
professional 
forecasters.
Doublecheck 
any 
claim 
someone 
makes 
on 
FinTwit. 
Much 
of 
the
“information” out there is biased or wrong.
This concludes our review of the cognitive traits from the first two
columns of the table at the beginning of the chapter. Now we’ll move on to
the third column: Non-cognitive traits.
NON-COGNITIVE TRAITS
While cognitive traits like intelligence, rationality, quantitative skill, and
properly-calibrated confidence are crucial for trading success, there are
many non-cognitive traits that are equally important. Before we dig in, here
is the complete list of traits we will cover:
1. Discipline and self-control
2. Adaptation
3. Courage
4. Self-awareness
5. Ability to handle stress
6. Focus
7. Patience
8. Locus of control
9. Decisiveness
Discipline and self-control
Discipline 
and 
self-control 
are 
facets 
of 
conscientiousness 
and 
are
crucial to trading success. It is easy to learn the rules of trading but if you
don’t 
follow 
them, 
you 
will 
fail. 
Many 
sophisticated, 
intelligent, 
and
knowledgeable traders fail because of poor discipline and bad self-control.
The fight to remain disciplined and fully in control of our actions is one
of the great challenges faced by every human being. We all know that
exercise and a healthy diet will keep us slim and healthy. Most people want
to be slim and healthy. Yet 71.6% of US adults are overweight or obese
54
.
Understanding what needs to be done and doing what needs to be done are
two completely different things.
Self-discipline is the greatest edge in every aspect of life. Health,
fitness, education, career success, productivity, marital longevity, and of
course trading… They all require discipline. Improve your current level of
discipline and you will increase your future levels of happiness and success.
It’s true in life, and in trading.
To start, understand where you are on the continuum of self-control.
What score did you give yourself in the quiz from Chapter 1 (Row G)? If
you are low in this category (as I am), this is the place to focus. The
smartest trader in the world will not succeed if she has terrible self-control.
There are many traits and characteristics and ideas in this book but if
you have a problem with self-discipline, I would make fixing that your first
priority. Take action and learn to become more disciplined. Here are some
suggestions on how to do that.
How to level up your self-discipline:
If you have poor self-discipline, admit it. Then create systems to deal
with it. Too many people just hope they will be stronger and more
disciplined next time instead of creating friction to prevent unwanted
actions, and automating desirable habits.
Outsource discipline as much as possible. For example, every time you
put on a trade, load up an automated stop loss right away. If you have a
team that works for you, keep your hands off the buttons and let them
get you in and out of trades according to parameters you set in
advance. Remember that once you put a trade on, the bias kicks in.
You often start to overthink, overreact, and overanalyze. Stick with the
parameters you selected when you entered, automate or outsource the
stop loss, and take profit so that you do not overtrade.
Create a clear set of risk management rules and keep them as simple as
possible. If you have a daily stop loss of $100,000, it’s easy to know
when you are done for the day. On the other hand, if you use a very
complex set of rules governing your risk management and have no
clear eject button, you are more likely to crash. Always have either a
daily, weekly, or monthly stop loss (or all three) to manage risk of ruin.
Meditate or do yoga. A mind in a state of agitation has less self-control
and less willpower. Learn about mindfulness. Check out
dailystoic.com.
Read books about willpower and self-control. It is a trait that is innate
to some extent but can also be built. Willpower: Rediscovering the
Greatest Human Strength by Roy Baumeister and John Tierney is
excellent, as are The Science of Self-Discipline by Peter Hollins and
The Disciplined Trader by Mark Douglas.
When you are done reading these books, create a short list of
takeaways: two or three actions you plan to take to improve your
process and become more disciplined. Keep things as simple as
possible.
Get a coach. There are many levels of coaching available for traders.
When I worked at a hedge fund, we had a coach that came in once a
month and I found the process useful. I found I did most of the talking
and the coach prompted me and helped me find my way. There are
online trading coaches available too, but do your homework before
hiring someone.
A majority of the trading advice, coaching, lessons, seminars, and
products available online are worse than worthless. They are often scams or
borderline scams, frauds offered up by individuals with marketing, not
trading skills. Good trading coaches have some combination of experience
in psychology, performance science and trading. Do some due diligence
before you hire a trading coach.
Adaptation
Many traders are good in a specific type of market. Some are good
breakout traders, or range traders or flow traders. Maybe they do well when
stocks are falling but not when stocks rally. Some traders were great before
the algos but have no idea how to trade algo-driven markets. The challenge
is that markets are always changing. If you’re really good at one type of
market, it is almost guaranteed you will be a dinosaur at some point.
Adaptation is such an important part of long-term trading success that I
devoted an entire chapter to it. See Chapter 14 for a full discussion of why
and how excellent traders adapt.
Courage (but not recklessness)
Good trading requires courage. You need to be able to put on positions
that go against what common knowledge, media hype and the smart guy on
TV are saying. You need to take positions big enough that they make you
feel legitimately at risk if things go wrong. You need to be able to drive the
car fast enough to win the Grand Prix… But not so fast you slam into the
wall.
Optimal risk appetite is the narrow balancing point between tight,
riskaverse white-knuckling and sloppy overtrading. There is no such thing
as a perfect trade. When you see a setup that looks amazing, commit the
maximum capital possible under your risk management framework.
I use a three-level system for conviction and risk allocation. We will go
in depth on sizing and conviction in Chapter 11 but for now just know that
when it comes to your highest conviction trades, you should have enough
risk on to make you feel uncomfortable, but not out of control. The biggest
size you think is still rational, whether or not that makes your knees weak.
If it makes your knees wobble a bit but the math is rational, that’s perfect.
Varying bet size when huge opportunities come along
is an important determinant of trading success.
Changing bet size is the way card counters beat the dealer in blackjack.
They look for opportunities with abnormally good odds and then make
large bets on those events. Obviously the big difference with trading is that
you don’t know the odds of any trade, you can only estimate them. But if
you see a trade that you believe has a 90% chance of success and a payout
of 2 : 1… You need the courage to bet big.
Good traders understand the importance of varying bet size based on
opportunity, market volatility and their current performance. Bad traders
always trade the same position size regardless of the opportunity set,
volatility or P&L.
Remember, there is a continuum from chicken to crazy. You need to be
courageous, but not reckless. Risk of ruin is the number one risk to manage
— not risk of missing out. Not risk of falling behind budget or benchmark.
Not risk of underperforming the guy next to you.
Take meaningful, courageous risk but never look into the abyss.
Note that risk appetite for an individual is not constant. Many traders
behave differently under different conditions. Here are three effects that
influence trader risk appetite:
1. Zero-bound effect. Traders that are down on the year tend to trade
more nervously than traders who are up. If you are up $4 million on
the year and drop to $2.5 million (a loss of $1.5 million), that will
feel different than going from plus $1 million to minus $500,000.
You need to have the courage to take smart risk, even when you are
down.
2. End-of-period effect. Traders tend to take less risk at the end of the
year. If a trader has had a good year, they want to bank it. If they
have had a bad year, they don’t want to make it worse. This effect is
why most hedge funds will not pay out more than once per year.
Hedge funds that institute twice-yearly payouts find that trader risk
appetite 
drops 
in 
both 
June 
and 
December, 
instead 
of 
just 
in
December.
3. House money effect. Traders that are massively profitable in a given
period will tend to take on extra risk. This is known as the house
money effect, a bias that shows up in both experimental and real-
world 
settings. 
The 
house 
money 
effect 
is 
especially 
strong
immediately after large gains, and then it dissipates over time.
HOW IS YOUR RISK APPETITE?
How did you score yourself on the continuum from “Risk Averse” to
“Sometimes Reckless” in the Chapter 1 quiz (row A)? If you scored 7 or 8
you are probably in the sweet spot. Below seven, you are probably not
taking enough risk and could be trading below potential. 9 or 10? You may
well be overtrading or pushing too hard.
Here is a quick discussion of different risk appetite scores, what they
mean, and how to address problems related to specific ranges. I suggest you
read all the sections, regardless of your risk appetite score, because there
are tips and anecdotes in each section that apply to everyone.
Risk appetite score: 1-4
Risk averse trader
More traders than you would expect fall into the 1-4 range. That’s OK!
You can still succeed in trading if you are risk averse. But don’t be in
denial. Be self-aware and be honest about your score. A score between 1
and 4 signals you are a risk averse trader. Even if your risk appetite score is
higher than four, please read this section.
The risk averse trader:
Is afraid to lose money. It is impossible to trade successfully if you are
afraid of losing money. You will always be weak. If your fear comes
from within, you need to work on it. If your fear comes from
inadequate capitalization, the irony is this: your fear of losing money
means you are going to lose all your money. Wait until you are
adequately capitalized and find another source of income until then.
Traders with too little capital end up gambling. The biggest real risk in
trading is that you will lose money. You need to understand and accept
this risk before you can have any chance of success as a professional.
Has trouble pulling the trigger.
Always looks for the perfect trade.
Needs many things to align before trading.
Often feels much more comfortable having the same position as
manager or peers. Rarely takes the opposite position.
Looks for an excuse to take off a trade as soon as she puts it on. She
will say things like “It should have gone up by now”, “It’s not trading
well”, “I don’t like the price action” or “This idea isn’t working” even
when the security has barely moved. She will take a tiny loss or tiny
profit using any possible excuse because fundamentally she is risk
averse and her subconscious would prefer not to have the position (or
any position)! There is a difference between taking risk and putting on
positions. If you are always on edge the second you put on a position,
you need to think about how to develop staying power. See the tips
below.
Tips for risk averse traders
First of all, plenty of good traders are risk averse. They have many of
the skills necessary to succeed in trading, and this is their main weakness. It
is not the hardest weakness to overcome, but it requires a short list of rules
that must be followed religiously:
1. Set a minimum risk size for every trade. With aggressive traders,
you are more worried about maximum dollars at risk. With risk
averse traders, you need to set minimums. Much as there is a speed
limit on every highway, there is also a lesser-known minimum speed
on 
many 
roads. 
If 
you 
are 
trading 
from 
home 
with 
a 
$50,000
account, risking $100 to make $200 is not going to move the needle.
In that example, a trader could set a minimum of at least $500 of risk
per trade, $1,000 if it’s a high-quality idea. Minimum risk amounts
ensure that you extract maximum value from your good ideas.
Be thoughtful about what is a reasonable minimum. If you are a bank
trader trying to make $10,000,000 of alpha in a year, risking $30,000
to make $50,000 is a waste of time unless you can find many of these
trades each day. Reverse-engineer your minimum $ at risk per trade
using your monthly or yearly P&L objective.
Here is an example. You are trading from home and want to make
$250,000 next year. You make money 50% of days and lose money
50% of days. Your average winning day is 1.6X your average losing
day. Toss this into a spreadsheet and keep changing the “average
winning day” amount until the year total is $250,000. That gives you
a starting point for how much risk you will need to take.
This concept can also be relevant to traders with high risk
appetite scores. When I first worked at a hedge fund, I felt like a kid
in a candy store because instead of just FX, I was able to trade every
financial market under the sun. I could trade oil, wheat, bonds and
whatever else I wanted.
At first, this led me to dabble in many markets. It was a great
learning 
experience, 
but 
I 
found 
that 
I 
did 
a 
poor 
job 
of 
risk
managing trades in secondary markets because they were much
smaller than my core trades. I would risk $300,000 on an FX trade,
but I might only risk $50,000 on an oil trade at first, because I felt I
didn’t know the market as well.
Thus, when an oil trade went against me, I would tend to show poor
discipline because the P&L impact was minimal. I would drag my
stop lower or even just cancel it because the losses didn’t really hurt.
In contrast, when a trade went my way, I had trouble taking profit at
my target because the gain didn’t feel big enough.
I might say to myself: “Man, that was a great idea, but I only made
$65,000. Not even worth the mental capital. Maybe I can stretch it to
$100,000 and at least make it worth the effort.” Needless to say, after
hitting the target, oil would reverse and I would cut at a small loss.
My trading in these products improved substantially when I set risk
minimums for non-core markets. Instead of dabbling in oil or silver
or other futures, I would only enter if I had a strong view and was
willing to take meaningful risk (say $200,000 or more if my normal
risk size in FX was $300,000). This ensured:
a. 
High 
conviction 
before 
entering 
a 
secondary 
market 
because
meaningful capital was at stake; and
b. proper attention to the position and rigorous risk management since
the position was big enough to matter, meaning
c. no too-small positions in non-core markets to distract or waste
mental capital.
2. Do not take off a trade until the stop loss, take profit, or some
other predetermined reassessment trigger is hit. I will explain the
meaning of “reassessment trigger” throughout this book. The risk
averse trader sees danger at every corner and is consciously or
subconsciously looking for excuses to end the discomfort of being in
a trade and get back to the relaxed state of flat. Remember: to be an
Alpha 
Trader, 
you 
need 
to 
be 
OK 
with 
feeling 
uncomfortable
sometimes.
If you are a risk averse trader (or you are managing a risk averse
trader) simply institute a rule. When you put on a trade, list the
reasons you will take it off: stop loss or take profit hit (of course).
Time triggers are fine, as long as they are determined ahead of time.
For example: I will reassess at 4 p.m. today (if it’s a day trade) or at 3
p.m. Friday (if it’s a multi-day trade). These are called reassessment
triggers
55
.
All reassessment triggers should be determined ahead of time. Any
other reason to take off a trade is not acceptable. It looks bid! It’s not
going 
down! 
Some 
other 
market 
just 
blipped 
higher 
so 
I 
got
nervous… etc. These are not good reasons to reduce risk.
Once you take a position, you are a gigantic drooling bias monster.
Your weaknesses are multiplied by ten when you are in a trade. Set
specific rules that will restrict your actions when the inevitable
discomfort kicks in. Learn to live with the discomfort. That’s what
real risk feels like. Have courage. Stop white-knuckling every trade.
Put the trade on and let it cook. Do not take it off until one of your
ex-ante triggers hits.
3. Use trade quotas. Set a number of trades that you plan to do in a
given period and stick to it. Your first instinct might be: “What if
there 
are 
not 
that 
many 
opportunities?” 
There 
are 
always
opportunities. If they are only lower conviction opportunities, then
just size them appropriately.
The quota you set for yourself is highly contingent on your trading
style, but if you are a short-term trader (but not a day trader or high-
frequency trader), you might set a minimum of three trades per week.
This forces you to get engaged and take risk, even when you are
uncomfortable doing so. Sure, it might put you in a few lower EV
trades, but the tradeoff is necessary to ensure you don’t spend too
much time underinvested on the sidelines.
A basketball player who always waits for the perfect shot might
shoot 100% from the field and score 4 points per game. That is not
good! As a coach, you want that player to take 15 shots and miss 5
(and thus score ~20 points). Traders who are risk averse do not take
enough shots, so implementing a quota forces them to find a better
place on the continuum
56
.
Risk appetite score: 5-7
Moderate risk trader
If you gave yourself a 5, 6 or 7 on the continuum of risk averse to risk
seeking, you can probably up your game. Your risk aversion is not a
weakness, but you might be able to stretch yourself a bit and avoid an early
career plateau.
In the early 2000s, I worked for a bank that was generally risk averse.
They ran a risk business model that is surprisingly common in banks: “take
risk, but don’t lose money”. This is the optimal business model for a
manager that wants to protect the bank but also allow for a bit of upside if
trading conditions are optimal. This same business model is employed by
many pod-based hedge funds. If you have 100 traders all working with very
tight stops but some of those traders are still able to generate 20% returns in
a year, the overall returns and Sharpe ratio of the hedge fund will be
outstanding.
Some traders detest this business model because it makes them nervous.
Taking risk without losing money sounds like an oxymoron. It really isn’t.
It just means that you need to behave like a call option. Take as much risk
as you want when you are profitable, but play extremely tight when you are
not. This is the logical approach for any conservative senior manager who
views the traders working for him as a portfolio. It is a good business model
even if it’s not the most fun one to work in for traders with very strong risk
appetite.
The moderate risk taker thrives in that sort of model because they
deliver 
exactly 
what 
management 
wants: 
decent 
upside 
with 
limited
downside. I have generally been fairly flexible in my approach but I
definitely have concluded that this is the optimal strategy for most traders.
Increase your risk when you have a strong P&L base and decrease your risk
when you are near or below zero. This substantially reduces risk of ruin,
allows for the right tail, and offers you the best chance at long-term success.
The trader with risk appetite in the 5-7 range struggles to produce the
right tail of the distribution though, because they will more likely be
satisfied once they hit their budget or goal. This is the kind of trader I was,
when I worked at the generally risk-averse bank I mentioned. If my budget
was $5 million and I got there eight months into the year, I was encouraged
to “bank it” or “ring the register” or “take it easy into year end.”
This makes sense on some level but greatly reduces your ability to see
what kind of trader you can be, because despite the risks of the house
money effect, most traders are at their best when they have a big base of
P&L to work with but can remain patient and on the lookout for great
opportunities worthy of a big bet.
Given the incentives and guidance from management, at that bank I
acted like a trader with risk appetite of 5-7 even though my true risk
appetite is much higher. High enough that it tends to be a weakness when
I’m not at my best.
When I went to Lehman Brothers in 2006, I had a great start to the year.
My budget was $6 million and I was up more than that by March. I went to
my boss at the time and asked him how he felt I should proceed. I gave him
the explanation of how things went at my last job and how they would tell
me to “take it easy” once I hit my budget. Steam came out of his ears.
“No way, dude! This your chance to see what kind of trader you are!
You have six million dollars in the bank! Set a stop loss at three million and
go turn that six into ten.”
I sat there thinking for a bit and he waved me out of his office.
“Go! Go make money!”
That year I made $50 million dollars and I am forever thankful to that
manager for teaching me that lesson. The lesson was not: “You have money
in the bank so go gamble it.” The lesson was: “When you are in a strong
capital position with chunky P&L, increase your risk in a methodical way
and try to blow through the ceiling. The time to go for it is not January 1;
the time to go for it is when you have money in the bank and markets are
full of opportunity.”
When you take this approach, it is crucial that you remain aware of
downside and drawdown. Set a point at which you will go back to a more
defensive approach. In the case outlined above, I was up $6 million and set
my “go back to defensive” level at +$3m. This gives you ammo to push
hard when you’re doing well but also defines your downside so you don’t
just blow through all the money you’ve made.
This idea of pushing hard when you are in a strong position is 100%
contingent on the opportunity set. You don’t push just because you’re doing
well. You push because you’re doing well and there are great opportunities.
Wait, wait, wait… Then pounce. Traders with risk appetite scores in the
5 to 7 range need permission and opportunity to push hard when they are
doing well. If you are managing a trader like this… Push them to push
themselves. Ask them: “Do you want to see what kind of trader you can be?
This is your chance.”
If you scored between 5 and 7 on risk appetite, here are some things to
try:
As described above: When you reach a P&L threshold where you
would have been satisfied in the past (e.g., at budget, above budget,
best YTD ever and it’s only August…) don’t look at it as an
opportunity to chill. Think about an amount you could lose that would
still leave you in a strong position. If your budget was $4 million and
you are up $3 million in April, for example. Say to yourself: I’m going
to wait for a really good opportunity or series of opportunities, and
trade extra aggressively until I draw back down to $2 million. In other
words, I’m going to be very aggressive with $1 million of my P&L if I
see trades I believe in.
If you draw back down to $2 million, reset and slow down. But if you
are able to risk that $1 million to make $3 million, suddenly you find
yourself up $6 million and it’s still only June!you draw back down to
$2 million, reset and slow
To be 100% clear: this is not mindlessly doubling down at a casino
because you have seventeen black chips in your pocket. This is
increasing your bet size on high odds opportunities because you have
the capital to do so. This is how you generate outsized returns without
risk of ruin.
No matter what type of trader you are, there will not be an infinite
number of years where you start the year very strong and the trading
environment is favorable. When the stars align like this, be
courageous. Go for it. If you draw down to your predetermined point,
that’s OK. Trading is about risk. Sometimes you’ll be wrong and you
will lose. That’s trading. Then you hunker down and start building up
the P&L again.
Another thing to try if you are in the 5 to 7 range and have been doing
OK: Increase all your risk parameters by a fairly small increment, say
20%. If you are normally trading 200 e-minis, go to 240. If you are a
home trader risking 1% of capital as your daily stop loss, increase it to
1.2% of capital. If you are a bank trader who usually trades 20 million
EURUSD, try 24 million. This is something you should do when you
are confident and trading well. Incremental risk increases break you
out of the habit of sizing your positions the same all the time.
Many traders establish a comfort level and standard position size and
never move away from it. If you work at a hedge fund, you are often
forced to change position size as your capital increases. But if you
work at a bank or at home, you can feasibly trade the exact same
position size for years at a time. To grow, you need to keep gradually
increasing risk until you either hit capacity constraints (a significant
problem when it happens, but not a concern for 95% of traders) or
until you reach the maximum allowable position for your capital base.
Position sizing is discussed in Chapter 11.
Depending on your capital base, you may already be running the
largest possible positions given your risk framework. If you are a
home-based trader with a $1m account and you’ve determined that 3%
of capital is the right daily stop loss for you, and you’re hitting your
stop loss once a week, that’s too much. If you hit it once per year, you
are probably too risk averse. Your variance is probably too low and
you can up your risk.
Trading is always a tension between taking the most possible risk to
make the most possible money when you are right, and taking small
enough risk that you don’t blow yourself up when you hit a string of
bad ideas. Think about where you are on this continuum. Most traders
that I have seen could take more risk. Some (including myself ) would
do better if they took less. And that brings us to the other end of the
risk appetite spectrum.
Risk appetite score: 8-9
Strong risk appetite
A trader with a risk appetite score of 8 or 9 has the most upside but also
requires more supervision and has more downside risk than a trader with a
lower score. I would say the sweet spot for risk appetite is somewhere in the
7.5 to 8.0 area, though traders with very high scores, when harnessed, can
deliver 
blockbuster 
returns. 
Then 
again, 
they 
can 
be 
scary 
to 
watch
sometimes.
A trader with strong risk appetite needs rules. If you are in this category,
develop specific but simple rules to regulate your desire to take risk.
All of the following limits should be clearly defined and deemed to be
unbreakable:
1. Maximum daily, monthly, and yearly loss. This can be a formula
based on total capital and current P&L. Depending on trading style,
the liquidity of products traded, and time horizon, daily stops are not
appropriate 
for 
all 
traders. 
There 
is 
a 
full 
discussion 
of 
risk
management in Chapter 11.
2. Permitted products and strategies. Can a hedge fund PM sell volatility
with unlimited downside, for example? Can a home day trader short
low-priced stocks? Can an FX trader take a position in a pegged or
managed Asian currency?
Depending on where you trade, this question may not be relevant. It
is an esoteric question that does not come up all that often, but can be
the difference between blowing up and not blowing up.
Many of the blowups that I have witnessed first-hand have been the
result of trades where the trader never should have been trading that
product in the first place. Hedge fund managers risking 24 basis
points to make 1 on Bank of Canada day. Retail day traders going
short a thinly-traded biopharma stock. Option traders selling topside
USDCNH volatility. Retail FX punters going long EURCHF at
1.2010. These are all blowups caused by traders dealing in products
that they never should have touched.
If you are day trading from home, what stocks are fair game? The
way you answer this question might be the difference between long-
term success and instant, nuclear devastation of your trading account.
See GameStop shorts, for example.
3. Maximum position size by product.
4. Value 
at 
risk 
(VAR) 
or 
stress-test 
P&L. These 
are 
higher-level
frameworks used at banks and hedge funds, but both methods have
many issues when applied in real life. If you trade from home, don’t
worry about VAR, it’s a tool used by institutions. Some problems
with VAR and stress testing:
» VAR often depends on historical volatility which is not always a
good predictor of future volatility.
» Stress tests can overweight rare events and ignore the fact that stop
losses are effective loss control mechanisms in liquid markets. For
example, stress-testing the P&L of 50 million USDJPY against five
years of data might show a maximum possible loss of 500 pips or
$2.5 million (approx.) but a stop loss will protect a disciplined
trader from anywhere near that large of a loss.
» VAR and stress testing often rely on historical correlation which is
backward-looking and unstable.
This book is for active, short-term traders attempting to generate
alpha. It is not meant to address carry, short volatility, rolldown,
basis, and other trading strategies that involve convex and non-linear
payout structures.
5. Cooling off levels. If a trader draws down X from high water or over-
earns by Y, she should enter a two or three day cooling off period.
During cooling off periods, all risk is cut in half. This helps stabilize
P&L after weak periods and avoids winner’s tilt after strong periods.
If a trader has enough experience, P&L history, and self-awareness to
know she does not suffer from winner’s tilt or overconfidence after
very strong periods, the topside cooling off levels can be excluded.
Cooling off levels are different from stop losses on the downside as
they 
relate 
more 
to 
bad 
streaks 
and 
drawdown 
from 
peak, 
not
absolute levels of P&L.
Risk appetite score: 10
Too much risk appetite
If you gave yourself a score of 10 on risk appetite, you need to be
careful. You are probably in the sensation-seeking, trading-for-excitement,
or gambling category. Trading can be a lot like gambling (if you want it to
be) 
and 
it 
has 
similar 
dopamine 
payoffs 
if 
you 
have 
an 
addictive
personality. Along with the rules I listed above, traders with a risk appetite
score of 10 need to honestly analyze their motivation for trading and be
self-aware enough to know whether they are acting more like finance
professionals or gambling addicts.
Traders on the extreme end of the risk-taking spectrum use trading as
another method of sensation seeking. This is not good. We will talk much
more about trading for fun (instead of profit) in Chapter 7. That ends this
discussion on risk appetite. Now let’s go back to the non-cognitive traits
that define the Alpha Trader.
Decisiveness
Good traders are decisive. I want to acknowledge here I know there is
overlap between many of the traits I describe in this section. In fact, as I
stated much earlier, most of them fall under the Big Five psychological trait
of conscientiousness. Risk appetite, courage and decisiveness are all similar
personality facets. I could have lumped them all under risk appetite but I
want to dig deeper and unpack some subtle distinctions.
So yes, decisiveness is like courage and risk appetite, but here I mean it
more as the specific ability to press buttons once you have an idea. Trigger
happy vs. gun shy. Do you find it easy to put on a trade once you have a
good idea? Or do you hesitate? Does this hesitation lead to worse entry
points 
and 
tactical 
weakness, 
or 
is 
it 
healthy 
calibration 
and 
impulse
control? If you gave yourself a 10 out of 10 score on decisiveness, there is a
good chance you are too impulsive, overconfident, or both.
Here is how I would describe the continuum from decisive (10) to hesitant
(1):
9-10 Probably trigger happy. Risk of overconfident and impulsive
trading. If it is too easy to decide and pull the trigger every time,
perhaps you need to hesitate a bit more? Most likely you should filter
out some trades and focus on your best ideas. Decisiveness is great
but think about whether it is possible you are too decisive. Maybe
you need to filter your ideas a bit more and either reduce your
number of trades or at least be sure to size your best trades much
larger than the others.
Traders with a score of 9 or 10 in decisiveness probably have a hard
time ignoring random headlines and feel the urge to trade on every
bit of news. “News” sounds a lot like “noise”.
7-8 The sweet spot. Decisive but still cautious enough to understand
that not every shiny object has value. Able to hit the buttons when a
headline comes out but also able to not hit the buttons.
5-7 Probably a bit too hesitant but still nothing to worry about. Think
about whether you are waffling on good ideas. What exactly do you
need to get over the line and put on a trade? Are you waiting for
confirmation from others? When you come up with a trade idea, do
you feel better if you run it past a few other traders before executing?
Try not to look for validation from others. Own your ideas and
remember that if other people agree with your idea, that does not
necessarily make it better. It may mean it’s a popular idea with less
upside than a unique or contrary idea that nobody likes.
1-4 Too hesitant. You are probably leaving good trades and good
money on the table as you fail to pull the trigger. Force yourself to do
a certain number of trades per day or per week as described in my
quota system earlier. This takes away the should I / shouldn’t I
hesitation because knowing you have to do X trades this week, the
decision has already been made. The question then just becomes
which trades to do, not whether to trade.
Another exercise to help short-term traders get more comfortable
hitting 
the 
buttons 
and 
trading 
more 
frequently 
(and 
with 
less
hesitation) is to make markets. If you are a day trader at home, put a
small bid and a small offer in the same stock, 3 cents apart. When
both sides trade, do it again. Set a stop loss in case it blows through
one side of your price and keep putting in two-way prices for an hour
or so. This is also a good way to get quicker on the keys if that is
relevant to your trading style (if you trade headlines, for example).
Finally, get a trading coach. This does not have to be a huge financial
or time commitment. You can meet a trading coach once per month
and communicate with him by email once a week. Talking out loud
about trading-related issues can be valuable. Thoughts buzz around
in your head and sometimes make sense and sometimes do not. A
conversation can help you identify and unpack the issues that cause
your hesitation.
While trading coaches often have a psychology background, the most
important part of talking to a trading coach is the talking, not the
psychology 
expertise. 
Putting 
your 
thoughts, 
concerns 
and
weaknesses out in the open often clarifies them and will help you
deal with them. A co-worker or experienced trader you know can
most likely offer nearly as much help as a trained psychologist. That
has been my experience anyway.
Self-awareness
Part of the intent of this book is to make you more self-aware and more
honest about your strengths and weaknesses as a trader. There is no shame
in having low scores on some dimensions. Nobody possesses all positive
characteristics in abundance. Better to admit that you are risk averse and
trade accordingly than pretend your name is Gordon Gekko or Dollar Bill.
The number one way to build and cultivate self-awareness is to
maintain a trading journal.
This is such a cliché of trading advice. That’s because it’s true. You can
journal individual trades or individual days or just sporadic thoughts. Keep
a document or spreadsheet open in the background and note what you are
doing.
I will tell you this up front: keeping a journal is a tough habit to
maintain. It’s a huge pain in the butt and two things tend to happen. Either:
A) You start trading really well and you get in the zone and you can’t be
bothered updating your journal because you feel like a trading God or
B) You keep losing money and you get worn down and the last thing
you want to do is spend 20 minutes journaling what happened because all
you really want to do is bolt out of the office and go meet some friends for a
G&T.
It is extremely difficult to maintain a trading journal habit but it is worth
it. And just because it is difficult, that is no excuse not to do it. Very few
highly-productive habits are easy to maintain. Remember that if trading was
easy, it would not pay so well.
One trick that works for any difficult-to-maintain habit like lifting
weights or not smoking or keeping a trading journal is to find a partner who
wants to do the same thing. If you promise to exchange one paragraph a day
with a friend, you are not just letting yourself down if you get lazy, you are
letting down your friend as well.
If you think “I’m going to go lift weights today at 10 a.m.”, that is much
less powerful than setting an appointment to meet your friend and lift
weights at 10 a.m. Most people find it easier to let themselves down and
will work harder to do the right thing for a friend (or acquaintance for that
matter).
This can also be handled with a professional trading coach. On the most
basic level, a trading coach can simply be there to help enforce your daily
regimen. Like a personal trainer, a coach can keep you on track and help
you enforce the good habits that you don’t quite have the willpower to
enforce yourself. This section is about self-awareness: if you know you are
not good at forming strong habits, find a way to get one paragraph of
journaling out every day. Somehow. Some way.
A trading journal helps you keep track of emotions, bias, themes, and
thoughts. There are many ways that a journal can help you. It can take two
basic forms. One is a trade-by-trade journal. If you are new to trading, I
recommend 
this 
approach. 
A 
free 
form 
approach 
is 
fine 
for 
more
experienced traders but a more granular system will help new traders collect
more data.
The more data you collect, the more likely you will learn something
from your journal. Think about areas where you know you are weak and see
if you can come up with data that might reveal your progress in that area.
Here’s a sample trading journal in a spreadsheet:
I have formatted the information to fit it on the page here but in real life
I record each trade across a huge row in Excel. This makes it is easier to
process the data later. For example, you can calculate the average length of
time you are in a trade, or see whether you stick to your stop losses or not
by creating simple formulas below the final row.
In this example, you see a frequent problem that many traders have:
This trader put the trade on looking for USDCAD to go to 1.3950. But
when it ripped higher from 1.3460 to 1.3650 in just one day, he took profit
because it felt like “too much, too fast”. He didn’t stick to his plan. Instead
he should have done one of the following:
a) Trailed his stop loss up. We will talk more about this in the chapter
on risk management. It can be a good strategy, but it also has
downside.
b) Stayed with his original plan. This is usually the best course of
action. Before you put the trade on, you were a sober tactician.
Once you have the risk and the market is flying higher, you are an
emotional human being who does not want to give back a huge
profit. If you always cut your winners prematurely, the risk/reward
ratio you think you are using is inaccurate. If you risk 1 to make 2
at inception, but then cut half way to your take profit all the time,
your real risk/ reward is 1 : 1. That is why there are boxes for
reward vs. risk at both inception and exit. You need to keep track
of whether you are sticking with your ideas or jumping out of good
trades too early.
c) Sold one third or half of the position and let the rest ride. This can
be a good way of dealing with your desire to cut. Can you reduce
just 33% of the risk and at least make yourself feel better?
A trading journal is the most direct route to trading self-awareness.
Ideas become concrete when you write them down. By recording each trade
along with a rationale and thought process, you can pick up on recurring
errors, problems, or leaks in your trading.
Thoughts are abstract and fuzzy. Writing is concrete and solid.
Often, the process of writing things down will bring out new ideas and
thoughts, and will lead to different results. As Daniel Boorstin once said: “I
write to discover what I think.” 
57
Sit down and do a deep dive into your trading journal every month or
so. See if you can find meaningful takeaways. For example:
Do you stick to your plan? Does your risk/reward at inception come
close to your actual risk/reward. If not, why?
Are there any consistent features of your good or bad trades?
» Time horizon
» Asset class
» Conviction level
Did you hit your stop loss more often than usual? This might be a sign
that your positions are too big or the volatility regime has changed and
you have not adapted.
Once you have your takeaways, set one goal (or two at most) to address
a leak or issue you have discovered. I am a big believer in working on just
one or two measurable and achievable goals at a time. Let me explain.
When I was a senior manager at a bank, we used a formal corporate
goal-setting system and usually it allowed for somewhere between five and
fifteen goals to be entered. I found that was just way too many goals for me
to supervise or coach as a leader and way too many goals for an employee
to manage as an individual.
I eventually instituted my own “One Goal” system. I told the people that
worked for me that all those goals in the corporate system were great, but
all I cared about was their one most important goal. I asked them to e-mail
me that goal and explain why it was important and how they planned to
achieve it. This was effective. I saw much more impact from this One Goal
system than I ever saw from more formalized, multi-goal systems.
So… After 
reviewing 
your 
trading 
journal, 
come 
up 
with 
a 
goal.
Something fairly short-term (a few months at most). Another feature of
good goals is that they are specific, and not too long-term. If you can set a
goal that covers the next month or two, that is much easier to achieve.
You are more likely to succeed with a goal like “I will not drink any
soda for the next month” than with “I’m never going to drink soda again.”
Chunking into smaller, achievable, and short-term goals develops habits
and process that will lead to achievement of bigger-picture, longer-term
goals.
Here are a few hypothetical examples of useful takeaways or goals that
might emerge after you analyze your trading journal:
No S&P futures trades for 30 days. All the money I make in other
assets, I give back with my irresistible urge to go short S&Ps!
My trading journal entries are much more emotional than usual.
Tighten daily stop loss to $15,000. My normal stop is $30,000 but I
have been trading badly and I know I’m in a weird state of mind
because my Dad is really sick.
No trades between noon and 3 p.m. Those trades hit 35% of the time
vs. 57% of all trades initiated outside that time frame.
One of the easiest ways to lose money in trading is by hitting buttons
somewhat randomly in response to stimulation from noisy price movement.
This sort of thing:
{TSLA RALLIES FROM $444 TO $449}
“Tesla’s rallying! Something must be going on. Whoa, it’s breaking
$450! There must be news out.”
{TRADER BUYS 300 SHARES AT $450.70. THE HIGH IS $450.85. THE
STOCK FADES DOWN TO $450.10.}
“Hmmm. It’s losing momentum.”
{TRADER FRANTICALLY SCROLLS THROUGH TWITTER LOOKING
FOR POSITIVE TESLA HEADLINES. TSLA DRIFTS BACK DOWN TO
$449.00}
“Crap. That was dumb.”
{TRADER SELLS AT $448.60 FOR A LOSS OF $2.10 PER SHARE}
If you update your trading journal with every trade in real-time, it is less
likely you will put on pointless trades like the one above. First of all, as you
fill in your trade journal in real-time you will realize you have nothing to
put in the “Rationale” box. Ummm… Because it was going up?? Because I
thought there might be a headline? Because: FOMO? Second, once you are
in the habit of completing your trading journal, you will become rooted in a
process 
where 
you 
already 
know 
you 
need 
a 
decent 
rationale 
before
entering a trade.
When you know you need a decent rationale to enter in your trade
journal, that tightens up your filter. You avoid dumb noise trades because
you know as you move your hands toward the buttons that there is no good
rationale. You don’t hit BUY or SELL, because you have developed good
discipline.
Knowing that you are going to record every trade in a trading journal
makes you more selective and logical when trading. You are less likely to
hit buttons for no good reason and get sucked in by the deafening noise. It
also boosts your confidence once you are in the trade because you have
clearly laid out your reasoning, and it is solid.
Everything in your head is abstract. There is a ton of noise in there.
Multiple competing voices with logic, ego, mental shortcuts, bias, memory,
and emotion, all competing for airtime. When you record a plan, you filter
out the noise and distill the logical output.
The Alpha Trader always has a plan.
A trading journal is not the only way to build self-awareness. Here are
some other methods:
1. Step outside yourself. This sounds a bit weird and self-helpy, but it can
be a powerful way to up your self-awareness. Sit there, quiet your mind and
imagine your rational self, standing right next you. What do they think of
your trading right now? This is a way of shutting down System 1 (gut) and
activating System 2 (logic). When you ask, “What would my rational self
think?”, you break through the storm and noise of swirling thoughts and
focus on the logical. This is especially important for active traders, because
rapid 
trading 
activity 
is 
more 
likely 
to 
be 
driven 
by 
quick 
decisions
influenced by emotion and bias.
The key here is to slow things down and observe yourself and your
actions rationally. If you identify a mistake, correct it as quickly as possible
without much further thought. Seeing yourself making a mistake is step
one, but then you need to take action and correct it. I have literally said out
loud: “I know this is a mistake, but I’m doing it anyway,” as I press buttons
to enter a trade. I showed good self-awareness there, I guess, but it is clearly
not good enough to simply identify a mistaken action. One needs to stop it
before it happens.
You need to have the self-control and willpower to take over when you
see your dumb brain doing something suboptimal. Your dumb brain is the
one that wants to yell “squirrel!” when it sees a squirrel. Your smart brain is
the one that resists impulses and takes control. Try to be aware of the
different layers of thought that go on in your mind and notice repeating
patterns such as the urge to:
Buy something just because it’s going up.
Do a trade because you are bored.
Exit a good position because it’s not moving.
Cut a position because you don’t like the price action.
When you are self-aware, you understand the many pieces that make up
the 
mental 
puzzle. 
You 
are 
part 
intelligent, 
rational 
thinker 
and 
part
impulsive, jumpy, fight-or-flight lizard. Know when your smart brain is in
control, and notice yourself acting irrational and dumb. Comment on it.
Then grab the steering wheel. Sorry dumb brain, you’re not taking me
where I want to go. Move over, I’m driving.
2. Think about your motivations. This is another way of building self-
awareness. Human beings are driven by incentives. What motivates you to
succeed? The most reliable motivation is a strong internal desire to achieve.
External motivations like money, proving yourself or outperforming the guy
that sits next to you will not lead you to the promised land. This is well-
known 
in 
education 
circles. 
Intrinsic 
motivation 
crushes 
extrinsic
motivation.
In other words: are you trading because you enjoy it, you want to win,
and/ or it satisfies you intellectually? Or are you trading to get rich? This is
a complex question given the instant feedback and direct monetary rewards
of successful trading. Research shows that if you dream of being rich… No
matter how rich you get, you will always wish you were richer. So,
pursuing money for the sake of money is a pointless goal.
There is a concept known as the hedonic treadmill which states that as a
human being earns more money, his desires and expectations rise in tandem
so that no amount of wealth will lead to greater happiness. Research shows
this 
to 
be 
generally 
true. 
Once 
someone 
makes 
enough 
money 
to
comfortably acquire shelter, clothing, food, and health care (annual income
somewhere around $75,000 to $125,000 per year in most parts of the
United States), additional increases in income do not increase happiness
much.
Harvard’s Study of Adult Development followed the lives of hundreds
of people over eight decades and found the happiest people were the ones
that had the strongest and most durable relationships with community,
family, and friends. Relationships predict longevity and happiness better
than money, intelligence, or fame.
Making ten million dollars is not going to make you happy on its own.
But if you truly love trading… It might! You should (generally) enjoy the
process and act of trading. You should find it intellectually stimulating,
exciting and (sometimes) fun. You should look forward to going to work
most days. If you don’t, you are doing it wrong. Here is a quote from one of
the great books on self-awareness: Eckhart Tolle’s The Power of Now.
See if you can catch yourself complaining, in either speech or thought,
about a situation you find yourself in, what other people do or say, your
surroundings, your life situation, even the weather. To complain is always
nonacceptance of what is. It invariably carries an unconscious negative
charge. When you complain, you make yourself into a victim. When you
speak out, you are in your power. So change the situation by taking action
or by speaking out if necessary or possible; leave the situation or accept
it. All else is madness.
I highly recommend The Power of Now. The book is not directly related
to trading, but it does offer insight on mental skills that help with good
trading and good thinking. Specifically, the book (as you might guess from
the title) is about a focus on the present, the now. Good traders don’t get
mired in what ifs. They trade the market one day at a time and do not waste
finite mental energy on thoughts of past outcomes or fears of an uncertain
future.
Trading is not life or death. If you fail, you will learn and the sun will
rise 
tomorrow. 
This 
is 
not 
emergency 
heart 
surgery 
where 
failure 
is
catastrophic. Maintain perspective. If you spend a stretch of more than 18
months of trading where you are mostly miserable, I would think about
finding another role or another career. Trading is not just about P&L. It is
also about learning, personal growth, self-discovery, and self-improvement.
Focus as much as possible on self-improvement and process development—
let the money take care of itself.
For the record, I have found myself miserable on several occasions and
for me it has always been about the role, not the career. If you work in an
unpleasant setting; if you work for a manager that does not respect you or
does not know how to run a risk business; if you work for a firm that is
extremely risk averse; or if you trade at home with insufficient capital or
insufficient support from your family, the problem is probably the role, not
the trading.
If you are in a good firm and you like your manager, or you are trading
independently with plenty of capital, and you still dread sitting down in
front of your computer in the morning: that is bad. Make a change.
If trading isn’t fun most of the time, you need to figure out why.
3. Morning prep. Another way to build self-awareness is to do a quick
morning prep and self-check-in. You can simply fill out a quick one pager
when you first sit down at the desk. For a NASDAQ day trader, it might
look something like this:
It takes about two minutes to complete; this is not a major task. It sets a
professional and organized tone for the day and allows you to ask the key
questions. This Daily Sheet as I call it, forces you to lock in on what is most
important for the day; your mood, the market, and your plan. To steal a term
from mindfulness and yoga, the Daily Sheet forces you to center yourself
before you start trading.
Complete your daily sheet, then take a few breaths, clear your mind, and
center yourself.
Then go.
A few comments on this trader’s DAILY SHEET:
The trader has a max daily risk of $5,000 and then reduces risk
depending on mood and opportunity set. The formula is the average of
the mood and opportunity scores divided by 10 times $5,000. In this
case: ((8.5 / 10) * 5000). It makes sense to adjust your risk based on
your perception of your own mood / confidence and your assessment
of what the market might give you today. There’s no point in allocating
max risk to a quiet Monday. We will talk about risk allocation later, but
note that daily loss limits should be set as a percentage of free capital,
not a raw $ number. In this case, I am using $5,000 to keep things
simple.
This trader’s target P&L is always 2X stop loss. That is reasonable but
can vary by trader. The target can be important for traders who like to
press and add risk when they are trading well. Hitting the day’s P&L
target alerts the trader that maybe it’s time to reduce risk, not increase
it.
The plan does not have to be anything super-complicated. A general
strategy and any specifics you know in advance will suffice. One or
two sentences.
Personal reminders can go at the bottom. Schedule all your personal
and business meetings for the afternoon. Never schedule meetings
(business or personal) before noon. That is your time to trade.
Keep it sacred and free of distractions. Whether you are a home day
trader or a Senior MD at an investment bank—if you want to trade
successfully, do not schedule meetings that interfere with prime
trading time. Your performance will suffer.
To reduce your morning workload, the technical levels section can be
filled in the night before. The rest must be completed, in full, before you
allow yourself to start trading. This is not difficult. Do it every day.
Write a brief plan for the day before you start pressing buttons.
Trading is a journey that can bring you wisdom that will benefit your
nontrading life. By the same token, self-improvement efforts outside of
trading can make you a better trader. We have scratched the surface of self-
awareness here, mostly as it pertains to trading. Pursue self-awareness as a
trader, but also as a curious and growth-oriented human being.
Embrace meditation, yoga, exercise, and other paths to self-awareness
and you will become a better trader. A healthy body and a healthy, self-
aware mind will give you the endurance for long-run survival in the market.
Ability to handle stress
Whenever people ask me “Don’t you find trading stressful?” I reply:
“Yeah, but it’s good stress.” Like playing professional baseball is stressful.
Or flying a fighter jet is stressful. And sure, the stakes are high but it’s not
life or death. It’s important. But it’s not life or death.
Good traders have the right perspective. They take the job seriously but
do not allow it to consume them.
Trading is not who you are. It is what you do.
A fair bit of research has been done on the physiological impacts of
trading. The book The Hour Between Dog and Wolf by John Coates covers
the topic well. When a human senses danger, the brain releases adrenaline
and cortisol. This boosts the person’s blood pressure and heart rate and
prepares them to fight the lion or run from it. In our case, the threat is
market risk, so the problem is that the stress reaction is not temporary, it
goes on and on.
The original purpose of our response to danger was to allow for fight or
flight, either of which is meant to be a temporary burst of activity followed
by recovery. In trading, we can stay stressed all day and eventually this puts
strain on our digestive, immune and other systems because we are flooded
with cortisol. Excessive cortisol can lead to poor memory, paranoia, anxiety,
and all sorts of bad stuff. That is why traders burn out.
Nobody who is 24 years old believes they can ever burn out. People
who have experienced almost exclusively success in their early life can’t
imagine ever being tired or burnt out or failing. But trading is exhausting. If
you don’t manage your stress level properly and stay somewhat healthy in
your 20s and 30s, you probably won’t be trading in your 40s or 50s.
One trader I work with had her Apple Watch monitoring her heart rate
as the Fed announced its interest rate decision in August, 2019. She had a
ton of orders to watch and was at significant risk through the meeting.
Check out Figure 5.3 for a chart of her heart rate that day.
How good traders deal with stress:
Perspective. Like I said earlier, we are not storming the beaches of
Normandy here, we are buying and selling assets in an attempt to
generate short-term profits. If you can take the job seriously and treat it
as a profession, but still understand the sun will come up tomorrow no
matter how well or how badly you trade… You can win.
Relax. Learn to relax and breathe when you have big risk on. Don’t
white knuckle every trade and grind your teeth over every basis point
jiggle. You need to get comfortable with being uncomfortable. This
took me a long time, but it is a nice state of mind to have a ton of risk
on and know that you can see the world clearly and breathe. This does
not mean you don’t care. It just means you have put on risk before, you
will put on risk again and this is just a single trial in a process with
thousands of trials. Each trade is a spoonful of water in an ocean.
Don’t get riled up.
Source: Christina Fusilli’s phone
Go off the desk. Many traders hate to go off the desk because they are
worried about missing something. In the long run, the benefits you
gain from going off the desk exceed the risk you take of missing
something. When you go off the desk, your heart rate goes down and
you will often experience stunning moments of clarity. Every
experienced trader knows the feeling of that super-clear market insight
that pops into your head when you’re off the desk.
The human brain produces new ideas by creating connections between
disparate thoughts and stimuli and it does this best when it is at rest. To
achieve clarity and produce a-ha moments of trading insight,
sometimes you need to go off the desk and let your brain work. Much
in the way sleep allows your brain to process everything you have
experienced during the day, pulling yourself away from the screens
allows your brain to cool off and run some different, less urgent
subroutines.
Frequently heard on the trading floor: “Man, I just realized something
really interesting on my way back from the bathroom…”
Turn off your phone at night. Checking your phone four times a
night makes you feel important and allows you to impress your friends
with your aggressive commitment to capital markets. Checking your
phone at night is more addiction than useful habit. Markets are always
awake, but you need time to rest. They will be fine without you for a
few hours.
Leave a stop loss and a take profit on every position you hold at night.
Then turn off your phone and get some proper sleep.
I used to leave call levels in various currencies and I would get the
call from Hong Kong or Tokyo or London at 2:30 a.m. This would
result in:
a. Wife, annoyed.
b. Young kids, awake.
c. No good trades since I had no idea what was going on in the market
and was groggy and not in a strong position to make split-second
decisions.
d. Much more tired the next day because of elevated heart rate in the
middle of the night and 60 minutes of tossing and turning and half-
awake dreams about USDJPY before finally falling asleep twenty
minutes before my alarm went off in the morning.
Eventually, I left instructions with all the other centers. Do not call
me at night. Still, even once I kicked the call level habit, if I woke up
to the go to the bathroom in the middle of the night, I was always
tempted to check the market
58
. Again, this is pointless. Do not do it.
Turn your phone off when you go to bed and turn it back on when
you wake up. It took me many years to learn this and implement it
and my health and sleep quality improved dramatically when I did.
Well-rested outperforms sleep-deprived.
It 
is 
common 
sense 
but 
research 
also 
shows 
conclusively 
that
humans perform tasks at a substantially higher level when properly
rested and we make persistent and frequent errors when sleep-
deprived. And if you use your phone as your alarm: don’t. Get a
normal alarm clock or a Shake and Wake
59
.
Breathe. Learn how to focus on your breath through meditation, yoga,
or other mindfulness practices. Also, read the book Breath by James
Nestor.
The ability to deal with stress is somewhat innate, but you can learn
stress management and be thoughtful about your own reaction to
pressure. Again, try to step outside yourself at times and make
observations. Hmm, I just smashed my fist on my keyboard, maybe I
should take a little walk. Observe your own behavior and understand
what it might mean. I have a huge lump in my throat and I want to
yell. This trade is getting under my skin in a bad way. I need to square
up and start fresh tomorrow.
The struggle for self-awareness is a timeless piece of the human
condition. Greater self-awareness will help you in trading and will help
you in real life. Now let’s move on to the next non-cognitive trait on
our list.
Focus
Alpha Traders maintain focus even when flaming arrows are raining
down on the battlefield and everyone else is losing their mind. Trading
floors are quieter than they used to be but there is still plenty of chaos when
markets are on the move. There are moments when market makers need to
watch multiple markets, yell out accurate and tight prices to multiple
salespeople and execute trades in more than one asset at the same time. This
requires military-style concentration and focus.
The sample size is small, but two of the best traders that ever worked
for me came from the military. There is some overlap in terms of level of
focus between trading and military operations and anyone who has engaged
in live gunfire is certainly not going to be scared off by a flash crash in
GBPUSD or a 7 standard deviation move in US 10-year yields! Another
bonus when hiring ex-military into trading is that they are usually older and
more mature than standard graduates. Thus, they are better-prepared and
more able to jump straight into a trading seat.
One obvious tell, when new analysts join us on the trading floor, is
whether they can process various streams of information simultaneously.
Some young recruits have this skill and some do not. There have been times
when two sales-people were yelling at me for a price at the exact same time
and a junior analyst came right up to me and said “I’m getting coffees. Do
you 
want 
one?” 
without 
even 
realizing 
I 
was 
engaged 
in 
multiple
transactions. This sort of market awareness is hard to teach. New kids on a
trading floor either have it or they don’t.
I would therefore say that focus is one of the skills that is most innate
and toughest to teach or upgrade. That said, here are a few things you can
do to improve your trading focus:
Schedule. Schedule all non-trading tasks either outside of work hours
or in narrow, uneventful windows like 1:30 to 3:30 p.m. for equities or
after 2:30 p.m. if you trade commodities. I mentioned this earlier but it
is a dumb mistake that even senior traders make. I often made this
mistake myself when I was running a large FX business and had
around 50 people working for me. Outlook meeting notifications
popped up on my screen like fireflies all day when I first started in
management, but I realized that the good trading hours need to be
protected from outside distractions.
Your boss wants you to succeed so don’t be afraid to ask to reschedule
a request you receive for an 8:00 a.m. meeting. Most meeting times are
set somewhat arbitrarily. Explain to your manager or employees or
wife or whoever needs to set up a meeting: these hours are sacred and
I need to be on the desk from X to Y. Any other time is fine.
Focus. Close your email during peak trading periods. If your main
trading time is the equity open, close your email from 9 a.m. to 11:00
a.m. Answering emails one at a time as they come in distracts you.
Over and over and over. And 99% of them are completely useless.
Open emails and deal with them in batches every few hours. Your
efficiency and focus will improve. Also: you should learn about Inbox
Zero.
Exercise. In some years I have exercised like an athlete and stayed in
outstanding shape. On the other hand, I have had a few multi-year
periods where I could not fit proper exercise into my schedule for
whatever reason. The difference is glaring. After a year or so of no
exercise, my brain gets dull and hazy. I have trouble waking up in the
morning and I am dying for a nap around 3 p.m. every day. Optimal
mental performance does not require you to be a ripped V with six-
pack abs. But it does require a minimal amount of physical
maintenance—a few workouts per week, ideally combining weights
and cardio.
If you think you don’t have time to work out. Make time. I moved my
wake-up time from 5 a.m. to 4 a.m. to allow time to work out and the
extra energy I get from the exercise, and the psychological benefits of
exercise more than outweigh the hour of sleep I give up. Get up one
hour earlier three days a week. It’s worth it. Unless you have a
newborn baby or a sick relative or some truly extenuating situation…
You need to make time to exercise. It’s a big part of playing the long
game successfully.
Stretch. Stand up and walk around a bit. Take short breaks away from
the desk. This gets the blood flowing, resets your mind, and forces you
out of mental ruts. Change your perspective and breathe a bit. This can
be a 3-minute stroll. It sounds so simple but many traders stay welded
to their chair for hours when they should be standing to stretch every
few minutes. You need to move around a bit to maintain physical
energy and you need to get off the desk every now and then for a
change of mental scenery.
Put your phone away. Many trading floors prohibit mobile phones for
compliance reasons, and one side benefit of this policy is that it
removes the distraction. You can answer the text from your mom later.
Peak trading requires flow.
Flow happens when you are in the zone and you process all the
incoming information in the most efficient way possible. Remove as many
distractions as possible from your point of contact with the market and be
particularly brutal about protecting the most sacred hours of your trading
day. For many styles of trading, that can be just two to four hours per day.
Don’t clutter up those crucial hours. Close Facebook, put your phone in a
drawer, shut Outlook, and focus.
Patience
Winning traders very often use a style that also performs well in poker.
The style is called “tight/aggressive”. The idea is you play as tight as
possible (waiting for clear opportunities where you have a substantial edge)
and then act aggressively when those opportunities arise.
In poker this means instead of limping into many pots, often with
marginal hands, you wait for strong cards in strong position or large pots
that will justify the risk of entering with medium cards or weaker position.
In trading this means instead of trading every chart pattern and support
and resistance and up and down jiggle and random news headline, you wait
for strong set ups where you have an edge and then you commit significant
capital to the idea.
The path to success is to take massive, determined action.
TONY ROBBINS
This is easy to type out in a document but much harder to execute in
real life. What happens in real life is either a) the trader is not disciplined
enough to wait for high quality opportunities, she gets bored and puts too
much money behind too many low-quality ideas or b) the trader is not
courageous enough to commit to even the best ideas and so she puts on
small bets even when there is a once-per-year type opportunity. Then, when
the trade works exactly as expected, she whinges about how she is “way too
small!” and “she knew this was going to happen!”
While I stated earlier that good trading requires courage; it all also
requires patience. Most traders have a bias to action and this can lead to
poor trade selection and bad capital allocation. If you put money behind
every idea that pops into your head, the high-quality ideas will be diluted by
the random dumb ideas.
When I am trading well, I am patient, I pick my spots and I do fewer
trades. When I am trading poorly, I react to every headline and chart pattern
and flicker of the numbers on the screen. The key for me is to wait and wait
and wait as long as possible. Reject as many trade ideas as possible until
finally there is a trade idea that is so juicy I cannot resist. Then attack it.
Wait until all the planets are aligned.
You 
want 
to 
participate 
in 
trades 
where 
the 
macro 
story, 
charts,
positioning, 
sentiment, 
and 
cross-market 
indicators 
all 
point 
the 
same
direction. If you use 10 criteria for trade selection, you don’t want a trade
that ticks two boxes. You want the one that ticks eight! But those trades
don’t come along every few hours. the way you wish they would. You need
to 
wait. 
This 
is 
especially 
difficult 
in 
low 
volatility 
markets 
where
frequency of opportunity is lower.
Patience, of course, should not be confused with a bias to inaction. This
is where self-awareness is important. If you are biased to inaction, you need
to be less patient! Since I am always biased to action and overtrading, I
need to be more patient. Think about where you lie on that spectrum. An
interesting (though not very surprising) pattern that emerges from my innate
lack of patience is that my Sharpe ratio is higher when I am in the red vs.
when I am deep in the black.
If I’m in the red for the year, or even for the month, my main goal is to
avoid going deeper into the red. This is the zero bound effect I describe
earlier, in the section on Courage. Everyone has a point of discomfort as
they near their stop loss, and your goal is to stay away from that point of
discomfort so that you are not weak when a huge opportunity or great trade
idea emerges.
Therefore, I know that when I am below zero on the year, I need to be
selective. I wait and wait and wait and then the “I’ll know it when I see it”
moment arrives and I pounce. Often when I’m doing very well, my patience
slips and I feel like I can afford to swing at some bad pitches. I get a bit
sloppy 
and 
drawdown 
before 
going 
back 
to 
basics 
and 
renewing 
my
commitment to tight/aggressive. Even though I know my bias to action is a
weakness, I still struggle with it. Some rough parts of your personality are
easier to smooth out than others.
A good trader is like a leopard hiding in the tall grass. The cat will wait
for long periods, sometimes hours, for the right opportunity to pounce. If he
lunges too early or too late, he will miss the kill. He waits and waits, until
the perfect moment—and then attacks with 100% commitment and force.
Locus of control
Locus of control is our next non-cognitive attribute. Broadly speaking,
locus of control is a concept in psychology that explains how people see
their own influence on the situations, outcomes, and experiences in their
lives. In school, students with internal locus of control believe success or
failure come from effort and hard work. Students with external locus of
control believe success or failure come from luck, fate, unfair or bad
teachers, bias, and so on. Students with internal locus of control might
blame a C grade on their own poor preparation, while students with external
locus of control would blame the teacher or the test.
How do you view the outcomes and experiences in your life? Do you
take responsibility or blame external forces? In life outside of trading,
internal locus of control tends to lead to better outcomes, because when
people believe they can control their own life, they take ownership and do
the necessary work to improve their situation. Those who believe they don’t
control their own life, don’t bother to try.
In games and pursuits involving probability, successful participants
understand what they control and what they do not. This is the entire
message of a book like Thinking in Bets by Annie Duke: if you focus on
results instead of process, you fail to understand which part of the system
you control and which part you do not.
While strong internal locus of control generally correlates with positive
life outcomes (because those who believe they influence outcomes in their
life tend to have stronger motivation and make more effort), it can also lead
to the illusion of control. Many think (either consciously or unconsciously)
that they have control in areas where they cannot possibly influence the
outcomes.
A remarkable experiment by Langer and Roth showed that students who
had success predicting a coin toss early on tended to believe they had
superior coin toss prediction skills to those that did not. If people can
convince themselves they are superior forecasters of a coin toss, imagine
how they might convince themselves of their ability to predict markets!
Langer and Roth reported their findings in “Heads I win, tails it’s
chance”
60
. I love the title because it captures the faulty thinking of many an
overconfident trader. If I make money on the trade, I’m smart. If I don’t, it
was just bad luck. That’s not rational thinking!
Example 1: You are playing poker. You have two aces and your
opponent has a junk hand like 9-5. The player with 9-5 is drunk and
goes all in and you obviously call. The flop is 9-9-5 and you lose to
the full house.
Example 2: A tennis player hits a perfect shot down the line and the
umpire calls it out, even though it was clearly on the line.
Example 3: A baseball player hits a line drive that looks like a clear
home run but the opposing center fielder climbs the wall and grabs
it for a very loud out.
A professional poker, tennis or baseball player in these situations will
tend to understand that they did everything they were supposed to do and
ran into a very unfortunate bit of bad short-term luck. They understand that
if you reran the same event 1,000,000 times, the result would be a success
more than 99% of the time. They can shrug it off and understand that their
process was good and while the outcome clearly stunk, they have nothing to
feel bad about.
On the other hand, a weak player or someone who does not understand
process vs. outcome or what they control vs. what they do not control will
be enraged. “I can’t believe that guy flopped a full house! I am the
unluckiest 
person 
in 
the 
world!” 
etc. That 
is 
what Annie 
Duke 
calls
“resulting”. When you focus on results, you fail to understand what you
control and what you do not control—this is a major fault. In life, trading,
sports, and everywhere, you need to understand what you control and what
you do not.
In trading, internal or external locus of control is not most important.
What is most important is making the distinction between those things that
we do and do not control. This is captured nicely in the Serenity Prayer, a
mantra popularized by Alcoholics Anonymous but relevant to everyone:
God, grant me the serenity to accept the things
I cannot change, courage to change the things
I can, and the wisdom to know the difference.
The last line is key. Think about what parts of the system you control.
You control the inputs, not the outputs. In trading, this means focus on good
thinking and rational decision-making, and don’t get upset when you hit a
bad run.
Understand that variance is part of the game and you cannot and will
not ever control it. What you can control (and change if necessary) is your
process and your attitude. Nick Jonas (the Aussie trader I work with, not the
singer) has this on a Post-It stuck to his monitor at work: “The only things I
control are my effort and my attitude.”
People waste way too much time worrying about random stuff they
can’t control. This is often true in trading but it is true out there in the
world, too. A big part of my personal philosophy is to not waste time on
things I cannot control. For example, when I was younger, I would spend
months obsessing about what my bonus was going to be in January. As
discussions started in September and expectations management took hold
into October and November, I listened to all the speculation about the bonus
pool and tried to keep my ear to the ground to get a sense of what my bonus
might be.
As years passed, I realized something. If I come into work and try my
best and perform well and do a good job… The bonuses take care of
themselves. There is no correlation between how much you worry about
what your bonus is going to be and how much you get paid. There is,
though, a strong correlation between your bonus and: how hard you work,
how well you prepare, how disciplined you are and what kind of attitude
you have.
Come in to work each day with a positive attitude.
Do the work. Focus.
Behave rationally. Go home.
Do it again tomorrow.
That is the 22-word recipe for trading success.
Don’t obsess over your MTD or YTD P&L or the bonus pool or what
kind of car you might buy if you finish strong. Don’t waste time on what
might happen if you flame out as a trader and spill your entire account.
Don’t wonder why that guy got paid more than you or that woman got
promoted or that dummy gets invited to all the client dinners and you don’t.
There is always someone doing better than you and someone doing
worse than you. Focus on yourself. Run your own race and ignore the
runners in front of and behind you. Be better today than you were yesterday.
A bad poker player constantly complains about bad cards or bad beats.
A good poker player knows that in the long run her superior skill will
deliver outsized returns and short-term variance means nothing. A good
trader doesn’t spend too much time upset when they get stopped out at the
high or low. That is just something that happens sometimes.
The good trader knows there will be just as many times they survive by
a hair. Good and bad luck even out and the result at the end of many years
is not luck. Also note: good traders rarely use words like “should have” or
“would have” or “could have”. They focus on what is and what will be. The
present and the future. Not the past.
Other traits
Like I mentioned in a footnote earlier, it is a tricky exercise to place
traits into cognitive and non-cognitive buckets. In the end, I did my best but
still I was left with a bunch of traits and factors that don’t fall neatly into
either category. These “other” traits and factors I will call Category 3
Factors. I will discuss them in this section. They are:
1. Raw trading instinct
2. Passion for trading
3. Experience
4. Luck
5. Appropriate capital
6. Healthy risk-taking environment
Raw trading instinct
Trading instinct is what I call the x-factor. The thing that separates good
from great. When you watch American Idol, you can detect this x-factor
right away. The singer’s voice might not be the best you’ve ever heard, and
they might not be the best-looking or best dancer, but there is some hard-to-
define aspect that moves you. Most people will agree on who has this x-
factor and who does not.
There is a similar x-factor in trading. It is not just about risk appetite or
quant skill or patience or discipline or any of the traits I have mentioned.
It’s about instinct. When new traders come to the desk out of an analyst
program, it’s easy to see when they have this x-factor.
They intuitively get what is going on much more quickly than others.
They don’t ask questions 15 seconds after a huge market move because they
understand when is the right time to converse and when is the right time to
keep quiet. They input tickets the right way and can mentally calculate P&L
on a trade quickly without making a series of tortured faces first. They
understand the metagame and know that if ten separate banks recommend
short oil on the same day, that is not bearish oil.
Innate trading skill varies dramatically from person to person and can be
a huge head start for some and a hurdle that is too high to get over for
many. I believe that some people are innately good or bad at trading and it
is fairly easy to see this early on. If you are a manager, invest in the people
that have the x-factor and help those that do not have it to pivot as quickly
as possible.
One trader that worked for me who did not have the x-factor told me, 10
years after he pivoted to a job that fit him much better, that he wished
someone had told him earlier that he wasn’t suited to be a trader. He could
have moved on to a new career that fit his personality and skills more
quickly instead of wasting five years in a job that he and I probably both
knew was not the best fit.
This is a useful insight. Not everyone was born to be a trader… Even if
they successfully complete a sales and trading analyst program at a major
bank.
Some of this x-factor is the difference between street smarts and book
smarts. Investment banks emphasize book smarts because they are easy to
quantify and there is much less risk in hiring someone with mega quant
skills from an Ivy League school. Pre-2005 or so, many traders emerged out
of the back office or even the mail rooms of Wall Street firms because
managers weighed x-factor and personality higher than they do now. While
those managers probably over-weighted personality and “fit”, the system
now overweights academic credentials while failing to appreciate the street
smarts needed to succeed in most trading roles.
You cannot hone x-factor but it is important to be aware of it. Were you
born to be a trader? Or did you just kind of fall into it by accident or
because you saw how much money traders make? This matters. Traders that
feel they were born to trade have a better chance of surviving through the
inevitable existential storms that blow into every trader’s mind from time to
time. If you believe you are doing what you are meant to do, you won’t quit
when it feels impossible.
This brings us to the next Category 3 trait: passion.
Passion for trading
The number one thing I care about when hiring traders is their passion
for trading. This is usually easy to see because fake passion is easy to
discern. I care that traders are passionate because I believe:
1. their chance of success is exponentially higher than that of a less
passionate trader;
2. they are much more enjoyable to work with because they are not
complaining about how the market sucks or the job sucks or the
world sucks; and
3. they are more likely to find personal happiness as a trader.
People that enter trading by accident, or because they are not sure what
they want to do and just kind of land there after a training program, are less
likely to succeed than the myriad of kids who have had their eye on trading
since sophomore year of college. Trading is tiring, frustrating, and often
unrewarding. You have to love it to stick with it.
When I worked as a day trader there was a huge banner that read:
THANK GOD IT’S MONDAY! That is exactly how I feel about trading,
even after 25 years. When the FX market opens on Sunday afternoon and
when S&Ps open at 6 p.m. on Sunday night… I am logged in and often
trading right away. I am excited for the week to get started and to try to
outtrade 
everyone 
else 
after 
analyzing 
all 
the 
weekend 
news. This 
is
borderline obsessive behavior but for me it is a passion, not an obsession.
I know that the line between passion and obsession is crazy thin. That is
why I take specific steps to ensure I do not lose perspective. I turn off my
phone at night; I square up when I am on holiday; I go for walks without
my phone so that I am not constantly checking the market, etc.
I am a big believer in doing something you love. It’s the biggest cliché
in the world but most clichés exist because they are true. Something that is
universally true often becomes cliché but that does not make it any less
true.
My desire to always be in a growth environment, where I can come in
every day and do my best while feeling passionate about what I do, is part
of the reason I have changed jobs many times over the course of my
lifetime. Why settle for a decent job? Why work for someone you don’t get
along with or in a job that doesn’t really fit? Do something you are
passionate about. If you lose the passion or find the role or environment
does not fit—make a change if you can.
If you don’t love trading, find another job!
Since not everyone is cut out for trading, part of the decision-making
process for many traders is figuring out when to quit. When you have
invested significant time and money into your trading career, how do you
know when enough is enough? This is a hard question to answer because
success in trading only comes with extreme perseverance and experience.
Therefore, by its very nature, trading rewards those who refuse to quit.
You have to recognize that for most people there will never be a clear
sign from above that tells you exactly when enough is enough. If you have
been trading for more than two years and you are not making significant
progress, that is a bad sign. I would say that anyone who has been trading
for more than three years and does not feel confident that they are on the
right path, is probably on the wrong path.
Not everyone can succeed at trading. If things are not working out after
two or three years of effort, think about what comes next. Can you parlay
your trading experience into another job or pursuit? Investing, financial
planning, research, etc.?
Experience
One Catch-22 of trading is that experience is one of the most important
drivers of trading success but if you don’t succeed fairly early on, you never
have the chance to get the experience. Young traders should put themselves
in a position to gain experience at as low a cost as possible. If you want to
learn to trade and have $25,000 to your name… Don’t open a trading
account with $25,000 in it! Most traders lose money when they start out.
A good substitute for experience is a strong mentor. Traders that go
from college into junior trading roles at banks or hedge funds have an
enormous advantage over those who do not. They get experienced mentors,
solid training, and the ability to learn using someone else’s money. Traders
of any age trying to learn to trade from home need to be aware of the huge
disadvantage they are saddled with, and find a way to develop a network of
peers and some sort of mentorship.
Luck
There is an ironic fact about most good traders. They simultaneously:
Understand the difference between variance and luck;
Know that luck is not a long-run factor in successful trading;
Don’t really believe in luck; and yet
Consider themselves lucky.
We will get into the topic of luck much more in Chapter 11 but for now
let me just tell you that most good traders I know think of themselves as
lucky. I think deep down most of them believe in the saying “luck is when
preparation meets opportunity” but at the same time they also believe
themselves to be abnormally lucky. You don’t hear successful traders saying
stuff like:
“The market is out to get me!”
“I am cursed!”
“I am the unluckiest person in the world.”
If you say stuff like that: STOP.
Those are things you hear bad traders blurt out on a trading floor. Is the
world out to get you, or are you going to take over the world? Good traders
understand that luck is purely a short-term phenomenon and it is evenly
distributed 
over 
longer 
time 
frames. 
Luck 
should 
have 
no 
impact
whatsoever on a trader’s emotions. Good traders say things like:
“Wow, another disappointing day today. I have now lost money five
days in a row. I need to stick to my process more than ever. I will stay
unemotional and work as hard as possible tomorrow.”
Or…
“My methodology is not working in this regime. I will cut my risk in
half and think about why there seems to be a mismatch between my style
and the market.”
There are only three reasons you are losing money:
1. Your methodology is not producing edge.
2. Mental or behavioral issues are causing you to deviate from your
methodology (i.e., you are not sticking to the plan).
3. Variance.
That’s it. Again, we will talk about this later but variance is part of
trading. There is no good and bad luck. Just variance which can be
explained with statistics and probability. That is why there is no reason to
pray for a market outcome or beg the trading gods for a rally. Please, just
this one time. The only god of trading is probability. Even a forecaster who
can predict the market accurately 90% of the time will still be wrong five
times in a row every now and then.
Locus of control, grit, growth mindset and an individual’s perception of
her own luckiness all come down to the same core belief: I control my own
fate. The harder I work, the better things will get for me in the long run,
even if bad stuff will inevitably happen in the short term. All that matters is
the long game. Daily returns mean nothing, monthly and yearly returns are
what matter.
You control your own fate. Never blame external factors when you lose
money.
Healthy trading environment
While I just spent several paragraphs talking about the importance of
internal locus of control and embracing the belief that you determine your
trading 
outcomes, 
there 
is 
one 
extremely 
important 
external 
factor 
to
consider. You cannot succeed in an unhealthy trading environment. You
must have a risk-taking environment that is not hostile to risk, or thinly
capitalized.
This point could have been at the top of this chapter because in the
wrong environment, even the most rational, disciplined, skilled and self-
aware trader will fail. There are many features of a trading environment that
can be desirable but there are two that are absolutely necessary for survival
and success:
1. Appropriate capital.
2. Healthy and supportive risk-taking environment. Let’s look at each
feature separately.
Appropriate capital
In terms of external factors, sufficient capital is an absolute prerequisite
for successful trading. Let’s look at what this means for the three main
types of trader.
Retail traders
No retail trader can succeed with a $1,000 trading account because the
income generated from the most successful strategy will be too small to
move the needle. Even a 300% return will not be enough to make a
difference and so the trader is very likely to employ too much leverage and
blow up the account via gambling.
A tiny trading account is OK for learning the markets and much better
than 
paper 
trading. 
It 
might 
give 
you 
a 
sense 
of 
the 
emotional 
and
psychological hurdles that come with live trading, but it will never give you
a chance to really know what kind of trader you are.
In 
general, 
position 
sizing 
can 
account 
for 
most 
issues 
around
insufficient capital. If your capital is small, you need to take smaller
positions. We will discuss position sizing in Chapter 11. But there are
thresholds below which you cannot hope to succeed. For a young retail
trader with no family to support and low expenses, this amount could be as
low as $25,000. For a dentist with three kids in private school looking to
quit his job and trade full time, this number would be significantly higher.
Bank traders
If you work in a bank, you don’t have a fixed amount of capital. Instead,
you have risk limits. As such, your risk limits need to be properly aligned
with your performance expectations or budget. If you have a $30,000 daily
stop loss and a budget of $10,000,000, you will fail. It’s impossible to make
ten million dollars in a year with such a tight daily stop.
The easiest way to determine whether your risk limits are appropriate in
a bank is to run simulations. You can set up simple simulations in a
spreadsheet to look at a 252-day period
61
and spit out ranges of outcomes
based on various inputs. Retail traders can do this as well to determine risk
of ruin. The greater idea you have of your prior performance statistics, the
more accurate the simulation will be. I will go into a deeper discussion of
how to use simulations to understand performance and risk of ruin in
Chapter 11.
Portfolio managers
Capital or assets under management is a critical variable for every
hedge fund and real money portfolio manager (PM). Good PMs can scale
their strategy substantially and tend to think of performance in terms of
basis points, not dollars. Good PMs comfortably scale their risk up or down
as necessary based on the capital they are managing. On the other hand,
PMs that think about P&L in terms of dollars tend to have trouble sizing up
(or sizing down) because they are anchored on various P&L thresholds. If
you think of a good day as $1 million of P&L, you won’t adjust very
smoothly as your capital increases from $100 million to $1 billion. On the
other hand, if you think of a good day as 100 basis points, you will.
Note that it is possible to have too much capital. In fact, a common
issue with hedge fund portfolio managers is that they have too much capital,
not too little. Many traders at hedge funds are pressured to take on more and
more capital, regardless of the capacity of their trading strategy. And it takes
a trader with courageous integrity to say “no” to more capital. It is a bit like
refusing a promotion—quite often it could be the right decision, but it can
feel strange and potentially risky to do so.
Every trader and every trading strategy has an optimal level of capital.
The more capital you take on, the worse your returns will be after a certain
point, because your best strategies will reach capacity and additional capital
will need to be allocated to inferior strategies. If you are a PM at a hedge
fund, you should target your optimal level of capital, not just look to
increase your capital year after year.
Capacity depends to a great extent on the products you trade. A boutique
institutional trader specializing in microcap stocks will have much lower
capacity than a hedge fund PM trading G10 currencies. Capacity is mostly
determined by liquidity.
Research shows there is a sweet spot for hedge fund size in the $250
million to $1 billion assets-under-management range. Below $250m, costs
are hard to cover and above $1 billion, returns and Sharpe ratios fall
62
. This
is logically true for individual managers as well. This does not mean all
increases in capital are bad. You need to think about what your optimal
capitalization level looks like and aim for that, not higher. As your capital
rises to higher than optimal levels, the opportunity set is diluted and
transaction costs increase disproportionately. The high-alpha opportunities
are slowly drowned out by inferior trades.
A healthy risk-taking environment
A healthy environment breeds successful risk takers. Even the best
trader is unlikely to succeed in a toxic environment. A healthy risk-taking
environment means different things for different types of trader.
Retail traders
For people trading their own money, a healthy environment means
enough 
runway 
to 
learn, 
make 
mistakes, 
bounce 
back 
and 
eventually
prosper. Capital is crucial, as mentioned in the last section, but so is support
from family, financial flexibility, and the ability to focus and get in the zone
all day.
If you want to be a trader, but your wife wants you to get a “real” job
and you have twins screaming from the other room and no money to pay
rent next month… Put down this book and come back when you have a
more conducive environment. Trading is hard enough; anything that makes
it harder usually makes it impossible.
You own your life, so if you want to be a trader, do it. But pick the right
time and circumstances to do it so that you give yourself a proper shot at
success. There is nothing worse than wondering what could have been.
Quite often, you can work full time and find ways to trade on the side (and
more 
importantly, 
study 
trading) 
so 
that 
as 
you 
gain 
experience 
and
confidence in trading you are still earning a steady income. Then, once you
have a decent amount of money in the bank, you have a bit of runway to
trade full time and see if you have what it takes.
Bank traders
You would think that most or all bank traders would operate in a healthy
risk-taking environment but this is absolutely not the case. Banks have
different levels of risk appetite and managers within those banks can have
dramatically different incentives.
Let’s say you trade 10-year bonds at a large commercial bank. Imagine
two environments:
A) The manager that hired you and mentored you got a job offer at an
investment 
bank 
and 
just 
left 
under 
somewhat 
acrimonious
circumstances. Instead of replacing the head of trading, the bank
has given the current head of sales responsibility for your group.
He never liked your old boss, he has never traded before, and he
plans to retire in a few years. He just wants to survive the last few
years of his career and pay for his kid’s last few years of college.
He is extremely risk averse. He views the business model as an
agency where clients do trades, the bank goes to market and
offloads the risk, and the bank earns a small, nearly risk-free
commission.
Or…
B) Your manager is fired up and entrepreneurial and previously ran
global macro at a big hedge fund. He wants that kind of ambitious
risk culture at your bank because he believes a strong, healthy risk
culture 
best 
serves 
the 
clients 
of 
the 
bank. 
By 
employing
meaningful risk appetite, the bank can provide best-in-class pricing
to clients, world class trade ideas and expert market intelligence.
Customers get superior service from the bank and the bank makes
more money than the competition in the process. Win/win.
It is obvious which trader is going to have a greater chance of success
and most enjoy coming to work each day. If you work at a bank, you should
regularly evaluate your environment and study where your incentives are
aligned with the bank’s and where they are not. To succeed, you need clear
risk limits and rules of engagement so that no one is ever second-guessing
your actions, and you don’t have to second guess them yourself.
Portfolio managers
Portfolio managers are most likely to work in a healthy risk-taking
environment. Since hedge funds and asset managers are often exclusively in
the business of taking risk, they best understand the nature of risk and they
are usually good at creating a clear set of rules and then letting traders trade.
Still, it’s important to understand where your incentives align with those
of the firm and where they do not, so that you don’t misfire. The most
important example of this is that many hedge fund risk managers focus as
much or more on volatility of returns than on absolute returns. This is
because the risk manager at a pod-based hedge fund sees each trader as part
of a portfolio.
If the returns of each PM look approximately like those of a call option
(small downside with unlimited upside), then the aggregate performance of
all those traders at the end of the year is likely to look pretty good. If, on the
other hand, most traders are targeting 6% volatility while two or three are
realizing 25% volatility, the business model does not work as well.
While you are paid a percentage of your absolute returns, quite often
your manager is almost as concerned about your volatility as she is about
the headline returns number. This makes perfect sense, especially as risk
managers are constantly trying to separate luck from skill. A trader that
makes money consistently with low volatility is much more likely to be
displaying skill than a PM that puts up three years like: +70%, -24%, +
35%. Furthermore, the risk of ruin of a Steady Eddie is significantly lower
than the PM I just mentioned, and nobody wants to be the one managing a
trader when he blows up.
This is not an argument for you to target a specific level of volatility and
forget about returns. All I am saying is that you should be acutely aware of
your manager’s (and your investors’) incentives, not just your own.
A related phenomenon you will see at many hedge funds is that while
your contract may have a stop loss, your real stop loss might be much
tighter. Contractual risk limits are often wider than reality, depending on the
personality of the business and risk managers involved. If you are new at a
hedge fund, make sure you fully understand all the written and unwritten
rules the fund follows. Your official stop loss might be -15%, but if every
other trader that ever went down 9% at the fund got a shoulder tap, you
should probably calibrate to a 9% stop loss (or tighter!)
Think about your manager’s (and investors’)
incentives. Does your strategy and behavior align?
This advice applies to traders at every type of institution. When you
understand the incentives of management, you can make sure you are
playing by the correct rules and that you will not put yourself or your
manager in an unwanted or awkward position.
Other features of a healthy risk-taking environment:
Peers. There are other good risk takers to talk with and bounce ideas
off. Hopefully there is at least one trader that is more experienced
and/or more skilled than you. Otherwise you are always the mentor
and never the mentee. For retail traders, I believe there is a huge
benefit to working in a trading office, not at home. You learn from
others, have people to share ideas with and share the pain with when
things go wrong. A robust network of peers gives you a chance to talk
about specific trades, general risk management and other trading-
related topics.
Make a concerted effort to build a strong network of trading
peers. This can be online or IRL. Learning takes longer if you have to
figure everything out yourself.
Rule-based limits and risk-taking framework. The clearer the rules
of engagement, the easier it is to develop a clear process and proper
risk management. You don’t want an environment where a loss is fine
one day, but the same loss two weeks later results in a bunch of emails
flying around asking what happened. Ask for clear, numerical limits
and goals.
Management risk appetite. Management understands that if you take
real risk, you will lose money sometimes. It is common to hear bank
traders joke about the “Take risk, but don’t lose money” business
model. This is a model that works well for management as it
essentially means they can sleep well at night knowing that traders are
monetizing client flow but not taking any meaningful risk. It is less
attractive for individual traders because their leeway to express views
is severely limited. The only time traders can take “risk” in this model
is when they are already profitable (usually from a client trade). This
model allows traders to risk money earned but not take real financial
risk that may result in losses.
A mentor to teach you, support your risk taking and help you maintain
confidence during the inevitable down times.
A clear connection between performance and pay. Risk appetite
fizzles when traders don’t expect to get paid for alpha they generate.
Taking real risk requires significant mental effort and endurance and
traders will not give their all to a business they do not believe will
compensate them for doing so.
There are so many characteristics that make a good trader. That just
about 
concludes 
this 
chapter 
on 
winning 
traits. When 
you 
finish 
this
chapter, put the book down and take a moment to think about one or two
characteristics you want to work on. Go through my tips and write down a
couple of specific actions you will take to improve in particular areas. Then
come back to Chapter 6.
I strongly believe that improvement comes in small increments and by
focusing on one or two specific goals. Achieve those goals, then set new
goals. Don’t try to do everything at once or monitor seventeen areas where
you hope to improve. Drill down and pick one or two. Then do the work.
That is the end of Chapter 5. Those are the positive traits that will bring
you success in trading. Now let’s look at all the faulty thinking and ugly
habits that lead you astray.
37. Note: It is more difficult than you might expect to bucket skills as cognitive or non-
cognitive; don’t get mad at me if you think I put something under cognitive that you believe
should 
fall 
under 
non-cognitive. 
For 
example, 
reasonable 
people 
might 
categorize
“confidence” as either cognitive or non-cognitive.
38. See the section on favorite/longshot bias in Chapter 7. People tend to prefer longshots
because optically they offer better payouts. But payouts depend not just on the odds the
bet offers, but the probability of it paying out.
39. Conformity bias is the human tendency to take cues for proper behavior in most
contexts from the actions of others instead of exercising independent judgment.
40. https://www.saffo.com/02008/07/26/strong-opinions-weakly-held/
41. Abridged from: Richards J. Heuer, Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, Center for the
Study of Intelligence, 1999
42. Brent Donnelly, The Art of Currency Trading, John Wiley & Sons (2019). It is a tad meta
for me to footnote my own book here. I acknowledge it feels a bit like I’m referring to
myself in third person. Anyway, there is some overlap between my FX trading book and
this book, so I will refer to that one in here a few times. I hope you don’t mind. :)
43. 
This 
website 
is 
great 
if 
you 
are 
interested 
in 
global 
import 
and 
exports 
data:
https://oec.world/en/profile/country/nzl/
44. Heuer (1999), abridged from p. 65.
45. 
https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2017/07/the-underrated-gift-of-
curiosity/534573/
46. Hassinger-Das, B., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Appetite for knowledge: curiosity and children’s
academic achievement (2018)
47. Mussel, P., Introducing the construct curiosity for predicting job performance Journal of
Organizational Behavior (2013)
48. Reio, T.G., Jr. and Wiswell, A., Field investigation of the relationship among adult
curiosity, 
workplace 
learning, 
and 
job 
performance, 
Human 
Resource 
Development
Quarterly (2000)
49. Fiat Money in France by Andrew Dickson White is a classic 1876 book about how paper
money can become worthless when governments print and spend irresponsibly. It is
highly relevant in this era of unlimited money printing to finance unlimited government
spending.
50. 
Check 
out 
the 
full 
Q&A 
(which 
is 
where 
this 
excerpt 
comes 
from) 
here:
https://angeladuckworth.com/qa/
51. Why is it that some four-letter words have so much more oomph than any 3 or 5 letter
words? :]
52. In finance, people prefer to say “variance” not “luck”. It is more polite and sounds
smarter. And seriously, there is a difference. Luck is what happens in a short sample.
Variance is the fluctuation of a random variable around its mean. The better we can
measure this variance, the less we worry about luck because in the long-run, luck
disappears and variance can be predicted and managed.
53. You might also enjoy this Australian poem from 1937 which makes the same point:
“Were ‘ifs’ and ‘buts’ just tents and huts / how gaily could we hide! / if ‘buts’ and ‘ifs’ were
yachts and skiffs / how merrily we would ride! / but ‘ifs’ and ‘buts’ they interfere and spoil
the whole affair / If it were not for ‘ifs’ and ‘buts’ / I’d be a millionaire! Source:
https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/58819878?searchTerm=%22ifs+and+buts%22
54. That’s a CDC stat from 2016.
55. I first heard the term “reassessment trigger” while reading Bija Advisors notes online. So
I give credit to Stephen Duneier for coining the term, though I’m not positive he invented
it. It’s a good term.
56. If you don’t like the word quota, you can use “goal” but to me quota implies you must
reach the number and goal implies you hope to reach it. So I like “quota” better.
57. He was Librarian of the United States Congress from 1975 to 1987. Don’t feel bad that
you’ve never heard of him.
58. Pro tip: Don’t drink any liquids after 7 p.m. and you will sleep through the night.
59. That’s what I use—it’s a wristband alarm that vibrates—it quietly buzzes you awake
without bothering your spouse at 4 a.m. or whatever time you get up.
60. Langer, E. J., & Roth, J. Heads I win, tails it’s chance: The illusion of control as a
function of the sequence of outcomes in a purely chance task. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology (1975).
61. There is an average of 252 trading days in each year.
62. See for example: https://www.aurum.com/insight/elephant-in-the-room-size-and-hedge-
fund-perfor-mance/ 
and
https://docs.preqin.com/newsletters/hf/Preqin_HFSL_Mar_14_Fund_Size_Performance.p
df