T
CHAPTER 6
KRYPTONITE
Bad habits, mistakes, sloppy thinking, and leaks
here 
are 
specific 
bad 
habits, 
mistakes, 
unhealthy 
mindsets 
and
persistent errors that lead traders to fail. Most bad trading follows a few
specific patterns. In this chapter, I will go into some of the most common
sources of trader kryptonite, and outline strategies to reduce the impact of
negative traits. Building strength is important but you must also minimize
destructive and unprofitable behaviors.
The most damaging of all forms of trader kryptonite is biased or bad
thinking and we will discuss bias in depth in Chapter 7. This chapter will
focus on everything else that holds traders back, other than irrational and
biased thinking.
When thinking about why traders lose money, the starting point is
simple. Trading is not a zero-sum game; it is a negative sum game. There
are external costs (technology, hardware, research, data, personnel, etc.) and
transaction costs (commissions, bid/offer, slippage) that eat away at your
performance, day after day. If you generate small gains, your alpha will leak
away in a steady stream of payments to vendors and market makers.
When I traded the NASDAQ bubble from 1999 to 2002, my gross daily
P&L was rarely negative, and I was gross positive every single month. But I
went from wildly profitable in 1999 and 2000 to flat in 2001 and net
negative in 2002, as I had to trade more and more shares to generate the
same P&L after the absolute value of NASDAQ stocks collapsed following
the bubble burst.
Instead of trying to make $3 on 1000 shares as Qualcomm jumped from
$600 to $603, I had to make 30 cents on 10,000 shares as Qualcomm
moved from $60.00 to $60.30. The simultaneous collapse of stock prices
and 
the 
decimalization 
of 
equity 
trading 
meant 
the 
highly-profitable
strategies I employed in 1999/2000 were no longer profitable in 2002.
Transaction costs are a constant drag on performance so you need a big
edge to succeed in trading.
Today, stock market trading is “free” in theory for many individuals.
But you know the saying: if the product is free, then you are the product. In
the past, you paid a transparent commission and the bid/offer spread. Now,
you still pay the bid/offer spread and you pay a hidden transaction fee
which is the profit earned by a high-frequency market maker which receives
an ultra-short-term “free” option as it chooses how to execute your trade.
Trading costs continue to trend lower but are more and more difficult to
observe or measure. And they still matter.
Another 
reason 
that 
trading 
is 
negative-sum 
for 
individuals 
is
information and technology asymmetry. Large institutions (banks, asset
managers and central banks) have better access to information, and superior
(faster) technology. A trader at home watching news headlines cannot
compete with algorithmic headline reading software. When market moving
news comes out, individual human traders are at a meaningful speed
disadvantage.
A portfolio manager at a hedge fund or a trader at a bank has a team of
analysts and quants working with them to extract signals from the noise.
They have in-depth analysis of upcoming events and instant breakdowns of
important news. The Twitter era has democratized this a fair bit and
substantially decreased the advantage of the institutions over individuals.
There is a ton of high-quality information and analysis on Twitter if you
know where to look. Still, institutional information is generally higher
quality and easier to access than the information available to those outside
the industry.
Let’s look at some of the most common reasons traders lose money.
1. Bad discipline
2. Not enough edge
3. Overreliance on simple indicators
4. Too 
much 
focus 
on 
trade 
ideas 
and 
not 
enough 
focus 
on 
risk
management
5. Emotion
BAD DISCIPLINE
The number one reason that traders lose money is bad discipline. No
amount of edge or skill matters if you cannot stick to the plan. The most
amazing alpha-generating strategy is useless if you deviate from it. The
most sophisticated, optimized and adaptive risk management system will
fail if you selectively ignore some of its rules and procedures, depending on
your mood or emotional state. Every time you deviate from your process or
your plan because of bad discipline or emotion, you leak money.
Learning the rules is easy. Following them is hard.
I am highly qualified to talk about the importance of discipline in
trading because my best and worst trading always depends on my level of
discipline. The market is like a siren from Homer’s Odyssey, always trying
to get you to crash your boat into the rocks, constantly trying to make you
break your own rules.
Overtrading is my kryptonite and I could write an entire book about my
own battles with bad discipline. One of the great contradictions of trading is
that conservative, disciplined people tend to be risk-averse while risk-
loving people tend to be compulsive and undisciplined. This is not a truism,
just a general relationship between overlapping character traits.
The great paradox of trading is that it demands you be both risk-loving
and highly disciplined.
Most people are one or the other. You need to be both. This is the
essence of the tight/aggressive philosophy described earlier. You follow the
rules, you wait, you analyze, you stay patient, you ignore low-quality ideas
and then (finally!) a juicy trade presents itself and you attack aggressively.
Bad discipline often reveals itself as overtrading, gambling, or trading
for fun and stimulation. Another symptom of bad discipline is the inability
to stick to the plan—moving your stop loss and take profit when they get
close, for example. Often this is a simple emotional reaction to movements
in price. When people own an asset that is going up, they have trouble
selling it, even if their initial plan was to take profit at a particular level that
has just been reached.
If discipline is an issue for you, spend most of your time trying to level
up this characteristic. Automate your process as much as possible.
Bad discipline is the #1 source of trader kryptonite.
There is a demon voice in many people’s heads. The voice that tells
skinny women they are fat or convinces alcoholics to have “just one drink”.
That voice is there to sabotage you and your trading. It can make you do
things that make no sense and often you will barely understand your own
actions when you follow it.
Have you ever heard a voice in your head saying:
“Just hold on a bit longer, it’ll bounce back. Get back to flat, then square
up. No point taking the loss here. It’ll definitely bounce.”
Or:
“The stock is rallying, you can’t miss this move! I know you stopped
out at the low already… But you have to buy the high now; you’re gonna
miss a huge rally! The guy next to you is long at good levels and he’s
making so much more money than you!”
Do you control that voice? Or does it control you? This sort of stuff gets
existential pretty fast and “the voice in your head” is the subject of many
books and articles on psychology, mental health, self-help and philosophy.
The 
duality 
or 
multiplicity 
of 
the 
human 
mind 
is 
an 
incredible 
and
fascinating topic, and you should be aware of how and when these voices in
your head sabotage you.
Understanding how your ego and the non-productive voices in your
head manipulate your behavior and self-worth is a critical step towards self-
awareness. You must recognize when the wrong voices tell you to press the
BUY and SELL buttons.
Meditation and mindfulness training along with books like The Power
of Now by Eckhart Tolle can help you quiet and control the non-productive,
negative or disruptive voices in your head. A well-designed process and an
automated risk management system also help, as they create fewer decision
points where you have to intervene or actively make decisions under stress.
The less you have to decide on the fly while in a position and the more your
parameters are laid out beforehand and not subject to revision, the better.
We will get more into risk management in Chapter 11.
While bad discipline often kills off otherwise good traders, bad traders
usually lose money because they suffer from one or more of the following
problems.
NOT ENOUGH EDGE
Whether you trade at the biggest asset management firm in Midtown
Manhattan or out of a spare room in your parent’s house in Wichita,
Kansas… Trading is an impossibly complex game of imperfect information
played by many thousands of technologically-sophisticated and highly-
motivated opponents. What is your edge?
Successful traders can clearly and confidently explain their edge.
Do 
you 
have 
enough 
edge 
to 
outperform 
the 
market 
and 
exceed
transaction costs? This is the most important question in trading, especially
if you do not work at a bank. Banks have some built-in edge (better
information, market making revenue, best access to liquidity) but if you
work at home or at a hedge fund or at an asset management firm… What is
your edge? Don’t lie to yourself. Think about it and be honest.
Detour: Sources of edge
Let’s take a detour for a minute and look at some sources of edge over
the years. There are many other sources of edge, especially at the micro
level. This list is meant to get you thinking about your own edge. The point
is not to go through the list and pick one. It’s a starting point for thinking
about and understanding your personal trading edge.
There is a cliché that if you are at a poker table and you don’t know who
the sucker is… You are the sucker. Similarly, if you are a trader and you do
not know what your edge is, you probably don’t have an edge. I will focus
on sources of edge for human traders and the date ranges I provide are my
best estimate of when that source of edge was most prevalent.
Most of these sources of edge still exist, but are greatly diminished from
peak.
Trend Following
1984 to 2003
Trend 
following 
systems 
were 
the 
go-to 
source 
for 
human 
(and
computer) 
alpha 
in 
the 
1980s 
and 
1990s. 
Many 
large 
trend-following
commodity trading advisors (CTAs) extracted meaningful abnormal returns
for more than two decades. Returns from trend following systems have
steadily declined over the past 40 years. Many studies cover the slow
decline of trend following performance. This table from the Winton study
63
shows the decline in trend following Sharpe ratios over time:
10-year gross Sharpe ratio. Fast: Weekly, Medium: 6-week, Slow: 13-week
This does not show there are now zero profitable trend following
strategies, but clearly the edge has dropped over time. This is not a surprise
given the proliferation of academic literature on the topic in the 1990s and
2000s. As a strategy becomes well known, its Sharpe ratio grinds towards
zero.
Asymmetrical information and lack of transparency
1980 to 1996
Before the internet, markets were opaque and it was hard for those
outside financial institutions to get an accurate view of prices. Traders at
banks and large investment firms had a meaningful advantage given their
knowledge of accurate price levels and because of wide bid/offer spreads.
Meanwhile, relatively few macro traders had big research budgets and
access to policy makers. Those who did had a massive edge over less
informed and less sophisticated corporations and speculators.
Instantaneous 
communication 
speeds, 
near-unlimited 
availability 
of
information 
and 
rigorous 
compliance 
and 
monitoring 
of 
non-public
information have dramatically flattened the landscape for both macro and
bank traders.
Technical Analysis
1980 to 2006
The most common trading strategy on most trading desks I worked on
before 2006 was technical analysis. Most techniques were fairly basic,
while some of the smarter-sounding people might throw in some Elliott
Wave or more esoteric systems built in Lotus 1-2-3. Most of these strategies
produced 
what 
amounted 
to 
trend 
following 
or 
breakout 
signals.
Continuation patterns, breakouts, head and shoulders etc. were the favored
setups and these piggybacked on the underlying high Sharpe of trend
following strategies in that era.
As algorithmic strategies became more common in the mid-2000s and
trend following Sharpes fizzled, traders using simple technical analysis lost
their edge because technical strategies are easy to replicate with a computer
and computers are better than humans when it comes to risk management
and unbiased trade selection. Now, I believe technical analysis has been
reduced to a risk management tool and does not work effectively for trade
selection or forecasting.
Analyzing Price action
1970s to 2015 (?)
It feels to me that price action in recent years has become increasingly
meaningless. The idea that something “trades well” or “looks bid” pretty
much just means it’s at the highs these days, not that it’s going higher. Price
action has lost most of its forecasting value. I think very short-term, there is
still meaning in Good News/Bad Price setups (i.e., when something can’t
rally on good news, that is temporarily bearish) but this effect has a short
half-life.
Here is Stan Druckenmiller commenting on the decline of price action
as a signal in 2018
64
:
These algos have taken all the rhythm out of the market and have
become extremely confusing to me. And when you take away price action
versus news from someone who’s used price action as their major
disciplinary tool for 35 years, it’s tough, and it’s become very tough. I don’t
know where this is all going. If it continues, I’m not going to return to 30%
a year any time soon, not that I think I might anyway, but one can always
dream when the free money ends, we’ll go back to a normal macro
trading environment.
I think perhaps algorithms which are less emotional and react less
predictably to news, are partly to blame for the decline in the importance of
price action, but there could also be the simple fact that everyone knows
about this style of analysis, so it has lost its edge. The current generation of
30-to 45-year-old traders were all brought up on Reminiscences of a Stock
Operator and Market Wizards and thus we are always scouring the price
action for a signal.
Throw in the massive price distortions from non-price sensitive central
bank buying of various assets and it’s not hard to see how whatever signal
price action might have carried in the past has been destroyed by central
banks, and arbitraged away by speculators who all learned from the same
books and interviews.
Global Macro
1970s to ???
Global macro is very crowded as the proliferation of pod-based hedge
funds 
and 
internet 
macro 
strategists 
pushed 
global 
macro 
into 
the
mainstream around 2005 and left too much capital chasing too little alpha.
If you assume that any market strategy or inefficiency has X amount of
alpha available, then the more actors trying to gobble up that alpha, the
lower average returns and average Sharpes must fall over time. Too much
competition and low interest rates are the top two challenges to global
macro hedge fund returns since 2008.
Massive moves in asset prices driven by Fed QE, Abenomics and ECB
QE delivered monster alpha to hedge funds at various points in the 2010s,
but these epic events have been rare in recent years.
Correlation and intermarket analysis
2004 to 2014
This was my bread and butter back in the Lehman Brothers days but
after the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, everyone became acutely aware of
the 
importance 
of 
correlation 
and 
intermarket 
analysis 
for 
short-term
trading.
Just about every global macro trader (and blogger) in the world is
highly proficient in this style of analysis now. And there are many, many
computerized systems using dynamic correlation to trade every asset class.
Again: Too much money chasing too little alpha.
I still use correlation as an important input for my trade ideas but I think
its usefulness has declined significantly over the past 20 years.
Data Trading
1990 to 2005
It’s 
1997. 
I 
expect 
a 
strong 
nonfarm 
payrolls 
(NFP) 
number 
and
USDJPY is 118.80/85. As 8:30:00 a.m. approaches, I key up a bid for 100
million USDJPY at 119.01. I stare intensely at the US economic release
page on Bloomberg.
5, 4, 3, 2, 1…
If the number is significantly better than expectations, I hit send. If not,
I do nothing. Often, pre-2005 or so, you could scoop all the lazy offers left
by risk averse traders and make an instant $100k or $200k profit in the
seconds after any major economic release. Now, there are hundreds of algos
set up with a series of commands like: (If NFP beats by 1 standard deviation
+ Unemployment rate drops, buy 100 USDJPY, limit X). All available
liquidity is sucked up in microseconds as an army of algos wipes the
battlefield clean.
There are some second derivative ways to make money trading the
economic data now, but 95% of the alpha is now owned by algorithms. This
creates a form of singularity where price finds its new equilibrium point
almost instantly after economic data hits the market. Instead of flailing all
over the place as it tries to find the right price, USDJPY just ratchets to the
new “correct” price in a few minutes as similarly-tuned programs react at
faster than human speed.
Pattern Recognition
1980 to ???
There is a famous story of Paul Tudor Jones and Peter Borish using
price and volume patterns to uncover an analogy between the price and
volume pattern in the stock market in 1987 and price and volume in the
stock market in 1929. Using this analogy, macro analysis, and his concerns
about derivatives, portfolio insurance, and equity futures without price
limits, Tudor predicted the Crash of ‘87 and returned 62% in October
1987!
65
In 2019, this type of analogy would be tweeted twenty-two times by day
traders and online bloggers and would be revealed in the output of every
machine learning, AI and pattern recognition machine at every hedge fund
and bank in the world. Computers are significantly better than humans
when it comes to unbiased pattern recognition.
I do believe, though, there is still an edge in pattern recognition.
Experienced human traders can still combine complex pieces of information
to form conclusions that would elude the best computers.
Leverage, carry and selling risk premium
Forever
Borrow at 2% and buy an asset that yields 7%. Carry and roll down.
Sell insurance to hedgers. Sell SPX puts. These are the tried, tested and true
ways to generate consistent returns. These strategies produce non-normal
returns and lead to occasional blowups and meltdowns and are often more
beta than alpha. Tactics like timing on entries and exits and superior risk
management, though, can make simple levered carry and option selling
strategies more like alpha than beta.
Quant / discretionary combo
2012 -
While quantitative analysis was once mostly the domain of systematic
and 
algorithmic 
trading 
programs, 
human 
traders 
now 
use 
more
sophisticated 
quantitative 
methods. 
Combining 
the 
best 
quantitative
analysts, 
the 
best 
datasets 
and 
the 
best 
discretionary 
traders 
into 
one
business pod looks to me like the ideal model for discretionary alpha
capture in the current era. Quantitative analysis is greatly enhanced by
experienced humans who can ask the right questions. Models are great for
many types of trading, but are not as good at other tasks such as predicting
or reacting to regime change or handling one-off events.
All these styles of trading still work, off and on. The challenge is to find
a trading style that gives you an edge in the current market, and then stay
clear-eyed, open-minded, and adaptable so you can transition or pivot as the
market changes. Your edge this month might not be your edge next month,
or next year.
Detour complete! I hope this brief roundup of historical sources of edge
helps you think about and identify your current edge. Before we get back to
our main discussion about why traders lose money, let’s play a quick little
game.
Take a look at Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2. I pulled these from Bloomberg
and took the name of the security off so that you won’t be biased. See if you
can predict the next move in the asset (or at least get a feeling for where it
might go next). Think about what you see in terms of trend, support,
resistance and any other tradeable patterns. What is your view on the future
direction of these two assets? How strong is your view? If you were forced
to trade these, would you go long or short?
Did you take a view? Long or short?
I lied. These are not from Bloomberg. The two charts were generated
using the =RAND() function in Excel. They are randomly-generated and
have no connection to any security. If you had any view or guess as to
where 
these 
charts 
are 
heading… That 
view 
has 
no 
basis. These 
are
randomly-generated squiggles that might go up, down, or sideways.
This brings us to the next reason that traders lose money: They rely too
much on simple indicators.
OVERRELIANCE ON SIMPLE INDICATORS
Many traders put way too much faith in simple indicators. While there
is something to be said for simplicity, you also need to be realistic enough
to grasp that drawing a trendline on a daily chart and buying the break of
that line is probably not a strategy that will offer much edge in the long run.
Anything a computer can easily do is unlikely to be a huge winner.
Many retail traders get sucked into seminars and trading courses that
advertise simple breakout or similar technical strategies. Often the sellers of
these strategies offer up impressive data showing that a particular strategy
has generated outsized returns. Remember that this is all backward looking.
Using any simple trading software, I can backtest a few thousand strategies
and then cherry pick the ones that were incredibly profitable in hindsight.
Then advertise those. The problem with this sort of analysis is that it does
not work out of sample
66
.
Do not believe the hype of online trading seminars that claim consistent
profits from simple technical indicators. There is an entire industry built
around the idea of easy profits and simple strategies and the sad fact is that
these programs do not work. Instead of dumping $15,000 into a bogus
training program, put $10,000 into a trading account and buy a huge pile of
trading books and a bunch of meditation classes. Think of that $10,000 in a
trading account as tuition and start trading. Very cautiously.
Reliance on simple indicators is not just a problem in retail trading.
Very often, a bank trader will send out a trade rec featuring something like a
trendline going back five years that just broke. They will advocate a trade
based on the breakout. Personally, my philosophy is that simple is good in
general but there is a point where analysis is too simple. Buying an asset
because a line on a chart broke belongs in the “too simple” category for me.
Does it really pass the sniff test that you can draw a line on a chart and
then wait for it to break and that will be a sustainable source of alpha or
edge in a complex game played by the most expensive computers and some
of the smartest human beings in the world? I doubt it. These sorts of basic
trend following strategies were money in the 1980s and into the 1990s but
not now. A computer has better discipline than you and can execute a
simple technical breakout strategy with less slippage and zero emotion.
Simple 
technical 
strategies, 
especially 
breakout 
strategies, 
are 
like
dashboard 
indicators 
in 
your 
car. 
Yes, 
they 
are 
helpful, 
almost
indispensable, really… But you would never drive a car just by staring at
the speedometer, tachometer and GPS.
If you want to succeed in trading, you will need to find a more
sophisticated source of edge than technical analysis. It is a part of the
toolkit but it doesn’t work by itself.
We’ll talk more about the behavioral pitfalls of technical analysis when
we discuss apophenia in Chapter 10, and I touch on the good, the bad and
the ugly of technical analysis throughout this book. Now, let’s move on to
the next reason traders lose money:
TOO MUCH FOCUS ON TRADE IDEAS AND NOT ENOUGH FOCUS ON RISK
MANAGEMENT
For every 100 trading books available on Amazon, I would estimate that
one is about risk management, 29 are about trading psychology and the
remaining 70 are mostly focused on trading systems or how to come up
with trade ideas. And half of those “How to come up with trade ideas”
books describe simple strategies that have no edge.
Finding good trade ideas is the start of the trading process, but risk
management is the ultimate determinant of success or failure in trading.
Even if you can properly forecast the direction of the market 65% of the
time (a very high success rate), if you don’t manage your risk properly, you
will either slowly bleed out or quickly blow up. Risk management is so
important that I have devoted all of Chapter 11 to the topic. For now, just
know that bad risk management leads to failure mainly via three channels:
1. Risk of ruin. This is the big one. It doesn’t matter how smart you are
or how much edge you have, if you look into the abyss enough times,
eventually you will fall in. Some trading styles and strategies are
more prone to ruin than others.
2. Slow bleed. If you cut your winners too fast or regularly ignore or
move your stop losses, trades where you were risking 1 to make 2
turn into trades where you are risking, say, 1.3 to make 0.8. Your
capital slowly leaks out, like air from a tire.
3. Static position sizing. Failure to understand how position sizing
relates to volatility, capital levels and profit objectives can lead you
to trade the wrong position size, especially when macro or volatility
regimes change. This will lead to both suboptimal performance and
increased risk of ruin.
I will save the rest of the risk management discussion for Chapter 11.
Let’s look at another reason traders lose money: emotion.
EMOTION
Emotions are not necessarily bad but they are detrimental when you do
not recognize them and when you allow them to influence your thinking.
Emotions can make you less rational.
When an attractive trade idea comes along and you have a solid process,
it doesn’t matter whether you have lost money five days in a row or just
finished a record six week run. It does not matter if you woke up in a great
mood or can barely get out of bed. Your process will determine when to
take risk, what position size to set, and what reassessment triggers make
sense. But emotions can trigger bad thinking and bad trading, if you let
them.
Several 
studies 
confirm 
this 
including 
one 
by 
Lo, 
Repin 
and
Steenbarger which says:
Specifically, 
the 
survey 
data 
indicate 
that 
subjects 
whose 
emotional
reactions to monetary gains and losses were more intense on both the
positive 
and 
negative 
side 
exhibited 
significantly 
worse 
trading
performance, implying a negative correlation between successful trading
behavior and emotional reactivity
67
.
Some emotions that cause trouble for traders:
Frustration
When you smash your fist repeatedly on a pinball machine, it eventually
tilts and stops working. The human mind can be similar. When faced with a
series of stressful losses, especially particularly hard to believe or unlucky
losses, many traders will tilt. When on tilt, they will either shut down or
take extra risk in order to get revenge on the market. Traders who attempt to
get revenge on the market are more likely to face ruin, not find redemption.
The 
point 
is 
not 
to 
turn 
yourself 
into 
a 
robot 
and 
operate 
in 
an
emotionless void, but to recognize your emotions via self-awareness, and
develop strategies to deal with strong and harmful emotions before they
jeopardize performance. Often, all it takes is a quick walk outside or across
the trading floor to clear your flooded mind and return to emotional
equilibrium. For more severe or prolonged negative emotional states, a few
days off might be required.
Since I work at a bank and have client-facing responsibilities, it’s not
practical for me to take a day off when my frustration level is high. Instead,
I still come in to work, but I don’t trade. I write and research, or work on
quantitative projects. The benefit of this approach is that I still stay in touch
with the market but the drawback is that if you are in front of the screens,
there is always going to be the temptation to trade.
If you are worried that you are not disciplined enough to keep your
hands off the keys; find something else to do. Take a day with the kids or go
watch a movie or spend a day reading at the library. Some traders prefer the
mental 
clarity 
and 
cleansing 
that 
comes 
with 
getting 
away 
from 
the
computer and truly disconnecting from the market. I can see that logic.
Whatever you need to do, do not sit there with an angry lump in your
throat, pounding the BUY and SELL buttons out of frustration. This is like
the poker player who loses eight hands in a row, turns red-faced and shoves
all his chips into the pot without even looking at his cards. This is not good.
Euphoria
On trading’s emotional spectrum, the opposite of frustration is euphoria.
In my trading, I tend to have more of a performance issue around euphoria
than frustration. When I am frustrated, I tighten up and wait for outstanding
opportunities and that makes me better, not worse. On the other hand, when
I am doing very well, I sometimes increase my risk more than is justified by
the 
set 
of 
market 
opportunities. 
This 
is 
the 
“house 
money” 
effect 
I
mentioned earlier.
Rarely will I see my P&L crash after a moderate or bad trading period.
My biggest drawdowns almost always come after a sustained period of
overearning. I get overconfident. Cartoon dollar signs flash in my eyes. I
double a position that is deep in the money when I should be taking profit.
There is a particular level of P&L where I know I tend to get sloppy so I
use conditional formatting in my P&L spreadsheet to create an alert. The
month-to-date cell turns orange as the “I’m doing too well” level gets close
and then the cell turns red once the overearning threshold is crossed. For
me, trading well seems to lead to more good trading up until a point and
then 
eventually 
I 
hit 
a 
point 
of 
overconfidence/sloppy 
trading 
which
sometimes leads to a big drawdown.
This 
phenomenon 
is 
also 
called 
“Winner’s Tilt”. Tilt 
is 
usually 
a
condition associated with traders or poker players that are losing or on a run
of bad luck. They go on “tilt” which means they start chasing with bad
cards in bad situations because their minds are flooded or they are seeing
red.
In contrast, Winner’s Tilt is another way of describing the house money
effect: temporary madness brought on by a series of winning trades or
winning days. I can feel this coming on now as usually I feel a bit giddy
when it’s happening and might even find myself singing or joking around
more than usual on the desk.
Thaler and Johnson find strong evidence of the House Money Effect in
their 1990 paper: “Gambling with the house money and trying to break
even: The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice”. The gist of the paper
is that when wagering with uncertainty, we should logically make decisions
based on the probabilities associated with various outcomes and those
decisions should be rational and independent of what happened beforehand.
Instead, we gamble more recklessly when our pockets are full of black
chips. Meanwhile, when we are in a negative position, sitting on a loss, we
find bets that offer the chance of break-even inordinately attractive. Anyone
who has ever traded recognizes these two related forms of bias.
Rational bettors evaluate current odds and do not factor in prior
outcomes.
Be aware of your own emotions at all times and watch for the house
money effect in your trading. Do you trade strong when you are up money?
Or do you trade overaggressive and sloppy? If you are singing on the desk
or yelling with excitement or pumping your fist… Achtung! You are about
to get punched in the mouth.
Here’s a short post I wrote on this topic in 2020.
Joyful yelling signals imminent P&L crash
One of the underappreciated features of working on a trading floor is that
you are allowed to yell; pretty much whenever you want. In contrast, at
other jobs I have held in the past (pizza maker guy at Little Caesar’s, data
entry clerk at Statistics Canada, gas pumper at Texaco)… It would be
super weird to randomly yell out (for example) the number 32 at max
volume. It would generally be frowned upon if I suddenly screamed:
YOU’RE DONE!!! from a government office cubicle.
But on a trading floor, random yelling is perfectly fine!
As much as it is fun to yell on a trading floor, though, it can sometimes be
a 
sign 
of 
euphoria 
and 
overconfidence. 
Overconfidence 
leads 
to
overtrading, poor sizing, confirmation bias and a failure to see alternative
hypotheses (because you know you’re right, why bother thinking about
how you could be wrong, right?) Overconfidence is also one of the main
reasons men underperform women in trading.
Anyway, I am generally a fairly humble guy and I like to think about
alternative hypotheses and all that… But one of my leaks is a particular
type of momentary overconfidence. When I am doing abnormally well, I
get excited; I want to add risk even though I should be reducing. I am
momentarily swept up by a wave of irrational exuberance and should be
thinking about reversion to the mean, not further upside momentum.
Many traders commit this error.
Example: Last Thursday I could sense the market putting on a bit of a
deflation trade (or, more accurately, taking off the popular reflation trade)
and so I bought a USDMXN call to hedge a predicted flurry of coming risk
aversion. Almost instantly, USDMXN ripped higher from 18.76 to 18.85
and our franchise lit up. All at once, a flood of client trades came through
from sales.
Excited about my good timing and all the flow coming in, I yelled “FX IS
BACK!” across the trading floor… A hopeful nod to the idea that the
recent long and painful months of low FX volatility might be over. Then, I
looked over to my chat log and saw one of my brokers had just typed
“Hey 
Brent: 
NICE 
CALL 
MXN!”. 
A 
trader 
on 
the 
options 
desk
congratulated me a few seconds later. I glanced at my P&L and saw one
of my best days in the past two months. And then…
You can probably guess what happened next. Sad trombone. It all went
terribly wrong. Here is the chart:
This is a phenomenon I call the Cheer Hedge. When you cheer for a
position or yell or sing or fist bump on the trading floor—watch out. Your
P&L is about to crash. The reason I call it the Cheer Hedge is that when I
was a manager, whenever one of my traders started singing or cheering
for a position, I always hedged the position in the management book right
away. And the hedge always made money!
I wrote about this in THE ART OF CURRENCY TRADING and I now
make this mistake less than I used to. But knowing the rules and following
the rules is not always the same thing. That’s one reason trading is so
hard.
The takeaway here is that you need to be aware not just of your own
general level of risk appetite but also of how your risk appetite changes
under different conditions. I described the house money or “Winner’s Tilt”
effect in that story and you probably have similar personal experiences.
What makes your risk appetite go up and down? Catalog the factors and
be aware when they kick in. Note that I have just described how euphoria
can lead to overconfidence. I will dig much more deeply into the topic of
overconfidence in the next chapter. Let’s wrap things up with one more
reason traders lose money and then we will move on to Chapter 7.
FAILURE TO ADAPT
Chapter 14 is all about adaptation so I don’t want to front-run myself
here. I just wanted to include “Failure to adapt” here because it is critical,
but also different from the other reasons for failure I describe in this
chapter. While the reasons I listed above are generally reasons traders fail in
the first place, failure to adapt is the reason many good traders end up
failing over time.
Some traders are really good at one type of trading. Maybe it’s breakout
trading, or trend following or mean reversion or cross-market or whatever.
But a single style of trading does not work forever. Markets are by their
nature highly adaptive and efficient. Almost by definition, whatever works
best today is unlikely to work very well in the future. The whole process of
price discovery is built to sniff out abnormal returns. The more people or
algorithms discover a popular trading method, the less likely it is to work
going forward.
Do not form a strong bias toward a particular trading style. Adapt to
what the market is rewarding.
Markets 
are 
forever 
evolving 
and 
traders 
that 
cannot 
adapt 
are
eventually pushed over the cliff by an invisible hand. Flexible, open-
minded, creative and humble traders understand the fact that just because
they are making money today, that does not entitle them to make money
tomorrow.
They must earn tomorrow’s money by thinking harder, working smarter
and discovering new and untapped sources of inefficiency or low-hanging
alpha in the market. Before we end this chapter on kryptonite and how to
fail at trading, I am going to take a quick detour and talk about three
moments in my career where I failed. Then, I extract the lessons.
THREE BIG MISTAKES AND WHAT I LEARNED FROM THEM
While I have read most of the top trading books, the great lessons I have
learned about trading have come from real life experience. In this section I
go over a few specific trading experiences that went wrong for me. I hope
that reading about my mistakes will help you avoid making similar errors in
the future.
1. Thinking it would go on forever (2000)
When I was trading the NASDAQ bubble in the late 1990s, I was in my
late 20’s and appropriately immature. I took my trading account from
$25,000 (the only money I had at the time) to more than $350,000 while
simultaneously using the account to pay expenses including rent, travel, fun
and a black M3. To give you a sense of my overconfidence at the time,
another trader and I called the office we worked at “The Faucet”. Because
all you had to do was walk in and turn it on and… Out came the money. We
were kind of joking, but not really.
Trading is never easy, but the market in 1999 was about as close to easy
as trading could ever get. A simple, disciplined approach that followed
momentum and headlines was fairly easy to monetize if you had confidence
and some courage. The mistake I made was thinking it would go on forever.
I did not have the experience or maturity to realize that any period where
trading delivers outsized or easy returns is, by definition, unsustainable.
Markets can be inefficient for short periods but not forever.
By the end of 2002, my edge was gone, my account was shrinking fast
and I was out looking for a “real job”.
Make hay when the sun is shining. If the market is paying a particular
style of trading, lever up as much as you reasonably can and work as many
hours as you possibly can. It will not last forever. Instead of working my
butt off and squirreling away my gains, I worked when I felt like it because
I thought I could come in and make money whenever I wanted. I had no
sense of urgency.
The positive takeaway from my dumb approach in the late 1990s was
that when a similar moment of outstanding trading opportunity appeared in
2008, I recognized it. I knew it was time to work as hard as humanly
possible because the period of insane volatility and fat pitches was only
temporary. The tuition I paid in 1999 paid off with my best year ever in
2008.
2. Failing to ride the Abenomics trend (2012)
In late 2012, USDJPY was trading near 80.00 while the Japanese stock
market (Nikkei 225 Index) was languishing in the 8,500 area. Japan was in
a deep economic funk. The country was on the wrong end of a multi-decade
deflationary sucking machine that had sapped all confidence and left an
overvalued currency and undervalued financial assets.
That 
all 
changed 
with 
the 
announcement 
of 
Abenomics, 
a 
major
economic program spearheaded by prime minister Shinzo Abe. Abenomics
was a series of initiatives that called for major structural reforms and
massive monetary easing in Japan. Over the next three years, the Nikkei
Index rallied 250% and USDJPY had an eye-popping rally from 80.00 to
125.00. I know three traders that pretty much made their careers on that
move.
For whatever reason, I struggled to close my eyes and go with the move.
Positioning became extreme very quickly (as one might imagine when a
country’s leader decides to devalue the currency and ramp the equity market
higher). I knew very well by that point in my career (I started in 1995) that
when there is a major economic or policy shift, positioning doesn’t matter,
but for some reason I had a mental block and struggled to go with the trend.
I had seen enough times where positioning didn’t matter for extended
periods, so I should have known better. For example, in 2008 (the global
financial crisis, most people were short stocks most of the way down), 2010
(US quantitative easing, the market went short USD and cleaned up) and
2011 (the Eurozone crisis, the market was short EUR all the way down
though punters did get badly rinsed when EURUSD finally bottomed).
Eventually, positioning always matters but in the early and middle
stages of watershed economic and policy changes, the macro is much
bigger than any concern about positions. Thing is, as USDJPY climbed
from 80 to 90 to 100, I struggled massively to trade from the long side.
Instead, I was playing retracements and “big levels” and trying to top tick
one of the biggest economic stories of my lifetime.
I still don’t have a good sense of why I could not get myself to trade the
Abenomics 
trend 
successfully. 
I 
have 
various 
excuses 
but 
no 
good
understanding of where the mental block came from. But when a similar
trade showed up in 2015 (ECB quantitative easing, which drove EURUSD
from 
1.40 
to 
1.05 
in 
pretty 
much 
a 
straight 
line) 
… 
I 
was 
ready. 
I
recognized the similarity of the setup and was strict about trading EUR only
from the short side until after the pair had already dropped massively lower.
A hedge fund PM told me about how the founder of his fund (and the
firm’s biggest risk taker) put a Post-It note on his monitor in 2009 that said:
LONG OR FLAT. At that time, the authorities had just changed all the rules
(suspended mark-to-market, banned short selling, bailed out the banks,
bailed out the car companies, announced quantitative easing, etc.) and he
realized that it was going to be impossible for stocks to go down from that
moment on.
I usually preach “nimble” as a key defining characteristic of successful
short-term traders. There is, however, a time to have one core view and
stick to it. Identifying these rare moments where the markets will be one-
way for an extended period can be the difference between an uninspired
trading career and a great one.
3. Sprinting out of the gates
One recent December, after a decent trading year, I decided I was going
to try something different in the new year. I had been pretty consistent over
the previous 5 or 6 years, putting up excellent but not amazing yearly P&L
and I thought: “I have hit a plateau. I want to do something bigger. Trade
bigger. Double last year’s P&L.” So instead of starting slowly and building
a base of P&L before adding meaningful risk, I took a different approach.
It just so happened that I had a very strong view that the USD would
sell off in the new year and so I decided to go all in right off the bat and
take a ton of risk on January 1. Take a guess what happened. I got
absolutely crushed, losing ½ of my prior year’s P&L in the first four weeks.
This put me in a devastating hole where I could barely trade for a while as I
scraped back and precariously avoided getting to the point where I would
need to worry about my YTD stop loss.
Sprinting out of the gates is a bad strategy!
No matter how strong your view at the start of the year, there is too
much path dependence involved if you go hard on Day 1. Even if you are
placing what you think is an 80/20 bet, if that 20% comes up, you are so
hobbled that you threaten your entire year. It’s not worth the risk. You are
essentially betting your entire year on a small sample. This is not good!
I spent the next six months scratching back to flat and managed to finish
up a tiny bit on the year. But those 11 months were a grueling and painful
marathon. The following year, needless to say, I started with smaller risk
and successfully built a base before taking on larger risk.
Sometimes you have to do the wrong thing to be reminded why you
need to do the right thing. You cannot make your year in January, but you
can lose it. Learn from my mistake. Start slow, build the base and be like a
call option with limited downside and unlimited upside. We will dig into the
concepts of path dependence and risk management in Chapter 11.
That’s it for Chapter 6 and that ends our initial discussion of trader
kryptonite. Now let’s dig even deeper and talk about bias and irrational
behavior, and how traders can recognize and avoid bad thinking and bad
habits.
63. Check out this, for example: https://www.winton.com/research/historical-performance-of-
trend-following
64. https://macro-ops.com/notes-druckenmiller-real-vision-interview/
65. http://www.chartpattern.com/articles/40greatest-trades-article.pdf
66. In-sample is data you analyze to come up with a strategy. Out-of-sample data is a
separate set of data you use to test the strategy. This helps avoid datamining and
snooping problems because almost any set of data will eventually yield what looks like a
decent strategy if you torture it long enough. If you want to learn more about backtesting
and the pitfalls of datamining, there is a lesser-known book called Fooled by Technical
Analysis: The perils of charting, back-testing and data mining by Michael Harris. It is
available online.
67. Lo, Repin and Steenbarger: Fear and Greed in Financial Markets: A Clinical Study of
Day-Traders (2005)