O
CHAPTER 7
SMART PEOPLE DO STUPID THINGS
Rational, unbiased trading
ne of the great a-ha moments of my life was the realization, not so
many years ago, that smart people still do stupid things. All the time.
Once you recognize this, the world starts to make a lot more sense as you
observe both your own actions (assuming you are smart), and the actions of
others. In this chapter we will delve into some of the ways that even the
smartest traders act irrationally, and then we will try to find remedies for
these biased behaviors.
In Chapter 3 you learned that superior performance on the Cognitive
Reflection Test (CRT) predicts trading success. In other words, traders that
rely on System 1 and heuristics (thinking fast) will underperform traders
that favor System 2 and logic (thinking slow). There is a conundrum here
though: trading requires fast decision making!
The 
Alpha 
Trader 
needs 
to 
make 
quick 
decisions 
that 
are 
not
contaminated 
by 
behavioral 
bias. 
There 
is 
an 
inherent 
conflict 
here,
obviously, because fast thinking generally relies more on shortcuts while
slower thinking relies more on rational logic. In this section, we will discuss
a host of behavioral biases, and then think about how to counter them.
High-performing traders understand behavioral bias and are self-aware
about how their own bias negatively impacts their decision-making. They
know that even the best, most knowledgeable trader is subject to many
types of behavioral bias.
The amazing thing about most behavioral bias is that it works on you,
even if you know about it. This is similar to the way optical illusions work.
Even 
if 
you 
have 
been 
told 
about 
the 
exact 
way 
your 
thoughts 
are
malfunctioning, it doesn’t matter. I can tell you there are no gray dots in the
intersections in Figure 7.1, but you will see them anyway! You are a silly
human just like the rest of us.
Image: Donnelly
It’s important for you to internalize the fact that mere awareness of a
bias does not make you immune to it. So first we will examine the different
types of trader bias, then discuss techniques to deal with each. This chapter
will outline the types of bias that vex traders, and present specific methods
you can use to avoid, or at least reduce, their potential damage.
Trader Bias #1: Overconfidence
The only thing I am 100% sure of is that anyone who is 100% sure of
anything is not worth listening to.
MATTHEW GITTINS (a well-known FX spirit guide), 2019
As mentioned in Part 1, overconfidence is the most important and most
devastating 
bias 
in 
trading. 
The 
line 
between 
confidence 
and
overconfidence is wafer thin.
Confidence is critical but overconfidence is deadly.
If you think all your trades are 5-star home run/amazeballs ideas, your
ability to determine the expected value of those trades is likely to be
hampered 
by 
this 
overly 
rose-colored 
view 
of 
the 
trade’s 
prospects.
Overconfidence leads to overtrading, poor assessments of probability, and
rigid, closed-minded assessments. Overconfident traders are also less likely
to 
explore 
alternative 
hypotheses 
and 
will 
embrace 
confirmatory
information much more openly than contradictory info.
Overconfident traders:
take too much risk
trade too frequently
behave recklessly
make poor assessments of probability
do not keep an open mind
overweight evidence that confirms their idea and ignore evidence that
does not
fail to consider alternative hypotheses
refuse to admit when they are wrong
In the 2020 Super Bowl, the San Francisco 49ers were up 13-10 early in
the fourth quarter. They intercepted a pass to take a commanding 20-10 lead
and the entire 49ers defense ran into the end zone for a show-offy group
celebration and team photograph.
Even if you are not an NFL football fan, you can probably guess what
happened next. The opposing quarterback, Patrick Mahomes put up 21
straight points. The Kansas City Chiefs won 31-20 and Mahomes is now
my favorite quarterback of all time. The San Francisco 49ers were reckless
and loose. They failed to consider the alternative hypothesis (that they
might lose).
A less cocky team in that spot would be thinking about finishing and
winning the Super Bowl, not assembling like a group of clowns in the end
zone while the opposing team game-plans the next possession.
There is nothing more dangerous than a team that celebrates as if they
won the championship before the game’s over. By the same token, there is
no trader more likely to dump a huge wad of cash than the one who pumps
his fist, celebrating a trade he hasn’t squared up yet.
Don’t do this in the middle of a football game! Photo by Doug Benc (AP Images)
Perhaps surprisingly, research shows that the more difficult a task, the
more overconfident people tend to be. This is obviously a problem when it
comes to finance, given its extraordinary challenges. Research shows that
training and experience can reduce miscalibration (of confidence), but only
to a minor degree. You must appreciate and understand that we all tend
toward overconfidence. Remain humble and do your best to consider what
you don’t know or might be missing in a given situation.
For a fascinating read on overconfidence and miscalibration, Google:
“Calibration of Probabilities: The State of the Art to 1980” by Lichtenstein,
Fischoff and Philips. Not only is the paper full of interesting insights, it was
scanned from a typewritten document presented to the US Navy in 1981, so
it has a cool retro vibe. And it’s not boring.
There are three types of overconfidence:
1. Overestimation, where people tend to overestimate how well they
will perform a task.
2. Overplacement, where people grossly overestimate their rank or
placement among others. This is also known as the “better-than-
average effect”. Most individuals think of themselves as better than
average at most tasks, even though it is not mathematically possible
for more than 50% of individuals to be better than average. There has
been considerable research on this topic. One of the earliest studies
showed that 93% people surveyed in the US and 69% of Swedes
thought they were better than average drivers!
68
3. Miscalibration. This occurs when an individual believes his ability
to estimate something (say, the price of a stock) is better than the
reality. His confidence interval should be wide but it is narrow.
Research shows that overconfidence can have positive consequences in
many 
aspects 
of 
life. 
Overconfidence 
helps 
with 
ambition, 
morale,
persistence, and helps individuals signal a better-than-reality level of skill
or knowledge to peers. Overconfident people are viewed by peers as more
competent than properly calibrated people.
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
when 
it 
comes 
to 
trading 
(and 
investing):
overconfidence is unambiguously negative.
There 
is 
so 
much 
research 
showing 
that 
overconfidence 
leads 
to
negative outcomes in both trading and investing that it’s hard to know
where to begin. The first study I want to discuss
69 
uses miscalibration to
assess subjects’ potential overconfidence and then compares that to their
trading performance. A standard psychological questionnaire to measure
calibration asks subjects to give a low and high estimate for difficult
questions such as:
Martin Luther King’s age at death.
Length of the Nile River (in miles).
Number of countries that are members of OPEC.
Number of books in the Old Testament.
Weight of an empty Boeing 747 (in kilograms).
And so on. Properly calibrated individuals will write down low to high
ranges that include the correct answer most of the time. Overconfident or
miscalibrated individuals will answer with ranges that are too tight and
often do not include the correct answer.
In the Biais et al. study, subject miscalibration was measured and then
subjects were grouped into quartiles from most to least miscalibrated. The
subjects were then placed in an experimental asset trading market. At the
end, trading profits were checked against miscalibration to check for a
relationship. 
As 
you 
might 
guess, 
there 
was 
a 
strong 
relationship.
Miscalibrated individuals performed worst and well-calibrated individuals
killed it (see Figure 7.2).
Image: Donnelly, with data from the paper cited above
This gets at the idea of knowing what you know and knowing what you
don’t know. If you have no idea about an answer, you should answer with
an extremely wide range. People that don’t have a good understanding of
their own lack of knowledge perform poorly in this trading experiment and
I believe these experimental results match real life outcomes. It is important
to know what you know and also to be humble about what you don’t know.
As Mark Twain or Josh Billings once said:
“It ain’t what you don’t know that gets you into trouble. It’s what you know
for sure that just ain’t so.”
Alpha traders have intellectual humility.
Prolonged time in the market inevitably beats the overconfidence out of
you. Traders who have survived for many years understand that no matter
how smooth the sailing is right now, there is always another storm just over
the horizon; no matter how much you know, you barely know anything.
The 
study 
just 
referenced 
shows 
a 
direct 
connection 
between
miscalibration and trading performance. There is often a more indirect
connection 
too, 
as 
overconfidence 
leads 
to 
overtrading 
which 
reduces
performance 
through 
higher 
commission 
or 
bid/offer 
spread 
paid 
plus
reduced trade selectivity.
Patient, well-calibrated and aggressive traders will trade less often than
impatient traders who always think the market is wrong and they are right.
Properly-calibrated traders understand the public signal (the market price) is
probably correct most of the time and they need a very strong reason before
believing in the superiority of their own private signal (their alternative
view of where the price should be or where it’s going).
If the market was always right, you could never make money. On the
other hand, markets are generally very efficient; they are usually right, or
correct themselves quickly. You should always give the market the benefit
of the doubt and think about what you might be missing before you decide
to challenge the wisdom of the crowd (i.e., the current market price) by
entering a trade.
Another excellent study conducted in 2001 looked at six years’ worth of
retail discount brokerage trading records for more than 35,000 households
70
.
The study concluded that men executed 45% more trades than women and
this overtrading was the primary reason women outperformed men by about
1% (net returns).
In another study
71
, researchers measured subjects’ confidence and then
set up ten experimental asset markets. They constructed some markets of
overconfident traders and some of people with a more rational view of their
own abilities. Prices in the rational market tracked the fundamental asset
value fairly accurately while the market of overconfident traders saw higher
prices, greater volatility, higher trading volumes and more bubbles.
Anyone watching the NASDAQ in 1999 or bitcoin in 2017 (and 2021)
can 
see 
how 
this 
experiment 
is 
an 
accurate 
reflection 
of 
reality.
Overconfident traders think they are right and the market is wrong. They
overvalue their own opinion (private signal) and underweight the market
price (public signal).
The majority of the research shows that women are less overconfident
than men and that they outperform men in trading and investing.
…girls are not necessarily less confident than boys, but rather they are
less overconfident.
72
…although both men and women were overconfident, undergraduate
men were especially overconfident when incorrect.
73
That last quote is from a paper called: “Highly confident but wrong.”
What a great title. It makes me smile. And here is the conclusion of an even
more topical study:
This 
paper 
studies 
performance 
predictions 
in 
the 
7-item 
Cognitive
Reflection Test (CRT) and whether they differ by gender. After participants
completed the CRT, they predicted their own (i), the other participants’ (ii),
men’s (iii), and women’s (iv) number of correct answers. In keeping with
existing literature, men scored higher on the CRT than women and both
men and women were too optimistic about their own performance. When
we compare gender-specific predictions, we observe that men think they
perform significantly better than other men and do so significantly more
than women.
74
That quote is particularly relevant because it comes from a study of
gender differences related to the Cognitive Reflection Test. Recall the CRT
is the test we covered in Chapter 4. Performance on the CRT is evidence of
rationality and predicts trading success. A well-calibrated estimate of CRT
performance is also likely to predict trading success.
There is a strange irony that aggressive Type A males are often attracted
to 
trading 
and 
this 
sub-category 
is 
(in 
general) 
most 
likely 
to 
be
overconfident. Then again, it also makes sense. Risk-seeking behaviors and
overconfidence tend to go together (if you think you’re invincible, you take
more risk) while less overconfident but risk-averse individuals are not
interested in, or likely to be good at, trading.
There is much more research I could present but I think you get the two
main points:
1. Women outperform men in trading, mostly because they are less
overconfident.
2. Overconfident traders trade too much and underperform those with
well-calibrated confidence.
How to combat overconfidence
1. Respect the market. The market is not always right, but it is not
often wrong.
2. Do a pre-mortem on your trades. Picture the trade going wrong and
see if you can imagine what might have caused the failure. This puts
you in the mindset opposite to overconfidence. Instead of assuming
it’s the best trade ever and you are smarter than the market, you
assume it’s a failure and ask yourself why.
3. Be aggressively open-minded and stay humble. No matter how
confident 
you 
are, 
there’s 
still 
a 
good 
chance 
you 
are 
wrong.
Embrace the fact that part of being a good trader is accepting that
you will frequently be wrong. Daniel Negreanu (one of the best
poker players in the world) still loses countless hands.
4. Bounce trade ideas off people you respect. I send out my trade ideas
every day and the feedback I get is tremendously useful on many
levels. First, people that disagree with me will present reasons they
disagree and I can assess these reasons and recalibrate my confidence
level. If the reasons are strong enough, I might even change my mind
or exit the trade. Second, I get a good sense of sentiment. If everyone
agrees 
with 
me, 
the 
market 
is 
most 
likely 
positioned 
that 
way
already. If everyone disagrees, I am probably in the minority position
and if I can comfortably rebut the counterarguments, my idea is more
powerful.
Trader bias # 2 : Overtrading
Trading can be incredibly fun. That’s good. But that is also a problem!
Enjoyment should always be a side benefit of trading and not the primary
objective. The first objective must always be profit. Very often, traders will
get involved in the market out of boredom or out of a need for stimulation.
This gets them into trades that have weak (or no) logic and low or negative
expected value. Remember: tight / aggressive. Look for juicy, low hanging
fruit and pluck it. Don’t climb up into the treetops and risk a big fall. Be
patient.
How powerful is trading as a stimulant? Very. This is from a 2001
study
75
:
The psychological processes underlying the anticipation and experience
of monetary prospects and outcomes would appear to play an important
role in gambling and in other behaviors that entail decision making under
uncertainty. In this regard, it is striking that the activations seen in the
NAc, 
SLEA, 
VT, 
and 
GOb 
in 
response 
to 
monetary 
prospects 
and
outcomes overlap those observed in response to cocaine infusions in
subjects addicted to cocaine.
In case you are wondering: NAc (nucleus accumbens), SLEA, VT, and
GOb are four reward-related brain regions. And the following is from
Andrew Lo’s testimony to Congress on Hedge Funds, Systemic Risk, and
the Crisis of 2007-2008:
… the same neural circuitry that responds to cocaine, food, and sex—the
mesolimbic dopamine reward system that releases dopamine in the
nucleus accumbens—has been shown to be activated by monetary gain
as well.
Both the anticipation and receipt of monetary gains trigger the reward
circuitry of the brain. Human nature is to seek activation of this circuitry
both consciously and unconsciously. You must come to grips with the fact
that trading often involves sitting there doing nothing, just waiting for a
great opportunity. Unfortunately, the numbers moving up and down on that
screen are like squirrels, and you are a dog.
Various commentators, including Jean-Paul Sartre, have commented
that war is “…hours of boredom interspersed with moments of terror”.
Trading can often be the same. There is a strange temporal rhythm to
trading where time speeds up and slows down depending on what is going
on.
I remember instances after a major economic announcement or market
event where I did 5 or 6 big trades, got into a position and out of a position
and made hundreds of thousands of dollars. The time elapsed felt like 15
minutes. Then, later in the day when things were quiet, I would go look at
the 1-minute chart and could not see enough detail to capture what had
happened. I would have to go to a 1-second chart to see the levels at which I
did those 5 or 6 trades and I would realize that the entire sequence, which
felt like 15 minutes, actually took more like 90 seconds.
This 
time 
dilation 
is 
a 
common 
feature 
in 
sports, 
military 
action,
trading, and other fast-moving pursuits that require rapid-fire, high-stakes
decision making. Of course, the stakes are much higher in the military but
the mental effect where time slows down is similar.
Once you get that feeling of excitement, the in the zone moments where
the P&L piles up so fast you can’t believe your eyes—you want that feeling
again. Problem is, you can’t get that feeling by trading low probability set
ups. Instead, those low EV trades give you that “why did I do that” feeling.
You can’t trade to chase a rush. Your only goal each day should be to
maximize P&L.
In 2018, Stephen Brown of NYU et al. conducted a cool study where
they dug through vehicle ownership records and found the make and model
of car driven by more than 1,000 hedge fund managers
76
. Then, they
compared fund performance to car type and found this intuitive result:
Using a novel data set of automobile purchases by hedge fund managers,
this 
paper 
exploits 
cross-sectional 
variation 
in 
vehicle 
attributes 
to
investigate the effects of sensation seeking on investment behavior. We
argue that the purchase of a powerful sports car signals the intent to drive
in a spirited fashion and therefore conveys a propensity for sensation
seeking. Our results empirically validate the advice given by some hedge
fund allocators to avoid managers who drive fancy sports cars. We find
that managers who own performance cars take on more investment risk
than do other managers, without being compensated with higher returns.
Therefore, performance car owners deliver lower Sharpe and information
ratios than do non-performance car owners.
The incremental risk-taking by sports car enthusiasts extends beyond
financial markets to the fund operations arena. Sensation seekers are
more likely to terminate their funds, disclose violations on their Form
ADVs, 
and 
exhibit 
greater 
operational 
risk. 
Sensation 
seeking 
also
shapes trading behavior. Managers who embrace powerful sports cars
trade more frequently, actively, and unconventionally than do managers
who eschew such cars. They also gravitate toward lottery-like stocks.
Trading hurts the performance of sensation seekers more than it hurts the
performance of sensation avoiders.
Here is another excerpt:
… sports car drivers underperform non-sports car drivers by 2.92% per
year while minivan drivers outperform non-minivan drivers by 3.22% per
year.
Jesse Livermore did not drive a mini-van! :] This is more evidence that
you can be risk-averse and still succeed as a trader. The researchers also
found that hedge fund managers who received more speeding tickets also
underperformed, which is consistent with the idea of sensation-seeking
leading to more risk but not better returns. Other studies also confirm:
sensation-seeking traders overtrade, pay more commission, and perform
worse than non-sensation-seeking traders
77
.
You need to be honest with yourself. Just like it’s OK to be risk averse,
it is OK to be sensation-seeking or boredom-averse. You just need to be
aware of it and institute a set of rules to control your behavior and manage
your weaknesses. You also need to accept that this sensation-seeking or
disinhibition is a weakness you will need to deal with throughout your
career. Attitudes toward risk are highly innate and very difficult to modify
even with the healthiest, most growth-oriented mindset.
Sensation-seeking and gambling often go hand in hand. To get a sense
of whether you are trading to feed your desire for excitement (i.e., as a form
of gambling) take a look at the following excerpt from the DSM-V. The
DSM-V or DSM5 is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders. 
It 
contains 
descriptions, 
symptoms, 
and 
other 
criteria 
for
identifying mental disorders and it is the authoritative guide to mental
illness throughout most of the world.
Here, 
I 
have 
taken 
the 
section 
on 
identifying 
gambling 
disorder
(previously 
known 
as 
pathological 
gambling) 
and 
replaced 
the 
word
“gambling” with “trading”. Do any of these line items sound familiar to
you?
78
A diagnosis of gambling trading disorder requires at least four of the
following during the past year:
1. Need to trade with increasing amount of money to achieve the desired excitement
2. Restless or irritable when trying to cut down or stop trading
3. Repeated unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back on or stop trading
4. Frequent thoughts about trading (such as reliving past trading experiences, planning
the next trade, thinking of ways to get money to trade)
5. Often trading when feeling distressed
6. After losing money trading, often returning to get even (referred to as “chasing” one’s
losses)
7. Lying to conceal trading activity
8. Jeopardizing or losing a significant relationship, job, or educational/career opportunity
because of trading
9. Relying on others to help with money problems caused by trading
Many traders would recognize their own thought patterns in that list. A
trader who scores himself as 10 out of 10 for risk appetite might see himself
in five or six of those behaviors. Think about these criteria for gambling
disorder and be honest with yourself about how trading impacts your life. It
should be an enjoyable, intellectually stimulating profession, not a way to
achieve a gambler’s high.
Jesse 
Livermore 
is 
celebrated 
as 
a 
trading 
hero 
but 
it 
is 
worth
remembering that he took his own life after going bankrupt for a third time,
after his second divorce. He is a trading hero and a cautionary tale wrapped
into one.
The process and mechanics of trading and gambling overlap. Both
involve risk management, probability, randomness, risk of ruin, emotion,
bias, and irrational human beings. Bad trading can often be very much like
casino gambling. It is impulsive, emotional and has a negative expected
value.
Excellent trading deals with incomplete information and variance of a
game like blackjack, but has a positive expected value, like a professional
poker player at a table of weaker opponents.
One final note here: The term “gambling” usually describes a form of
entertainment where the gambler’s odds or expectation are negative. Some
forms of gambling, like poker, can have a positive expectation if the player
is highly skilled. I would say that when a highly-skilled and highly-
disciplined poker player sits down at a table full of tourists or recreational
poker players, that is not gambling.
The skilled player has a significant mathematical edge. Poker is much
closer to trading than most forms of gambling because it offers a small
group of highly-skilled players the ability to generate abnormal returns
consistently. In other words, poker is skill, not luck. Research confirms this
unequivocally.
I 
think 
it 
is 
interesting 
that 
research 
also 
shows 
that 
hedge 
fund
managers who are skilled in Texas Hold ‘em outperform those who are not.
Here’s the conclusion reached by Yan Lu, Sandra Mortal and Sugata Ray in
a 2019 research paper
79
:
We find that hedge fund managers who do well in poker tournaments
have significantly better fund performance. This effect is stronger for
tournaments with more entrants, larger buy-ins, larger cash prizes and for
managers who win multiple tournaments, suggesting poker skills are
correlated with fund management skills.
Like Taylor in Billions. This further solidifies the skill link between
poker and trading and separates them from luck-based gambling such as
roulette, 
craps 
and 
(mostly) 
blackjack
80
. 
Trading, 
like 
poker, 
involves
significant 
variance 
and 
path 
dependence 
but 
long-run 
outcomes 
are
primarily driven by skill. We will talk much more about skill, luck, and
variance in Chapter 11. For now, remember:
If you want to gamble, go to a casino.
A substantial portion of investor underperformance can be explained
simply by the fact that investors are active when they should be doing
nothing. This is proven again and again by the consistent and sizeable
outperformance of index funds vs. active managers and by the poor returns
in retail accounts. Most of the time you should be doing nothing!
This is a simple concept but one that is extremely difficult to put into
practice in real life.
Your default mode should always be to do nothing.
Flat is the most powerful position in trading. When you have no
position, you are unbiased, ready to pounce, and unconstrained by any prior
view or notions. You are not anchored on any price or level. You are most
open-minded and nimble when you have no position.
Yet people often feel bad when they are flat, especially if they remain
flat for many days. “I’m not putting my capital to work”, they might think.
Or “My boss is gonna think I’m lazy.” Human nature equates doing nothing
with laziness, and in most jobs that’s a pretty accurate assessment! An
employee who sits there and does nothing over multiple days is probably
not doing a great job in most roles. In trading, though, the opposite can be
true. Quite often, the trader doing nothing is the wolf waiting silently in the
long grass. Ready to pounce. An Alpha Trader.
Take pride and comfort in your ability to remain flat. The very nature of
the tight/aggressive framework in trading is that you should be flat as often
as possible and only engage when the expected value of a trade is high.
Flat is good. A trader with no position has no bias.
How to combat overtrading
1. Think about your motivations for trading. Do you overtrade?
Why? Self-awareness is key before any action can be taken to fix the
problem.
2. Create speedbumps that must be cleared before you can trade.
Maybe that means filling in a quick pre-trade checklist. Maybe it
means going through an execution desk instead of pressing the
buttons yourself. If all you have to do is press a button to trade, you
can easily become the lab rat pushing the little button for more
cocaine. If your process includes a speedbump or two, it is harder to
overtrade.
The 
idea 
is 
to 
create 
friction 
around 
unwanted 
behaviors. 
For
example, I find when I leave my orders with a broker, I am much less
likely to cancel them than if I watch them myself. It can be rude or
annoying to cancel a close order with a broker and so the bar to
cancel is higher. This is good. You should not be cancelling your take
profit sell order just because “it looks bid”. It always looks bid at the
high.
At one particular bank I worked at, we had the ability to trade at any
time through an app on our phones. Most other banks did not have
that functionality. As you might expect, the ability to trade on your
phone was incredibly convenient but it also led to overtrading. It
takes particularly high conviction for me to contact a trader in Hong
Kong or London and put a trade on, but if all I need to do is open my
phone and press a couple of buttons, I am much more likely to put on
any trade idea that pops into my head at whatever time of night.
A good trading process usually involves some sort of written trade
plan. It is not always practical to completely write up a trade before
you put it on, given that short-term trading often requires quick
thinking and rapid execution. That said, once you have the trade on,
you usually have plenty of time to write it up afterwards. By doing
so, you justify the trade, you game plan it and you may find out that
the trade was a dumb idea before you get stopped out. Have the
flexibility to get right back out of a trade if you realize as you write it
up that the idea is weak.
3. Create hurdles and barriers between you and the market. If you
can trade with a single click, you are going to trade more. If you can
trade on your phone at 3 a.m. (and your phone is on), you will trade
more. If you need to convene a 10-person investment committee to
vote on a new investment, you are going to trade less. If you need to
log into Bloomberg or call someone at 3 a.m. in order to execute, you
will trade less.
Obviously this is a continuum and there can be huge negatives to
slowing down your process, too. But knowing that overtrading and
too much activity is the biggest leak for many traders, what can you
do to slow down your execution process? What is the right balance
of speed/accessibility and restraint/selective trading? I would say it’s
too 
easy 
for 
most 
people 
to 
trade. 
Can 
you 
create 
a 
trading
framework that allows you to express your views but that also
constrains any impulsive urge to jump into new trades or out of
existing ones?
4. Stop staring at the screen. Take a break from the screens once in a
while. Staring at price action will lead to suboptimal decisions
triggered by price action and random noise. Once you have a position
on, let it breathe. Price action is mostly meaningless. Staring at the
screen ups the amount of stimulus you receive each day and may
lead to excess action.
5. Set a maximum number of trades per period. This needs to be
logical and based on your trading history. Answer this question:
When I am trading well, how many trades do I execute per day or per
week? Then set a maximum that you feel is close to optimal. A lower
number forces you to be more selective (and tight/aggressive). On
the other hand, your returns will suffer if you set the limit too low.
Market conditions should be the primary determinant of when and
how much you trade, but a maximum trades figure anchors you
around the appropriate level of activity.
My time horizon is short and my trades usually last one hour to three
days. If I take more than two or three positions in a day, I am usually
overtrading. As a market maker, I tend to trade much more than an
average hedge fund PM and this has become a bad habit for me at
times. Client trades provide a convenient excuse for a market maker
to take on risk that makes no sense. Instead of covering a client trade
for a small profit or loss, the temptation can be to justify the position
and ride it. It’s the endowment effect again… We overvalue trades
we have on. It’s dumb, but we all do it.
A similar rule you can set for yourself (which is easier to follow if
you are mostly a day trader) is to set a maximum number of line
items. When I was day trading stocks, I never had more than three
positions. There is a good reason for this. When things go wrong, it’s
hard to manage 14 line items in your book and anyway, most traders
will find there is high correlation between their positions. Instead of
spreading yourself thin, focus on one or two core positions and put
all 
your 
risk 
where 
it 
belongs. 
Diversification 
has 
benefits 
in
investing but good trading is all about concentrated risk.
6. When you put on a trade, establish firm stop loss, take profit and
reassessment triggers. Then, do your very best not to take the trade
off before one of them hits. Overtrading doesn’t just mean putting on
too many trades. Often it means taking off trades prematurely for no
reason. It is hard to stick with a trade when nothing is going on but
remember that most of the movement in a security comes in short
bursts of activity that take very little time. Most of the time is boring,
random drift.
Let’s say you spend an hour analyzing spreadsheets, thinking about
positioning, planning out your trade, etc. Your idea is solid, all the
planets are aligned and you decide it is time to go short Venn
Corporation (VENN). Let’s go.
You sell 1,000 shares of VENN, risking 1% to make 3%. Two hours
later, the market is quiet. VENN has been stuck in a tiny range and
you’re bored. A random headline comes out that is vaguely bullish
one of VENN’s competitors and a flash of a thought crosses your
mind that VENN might rally in sympathy. You press a few buttons
and cut the trade.
The stock rallies 30 cents then drops a buck as the market decides the
story is good for the competitor, but bad for VENN. Now your trade
idea should have been 70 cents in the money and instead you cut for
reasons you don’t even really understand. You are now in a tricky
position. Do you get back in at worse levels? Or just forget about it?
Man, if this thing drops 3% this afternoon …
(EVIL VOICE IN YOUR HEAD: And you know it’s gonna drop…
‘Cuz you cut like a chicken!)
If you had input your stop loss and your take profit in an automated
system 
and 
controlled 
your 
impulsive 
desire 
to 
press 
buttons…
Things would be so much better. Remember, once you have a
position on, you are steaming hot bias stew. Your first assumption
should always be: the original plan was the best.
Stick to the original plan unless material new information emerges.
Or, better yet, just stick to your original parameters every time. Sure,
new 
information 
might 
matter, 
but 
your 
interpretation 
of 
new
information once you have a position on is often biased. Always err
on the side of inaction. When you have a position on, you should
almost always ride it out until the stop loss or take profit hits. Not
always. But almost always.
7. If you have a constant need for activity, find productive outlets.
Every time you have an idea for a backtest, trading strategy or
analysis, write it down so that you have a list of projects to pursue
when you are bored. I am constantly jotting down stuff like “What
hour of the day has the highest volume in USDJPY?” “Does bitcoin
outperform on weekends?” etc. Then, when I’m bored, I can work on
these questions instead of sitting there twitching as I try to keep my
fingers off the BUY and SELL buttons.
When in doubt: Do nothing.
There is a fascinating 1975 essay by Charles Ellis called: “The Loser’s
Game”. It is mostly fascinating because even back in 1975 it was obvious
(and 
easily 
proven 
with 
data) 
that 
active 
management 
of 
investment
portfolios consistently underperformed passive management. This is still
true today but for some reason it took the world about 40 years to catch on
and now money is finally flooding out of active funds and into passive
indexes.
The essay is worth a read; there are some great analogies in it and it
goes into some detail on why active will underperform passive by definition
due to transaction costs. Later in this book, I show just how dramatic
transaction costs are as a drag on your performance. The more you trade,
the more money you leak. Remember this: All other things being equal it is
a fundamental truth of trading and investing… The more you trade, the
more you pay.
Make fewer, higher quality decisions.
This is the essence of the tight/aggressive way. This is a core behavior
of the Alpha Trader.
Trader bias # 3 : Confirmation bias
Faced with the choice of changing one’s mind or proving that there is no
need to do so, almost everyone gets busy on the proof.
JOHN KENNETH GALBRAITH
There is a good chance you already know about confirmation bias. It is
one of the best-known and most-discussed forms of bias out there. It is
most-discussed because it is critically important and hard to fight, even
when you understand it.
Confirmation bias is the tendency for humans to seek and incorporate
information that supports their existing view, and ignore or reject new
information that does not.
Instead 
of 
impartially 
evaluating 
new 
evidence 
in 
the 
search 
for
unbiased conclusions about the market, people tend to stick to their current
view and then look for evidence to support it, while ignoring evidence that
does not.
While Kahneman and Tversky tend to be the names we most associate
with 
behavioral 
bias, 
confirmation 
bias 
was 
discovered 
by 
British
psychologist Peter Wason. His experiment was simple. He gave subjects the
series: 2-4-6, then told them it satisfied his Pattern Rule. He then told
subjects they could construct other sets of three numbers to test their
assumptions about the Pattern Rule. Each time the subject showed the
experimenter 
their 
three 
numbers, 
the 
experimenter 
would 
tell 
them
whether or not it satisfied the Pattern Rule until the subject was confident
they figured out the rule.
Subjects would test either a series like 8-10-12 (satisfies rule) and 22-
24-26 (satisfies rule) or 3-6-9 (satisfies rule) and 5-10-15 (satisfies rule) or
4-8-12 (satisfies rule) and 10-20-30 (satisfies rule) until eventually most
would answer that the Pattern Rule is either:
Count up by 2’s
Count up by a multiple
Some formula like add the first two numbers to get the third number.
But whatever answer people came to, they tended to get an idea and
then test it over and over until they were certain it was right. What they did
not do, generally, was try deliberately-wrong sequences to see if those
might work.
The actual Pattern Rule was “any three numbers that increase in value”.
Anyone that tested 1-2-3, for example, would have instantly ruled out all
three patterns listed above. But subjects were always busy testing patterns
that fit their rule without ever thinking to test those that did not. Instead of
looking for more and more evidence that their hypothesis was correct, they
should have tried sequences that did not fit their hypothesis, in an attempt to
invalidate it.
Look harder for evidence and arguments against your hypothesis.
Confirmation bias is one of the most harmful bugs in human reasoning.
You see it everywhere in media and on Twitter as consumers of information
ignore competing views and augment their existing opinions with more and
more confirmatory evidence.
The concept is especially disruptive in trading and investing because it
inhibits good thinking, locks us into a view, and blocks out useful non-
confirmatory information. Also, other types of bias (such as the endowment
effect) work together with confirmation bias and make it very difficult for
investors to change their mind once they take a position in the market. You
see confirmation bias in action almost every day on a trading floor.
Example: You have been following Zzap Corp. for months and you
bought the stock at good levels. Everyone has been excitedly waiting for the
hot new Zzap Flidget Fone to come out. A headline hits:
*ZZAP REPORTS 90-DAY FLIDGET FONE LAUNCH DELAY DUE TO
SUPPLIER ISSUES.
An unbiased market watcher might think that is bearish. The stock drops
4%. But you are a fan of Zzap, you are long the stock and so you might
think something more like: “Meh, this isn’t big news, the phone’s still
coming out. It’s not even Zzap’s fault. This is an overreaction. The stock’s
gonna bounce.”
Meanwhile, two analysts downgrade the stock. They say this is further
evidence that Zzap’s supply chain is overly reliant on a single chip supplier
in Vietnam and that the supplier is severely mismanaged. The stock drops
another 4%. You might think: “Man, I can’t believe how much the market is
overreacting here!”
On the other hand, bears are probably yelling: “I knew this was gonna
happen!”
How to combat confirmation bias
1) 
Read 
about 
confirmation 
bias. 
It 
is 
one 
of 
the 
most 
catalogued
psychological 
phenomena 
out 
there 
and 
the 
research 
is 
surprisingly
interesting. Confirmation bias is powerful and kind of frightening because it
severely compromises the human capacity for reason. For example, if you
take two people who have opposite views on a divisive issue like capital
punishment, 
and 
give 
them 
new 
information, 
here’s 
what 
happens.
Excerpted from an excellent article on confirmation bias from the New
Yorker
81
.
One of the most famous of these [confirmation bias experiments] was
conducted, again, at Stanford. For this experiment, researchers rounded
up 
a 
group 
of 
students 
who 
had 
opposing 
opinions 
about 
capital
punishment. Half the students were in favor of it and thought that it
deterred crime; the other half were against it and thought that it had no
effect on crime.
The students were asked to respond to two studies. One provided data in
support of the deterrence argument, and the other provided data that
called it into question. Both studies—you guessed it—were made up, and
had been designed to present what were, objectively speaking, equally
compelling statistics. The students who had originally supported capital
punishment rated the pro-deterrence data highly credible and the anti-
deterrence data unconvincing; the students who’d originally opposed
capital punishment did the reverse. At the end of the experiment, the
students were asked once again about their views. Those who’d started
out pro-capital punishment were now even more in favor of it; those who’d
opposed it were even more hostile.
I 
have 
found 
over 
the 
years 
that 
the 
more 
deeply 
I 
read 
about
confirmation bias, the more easily I can see it happening to me in real time.
I have realized mid-sentence sometimes that I am shooting down the
importance of a headline simply because I am positioned the wrong way.
The longer you trade, the more you will notice that when news comes
out and you are flat, you react quickly and without bias. When news comes
out that goes against your view and position, you will often hesitate or
freeze or explain away the news. Watching yourself make a decision
influenced by confirmation bias in real time is the first step toward beating
the problem. Until you see yourself doing it, you have not really recognized
how confirmation bias negatively impacts your decision making.
2) Actively consider other hypotheses. We talked about this in Chapter 5.
If you can spend two hours reading reports and studying charts and coming
up with a thesis on why you want to buy PommeTech stock…. Can’t you at
least take 15 minutes to think about why NOT to buy it? Or, even better,
think about the reasons you might want to go short PommeTech.
This intellectual exercise greatly strengthens your trade ideas because if
you can come up with five good reasons to short PommeTech at this point,
your bull case weakens. If you can only think of two, and have good
rebuttals to both, that’s more like it. And finally, if you can think of exactly
zero reasons anyone would want to short PommeTech, your thinking is
probably biased and you better ask around.
Step outside yourself and pretend you are an analyst forced to write a
bearish piece about PommeTech. What might it say? While many smart
individuals are happy to play Devil’s advocate whenever they hear someone
else’s ideas, they are often unable to poke holes in their own logic.
Not only does actively considering other sides of the story help deal
with confirmation bias, it can also help you later on. If the facts of the story
start to change, you may recognize the competing hypothesis coming true
and your hypothesis losing steam. Having explored the bearish case, you
are more likely to recognize it when it comes along as opposed to remaining
blind to it or shrugging it off.
Once you have a great trade idea:
poke some holes in it for a few minutes.
3) Be a Bayesian. Think about the world now as your prior and commit to
updating as new information comes in. If today you think the probability
that Italy leaves the Eurozone in the next 12 months is only 10%, and that is
a big reason you are bullish euro, adjust your probability honestly as new
information comes in. Don’t just scan the news for bullish stories about
Italy and skip over the bad news. That sounds silly but it is exactly what
people do!
Read both sides of the story and continuously adjust your worldview.
When you have a solid grip on Bayesian thinking, you will suffer less from
confirmation bias (“Bayesian thinking” is explained in Chapter 5).
4) Create a quick pros and cons sheet for any trade that involves
meaningful risk. This is such a simple exercise and your mom probably
told you about it when you were 11. Still, it’s effective. When I am making
a major decision (new job, new home, kids’ school, etc.) I always create a
list of pros and cons. Quite often, the decision becomes much easier
afterward because the result of the pros/cons list is so clear. Research shows
this 
simple 
procedure 
produces 
a 
marked 
improvement 
in 
the
appropriateness of confidence judgments
82
.
I do the same thing when I’m writing about trade ideas. Once I’m done
writing my thesis or trade idea in AM/FX (pros), I spend a few minutes
trying to take the other side (cons). This is important because I’m sending
my ideas out to thousands of people and I don’t want to look stupid, but it’s
also part of a strong intellectual process and sound trade idea development.
Questions I ask:
Why might this trade not work?
What are the key assumptions I have made?
What are the key risks to the idea? What might go wrong?
Imagine the trade as it crashes and burns. What happened? Sometimes
by imagining the adverse scenario, we can tease out risks we might
have missed. This is the pre-mortem concept discussed in the section
on overconfidence.
In the climactic rap battle in the movie 8 Mile, Papa Doc wins the coin
toss 
and 
elects 
to 
let 
B-Rabbit 
(Eminem) 
go 
first. 
Eminem 
uses 
the
“Stealing Thunder” technique to bring up and tear down and run through
every insult that his opponent might possibly use on him. By the time Papa
Doc hits the stage, there is nothing left to say. Eminem refuted every
possible argument Papa Doc could have made.
Your trade ideas should be like that. You know the contrary view so
well, you can dissect and refute it better than anyone else.
5) If you have a particularly strong economic worldview, don’t get
sucked into the echo chambers that support specific narratives. Too
often, the bears read only bearish material while the bulls are plugged only
into cheerleading analysts. Gold and bitcoin bulls can spend the whole day
reading bullish forecasts and stories on the internet but they will laugh off
anything bearish with “Those guys don’t get it.” Don’t be like that.
Give 
weight 
to, 
and 
spend 
time 
evaluating, 
credible 
opposing
viewpoints. Don’t lock into one view. It’s intellectually lazy and can be
hazardous to both your wealth and your credibility. Discount the views and
analysis of anyone who always has the same view.
There is a reason I sign off AM/FX each day with: Good luck, be
nimble. Intellectually nimble is the best mindset for successful trading.
It is important to know that confirmation bias is not strongly related to
intelligence. This is consistent with the idea that rational thinking and
intelligence are not the same thing
83
. That should be one of your main
takeaways from this book.
Smart people do stupid things. All the time.
To succeed in trading, you can’t just be smart. You also have to be
rational. You have probably spent most of your life getting smarter. Now it’s
time to train yourself to be more rational. To quote from an article titled
“Why Intelligent People do Foolish Things”
84
:
The absence of knowledge in areas important to rational thought creates
a mindware gap. These important areas are not adequately assessed by
typical intelligence tests. Mindware necessary for rational thinking is often
missing 
from 
the 
formal 
education 
curriculum. 
It 
is 
not 
unusual 
for
individuals to graduate from college with minimal knowledge in areas that
are crucial for the development of rational thinking.
Everyone, including you, suffers from confirmation bias.
Trader bias #4 : Extrapolation
One thing you learn after five years or so of working on Wall Street is
that most “forecasts” you read are simply extrapolations of the current
trend. I will show you a few good examples, but I could literally make 100
of these charts and then 100 more if I had time.
Figure 7.3 shows EURUSD in black and the average FX strategist’s
EURUSD forecast in dotted gray. If you look closely, you can see that the
forecast simply follows the trend and turns when the price of EURUSD
turns. The forecast is useless. This is a concept you should get used to. If
you piled up all the research showing humans cannot forecast accurately, it
would 
stretch 
to 
the 
moon. 
I 
strongly 
recommend 
you 
read
Superforecasting by Tetlock and Gardner to get a full grasp of the perils of
forecasting.
The chart is comical (to me at least!) but it’s even funnier when you see
it in real time. In 2017, Emmanuel Macron won the presidency in France
and this was seen as a bullish development for the euro. EURUSD started
trending higher and every analyst set a topside target of 1.15 or 1.20. When
EURUSD rallied to 1.20 fairly quickly, forecasters did not say “mission
accomplished” … They simply raised their forecast to 1.25. When it got to
1.25, they raised their forecast to 1.30.
Take a look near the middle of the chart where EURUSD peaked. You
see the black line crash lower, then the “forecasts” follow a few months
later. As EURUSD sold off hard from 1.25 to 1.18 in April 2018, analysts
climbed over each other to lower their forecasts for months and months.
This is not forecasting—it’s extrapolation.
The default and easy view to take in the market is to assume that
whatever is going on right now will continue. But that is often not how the
world 
works. 
Periods 
of 
outperformance 
are 
very 
often 
followed 
by
reversion to the mean.
This is the logical explanation for the “sophomore jinx”, the Cheer
Hedge, the Sports Illustrated jinx and the Magazine Cover Indicator. A
theme or market move that has become such an important story that it
landed on a magazine cover has probably outperformed in a major way and
thus is more likely to revert to the mean than to further outperform its
already stellar outperformance.
In markets, there is another reason why price reverts to the mean.
Extremely low or high prices change the supply and demand profile for the
asset. If oil goes to $100, new rigs come on board and increase supply and
this pushes the price lower. If oil goes to $20, people buy more fuel-
guzzling 
trucks 
because 
gas 
is 
cheaper. 
This 
increase 
in 
demand 
for
gasoline pushes oil prices back up. If the price of corn triples, companies
will substitute other commodities that are cheaper. And so on.
Watch for changes in supply and demand in your market after large
price changes. Are medium or long-term sellers or buyers entering the
market to take advantage of high or low prices? This change in participant
behavior can mark the beginning of the end of a trend.
The number one input into almost every forecast is the current level and
trend of the asset. There are notable exceptions, such as the fact that
everyone has been (mostly) calling for higher US yields despite a 40-year
trend lower, but generally you will see that when something is going up, it
is forecast to go up more and when something is going down, forecasters
expect it to keep going down.
Extrapolation bias is a form of recency bias. Humans tend to overweight
more recent information in most analysis simply because that information is
more available (i.e., top of mind). Events from years ago are harder to
remember and incorporate. This is why you see analysts put out bullish
predictions for oil when it’s trading at $100 and bearish predictions for oil
when it’s trading at $25.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Check out Figure 7.4. When Greek debt was the most attractive and
yielded 35%, the ratings agencies downgraded it. As of December 2020, it
is the least attractive it has ever been, with yields close to zero. And they
upgraded it. Note that yield moves opposite to the price of the bond so the
ratings agency downgraded the bond at the lows and upgraded it at the
highs.
My point is not to troll the ratings agencies, and I know technically they
are not forecasting, they are just nowcasting. The point is just that when an
asset is in trouble, everyone hates it. When an asset is ripping, everybody
loves it.
Now let’s do oil (see Figure 7.5).
Again, note how the price moves first and the forecast follows and has
no predictive value.
Extrapolation bias does not just impact economists and forecasters, it
impacts traders (big time). Most traders are much more comfortable buying
things that are going up and selling things that are going down. Sometimes
this is an appropriate strategy, often it is not.
The bias manifests in another way besides the tendency to chase the
market higher and lower. Many traders put on a trade, and when it hits their
target, instead of taking profit, they raise their target. “It looks bid! I can’t
take profits here!” they will say.
Be aware of this bias. Notice it in your thought patterns. Be rational. As
my friend The Gold Crow says:
It always looks great on the highs and terrible on the lows.
When there is a strong trend and you have faith in it for multiple
reasons, that’s not extrapolation bias. That’s a rational expectation that the
thing will go up. When a stock rallies three bucks out of nowhere and your
instinct is to buy it because “someone must know something” you are
making an irrational extrapolation.
There are traders out there that have the opposite bias and tend to trade
mean reversion all the time, even when things are trending. That’s me. I am
more biased towards mean reversion and this bias can be just as costly as
extrapolation. Trading mean reversion all the time can be like trying to
catch falling pianos.
Strong trend = falling piano
85
.
Do you like to catch falling pianos?
This is really important: good traders go with the trend, or fade it,
depending on the regime, the setup, the fundamentals, the technicals and so
on. They don’t identify themselves as trend or mean reversion experts.
Don’t say “I’m a mean reversion guy” or “I’m a trend follower”. Different
styles work at different times.
You should identify and trade what works in the current market. Don’t
commit to one trading style and hope the market cooperates. It won’t.
Negative extrapolation
While 
what 
we 
typically 
witness 
in 
financial 
markets 
is 
positive
extrapolation 
(everyone 
assumes 
whatever 
is 
happening 
will 
keep
happening), there can also be the problem of negative extrapolation. That is:
it has never happened before so it can’t happen now. This is a failure of
imagination. The best outlook is to always consider almost any possibility,
no matter how unlikely. This does not mean you need to position for
extremely low probability outcomes; you just need to consider them.
A 
famous 
example 
of 
negative 
extrapolation 
is 
Ben 
Bernanke’s
infamous failure of imagination just before the 2008 Global Financial
Crisis:
INTERVIEWER: Tell me, what is the worst-case scenario? Sir, we have
so many economists coming on our air and saying, “Oh, this is a bubble,
and it’s going to burst, and this is going to be a real issue for the
economy.” Some say it could even cause a recession at some point.
What is the worst-case scenario, if in fact we were to see [housing] prices
come down substantially across the country?
BERNANKE: Well, I guess I don’t buy your premise. It’s a pretty unlikely
possibility. We’ve never had a decline in house prices on a nationwide
basis. So what I think is more likely is that house prices will slow, maybe
stabilize: might slow consumption spending a bit. I don’t think it’s going to
drive the economy too far from its full employment path, though.
In case you were born very recently: housing went down nationwide in
2008. It went down a lot. People used similar logic when assessing the
SNB’s EURCHF floor at 1.20 before it broke in 2015. The idea was: “They
held it this long; there’s no way they’ll let it break!”
Annndddddd…. It’s gone.
Another concept that long seemed ridiculous and unimaginable but then
quickly became mainstream is the idea of negative interest rates. Most
market pricing before 2012 or so always treated zero as the absolute lower
bound for interest rates.
Therefore, punters made many bets in Swiss rates (for example) that
went horribly wrong when the SNB cut rates below zero.
Always remember:
anything can happen.
This does not mean you need to be wracked with fear, on high alert for
extremely low probability events all the time. It means you need to be open
minded to outliers and their possible impact. Consider low probability
events and think about how they could influence your risk of ruin. No
matter how unlikely an event might be, it’s not worth taking the other side if
it can blow you up. Many learned this the hard way after the SNB debacle
in 2015.
Trader bias # 5 : Favorite vs. longshots
Human beings generally prefer to bet on longshots and avoid favorites,
even though favorites almost always offer higher expected returns. Before
we delve into why that might be and how it is relevant to trading, let’s look
at a bit of evidence from the world of horse racing. Here is the money quote
and an accompanying chart from a 2010 paper by Erik Snowberg and Justin
Wolfers
86
:
The racetrack provides a natural laboratory for economists interested in
understanding decision making under uncertainty. The most discussed
empirical regularity in racetrack gambling markets is the favorite-longshot
bias: equilibrium market prices (betting odds) provide biased estimates of
the probability of a horse winning. Specifically, bettors value longshots
more than expected given how rarely they win, and they value favorites
too little given how often they win. Figure 1 illustrates, showing that the
rate of return to betting on horses with odds of 100/1 or greater is about
-61%, betting randomly yields average returns of -23%, while betting the
favorite in every race yields losses of only 5.5%.
The chart clearly shows that betting on favorites is a better (err… less
bad…) strategy than betting on longshots. Yet even though the effect is
wellknown, it has persisted over many decades. Favorite/longshot bias was
initially discussed in 1949 and yet the effect still shows up in many (but not
all) gambling and financial markets
87
. The more asymmetric (lotto-like) the
payout, the more likely traders, investors, gamblers (and regular folk) will
overbet the longshot.
There are three main reasons for the existence of favorite / longshot
bias:
1. The marginal utility of a large win is often higher than the marginal
utility of a small win, even if the odds of the small win are near
100%. With a fixed amount of capital at risk, small payoffs don’t
really “move the needle” financially or psychologically.
Say you are a hedge fund manager who wants to generate a 10%
return this year. You are offered two trades, both risking 5 bps if
wrong: 
Trade 
1 
has 
an 
80% 
chance 
of 
making 
5 
basis 
points
(expected value = +3 bps) and Trade 2 has a 5% chance of making
80 basis points (expected value = -0.75 bps).
Even though Trade 1 is clearly more attractive mathematically, many
traders (whether they will admit it or not) are more attracted to Trade
2 because it moves the needle for their YTD P&L while the first one
does not, unless they place a huge bet.
2. Betting on favorites is not as fun as betting on longshots. Bettors and
investors looking for excitement or stimulation prefer longshots.
3. 
Human 
beings 
tend 
to 
overestimate 
the 
likelihood 
of 
lower-
probability events and underestimate those with higher probability
(see Figure 7.7). Keep this in mind when assessing odds. If you think
something is a 5% shot, you are probably too high. If you think
something is an 85% shot, you are probably too low. In contrast,
humans are good at evaluating probabilities in the middle of the
spectrum (the 25% to 60% zone).
Figure 7.7 shows a stylized curve of how research shows humans
typically estimate probability (solid black line), versus how probability
looks in real life (dotted line).
Since estimating probability is a critical skill in trading, you must
understand: It is more difficult to estimate high and low probabilities
than those near the middle.
In trading, the longshot bias effect shows up in language like “levered
bets”, “outstanding risk/reward”, and the ever-popular “asymmetric payout
profile”. Looking for asymmetric payouts makes sense in aggregate: if you
are always betting $1.00 to win $0.50 in a game where the odds are not
known beforehand (only estimated), it is hard to achieve persistent success.
On the other hand, this preference for longshots can sometimes lead to bad
trades with good optics (like those 5% one-touches that are always so hard
to resist).
The longshot mentality is bolstered by financial media features that
shower adulation on tail risk managers in the rare moments their highly-
levered insurance bets pay off. There are no stories written about the tail
risk fund that bleeds for four straight years while the VIX is pinned at 12!
The takeaway here is: be aware of favorite/longshot bias. Don’t get sucked
in by bad trades with good optics.
Various estimates put the cross-over point around 35%/40%
An example of favorite longshot bias in action
You often see favorite-longshot bias over economic and central bank
events. For example, when a central bank meeting is coming up, and there
is a tiny (but not zero) chance of that central bank cutting rates, the market
loves to go into the meeting short the currency. This often creates an
imbalance where there are so many people betting on the longshot (a rate
cut) that you get an outsized move when no cut is delivered.
Here is an example: in early February 2020, COVID-19 was popping up
all over the world and had triggered the first wave of fear about the global
economy. Given Australia’s dependence on commodities and global growth,
some observers thought the Reserve Bank of Australia might cut rates in
response to the virus contagion.
Interest rate markets priced the probability of an interest rate cut as less
than 10%, but if the cut was delivered, AUDUSD might drop 100 points.
The simple longshot trade was to go short AUD and cover quickly if the
RBA did not announce a rate cut. Traders in this set up thought they were
risking a few pips for a chance to make 100 pips of profit. But Figure 7.8
shows what happened:
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
There were so many traders caught short on the lotto ticket trade, the
pair gapped 30 pips higher (from 0.6690 to 0.6720). Traders thought they
were risking 5 pips to make 100, but were actually risking 30 to make 100.
If you assigned a 10% chance to the RBA cut (which was probably
generous), the expected value of the trade with 5 pips of downside risk was
+5.5 as you can see in Table 1. But in real life, because the “no cut” cost
you 30 pips, the expected value of the trade was actually -17 pips! See
Table 2.
Note that while we don’t know for sure (because it didn’t happen), a cut
from the RBA might have yielded a drop of less than 100 points, because
the position was so crowded. In other words, the expected value of the trade
might have been even worse than -17bps.
Any time you hear people talking about a lotto ticket trade or a trade
where there is very little risk, or where you win in almost every scenario: be
cautious. This is probably a sign that traders are flocking to a trade that has
great optics on paper but possibly bad mathematics in real life. Those trades
get crowded. As a trade gets crowded, the risk/reward gets worse and your
ability to get out quickly becomes impaired.
Favorite/longshot bias also shows up in option pricing. Speculators love
to buy low-delta options (cheap options that pay out a huge windfall if
something very unlikely happens) and market makers generally do not like
selling them. Therefore, research shows that the lower the probability of an
option paying off (and thus the more leverage is embedded in that option),
the more overpriced it will tend to be.
Watch for favorite/longshot bias in your own trading and in setups that
unfold in front of you.
Trader bias # 6 : Round numbers
When you fill your car with gas, do you sometimes have the urge to
round it off to the nearest dollar, even though you are paying with a credit
card? Do you get a tiny thrill watching a car’s odometer roll over from
99,999 to 100,000? For many amateur marathon runners, a finishing time of
3:59:58 is a great success while 4:00:02 is a disappointment. These are
examples of round number bias.
Human beings tend to pay attention to round numbers and treat them as
special or more important than other numbers. OK, sure Brent… Who
cares?
You should.
Round 
number 
bias 
appears 
in 
financial 
markets, 
and 
while 
this
knowledge will not be life-or career-changing for you, it will save you from
the occasional big disappointment. Due to round number bias, many market
participants leave their orders on the round numbers. Many more than you
would see if orders were randomly or evenly distributed. I will show you
two examples from the world of equities, but these anomalies are present in
every market I have studied.
Figures 7.9 and 7.10 show the distribution of the last two digits (the
cents) of each daily high and low in TSLA and NFLX from 2015 to 2020.
For example, $520.40 would be 40. $765.00 would be 00. $509.33 would
be 33, etc. Note the huge overrepresentation of highs and lows at 00 and 50,
exactly as round number bias would predict (00 is far, far left).
Therefore, if you leave an order to buy at, say $473.01, you are
statistically more likely to get filled than the person with an order at
$473.00 or $472.99 because the majority of buy orders will be on the round
number at $473.00. Most days, you’ll probably get filled at any one of those
three levels, but the occasional time you get filled at 01 when you would
not 
have 
got 
filled 
one 
cent 
lower 
can 
have 
a 
big 
impact 
on 
your
performance.
On the flip side, if you are leaving stop loss orders, always leave them
on the correct side of the round number. Sell stops should be below 00 and
buy stops should be above. The day you leave a stop loss at $474.99 and the
low is $475.00, you will feel like you got lucky, but these tiny alterations in
behavior can sometimes be skill masquerading as good luck.
P.S. When that happens, you owe me a beer.
Trader bias #7: Apophenia
Chaos is not dangerous until it begins to look orderly.
MAX GUNTHER, The Zurich Axioms
Great traders are masters of pattern recognition. They will see a setup
and recognize it either consciously or unconsciously. I remember many
times after great runs of trading that I felt like I knew what was going to
happen before it happened. This ability comes from the incredible powers
of human pattern recognition. The problem is:
Humans are built to see patterns, even when none exist.
Apophenia or patternicity are terms psychologists use to describe the
human predisposition to see patterns or connections, even where none exist.
Apophenia leads to many flaws in human thinking and explains why people
see Jesus on toast, UFOs in the sky, bigfoot in the woods and so on. This
human bias toward pattern recognition also leads gamblers who are on a
winning streak to believe they will keep winning. Even smart, logical
people often feel like they are “heating up” after a lucky series of hands at a
poker table.
This is also known as clustering illusion. People have a hard time
believing that streaks are the result of randomness, even though random
data contains many streaks!
We 
are 
wired 
to 
find 
meaning 
and 
significance 
in 
random 
and
meaningless data. Apophenia goes a long way toward explaining why
humans believe conspiracy theories, suffer from paranoia, and embrace
pseudoscience. When you see patterns everywhere, you see meaning and
connections too. Understand that you are not immune! You are predisposed
to see patterns, even where none exist.
The human ability to see patterns is a critical part of our evolution and
allows us to understand the world without having to analyze every single
new piece of information. If we have never seen a large black cat with large
teeth on the savannah, a useful evolutionary trait was to assume that its
behavior and risk profile is similar to other large animals with huge teeth
we have encountered in the past.
We can correctly infer that the presence of dark clouds in the sky above
us represents an increased probability of rain in the next few hours. We
know a hissing sound nearby means snake bite risk is higher than normal
and we dramatically increase our alert level.
Evolution favored false positives over false negatives because the cost
of a false positive in the wild was much lower than a false negative. For
example, there is a loud grumbly noise in the bush that Caveman Kror
cannot clearly identify:
False positive (Type 1 error): That sounded like a lion, I think?! I’m
out of here!
Cost: Kror may have used some unnecessary energy avoiding what
could have been just a random sound.
False negative (Type 2 error): Hmm, I wonder what that grumbly noise
was. It didn’t sound exactly like a lion. I guess I’m good. (42 seconds
later) Oh, dang, it was a lion.
Cost: Kror is dead.
Seeing patterns where there are none may be superior evolutionary
behavior, but it’s not helpful in trading. Given the very strong human
instinct to see patterns, how useful do you think simple eyeballing of charts,
basic trendlines and breakout patterns is likely to be? What are the odds that
chart break is just a standard false positive—like the loud noise in the bush?
Now add on human confirmation bias… Are you just seeing what you want
to see? Probably.
This does not mean that there are no patterns in the world. If you run
into heavy traffic four days in a row at a particular interchange, it makes
sense 
to 
consider 
whether 
there 
is 
causation. 
Investigating 
further, 
or
temporarily changing your route is likely to be optimal. But you need to be
aware that the way humans see patterns is biased to Type 1 errors. You need
to be discriminating and use a tight filter when looking for patterns. You
need to consider that what you are looking at could be random.
How to combat apophenia
There 
are 
three 
ways 
to 
beat 
apophenia 
in 
trading. 
Awareness,
skepticism, and analysis.
1. Awareness. Hopefully this section has you thinking about, and more
aware of, apophenia and patternicity. It’s a deeply engrained and
basic part of human cognitive function. Once you appreciate that the
human brain is biased toward pattern recognition, new patterns you
detect are placed in the proper context.
2. Skepticism. Start from a place of skepticism. When you see a pattern
or a correlation, assume it is bogus and try to work out why it might
not be. Most people assume patterns are valid and then spend time
further 
validating 
them 
with 
other 
analysis 
or 
information. You
should start by assuming patterns are meaningless and work your
way towards meaning via analysis.
3. Analysis. Let’s say you see a headline on Bloomberg: “Death Cross
in silver futures triggers bearish signal”. You pull up the story and
see a fugly chart where the 50-day moving average has just crossed
below 
the 
200-day. 
Is 
your 
first 
instinct 
to 
sell 
silver? 
Or 
to
investigate more deeply? Patterns like this should not be taken at
face value. Most of them are meaningless and have no empirical
basis. Take half an hour to pull some data into Excel and backtest the
pattern. Does it have any predictive value?
When I say “patterns” that does not just mean technical analysis. It is
any cause-and-effect relationship that appears to exist in markets. Again,
humans tend to ascribe causality to many things that are the result of pure
chance.
On the other hand, patterns like the following examples could be
meaningful, persistent, and predictive:
gold tends to go lower from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m. (maybe gold producers
sell at this time?)
whenever US rates go lower, USDJPY goes lower (Japanese investors
prefer higher rates?)
AAPL tends to lead the QQQs (large caps lead indexes?)
And so on. Sophisticated pattern recognition can be a significant source
of edge when it is free from bias.
I spend a good part of my time analyzing data in an attempt to
determine whether patterns have predictive value or not. Most often, the
answer is “not”. Taking the time to analyze patterns and to determine
whether or not they are useful for forecasting is a good way to overcome
apophenia and discover useful tools for beating the market.
This is my simple four-step method for accepting or rejecting patterns:
1. Identify a pattern or relationship.
2. Generate a hypothesis.
The best patterns have some sort of underlying logic. If gold goes
down every day from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m., maybe that is the window
when gold producers sell? If you can logically explain why a pattern
works, it is much more likely to be non-random and persistent.
3. Analyze the data.
4. Accept or dismiss the pattern.
Anyone who took a science class as a kid should recognize this as a
shortform version of the scientific method. Most patterns you analyze will
be worthless. You will dismiss them and move on. On the other hand, the
few patterns you find that are non-random can be incredibly valuable to
your future trading.
Every time you notice a pattern, reduce it to something you can test and
then get to work. You don’t need sophisticated quantitative skills to do basic
backtesting of simple theories. Once you backtest a pattern, you have a
much deeper understanding of whether or not it is random, and you know
whether to factor it into your trading decisions.
For example, I like to use moves in one market to predict moves in
another market. Here is an example of how I will look at a pattern and try to
determine whether or not it has meaning. This excerpt from AM/FX also
gives you an idea of how I pull together multiple reasons for a particular
trade idea. We will discuss how to build a trade idea in much more depth
later on.
From July 1, 2020:
We had a rare setup at the close yesterday as US rates have dropped 8
bps in the last five days while USDJPY was up 1.3%. There have been
2610 trading days in the last 10 years and just 49 of them have satisfied
the condition: (USDJPY up >1% and US 10-year yields down more than
7bps). Here is how USDJPY performed after:
Two conditions: Up >1% in past 5 days and US 10-year yield down >7bps in past 5 days.
And note that USDJPY rallied from 88 to 107 in the last 10 years, so if
you took any random sample it would show USDJPY going up, not down.
That makes this result even more interesting. The medians are similar to
the averages, so there is not a small group of instances skewing the
average.
Overall, I think USDJPY is a sell based on yields, the move in gold, and
USDJPY’s consistent inability to take out 108.00. Also, there was a three-
day run of buying madness in NY time from 7 a.m. to 11 a.m. and there is
no evidence of that today. It was probably a major rebalance into month
end. So that is over, which also helps.
Note in Figure 7.11 how USDJPY bashed against 108.00 four times (four
arrows) before a huge false break and then it retested the 108.00 level
again afterwards (fifth arrow).
I am therefore adding a short USDJPY recommendation. You could either
sell here or leave an offer at 107.75 with a stop at 108.26.
With ISM and payrolls tomorrow, there is a decent chance you get done.
And 
with Yield 
Curve 
Control 
on 
the 
horizon 
and 
the 
explosion 
of
coronavirus cases in the US South, I doubt strong US data will impact
yields much.
Note by leaving an order to sell above market at 107.75 through
nonfarm payrolls, I attempt to take advantage of the noisy volatility created
by an event I think is meaningless to get set at a good level on a trade I like
for a bunch of reasons. See Figure 7.11.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
I got set on the trade the day after payrolls (at 107.75) and USDJPY
went pretty much straight down.
Backtesting is an entire field of quantitative research and there is
considerable complexity involved. I am not a computational finance or
applied math expert, so I like to keep things as simple as possible. I come
up with a theory, and then I test it. I don’t tweak the parameters or snoop
around until I find something useful. I just go in, test, and get out. While a
full course in backtesting is beyond the scope of this book, you don’t need a
degree in financial engineering to conduct basic backtests of patterns you
identify and ideas you come up with.
When testing your hypothesis, be aware of a few things:
1. The law of small numbers. You need a decent sample of observations
for your analysis to mean anything. If you see that TSLA stock went
down the last four Aprils in a row, that’s meaningless. If it went
down 33 of the last 41 Fridays, that might mean something. While
there is no hard rule for legit sample size, any study using less than
30 observations is risky and likely to be unreliable.
2. The harder you have to look, the more likely whatever you find is
bogus or biased. Let’s say you want to see how the stock market
performs the Monday after a 3% drop on Friday. You find nothing
interesting. So then you test how it performs after a 4% drop on
Friday. Still nothing. Then, you up the threshold to 5% and find the
subsequent Monday averages a 2% further fall. Then you test, “What
if stocks fall 2% or more Thursday AND 5% or more Friday” … The
more you mess around with your parameters, the more likely you are
to 
find 
“interesting” 
results. 
This 
is 
called 
“p-hacking” 
in 
the
research business. You keep tweaking the inputs until you get an
interesting result. That is not good research.
Don’t torture your data in an effort to make it confess. Keep your
analysis simple. For the best ever and super simple explanation of
how p-hacking, snooping and data-mining work, Google “xkcd green
jelly beans”.
3. Be aware of the trend in your data. If you do any study of S&P 500
data 
since 
1930, 
you 
will 
generally 
find 
that 
bullish 
strategies
perform well and bearish strategies perform poorly! This makes
sense since stocks have gone up a zillion percent in that time period.
Similarly, you will find it easy to “discover” bullish NASDAQ or
bearish oil company strategies. The secular trend in the data is an
important driver of the output of any strategy you analyze.
4. 
No 
matter 
how 
well 
something 
worked 
in 
the 
past, 
there’s 
no
guarantee it will work in the future. In a world of infinite data, many
relationships, and a huge number of sophisticated analysts, people
are going to find strategies that worked in the past. If you have a
strong opinion on why the strategy is likely to work in the future, the
value of your analysis is higher.
For example: Turnaround Tuesday (discussed in more detail below)
is well known and has existed for many years. It is founded on a
reliable and repeatable pattern of human behavior and a persistent
fear 
and 
greed 
cycle 
that 
repeats 
around 
weekends, 
even 
if
statistically savvy investors know about it. Also, as a short-term
strategy, it is fairly expensive to execute (in terms of transaction
costs) so large institutions are unlikely to quickly arbitrage it away.
5. Don’t build regression models unless you know what you are doing.
Regression models can be useful but often require sophisticated
knowledge to avoid datamining, overfitting, and other errors.
Most patterns in finance are random. You need to find evidence and use
logic before accepting a pattern as meaningful.
As a quick detour, here is a bit more info on Turnaround Tuesday, in
case you are not familiar with its amazing power.
Turnaround Tuesday
During periods of market fear, there is a common intraweek pattern that
stock markets often follow. This sequence is shown in Figure 7.12. Markets
don’t always follow this pattern but they do follow it a surprising proportion
of the time.
The most reliable part of this pattern is “Turnaround Tuesday”. This is
the tendency for stocks to rip higher on Tuesday if they sold off the Friday
and Monday before. It is a simple human pattern that occurs because when
the news appears bad, traders get nervous into the weekend and sell some of
their holdings on Friday. Then, they read all kinds of negative media reports
about the big scary thing and that scares them into selling more on Monday.
Investor selling pulls in momentum traders who go short on Monday.
This adds to the selling pressure. Then, Tuesday comes and there is nobody
left to sell. Then the shorts get squeezed and that triggers Turnaround
Tuesday.
In case you think this sounds silly, have a look at this evidence. First,
here is how the S&P performs in the most extreme Turnaround Tuesday
setup which is when it falls Thursday and Friday and then is down more
than 5% on Monday. This is rare but check out the returns in Figure 7.13.
In contrast, if you study all days after a 5% one-day drop, the average
return the next day is just +0.9%. Not terrible, but nothing amazing.
Second, to give you more evidence supporting Turnaround Tuesday,
Figure 7.14 shows SPX performance for Tuesday vs. all other days in 2008.
Note that 2008 was one of the worst bear markets in history so Turnaround
Tuesday was a thing almost all year. If you traded in 2008, you probably
find this chart pretty mind-blowing.
Trader bias # 8 : Anchoring
I have always found anchoring bias to be one of the most interesting
forms of trader bias. The basic idea of anchoring bias is that when we are
asked 
to 
guess 
or 
predict 
something, 
we 
are 
biased 
toward 
the 
first
reference point offered.
Outside of finance, this is most commonly seen in negotiations. If we
are told the price of a car is $12,000, anything below that feels cheap and
anything above that feels expensive. Even if we find out later that the car is
only worth $10,000, we will still find ourselves anchored on the initial
price. Heaps of research proves this. Weirdly, anchoring works even if the
initial number is unrelated to the question at hand.
A simple anchoring experiment (which my son did for Science Fair
once, and it worked) goes as follows: subjects first draw a random number
from 1 to 100 out of a bag. Then, they are asked to guess (for example) how
many African countries are in the United Nations. Those that drew low
numbers from the bag answer consistently lower than those who drew
higher numbers out of the bag.
Another famous example of anchoring is when you ask people to
quickly estimate 1 X 2 X 3 X 4 X 5 X 6 X 7 X 8 you get a much lower
answer than if you ask them to quickly estimate 8 X 7 X 6 X 5 X 4 X 3 X 2
X 1.
In negotiation, you often hear “never make the first offer” because you
are giving up too much information and optionality. In contrast, an effective
negotiation strategy can be for one side to make an outrageous first offer,
thereby anchoring the negotiation on a figure that is hard to get away from.
Say 
you 
are 
negotiating 
with 
an 
employer: 
you 
want 
to 
get 
paid
$500,000 and you believe you have decent power in the negotiation. You
open by suggesting a salary of $650,000. Now, both sides are anchored so
high that when you both finally settle on $550,000, everyone feels like a
winner.
Once you know about anchoring, you see it all over the place, especially
in how companies price their goods. Treadmill: Was $1299, now $999. That
sounds like a good deal, but it could well be the company has never sold a
single unit for $1299 and they are just trying to anchor you on that inflated
price to make you feel good about paying $999.
In markets, anchoring bias manifests in four main ways.
1) We anchor on our entry point. This is the most common and powerful
way you see anchoring bias in markets. If you buy a stock at $99.40, that
specific level becomes very powerful in your mind. You will find it much
easier, for example, to sell at $99.41 (a small profit) than $99.39 (a small
loss) even though the economics of selling at these two different levels is
practically identical.
Losing is painful and negative. Winning is pleasurable and positive. So
even though two cents is meaningless to your P&L, the difference between
selling below or above your cost is the difference between winning and
losing. Human beings are hard-wired to avoid losses. As discussed earlier,
research shows the pain we feel from losses is about double the pleasure we
get from gains of equal size. This bias is called loss aversion.
A related bias is the disposition effect. This is the strong and consistent
tendency for investors to prefer to sell assets that have increased in value
while holding onto assets that show a loss. If it goes up, you sell it. If it
goes down, you hold on to it and pray for a bounce. These related forms of
bias all come down to the same thing: humans don’t like to lose
88
. The
remedy is simple:
You must learn to love small losses.
When you take a small loss, try to feel good about it. Say: “Taking small
losses is the way to achieve trading success.” Say it over and over.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.
Trading losses are an expense incurred by your trading business. Your
goal is to minimize trading loss expense while maximizing trading revenue.
You minimize trading loss expense by cutting bad trades quickly and by
sticking to your plan. You increase trading loss expense with shoddy risk
management, poor discipline, and sloppy trading.
As a beginning trader, you will no doubt hear yourself thinking “This
trade feels wrong. As soon as I get to break even, I’m out.” Two problems
here:
Problem One: “This trade feels wrong” is not rational analysis. Unpack
why it feels wrong. Is there something inherently wrong with the price
action, or is the stock just not moving and you’re bored? Those are two
completely different things. Often your instincts are just your impatience
and emotions trying to sabotage a perfectly good trade.
Problem Two: “As soon as I get to break even, I’m out” is not logical.
Do you think the market cares where you got in? As if there is something
magical about your entry point? If you have determined, via logic, that the
trade is not worth holding onto, get out. If you have not determined you
should get out of the trade, maintain your existing parameters.
Every trade you put on should have a stop loss and a take profit. After
that, you need a solid reason to cut the trade. Otherwise, stick to your
original plan. Don’t keep recalibrating based on every emotion you feel.
Emotions are fine but overreacting to them is not.
Just remember: Your entry point is meaningless.
2) We tend to anchor on price level highs and lows. The feeling you get
from the market is often more about recent changes, not absolute moves.
This is why if you buy gold at $1570 and it goes to $1670 you feel good but
then when it drops to $1600, you feel more bad than good even though you
are still $30 in the money. How we feel about a trade is often more
influenced by recent changes in price than by aggregate moves.
Say you are long gold with a stop at $1540 and a take profit at $1680. It
rallies to $1670, then pulls back to $1620. Quite often a trader will say: “If
it just gets back to $1670, I’ll get out.” They are anchoring on the high
because that was their moment of maximum pleasure. Sure, if $1670 is a
major tech level now and you realize that $1680 was the wrong level to take
profit… Be my guest and move your take profit lower. But don’t just move
it because you are anchored on that level now.
3) We also anchor on P&L highs. Have you ever been up $15,000 at
midday then you give back half and you say: “OK, if I get back to
+$15,000, I’ll square up.” That’s not rational. When you hear your internal
monologue saying something like this, recognize that you are not being
rational. Trade the current setup, not the arbitrary P&L threshold you hit
two hours ago.
One of the key overall lessons I hope you get from this book is this:
Recognize when you are thinking or behaving irrationally and stop it.
Even after 25 years of trading, I still think and say irrational things on
the trading floor. The biggest difference now is that I hear myself saying
these things and quietly laugh at myself. The ability to get outside yourself
and see when you are not being rational is a necessary step towards
becoming an Alpha Trader.
4) Economists anchor on prior economic data. If the nonfarm payrolls
(NFP) number was +325,000 last month and all signs point to a much lower
number this month, research shows that economists will tend to anchor on
the prior number and their forecasts (on average) will be too high.
Say you are an economist and your extremely detailed and complex
econometric model says that this month NFP should be +38,000. If last
month’s number was +325,000, that +38,000 number feels kinda low. You
will be inclined to submit a number that sounds a bit less extreme or “more
rational” 
like 
+100,000. 
In 
fact, 
that 
number 
is 
less 
rational 
and 
is
influenced by anchoring bias.
If you trade the economic data, look for moments when this month’s
data is expected to be significantly different from last month’s. Then,
assume the actual outcome will show an EVEN LARGER discrepancy than
economists’ forecasts suggest.
If you are interested in the specific topic of how economists anchor,
check out the research footnotes on this page
89
. Here is a quick excerpt from
the Campbell and Sharpe paper
90
:
We examine whether expert consensus forecasts of monthly economic
releases from 1990-2006 have a tendency to be systematically biased
toward the value of previous months’ data releases. We find broad-based
and 
significant 
evidence 
for 
the 
anchoring 
hypothesis; 
consensus
forecasts 
are 
biased 
towards 
the 
values 
of 
previous 
months’ 
data
releases, which in some cases results in sizable predictable forecast
errors.
Trader bias # 9 : Herding
One great paradox of markets is that they are mostly driven by the
wisdom of the crowd but occasionally by its madness. Separating the two is
a key source of alpha. Before we talk about herding and temporary madness
in markets, let’s first discuss the wisdom of crowds.
Most of the time, the errors made by buyers and sellers cancel out and
the average of all the transactions is some approximation of a reasonable
equilibrium price. This outcome is similar to the jelly bean experiment. In
that experiment, a crowd of people are asked to guess how many jelly beans
are in a jar. The interesting result is that the crowd (the average of all
guesses) 
is 
always 
very 
accurate 
and 
often 
more 
accurate 
than ANY
individual in the entire crowd. This is astounding and suggests you should
be humble when trying to beat the market.
Instead of a bunch of undergrads guessing how many jelly beans are in
the jar, imagine 1,000 highly-trained quants who have millions of dollars to
invest in jelly bean estimation technology. Do you think you can beat them?
That’s a more apt analogy for the markets.
The wisdom of crowds, though, relies on diverse and unbiased opinion.
And it relies on incentives. If there is no prize, estimates will be lazy and
less accurate. Or (for example) if the jar is extremely far away from the
people trying to estimate the number of jelly beans (say at the very front of
a huge lecture hall), the crowdsourced conclusion might be too low because
the jar looks smaller from afar. If everyone is drunk or distracted, the
estimate also might not be as good.
In trading, if you can explain exactly why you think the crowd is wrong,
you are on the right track. Usually this will be either because the crowd is
biased or the crowd’s incentives are not aligned with the goal of finding the
equilibrium price. I will explain both in the section that follows. The main
takeaway for this section is:
Assume the crowd is wise most of the time and look for moments when
you can explain exactly why it is wrong or identify that it has gone
mad.
As the amount of quality data available to all investors approaches
infinity, it is more and more difficult to find an informational edge. Before
2000 
or 
so, 
economic 
and 
financial 
market 
data 
were 
expensive 
and
difficult to acquire for non-institutional investors. As recently as 2006 or
2007, a trader with live price feeds and a solid understanding of correlation
had an informational edge over other short-term traders. Live news feeds
were expensive and out of reach for individual investors until recently.
Now, literally anyone can access reams of financial data, read dozens of
well-informed blogs doing sophisticated cross-market analysis, and get free
real-time news from Twitter. Informational edge is incredibly difficult to
find. This puts a premium on other types of market analysis and (I believe)
potentially increases the value of sentiment and positioning analysis.
By their nature, markets are prone to periods of herding. Narrative-
driven markets with many traders chasing the same themes and responding
to the exact same information and incentives can drive everyone toward the
same cliff. If you can identify the times when the entire market is running in
the same direction, you can pivot and profit by going the other way.
There are a multiple reasons market participants herd to the same
themes and trends:
1. Herding is human nature. In Chapter 5, we talked about the Asch
conformity experiments, where even when it was obvious that a line
was the same size as other lines, many subjects would go with the
crowd if the majority said one line was longer. Asch did another
famous experiment to show how human beings prefer to conform
with their peers.
The experiment involved multiple actors who enter an elevator and
face the back of the elevator, away from the door. Asch found that
most random strangers who entered the elevator afterwards joined
the crowd and faced away from the door. Conformity and herding are
basic human instincts that help society function. If you see a group of
people acting a certain way, it sends you a strong subconscious signal
that the group behavior is appropriate and so it requires strong,
conscious pushback for you to act independently.
2. It is much easier to believe in and respond to a narrative than it is
to value securities. “The internet is going to be huge! You gotta buy
Cisco!” is an easier story to understand than “Cisco is overvalued at
100X sales.” Since human traders are more stimulated by stories than
they are by data, the price level of an asset is often less important
than the story being told. This is why good companies can be terrible
investments.
While there is usually great uncertainty surrounding the appropriate
value of a company’s stock, there is frequently little disagreement
over good stories. “Amazon is a revolutionary company that offers
an unprecedented customer experience” is hard to debate and easy to
invest in. Since most people are trading narratives (whether they
want to admit it or not), and narratives are often pretty clear and one-
sided, investors herd into the great stories. This is not just true with
stocks, it is true with macroeconomic stories too.
3. FOMO. The fear of missing out pulls in those who have not yet
bought into a narrative. As they see their peers making money on an
investment (and hear the amazing stories of ginormous profits over
IPAs at the bar), they do not want to miss out. This is especially
powerful 
in 
the 
professional 
investment 
business 
where 
most
managers 
are 
benchmarked 
to 
their 
peers 
and 
where 
portfolio
managers fear looking stupid if they miss a big story.
When a powerful macro narrative appears, you see hedge fund
money pouring into the story. Not just because it’s a good story they
believe in but also because managers are afraid their peers will make
money on it and they won’t. FOMO is a terrible yet common reason
traders put on trades. You see this at a micro level on trading floors,
too. When two or three traders on a desk have a profitable trade on,
other traders get jealous and put the trade on to avoid looking bad in
case the trade continues to perform.
I remember multiple FOMO periods during the 2012 to 2015 period,
when Abenomics and Bank of Japan (BOJ) easing were driving
USDJPY higher. Portfolio managers knew their peers were killing it
on the trade so even later on, when USDJPY had already gone from
80 to 120, traders “had to have it” because they felt stupid if they did
not. Before the BOJ meetings in 2015 and 2016, I often heard hedge
fund PMs say something like “Well, I don’t think the BOJ is going to
do anything tonight but I’m going in long USDJPY anyway just in
case.” This is FOMO and favorite/longshot bias all wrapped into one
negative EV trade idea. PMs were thinking more about the lotto
ticket style payoff profile and how they might look bad for missing it
instead of rationally sizing up the risk/reward of playing for a low
probability event that was already heavily subscribed.
4. As a rule, human beings are not very original and this is true both
inside and outside the investment industry. This is why independent
thinkers are so highly valued in investment firms: there are not very
many of them. Many traders on Wall Street are extremely book
smart, gifted test-takers that made their way into trading by playing
the Ivy League game to perfection. Get straight A’s, crush the SATs,
play a sport, network like crazy and voila. None of this requires
much independent thinking.
This 
is 
not 
to 
say 
Wall 
Street 
is 
a 
particularly 
unoriginal
environment, it is just to say that on average, most people follow the
crowd and Wall Street is no exception. Original, creative thinking
can be a huge source of edge in trading. If all you see is the same
stuff everyone else sees, how can you find inefficiencies? How can
you profit? You probably can’t. You follow the crowd, stick to
benchmark and hope nobody finds you out.
5. Incentives. Many traders and investors are incentivized to stick with
the crowd. As an investment manager, if you hug your benchmark
and own mostly technology stocks during a tech bull market, you are
unlikely 
to 
get 
fired. 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
if 
you 
think 
tech 
is
overvalued and you stay underweight throughout the bull market,
you are very likely to get fired! If tech crashes, and you were long
with everyone else, your investors are likely to give you a pass.
“Everyone else got killed in the crash, too… Nobody could have seen
it coming!”
Traders and investors who have mortgages and kids in private school
often 
think 
more 
about 
keeping 
their 
job 
than 
they 
do 
about
maximizing profits.
Let’s go back to the jelly bean game again for a moment. Imagine a
game where 400 students are asked to guess how many jelly beans
are in a jar. But the five highest and five lowest guesses are expelled
from school and the rest compete for a prize of $50. How would that
change the distribution of the guesses? My bet is that particular set of
incentives would herd everyone towards the average, and greatly
reduce the number of extreme guesses.
Herding does not just happen in investing, it is a feature of trading
too. Let’s say you are a trader at a macro hedge fund and there is a
huge macro theme (e.g., the ECB is doing QE). Most people in the
business are doing the trade; in fact, you went to a macro round table
dinner at Milo’s last week and 12 out of 15 traders said long Italian
bonds was their TOP TRADE.
Thing is, you don’t like Italian bonds. You think they are priced for
perfection. Then again, you know if Italian bonds rip and all your
peers deliver returns of 10%+ while you drop 3%, it’s going to look
bad. Your wife just delivered your second child and you just upsized
to a 5,700 square foot McMansion in Westchester. Maybe it would be
better to just plug your nose and buy the stinking Italian bonds. If the
bonds crash… You and all your peers end the year down and
investors be like: “What are you gonna do! Bad year for macro!”
Quite often, herding is caused by career risk. It often feels riskier for
a trader to go against the herd than it is for him to just follow along.
Doing the opposite of what everyone else is doing is hard! It goes
directly 
against 
human 
nature. 
Most 
people 
react 
strongly 
to
incentives and so instead of solving for: “How can I make my
investors the most money?” they solve for: “What will give me the
best chance of keeping my job?” Even if they are not doing this
consciously, there is a good chance their subconscious is busy doing
it for them.
To recap: wisdom of the crowds works when the crowd is diverse,
unbiased and motivated by aligned incentives. When you see a market
where these conditions are not met, start to think about going the other way.
Herding is a tricky concept because being part of the herd is often
profitable. In fact, the reflexive contrarian will lose more money than the
sheep because major trends get very crowded for a long time before they
blow up. Don’t be the trader that is always trying to be smarter than
everyone else and who is always going the other way. There is a time and a
place to be contrarian. Alpha traders identify the time and place to be
contrarian but are also perfectly comfortable riding with the herd (going
with the trend) much of the time.
How to detect and combat herding:
1. Embrace independent thinking. Humans are built to conform: fight
this 
instinct 
and 
make 
confident, 
independent 
judgments 
while
staying humble at the same time. This is not easy!
2. Get comfortable with feeling uncomfortable. Humans are social
animals that find comfort from doing what others do, and success in
trading requires you to go against that instinct somewhat regularly,
so successful traders are going to feel uncomfortable a fair amount of
the time. Get used to feeling uncomfortable.
3. Study and quantify sentiment. Sentiment data is widely available
and comes in all shapes and sizes. We’ll talk sentiment in Chapter
10. Whatever asset you trade, investigate the best ways to collect and
analyze sentiment data. While it’s great to listen to the market noise
and try to come up with your own view on sentiment, data usually
beats anecdote. This is especially true in our current world where
people on Twitter are constantly calling for the end of the world and
bitcoin to one million. Data is much more useful than randomly-
collected snippets.
4. Use overbought and oversold indicators. My experience with over-
bought and oversold indicators is that your threshold for putting on
trades should be as extreme as possible. I like signals that come up a
few times per year, such as Jake Bernstein’s Daily Sentiment Index
below 10 or above 90. The reason is that sentiment is not extreme
most of the time. Sentiment that is rather bullish or kinda bearish
means nothing. The market will spend most of its time in the space
where sentiment has no predictive value. In fact, sentiment is a “go
with” most of the time. The only time it’s contrarian is at the mega-
extremes. But if you can identify these mega-extremes, you can hit
some huge winners.
5. Always be on high alert for turns in sentiment. If you ever notice
bullish sentiment at the low or bearish sentiment at the high: pay
attention. 
Generally, 
sentiment 
almost 
always 
follows 
price. 
If
something is going up, people will be bullish. If the price is falling,
most people will be bearish. There are exceptions (many are always
bearish the stock market, even when it’s at the highs) but in general,
that’s how sentiment works. Very rarely, though, you will see the
opposite and those moments are meaningful.
A prime example is the US dollar in March 2020. The COVID-19
pandemic triggered a liquidity crisis and there was a mad scramble
for dollars. The Great Dollar Shortage drove EURUSD from 1.1300
to 1.0800 in very short order (stronger dollar, weaker euro). Then,
the Fed went all-in, announcing a massive QE and dollar liquidity
program. 
Due 
to 
ongoing 
pressures 
in 
emerging 
markets 
and
equities, though, the USD remained in demand.
At 
that 
time, 
you 
could 
see 
a 
subtle 
but 
important 
change 
in
sentiment happening. The market, which had been raging bullish
USD, started to think about the future impact of all this new USD
liquidity and sentiment slowly turned from bullish USD to modestly
bearish USD. But the USD was still at the ding dong highs! This is a
rare but extremely high EV setup. If you notice a subtle shift away
from a popular narrative, but the price hasn’t moved yet, get ready to
go the other way. Often price will lag sentiment. A market that is
bullish on the lows or bearish on the highs is getting ready to turn.
6. Stay objective. Understand the bias of the media you consume and
look for unbiased sources of data. Twitter leans bearish stocks and
bullish bitcoin and gold. CNBC is almost always bullish stocks.
Zerohedge tends to be bearish Wall Street and bullish gold. Whatever
you read, always consider which way it leans. I prefer to read
analysts who are flexible because those who constantly stick to the
same view tend to be locked in and plagued by confirmation bias.
One of the best financial-market-guru business models is to pick a
view (hopefully a popular one) and pound the table on it year after
year. You attract a following of like-minded people and you deliver
the echo chamber that they need to reinforce their views. And they
will pay you for it. This is not analysis or forecasting, it’s marketing.
Be aware when you receive information from people like this; they
will never change their view and as such their view is probably not
worth much. Good analysts will change their view (at least once
every few years!) Good marketers will stick to one view and beat it
until they have paid off the summer house in East Hampton.
Don’t go on Twitter and see 400 bearish stock market posts and
conclude that the market is short. It might be; it might not be.
Collecting anecdotal information can be extremely useful but you
need to know the bias of the source. Data is always better than
anecdotes so look for objective sources of sentiment and positioning
data and focus more on those than what you consume via traditional
or new media.
A special comment on bubbles
Bubbles are the most spectacular of all financial herding events. Here is
a commentary I wrote in June 2020 about the Davey Day Trader technology
and retail stock trader bubble. It explains how I think about bubbles and
how to trade them.
HERE’S THE THING ABOUT BUBBLES
I don’t go around calling every bull market a bubble. In fact, when
people do that, it bothers me. But this equity rally contains a bunch of micro
bubbles. These sector and stock-specific retail bubbles are fueled by:
People have extra savings and nothing to spend money on;
People can’t wager on or watch sports or go to bars;
A new culture of day trading has emerged with Dave Portnoy as the
supreme leader;
People over consume free goods and retail stock trading is now “free”
There is no widely-accepted definition of a bubble but to me the
evidence 
of 
a 
bubble 
is 
clear 
from 
people’s 
behavior. 
They 
have 
an
unwavering belief in the topside, completely ignore risk, use leverage to
amplify gains and brag about how easy it is to make “free money”.
The recent series of mini-bubbles has featured a rolling series of non-
sensical moves.
Nonsensical moves
There are two kinds of nonsensical stock moves. One is where a bunch
of people think a move is wrong because of valuations or whatever. Also
known as sour grapes. Those “nonsensical” moves happen every day and
are purely subjective and meaningless. The other kind of nonsensical move
is 
when 
there 
is 
a 
move 
that 
represents 
a 
huge 
divergence 
from 
a
mathematically 
known 
outcome 
that 
is 
on 
the 
foreseeable 
/ 
tradable
horizon. These are quantifiable or observable violations of efficient markets
or the law of one price and are much less subjective.
There were multiple examples of this in 1999/2000. The most famous is
when 3COM spun off 5% of PALM
91
. The hot thing at the time was
handheld gadgets so everyone wanted to own PALM and their awesome
Palm Pilots. Nobody cared about poor old 3COM and their dial-up modems
and PCMCIA cards.
The day of the PALM IPO, PALM closed at $95, giving it a market
value of $54B. 3COM’s closing price of $81 gave it a market value of
$28B. So even though 3COM owned $50B worth of PALM stock, it was
trading at a market value of $28B. The company had no debt and $1B in
cash.
This (kind of ) breaks the rule of one price and violates assumptions of
market efficiency and arbitrage. One analyst asked: “Can the markets add
and subtract?” You only get this stuff when the market is losing (or has lost)
its mind
92
. Something similar happened in June 1999 when TD spun off its
TD Waterhouse online brokerage division as discount brokerages were hot
stocks at the time because the environment was just like it is today: retail
gamblers galore.
Today, we have the curious cases of Chesapeake Energy and Hertz
Rent-A-Car (aka Hertz Global Holdings). Chesapeake is on the verge of a
potential bankruptcy filing and its bonds trade for less than 10 cents on the
dollar. Hertz Global Holdings has already declared bankruptcy.
4:44PM yesterday: *CHESAPEAKE SAID TO PREPARE CH. 11 FILING,
GIVE LENDERS CONTROL
It probably goes without saying, but shares of bankrupt companies
should not be worth very much! They are almost always cancelled and end
up being worth zero. They keep trading though, sometimes for years.
Usually they bounce along around $1 and eventually bleed to zero. At a
low enough price point, even though the stock is worth $0, it’s not worth it
to go short and longs can’t be bothered selling (or they already sold) so it
never goes straight to zero right away. Figure 7.15 is the chart of a company
that went bankrupt in 2014 but still trades. That is approximately what the
stock of a bankrupt company should look like.
So what about Hertz and Chesapeake, then? Figure 7.16 and Figure 7.17
show their movement from from January 1 to mid-June 2020:
I’m not a corporate finance guy and I have no opinion on the breakup
value or recovery values of either of these companies. All I am saying is
that in a normal market these two assets would be bouncing along between
$0 and $1, not producing 1000% returns. Sure, there are squeezes in the
stocks of bankrupt companies, but not like this. These moves are another
sign of excess (especially relative to the HTZ and CHK bonds, which are
priced around 35 cents and 6 cents, respectively).
Here’s the thing about bubbles
Ok, sure, it’s a bubble. Even if you agree with me, what do you do?
First of all, let me clarify that I believe this is a retail bubble in a specific
group of stories, not a broad market bubble. If you are a professional asset
manager, you should know what stocks are being bid up by retail right now
and think about your dream exit levels.
Here’s the thing about bubbles. Just because you have identified one,
that does not mean you should be short. Often the real money is made by
identifying a bubble and jumping on for the bullish Wave 5 insanity.
For example, while it was obvious that bitcoin was a classic bubble by
May/ June 2017, it did not crash until seven months later after rallying
another 500%. Correctly identifying bitcoin as a bubble in June 2017 would
have cost you a ton of money.
Identifying something as a bubble just frames the volatility to expect
(high) and lets you know you should use your imagination when setting
upside and eventual downside targets. It also tells you that the endgame is a
high-speed collapse of 75% to 90% off the ultimate high. It does not mean
you just go short and collect the free money. In fact, it’s often easier to
make money long a bubble, not short. So what do we do?
Identify bubble assets that you own and find a moving average or other
technical signal that will tell you when to get out. Bitcoin had already
rallied from $300 to $3,000 when people called it a bubble. Then it went
from $3,000 to $20,000. Missing the last leg of a bubble can be costly.
Shorting the last leg of a bubble can be deadly. In the 2017 bitcoin rally, the
100-day moving average defined the trend the whole way up. Fit a moving
average to the current price trend of whatever bubble assets you own and
liquidate on a daily close below.
Remember that it’s OK to be long during a bubble. It’s also OK to be
short! I worked at a day trading firm 1999/2001 and the people that went
bust in that period mostly fell into two categories:
1. People that believed religiously in the future of the internet and the
unlimited upside of the internet stocks and lost all their money
trading from the long side.
2. People that believed it was a bubble and lost all their money trading
from the short side.
3. I know I said two categories, but there was a very small third
category: The gold bugs. There were two guys off in the corner that
were like: “These sheep are stupid, we’re long gold and PAAS
(silver). This will all end in tears.” They were right! But they
couldn’t hang on long enough and both had to liquidate and find
“real” jobs in mid-2001.
The people that did well in 1999/2001 were the most flexible and open-
minded. We never got married to a side. We didn’t think the bull market
was dumb and we didn’t think the internet was a world changing miracle.
We were not overly philosophical about anything; we just wanted to make
money. Getting philosophical about markets (i.e., “The Fed is manipulating
markets, this is dumb!”) makes it way harder to win. Try not to do that.
Look for signs of blow off tops. One clue that it’s over is when bubble
stocks don’t respond to good news. In 2000, many internet stocks topped
out after failing to rally on blowout earnings reports.
When someone hears that a market is a bubble, they generally want to
go short. Watch for the inevitable burst but don’t get married to either side.
Detour complete! To sum up: When you see what looks to be a bubble,
there are just two things to remember.
Be rational… And be flexible.
Before we wrap up this section on trader bias, let me first give you a
few blurbs on other important forms of bias to watch out for.
Outcome bias
This is our tendency to evaluate a decision based on the outcome,
instead of the process that was followed to reach that decision. I discuss
process vs. out-come in Chapter 5 and it is extremely important to separate
the two. If you do a ton of research, come up with a great trade idea and
then a totally random news event stops you out 10 minutes after you put on
the trade… That’s good decision / bad outcome. Don’t worry about it.
Annie Duke’s book Thinking in Bets spends a ton of time on outcome bias
(she calls it “resulting”). It’s a great book if you want to learn more about
thinking about thinking.
Squirrel-chasing bias
Human attention is drawn to shiny objects. Homer Simpson is often
distracted by squirrels. Prices on the screen are stimulating and interesting
and human beings tend to confer much more meaning to price movement
than it generally deserves.
Chasing bias is the tendency to enter trades in a security simply because
it is moving. Something rallies, and you want to buy it. Something sells off
and you want to sell it. Rid yourself of this bias. It is a weakness that
plagues many traders, even hedge fund professionals. It is essentially a
combination of activity bias (the need to be active even when doing nothing
would be a better choice) and extrapolation bias (“It went down so it’s
gonna keep going down!”)
Bad traders see price moving on the screen and think somebody knows
something. Good traders know 97% of all price action is noise.
“Apple’s gapping lower! Somebody must know something!”
Nope. No. No. They probably don’t. There is an endless series of buys
and sells going through the market and the overwhelming majority of those
buys and sells have no particular edge or informational advantage. It could
be a guy selling to pay for his divorce. It could be an asset manager
reducing risk before she goes on vacation. It could be tax loss selling that
has 
nothing 
to 
do 
with 
the 
company 
in 
question. 
Don’t 
assume 
that
someone knows something when you see price moving.
If you are bearish Apple for six different reasons, and you have been
watching a key level all week, and Apple finally breaks down through that
level, then by all means, sell! But don’t be the trader that just jumps on
whatever is moving just because it’s moving. If you find yourself doing
that… Stop. That is what bad traders do. That is what traders with no plan
do. It is the trading equivalent of Homer Simpson chasing the squirrel.
Be aware of this leak and catch yourself chasing price. Step away from
your computer and give yourself a firm talking to. Chasing price without a
plan is a recipe for persistent losses and frustrating performance.
Hindsight bias
Humans tend to think they know more than they know and they tend to
think that they knew things were going to happen even when they truly had
no idea. My first boss was famous inside the bank for walking by, seeing
what had moved up or down the most and then saying (for example): “I
wanted to be long USDJPY! I knew it was going up!” Well, if you knew,
why didn’t you buy some?
After something has moved, you might remember some weak gut
feeling you had or some random thought that flitted through your mind
about buying that thing. It’s meaningless! It is also annoying. Don’t be one
of those people that says woulda, coulda or shoulda on a trading floor. The
only thing that matters are the decisions and actions you take in real-time.
Hindsight bias is also a constant feature of financial media. When you
see a headline like “Stocks rally on higher oil price” remember that the
journalist is writing with the benefit of hindsight. If you went back to the
start of the day and asked people what stocks would do if oil prices went
up, you might get 50% saying stocks would go down and 50% saying
stocks 
would 
go 
up. 
Journalists 
are 
often 
storytellers, 
not 
traders 
or
financial professionals. They are always trying to make up stories to explain
moves that are often driven by non-macro factors like flow and positioning.
There 
are 
many 
excellent 
finance 
journalists 
but 
there 
is 
also 
the
obligation for the financial media to tell a story based on fundamentals and
macro when often that is not the driver of a market move.
You will never see a headline like “USDCAD rallies as macro portfolio
manager stops out of huge short because he’s going on vacation.” If this is
the reason USDCAD rallies, journalists will fabricate some sort of narrative
that seems to fit in hindsight. That’s their job! Overall, you should be
extremely skeptical of most articles in the financial press. They are not
intentionally false, but they are biased almost exclusively to trying to fit a
macroeconomic explanation even when short-term moves in markets are
often explained by other factors.
Don’t talk about bad beats or ideas you never put on or the times you
get stopped out at the high or low. That’s all just part of trading and nobody
will find you interesting if you tell them about these types of incidents.
Always look forward.
Grizzly bias
Compulsive 
bearishness 
is 
a 
bias 
that 
has 
not 
received 
as 
much
coverage as other forms of trader bias. The bearish bias in the market since
2008 is probably the costliest human bias in finance. Think of all the money
lost on short ES futures in the past 10 years. All the “crash is imminent”
blog posts. All the apocalyptic hedge fund bets. Crazy.
One way permabears justify imminently lower equity prices is by
referencing the bond market. If yields are going up, that’s bad for earnings,
bad for margins, bad for borrowers, bad for severely indebted sovereigns,
etc. If yields go down, it’s “What do bonds know!?” or “The rates market
don’t lie!”
The relationship between stocks and bonds is fluid and for most of my
lifetime, stocks have been going up and bonds have been going up. This is
not to say it will go on forever, only to say that stock market bears need
better reasons than “yields are going up” or “yields are going down”. In
times of plentiful liquidity, it is perfectly logical for both stocks and bonds
to go up, up and away.
Bears sound smarter than bulls
Research shows conclusively that humans perceive people who present
negative or pessimistic opinions as more intelligent than those who express
positive or optimistic opinions. Bearish analysts are viewed as “cutting
through the noise” while bulls are often viewed as naïve fanboys banging
pompoms together on CNBC.
Strangely though, the path of human progress is an undeniable upward
trend. As Deirdre McCloskey put it:
… pessimism sells. For reasons I have never understood, people like to
hear that the world is going to hell, and become huffy and scornful when
some 
idiotic 
optimist 
intrudes 
on 
their 
pleasure. Yet 
pessimism 
has
consistently been a poor guide to the modern economic world
93
.
Similarly, stocks mostly go up, most of the time. Morgan Housel put it
like this
94
:
In investing, a bull sounds like a reckless cheerleader, while a bear
sounds like a sharp mind who has dug past the headlines – despite the
record of the S&P 500 rising 18,000-fold over the last century.
Yet 
many 
of 
the 
best-known 
Wall 
Street 
pundits 
are 
persistently
pessimistic and many of them have been around for decades. Think of all
the famous bears in finance. I could make a list 20 names long without even
Googling. Plenty of them have cool nicknames and there are even two
different celebrity economists nicknamed Dr. Doom. I find that funny.
These are all incredibly smart guys who do amazing analysis that
mostly points to an imminent large-scale bear market. And yet the evidence
shows these forecasts are almost always wrong. Why do we keep reading
their stuff? Because it sounds really smart! The forecasting business has
very little accountability and is mostly about marketing and sounding smart,
not accuracy.
These permabears are famous and they are highly paid. How is this
possible when stocks have spent most of their time in a bull market since
1980? If you always call for a bear market, and then one happens, were you
right? Answer: it doesn’t matter. Pessimism sells, even if it’s the wrong
view most of the time. When you read a “crash is imminent!” piece ask
yourself: is the author preying on my inherent negativity or is she actually
providing useful and actionable analysis supported by a verifiable track
record?
There is an entire industry of permabears because there is steady
demand for them. Don’t stoke that demand. Permabears sound smart, they
are entertaining and they reassure us that our intelligent skepticism is not
misguided despite mountains of evidence to the contrary. The funny thing
is, if these permabears ever change their view, they lose followers and
subscribers.
There is a tried and true strategy in the financial media: adopt one
dramatic world view, stick to it no matter what happens, and sell sell SELL
SELL it no matter what new information comes in to contradict your
viewpoint. As the saying goes: never let the facts get in the way of a good
story.
To be clear, I’m not advocating a permabull stance either. That would be
equally bad. As a trader, you need to be flexible and open-minded, not
perma- anything. This discussion is meant to make you think about how
pessimism is like intellectual candy. It tastes delicious, but it’s generally bad
for your financial health.
Negativity outsells positivity everywhere you look. Cynics and critics
sound smart. People love to read negative stories. Here’s a short excerpt
from a study of how people perceive writers of book reviews
95
:
Negative reviewers were perceived as more intelligent, competent, and
expert than positive reviewers, even when the content of the positive
review was independently judged as being of higher quality and greater
forcefulness.
The same bias exists in non-financial news. Multiple experiments show
that people claim to prefer positive news but actually prefer to consume
negative news. This negativity bias is part of human nature. Even infants
react to negative stimuli with more intensity than they do to positive
stimuli. When people of any age are subjected to two stimuli of equal
intensity, one positive and one negative, the negative stimulus has a greater
psychological impact than the positive one. Negative impressions are more
salient and more memorable.
Negativity is an attention magnet. Like McCloskey said: “Pessimism
sells.” Be a rational consumer of information and do not allow smart-
sounding permabears to bias your process.
Ignore the permabears.
Stories of funds that set money on fire trying to short stocks are
plentiful. One fund I know opened in 2012 and the first trade they did was
go short S&P futures. The last trade they did before shutting down in 2016
(due to poor performance) was cover a short S&P futures position. Another
fund made 22% on Abenomics in 2013 but lost 18% on bearish S&P bets
that year and ended around flat overall. It is a costly bias. When you trade,
you should always be equally able to go long or short risky assets. If you
can’t, it’s a major leak you need to work on.
Warren Buffett said it best:
For 240 years it’s been a terrible mistake to bet against America, and now
is no time to start. America’s golden goose of commerce and innovation will
continue to lay more and larger eggs.
The Gambler’s Fallacy and the Hot Hand
The Gambler’s Fallacy and the Hot Hand are two opposite but related
forms of bias. Some people see a roulette wheel that comes up red eight
times in a row and they think black is due. Some win a few rolls at the craps
table and want to increase their bet size because they have the “hot hand”.
Thing is, in randomly generated data, there are many streaks. They don’t
mean anything; they’re just how random sequences go. Seven heads in a
row does not impact the eighth flip. The coin has no memory.
Probability has no memory.
There is no supernatural element to probability; it is a mathematical
construct. The intuition people get at casino tables is nonsense. If you had a
hunch you were going to win and then you won… It’s a coincidence. Every
spin of a roulette wheel is mutually exclusive and each roll of the dice in
craps is independent of the last.
In finance, things are trickier. If TSLA is up 10 days in a row, is it
wildly over-bought and more likely to fall on day 11? Or is day 11 an
independent event with no relationship to the prior 10? It can be hard to say.
The best starting point is to assume each financial minute, hour and day
is independent from the last. Then be open to exceptions. A good example
of this is seasonality. If GBPUSD is up 8 Aprils in a row, does that mean it
is more likely to go up in April of Year 9? Probably not. There are 10 or 15
actively traded currency pairs and 12 months in every year, so odds are high
that if you look hard enough you’ll find some months that show a seasonal
pattern. Especially if your sample size is just eight years. But this seasonal
pattern is probably simply a random streak.
There 
are, 
however, 
many 
examples 
of 
persistent, 
non-random
seasonality and price patterns. The Halloween Effect, more commonly
known as “Sell in May and Go Away” has been in existence for more than
300 
years 
and 
has 
worked 
out-of-sample 
for 
decades 
after 
it 
was
discovered. It is almost impossible to dismiss this effect as an artifact of
randomness. It is far too persistent.
If a pattern is persistent, then we try to explain it. In the case of “Sell in
May and Go Away”, the explanation could be a pattern of human optimism
where we start the year optimistic, eventually overshoot, pull back from that
bit of irrational exuberance, then rally into year end.
Similarly, there are micro patterns of seasonality and repetition that
make sense and repeat for a reason. The first day of the month is a day
when a big lump of automatic contributions go into US employee 401k
retirement plans. A good proportion of these contributions end up in index
funds and as such the first day of the month tends to be a bullish day for
stocks. Same goes for the start of the year.
There are other seasonal patterns like this in various markets and ideally
when you spot a pattern, you want to be able to ascribe some sort of logic to
it. If you can’t, assume it is random unless you are studying a large sample
of data or have some other reason to think the streak is not just a product of
chance.
The paper “The hot hand belief and the gambler’s fallacy in investment
decisions under risk”
96 
is an excellent summary of two ways in which
investors fail to understand that most events are independent. Here is the
abstract:
We conduct experiments to analyze investment behavior in decisions
under risk. Subjects can bet on the outcomes of a series of coin tosses
themselves, 
rely 
on 
randomized 
‘experts’, 
or 
choose 
a 
risk-free
alternative. We observe that subjects who rely on the randomized experts
pick those who were successful in the past, showing behavior consistent
with the hot hand belief. Obviously the term ‘expert’ suffices to attract
some subjects. For those who decided on their own, we find behavior
consistent with the gambler’s fallacy, as the frequency of betting on heads
(tails) decreases after streaks of heads (tails).
Assume most events in financial markets are independent, but always
look for ones that are not. When you find a pattern, dig deeper. Keep
digging until you find patterns that might logically repeat in the future.
Most streaks and patterns in finance are random. But not all of them.
There are literally 100s of ways behavioral bias influences traders and
investors. I have gone through a short list of some types of bias that I
believe are particularly important but there is an entire academic field (and
a library-full of books) devoted to the topic. At some point, make sure you
read Thinking, Fast and Slow (Kahneman), Fooled by Randomness (Taleb),
and Irrational Exuberance (Shiller). Those are my three favorite books on
behavioral finance.
Also, just Google “behavioral bias trading” occasionally and go down
the rabbit hole of academic research and blog posts. It is such an interesting
topic 
and 
there 
are 
many 
people 
writing 
about 
and 
researching 
it
passionately. Humans are so silly, there will never be a shortage of foibles
to unpack.
Before we complete this chapter on rational thinking, I want to venture
into the weird and wonderful world of counterintuitive math facts. I want to
open your eyes to just how counterintuitive mathematical reality can be.
Your takeaway from this section should be that it is important to coldly
examine your assumptions and interpretations when looking at data because
your intuition can often be wrong.
Also, math is fun.
COUNTERINTUITIVE MATH FACTS
Education has made all the difference for me. It builds software for your
brain. Mathematics taught me to reason logically and understand numbers,
tables, charts, and calculations. Even more valuable, I learned at an early
age to teach myself.
EDWARD O. THORP, A Man for All Markets
One of the most fun parts of math is that even though it is 100%
objective and rational, it can still surprise us and it can sometimes feel a
little 
bit 
like 
magic. 
Part 
of 
acquiring 
a 
higher-level 
and 
rational
understanding of math and probability is to simply understand that math,
statistics, and probability are not always 100% intuitive. Many empirical
and statistical outcomes can be surprising.
In this section I will take a look at a few instances, not so much because
these specific examples are critical for trading but more so you can see that
it is worth challenging your system 1 assumptions if you want to get to the
right 
mathematical 
answers. 
Alpha 
Traders 
have 
a 
strong 
basic
understanding of numbers and statistics. You should constantly be working
to improve your numeracy.
The counterintuitive math facts that follow highlight just how wrong
your gut can be when it jumps to conclusions and should reinforce that your
slow rational mind is where it’s at.
Example 1a and 1b: The bat and ball problem
Even simple problems can be counterintuitive
The classic counterintuitive math problem is the bat and ball problem. If
you have not heard this before, take a quick second to answer. The question
is:
A baseball bat and a ball cost $1.10 total. The bat costs $1.00 more than
the ball. How much does the ball cost?
Did you answer 10 cents?
That is the standard System 1 answer but if you stop to think for just a
moment, you will see that the answer is 5 cents.
Let x represent the cost of the ball x + ($1.00 + x) = $1.10
$1.00 + 2x = $1.10
2x = $1.10 - $1.00
2x = $0.10
x = $0.05
This is question one in the Cognitive Reflection Test discussed earlier. It
shows how, if we listen to our gut, we get the wrong answer. Our brains can
take data and jump to seemingly logical, but completely wrong conclusions.
Slow 
down 
and 
use 
System 
2 
for 
mathematical 
analysis. 
Evaluate
alternative hypotheses, even when the answer seems obvious.
When it comes to trading, the more obvious the conclusion, the more
likely it is already priced into the market and thus the more likely the trade
you enter based on the conclusion will lose money
97
.
Another quick one: You have $100,000 split evenly between ten stocks.
They all drop one percent. What percentage of your portfolio did you just
lose in total?
Most people get that one right (1%) but hear the wrong answer in their
head first (10%).
Example 2 : Up / down / up / down is actually… Down?
People don’t always understand log returns
A $100 stock goes down 10% one day then up 10% the next. What is
the stock worth now?
If you answered $100, you used System 1. And you are wrong.
If you answered $99, you used System 2 and you are right.
This is another simple example of a mathematical result that is not
always obvious on first inspection. If you ask someone what happens to a
stock that goes down 20% one day then up 20% the next, their kneejerk or
System 1 response would be that the stock is unchanged. But anyone that
worked at Lehman Brothers in 2008 (to pick just one of many examples)
knows that if something goes up and down 20% over and over, it will
eventually end up much, much lower.
Here’s a chart:
This truth can be painful in trading. If you lose 10% of your capital, you
need to make 11.1% to get back to flat. If you drop 50% of your capital,
you need to gain 100% to recover. If you lose your mind and drop 90% of
your capital, you will need to make 1,000% just to get back to flat! The
further you fall from your starting capital, the harder it will be to ever come
back.
Example 3 : NBA superstars
98
People don’t always understand averages
Take a look at the statistics from these two star basketball players and
tell me who has the better career shooting percentage:
One would reasonably think that if Miller’s shooting percentage is
higher from both 2-point and 3-point range, he must have the higher career
shooting percentage, right? Wrong. Overall shooting percentage is weighted
and 
Jordan 
took 
many 
more 
2-point 
shots, 
so 
his 
lifetime 
shooting
percentage was 49% while Miller’s was 47%.
So the lesson again is: Don’t just jump to a conclusion. Think.
A simple check you should always employ when analyzing data is to
compare the average to the median. If they are similar, you are probably
good but if there is a big difference, then something is up and you need to
dig deeper.
A common source of discrepancy in my backtesting work is that when I
include data from 2008, the moves that year can often swamp the average
and distort the analysis. This will show up in the median vs. average
validation check and then I can either cut the 2008 data from the series or
use the median figures.
You should never overestimate the meaning of an average. If you put
one foot in a bucket of boiling water and one foot in a bucket of ice water,
are you feeling warm, on average? The more extreme the data points in
your average, the less meaningful your median and average outputs will be.
The 1956 classic “How to Lie with Statistics” by Darrell Huff does a
super job of explaining the basics of how to handle statistics like this. I
think every human being should read that book, even if they don’t care
about statistics or finance.
Example 4 : Arcsine Law
People don’t always understand random walks
This example has a direct application to trading and finance. In fact,
before I knew about Arcsine Law, I made a mistake that I now see others
making from time to time. This one is crazy complicated, so if you don’t
understand 
the 
reasoning, 
just 
at 
least 
make 
sure 
you 
remember 
the
conclusion. Arcsine Law is about as annoying and difficult to understand as
the Monty Hall problem. But worth the effort to understand.
First, let me reprint some faulty analysis I did in 2017. If you know why
it’s wrong before you read the whole thing, you are either a genius or you
already know about Arcsine Law. The following is an excerpt from a daily
wrote toward the end of 2017.
Have you ever noticed that the yearly highs and lows in G7 FX tend to
happen more at the start and end of the year (and less in the middle)? It
is true. We ran the numbers and they were so extreme that I did not
believe them. So we ran them again and I manually checked a bunch of it
because again, I was shocked at the non-randomness of the distribution.
Here is how annual highs and lows are distributed (by month) over the
year for the G7 currencies:
EURUSD USDJPY USDCAD NZDUSD AUDUSD USDCHF and GBPUSD y-axis shows
sum of how many times it happened
Now obviously there is a USD component to all these pairs so if one
makes a high or low at a certain time, it is likely all the others probably will
too. But the extremeness of the skew in the distribution is amazing. But
wait! It gets crazier!
If you look at all the times a currency makes its year high or low in
January, check out the day of January that it happens:
Y-axis is number of occurrences. 1980 to now. Synthetic EUR used for EUR pre-1999
Can you guess what December looks like?
Insane, right? This is a massive anomaly in what should be close to
randomly-distributed data. Clearly year end transactions (which are often
not price sensitive and more timing-related), window dressing, positioning
for the new year and reduced liquidity create enough distortions to make
even the most unrepentant ivory tower academic question EMH. The front
of 
the 
month 
sees 
NFP 
and 
back 
of 
the 
month 
sees 
month-end
rebalancing so that is a partial explanation. Am I missing any other
explanations?
I grind up the data like this all the time and rarely have I seen a more
extreme result.
Pretty cool stuff, I thought. Until I learned… MY ANALYSIS WAS
TOTALLY WRONG.
I 
have 
seen 
others 
make 
this 
same 
mistake 
since 
and 
you 
will
occasionally see excited commentaries like mine remarking on the U-
shaped pattern of highs and lows in a data set. This can relate to data on any
time 
slice, 
monthly, 
daily 
or 
hourly. 
For 
example, 
I 
have 
seen 
blogs
comment recently that stock market highs and lows are more likely to occur
near the open and the close, vs. the middle of the day. It’s the same fallacy.
In a random walk process, there is not a uniform distribution of highs
and lows throughout the day, week, month or year. Instead, we see a U-
shaped pattern with more highs and lows near the start and the end of the
series. This fundamental property of random walks is described by a
counterintuitive branch of probability known as Arcsine law.
If you spend a bit of time thinking about a random walk, it starts to
make sense that the high or low is more likely to occur at the start or end of
the year. Imagine a series of coin flips where you simply add 1 for heads or
subtract 1 for tails. The longer you flip the coin, the farther the sum will
move away from the starting point (zero) and thus the start and end point
are more likely to be the extreme points relative to any point in between.
Our intuition is that they would oscillate around zero, but this is not the
case. They slowly move away.
Figure 7.18 demonstrates how random walks slowly make their away
further and further from their starting point of zero. Therefore, the extreme
low and high points appear more often near the start or the end of the series.
Example 5 : The Birthday Paradox
People don’t always understand probability
Here’s a simpler one. There are 70 people in a room, what are the odds
that two of them will have the same birthday?
If you don’t know this problem, you might start with 70/365 and then
realize it’s much higher than that so maybe guess 50%? Or… 60%?
How about 99.9%? Most people’s intuition is to start with one birthday
and think through the odds of someone in the room having that birthday, but
really all you need is one of any 70 birthdays to match any other birthday in
the room. Figure 7.19 shows you the numbers.
You only need 23 people in a room to have a 50/50 shot of two
matching birthdays. I learned this 20 years ago and it still gives me a mild
case of vertigo when I think about it. It’s weirdly counterintuitive.
When you analyze market data and come to conclusions, make sure you
are confident that your conclusions are logical. Not just intuitive. Logical.
Even if something seems obvious, check it. Think about it.
Image by Rajkiran g via Creative Commons 3.0 (Wikipedia)
Example 6 : Non-linear craziness
People don’t always understand non-linear relationships
When you go to a casino, you know you have a good chance of losing,
but do you truly appreciate how your equity evolves over time in an
environment with negative leakage? Think about this: If you start the night
with $100 and play a fair game (50% chance of winning, bet $1 to win $1),
what are the odds you will hit +$100 before you lose your $100?
Trick question! Because it’s not a trick. 50%.
OK, now what are the odds you get to $100 before losing $100 in the
same $1 game, but now the odds of winning each time are 49.5%? Answer
11.5%.
What about if the odds in the game are 49%? Answer 1.8%.
As you repeat a game with negative edge, the probability of loss is non-
linear. This is why the only way to make money at a casino is with highly
variable, or lumpy bets. If you want maximum odds to win in Vegas, go to
the roulette table when you arrive and put your entire stake on black (or
red). Another “strategy” is to place lumpy bets with your $100. Bet $50
then $2. $60, then $1, etc. At least this way you have a chance. Any
methodical application of a strategy that has a sub-50% win rate will lead to
almost guaranteed loss.
When I’m trading badly, my P&L kind of looks like the $1 bet with the
49% odds.
Note that this is just an example of how math can be counterintuitive.
The takeaway should not be that you want to randomly make lumpy bets in
in trading. In trading your bet-sizing should:
Eliminate risk of ruin.
Be proportionate to conviction level.
Be large enough (even if it’s a low conviction trade) to move the
needle toward your goal.
Finally, note that if your capital is slowly bleeding lower over an
extended period, it is a sign that you have negative edge. Figure 7.20 is the
chart of 10 simulations of a 48%/52% game where you risk $1 to make $1.
If your P&L chart has that steady top-left to bottom-right skew like these
simulations, it is time to think about your edge. Has it disappeared? Have
markets changed and you didn’t adapt? Are you paying too much in
transaction costs (a major source of negative edge)?
250 trials (that is, the game is played 250 times in each simulation)
Example 7: Survivors and incomplete samples
People don’t always think about whether their sample is
complete or biased
In World War 2, the US Navy wanted to reduce the number of its fighter
planes being shot down and wanted to add armor at various points to
reinforce the fighters. Armor increases a plane’s weight and makes it less
efficient, so you need to be selective about where to put armor. The
statisticians in the wartime Statistical Research Group received a diagram
showing data something like this:
By McGeddon - Own work, CC BY-SA 4.0
The intuitive or obvious answer is to reinforce the areas that are getting
hit by enemy fire. The wings, fuselage, and tail look like natural places to
add armor since they get shot up the most.
But 
legendary 
mathematician 
Abraham 
Wald 
ignored 
the 
intuitive
answer and thought more deeply. He thought to ask: “Why are there so
many holes in the fuselage and wings, but no bullet holes in the engines?”
This is like asking: why are there so many ER patients with gunshot
wounds to the arm but so few with gunshot wounds to the heart, even
though both sections of the human body are in a similar area? The answer,
of course, is that the planes that got shot in the engine went down and were
destroyed, so they couldn’t be examined. There are no bullet holes in the
engines of the planes that return to base because the planes that are shot in
the engine don’t make it back to base. Victims shot in the heart don’t make
it to the ER.
Survivorship bias is the phenomenon where we evaluate a sample (say
planes returning from battle or mutual funds) and then draw conclusions
based on that sample without considering all the parts of the sample that did
not survive. We look at planes that returned to base without considering the
ones that got shot down. We look at performance of existing mutual funds
without considering all the ones that went out of business. This is another
way we misinterpret data.
Here’s one way this applies to trading. A friend of yours shows you a
specific strategy that earned 1105% returns last month. Your first reaction
might be “Wow, tell me more!” When really your first reaction should be:
“What other strategies did you test before coming up with this one?”
When analyzing data, look for missing evidence.
This is a common trick in the sports gambling industry. Say the Tigers
are 
playing 
the 
Bears 
tonight. 
You 
send 
10,000 
e-mails 
out 
to 
new
prospects. 5,000 of the e-mails read: “Attention subscribers: OUR GOLD
STAR, GUARANTEED PICK TONIGHT IS: TIGERS TO WIN!” and
5000 say: “Attention subscribers: OUR GOLD STAR, GUARANTEED
PICK TONIGHT IS: BEARS TO WIN!” Then, they wait to see who wins.
Let’s say it’s the Tigers.
The next game is Lions vs. Panthers. The marketer now takes the list of
5,000 e-mails that received the correct Tigers pick e-mail and splits those
into two groups of 2,500. Half the e-mails predict the Lions and half predict
the Panthers. They do this twice more and now have a list of 625 people
that just received FOUR STRAIGHT GOLD STAR PICK WINNERS!
Then, 
they 
call 
up 
those 
625 
prospects 
(many 
of 
whom 
are 
suitably
impressed—nobody else had the Panthers to beat the Lions in that game!)
and try to close the deal on a $1,200/year subscription to the GOLD STAR
PICK SHEET.
Those bettors that got the four accurate e-mails in a row have to be very
smart to think of the hidden evidence they might be missing. More likely,
their emotional desire to win overrides their logical or rational mind and
they hand their credit card number over to the waiting operator.
Numbers on their own do not always tell the full story. You need to
think more deeply about conclusions and treat even the most obvious
answers with rational skepticism.
Remember, skepticism is not cynicism. It doesn’t mean you assume
everything is wrong and everyone is lying and nothing is true. Alpha
Traders 
filter 
information 
with 
slow 
System 
2 
thinking, 
even 
if 
the
conclusion drawn from that information seems simple or obvious at first.
Skepticism is a healthy state of mind that represents quality thinking.
The healthy skeptic understands that most knowledge is uncertain to some
degree and looks to support statements with evidence. She listens to experts
but does not take their claims or forecasts at face value. She uses research
and logic to see through false claims and avoid hasty, incorrect conclusions.
The goal of this section was not to provide examples of counterintuitive
math that you could apply directly to your trading. The idea, instead, is to
get 
you 
thinking 
on 
the 
next 
level. 
Don’t 
just 
scan 
the 
surface 
of
information you receive and let it make its way into your mind, unfiltered.
Think deeply. Seek accuracy and truth, and identify and ignore bad thinking
when you encounter it.
That concludes our discussion of counterintuitive math. I hope you
found it interesting and fun and I hope that it shakes you up a bit and gets
you thinking more actively about your own thinking. If you enjoyed this
section, I highly recommend Darrell Huff’s book How to Lie with Statistics.
It is a classic that explains in clear language how innocent-looking data and
statistics can often be devilishly deceptive.
Be curious. Be open-minded. Seek evidence.
That is the essence of high-quality thinking.
ALWAYS QUESTION COMMON KNOWLEDGE
This is also a useful rule when you run into “common knowledge” in
markets. Don’t just listen to pundits and take their word or accept their
forecasts at face value. Quite often, even Wall Street professionals on
Bloomberg or CNBC will spout non-truths as if they were fact. Be on the
lookout for statements that are presented as fact but could be totally false.
When you hear forecasts, no matter how smart the person sounds,
assume they are probably pretty random. Analyze declarations, verify them
with data and come to your own conclusions.
Here are some examples of questionable “common knowledge” that you
hear in markets all the time.
1. Higher interest rates are bad for stocks
FACT CHECK: Sometimes true
Very often, when interest rates are rising, it is in response to a strong
economy. A strong economy can be good for stocks if the central bank is
accommodative, and bad for stocks if it leads the central bank to hike into
restrictive territory. Rising interest rates and falling bond prices can be good
or bad for stocks. It depends on many factors, especially where the Fed is in
the cycle. If the Fed has hiked seven times and the economy is still strong
and yields are ripping higher, then sure, that kind of rising rate move is
probably bad for stocks.
On the other hand, almost every time US interest rates went up in recent
years, that was likely good news for stocks as it signaled reflation and
momentum 
away 
from 
the 
dreaded 
deflationary 
secular 
stagnation
environment. Any time someone posts or blogs or tweets that rising rates
are bad for stocks, stop and think. What do higher rates represent? Why are
rates rising? Where are we in the interest rate and economic cycles? Unless
you’re near the end of the cycle, rising rates are usually good news for
stocks, not bad news.
2. Bonds are smarter than stocks
Or: “The bond market knows something.”
Or: “The bond market smells a rat in the economy.”
FACT CHECK: False
Bond traders sit only a few rows from equity traders in most banks.
They have the same information as multi-asset macro PMs with billions of
capital under management. Bond traders do not have access to secret
information about the economy that is kept hidden from traders in every
other asset class.
No, no, no, no… No.
Many permabear pundits feel nauseous when they see the stock market
going up, so they will come up with any excuse for why the rally is “on thin
ice” or “set to falter”. If bonds happen to be rallying along with stocks,
these fear-peddling pundits assume that the bond market has some sort of
secret information that hasn’t yet been disclosed to the stock market. They
will say that the bond market knows something and stocks are going to
crash any minute.
When people say any of the three clichés listed above, chuckle to
yourself and hit ignore. Figure 7.22 is a chart of stocks and bonds for the
last 10 years.
Does it look like bond rallies have been bad for stocks? Nope. It would
be just as dangerous to say stocks and bonds always go up together. That’s
not true either. It’s more complicated than a simple soundbite will allow.
Quantitative easing creates long periods where stocks and bonds go up in
tandem.
The relationship between stocks and bonds is complicated and varies
considerably 
depending 
on 
the 
regime. 
It 
depends 
what 
part 
of 
the
economic and Fed rate hike or rate cut cycle the world is in. Any simplistic
comment formulated as: “Bonds are doing X so stocks should do Y” is a
waste of time.
The stock vs. bond relationship is dynamic and unstable. Any statement
about correlation or cross-market signal between stocks and bonds needs to
be evaluated with a heavy dose of critical thinking and analysis. Mostly,
your starting point should be: bonds don’t predict stocks. Then work from
there.
If you are astute, you might have noticed that these first two sections on
“common knowledge” can be boiled down to:
1. Higher rates are bad for stocks
2. Lower rates are bad for stocks
The 
permabears 
leave 
many 
heaping 
piles 
of 
steaming 
hot 
brown
nonsense in the financial forest every day. Learn to step over and around it
and don’t waste your time trying to convince the bears that their guano
smells. Just slowly and quietly walk away.
3. Gold is a safe haven
FACT CHECK: Kinda. But not really.
A safe haven is an asset that goes up or at least holds its value during
periods of risk aversion. Bonds typically perform this role, though with
interest rates approaching zero in most countries by the year 2020, that role
is likely to be questioned going forward.
The Japanese yen and Swiss franc are traditionally viewed as safe
havens though their role as safe havens has diminished in recent years due
to 
central 
bank 
and 
semi-official 
currency 
intervention 
(perceived 
or
actual). Many prognosticators and journalists talk about gold as if it is a
safe haven. When you see a headline like: “Gold rallies as US stock market
sell-off accelerates”, ignore it. Gold is just as likely to go down on days or
during weeks that stocks go down.
Gold’s behavior during periods of risk aversion depends mostly on
positioning and overall financial market and USD liquidity. If stocks sell off
because of economic worries, you might see gold rally. On the other hand,
if stocks sell off because of liquidity fears (like in March 2020), expect gold
to plummet right along with stocks.
The correlation between changes in the price of gold and changes in
stock prices is usually mildly positive, meaning gold and stocks go up and
down together, a tad. In Figure 7.23, I present a simple chart to quickly
demonstrate.
I found the 25 worst weeks for the stock market (largest fall, in
percentage terms) between 1980 and 2020 and then checked what gold did
during those same weeks. If gold is a safe haven, it should reliably remain
unchanged or go higher at these moments. The table shows the results,
sorted by worst SPX performance, starting with the worst week in S&P 500
history.
The average move for gold in big down weeks for stocks is -0.4%.
There are 13 down weeks vs. 15 up. The takeaway is that gold is not a
reliable safe haven. If stocks collapse, gold might go up, or it might not.
4. Bad economic news is bad for stocks
FACT CHECK: Sometimes true.
The economy is one of many, many factors that influence stock prices.
Analysts often overweight the importance of the economy when discussing
stocks and giant question marks appear over their heads as they discuss the
baffling divergence between equities and the economy.
Sometimes it’s all about the economy; sometimes the economy has
nothing to do with stocks.
2020 was the most glaring example in history of a feature of the stock
market that really bothers some people (especially journalists, pundits, and
noob traders): the stock market is not always a reflection of the economy,
nor is it a reflection of social mood. It reflects supply and demand for
stocks.
Often, nobody really understands what is driving the stock market (in
either direction), and most of the “analysis” you see is simply ex-post
rationalization 
for 
things 
that 
have 
already 
happened. 
If 
we 
really
understood stocks, we could probably predict them better!
There are so many variables that can drive a wedge between stocks and
the economy. For example:
Excess liquidity provided by central banks.
Expectations of future economic conditions are often more important
that the current economic situation or economic numbers.
Valuations can expand and contract in the same direction as the
economy or in the opposite direction. This makes it hard to trace the
direct connection between stocks and economic output. Multiple
expansion and contraction (higher and lower price/earnings ratios) and
many other factors unrelated to the economy can move stock prices.
Supply and demand. If companies are buying back stock, other
companies are going private, M&A activity is frenzied and retail
traders are furiously opening new accounts, there can be a mismatch
between supply and demand for stocks. These technical factors do not
always correlate with economic growth.
Sentiment. If everyone is raging bullish and caught in a speculative
mania, economics don’t matter much. Stocks are going higher.
5. The stock market is going to crash this week, this month, any
day, etc.
FACT CHECK: Almost always false.
Fear sells. Dire predictions get clicks. Predicting crashes is a great
media strategy. This is a fact and it has been confirmed by a huge pile of
research. Human beings are attracted to dark narratives and scary headlines.
As mentioned earlier, research shows that negative views on the stock
market are perceived to be smarter while bullish views tend to be perceived
as 
naïve, 
unrealistic, 
or 
rose-colored, 
despite 
the 
fact 
that 
empirical
evidence strongly supports a bullish stance most of the time.
The fact that “the stock market is about to crash” is common knowledge
on many websites and is a frequent theme on Twitter. People are always
saying this; yet oddly enough, the stock market barely ever crashes! Take a
look at history.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Regularly predicting a crash is for people that want clicks and
followers, not for people that want to make money.
When 
you 
see 
nonsense 
like 
“stocks 
can’t 
fight 
gravity 
forever”
remember Figure 7.24.
Prices operate in a vacuum; there is no gravity. Most people that
“successfully” predicted a crash in the past (say 2008) just predict crashes
all the time. A stopped clock is right twice a day.
Here are some statistics about the stock market that I hope will dissuade
you from joining the permabear sloth.
It is true that stocks have a left tail, which means that the fastest,
craziest moves in the stock market are down, not up. This is part of the
reason it is more fun to be bearish than bullish. You are more likely to get
instant gratification.
There is a crash (15% drop in one month) about once every five to eight
years. Still, despite the four crashes between 2000 and 2020, the S&P went
from 1,320 to 3,420 in that period (including four separate months when
stocks ripped higher by more than 15%).
If your goal is to make money trading, you should be comfortable
shifting between long or short risky assets depending on market conditions.
You should trade without a directional bias. It’s fine to be bearish, just don’t
let it become your religion.
Don’t be a permabear. Don’t be a permabull.
Keep an open mind and analyze the evidence, then make a rational and
unbiased short-term forecast of market direction. That’s the essence of
good trading.
That concludes this chapter on rational, unbiased thinking. The biggest
challenge with human bias is that studies show that even when we know
about a bias, we can still fall victim to it. Therefore, it is important not just
to know about various forms of bias and bad thinking, but to implement
strategies and tactics to counteract bias in a rigorous and systematic way.
At 
this 
point, 
I 
hope 
you 
have 
a 
better 
understanding 
of 
the
characteristics that make up an Alpha Trader and where you are strong,
medium, and weak. I hope I have given you a few new ideas on how to
improve your trading, tighten up your game, eliminate leaks and become
more self-aware.
That’s Part Two done. Now, it’s time for some fun stuff. I’ve laid the
ground- work and it’s time to take action. You know what it means to be a
rational thinking trader and you have learned many of the strengths and
weaknesses 
that 
enhance 
or 
hamper 
trading 
success. 
Now, 
let’s 
talk
markets.
In Part Three, we look at how to become an expert in your market
(Chapters 8 to 10) and then examine the topic of risk management in
Chapter 11. Chapter 12 brings the entire book together as I explain exactly
how I come up with, structure and execute trade ideas. Finally, I walk you
through a detailed, real-life trade example in a way that I hope you will find
both interesting and informative.
You are more than half-way through the book.
Let’s move on to Part Three.
68. Svenson, O., “Are we all less risky and more skillful than our fellow drivers?” (1980).
69. 
Biais, 
B., 
et 
al. 
“Judgemental 
Overconfidence, 
Self-Monitoring, 
and 
Trading
Performance in an Experimental Financial Market,” The Review of Economic Studies
(2005).
70. Barber and Odean, “Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence and common stock
investment” (2001).
71. Julia Michailova and Ulrich Schmidt, “Overconfidence and bubbles in experimental
asset markets”, Kiel Institute for the World Economy (2011).
72. Seo-Young Cho, “Explaining Gender Differences in Confidence and Overconfidence in
Math” (2017).
73. Lundeberg, M. A., Fox, P. W., & Punćcohać, J., “Highly confident but wrong: Gender
differences and similarities in confidence judgments” (1994).
74. Patrick Ring, Levent Neyse, et al., “Gender Differences in Performance Predictions:
Evidence from the Cognitive Reflection Test” (2016)
75. 
Breiter, Aharon, 
Khaneman 
et 
al., 
“Functional 
Imaging 
of 
Neural 
Responses 
to
Expectancy and Experience of Monetary Gains and Losses” (2001)
76. Brown, Stephen and Lu, Yan and Ray, Sugata and Teo, Melvyn, “Sensation Seeking
and Hedge Funds” (2016).
77. For example: Grinblatt and Keloharju, “Sensation seeking, overconfidence and trading
activity,” (2009).
78. 
https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/gambling-disorder/what-is-gambling-
disorder
79. Lu, Yan and Mortal, Sandra and Ray, Sugata, “Hedge Fund Hold ‘em” (2019).
80. It is theoretically possible to play Blackjack with positive expectation but with 6-deck
shoes and security cameras everywhere, not so much!
81. https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/02/27/why-facts-dont-change-our-minds
82. Koriat, A., Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B., “Reasons for confidence.” (1980)
83. Stanovich, K.E., West, R.F. and Topiak, M.E., “Myside Bias, Rational Thinking and
Intelligence.” (2013)
84. https://psychcentral.com/lib/why-intelligent-people-do-foolish-things/
85. Copyright 2021, Angus Greig.
86. Erik Snowberg, E., and Wolfers, J. “Explaining the favorite-longshot bias: Is it risk-love
or misperceptions?” (2010).
87. Baseball betting is an interesting exception. Despite some underdogs paying 2:1 or
even 3:1, baseball bettors prefer to bet favorites.
88. Multiple investor biases are explained by Prospect Theory. To read more about this
huge topic, just Google ‘Prospect Theory Kahneman Tversky’.
89. Tong, Sean, “The anchoring and adjustment bias in estimates of US employment”
(2014).
90. Campbell and Sharpe, “Anchoring bias in consensus forecasts and its effect on market
prices” (2007).
91. For the record, Jared Dillian wrote a whole novel, All the Evil of this World, centered on
the 3COM/PALM spinoff. I loved it, but apparently it was a love it/hate it type of book so
it’s a risky one to recommend. If you like dark stuff, and you want to know what 1999 felt
like—go for it.
92. Generally, the main explanation for these illogical moves is that it’s difficult or expensive
to borrow a stock that is overpriced. Regardless, these large disconnects from basic math
are usually a symptom of Bubbliciousness. See Cherkes, Jones and Spatt: “A solution to
the PALM, 3COM spin off puzzles” (2013) for an academic paper that does a good job of
explaining the PALM/3COM non-arbitrage.
93. http://www.deirdremccloskey.org/docs/pdf/PikettyReviewEssay.pdf
94. 
https://www.fool.com/investing/general/2016/01/21/why-does-pessimism-sound-so-
smart.aspx I learned of the mcloskey quote (footnote 1) from this article, too.
95. Teresa Amabile, “Brilliant but Cruel: Perceptions of negative evaluators” (1983).
96. Huber, J., Kirchler, M. & Stöckl, T. “The hot hand belief and the gambler’s fallacy in
investment decisions under risk” (2010).
97. This is not always true! Sometimes the obvious trade is the right trade. But if it’s
obvious, spend even more time than usual thinking about what could go wrong because
obvious trade usually means crowded trade.
98. 
This 
example 
is 
from 
a 
December 
2, 
2019 
blog 
post 
by 
Noah 
Xiao 
on
towardsdatascience.com.
I
PART THREE
METHODOLOGY AND MATHEMATICS
“Nothing in the world is worth having or worth doing unless it means effort,
pain, difficulty… I have never in my life envied a human being who led an
easy life.”
THEODORE ROOSEVELT
n Part Three I will outline the specific steps you must take to master your
market. Your goal must be to become an expert in the product or markets
that you trade. Stay narrow (focus on one or two markets) and go deep
(learn as much as possible, right down to the nitty-grittiest details). This
approach gives you the best shot at a sustainable edge. Wide and shallow
can work, but has a much lower probability of success than narrow and
deep.
Here is the abstract of an interesting study of Twitter sentiment that
supports the idea that narrow focus yields higher returns
99
.
Using 
tweets 
from 
StockTwits 
and 
machine-learning 
classification
techniques, we find that social-media sentiment predicts positively and
significantly 
future 
stock 
returns, 
and, 
importantly, 
such 
positive
predictability 
decreases 
when 
the 
number 
of 
stocks 
users 
follow
increases. The return predictability appears to stem from users’ ability to
forecast future earnings. Further tests reveal that reduced predictability
due to stock coverage is significant only for firms that are complex,
opaque, and thus hard to analyze. The evidence suggests that stock
analysis by users with a more complex portfolio is inferior due to attention
and time constraints.
Key words: “attention” and “time constraints”. You have a limited
supply of attention and time and the more you spread it out, the less chance
you have of achieving mastery.
I can 100% confirm this from experience. Traders who master one area
succeed much more often than traders that dabble in every market. That is
why the term “macro tourist” tends to be used in a derogatory way
100
.
Locals have expert knowledge and can find a great meal for a reasonable
price. Tourists eat at the overpriced restaurants and leave disappointed.
The next three chapters will outline the three steps you must take to
become an expert in your market. Step one: understand microstructure. Step
two: understand the narrative. Finally, step three: understand technicals,
positioning and sentiment. Do the work to master these three areas and you
are on the way to trading success.
Think of the examples ahead as starting points for the deep dive you
will take into your own market. Each product and security trades differently
and has its own idiosyncrasies. I hope I give you enough detail here to both
teach you some aspects that I find important. I also want to open your eyes
to the many different ways one can think about, analyze and study markets.
Ultimately you should be able to analyze and dissect the market(s) you
trade, using a framework you’ve created.
In other words, the examples and ideas I present in these chapters are
not exhaustive. Take my ideas and build on them. Come up with your own
smarter, better, more up-to-date ideas. Think about a long game where each
day you stack more and more expertise on top of your existing knowledge.
Always maintain a philosophy of continuous improvement and lifelong
learning.
The two greatest sources of edge in trading are expert-level knowledge
of 
a 
specific 
market, 
and 
a 
rigorous 
execution 
and 
risk 
management
process. To succeed, you must know your product inside and out, and you
must have a process that maximizes leverage but also eliminates risk of
ruin. Then you are smarter, more knowledgeable and more nimble than the
competition and built to survive in the long run. Part Three is a study of the
specific methodologies and mathematics you need to understand to achieve
these goals.
Let’s go to Chapter 8, where we will go into some depth on a topic I
have always found supremely fascinating: market microstructure.
99. Leung, Woon Sau and Wong, Gabriel and Wong, Woon K., “Social-Media Sentiment,
Portfolio Complexity, and Stock Returns” (2019).
100. A Macro Tourist is a trader or investor who takes a position in a market they don’t know
very well, in an attempt to profit from a popular narrative. The appearance of macro
tourists often makes the locals want to run for the hills.
