E
CHAPTER 8
UNDERSTAND MICROSTRUCTURE
Step one towards becoming an expert in your market
xcellent traders understand microstructure and have a deep knowledge
of the products they trade. This chapter will explain how to become an
expert in microstructure and how to use this deeper understanding to make
more money trading.
You are playing in one of the most complex, competitive games in the
world. You can’t dabble in 14 products and expect to have an edge.
Occasionally, traders can be experts in a particular strategy and apply that
strategy across products, but in general most traders that succeed have
knowledge that is narrow and deep, not shallow and wide. They are product
experts. How do you become an expert?
Read. Observe. Study.
Let’s say you have been trading for a while without much success and
so you decide to day trade Tesla (TSLA) and focus all your energy there.
You will trade nothing else. There are pros and cons to trading TSLA (like
any stock).
Pros:
it’s liquid
it’s volatile
there are opportunities in the stock every day
many non-professionals trade it
Cons:
there are 1000s of people trading it who probably know more than you
do
it’s extremely volatile
many traders are biased one way or the other when it comes to Tesla
because of their love or hate for the product and/or its larger-than-life
founder. Never trade the stock of a company you have an emotional
connection to
101
.
So how do you become an expert in TSLA? You start by studying its
microstructure. Start by watching the price action for a few days. How does
it trade on the open and close? Who are the players trading it and talking
about it? What is the average daily range? Average hourly range? What is
the average range on the day after earnings? How does liquidity vary by
time of day? Does it trade differently around option expiries? How big are
the close to open gaps after news comes out?
Those are sample questions you might ask about microstructure. Let me
explain microstructure in detail so that you can ask the right questions in
your market. A market’s microstructure is determined by the following:
1. Types of participants
2. Liquidity
a. Transaction costs and bid / offer spread
b. Gap risk
3. Intraday activity patterns
4. Volatility
Let’s start with a brief discussion of market participants then make our
way through the list.
1. Market participants
Who trades your product? Depending on your seat, you may have more
or less visibility into who trades your product and who does not. If you
trade futures you have very little insight, while if you are a market maker,
you have a ton of insight. When I was day trading equities, I could often
figure out by studying the Level 2 screen all day which market makers
mattered 
and 
which 
did 
not. 
In 
general, 
there 
are 
six 
major 
market
participants:
1. Retail. People sitting at home trading their own money or trading on
their phones. The influence of retail varies from minimal (most of the
time) to total dominance (Hertz stock in April 2020). Even in the
largest 
market 
of 
all, 
foreign 
exchange, 
retail 
can 
matter. 
For
example, Japanese retail investors can move the entire currency
market sometimes with large mean reversion and stop loss activity.
2. Institutional. There are five main types of institutions:
a. Banks. Commercial and investment banks are active players in
most securities. They act as market makers, agents, principals and
speculators.
b. Real money. This is traditional investor capital, usually invested in
stocks and bonds, but also other asset classes. It is pensions,
mutual funds, 401k money etc.
c. Hedge funds. These are pools of capital formed to invest and
generate alpha. Hedge funds execute a wide range of strategies
from trend following and systematic to discretionary macro. Hedge
fund activity tends to be herd-like in aggregate, even though many
individual portfolio managers run individual and unique strategies.
Hedge 
funds 
generally 
employ 
more 
leverage 
than 
other
institutional participants.
d. Corporates. Corporations issue stock, buy back stock, hedge via
futures, buy and sell currencies to hedge income and balance sheet
exposure, etc. Their activity is hard to track unless you work at a
bank. Decision making tends to be more timing or transaction-
focused, not market or macro driven. That is, a company might
have a large need to buy euros due to a cross-border acquisition.
That does not necessarily mean they are bullish euro, they just
need to buy the euros to complete their asset purchase.
e. Central banks. Central banks around the world hold huge reserves
and manage those reserves by investing in countries and securities
they expect to outperform. Second, central banks buy and (rarely)
sell assets as a part of their monetary policy. The Federal Reserve
bought a laundry list of assets in 2020 in response to the massive
economic 
damage 
caused 
by 
COVID-19. 
Central 
bank
participation in some asset markets is the primary determinant of
price, while they are secondary actors in other markets.
Who are the players in your market? Can you identify any particular
activity by specific participants? In some markets, this is impossible, but it
is worth thinking about your market and whether or not you can monitor the
activity of the largest players and use this as an input into your process.
Below are some examples of how to monitor these players. This is
mostly expert-level stuff that you would not know when you are just
starting out. As you spend more time studying your market, you will learn
how to identify what the big players are up to. These are six real-world
examples of how you can see the larger participants in action:
1. There is a well-known pattern where large real-money flows take
place in currency markets on the last day of each month, peaking at 4
p.m. London time. I will give a short example later in the chapter.
2. If you are trading equities, study the supply and demand from
institutions on the Level 2 screen. While the Level 2 info was much
more useful and yielded much more edge in the late 1990s and early
2000s, there is still value in watching and studying it.
3. Track cross-border mergers and acquisitions to monitor possible
currency flows.
4. Monitor equity moves around triple witching as market makers and
real money hedgers trade actively.
5. Study a central bank’s activities and operations and see if there is any
pattern to trading activity when the central bank is active in the
market vs. when it is not. Does it impact markets at a particular time
of day or price level?
6. Learn how stocks trade on the day they are added to the S&P 500
index (as real money adds the stock to stay on benchmark) and trade
that pattern.
Think about what you know about the various actors in your market and
see if you can unpack any useful, predictive information about future moves
by analyzing their actions. It sounds esoteric but in most markets there is
some visibility into what people are doing, especially if you read like a
fiend. Note that due to efficient markets, patterns that become well known
tend to lose their predictability over time.
Assume markets are very, but not perfectly, efficient.
When you think you have found an inefficiency or exploitable pattern in
the market, be skeptical but optimistic. Don’t be so naïve as to think there
are high-Sharpe pots of gold lying around all over the place but also don’t
fall into the negative trap of these two economists who believe that every
good idea has already been found:
Two economists are walking down the street when one points to the
ground and says, “Look, a ten-dollar bill!”
The second economist replies, “That’s crazy. If that was a ten-dollar bill
someone would have picked it up already.”
This is a common trap in all areas of innovation. You have an idea for a
novel and think “oh, I’m sure that’s been done before” or you think of a
product idea and imagine “Ah, someone must have thought of that already.”
That 
is 
a 
losing 
mentality. 
New 
ideas 
are 
the 
absolute 
lifeblood 
of
capitalism 
and 
creativity. 
Never 
dismiss 
any 
idea 
on 
the 
assumption
someone must have already thought of it.
2. Liquidity
Understand liquidity. Some products, like FX, are extremely liquid and
trade continuously all day and all week. Some markets, like lumber and
wheat, are much less liquid, trade short sessions with a defined open and
close, and offer minimal price transparency and poor liquidity outside
primary trading hours.
Some assets trade freely all the time while some futures contracts can
hit limit up or limit down for multiple days in a row, leaving specs trapped
on the wrong side. How does your product trade? Is there plenty of liquidity
all the time, or do you need to consider liquidity when you execute? Let’s
drill into liquidity a bit so you can think about the specific features of your
market.
Transaction costs and bid /ask spread
The difference between the bid and the ask in a market is called the
spread.
102
Transaction costs are the amount of spread you pay when you
trade.
(SPREAD) X (NUMBER OF UNITS) = TRANSACTION COST
If AAPL is trading 350.00 / 350.08, the spread is eight cents. This is
often expressed either as a percentage of the mid-price
103
or in basis points:
= 0.08 / 350.04
= 0.029%
= 2.9bps
104
2.9bps is one of the tightest bid/offer spreads you will see. Spreads vary
dramatically by asset class and by product within an asset class. In FX,
spreads in EURUSD (the most liquid pair) are often less than 1/10 of
spreads in USDTRY (Turkish lira). The bid/ask in a small cap or microcap
stock 
can 
be 
50X 
the 
AAPL 
bid/ask. 
Gold 
trades 
way 
tighter 
than
palladium. Spreads in credit are generally wider than spreads in fixed
income. 
Spreads 
in 
agricultural 
commodities 
are 
generally 
wider 
than
spreads in short-term interest rate futures. And so on.
Every market has a different texture and part of this texture comes from
the bid/offer spread. Trading activity on each side of the spread is called
bid/ ask bounce.
Think about your average trade size and call that one unit. How much
does it cost you to trade one unit in normal markets? For example: If your
normal trade size is 10 million EURUSD and EURUSD trades 2 pips wide
in 10 million (1 pip = 0.0001). Each round trip (buy and sell) costs:
= 10,000,000 * (0.0002)
= $2,000
That is to say: if the market in EURUSD is 1.1000 bid / 1.1002 offer
and you buy and sell without the market moving, you have paid 0.0002 in
transaction costs which is $2,000 per 10 million transacted.
When you buy and sell stocks at zero commission, you are still paying a
toll of somewhere between 0.02% and 0.50% (2bps to 50bps) due to the
bid/ask spread. Some stocks are much wider than 0.50% but you probably
should not be trading those. Spreads and commissions are the main reason
trading is a negative-sum game, not a zero-sum game. Spread is the
invisible enemy, like a slow leak in a tire. It costs you a ton of P&L but it
can be very hard to observe or measure correctly.
Tiffany is an active day trader. She executes 15 round-trips per day (15
buys and 15 sells) and the stock she specializes in (Take Two Interactive,
TTWO) has an average bid/ask of 38bps. That means if the stock is trading
at $173, the average bid/ask is about 66 cents
105
. Her account size is
$100,000 and her average trade size is 150 shares. So she is leaking:
150 shares X 15 round trips X $0.66 per round trip
= $1,485 per day
X 5 days
= $7,425 per week
X 48 weeks
106
= $356,400 per year
Insane, right? These are realistic assumptions and they give you a good
sense of just how expensive it can be to cross big spreads. She can reduce
her transaction costs by using other execution strategies like limit orders,
but we don’t know if this will hurt her performance.
Obviously she can’t keep doing this for very long unless her strategy
has significant edge. If she used the same strategy but switched over to
AAPL (and we assume 3bps bid/ask in AAPL), her transaction costs drop
to:
$117 per day
$585 per week
$28,080 per year
I am not saying you should only trade AAPL! What I am saying is that
you should have a clear and thorough understanding of how much it costs
you to transact. When you fully grok how expensive it is to transact, you
will probably transact less. As we have discussed, transacting less is almost
always a good thing.
Accurate data on bid/offer spreads can be hard to come by. In FX, the
banks collect this data and some are willing to share it with clients while
others view it as proprietary. In the stock market, the easiest thing to do is
watch the stock you trade and take occasional snapshots of the spread.
Bid/offer spreads in an individual stock will vary substantially by time
of day and around events. In times of stress, bid/offer spreads can widen
dramatically but in normal markets, they are somewhat consistent. In other
words, if AAPL trades 3bps wide today at 10 a.m., it will probably trade
around 3bps wide tomorrow at 10 a.m. unless there is news, or a profound
change in the markets.
In contrast, at the open (9:30 a.m.) it could be tighter or wider, and at
times of higher volatility it will almost certainly trade wider. Your estimate
of bid/offer spreads does not have to be perfect, just eyeball it and multiply
by your estimated number of trades per day to get a rough sense of your
transaction 
costs 
(TC). 
TC 
is 
a 
slow 
and 
steady 
leak 
that 
adds 
up
substantially.
You need a significant edge to make money in any market because you
don’t just need to generate alpha, you need to generate alpha net of
transaction costs. Figure 8.1 and Figure 8.2 show the theoretical P&L for
two 
different 
traders. 
The 
thinner 
gray 
line 
shows 
the 
P&L 
before
transaction costs (known as “gross”) and the black line shows the P&L after
TC (known as “net”).
I used realistic bid/offer spreads to show the impact of trading costs on
two realistic P&L streams so you can get a sense of the enormous strain TC
exerts on performance.
You should not obsess over TC but you need to be smart about it. Most
of all, you need to quantify and monitor it. TC is a serious and important
leak that you need to reduce as much as possible.
At the same time, TC is a cost of doing business in trading and you
don’t want an unhealthy approach to reducing TC that could jeopardize
your reputation or your future liquidity. Be smart, but not obsessive about
reducing TC. We will discuss some ways to do this in the section on
execution in Chapter 12.
Average bid/offer spread is 10 cents. Zero commission. She trades 252 days per year. Her
average up day is +$3,000, her average down day is -$2,000 and her WIN% is 50%
Assumes average bid/ask spread of 2 pips. His average up day is +$800k, his average
down day is -$350k and his WIN% is 50%
Gap risk
Another element of Liquidity is Gap risk. There are three types of gap
risk. The first is when markets close and then reopen. A stock closes at $50
on Friday and then over the weekend their CFO quits and the company
announces that they have fired their auditor. That doesn’t sound good! The
stock opens at $25 on Monday morning. Yikes. If you have a $50,000
account and you went home long at 2X margin, you’re done. Ruined. That’s
gap risk number one.
Usually the timing of close-to-open gap risk can be predicted in advance
since we know the trading hours of whatever securities we trade, but this is
not 100% the case. Many futures have trading limits: if they move a certain
amount, trading is halted
107
. Individual stocks are often halted for pending
news or due to extreme volatility. You must have a complete understanding
of how your market trades and avoid risk of ruin before everything else.
The second type of gap risk relates to events. When the US jobs report
comes out the first Friday of each month at 8:30 a.m., you will often see
S&P futures and USDJPY (and other markets) jump to a new level without
trading 
continuously 
from 
A 
to 
B. 
For 
example, 
USDJPY 
might 
be
112.10/15 at 8:29:29 and then the jobs number comes in strong and the first
trade after 8:30 could be 112.68. If you go into the number short and don’t
have a good understanding of the gap risk, you might get wrecked.
After economic releases and events, there is usually a fast market for 5
to 10 minutes as well, so not only do you need to worry about gap risk, but
also liquidity risk. Even if you are trading small size, it can be difficult to
get in and out in fast markets. You might deal on wrong prices or get error
messages or, if you trade bigger size, simply find you cannot transact your
full amount. Like I said earlier, unless you think you have a big edge on the
number or event, go in flat and react.
The third type of gap risk comes from markets that are pegged, capped
or floored by central banks or other entities. One famous example of this is
the EURCHF floor at 1.2000. The Swiss National Bank tried to enforce an
exchange rate and eventually, when they gave up, the largest one day move
in the history of foreign exchange happened. In about two hours. EURCHF
traded from 1.2000 to 0.8500 in a matter of minutes.
Pegs and caps and floors are most common in FX markets but also show
up in equity markets in the days after an IPO. Market makers representing
the investment bank(s) that underwrote the IPO are permitted to intervene
in the market to stabilize the price of the stock if it starts to fall below the
IPO 
price. 
This 
stabilization 
bid 
is 
not 
infinite. 
At 
some 
point, 
the
underwriter will say enough is enough and pull away and the stock will
usually gap aggressively lower.
There is a fantastic piece about the Facebook IPO stabilization effort on
the Liberty Street Economics Blog
108
. Figure 8.3 shows how the number of
shares on the bid (vertical bars) increased as Facebook’s share price reached
$38 (the IPO price) on its first day trading.
Chart used with permission of Liberty Street Economics (NY Fed)
The huge bids that came in are from the underwriter of the Facebook
IPO. The chart shows that the underwriter made a concerted effort to buy
nearly limitless stock at $38. Traders might see this huge intervention and
think it’s smart to go long with a stop below $38. Generally that is not the
right way to look at situations like this.
Instead, you should realize that the price is badly out of equilibrium.
With one buyer and myriad sellers, the stock is out of line and the second
the buyer disappears, it’s going to be chaos as the price will gap lower in
search of equilibrium. Figure 8.4 shows the first day of trading (same price
pattern as above) plus the next five days.
When the stock opened the next day, the stabilization bid wasn’t there
and Facebook gapped lower. Longs were lucky if they got out at $34. The
stock did not trade back above $38 again for more than a year.
While 
it’s 
tempting 
to 
go 
with 
a 
market 
distortion 
like 
the 
FB
stabilization bid or the SNB bid in EURCHF at 1.2000, counterintuitively
the best move is often to go against it. When you follow an intervention bid,
you are dead if that bid disappears. If you go short against it and the price
rallies, there will probably be a reasonable price where you can get out.
When an entity is supporting the price of a security or currency pair, it is
usually reasonable to assume that the price is out of equilibrium and the
entity supporting it is the only source of demand. Unless you have an edge
in predicting what that entity is going to do, you should stay away. These
setups present huge gap risk and can lead to risk of ruin.
Many retail investors and some large, well-known hedge funds were
ruined by the SNB fail at 1.2000. Is it worth betting your job, your client’s
capital or your entire fund on a single trade? No. Never.
When gap risk is extreme or hard to estimate, avoid it. The risk is not
worth the reward.
Be thoughtful about major gap risks in your product and avoid them.
This does not mean you can never carry a position through economic data.
Gaps around economic data can be reasonably estimated. What it does
mean is you should not go short a tech bubble stock into earnings. You
should not go long USDHKD at the bottom of the band, and you should
seriously consider your weekend positions and whether or not they are
worth it. Oil can gap 10% over a weekend. USDJPY can gap 100 to 150
pips.
Avoid gap risk. Avoid gap risk. Avoid gap risk.
That concludes our discussion of gap risk. Now let’s visit one of my
favorite topics, an area where true experts shine. A field of study that can be
an underappreciated source of edge: The idiosyncratic intraday trading
patterns of each asset class.
3. Intraday activity patterns
Every market has a specific pattern that it follows (on average) during
the day. Think about your favorite market. Are there specific times of day
when volume and volatility spike? In currency markets, for example, there
is a long list of key times that FX traders need to know including the US
open, economic data, options expiry, WMR fix, Tokyo fix, etc.
Hedge fund portfolio managers and other large institutional traders need
to know how liquidity ebbs and flows in their products over the course of
the day. If you want to take a big position in USDJPY, for example, you
should know that 10:57 a.m. NY time (3:57 p.m. LDN) is a much better
time to put it on than 11:51 a.m. because FX is deepest from 7 a.m. to 11
a.m. Even small lot traders need to know these patterns because they affect
not only liquidity but also volatility and volumes.
What are the key times of day for the products you trade? Let’s take a
look at a few major markets so you can get an idea of how time of day
activity varies in different asset classes.
Volume by time of day for major markets
If you are an expert in the market or products you trade, you will know
every important time of day and you will know the distribution of volume
by time of day.
First, this is useful because it tells you when the “real moves” happen in
your market. If there is very little volume going through, the probability of
random, meaningless moves is higher. Second, if you need to transact
meaningful size, volume by time of day is even more important as it tells
you the trading time that minimizes your footprint. Third, intraday volume
spikes often reveal important moments in the day like fixings and data
releases.
Let’s look at a few major markets. I will show you the volume by time
of day in 5-minute increments and then give you a few short takeaways
109
. I
wanted to include bitcoin but the volume data is too decentralized. Let’s
start with spooz.
S&P futures (aka, e-minis, aka spooz)
Figure 8.5 shows volume by time of day for S&P futures. You can see
the huge spikes on the open and close with dwindling volumes that trough
at lunch time.
This chart explains why most day traders make most of their money
from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m. and 3 p.m. to 4 p.m. This was 100% true for me
when I was day trading the NASDAQ. If you trade stocks: Concentrate
your efforts around the busy times and eat lunch, do research and lift
weights from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m.
First row of x-axis label is GMT, second row is NYC time
10-year bonds
Figure 8.6 shows TY futures, which is the US 10-year note futures
contract. The volume pattern for this one is not too surprising, though that
huge burst at 3:00 p.m. is larger than I would have guessed before I made
this chart. Otherwise, volumes are high in the NY morning with little spikes
around the economic data. Volumes are super low until London comes in
(7:00 a.m. GMT or 2:00 a.m. NY) and then pick up substantially when the
US gets to work.
The 3:00 p.m. spike is the close of the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT).
Many strategies and funds mark to market against this closing price so there
is a ton of activity at that time as these funds try to match the closing price.
You often see buying of bond futures into 3:00 p.m. due to rebalancing and
duration extension.
First row of x-axis label is GMT, second row is NYC time
Gold futures
Next, we look at gold futures (see Figure 8.7). Again, New York
dominates but you can also see a big spike at 8:00 p.m. NY time when
Shanghai 
opens. 
Shanghai 
gold 
markets 
have 
taken 
on 
increasing
importance but remain less important than US and London markets. Again,
you can see volumes pick up when London walks in and then huge spikes
when data comes out and at the 10:00 a.m. gold fix.
The COMEX close (1:30 p.m.) also sees a large spike in volume. Even
though the gold futures trading pit is not a thing anymore, many systems
still mark to the COMEX close and so activity jumps into 1:30 p.m. before
fizzling into the end of the New York day.
EURUSD currency spot
Currency markets are most active in the London / NY overlap which
runs from 7 a.m. to 11 a.m. NY (noon to 4 p.m. LDN). But even inside that
4-hour window, there are critical moments like the economic data at 8:30,
options expiry at 10:00 and the WMR fix at 11:00 (all NY time). You can
see this pattern in Figure 8.8.
Other currencies have important moments throughout the day, too, like
USDJPY and the Tokyo fix (9:55 a.m. Tokyo time) which is the highest
volume point of the entire 24-hour session for USDJPY. For a full and
detailed look at critical times of day in FX markets, check out my first
book: The Art of Currency Trading.
While volume and volatility do not always move together, it is generally
true to say that volatility and volumes correspond. For example, Figure 8.9
shows average EURUSD volatility by hour of the day. You can see that this
chart closely follows the intraday EURUSD volume pattern.
x-axis is GMT
NYMEX crude oil futures
Finally, Figure 8.10 shows how oil trades throughout the day.
If you are moving decent volume in US crude futures, you should be
aware of when liquidity might be a problem. Selling 5,000 CL (NYMEX
crude oil) futures at 2:25 p.m. will generally be easier than the same trade at
2:45 p.m. That insane volume spike at 2:30 p.m. is the NYMEX close.
Many participants use Trade at Settlement (TAS) orders to guarantee the
closing price on their fill and the hedging of these TAS orders creates a
monster volume spike in the minutes leading up to the close. If this volume
is not balanced, you will sometimes see a huge move at that time. If
someone yells “What’s going on in crude!” right at 2:30 p.m., just shake
your head and say “NYMEX close, dude. NYMEX close.” :]
You need to understand whether liquidity is a possible constraint in the
products you trade. If it is, track liquidity daily using a quantitative measure
like bid/ offer depth and ask traders or market makers for their opinion.
Adapt your tactics and position sizes as necessary to avoid liquidity issues.
If your products are deep and your volume is easily absorbed, life is good.
If not, be thoughtful and strategic about what time of day you execute, and
partner with a market maker you trust.
This concludes our discussion of liquidity and how activity varies by
time of day. The last facet of market microstructure we will cover is
volatility.
First row of x-axis label is GMT, second row is NYC time
4. Volatility
The next step in understanding how your market moves is to understand
your product’s volatility. Market professionals often call volatility “vol”.
Vol is a critical part of a market’s microstructure. It is the dispersion of
returns over time, usually measured as the standard deviation of logarithmic
returns. In simple English: How much does the thing move?
Volatility is not constant or static. A currency pair like USDJPY might
realize 6% volatility one year and 18% the next. Vol is a key concept to
understand and you should always know your product’s vol profile, how it
has evolved over time, and how it might change in the future.
A few things you need to know about vol:
1. Markets tend to be more volatile around events because equilibrium
is a function of all known information, and events introduce new
information and upset the equilibrium. For example, overnight vol
for AUDUSD might be 8% on a normal day and 20% on the day the
Reserve 
Bank 
of Australia 
(RBA) 
meets. 
Facebook 
trades 
with
higher vol on earnings day relative to other days.
2. Volatility within and across markets is correlated. If equity volatility
is 
exploding 
higher, 
it 
is 
likely 
that 
FX, 
bond 
market 
and
commodities volatility will go up too. There is often a single factor
driving 
volatility 
in 
capital 
markets. 
This 
can 
be 
economic
uncertainty, geopolitical drama or something else. Volatility and
uncertainty are usually associated.
3. It is hard to make money trading low vol markets. Most traders make
more money when things are moving. One of the keys to success in
trading is identifying the vol regime and adjusting your trading
accordingly. You probably won’t make money trading breakouts
when the VIX is at 11
110
. You probably can’t trade mean reversion
when the VIX is at 80. My P&L is highly correlated to volatility. If
you notice a meaningful drop in volatility in something you trade,
consider trading something else or monitor the situation closely and
see if your P&L is drifting lower along with vol.
To be 100% clear, when people talk about volatility, they usually mean
historical volatility, but it is important to understand the two different types
of volatility:
Historical volatility. This is the dispersion of returns in the past.
You can measure it different ways but unless you are an options
trader, I wouldn’t worry about where the number comes from. Just
know that when people say “volatility” they are mostly referring to
daily historical or realized volatility. The amount the security has
moved around in the past, based on daily data.
Implied volatility. This is the market price for volatility going
forward. This measure is used in option pricing, and is a better
proxy for future volatility than historical volatility. The distinction is
not important here and for the purposes of an exercise like vol-
adjusted position sizing, it rarely matters which data you use.
When it comes to the product you trade, what is the average daily range
for your product? Daily average ranges are useful and it is also good to
know the average hourly range and how that range varies by time of day.
For example, Figure 8.11 shows how that looks for Apple stock (AAPL). I
added SPY (the S&P 500 ETF) as well to give you some context.
Most stocks and equity futures have an intraday volatility profile similar
to the profiles shown above. Stock market activity is heavy at the open,
heavy at the close and troughs around lunchtime.
Using data from February, 2020 to August, 2020 First six bars are 60-minute average range.
Open (9:30 a.m.) to 10:30 a.m., 10:30 to 11:30, etc. Final bar is the average range for 3:30
to 4:00 p.m.
When thinking about volatility, it’s important to understand the current
regime but you should also know how volatility has changed over time. You
can 
get 
historical 
volatility 
for 
almost 
all 
financial 
time 
series 
on
Bloomberg, Refinitiv or the internet. For example, if you want to know how
vol is changing in Tesla stock, Just Google “TSLA historical volatility” and
have a look. The absolute number is less important than the relative change.
Is the stock becoming more or less volatile? What are the most extreme
periods of volatility, and what was going on then? The more you understand
volatility and get comfortable with when it’s likely to be high and low, the
more likely you will avoid getting punched in the mouth.
If you have the skills and the data, you should study how your security
trades on big event days. This information can be incredibly useful if you
catch the right side of a move on event day because you can leave limit
orders around the extremes and as the market extends or overshoots, you
will take profit. It is nice to be the person selling the spike instead of the
one buying it.
Here is a detailed example of what I mean.
Curve shows normal days, bars show earnings days
You can see in Figure 8.12 that the normal curve for 1-day percentage
returns in Apple shows most days are in the -2% to +4% range. On the other
hand, earnings days show 1-day returns more like -6% to +7%. This is
important information. If you are long on earnings day, you should modify
your parameters relative to a normal day to account for the higher expected
volatility. Most traders would know that a stock is more volatile on earnings
day but when you crunch the data you get a deeper level of understanding.
If you catch a positive earnings move in Apple, it makes sense to leave a
few limit orders around (yesterday’s close + 7%) because that is about as
big a move as you can expect based on historical data. As usual, this type of
study gives you clues, not answers. There could be a day Apple rallies 20%
in one day, but this analysis gives you one more piece of the puzzle and
helps you understand what sort of volatility is likely and what is not. For
one stock, 15% moves could be the norm on earnings day. For another, that
figure could be 3%.
The best way to truly understand the volatility of a product or security is
to watch it all day. The goal is to gain an intimate knowledge of how your
market moves so that you get a feel for what is a big move, what is a logical
stop loss, where you should take profit, and so on.
One way to enhance your feel for a specific market is to graph it by
hand. Maintain a simple point and figure chart for a few days and you will
be surprised how much your market feel improves, especially if you are
new to trading or have not traded the product all that much. Much like
keeping score at a baseball game or taking notes in class forces you to pay
keen attention, manually charting a market keeps you in the zone, engaged
and connected.
You can also create point and figure charts in Excel if you are too
embarrassed to whip out the graph paper and go old school. Point and
figure is one of the original charting methods. It filters out noise and lets
you focus on the meaningful changes in price. There is no time element in a
point and figure chart, it simply measures price changes of a certain size
(this is called the “price interval”). The x-axis is blank.
Figure 8.13 is a point and figure chart I made for TSLA on December
18, 2020 (the day TSLA was added to the S&P 500).
Here is how you create a chart like this:
The black line separating the two parts of the day is just there for display purposes to show
you how point and figure charts distort or eliminate the element of time
1. Get a piece of graph paper or create a grid of small squares in Excel.
2. Calculate the average daily range of your security and divide by 10.
That is your price interval. I looked back two years to calculate that
the average daily range for TSLA is 4.7%. The stock closed at
$655.90 on December 17 and 4.7% of that is about $30. $30 divided
by 10 means we will use $3 increments. Always round the number
here to make the math easy.
3. Write the current price (rounded to the nearest price interval) in the
middle of the y-axis. So using the previous day’s close, I go half way
up the y-axis and write $656. If you know where the stock is trading
pre-market, that’s even better.
4. 
Complete 
the 
y-axis 
by 
adding 
the 
interval 
as 
you 
go 
up 
and
subtracting it as you go down. So you write 659, 662, 665, 668, etc.
on the way up the y-axis and 653, 650, 647… on the way down.
5. When the stock opens, wait for $653 or $659 to trade. If $659 trades,
draw an X in the box next to $656 and $659. X means the stock went
up. If $653 trades, draw an O in the box next to $656 and $653. O
means the stock went down.
As the stock continues in the same direction, keep marking the X’s or
O’s. Or, if the stock reverses more than 3 intervals (in this case $9), switch
to a new column and fill it in with the new X’s or O’s. You wait three
intervals before reversing in order to cut out the noise, otherwise you would
be switching columns too much and the chart would be wide and noisy.
Point and figure charting is meant to cut out noise and capture meaningful
reversals. You can mess around with the parameters but the choice of
parameters is not important so I would not bother. Just use (daily range/10)
for your intervals and 3 intervals as your reversal parameter.
The most interesting aspect of the chart is how the y-axis has no
meaning and the chart is stripped of the time dimension. Instead, the chart
shows any meaningful reversal, however long it lasts. Therefore, in this
example, the violent final 15 minutes of TSLA trading takes up as much
room as the calmer trading that took place throughout the prior 6+ hours.
For context, Figure 8.14 shows a line chart of TSLA that day.
When you contrast the point and figure to the line chart, you see how
time disappears and volatility is all that matters.
The insane closing rally is the demand from indexers at the close
If 
alternative 
charting 
techniques 
appeal 
to 
you, 
I 
suggest 
you
investigate Market Profile too. It is more complicated, but can be another
useful and intuitive way of charting and analyzing markets. There are some
excellent resources online: see if you can find the CME Market Profile
guide (300+ pages) in pdf form
111
.
The book Mind Over Markets by Dalton, Jones and Dalton turned me
on to Market Profile charting more than 10 years ago, and I continue to use
some of the specific methods from that book to this day. You can play
around with it using the MKTP function on Bloomberg (they call it “Market
Picture”).
Some people think it’s stupid to create manual charts but this is not like
some luddite clacking away on a manual typewriter just because he hates
technology. There is a practical value to the tactile practice of closely
tracking the market and recording its movements in a spreadsheet or on a
piece of paper. I promise you will learn something from this process and if
you don’t, it hasn’t cost you anything other than one or two pieces of graph
paper. You were going to be watching the market anyway.
As 
you 
gain 
experience 
in 
your 
market, 
your 
familiarity 
with 
its
microstructure will improve your execution skills and it will give you the
ability to recognize when the market is deviating from its normal behavior.
This ability will prepare you for regime shifts or even allow you to
recognize 
them 
at 
transition 
points 
when 
your 
market 
moves 
from
rangebound to trending, or slow to fast. Expert traders have a detailed
understanding of the microstructure of their market.
This concludes our discussion of microstructure. While microstructure
is a topic that requires you to spend some time in the weeds, it is a critical
area of study if you want to be a real expert in your market. You cannot
expect your genius trade idea generation skills to carry you. You also need
to be excellent when it comes to execution (and risk management).
A solid understanding of microstructure will improve your executions,
increase the payout on your good ideas and reduce the cost of your bad
ones. Even if you are confident in your knowledge of your market’s
microstructure, 
be 
on 
the 
lookout 
for 
changes 
and 
stay 
abreast 
of
developments that might change how your market behaves. Simple changes
to market microstructure can often lead to significant changes in your P&L
and can turn profitable strategies into duds.
Now, let’s move to the next step. In Chapter 9, I will tell you how I stay
in touch with the narrative, and how that helps me forecast future moves
and come up with trade ideas.
101. If you are a huge Elon Musk fan or if you really can’t stand him for some reason, don’t
trade TSLA. You need to be equally prepared to trade a stock from the long or short side or
you should not be participating. If you Stan for Elon, trading TSLA is like a Real Madrid fan
betting on a Real Madrid / Barcelona game. Do you think he’s going to make an unbiased
bet on the team he thinks has the best chance of winning? Or is he going to bet on Real
Madrid? Trade with your rational mind not your silly, silly heart.
102. I use bid/ask and bid/offer interchangeably in this book.
103. The mid (or mid-price, or mid-rate) is the center of the bid/ask spread. If gold’s bid/ask
is 2000.00 / 2000.20 then the mid-price is 2000.10.
104. Spreads are often expressed in basis points (bps). A basis point is 1/100
th
of 1%.
Therefore, for example, 1.00% is 100bps, 0.50% is 50bps and 0.02% is 2bps.
105. $173 X 0.0038
106. She takes four weeks of holiday per year.
107. This information is usually easy to find on the interwebs. Or use DES {GO} for any
future on Bloomberg.
108. Eisenbach, Lucca and Shen, “Evidence of underwriters’ efforts to stabilize the share
price in the Facebook IPO”, Liberty Street Economics Blog, (2012).
109. Note regarding the charts that follow. All use four months of 5-minute data from
January 6, 2020 to April 6, 2020. This subset works as a proxy for any period as intraday
volume patterns are remarkably stable over time.
110. VIX is the most popular measure of equity market volatility. 10 is very low. 80 is
extremely high.
111. It used to be on the CME website but is harder to find these days.