T
CHAPTER 9
UNDERSTAND NARRATIVE
Step two towards becoming an expert in your market
In my whole life, I have known no wise people who didn’t read all the time –
none, zero. I’ve gotten paid a lot over the years for reading through the
newspapers.
CHARLIE MUNGER
his chapter will explain how to study narrative and fundamentals, and
how 
to 
use 
this 
knowledge 
to 
better 
forecast 
short-term 
market
direction. Excellent traders have an expert-level knowledge of the primary
narrative 
and 
competing 
sub-narratives 
that 
drive 
their 
market. 
They
understand the importance of the story the market is telling and can see,
hear and feel when that story is changing. They know what is common
knowledge, and what is not.
Once you understand the microstructure of your market and the basics
of who moves the market, and how and when it moves, you should work on
your understanding of what moves it, and why. The what and the why of
market movements are never simple and as you gain experience, you will
realize more and more that many explanations in the financial press are way
off base.
The narrative is the story the market tells itself to explain movements in
price. Like any good story, there is usually the main plot and then a few
subplots. The main arc is the most important to understand because markets
tend to focus on one thing at a time. But you also need to be ready for the
next story as it elbows today’s narrative out of the way. Here’s how Bruce
Kovner explains it in Market Wizards
112
:
One of the jobs of a good trader is to imagine alternative scenarios. I try
to form many different mental pictures of what the world should be like
and wait for one of them to be confirmed. You keep trying them on one at
a time. Inevitably, most of these pictures will turn out to be wrong — that
is, only a few elements of the picture may prove correct. But then, all of a
sudden, you will find that in one picture, nine out of ten elements click.
That scenario then becomes your image of the world reality.
Understanding narrative is what most people used to call fundamental
analysis but there is an important nuance. Narrative analysis is about
studying not just what you think is the story, but (more importantly) what
story market players are telling and what story the market itself is trying to
tell. When it is done well, narrative analysis is a coherent and fluid
combination of ever-changing macroeconomic fundamentals and behavioral
factors. It is often about nailing down the one, most important story the
market wants to trade.
For example, 2010 to 2012 was a remarkable period in FX markets as
the market watched the near implosion of the eurozone at the same time as
the 
US 
Federal 
Reserve 
enacted 
a 
series 
of 
quantitative 
easing 
(QE)
programs. The eurozone crisis was bearish EUR and US QE was bearish
USD. During this period, EURUSD was known as “two garbage trucks
colliding” because both currencies had huge issues.
The interesting thing about trading that period, though, was that one
story or the other clearly dominated most of the time. The market was either
freaking out about the eurozone or going bananas over US QE but it was
usually clear which theme was in the driver’s seat. This is typical. It is very
difficult 
for 
markets 
to 
hold 
two 
competing 
themes 
in 
its 
collective
hivemind at once, and so the focus oscillates back and forth instead of
going in two directions at once.
Understanding the narrative cycle is important because when you are
good at it, it is a critical tool that helps you identify turning points and
trends. You see the psychology and storytelling at work in the market and
you can predict where price is going to go. Surprisingly, the narrative
often turns before price because price has momentum of its own and a
propensity to overshoot.
Speculators invested in a trend have confirmation bias and will ignore
the changing narrative until the turn in price forces them to pay attention.
Those turning points when the narrative has changed but price remains in
the old trend can be some of the most exciting and profitable moments in
trading.
Figure 9.1 shows the general narrative cycle:
The numbers in figure 9.1 refer to the following section in which I will
briefly describe each phase of the narrative cycle. You might recognize this
as similar to other cycle analysis like the panic/euphoria model or the
famous SELL? SELL? SELL? BUY! BUY! comic by Kal. It also rhymes a
fair bit with Elliott Wave analysis
113
.
UNDERSTAND THE NARRATIVE CYCLE
It is important to note when reading this that the narrative cycle operates
on many time fractals. There are the big macroeconomic narratives but
there are also sometimes much shorter narrative cycles that can last as little
as 24 hours. Often news or economic data will appear to be important but
then run out of steam very swiftly as the market pivots back to the main
story.
Picture a web of interconnected narratives with one or two dominating
and the rest all swirling around and vying for attention. The goal is to
determine what stories are driving your market now and what stories will
jockey for position and come out ahead in the future. Traders with more
experience will recognize the stage of the narrative intuitively and will
often have a strong sense of when a story is running out of gas as the
signposts are often similar at various stages of the narrative cycle. Ben Hunt
(Epsilon 
Theory) 
is 
one 
of 
the 
kings 
of 
understanding, 
parsing 
and
forecasting the narrative (or zeitgeist). I strongly recommend you check out
his material if you want to excel in narrative analysis.
Each stage of every narrative cycle will look and feel familiar in many
ways, even when the stories themselves will be radically different each
time. Kind of like a Hollywood movie that follows a standard three act arc
but with different characters, setting and plot. Let’s go through the seven
stages of the narrative cycle described by Figure 9.1.
Stage 1: Under the radar. At this point, there is a new narrative forming,
but very few traders have heard about it. Some smart, independent thinkers
and research-oriented people are talking about it and a few contrarians are
putting on the position. There are usually a few pullbacks as initial believers
have low confidence. Traders testing the waters tend to get bored or jiggled
out because the price is not moving their way or they just figure they’re too
early and don’t want to waste time on a narrative that is not valid.
The Holy Grail of trading, of course, is to identify below-the-radar
stories that will eventually become important market narratives. You want
to be early to the good stories but if you are too early, you need to make
sure you don’t get bored and give up before the market catches on to the
theme.
Stage 2: Momentum Builds. At this point, the narrative goes a bit viral (at
least among professionals or experts) and price jumps or falls to reflect the
new zeitgeist. My narrative cycle chart shows a bullish story driving the
price of an asset upward but you can flip the whole thing for a bad news
narrative. As the price jumps (often on a particular piece of news that
suddenly clarifies what was previously still a foggy narrative), people take
notice.
Remember that at every stage of the narrative cycle, there is a dynamic
interplay between price and narrative. The story drives the price and the
price drives the story and often it is hard to tell which one is causing the
movement. For example, say a stock has a good story but it’s still in Stage 1
of the narrative cycle. Nobody is paying attention. A fund manager reads
some three-week old research and decides he loves the story. He starts
buying stock and liquidity is poor. The price rallies 4%. Some stale shorts
stop out and the fund manager keeps buying and soon the stock is up 11%
over the course of two days.
Because the stock rallied, it appears on a few radars (many firms and
individuals run scans for stocks with unusual volatility) and this generates
some new interest. Traders and investors look it up and some of them like
what they see (great story!) and that triggers more buying. In this little
description, the price is now feeding the narrative, not the other way
around. The narrative already existed three weeks ago.
As momentum builds and the stock hits (for example) a 60-day high,
trend followers and CTAs will start to buy. This feedback loop where
changes 
in 
price 
influence 
investor 
expectations, 
which 
influence 
the
narrative, which influences the price, is a form of reflexivity. Reflexivity is
a concept from sociology that was transferred over to finance by George
Soros. It is a fancier way of saying “circularity” or “feedback loops”.
As momentum buying feeds the narrative and feeds on itself, we enter
Stage 3.
Stage 3: The Primary Trend. This phase is where the narrative drumbeat
takes hold and there are more and more converts lined up behind the
apostles from Stage 1. Pullbacks are bought and the news reinforces the
price which reinforces the trend which reinforces the buying. This stage is
often the most profitable in a strong narrative because Stage 3 can last a
surprisingly long time. Just because a narrative is well-known, that does not
mean it’s exhausted.
Stage 3 involves a lot of hype, usually from financial media and tourists
who have joined the party fairly early. Again, just because there is hype,
don’t think the story is over. The hype phase can accompany dramatic price
moves as demand outstrips supply for an extended period and the market
ignores bad news and doubles down on good news.
Stage 4: First cracks. At this stage, some cracks appear. Bad news hits that
threatens the narrative. The story is crowded and early entrants think maybe
the story is over so they take some profits. There is a meaningful pullback
in price. This pullback shakes off the weaker and more recent buyers but
those that believe in the narrative appear on the bid and the price stabilizes.
Slowly, the importance of the bad news dissipates and price climbs back
towards the highs.
Stage 5: The final hype wave. As price breaks through and makes new
highs, the narrative often goes into overdrive. Longs are emboldened by the
price action and a strong feeling of FOMO comes over anyone that is not
participating. Depending on the story, you will often see the narrative cross
over from financial media to the mainstream media at this point if the
narrative is interesting and important enough.
Non-experts will join the party (retail and macro tourists) and this will
push price aggressively higher. Stage 5 is usually the most surprising and
volatile part of the narrative cycle as sellers step away and buyers get
desperate. In Elliott Wave, this is also Wave 5 and Elliott Wave Theory
warns that Wave 5 can often be the most impulsive part of a move. This
stage is often characterized by choppy, jumpy, volatile moves, euphoria and
overshooting. Trend following systems add all the way up.
Stage 6: The Peak and the Turn. The top in the narrative and price can be
a long drawn-out process or an impulsive overshoot and collapse. Often, it’s
like the climax in a movie with a huge flashy rip higher followed by a rapid
reversal that catches everyone on the wrong side.
Excellent traders will realize there has been a meaningful turn in the
narrative here, even when price continues to make new highs. Bad traders
hate to give up on winning trades and great stories and will fall victim to
powerful confirmation bias. As long as price continues to rise, most traders
will ignore information that goes against the narrative. It is a skill to filter
out what matters and what does not, of course, because powerful bull
markets often climb a wall of bad news.
Eventually, price will start to turn and suddenly bad news from four
hours or four weeks ago pops back into the mind of the market and
everyone is like: “What the hell am I doing still long up here! Things have
changed.” Then everyone reaches for the SELL button at once and BOOM.
It gaps lower and the top is in.
Quite often, the price rise itself will also change the supply and demand
dynamic at this stage. There is a saying that “the best cure for high prices is
high prices”, which means that higher prices ultimately reduce demand and
increase supply and that eventually leads to lower prices.
For example, when the price of oil rises or falls gradually, consumer and
producer behavior does not change much. On the other hand, when the
price of oil explodes higher from $50 to $120 (like it did in 2008),
producers rush to bring on new supply and consumers simultaneously cut
their demand because they can’t afford to fill up their SUVs. They drive
less. These shifts in supply and demand are not instantaneous, so price can
continue to rise even as new supply works its way into the system and
demand 
disappears. 
Then, 
suddenly, 
the 
new 
supply 
runs 
into 
falling
demand and prices whoosh lower.
Furthermore, depending on the market, the higher price can also have
other macroeconomic impacts that will lead to lower prices in the future.
For example, a rise in the euro might lead to more accommodative ECB
policy or a huge ramp up in Tesla stock might spur Elon Musk to sell stock
in a secondary offering. Be sure to understand what price levels in your
market might lead to major or non-linear changes in supply or demand.
If you are expert in your market and keenly attuned to its driving
narrative, you will recognize moments when the story has changed but price
is not yet paying attention. Those can be some of the juiciest setups in
finance.
These tops can be false break spike highs that happen in a flash, or
drawn out periods of distribution that trace out triple, quintuple or even
septuple tops before finally capitulating lower. When you see a turn in the
narrative you can use your knowledge of technical reversal patterns to help
you align your strategy (turning bearish near the highs due to a change in
the narrative) with your tactics (finding high-leverage setups that allow you
to test your theory that the narrative has turned without risking a ton if you
are wrong).
Stage 7: The End. As a narrative expires, people lose interest and only
those with bad discipline hang on. Shorts hammer the price down and longs
slowly but surely get out. Market themes are like fashion trends. The
market’s interest is fickle and limited. People get bored of a theme, and they
move on. Sometimes this will be justified by fundamentals and sometimes
it will simply be that a sexier, more interesting theme came along.
That is the narrative cycle. I am describing something clean and visible
but the tricky part is that these cycles are anything but clean and are only
easy to see in hindsight. As you gain experience, though, you will start to
see these cycles play out in real time and will learn to anticipate and act
before the cycle moves to its next stage.
Remember, this section is not about long-term investing. It is about
understanding the current equilibrium so that as new information arrives,
you can capitalize. If you know where you are in the story and understand
current positioning, you will have an edge as the cycle moves from stage to
stage. These narrative cycles can last hours, days or weeks.
Understand the stories the market is telling itself and learn to identify
when the market is falling in or out of love with a narrative.
Let’s look at a very simple example of how understanding the narrative
can help you when news comes out. You have been trading the stock of a
hydrogen-powered truck manufacturer for a while and it has been in a
steady up trend. The market has attached a huge premium to electric and
autonomous vehicle stocks and the stock you trade benefits from the halo
effect of TSLA. The main narrative is that autonomous vehicles have
massive upside and almost any market cap can be justified.
With this stock, there is a bearish counternarrative humming in the
background. That story is that the company has not yet delivered a single
working truck to any customer and behind the scenes there is strife inside
the company as the founder is viewed by some as a classic visionary
entrepreneur and by others as a marketing genius with no technical skill. In
contrast to TSLA, which has produced thousands of working automobiles,
the narrative of the off-the-rails visionary founder has more potential weight
because the company has yet to prove itself capable.
A famous short seller comes out with a detailed description of exactly
how the founder of the company has used marketing and outright deception
to 
convince 
people 
of 
the 
company’s 
future 
success 
despite 
repeated
product failures behind the scenes.
Short sellers come out with reports like this all the time. Some are
credible, some are not. Some hit the stock on the open and it rallies back by
the end of the day. Some are the start of a long slow march to zero. How do
you decide what to do?
Obviously, the first thing you do is read the report. You are already an
expert on the stock and the narratives that drive it. In this case, you know
the 
worries 
about 
the 
founder 
have 
been 
whispered 
for 
a 
while 
and
therefore this short seller’s report will have more force than if a comparable
report was issued on TSLA. You sell the stock short on the open and as
fears mount, the stock (which opened down 7%) closes down 20%.
You are expert in this stock so you know the market’s prior short
position has been nearly eliminated over the course of the recent violent up
trend. You know from all your reading that the high-profile bears mostly
gave up a few months ago. The chart is a perfect island reversal day as the
stock gapped up to make a new all-time high the day before the short
seller’s report came out. Your stop loss is clear: If the stock goes back above
today’s open, something is wrong with the idea, and you’re out.
The first price a security trades after news comes out is called the
NewsPivot. These 
are 
critical 
price 
points 
going 
forward. 
NewsPivots
become significant reference points in the mind of the market and if price
subsequently recaptures the NewsPivot, it often means that either a) the
news wasn’t all that important or b) larger medium and long-term players
are using the news as a liquidity event to go the other way. If bad news
comes out and your stock goes back above the NewsPivot: watch out! We
will talk more about NewsPivots in Chapter 10.
So now you have:
Abrupt flip from bullish narrative to bearish narrative
Large long position and almost no shorts
Textbook island reversal
NewsPivot held and stock closed on the lows
Given all this, you figure this is a multi-day trade. Today is Tuesday.
Knowing that historically the big, impulsive moves in the stock last an
average of three days, and considering you don’t like to take positions over
the weekend, you set your stop loss at the NewsPivot + 1% and plan to take
back the short either Friday morning or after another 15% drop. Naturally,
you closely follow the narrative from here too and try to assess whether the
company’s responses to the short seller’s report are credible or maybe just
make things worse.
Whether it’s a single stock or a macroeconomic narrative you follow,
the idea is the same. You must understand the current equilibrium as well as
anyone else does, and then when new information comes in or the narrative
starts to turn, you are on it.
Here’s how to be an expert on narrative.
1. Read like a fiend with a focus on quality. Seek out analysis,
thought processes, trade ideas, event previews and unique insights.
Avoid long-term forecasts, market summaries and recaps. You need
to find forward-looking analysis that contains useful, non-duplicative
information and ideas and incorporate that information and analysis
into your own process.
There is so much information available now, filtering has become an
important skill. You can waste your whole day reading bearish
NASDAQ 
tweets 
and 
pointless 
market 
recaps 
if 
you 
are 
not
selective. It’s important to curate a good list of reading and news
sources. Then keep refining it and improving it over time. Learn who
is good in your market and get your hands on their write-ups.
As you gain experience as a trader, learn which names are worth
reading and which ones are not. Do not simply take everything you
read at face value. You can find the most intelligent permabear
analysis from various funds but what value does that analysis have if
the writer has been bearish for 10 years and never changes his view?
Consider what you are reading, but also who wrote it.
Reading 
obviously 
teaches 
you 
different 
thought 
processes 
and
directly yields new information. It also gives you a sense of the
zeitgeist. What narratives are dominant right now? Understanding
the 
dominant 
narrative, 
and 
where 
your 
market 
stands 
in 
the
narrative cycle are two important skills.
2. Develop a network. To form a strong network, you need to both give
and receive information and ideas. Try to find peers and mentors
either within your organization or online. No human being can scour
all the information available. The better your network, the less likely
you will miss key information.
The way to form a strong network is by giving, not by asking for
information. Post interesting comments in a message board. If you
work at a bank, blast your best ideas to clients. If you trade from
home, post your trades on a bulletin board or on Twitter.
To build a network, be authentic and give more than you take.
Building a network takes a long time. You will not get much traction
at first because nobody knows you and nobody cares what the new
guy has to say. Once in a while, an idea you send out into the
universe might get some feedback. Over time, you will connect to a
few people, then a few more. But it’s exponential. If you work hard
at it and find a way to authentically connect to people, after maybe
10 years you will have a huge network of followers or contacts.
To 
build 
a 
network, 
play 
the 
long 
game. 
It 
can’t 
be 
done
overnight.
Building a network is hard, frustrating work. Gains are tiny at first.
But network effects scale geometrically. The eventual benefits are
tremendous.
3. Study the central banks. If you are a macro trader, this is obviously
key, but even if you trade single name stocks you should still
understand what is going on with the major central banks (Fed, ECB
and PBoC). Overall global liquidity is the number one factor driving
all global asset prices much of the time and you need to have a
decent 
sense 
of 
what 
is 
happening 
on 
that 
front. 
Central 
bank
speeches are boring but necessary material for good traders.
If you trade interest rates or FX, you should read every central bank
speech for the countries you trade. A huge part of the narrative in
rates and FX is driven by the central banks and you should know
which central bankers matter, what their bias is, how their views
have evolved and what they think right now.
You don’t need to forecast what the central banks are going to do.
But you have to understand the current environment and what any
future actions mean. Some of the best trades come from simply
preparing for a central bank meeting by reading all the available
materials and then going into the event with zero position.
Then, you react to the news with a solid and complete understanding
of what the new information means and how it will affect prices.
The only way you can do this is by reading and studying beforehand.
If you trade macro, each FOMC and ECB meeting is a major exam.
Are you going to study for a few days in advance? Or just cram a
few bank previews the morning of, and hope for the best?
Even if you specialize in TSLA or crude oil, you still need to
understand the Fed because its actions and statements are a major
input into the price of those assets.
4. Find the subject matter experts. Who is the best analyst in your
market? Can you get your hands on their writing? Much of the best
Wall Street analysis can be found online and you can follow some of
the best minds in finance on Twitter.
As you read more and more about your domain, you will start to pick
up on who is smart, who is biased, who is useless, and who to
follow. This takes time. Also: talk to people! Go online and ask
people on Reddit or on Twitter (for example): “Who is the best FX
analyst out there? Who is a must-follow?” etc.
As I mentioned earlier, building a curated list of experts to read and
follow is an important part of your effort in understanding the
narrative.
“How to understand the narrative” is fairly easy for me to explain but
requires significant time and effort from you. You will notice over time that
your ability to read the story the market is telling gets better and better.
Soon, you will start to get a sense of what is about to happen, before it
happens.
The narrative is the internal story of your market. But outside your
market, there are hundreds of other stories being told in other markets, and
each of those stories has some loose (or possibly tight) connection to your
market. Global growth expectations, for example, will impact Canadian
growth expectations and that will impact Bank of Canada policy and the
narrative around Canadian interest rates and the Canadian dollar. At the
same time, global growth expectations will influence demand forecasts for
copper and the price of copper itself. Therefore, one might expect there to
be a correlation between copper and the Canadian dollar (CAD), both
driven by a third variable: Global growth expectations.
There 
are 
literally 
100s 
of 
these 
connections 
all 
permeating 
the
impossibly complex system that is the global economy and global markets.
These connections create a huge matrix of correlations between markets
and fortunately for traders, many of the correlations operate with various
leads and lags. So copper might move right now and then CAD moves two
hours later. When lead/lag trading works, it can feel like you have been
given the answers to the test.
DRIVERS AND CATALYSTS
What drives the product or security you trade? What drivers matter for
your particular strategy? This question can be fairly easy to answer for
some traders and extremely difficult for others. For example, if you think of
yourself as a global macro trader and your focus is on interest rate products,
the answer is fairly easy. Growth, inflation and global monetary policy are
the main drivers you need to worry about.
When you know the drivers, the catalysts are pretty obvious. For the
trader concerned with growth, inflation and monetary policy, the catalysts
are usually economic data and central bank meetings.
This is all theory, of course, and is easy on paper but hard in real life.
While a strong US economic data point should be a catalyst for a higher
dollar, for example, there are plenty of days when data comes in strong and
the USD goes down.
There are many types of market catalyst. Here is a list of some biggies,
working from most macro to least.
Market catalysts
1. 
International 
geopolitics 
(e.g., 
trade 
war, 
G20 
Summit, 
global
pandemic, OPEC meeting, military conflict)
2. Domestic politics (elections, coups, scandals, passage of new laws,
court decisions)
3. Central bank action or speeches
4. Economic data
5. Company news a. Earnings
b. Analyst up/downgrades
c. Personnel changes (especially CEO or CFO)
d. Capital structure (dividends, buybacks, secondary issuance)
6. Catalyst in a correlated market
7. Technical breakout
8. Time of day, week or month
The first five are easy to understand. If you are an expert in your
market, you will know upcoming events in each of those five categories that
might impact your trading.
The bare minimum for every professional trader is to know all the
economic and market events that could impact the securities they trade.
When an economic number is coming out, you should know in advance and
you should be ready. If your stock reports earnings tomorrow morning, you
should know that. You should be prepared with a list of scenarios so that the
second the news hits, you can react intelligently.
If you are the person on a trading floor yelling “Is this bullish or
bearish?!” when news comes out… You are not an Alpha Trader.
You must be properly prepared, have an expert level of knowledge, and
understand the narrative. Then, when important news comes out, you can
react quickly and take massive, determined action.
Worse than the trader that does not know if news is bullish or bearish
for a particular market is the trader that is not even aware of a scheduled
release. 
I 
have 
heard 
traders 
yell: 
“Whoa, 
what 
just 
happened 
to
USDJPY!?” after it jumped 15 points higher on an economic release like
Consumer Confidence. They didn’t even know the number was coming out.
That’s not good!
While macro traders have the luxury of at least knowing what the
catalysts are (even if it’s not always obvious what impact they will have), in
other products, the drivers and catalysts are not as clear. Crypto is the most
extreme example. The market is so new and has few fundamental anchors,
so the drivers are mostly sentiment and technicals (charts). This is not true
all the time as new adopters (corporations or financial institutions adding
crypto to their balance sheet or approved products), forking and other
events can be fundamental catalysts.
Because the short-term drivers in crypto are poorly understood, and
regularly-scheduled events like economic data and central bank meetings
don’t matter much, catalysts often feel random. There is the occasional
scheduled halving or obvious fundamental catalyst visible in advance, but
mostly crypto is driven by sentiment shifts and randomly-timed news. That
said, you could also argue that the same is true with most stocks, most of
the time. For every move that is logically driven by a fundamental driver or
catalyst like earnings, there are ten that are impossible to explain with any
kind of macro or microeconomic logic.
Take time to understand the fundamental and technical drivers of your
particular security.
Item 6 in the list above, “Catalyst in a correlated market” relates to the
idea of lead/lag and correlation. For example, if you are long USDCAD and
the pair has been trading with an 80% negative correlation to crude oil over
the past 12 months, you should be aware if there is an OPEC meeting
coming up. OPEC meetings often lead to large changes in the price of oil
and as such can lead to large changes in USDCAD. If you want to be an
expert 
in 
USDCAD, 
you 
should 
read 
everything 
you 
can 
about 
the
upcoming OPEC meeting.
If you are long Citibank stock (C) and J.P. Morgan (JPM) reports
tonight, you should be ready and know what to expect. You should know
not just market expectation for JPM’s numbers but also whether or not C
tends to move in sympathy with JPM, on JPM earnings day. Understanding
these ins and outs of how things trade and move are key. I will discuss this
in more detail shortly in the section “Cross-market correlation”.
Item 
7 
on 
the 
list, 
“Technical 
breakout”, 
is 
important, 
but 
don’t
overestimate the importance of every tech level that you see. There is
always another level nearby and not every break of a 10-day high or low or
trendline or Fibonacci level has meaning. If you read about your market and
talk to and follow other traders, you will start to get a sense for the big
levels.
A big level isn’t a level that is important to you, it is a level that is
important to the market. This is a big distinction. You need to have your
own views and thoughts but Alpha traders are also inside the mind of the
market and know what matters most to the market as a whole.
This concept is best captured by Keynes’ beauty contest analogy from
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936). Keynes
asks us to imagine a newspaper which holds a contest where readers are
rewarded for choosing which contestant will be chosen by the most other
readers. The task is not to choose the most beautiful woman, but instead to
choose the woman others will think is most beautiful. Sometimes that’s the
same woman, but not always!
Participants 
in 
complex, 
multiplayer 
games 
with 
incomplete
information (like trading, poker, and bridge) play a superior metagame
where they understand not just their own strategy and preferences but also
the strategy and preferences of the other players. If everyone you talk to is
talking about the 122^00 level in 10-year bond futures, you should have
that level marked on your charts and you should closely observe how the
contract trades around there. The market converging to the opinion that a
particular level is important does not happen all that often but when it does
you should pay attention.
If 
that 
level 
breaks, 
the 
price 
action 
afterwards 
has 
important
implications for the future. A key level that breaks and follows through is
indicative of a trending market, while a false break of a level everyone is
watching (aka, a Slingshot Reversal
114
) is one of the best indicators for trend
reversal.
Strong up trends hold above major support, and they break through
major resistance.
Always monitor how your market behaves at important levels. If a
market has been trending and everyone is focused on a particular pullback
level, that level should hold. If it does not, this may signal the trend is out of
gas.
The final catalyst in that list earlier was Item 8, “Time of day, week or
month”. Often you will notice that trends exhaust themselves and turn
around at the end of the day, week or month. For example, in months where
the US stock market is up 3% or more, GBPUSD frequently rallies into
month end and then sells off in the first week of the new month
115
. Figure
9.2 is a chart of how GBPUSD trades around the turn of the month, at the
end of months where US stocks rallied 3% or more:
The point of this little section is not to tell you how FX trades on the
last day of the month—though if you trade FX, you definitely should know
this!—it is to show you a good example of how time of day, week or month
can impact price. In this case, the month end effect determines the direction
of the USD into month end and then the effect unwinds (mean reversion) in
the first week of the following month.
The reason price very often turns at the end of a day, week or month is
that many orders in the market are timed that way. A large CTA that needs
to buy 1,000,000 shares of a company will start its VWAP at the open and
end it at the close. A large corporation that needs to buy 1 billion USDCAD
will tell the bank doing the trade to get it done by the end of the day.
Month-end is a time when many real money investors rebalance so they
will complete all their activity by the end of the day on the last day of the
month, etc.
t = the first business day of the month. Sample size is 37 months.
Very large orders can often dominate the supply/demand profile of an
asset for a short period. Most large order executions take place during the
most liquid period of the day. When that period draws to a close, it is
reasonable to assume the supply/demand profile for the asset might change.
Mean reversion kicks in as the large order is done and the market drifts
back toward equilibrium. In other words, with the big buyer out of the way,
the price can drift lower.
In stocks, there are patterns around the start and end of the month and
around options expiry (triple witching, etc.) The takeaway here is that
trends often mean revert at the turn of the week, the turn of the month or
another key time such as options expiry. If you are looking to fade a strong
trend, these are often good moments to take a shot. This is an example of
something I think it’s important to remember:
There does not have to be an obvious exogenous catalyst for every
market move, reversal, peak, or bottom.
When you discuss a trade idea with someone and they say “OK, sure,
but what’s the catalyst?” … It is OK to say, “I don’t know.” Not every move
has a logical macro catalyst. Market catalysts are often endogenous as
supply 
and 
demand 
change 
for 
reasons 
unrelated 
to 
macro 
or
fundamentals
116
. A market high can happen simply because the last buyer
bought and the market has run out of buyers. Or because a single huge
buyer is done buying (as in the GBPUSD example above).
When there are suddenly no buyers in the market, this is called a
buyer’s strike. A market that was grinding higher for days can often
plummet suddenly. The catalyst for a sell-off after an aggressive up trend or
ramp higher can sometimes simply be: no more buyers.
CROSS-MARKET CORRELATION
An important driver or catalyst for your market can be activity and
moves in another security or asset class. Try to identify how price action in
other markets may send clues about your market. To take an obvious
example, if gold spikes $25 in three minutes and silver is unchanged, would
you rather be long or short silver? Probably long.
While correlated products tend to move in sympathy with one other,
there are usually leads and lags. If AAPL rips higher on good product
launch news, can you find the sympathy plays before other traders do?
Display makers and semiconductor stocks might benefit too.
This style of trading, where you follow many markets and try to
determine 
which 
ones 
are 
potentially 
leading 
or 
lagging 
is 
called
intermarket, cross-market or lead/lag analysis. This type of analysis can
give you a significant edge, though it has become mainstream in recent
years and does not have the edge it once did.
I use cross-market analysis all day, every day; it is a central pillar of my
trading process. If I am trading USDCAD, I know all the products that are
correlated with USDCAD (e.g., oil, US/Canada interest rate differential,
Canadian equities, copper, gold, etc.) and I watch them all closely. I do this
by setting up a series of separate charts which overlay the main asset
(USDCAD) with the correlated variables on top like you see in Figure 9.3.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
You can see in Figure 9.3 the remarkable and steady relationship
between US stocks and the Canadian dollar in 2020. Often, especially in
periods of high volatility and uncertainty, correlations rise and everything
seems to depend on risk appetite and not much else. With COVID-19 raging
for most of 2020, this was one of those periods. Note that S&P futures often
moved before CAD, providing some excellent signals for FX traders.
Australia is heavily reliant on Chinese growth and commodity prices
because a significant portion of its GDP comes from commodity production
and export. Therefore, there is a strong connection between the price of
copper and the Australian dollar (AUD). Notice in Figure 9.4 that in July
2020 you can see how copper moved before AUD, providing an excellent
bullish signal for the currency.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Let’s look at one more example. In Figure 9.5, we look at S&P 500
futures (the US stock market) against the equity volatility index (VIX). I
inverted the VIX for this overlay because the standard relationship is that
when stocks go down, volatility and the VIX go up (and vice versa).
Generally, 
when 
stocks 
rise, 
volatility 
falls 
and 
when 
stocks 
fall,
volatility rises. This is true almost all the time because investors buy puts to
protect themselves as markets fall. In a normal rising market, investors sell
calls to take profit, earn income and monetize gains. When vol rises as
stocks rise, it can be a warning sign… Something weird is going on.
Any strange behavior in markets or change in reaction function should
always pique your interest. Whenever something weird happens in the
market, go on high alert and investigate. Try to find out why. In Figure 9.6,
volatility was rising, even as stocks rose in September 2020, because a large
institutional player and a herd of retail investors were going nuts buying
calls. This is behavior you see in bubbly and overhyped environments. Can
you guess what stocks did next?
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
See Figure 9.6.
This is a textbook case of lead/lag trading. The rise in the VIX sent a
clear and strong signal that something strange was going on and the rally in
the stock market was highly suspect. This is not hindsight, I wrote about it
at the time, before stocks dumped.
Here is my complete analysis of that moment (published in my daily on
September 2, 2020) so you can see what other factors I incorporated into
my thinking.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
I feel that today or tomorrow will be a short-term peak for this mega reflation trade. If
I am correct, it would mean NASDAQ, lumber, gold, EURUSD and USD in general
will start a meaningful correction in the next 48 hours. A few reasons:
1. Fed doesn’t sound as dovish as I thought they would. Yesterday, Clarida had the
opportunity to tee up September and did not.
2. Vol rising along with stocks can be a sign of danger.
3. Breadth in equity markets has been horrendous.
4. Real rates not making new lows.
5. Gold not making new highs. Actually, it’s making lower highs. Gold has been trading
like a risky asset.
6. 1.2000 target reached in EURUSD. EURUSD has been moving up and down with
stocks.
7. September is historically the worst month for risk assets (weak seasonality).
8. USDCAD at key levels after doing a full round trip. USDCAD has also been highly
correlated with the S&P 500.
You can see that the VIX UP / Stocks UP was one of many factors that
went into my decision to turn bearish stocks on September 1. Each bit of
information adds to the last and eventually (sometimes) you have enough
building blocks stacked up that it results in a solid trade idea.
The more you understand your market, the better feel you will get over
time as to what it means when divergences build between primary and
correlated markets. I always feel more confident putting on a trade if the
most important correlated variables are stable or moving in my direction.
For example, if I have a strong view that the Canadian dollar is set to
rally based on my economic and technical analysis, but then I see oil has
just dropped $2 in the past 30 minutes, I will probably wait on my CAD
execution. In contrast, if I am bullish CAD and planning to get long and
then notice crude rallying hard, I will hurry up and buy the CAD ASAP. If I
am about to go short NFLX but then see DIS and GOOG rip higher, I will
hold off and wait for DIS and GOOG to stabilize or for NFLX to catch up
before I go short. And so on.
Correlated variables give you a hint as to where your product is going.
But not the answer.
As 
discussed 
earlier, 
these 
cross-market 
relationships 
often 
exist
because there is a third variable driving two correlated products. For
example, gold and the US dollar have a common driver: US real interest
rates. If the world thinks the Fed is going to do more QE and push real rates
lower, you might see that reflected in higher gold first and then a lower
USD shortly after.
All other things being equal, lower real rates mean stronger gold and a
weaker dollar. But these markets will not all move in perfect sync. Rates
and gold might be on the move but a big buyer of US dollars may be in the
market, so the USD doesn’t move. Then, when the buyer of US dollars is
done, the USD will catch up.
Lead/lag traders look at the entire board and hunt for an overall pattern.
Then, they find particular asset prices that don’t make sense, and try to
position before those out-of-line assets move back into line.
Think of the markets as one huge, interconnected organism where
information influences many assets at once, but not all at the exact same
time. 
If 
a 
market 
moves 
and 
that 
market 
is 
correlated 
to 
yours, 
pay
attention. What does it mean?
You can use common sense to come up with a list of correlated markets
fairly easily. When you read articles about your market, do they mention
other assets? You will often see a headline like: “Australian dollar rallies on
China growth optimism”. This tells you someone out there is equating AUD
with Chinese growth. What are some other proxies for Chinese growth?
Iron ore, the Shanghai Composite Index, FXI (the China A Shares ETF,
which trades in NY time), copper, BHP and FCX (mining stocks), etc.
Every individual security or market is part of a universe of other
securities and markets and they all orbit and influence one another. Figure
9.7 is a grid of examples to get you started.
If you have Bloomberg, you can play around with the CORR and CFND
functions to find things that are correlated to your market, but it is more
useful to use logic rather than data mining tools. Start with things that
should logically be correlated to your market, then calculate the correlation
to see if your guesses are correct
117
. You can also go to websites like:
market-topology.com and mess around with their correlation tools. Just
remember to use a logic filter because you can data mine all kinds of
nonsensical correlations if you try hard enough!
Eventually, as you approach expert level in your product, slowly branch
out from your market and learn more about a small list of correlated
markets. For example, over many years of trading currencies, I have
accumulated a ton of knowledge about markets outside of, but correlated to
FX. This knowledge helps me better understand and trade the currency
market.
For example, if you trade USDCAD, it’s good to know what the TAS
order type is in the oil market because oil is correlated to USDCAD. It’s
good to know how volumes and volatility are distributed throughout the day
in the oil market, too. It’s helpful to know when NYMEX crude closes. And
so on. But if you are going to trade USDCAD, first you need to be a
USDCAD expert. Later in your career, go learn the markets that orbit your
main area of expertise.
Seek to understand any market that is correlated to yours. Search for the
most stable and logical correlations and ignore transitory or nonsensical
correlations, even if they look statistically strong.
A full discussion of lead/lag trading could fill an entire book. Study the
behavior of correlated markets and watch how correlations change over
time. Correlations are not static. Sometimes stocks and bonds go up and
down together. Sometimes they are inversely correlated. Sometimes stocks
go up and down with the dollar. Sometimes they are inversely correlated.
Closely follow a small list of markets correlated to your primary market
and you will slowly get a feel for how markets move together, even as they
do not move in perfect sync. Lead/lag is part art and part science, so you
should expect that it will take a few years to get a feel for it. Once you do,
you will sometimes feel like you can tell what is going to happen before it
happens as you pick up on a strongly correlated, leading variable that drives
your market for a while. Regimes where lead/lag works well can be highly
satisfying and profitable trading periods.
Lead/lag and correlation trading is not the holy grail. It is a popular
systematic 
strategy, 
therefore 
much 
of 
the 
edge 
is 
now 
captured 
by
computers. It is an input into a good discretionary trading process, not an
entire discretionary trading process. When you understand the story that
drives your market and you understand the catalysts and drivers that move
prices, you are ready to start trading.
But where do trade ideas come from? That is probably the number one
question I am asked by new traders. How do you come up with ideas?
Where do you start? What is the process? Chapter 12 is called “Bringing it
all together” and that’s where I will take you from start to finish; from trade
idea to execution to take profit to post-trade analysis.
But before we can bring it all together, we need to cover a few more
topics. 
Next 
up: 
The 
importance 
of 
technical 
analysis, 
sentiment 
and
positioning.
112. Jack Schwager, Market Wizards (1989).
113. Elliott Wave is an esoteric form of technical analysis. I studied it for a while and found
its general approach useful but its specifics too subjective, arbitrary and confirmation
bias-y. If you’re bullish: There’s a wave count for that! If you’re bearish: There’s a wave
count for that too.
114. Google “Brent Donnelly Slingshot Reversal” for a full definition and explanation.
115. This is caused by large hedging by foreign asset managers at month end which
climaxes at 4 p.m. London time on the last day of the month. More detail on this in
Chapter 12.
116. Endogenous: having an internal cause or origin. Not attributable to any external factor.
The opposite of exogenous.
117. Use correlation of daily changes, not correlation of levels, when calculating correlation.
If you want to know more on this topic, just Google “levels vs. changes correlation”. It’s a
big topic, beyond the scope of this book.