S
CHAPTER 10
UNDERSTAND TECHNICALS,
SENTIMENT AND POSITIONING
Step three towards becoming an expert in your market
uccess in any complex game, puzzle, or battle relies on both intelligent
strategy and effective tactics. Tactics are just as important as strategy
yet are often overlooked. This chapter explains technical analysis, sentiment
and positioning and shows how a superior understanding of these subjects
will give you a significant tactical edge. To be clear, when it comes to
trading, strategy means coming up with trade ideas and tactics means how
you execute and implement those ideas.
Nearly all my trade ideas start from either microstructure or narrative.
They never come from looking at a chart or from any form of technical
analysis. And
I never put on a trade purely because of sentiment or positioning. My
highest conviction trades generally have multiple inputs, but they always
start with fundamentals or microstructure and then get refined, streamlined
(or filtered out) by other factors.
I use technical analysis, sentiment and positioning as timing tools, but
not as trade selection tools. My thinking on this has evolved over the years
partly because markets have evolved, but also because I have seen enough
evidence to conclude that technical analysis is not a source of alpha or edge.
Charts are not a good forecasting tool.
There is a pretty tall pile of research to back this up. I’ll give you a
quick 
rundown 
of 
one 
paper 
called: 
“Are 
Random 
Strategies 
More
Successful Than Technical Ones?”
118
They analyzed four popular technical
strategies: RSI, MACD, mean reversion and momentum. They ran them
against four major stock markets (USA, Germany, Italy and the UK) and
compared the results to a strategy that chose entry and exit levels 100%
randomly. Here is their conclusion:
Our main result, which is independent of the market considered, is that
standard trading strategies and their algorithms, based on the past history
of 
the 
time 
series, 
although 
have 
occasionally 
the 
chance 
to 
be
successful inside small temporal windows, on a large temporal scale
perform on average not better than the purely random strategy, which, on
the other hand, is also much less volatile. In this respect, for the individual
trader, a purely random strategy represents a costless alternative to
expensive professional financial consulting, being at the same time also
much less risky, if compared to the other trading strategies.
There are entire books that go through all the major technical patterns
and backtest them and come to the same result: technical analysis is not a
good forecasting tool. I explained my philosophy on technical analysis
when I discussed overreliance on simple indicators and apophenia. I want to
make it clear though: I use technical analysis in my trading every day. I just
don’t use it to predict markets.
Technical analysis gives you an important set of tactical execution and
risk management tools. It does not help you forecast market direction.
Good traders are quick to admit when they are wrong. They make
leveraged, asymmetric bets. Technical analysis can help you do these things
better and provide strong and clear signals of when it’s time to give up on a
bad idea or take profit on a good one.
Believe it or not, the exact technical indicators you choose are not all
that 
important. 
The 
mathematics 
and 
concept 
behind 
most 
technical
indicators are similar. RSI, MACD, and oscillators all give you a similar
feel for trend and momentum. Simple trendlines plus support and resistance
work just as well as more complicated or convoluted methods. The more
esoteric you get with your technical analysis, the more likely you are to find
yourself wasting time in the weeds. Keep it simple!
Remember: alpha traders do not use technical analysis to predict the
market, they use it to optimize execution and risk management.
Here are some of the techs I look at:
SIGNIFICANT REFERENCE POINTS
Significant reference points (SRPs) are levels that are likely to feature
prominently in the mind of the market. These are levels a majority of
market players view as important. As is the case in Keynes’ beauty contest
analogy, it is important to know not just what you think is important but
what others think is important. Here are some standard SRPs.
NewsPivots
A NewsPivot is the last trade in a market before important, market
moving news comes out. I find that NewsPivots are the most powerful
reference points in trading. You should be aware of all NewsPivots in your
markets. If AAPL is at $100 when good news comes out and the first trade
after the news is $103, the gap is $100/$103 with the NewsPivot ($100)
marking the bottom of the gap.
Remember that price is a momentary equilibrium determined by the
sum of all known information in the universe. When new information
appears, 
the 
market 
frantically 
tries 
to 
find 
the 
corresponding 
new
equilibrium. If the market believes the news to be meaningful, it should
abandon the old equilibrium from before the news came out (aka, the
NewsPivot) and find a new one.
A return to, or through the NewsPivot is important information. It tells
you: the market has rejected the news and the attempt to find a new
equilibrium, and reverted back to its old happy place.
When news comes out, the market fumbles around in the dark as it tries
to find a new balance between supply and demand. Buyers and sellers of
various time frames jostle for position. The first price that trades after news
comes out is also a significant reference point going forward. Figure 10.1 is
an example of a NewsPivot and price gap:
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
In the chart of HYG (Figure 10.1, the high-yield corporate bond ETF),
you can see that on the day the Fed announced their intention to buy high-
yield bonds, HYG gapped massively higher. It closed just below $78 the
day before then opened at $82 the day of the announcement. Therefore, the
NewsPivot (price before the news) is $78 and the other side of the gap is
$82. These are both significant reference points going forward.
In the weeks that followed, HYG closed the gap and retested the
NewsPivot. The NewsPivot held perfectly and HYG never fell back below
$78 despite four separate tests.
Astute traders of HYG would be aware of the closing level before the
Fed’s announcement and would also be aware that that level is likely to be
massive support. A simple strategy of buying just above the NewsPivot with
a stop below the NewsPivot would have worked perfectly.
Always take note of the level of any market you trade going into a
major event. This level is likely to be a significant reference point going
forward.
Support and resistance
The next type of significant reference point to identify is simple support
and resistance. If a stock is in a downtrend, but it starts to build a base and
bounces off $80 three times, you should take note of this. The beauty of
support and resistance are their simplicity. They are easy to identify, and
their existence is logical because often they are a simple reflection of
supply or demand at a particular level. A patient medium-term buyer in a
market might decide to work a massive bid at $80 in a stock. That massive
bid will be visible as the price repeatedly trades at $80, but fails to break
through that level.
Support and resistance in your market can be identified simply by
eyeballing both an hourly and then a daily chart. Here’s what to look for:
1. Any topside or downside level that held more than once. This can
often be a band, not an exact level. For example, you might see a
series of lows in gold at $1914, $1908 and $1904. Don’t use false
precision when you determine significant reference points. A band of
support often makes more sense than trying to identify an exact level.
2. Any level that represents a major high or low for your product (60-
day low, one year low, etc.)
3. Broken resistance or support. When a major support breaks, expect
that level to become important resistance in future.
4. Major round numbers. These do not always matter, but remember
how humans love round numbers!
In the GBPUSD chart in Figure 10.2, you can see strong support formed
at 1.3000/25 (marked with 1’s), and the important swing high just below
1.3500 (2). Then, note how the old support (1.3000/25) became resistance
once it broke (3). Also note that a round number (1.3000) is the critical
pivot on this chart.
If your market has been in a nice up trend for a few weeks and pulls
back to major support, bounces weakly off it, then breaks through the
support… That is a warning sign. The trend has lost its power as it fails to
hold above the levels that matter.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Strong up trends hold major support. Strong down trends stay below
major resistance.
In Figure 10.3, which shows the price of gold in the Summer of 2020,
there is major support at $1910. Before and after the “1” on the chart, there
are five separate tests and holds of $1910. In this chart, I also show volume
bars 
below 
the 
price. 
Volume 
can 
add 
an 
additional 
layer 
of 
useful
information.
You can see the huge volume spike when gold tested the key $1910
support level in late August (the price and volume points marked as “1”).
This tells you that aggressive selling was absorbed and therefore demand
was significant at $1910. Successful holds of major support on high volume
are super bullish.
High volumes reinforce the importance of a support or resistance level
or can signal that it has been decisively broken. At the points marked “2”
you can see another huge volume surge but this time, gold slices through
the bottom of an important triangle and through the critical $1910 level all
at once.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
High volumes provide signal confirmation for technical patterns.
Figure 10.4 shows another example of a massive volume spike at a
turning point. This chart of EURNOK shows a monster volume spike on the
very last day of August 2020. That marked the ding dong low in the pair.
Most likely, this was a huge rebalancing flow; many FX rebalancing flows
coincide with 4 p.m. London time on the last day of the month and that’s
the timing of that big volume bar. If you squint, you can also see the second
largest volume bar coincides with an important low in mid-June.
Remember that because support and resistance are simple and not
subject 
to 
much 
interpretation, 
most 
people 
in 
the 
market 
will 
be
monitoring roughly the same support and resistance levels. Therefore, you
need to think about the metagame and leave your stops far enough below
support (or above resistance) that you are not dinged by a weak stop loss
run that takes out an obvious level. It is often best to place your stop loss
about a half-day’s range below a major level to avoid any noisy whipsaws
around that point
119
.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
If all you know about technical analysis is NewsPivots, support and
resistance, you know enough to function as a competent trader. I will now
go through a few more indicators that I use, but like I said: indicator
selection is somewhat arbitrary and not especially important. If RSIs make
sense to you, use them. If you prefer MACD, great. Your success or failure
in trading will not be determined by the technical indicators you choose,
and it will most certainly not be determined by which parameters you
choose for those indicators.
If you have never read any technical analysis books or websites, my
suggestion is that you either take 10 or 15 hours to read a bunch of technical
analysis websites and watch YouTube videos about techs… Or read two or
three good books on technical analysis (e.g., John Murphy’s or Steve
Nison’s book
120
). Another great resource is the 6-part Market Profile Study
Guide from the CME. You can Google it and find the PDF free online.
Market Profile is a bit esoteric but I find it logical and easy to understand.
Your intention while reading about technical analysis is to find 2 to 5
simple indicators or patterns that you like. Use these as your primary risk
management and market screening tools. Then, you can add a few more
over time. You don’t need 74 different technical indicators when you use
techs 
to 
manage 
risk 
and 
improve 
execution 
tactics. 
Running 
14
spreadsheets screening for every technical indicator ever invented is a waste
of time. Keep it simple.
Make sure you allocate enough time to strategy (coming up with trade
ideas) and tactics (entry point, stop loss, etc.) Many traders find it is more
fun to come up with trade ideas and do not allocate enough resources to the
tactics of extracting as much money as possible from the ideas.
You cannot win without good strategy and solid tactics.
SYMMETRY
Another setup I look for in financial markets is symmetry. It is logical
that a quasi-natural system like financial markets would often produce
symmetrical patterns. Furthermore, since volatility tends to be steady in
many markets for much of the time, it makes sense that moves (whether
they be up or down) would tend to be of approximately the same size. If
something just rallied 5% in three months, it is intuitive and logical that it
could fall 5% in three months, but less intuitive or logical that it might fall
12% in 1 month
121
.
Let me show you two examples of symmetry that I found useful in
September 2020. The first was USDCAD. The COVID-19 crisis triggered a
massive shortage of USD as the market scrambled for liquidity and freaked
out about the dramatic drop in the stock market. This pushed USDCAD
from 1.2952 to 1.4669 in just two months. Then, the Fed launched an epic
QE bazooka and stocks quickly stabilized. This helped USDCAD form a
top and eventually the pair dropped all the way back down to within 30 pips
of where it started (1.2952). See Figure 10.5.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
See how USDCAD rallied 17.17 big figures then sold off 16.72? Just
about 
perfect 
symmetry. 
Pretty 
amazing. 
Once 
it 
completed 
that
symmetrical round trip, USDCAD held in the mid-1.29s and that was an
excellent buying opportunity. This is not hindsight, I used this symmetry as
one of several reasons to recommend a USDCAD long at the time.
Figure 10.6 is a thing of absolute beauty. It shows USDCNH as it
followed a perfect M-shaped pattern and respected both price and time
symmetry.
Each leg of the M was about 95 days with the first two exactly 99 days
and the last two 92 and 97 days. The first rally matched the ultimate selloff
just about perfectly and the V in the middle displayed just about perfect
symmetry too. When an asset is completing a symmetrical pattern, you
should be on high alert for a reversal.
Furthermore, 
when 
trading 
options, 
you 
should 
start 
with 
the
assumption of price symmetry when choosing targets and strike prices. If
you are buying USDCNH puts on the second run to 7.1965, it makes sense
to start with 6.68 as your price target and then adjust for any other
information you have on direction and expected volatility.
If you were short USDCNH at the point this chart ends, and you feel
like the trade is losing its luster, this would be another input and possible
reason to think it might be time to cut. If you are bullish USDCNH but want
a reason to get long, this gives you one.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Note that one reason (especially a chart-based reason) is never good
enough for a trade idea. More appropriate would be that you already have
three or four reasons derived from fundamental, positioning or cross-market
analysis and the chart symmetry gives you a nice entry point with a cheap
stop loss.
REVERSAL PATTERNS
When you decide that you want to take the other side of a trend, it is
helpful to have specific indicators and patterns that will give you a signal
that the time is right. Copious cash has been set on fire by traders blindly
fading strong trends for no reason, or using weak logic like “this is a big
level” or “it’s come too far too fast”.
When I have a strong countertrend view, I don’t execute right away.
Instead, I go on high alert and wait for a sign that it’s time to jump in. I
would never enter a trade simply because of a reversal pattern or signal. But
when I have a countertrend view already, for reasons unrelated to technical
analysis, here are three reversal patterns I watch for.
1. Ending diagonal or rising wedge
This pattern works at the lows, too, but here I describe how it works at
the highs.
An ending diagonal occurs when price rises in a slowly narrowing
wedge as volatility contracts even as the price continues to make new highs.
Figure 10.7 is a nice example using NYMEX crude oil in 2018.
An interesting feature of the rising wedge formation is that as the
triangle narrows, the triangle must eventually close and the pattern must
conclude. Therefore, you get a sense of when the turn might come, if it’s
going to happen, as the apex of the triangle is a timing tool.
My approach to trading wedges is simple. When I have a countertrend
view, I wait for price to close below the wedge (under the bottom line, in
the example above) and then I go short with a stop loss above the high. In
the example above, I would sell crude at $70.80 on the day it dropped out of
the wedge on the big down day. My stop loss is $72.85 (above the highest
high).
2. Dojis
A doji is a candlestick that forms when the opening and closing price of
a security are the same. The daily silver chart in Figure 10.8 has two dojis
in a row after a 30% rally. The dojis are marked with large arrows.
A doji is a sign of indecision. Price went up and down and closed
unchanged. When you see a doji or two dojis in a row, it is a sign that
momentum has waned. The prior trend is losing steam. If you were bearish
silver in the case of Figure 10.8, but wanted a sign that it was safe to get in
the water, the doji is a good signal. Again, my methodology is simple.
When I am bearish a market that is in a strong trend higher, and I see a doji,
I sell on the close that day. I also use dojis on hourly charts.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
If I had no other information here, I would put my stop 1.5 average day
ranges away. 1.5 times the average daily range is my baseline starting point
when picking a stop loss for a normal trade. Note that I also look for major
levels to consider before determining my stop loss level. In this case, using
one year of data as the lookback, the average daily range in silver was 36
cents. Therefore, the stop loss is placed at the entry ($12.91) plus (0.36
daily range X 1.5) = $13.45. There was another doji the next day (the high
traded was $13.22 that day) and then silver cratered, reversing the entire
July/August rally in 5 days. Dojis are simple and powerful warning signs of
trend exhaustion.
3. Hammers
A hammer is a reversal candle where price makes a hard push in one
direction and closes at the opposite extreme. These are especially powerful
if they come as a failed attempt at a major new high or low. Figure 10.9 is
an example of a bull hammer candle.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
If you were bullish bitcoin in early 2018 but wanted a signal to buy, you
got a nice one in early February as the market made a bull hammer after the
50%+ decline. The bull hammer is marked with a large arrow. The strategy
is to wait for the hammer, buy at the close, and put your stop loss below the
low. Of course, the same setup (in reverse) at the highs is called a bear
hammer and it is bearish.
Note these patterns don’t work every time! There is also a bull hammer
on that same chart in January and that candle gave a bullish signal that only
worked for 3 days. No technical signal or setup is going to be anywhere
close to perfect. These reversal indicators are extremely useful, though, as
they 
help 
you 
enter 
countertrend 
trades 
with 
a 
set 
of 
logical 
risk
management parameters that allow you to put on your reversal trade with
meaningful leverage.
Develop a short list of reversal indicators that you like and use them as
triggers when you have a strong countertrend view. Be patient, then strike
with maximum force.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
I have now outlined a few ways to identify important levels and turning
points. You should also have one or two indicators in your toolbox that help
you identify the trend, and if that trend is overbought or oversold. Here are
two indicator sets I use for trend and overbought/oversold.
TREND AND OVERBOUGHT/OVERSOLD INDICATORS
Moving averages
To measure the strength, slope and direction of trend, moving averages
are the simplest, most effective indicator. I use 55, 100 and 200-hour
moving averages on all my charts. I almost always use hourly charts for
technical analysis, though I sometimes zoom in with 10-minute charts or
zoom out to the daily for a different perspective. When I zoom in or out, I
still use 55, 100 and 200-period MAs.
Here are three ways I look at moving averages:
1. The 200-hour is a great trend indicator and I use it on its own for
trend direction and also as support and resistance. If I am bearish
crude oil futures and the price has been repeatedly capped by the
200-hour, I will use the next approach to the MA to get short. Many
traders use the 55-day in the NASDAQ as a trend indicator. If the
market 
is 
above 
the 
moving 
average 
and 
holding 
above 
it 
on
pullbacks, that is a nice uptrend. And vice versa. One of the most
basic and effective strategies in trading is to play the pullbacks in a
primary trend using a moving average. This strategy is simple and
effective.
2. Watch for crossovers. When the 55-hour crosses up through the 200-
hour, that is a bullish signal. At that point, buying a pullback to the
55-hour could be attractive if you have other good reasons to be
bullish.
3. Check the slope of the moving averages. If all three MAs are flat,
that’s a choppy rangebound market. If all three are sloping upwards,
that’s a strong bull trend.
Here is a variation of a simple and effective (bullish) tactical approach
many use once they have a strong bullish view in a market: wait for a fast
MA to cross above a slower MA, which signals that an uptrend has formed.
Wait for the price of the asset to retrace back to the fast MA. Buy with a
stop loss at least 1.5 day’s ranges away and below the 200-hour MA.
Simple and effective.
The selection of period for moving averages (55 vs. 50 vs. 20) is
somewhat arbitrary and not super-important. Just pick two or three moving
averages of different lengths and put them on all your charts. You can also
fit a moving average to the current trend much in the way you would draw a
trendline. Then, if price breaks through that MA, you know the trend has
lost its mojo.
Relative strength indicator ( RSI)
Every trader should have one or two indicators that tell them when their
market is extremely oversold or overbought on the time horizon they trade.
The big three are RSI, stochastics and deviation from a moving average.
RSI is the standard that everyone uses, and the textbook strategy is that
if it goes above 70, wait for it to fall back below 70 and then sell. I use it
differently.
I take as much data as possible (using hourly data because that suits my
trading time horizon) and find the extremes in the RSI going back as far as
possible. I then calculate the top and bottom 5% most extreme and use these
levels as “get out no matter what” levels. That is, if I’m long, and the RSI
gets into the top 5% of the series, I cut. I find that at the mega RSI
extremes, the risk of a reversal is too high so the risk reward on staying in
the trend is poor. If I am trying to trade against the trend, I will also use
these mega extremes as an entry point.
Here’s a super short excerpt from one of my dailies (December 2, 2020)
where I use an extreme in the RSI to get short NZDUSD:
The textbook approach to trading RSI is to wait for it to rise above 70 and
then fall back below 70 and then go short. I prefer to isolate the most
extreme levels and use those as reversal points right away. While RSI is
a trend indicator, generally, it can be an amazing reversal indicator at the
MEGA extremes.
I sorted all the daily NZDUSD RSI data from 2010 to now and the most
extreme readings occur when the RSI breaks above 75. That happened
this week. With the dramatic repricing in NZ rates and the non-stop flood
of good vaccine news, much goodness is in the price of NZDUSD now.
The table below shows how the pair performed in the twelve instances
where the RSI went above 75 (since 2010).
x+1 means performance one day after the first RSI reading above 75, x+3 means three
days later, x+5 means 5-day performance, etc.
You can see in this short example that if you isolate the times when the
RSI is historically extreme, you can find points where you have high
confidence to go the other way. When the NZD RSI is above 75, future
performance is raging bearish as NZD averages a drop of 2.7% over the
next 60 trading days and goes up only 25% of the time.
In this case, I was already bearish risky assets (NZD is a risky asset) so
this just added to my thesis and gave me a way to play it. I went short
NZDUSD at 0.7040 with a stop at 0.7111 and a take profit at 0.6911. A high
RSI on its own would not be enough to get me involved but it’s a nice seed
that might grow into a full trade idea.
The Deviation
The other overbought and oversold signal that I use is the deviation of
price from a moving average or what I simply call “The Deviation”. My
technique is pretty simple, as usual. I take the price of the asset I’m trading
and check how far it is from the 100-hour moving average. Then, I look as
far back as possible and see if The Deviation tends to oscillate in a steady
range or if it looks unreliable or random. For many markets, you will see
that The Deviation tends to peak and trough around the same levels over
and over when volatility is fairly stable.
This is easy to set up on your trading system or in a spreadsheet. Use
historical data to determine what the extremes are in The Deviation and
then use those extremes going forward as reversal signals. In this case, I
filtered for the 5% of most extreme values in the deviation and this
represents a move in the S&P 500 of about 3.5%.
When using The Deviation, it is important to understand the skew of
your market. Skew is the direction of the market that tends to happen faster
and be more volatile. For example, stocks tend to sell off much more
quickly than they rally, so you might want to use a more conservative entry
point for your deviation signal on the downside or scale in gradually
knowing that sell-offs can overshoot and are harder and more violent to
fade.
An important note about using overbought and oversold signals: think
think think. If the Fed just announced a massive QE program and stocks rip
higher to extreme overbought… That is probably not a signal that it is time
to go short. Things that are overbought can become more overbought and
then more overbought again. Overbought on its own is not a reason to sell
an asset. It’s a warning sign that the future distribution of returns might be
skewed lower and that’s all.
An elevated RSI reading or a sexy stochastic are not reason enough to
do 
a 
trade. 
Incorporate 
overbought 
and 
oversold 
indicators 
into 
your
process and use them to fine tune entries and exits, but don’t be the trader
who fades a move solely because “It’s come too far, too fast.” That is not a
valid trading strategy. Remember we are using these technicals as guidance
and tactical inputs and not as a systematic quantitative trading framework.
MORNING QUICK TECHS
Most trading jobs are busiest in the morning. Markets are already
moving when you sit down but still, you need to prepare for the day. By 7
a.m. each day, I am fielding client queries, producing content, planning my
day and going through 100s of e-mails. I need to keep my morning process
as simple as possible. I like to create a quick sheet of techs that looks like
Figure 10.11.
Note that R1, R2, and R3 refer to the first three resistance levels while
S1, S2, and S3 refer to the first three support levels. The grid does not take
long to update each morning because many of yesterday’s levels remain
valid today and all the stuff on the bottom updates automatically using a
data feed from Bloomberg. Good traders have an established morning
process to prepare for the day and part of that process should be to identify
significant reference points for the day ahead. You know the old saying
about luck and preparation.
That concludes this section on technical analysis. I strongly advise you
to keep things simple and stick with just a few indicators and techniques
that make sense to you. Remember that techs are just the frosting on the
trade idea cake. Don’t try to make an entire cake out of frosting!
SENTIMENT AND POSITIONING
The market cycle is always a complex dance featuring narrative and
sentiment. Sometimes the news drives the price but quite often, the price
drives the news. In other words, sometimes a strong trend takes on a life of
its own and unfolds faster than the story on the ground, which follows
behind.
While I believe sentiment and positioning are important variables to
consider in every trade, and can sometimes be the main driver of a trade
idea, I also believe they are overrated as indicators by many traders. We
discussed sentiment a fair bit in the section on herding bias but there are
some other important points to cover.
Here are the key points on sentiment and positioning:
1. Sentiment and positioning matter sometimes, but not most of the
time.
2. 80-90% of the time, sentiment just follows price so if you trade
against sentiment and positioning you are often just fighting the
trend.
3. At inflection points, a tuned-in feel for positioning and sentiment can
be a huge source of edge.
Positioning is packed with potential energy, like fuel for a future fire.
Positioning unwinds are like fires. They need heat (a spark or catalyst), fuel
(large positions) and oxygen (more bad news, or mark-to-market losses that
trigger feedback loops that lead to more position unwinds).
Image: Gustavb - Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
You need large positions, a catalyst, and mark-to-market losses all at
once and then you get a chain reaction that continues until it finally burns
itself out (or is put out by a central bank). When I was in grade school, they
taught us this process with the fire triangle.
Large positions are like piles of dry tinder that can potentially burst into
flame at any moment, but probably won’t. Remember, just because you
have a large stack of dry wood next to an open can of gasoline… That does
not mean there will be a fire.
Figure 10.12 is the simple positioning and sentiment framework I use.
In other words, going against sentiment works at the turning points but
not during the trend. If you can identify a palpable turn in sentiment via
observation of behavior or via data analysis, you can position ahead of the
crowd.
Sources of sentiment and positioning data
The 
best 
source 
of 
sentiment 
and 
positioning 
information 
is
knowledgeable observation of how people discuss a market. This is easier if
you have been trading for a few years and talk to many people in the
market, but you can also get a sense of this from reading news and social
media. Just remember that many channels are biased.
In terms of data, the most commonly-used positioning data comes from
the CFTC. This data shows the positioning of non-commercial speculators,
and while it is closely followed and can be interesting information, it has no
predictive power on its own. If you see “Copper longs on CFTC hit all-time
high” your instinct is probably to go short copper but the inconvenient truth
is that a setup like that is actually modestly bullish on all time horizons.
The CFTC data is slow-moving and trend-following and is directional,
not contrarian. Do not use CFTC data by itself as a contrarian
indicator.
A source of sentiment data that is contrarian is the Daily Sentiment
Index, produced by Jake Bernstein since the 1980s. That data is the output
from a survey of retail traders that simply asks: “Are you bullish or bearish
on X?” It shows what percentage of survey respondents are bulls. When
bulls get below 10 or above 90, that is a good indicator of a near-term
extreme. DSI data is available only via subscription.
Options markets often contain important positioning information. For
example, when stocks rise and VIX rises at the same time, you know that
something unusual is going on because the correlation is almost always
inverted between those two. Stocks up / VIX up is a sign that the market is
so bullish it is adding to upside with calls, instead of hedging the downside
with puts. You can also look at the put/call ratio for a read on equity
sentiment.
In currency markets, people look at the risk reversal to see if traders
have a strong preference for puts or calls, and how that preference is
changing. As with most sentiment data, the risk reversal mostly follows
price but when there is a divergence (USDJPY going up even as the risk
reversal is more bid for USD puts) that can be a signal that something is
amiss.
Positioning surveys can be a useful source of information. They are
timely and fast moving. People change their minds quickly, as opposed to
trend following systems which move much more slowly as they wait for
price 
confirmation. 
Again, 
with 
surveys, 
most 
of 
the 
time 
they 
are
directional and the only time they are contrarian is when they hit an
extreme. In the positioning surveys I have done when working at banks, I
found that when sentiment made a record high or low for the past year, that
could often be a good sign of a turn.
In the stock market there are many sentiment surveys and indicators
available. I like the AAII survey (bulls vs. bears). CNN’s Fear and Greed
indicator is a nice simple snapshot of equity sentiment.
Many banks publish sentiment and positioning data. In FX there is the
Citi Pain Index and the HSBC Positioning Indicators. In broad macro, the
Bank of America Global Fund Manager Survey gets a lot of attention and
highlights crowded positions and tail risks. Retail brokers like Oanda,
Dukascopy and DailyFX publish detailed positioning data. Each market has
its important sentiment and positioning data, and this is generally easy to
find simply by Googling. As you become expert in your market, you will
learn the best sentiment and positioning indicators to follow.
Finally, magazine covers can be the ultimate contrarian indicator. When
a financial theme hits the cover of a mainstream magazine, always take
note. By the time journalists believe a theme is worthy of a cover story, that
theme is (by definition) well-known. That means the theme is probably also
crowded. 
For 
more 
on 
the 
Magazine 
Cover 
Indicator, 
Google 
“Brent
Donnelly magazine cover indicator”.
How to use sentiment and positioning data
Sentiment and positioning data can help you significantly at turning
points. The number one takeaway on sentiment and positioning, whether
you are using surveys, options markets, or other sources of information, is
that only the super-mega-extremes are times when you should consider
fading. 
Otherwise, 
positioning 
and 
sentiment 
are 
mostly 
just 
trend
indicators and they move up and down with the price.
In Chapter 9 we discussed how sentiment and positioning evolve as a
market moves through its narrative cycle. I want to mention here that when
sentiment is at an extreme and the narrative starts to turn, this is a situation
where good sentiment and positioning analysis can make you money.
Extreme bearish sentiment usually reflects that the price has been going
down and there is a strong and compelling bearish story that explains the
sell-off. The interesting moment comes when the narrative starts to turn,
good news starts to emerge, but price does not turn higher right away.
Confirmation bias hampers the judgment of the individual and it also
impacts the judgment of the crowd in aggregate. You will often see the
news flow turn against a major trend but no reaction in the price at first.
Often, traders with lower confidence will defer to the market (they
might say “Oh, I guess the news isn’t that bullish after all, since the market
keeps going lower”) while expert traders with a strong understanding of the
narrative 
and 
of 
positioning 
will 
see 
an 
opportunity 
in 
the 
mismatch
between price and narrative. They will say something more like: “The news
flow has clearly turned bullish here but the market is clinging to the old
bearish narrative. Short positioning is in the 97% percentile and I bet there
is going to be a huge reversal soon.”
Then, that expert trader will go on high alert for signals that price has
bottomed. This could be as simple as waiting for a moving average to break
or waiting for a bullish reversal pattern like a hammer, ending diagonal or
key reversal day. The savvy trader sees that the sell-off is set to reverse but
waits. She looks for evidence that a reversal in price is happening and finds
setups that allow for a reasonable stop loss. She knows better than to simply
buy over and over as the price continues to plummet. Try not to catch
falling knives. Remember what they say about bottom pickers.
Wait for an indication that things have turned before you trade against a
powerful trend. In Chapter 12, I will go through a specific example of how I
used 
a 
divergence 
between 
sentiment 
and 
narrative 
to 
get 
set 
on 
a
countertrend trade.
Alpha Traders use multiple approaches to find high confidence trades.
They 
wait 
for 
multiple 
indicators 
to 
line 
up. They 
use 
fundamentals,
narrative analysis, positioning and sentiment, and other factors to get a
reading on the market. Then, they use technical analysis to fine tune timing,
entry and exit. They structure trades in a way that acknowledges that many
ideas will be wrong so that when they are inevitably wrong, the cost is
small. When they are right, the payoff is large.
Excellent traders are confident in their views but also know they are
frequently wrong.
Some hedge funds make all their trading decisions using macro analysis
but 
then 
simply 
filter 
every 
idea 
with 
one 
or 
two 
simple 
technical
indicators. Trade ideas remain in the OFF state until the technical indicator
puts them in the ON position.
For example, let’s say a fund has a pod comprised of three genius
analysts and two senior portfolio managers. They currently hold five core
views: Bullish USDJPY, AAPL and gold, and bearish bonds and AMZN.
The fund will then systematically apply a simple filter to the ideas, let’s
say a 55-day moving average. The pod will only put on the trades that are
on the correct side of the 55-day moving average. For example, they will
only go short AMZN if it’s below the 55-day.
This avoids extended periods of wrongness because if AMZN enters a
prolonged uptrend, the fund will stay flat the whole time as the stock trends
higher and remains above its 55-day MA. When price breaks below the 55-
day, the fund will put on their AMZN short. If AMZN closes back above the
55-day, they’re out.
This approach of trading macro with a technical filter is an excellent
model. It allows you to find your edge on the analysis side but then forces
you to admit you are wrong when price goes against you
122
.
I hope this chapter has given you a sense of how I use technical
analysis, sentiment and positioning in my trading process. There are no
correct answers when it comes to trading, so take what resonates with you
in this chapter and throw out what does not. You should develop a process
that fits your personality and suits your objectives. Never strictly follow
someone else’s advice.
Now it’s time to move on to the most important topic in trading: risk
management. You can do everything else right but if you fail at risk
management, you automatically fail at trading. No matter how good a chef
you are, you will never succeed in the restaurant business if you keep
blowing up your kitchen.
118. Biondo, Pluchino, Rapisarda and Helbing. “Are Random Trading Strategies More
Successful than Technical Ones?” (2013)
119. Reminder: As discussed in the chapter on microstructure… You should know what one
day’s range is in your product, on average and at the extremes. This is the most important
measure of volatility for short-term traders.
120. John J. Murphy: Technical Analysis of Financial Markets (1999) and Steve Nison:
Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (2001).
121. But still possible!
122. No approach is perfect. In choppy markets the trend signal will generate a ton of noise
and that can be costly. But overall, the multi-factor fundamental approach with a technical
filter is a strong, logical approach to trading.