I
CHAPTER 11
YOU FEELING LUCKY, PUNK?
Data collection, risk management and variance
Most of what I have learned from gambling is also true for investing.
People mostly don’t understand risk, reward and uncertainty. Their
investment results would be better if they did.
EDWARD O. THORP, A Man for All Markets
n this chapter, we will discuss risk management. If you are new to trading,
this chapter will help you build and implement a robust risk management
framework. If you are an experienced professional, I hope you will extract a
few 
nuggets 
of 
wisdom 
and 
alternative 
viewpoints 
and 
use 
these
observations to make incremental improvements to your current framework.
Risk management is the most important skill in trading. Everything else
is a distant second. You can have the best ideas, the greatest algorithms, the
best instinctive pattern recognition and the fastest execution systems but if
your risk management system is not adequate… You will fail. I could write
an entire book about risk management but a) that would be boring to write
so I’m not going to do that and b) the real essentials of risk management are
fairly simple and can be boiled down into one chapter.
The big challenges in risk management come from trading businesses
that employ complex strategies, huge portfolios, correlated assets, illiquid
markets, 
and 
non-linear 
derivative 
products. 
For 
short-term 
directional
traders in liquid markets, it’s pretty easy to establish an appropriate set of
risk management rules. The hard part is following them.
COLLECT AND ANALYZE P& L DATA
Before you develop a risk management system, you need to build a
solid data collection system. Collecting and analyzing P&L data is one of
the most important and powerful activities in trading. Much in the way a
trading 
journal 
provides 
qualitative 
feedback, 
P&L 
analysis 
provides
quantitative feedback. This does not need to be complicated. If you don’t
already have one, create a spreadsheet to track your daily P&L.
Columns should include: DATE, STOP LOSS, OPEN, HIGH, LOW,
CLOSE.
DATE is today’s date. STOP LOSS is your daily stop loss today (if you
have one). OPEN is how much you made overnight. That is, your P&L
when you start trading in the morning. This is useful to track because it’s a
different type of trading than what you do during the day. HIGH and LOW
give you a sense of your daily P&L volatility over time and also what the
extremes tend to be.
After collecting a year or so of data, you might notice that you tend to
top out at the same level all the time and then close lower. If you always
peak around the same HIGH and then close lower, consider setting a take
profit target for the day. Many traders will consistently have a tough time
breaking through a specific level of P&L in a given day. This tendency to
peak at a specific P&L level is not random. It reflects a combination of your
position size and the volatility of your market.
If you trade $100 million positions in a product that tends to move no
more than 1% per day, you are going to notice your P&L tops out around $1
million quite often. To break to a higher plateau, you first need to know the
level of your current plateau and then you need to calculate how you can
move to a higher level.
The next step to building a quality P&L tracking spreadsheet is to set up
individual P&L columns for each major product and sub-product you trade.
FX, BONDS, STOCKS if you’re macro, for example, or individual stocks if
you are an equity day trader that trades particular names.
This is highly individual and depends on what you think is worth
tracking. A note of caution here: keep it high level. If you trade 50 stocks,
there is not much point maintaining a column for each stock. There is a
point at which your spreadsheet has so much data that it yields mostly noise
and little actionable information. Note that if you are a day trader, you can’t
be an expert in 50 different stocks and you shouldn’t be trading that many
anyway.
Another idea is to set up columns for each strategy you run. If you have
one strategy to trade the market open, another strategy that trades during the
day and a third strategy that trades on news, you can create one column for
each strategy to track how they are doing over time. The idea here is to have
data that will help you answer: “What is working and what isn’t?” and then
you can do more of what is working and less of what is not.
This spreadsheet should not be more than 12 to 15 columns wide,
including MTD and YTD columns on the far right. If you have more than
15 columns, aggregate or combine some of them until you can see the
whole thing on one screen. There is a point where too much information is
bad. Be thoughtful about what data might be useful and collect that data.
You can always add new columns later. Keep it fairly basic for now.
Once you have about six months of data, calculate the following:
WIN% (number of winning days / total number of trading days)
Average winning day ($ or bps)
Average losing day ($ or bps)
WIN/LOSE $ or bps ratio. This is simply your average winning day
($) divided by your average losing day ($). This is the most important
statistic for most short-term traders. Your P&L is simply:
(# winning days * average winning day)
– (# losing days * average losing day)
There are just two numbers you need to control. Your WIN% and the
ratio of the size of your winning days to the size of your losing days.
That’s it!
There is no right answer for how these two stats should combine, but
WIN% is much more difficult to influence than the relationship
between your winning and losing days. Your WIN% is usually
determined more by your trading style and the seat you are in
whereas the ratio of your winning day P&L to your losing day P&L
is influenced by your discipline, patience, and ability to cut losses
and ride winners. That ratio tends to be the best reflection of trading
skill, in my opinion.
I have been keeping these trading stats since 2006 and it is surprising
how consistently my WIN% hovers around 50%. All my success (or
failure) is determined by the size of my winning days vs. the size of
my losing days. And more precisely, if I can keep the losers under
control, the winners tend to take care of themselves. I have no
trouble making money, but I often have trouble keeping it. This is
the profile of the active, risk-seeking trader.
On the other hand, a skilled but more risk averse trader might have a
higher WIN%, say 60%. The idea here is to collect enough data and
then start to think about changes you can make to either increase
your WIN% or increase the size of your up days relative to the size
of your down days. Like I said earlier, for most traders the up vs.
down day ratio is easier to influence than the WIN%.
What stocks (or currencies or commodities…) you made money in.
Also which ones cost you money. Important note here: don’t
overestimate the importance of this information. Good products and
good markets come and go. I have heard people say stuff like: “I keep
losing money in EURUSD, it’s just stuck in this stupid range! I really
need to take it off my screen.”
In that scenario, the problem is not EURUSD, the problem is that it is
in a range and it sounds like the trader isn’t very good at trading
ranges. If she takes EURUSD off her screen and then it trends higher
for 10 straight days, she’s probably going to miss a huge opportunity.
Collect data on specific assets and asset classes, not so you can put
them in the penalty box, but so that you can isolate what is working
and what isn’t. And why.
How many times did you breach your stop loss? What were the
causes, on each of those days? Any time your LOW or your CLOSE is
lower than your stop loss, that is a red flag. Something is wrong with
your process. Your positions are too big; you are too slow to stop out;
you are out of control in some way. If you are a manager, take stop
losses seriously. Don’t increase a trader’s stop when it hits; shut her
down.
Performance by day of the week and on event days. Are you
making all your money on Fed days and month end and losing money
every Monday? Look for patterns that make sense but be careful not to
be fooled by randomness here. If you can explain why a pattern exists,
it is much less likely that it’s an artifact of randomness.
What time of day do you make and lose money, on average? This is
a bit more work and involves a separate spreadsheet where you take a
snapshot of your P&L every 30 minutes. After a few months you will
have an interesting P&L curve that will show you how your
profitability evolves throughout the day.
Are you making all your money on the open then leaking half of it
back out over the course of the day? Do you lose money consistently
from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. every day? Many day traders make all their
money in the morning and then spend the rest of the day trying not to
give it back. This is dumb. If you make all your money in the morning,
shut down at noon and find other ways to be productive. Do research,
read, work out, etc. Even if you work at a bank, nobody is going to
force you to trade in the afternoon.
Try to get a strong sense of how time of day influences your
performance. Personally, I make most of my money overnight and
from 7 a.m. to 11 a.m. and the period from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. NY is a
P&L graveyard. Identify the juicy times to trade and act with focused
aggression during these times. For the lackluster parts of your trading
day, find replacement activities to keep you occupied so that you do
not press buttons out of boredom.
You should also look at monthly and yearly data as time goes on.
Ideally, your P&L should skew to the right on every time frame. In other
words, your biggest days should be up days, not down days. Your biggest
months should be positive, not negative. You should rarely lose money in a
year and never two years in a row. The more edge you have, the more this
paragraph will be true of your trading statistics.
DEVELOP A RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
You 
have 
your 
data 
collection 
system. 
Now 
you 
need 
a 
risk
management system.
This section is about risk management for short-term traders who trade
liquid products and take mostly directional risk. If you sell low-delta
options or run a 78-line portfolio or buy and sell frontier market bonds, this
section does not apply to you.
I think the most useful way to explain my risk management thought
process is to start with longer time horizons then gradually zoom in to
smaller and smaller increments. I will start with one trading year, then
discuss monthly risk management, then move all the way down to daily risk
management and individual trades.
There is no single correct answer when it comes to managing risk.
Your risk management system has to match your personality, your time
horizon, your trading style, your capital, your access to leverage and the
liquidity profile of the products you trade. I am going to outline how I think
about risk management and give you some of the details of my risk
management system. Take what makes sense to you. Discard what does not.
YEARLY RISK MANAGEMENT
In most trading jobs, one year is the most important unit of trading
performance. Almost all bank and real money traders are paid based on
annual performance and most hedge funds also use the calendar year as
their main unit of time for evaluation and compensation. Sure, some hedge
funds pay out more than once per year, and retail traders don’t think as
much about yearly increments, but all traders should think about, monitor,
analyze and target yearly performance.
In order to survive in the long run, you want your yearly performance to
look like that of a call option. This means flat or perhaps small losses in the
bad years and medium-sized to huge gains in the good years. Twenty years
of performance for a skilled, adaptable trader using the risk management
style I will describe in the pages to follow, might look something like
Figure 11.1.
To achieve this sort of distribution of P&L, you need to do three things.
1. Start slow and increase risk as YTD P&L builds
You cannot have the same risk appetite on January 1 with zero P&L in
the coffers as you can have on August 15 when you are up 15 million
dollars. This means there must be an arbitrary change in your risk appetite
each January, but that’s just the way things go. In an ideal world, you
should always be varying your risk appetite based on conviction and market
opportunity, but we live in the real world. As such, you need to start slow
and build risk over time.
There is something special and scary about the zero bound in P&L.
Let’s say a hypothetical trader named Steven Kirk wants to make $10
million this year and his stop loss is $4 million. He will find that going from
+$2 million to +$1 million feels significantly less bad than going from
+$500k to -$500k, even though both are P&L declines of $1 million. Any
red number next to your name feels bad. This is consistent with theory
which tells us that if a gain gives us x pleasure, a loss of the same
magnitude gives us 2x pain.
This is not all just psychological, though. As Steve’s P&L falls below
zero, his ability to take risk (his leverage) decreases. There is a non-linear
real-world impact of losses as he moves below zero and closer to his stop
loss. When you are below zero P&L, you wear a straitjacket.
Let’s say it’s February 15. How is Steve’s psychology at YTD P&L of
$750,000? He is not ecstatic, because he’s a bit behind plan, but not too
bad. How about at YTD P&L of zero? Still OK, probably. At minus $1
million? He’s getting a bit nervous now. At minus $2 million, Steve is
halfway to his stop loss after only six weeks. At that point, he is going to
need to reduce his risk in order to avoid hitting the disaster zone which is
around $3 million. Remember: even if your stop loss is $4 million, you are
in big trouble trading-wise much before then, because you will need to
reduce your position size in order to avoid getting the shoulder tap.
You need to start the year slow and build up.
The year has a great deal of path dependence which means that how you
start has a big influence on where you end up. If Steve loses $2 million in
January, the odds that he will hit his $10 million goal are almost zero. If he
makes $400k in January and $600k in February, he’s behind budget but still
in an OK position.
The idea is to get safely away from the zero bound and then when a
mega-opportunity arrives and you have a cushion… Go for it. If Steve is
+$1.5 million on February 25 and there is a fantastic opportunity, he is in a
position to risk a bigger chunk of cash, say $500k, on the idea without
worrying about putting himself underwater.
Remember that Rule #1 of trading is: don’t blow up. Always give
yourself a chance to play tomorrow. It is tricky to give precise mathematical
formulas 
for 
risk 
management 
because 
this 
implies 
there 
is 
a 
correct
answer. There is no precise answer in risk management. Every trader, every
bank and every hedge fund must manage risk differently. What I can tell
you is how I think about risk in different scenarios. You can either mirror
parts of this framework if it makes sense to you, or you can transform it to
fit your needs.
Before I can establish my basic yearly framework, I need to know my
free capital. Free capital is the amount of money you can afford to lose. For
retail traders, that’s the portion of your account you feel you can lose in a
year and still come back. For bank, real money and hedge fund traders, it’s
your annual stop loss.
My strategy is to start slow and build up capital, then get as aggressive
as possible (if there are juicy market opportunities) by June or July at the
latest. Hopefully earlier. Budgets vary over the years, but I will again use
the $10 million goal and $4 million stop loss because that is a realistic ratio
and the absolute numbers don’t matter as much as the relative figures.
Using the same 2.5 : 1 ratio, a retail trader might be risking a maximum
loss of $40,000 for the year with the goal of making $100,000. A hedge
fund trader might have a stop loss of $40 million and a target of $100
million. This 2.5 : 1 ratio is not a rule, it’s just a realistic ratio that’s in the
ballpark. Some bank traders might have a tighter stop loss of $2 million and
be looking to make $20 million if they have a great market making seat. A
retail trader might be risking $20,000 but hope to make $200,000.
Again, the numbers I am presenting in this chapter are not meant to be
immutable laws of finance. They are realistic parameters that work in my
world but may need to be adjusted in yours.
A trader with a maximum loss of $4 million and a target of $10 million
can allow more risk taking when he is doing well and should take less risk
when he is struggling. Based on year-to-date (YTD) P&L, a good system is
to allocate a new monthly stop loss on the first day of the month and
determine that stop loss using the YTD P&L. The better you are doing, the
more leverage you use in the next month if good opportunities arise. For
example, this is a reasonable scale for the $4 million stop loss trader who
wants to make $10 million.
The objective is never to get to your YTD goal and then put your feet
up. The objective is to get stronger and stronger over the course of the year
so that you can take maximum risk when rare opportunities appear. Under
this sort of framework, you might find yourself up $6 million in June and
able to spend $1 million on a strong trade idea that makes you $4 million.
Then, you’re up $10 million in July and you can sit on your hands until the
next huge opportunity comes. If your goal for the year was $10 million and
you are there in July, you have put yourself in a position to make $20
million or maybe more. Those chances don’t come along every year. Keep
trading.
Often the P&L chart of an alpha macro trader in a good year will look
like a series of steps with interval periods where the P&L flatlines. This is
the P&L trajectory of a trader that waits for the big opportunities and then
puts on meaningful risk at the right times. This is not the trajectory for
every alpha trader.
A good retail scalper or news trader, for example, will have a P&L chart
that looks more like a 45-degree angle. But even a trader that is consistent
should be taking more risk and making more money when they are strongly
positive for the year and taking less risk when they are close to zero or
negative YTD.
2. Understand the metagame
Trading successfully and moving the risk lever up and down throughout
the year requires a good understanding of the specific metagame you are
playing. You need to understand the internal rules, incentives, politics, and
risk management framework where you work and incorporate these into
your risk management decisions as well.
For example, does your boss freak out when you lose more than $X? If
so, you know that is the internal no-go line, even if there has never been a
rule set. Does your contract say you will be fired if you lose more than 9%
while history shows that traders at your firm tend to get derisked or fired
when they lose 5%? Forget the number in the contract, the metagame rules
say your stop loss should be 5%.
If you work at a bank, does your compensation flatline once your P&L
hits a certain threshold? If yes, then keep in mind that if you hit that
threshold, losses will cost you more in compensation than gains will help
you. Adjust your risk accordingly.
There are so many different metagames, depending on where you work.
Take a few minutes to think about the metagame in your seat. Even if you
are a retail trader, there is probably a metagame. For example, if you don’t
earn a certain amount of money in your first two years, will your spouse get
antsy and ask you to get a “real” job? If so, then you need to set your target
above that level!
You need your family on board or you will find life difficult. Trading is
incredibly hard. It will inevitably test your belief in yourself. If those
around you (management, family, the person who provided your trading
capital…) don’t believe in you, it will be impossible.
3. Don’t blow up
This one is so simple and yet traders blow up all the time. Trade liquid
products. If you are a retail equity trader, don’t short the biotech stock that
just tripled from $1.50 to $4.50. If you are a currency trader, don’t take
positions in pegged currencies. Manage your overnight and weekend risk
tightly. The smaller your account size or free capital, the more careful you
need to be. If you sell options, think about ridiculous worst-case scenarios
and avoid them.
The universe of trades is so large in every asset class that there is no
excuse for putting on trades that have unlimited downside. You should be
confident about your ability to stop out of any trade or you should keep it
small enough it’s not going to kill you if it goes pear-shaped. If a trade you
have on has a low probability of a huge tail risk, cover it and find
something better to trade.
Understand path dependence
Path dependence is an important concept for every professional trader to
understand. It comes into play in different ways. Path dependence means
future steps of a process depend on its history. A series of coin flips is not
path dependent. If you flip 10 tails, the coin has no memory and the 11
th
flip
is fair and 50/50.
On the other hand, each month in a trading year is path dependent. Your
performance in January will determine your free capital and your state of
mind for February. The most important thing to remember is to never take
actions in one period that could be overly detrimental to future periods.
For example: you work at a bank where P&L resets every January 1.
There is a perfect, 5-star set up in S&P futures and you have never been so
confident that they are about to (finally!) crash. Your approach to this trade,
the sizing you choose and the amount of capital you will risk should be
different in January than in August.
While this is irrational from a theoretical point of view, in real life there
is too much path dependence in January for you to go all-in; you must act
conservatively knowing that your performance in January will influence
your performance in the following 11 months. On the other hand, if your
annual target was $5 million, you are now up $7 million and it’s September,
you know that even if you lose $2 million on this trade idea, it won’t have
much negative impact on your trading for the final three months of the year.
I know this might not seem rational to you, but believe me, it is. Playing the
multi-period metagame correctly is just as important as maximizing P&L
for a given period.
Another way path dependence matters is when you start a new job in
trading. A trader that has made money 8 straight years doesn’t attract much
attention if she loses money in Year 9. On the other hand, a new hire that
loses money in his first four months of trading might make a manager
question why they hired him.
Financial firms are generally not very good at separating luck from skill
or 
at 
comparing 
market 
regimes 
to 
trader 
performance. 
The 
absolute
number next to your name matters much more than any context surrounding
it. Therefore, when you start a new trading job, it is crucial that you
understand how much runway you have.
As ridiculous as it sounds, your ultimate success or failure at a hedge
fund is usually determined within the first 18 months. Your entire career (or
lack of career) at the fund will be rooted in that initial performance. The
trader that comes out hot and shoots the lights out will be given plenty of
slack going forward and can probably draw down in future without too
much hassle.
The equally-skilled trader that comes in and loses money for the first
five months will be under heightened scrutiny, even if those five months
were the lowest volatility period in the history of his asset class and he is
known to be a trader that performs well in high-vol markets.
The way to protect against this path dependence when switching firms
is to ensure you have at least one (and hopefully two or three) strong
supporters within the organization. And make sure that the strong supporter
who brought you in is planning to stay! Once your sponsor leaves, your life
or death in that firm becomes even more path dependent. Try to avoid
relying on luck by ensuring that you have sufficient runway when you go to
a new firm.
Jerry, the greatest trader who never was
Jerry was one of the best pure traders I have ever seen. But he drove so
fast we all knew that eventually he would slam into the wall…
Jerry was a 21-year-old college dropout who worked in the same day
trading office as I did in the late 1990s. He had no financial markets
background. He was a pure gambler who found his way onto the trading
floor because of a few lucky coincidences. He loved to go out clubbing
until 3 a.m. and then come in and trade the pre-open at 8 a.m. He was
hilarious and immature and knew very little about markets.
Despite all this, he had incredible instincts. He had a professional
gambler’s eye for risk/reward and opportunity. He was like a modern-day
Jesse Livermore who could read the tape and sentiment and price action and
make money in ways that were incredibly skillful and fun to watch. Jerry
could feel what was going to happen before it happened. He was so
obviously good at trading that the 40-year-old trader that was randomly
seated next to him decided to close his own account and back Jerry instead.
But Jerry couldn’t stay away from the thinly-traded names. He would
yell out “Look at -insert ticker symbol of a thinly-traded stock nobody has
ever heard of here-. It’s exploding!” We would bring up the chart and see
some random microcap trading at $5.25, up 361% on the day. Instead of
trading one cent wide in 500 or more shares like most stocks, these stocks
jumped around in $1 increments, trading 30 cents wide in 100 shares. Jerry
would sell 3,000 shares, taking it down from $5.25 to $4.25 and this would
often trigger a waterfall move that let him quickly take profit at, say, $3.10.
There was yelling involved and it was incredibly fun to watch. He
would then go back to trading normal stocks and making money and
someone would say to him: “Jerry, you can’t trade those microcaps. One
day, one of them will just keep going up and you will get carted out of
here.”
He would listen closely and nod his head and say: “Yeah dude. You’re
right. I’ll stop doing that. For sure.”
Then three days later Jerry’s yelling across the floor: “Oh boy! I’m short
a lot of this one! This is not good!”
A stock went from $2 to $4, and he got short 14,000 shares. A few
minutes later it was $6, then $8. His $50,000 account was suddenly worth
minus $6,000. The manager of the trading floor issued a margin call and
forced Jerry to buy back all the shares at an average of $8.20. The stock
closed the day at $3.45.
Jerry was such an obviously talented kid that even after that incident, a
different trader seeded him another $50,000. Four months later, guess
what… The same thing happened. Jerry had amazing natural skill as a
trader but it didn’t matter. He blew up.
This is an extreme case, but a true story of how risk of ruin is the first
and most important risk to manage. Never enter a trade unless you know
you can get out. One of my previous bosses once said:
Trading is like driving a race car. You want to drive as fast as possible,
but you can never lose control or crash into the wall.
Don’t be like Jerry. Don’t crash into the wall.
Astute readers might notice that Jerry’s story sounds a bit like the story
of the hedge funds that were mega-short low-priced, illiquid stocks in
January 2021. Those funds, like Jerry, broke the first rule of trading: Don’t
blow up. The GameStop episode was a friendly reminder that no amount of
upside justifies putting on positions that you cannot properly risk manage. It
was also a friendly reminder that short positions in cheap stocks have
limited profit potential and unlimited risk. Stay away from trades with that
payoff profile.
MONTHLY RISK MANAGEMENT
At 
the 
start 
of 
each 
month, 
you 
should 
take 
stock 
of 
your YTD
performance and decide on a reasonable goal and stop loss for the month
ahead. As the year progresses, you have more ammunition to take more risk
so if you have been doing well, increase your monthly allocation. If you are
struggling, keep it flat or cut it.
Keep in mind that increasing your risk allocation does not mean you
have to start taking bigger positions on the first day of the month. What it
means is that when a juicy opportunity arrives in the new month, you
allocate more to it than you would have in the prior month.
Just before the start of a new month you should determine:
Monthly stop loss
Monthly profit goal
$ at risk for Type I, Type II and Type III trades (I will define these
trade types soon)
One personal goal (fitness, sleep, eating, etc.)
As we move down the fractals from yearly to monthly to daily to single
trades, there is an important concept you should always have in your mind:
variance. Let’s talk about variance for a few pages because it is a crucial
concept in trading. First, here’s a quote that sums it up nicely:
The laws of probability, so true in general,
so fallacious in particular.
EDWARD GIBBON, 1774
In statistics and probability, variance is the concept that in a series of
numbers with a given average, individual data points will be spread out
away from the average. So even if your average daily P&L over the last 10
years 
is 
+$23,000, 
you 
might 
still 
lose 
$25,000 
five 
days 
in 
a 
row
sometimes. This may not mean you did anything wrong. It’s just variance.
Variance is a prominent feature in poker. A well-rested professional
poker player will inevitably beat a drunk amateur over a long period, say 12
hours. But over any 10-minute or even 30-minute period, the drunk amateur
might prevail. The key to understanding variance is that it is most visible in
short samples. The larger the sample, the closer the aggregate data will
approach the true average.
Luck is a short-term thing. In the long run, skill prevails.
Then again, as Keynes famously said… “In the long run, we are all
dead.” 
A 
very 
solid 
trading 
strategy 
with 
significant 
edge 
generates
substantial variance, even year to year. This is why it is incredibly difficult
to evaluate traders, portfolio managers and hedge funds. Was it luck or was
it skill? Michael Mauboussin’s book: The Luck Equation: Untangling Skill
and Luck in Business is the go-to book on this topic.
To give you a sense of how variance impacts a year of performance in
trading, let’s run a few simulations. For simplicity, we’ll use a static risk
management approach where the trader does not change their risk appetite
during the year, regardless of performance. That said, I strongly advocate
increasing your risk as your P&L rises.
I include these simulations because I think very few people, even expert
traders, truly appreciate just how dramatic the impact of variance can be on
performance. It is probably a defense mechanism. If we truly appreciated
how important variance was, we would feel like we barely control our own
fate. And humans love to believe they are in control.
The first simulation (Figure 11.2) approximates the performance of a
retail trader. She makes money 50% of days and loses money 50% of days.
Her average winning day (net P&L) is +$2,000 and her average losing day
is minus $1,200. Based on these figures, she will expect to make $100,800
in an average year. Here is her cumulative YTD P&L simulated 100 times.
The same trader using the same strategy in a world with the same
probabilities might make $50,000 one year and $150,000 the next, with
variance—and literally nothing else—to blame.
The second simulation (Figure 11.3) represents a bank trader. He makes
money 55% of days and loses money 45% of days. His average winning
day (net P&L) is +$150,000 and his average losing day is minus $120,000.
Based on these figures, his expected value is +$7.2 million. But you see in
Figure 11.3 how he fares in 100 simulations.
You can see that despite employing a process with substantial edge and
positive EV, a trader’s annual performance is all over the place simply due
to 
variance. 
This 
is 
a 
big 
reason 
why 
it 
is 
so 
flipping 
difficult 
for
management 
to 
properly 
assess 
traders 
and 
for 
traders 
to 
evaluate
themselves. It’s easy to be fooled by randomness!
One of the most difficult and most important skills in trading is the
ability to distinguish between variance and bad decision making. If you are
losing money right now, is it because your process has broken down, your
discipline sucks and the market has completely changed? Or is it because of
the inevitable variance within the P&L distribution?
When you are on a bad streak, you need to ask yourself this. The longer
you have been trading, the easier this is to answer (usually). For me, I can
usually look back on a losing streak and determine with a fair amount of
confidence whether it was variance. When you are starting out, it’s almost
impossible to tell.
Here are some examples of how I look at a losing streak and determine
whether it’s a product of variance or bad process.
Variance
1. I was wrong a lot. Being wrong is part of trading. It’s OK to be
wrong!
2. I got unlucky. I was long and some bad news came out yesterday.
Today, I got stopped out at the highs.
When I am wrong and I lose money, I barely care. That’s trading. As
long as I have been sticking to my risk management system, I shrug and
move on. Being wrong is where variance comes from in trading. Don’t
worry about it. On the other hand, some things can’t be attributed to
variance.
Not Variance
1. I have been right, and I am reading the market pretty well, but I am
losing money. This is a strong indicator that there is something
wrong with my process or risk management. For much of 2020, I
was in synch with the market and my percentage of accurate calls
was very high. But my performance was disappointing because of
multiple breakdowns in discipline and process. I was wrong-sizing
my trades and bleeding on random, low conviction ideas. If you are
reading the market well and losing money, that’s a red flag:
something is wrong with your process and it’s not just variance.
2. I traded with no plan. I walked in each day and started hitting buttons
without a good sense of what I was trying to do. I cut out of good
ideas early because I was bored.
3. I am overtrading. I should be tight/aggressive but instead I’m making
a series of small bets on random, dumb ideas and leaking money
every day.
4. I left a stale order in the system overnight and it triggered a loss. Poor
attention to detail is not bad luck.
5. My discipline is poor. I broke my risk management rules. My
positions were way too big. I kept moving my stop lower instead of
cutting. I doubled a losing position.
6. The market regime has changed and I have not adapted.
7. My boss is giving me a hard time and making me nervous.
8. If I keep losing money, I am going to lose my job.
9. I am tired. I am arguing with my spouse or children. I think I might
get a divorce. I am drinking too much. I feel depressed. I don’t want
to do this anymore.
If losses stem from any of 1 to 9 above; that’s not variance. That is bad
trading, bad process or bad mindset. Cut all your risk and figure out how to
get things back on track. When you trust yourself to do the right thing, you
are trading well. It should not matter all that much whether you make or
lose money on any given day.
When you are trading with a good mindset, you see each trade and each
day as a series of independent events with a probabilistic nature and you
understand that some trades and some days you will lose money. Each day,
you come in and do your best without getting too high or too low. You
invest most of your energy in the process and very little in the outcome.
Each trade, you go through a thoughtful process and execute in a rational
and systematic way.
If you trade sloppy, don’t say “I suck” or “I traded SO bad today”.
Instead ask: “Why was I so sloppy today? Am I burnt out? Discouraged?
Disengaged?” Robotic application of a process keeps you sane and lets you
know you can trust yourself. If you break your stop loss repeatedly, you
should quickly figure out why. Bad discipline? No automation of stop loss?
Don’t care anymore?
If you go through the above lists (variance vs. not variance) and are still
not sure whether a recent losing streak is caused by variance or bad trading,
take a step back. The more experience you have, the easier it is to make this
determination but if you are new, it can be very difficult, especially if you
tend to be critical of yourself.
Traders with a healthy mindset who are confident in their process have a
much easier time dealing with losing streaks because they can confidently
identify the cause as variance and move on. Traders with a less healthy
mindset or less confidence will tend to assume that a losing streak is the
result of bad decisions and a lack of trading skill.
Alpha traders with a solid process and excellent risk management still
hit losing streaks. In the long run, a solid process will win but in the short
run, there are always going to be ups and downs due to variance. If you
make money 50% of days, you can expect to lose money 6 or 7 days in a
row once in a while. That is fine! When you lose money six days in a row
and determine that it is simply because of variance, you need to double
down on your process and believe in what you are doing more than ever.
Variance can be managed, but never controlled.
Get comfortable with variance.
If you understand your edge and can confidently explain it, you will be
much more comfortable with variance. Furthermore, if you continually
spend time thinking about the current regime and how to adapt to present
market conditions, you will reduce your variance and maintain steadier
performance over time. No matter how good you are, though, you still need
to understand that variance is a thing.
DAILY RISK MANAGEMENT
Daily 
stop 
losses 
can 
be 
good 
for 
some 
styles 
of 
trading 
and
counterproductive for others. Daily stops work best for very short-term day
traders. If your time horizon is generally two minutes to two hours and you
square up your risk at the end of each day, a daily stop loss is probably right
for you. If you trade a 1-week time horizon and often buy short-dated
options, a daily stop loss makes no sense.
For retail traders, one of the simplest risk management systems is to
simply multiply your free capital by 1% every morning and risk that much
and no more. Then start fresh and do the same thing tomorrow. This
increases your risk as you make money, decreases it as you lose money and
keeps you in the game. If you are new to trading and plan to trade short-
term views only, I highly recommend this approach. It is conservative but
not ridiculously conservative. It will keep you safe but give you plenty of
opportunity to succeed.
Daily stop losses are best for retail traders, day traders and junior
institutional traders but less useful for most institutional or macro traders.
Daily stop losses create a timing mismatch for traders whose time horizon
spans beyond one day. They make it difficult to ride impulsive multi-day
moves.
Say you are a bank trader with a $250,000 daily stop loss, a $1 million
monthly stop loss and a $10 million budget. Some huge news comes out
and it looks like a game changer for euro. You buy 50 million euros at
1.1800 with a 50 pip stop loss, risking $250,000. EURUSD rips 50 pips
higher in 15 minutes and ends the day 100 pips higher at 1.1900. You are up
$500,000 on the day and think the move will continue.
You believe the logical stop loss is your original entry minus 10 pips
(1.1790) because you are a big fan of NewsPivots and feel if EURUSD
goes back below the NewsPivot (1.1800) the news has been rejected.
If you go home long EURUSD with a stop at 1.1790, your total risk on
the trade is just $50,000. But if you get stopped out your daily P&L
tomorrow will be the $500,000 you made today plus the $50,000 loss =
$550,000. That is way more than your daily stop of $250,000 so you either
need to cut your risk by more than half or you need to move your stop
closer. This is the tricky part of marking to market each day.
Very often in a case like this, you will see the trader simply put their
stop 50 points (or less) away in order to stay below their daily limit. Instead
of trading the market, they are trading their P&L. Inevitably, there is a 60-
point dip overnight and the trader gets stopped out before EURUSD goes
on a 400-point topside rampage.
On the other hand, if the trader’s limits match their time horizon, there
will be no such problem. If this trader is running with a $1 million monthly
stop, they can trade the market the way they believe it is meant to be traded
knowing that if it all goes horribly wrong, all they lost was $50,000. They
can get back on their horse and keep riding the next day.
The key with any risk management system is that it needs to match your
free capital, your trading style and your time horizon. Daily stops don’t
work with week-long ideas. Monthly stops don’t make much sense for day
traders, other than as a backup or overlay to a daily stop loss system.
INDIVIDUAL TRADE RISK MANAGEMENT
Managing the risk of an individual trade starts with understanding what
kind of trade it is. Is this a standard day trade, i.e., the type of trade you do
almost every day? Or is this a super rare opportunity that comes around a
few times per year? Clearly those two scenarios require a different position
size and risk management approach. Before I go through exactly how I
choose position sizes, let’s talk about conviction first.
Thoughts on conviction
Conviction level is one of the critical inputs into sizing your position.
Good traders vary their bet size based on conviction. That said, if your
conviction on a trade idea is not somewhere between “high” and “very
high” … You probably should not do the trade.
Once you find a trade you like, and determine that your conviction is
high, can you really extract a deeper level of granularity and determine
what trades are “somewhat high”, “high” or “very high” conviction? My
experience suggests that most of the time, you can’t.
You are unlikely to be able to judge, ex-ante, which routine day trades
or short-term swing trades have a higher probability of success. On the
other hand, there are some outlier trades that are clearly different from the
norm and will come with a higher level of conviction.
Most good traders use some sort of tiered risk management system and
the most common system involves three levels. A, B and C trades or 3-star,
4-star and 5-star trades are common ways of labelling conviction. These
systems are simple, and they work, but there is a fundamental error in most
of these systems: the increase in risk as you move up the scale is way too
linear. I believe risk should increase exponentially on super high conviction
trades.
The reason is that almost all trades have similar conviction. When you
do a day trade or trade some lead/lag relationship, or execute against a
pattern you see at the equity open… Those are the bread and butter trades
you do all day, every day.
My view is that attaching a finer, granular determination of conviction
or confidence level on those trades is kind of pointless. There is, however,
an important exception. Once every three to six months, an unbelievably
attractive trade comes along and you should allocate much more capital
than usual to those trades.
I’m talking about those rare opportunities where the timing, risk/reward
and probability of success all come together in a highly unusual and
attractive way. The clearest examples of this can happen at a watershed
moment for your asset market. For example: long hedged Nikkei futures in
2012 for Abenomics. The day they add your favorite stock to the S&P 500.
Short the bitcoin bubble on the day futures started trading in 2017. Short
Hertz and Chesapeake stock when the market bid them up even though they
were bankrupt. These moments that are nearly once-in-a-lifetime require a
different approach.
There can also be these super-high-probability trades that are less epic
in terms of news flow but where all the planets align.
For me, there are three levels of conviction
123
:
TYPE I
Run of the mill trade you would do on any given day. Your conviction is
high or you do not do the trade. This is not a rare opportunity, it is part of
your regular process. Allocate 1% to 3% of your free capital, depending on
your edge, experience level and historical performance. If you are new,
keep 
to 
the 
1% 
area, 
newish, 
stick 
to 
2% 
or 
below 
and 
if 
you 
are
comfortable with your process and know your success rate and statistics
well enough, venture up to 3% max.
TYPE II
High conviction: This is a trade where something unique is going on,
but not a watershed moment or extremely rare event. Maybe the Fed has
turned hawkish after a period of dovishness. Or a stock you are expert in
has a meaningful change of narrative. A 3-year trend in oil looks ready to
reverse as Saudi Arabia has said “no mas” to production cuts.
Type II trades almost always involve a big narrative shift or some sort
of 
significant 
dislocation. 
These 
are 
not 
routine 
trades. 
Allocate 
a
meaningful chunk of capital to the idea based on your predetermined
parameters. 3% to 5% of free capital generally makes sense but if you are
having an excellent year, you may want to add 10% of your YTD profits on
top.
The way you get outsized upside with limited downside is you reinvest
profits when excellent opportunities arise. A TYPE II opportunity at the
start of the year is a bummer because you cannot invest beyond 3% (or
maybe 5% max) of free capital. On the other hand, if you are having a great
year and it’s only June… You can overbet the TYPE II opportunity knowing
if you’re wrong, it’s completely fine.
Let’s say a high net worth individual has given you $100 million of
capital to trade with instructions to shoot for 15% returns and a $5 million
stop loss (i.e., stop trading if you drop to $95 million). On January 1, your
free capital is $5 million and your target is $15 million. Your compensation
is simple. You get paid 20% of your P&L in cash, once per year. Now it’s
June, your P&L is +$11 million and a TYPE II opportunity presents itself.
Remember free capital is your stop loss ($5 million) + your YTD P&L
($11 million) so free capital in this situation is $16 million.
Scenario
The USD has ripped higher over the past six months as the Fed hikes
rates. Money is piling into the USA because of the attractive yield and you
think the USD is overvalued. The long USD position is crowded; all your
metrics (and anecdotal evidence) suggest the market is max long USD. You
want to sell the USD, but you are waiting for some sort of fundamental or at
least technical catalyst. Hopefully both.
Today could be the day. The USD rips higher all morning, rallying to a
new YTD high in the hours before the Fed meets. Everyone has added to
their dollar longs as consensus calls for a hawkish meeting. The Fed is
likely to ratify market expectations of at least two more rate hikes this year.
You are ready for anything that sounds a bit dovish because that might be a
catalyst for your reversal trade (short USD).
2:29:45 p.m. Fifteen seconds to the Fed announcement. Your palms are
sweaty. Knees weak. Hands are heavy. You feel nervous but on the surface,
you look calm and you’re ready to sell dollars if the Fed moves to a more
dovish setting.
2:30:00 p.m. BOOM! The red headline hits Bloomberg:
*FEDERAL 
RESERVE 
SAYS 
CURRENT 
LEVEL 
OF 
RATES 
IS
APPROPRIATE 
AND 
FURTHER 
TIGHTENING 
UNLIKELY 
TO 
BE
WARRANTED.
Whoa. This is a major change in the narrative and you want to get short
USD. The USD gaps hard lower, you get short some USD and by the end of
the day the chart shows a massive key reversal day off the new yearly high
and the fundamental story has completely changed. You plan to hold this
position for a multi-day drop of around 4% in the dollar.
Now, you need to determine how much capital to risk on the idea. It’s
not a once-in-a-lifetime trade but it’s also clearly not a TYPE I. How do you
decide how much to risk?
As a baseline, start with a simple high-end TYPE I or low-end TYPE II
risk calculation. That would be around 3% of free capital. Free capital is the
original $5m you are allowed to lose + the $11m year-to-date P&L which =
$16m.
$16 million X 3% = $480,000
OK so that is the bare minimum, but that’s high-end TYPE I risk sizing,
not TYPE II.
You get outsized returns (right tail) by making big bets when you are in
a strong capital position.
You are more than 2/3 of the way to your yearly goal and it’s only June.
TYPE II opportunities are rare. In this situation, a simple formula for TYPE
II is:
TYPE II RISK = 3% of free capital plus 10% of YTD P&L
In this case that would be $480,000 + $1,100,000 = $1,580,000
I like this formula. It’s simple, and effective. But you don’t have to stick
to it religiously. Think about how you will feel if you drawdown that much.
Is it going to kill you psychologically? $11m minus $1.58m will take you to
around $9.5m YTD. That’s still not too shabby and in my opinion, that
would be perfectly manageable.
This is a good starting point and you can always scale up or down from
there depending on other factors such as how strongly you feel about the
trade and how sensitive your manager is to large drawdowns. This also
depends somewhat on how loose or tight you are with defining trades as
TYPE I and TYPE II. If you’re finding yourself thinking two trades per
month are TYPE II trades, you need to be more conservative. If you only
find 4 or 5 TYPE II trades per year, 3% of free capital + 10% of YTD is
probably about right.
Remember: Understand the Metagame
If you plan to take abnormally large risk on a trade, it never hurts to
overcommunicate with your manager. If management is used to seeing your
daily P&L fluctuate +/- $300k and then you drop $1.5 million in two
days… That will generate some discomfort. The best strategy is to fire off a
quick email saying you have a high conviction trade idea and plan to risk
more 
capital 
than 
usual 
on 
it 
given 
your 
strong 
YTD 
and 
elevated
confidence in the set up. Managers hate surprises. Whether you work at a
bank, hedge fund or other institution, my experience is that all managers
prefer a trader that overcommunicates.
TYPE III
Outlier 
opportunity: 
This 
is 
a 
dislocation, 
policy 
change, 
historic
moment or economic event so large it demands a huge bet—but only if you
are in a strong position to make that outsized bet. If you are down on the
year or near your monthly stop loss or near bossman shoulder tap level…
Unfortunately, you just have to keep it small. Allocate TYPE I or TYPE II
money and hope you are in a stronger position next time.
But… If you are in a strong capital position, you should rationally
assess what is the most you can invest in this idea. Keep in mind that no
matter how good the opportunity might seem—you could still be wrong!
You could still lose money.
No matter how great the opportunity, you must remember that a) your
assessment of the probabilities may not be accurate and b) you only get to
run the experiment once. You never bet more than you can afford to lose. A
roulette wheel will sometimes come up green and you will occasionally roll
a “1” on a 20-sided die.
The point with these TYPE III opportunities is that they can make your
year. They can make your career. And I think, in general, good traders know
them when they see them. If a TYPE III opportunity presents itself, think
long and hard about the optimal bet size. Have courage. Go big.
Here’s a short excerpt from Stan Druckenmiller’s famous Lost Tree
Club speech:
The only way to make long-term returns in our business that are superior
is by being a pig. The first thing I heard when I got in the business, not
from my mentor, was “bulls make money, bears make money, and pigs
get slaughtered.”
I’m here to tell you I was a pig. And strongly believe the only way to make
long-term returns in our business that are superior is by being a pig. I
think diversification and all the stuff they’re teaching at business school
today is probably the most misguided concept everywhere.
Bulls, bears, pigs, sharks, snakes, hedgehogs, foxes, hawks, doves and
owls. There are plenty of animals on Wall Street.
When a Type III trade comes along and you are in a strong position, you
need to take the most possible risk. That could mean as much as 50% of
your YTD P&L, depending on your risk management framework and your
role. I cannot tell you an exact formula because it depends too much on
where you work and how you manage your risk. But start with the TYPE II
formula and then increase as much as possible without introducing any
major path dependence problems. In other words, risk as much as you
possibly can knowing that you still might be wrong and don’t want to ruin
the rest of your year by destroying your momentum. Yes, you want to be a
pig in situations like this but you also need to consider you could be wrong.
Be like a call option
I have created a simple graphic (Figure 11.4) to show you why it is
important to structure your process so that you take more risk when you are
doing well and less when you are not. The chart shows is a P&L simulation
for three traders who start out with $100,000, risk 3% of capital each day,
make money 50% of days and whose average P&L on winning days is 1.5X
the P&L on an average losing day.
250 trades per year, simulated 1000 times
The factors represent how much of YTD P&L each trader risks on each
trade. The “zero factor” trader risks 3% each day, the “10% factor” trader
risks 3% of free capital plus 10% of YTD P&L and the “20% factor” trader
risks 3% of free capital plus 20% of YTD. You can see that the downside is
similar for all three traders: A bad year is around +$50,000. This is because
if the trader is struggling, they reduce risk and all three methodologies
would take similar risk.
On the other hand, a great year for the “20% factor” trader is closer to
$450,000 while a great year for the “zero factor” trader is more like
$300,000. More upside without more downside! Nice.
Why not go to 50% or 100% of YTD then? In an experiment with
unlimited time and infinite trials, higher percentages are best, but in real
life, 
where 
you 
only 
get 
to 
live 
each 
year 
once, 
lower 
numbers 
are
preferable. Higher numbers introduce unacceptable levels of variance. Even
20% is very high; I am just using it to make the point and show you how the
average annual returns vary as you tweak your risk factor higher.
This is a toned-down version of the Kelly criterion at work
124
. As you
make money, you take more risk and as you lose, you take less. This is the
core of how you behave like a call option over the years. A hedge fund or
trading business with a bunch of traders all behaving this way will have low
downside volatility with a ton of upside.
When I suggest you allocate 1% to 3% of your free capital to TYPE I
trades, this assumes you have only one trade on at a time. If you have more
than one trade on, you need to very carefully assess the correlation of the
trades and the probability that they could all go wrong at the same time.
Fewer trades = better trading =
lower transaction costs = easier risk management
Generally, when I have more than one TYPE I trade on at the same
time, I just treat them all as one trade for risk management purposes. In
other words, I size my positions so that if every single one gets stopped out,
I will not lose more than 3% of my free capital. Life is much easier if you
trade 
one 
position 
at 
a 
time 
or 
treat 
all 
your 
positions 
as 
one 
risk
management blob. If you try to take on more risk and start assuming
correlation between different trades, you might suddenly wake up one
morning down 8% of free capital because the correlations didn’t work out
the way you thought they would.
Furthermore, are you an investor or a trader? If you have 14 line items,
you are a portfolio manager or an investor, but not really a trader. Do you
have 14 good ideas at one time? Probably not. Do you have 7 good ideas at
one time? Again, probably not. Focus on one or two strong ideas and
monetize them. Concentrate your bets in the places you think you have the
most edge and the highest conviction. Spreading bets around is a recipe for
higher 
transaction 
costs, 
lazy 
risk 
management, 
diluted 
returns 
and
correlation confusion.
The big takeaway from this section is that when an epic, watershed
trade comes along and you are in a strong capital position, it is time to go
all-in. Allin does not mean risk your job or risk your fund. It means risk the
maximum possible within the parameters you have set. Play tight when
you’re weak. Play extremely aggressively when you’re strong and the
opportunity is exceptional. Huge opportunities do not come along all that
often. Jump on them.
Good trading takes courage.
Position sizing
One of the most common questions I get from new traders is: How do
you size your positions? For me, the answer is pretty simple. Here are the
five steps:
1. You have a trade idea. Let’s say you think bonds are going to sell
off in the days leading up to non-farm payrolls (aka The US Jobs
Report) because the market is massively long, everyone has been
super bullish for months and the whisper number for the jobs number
is creeping higher and higher in recent days. This is a classic run-up
trade as I will describe in Chapter 12. You have decided the best way
to trade this is to buy TBT, the ultrashort bond ETF. While TBT is
not a good way to short the bond market for more than a day or two,
your time horizon is just two days so you have decided this will be
the easiest, most liquid and levered way to execute the trade.
2. Determine your conviction level. You think this is a classic run-up
trade and you love a good run-up trade. You decide this is a Type II
trade, which this month means $250,000 of risk would normally be
allocated to this idea.
3. Decide how much to risk. You are up $1.0 million this year and have
a particularly strong feeling about this trade. The chart set up is great,
too, so you can take a big position. Since you plan to cover the trade
BEFORE the non-farm payrolls release, you don’t have to worry
about gap risk through the number. You decide to risk the standard
$250,000, 
plus 
10% 
of 
your YTD 
P&L 
($1 
million 
X 
10% 
=
$100,000) so you are risking $350,000 on the trade.
4. Determine the stop loss. Use technical analysis and other inputs
(average daily range, expected volatility, an understanding of round
number bias, etc.) to determine the stop loss on the trade. You have a
rule that you always place your stop loss at least one average day’s
range away from your entry point. This is a good rule of thumb for
new traders. If I know absolutely nothing about a security, the first
thing I do when looking to put in a stop loss is calculate the
security’s average daily range. Any stop loss closer than 1-day’s
range away is at high risk of getting dinged by short-term noise.
5. Determine the position size. To make the math easy, let’s say TBT is
trading at $100.00 and you have determined, after looking at the
charts and studying the volatility of TBT, that the appropriate stop
loss is $102.02. Liquidity is excellent and slippage is not an issue.
You estimate 3 cents of slippage on your stop. So you are risking
$2.05 / share and you decided in step 3 to risk $350,000. Here is how
you calculate the correct sizing:
Position size
= $ at risk / (entry point - stop loss level)
= $350,000 / (102.05 - 100.00)
= 170,731
Therefore, the trader in this example should buy 170,731 shares of TBT.
The formula for determining position size is always the same:
position size = $ at risk / (entry point - stop loss level)
Let’s do one more just to make sure it’s clear.
I am a retail trader and I want to sell AUDUSD because: reasons. The
currency pair is trading at 0.7500 right now and after studying the pair’s
volatility and doing 20 minutes of technical analysis, I have determined that
0.7572 is the correct stop loss. My trading account balance is currently
$165,000 and I always risk 2% of capital on every trade. I never run more
than one trade at a time so this is a safe way to run my account. I will add 3
pips to my stop loss level to allow for slippage on execution.
2% of 165,000 is $3,300.
Position size
= $ at risk / (entry point - stop loss level)
= $3,300 / (0.7500 - 0.7575)
= $3,300 / -0.0075
= - 440,000
So our short position in AUDUSD should be 440,000 AUD. If we get
stopped out, we will lose $3,300, which is 2% of capital.
Bad traders work in the opposite direction. They say: I’m short 2
million AUDUSD at 0.7500 but I can’t afford to lose more than $10,000 so
my stop loss will be 0.7550. This makes no sense because 0.7550 is a
totally arbitrary level that does not take market factors like volatility or
technical analysis into consideration. Always start with $ at risk, then
determine your stop loss by analyzing the market. The position size is the
output, not the input.
To summarize the five steps explained above:
1. You have a trade idea.
2. Determine your conviction level (TYPE I, II or III).
3. Decide how much to risk. This amount to risk can be in USD or in
basis points, depending where you work. This amount is determined
by your conviction level, YTD P&L and your risk management
system.
4. Determine your stop loss using technical analysis and other inputs.
5. Do the math to back out the correct position size.
Using this methodology, your position size can vary substantially. A low
conviction position with a wide stop loss for a good hedge fund trade might
be 20 million AUDUSD while a high conviction trade with a tighter stop
loss for the same trader could be 200 million AUDUSD.
Good traders vary bet size.
Good traders vary bet size.
Good traders vary bet size.
Whenever you see a trader that always trades in 1,000 share lots or $10
million USD FX positions, there is a good chance they don’t know what
they are doing. Alternatively, some traders are able to vary their position
size to a point but then hit a plateau. Above a certain amount of risk, they
feel uncomfortable and dial it back, even if that is not the optimal sizing.
Keep an eye out for plateaus like this in your trading. If you tend to top out
at 
a 
specific 
risk 
level, 
even 
when 
you 
know 
your 
capital 
and 
risk
management system allow you to take more, figure out why.
The best traders have the largest variation in bet size. A great trader
might trade lower conviction size of 1,000 shares of AAPL early in the year
and then 15,000 shares of AAPL by summer when she has high conviction
and a big chunk of P&L to work with.
Let me clarify something important here. When I talk about increasing
risk as your P&L grows, I am not saying you keep doubling down until you
bust. There is a bias known as the house money effect in which studies
show that traders and gamblers treat money they have won differently from
money they started out with. If you start the night at a casino with $100 and
now have $500, the incremental $400 feels different than the initial $100.
It’s free money. Studies show that gamblers treat house money with less
respect and are more likely to gamble it away recklessly. Don’t do that!
That is not what I am recommending.
What I am talking about is a methodical increase in risk appetite as your
bankroll grows. This is like the Kelly Criterion in sports gambling. As your
bankroll and your edge grow, you should take more risk. As your bankroll
and edge fall, you should take less risk.
Note: Be on the lookout for the house money effect. When you are up
huge on the day, do you trade sloppier? Many people do. I do. Remember
the 
story 
from 
earlier, 
“Joyful 
yelling 
signals 
imminent 
P&L 
crash?”
Systematic increases in risk appetite as capital increases are completely
different from winner’s tilt and the house money effect. Make sure you
understand the difference.
THE EVOLUTION OF EXPECTED VALUE OVER THE LIFE OF A TRADE
There is a particularly tricky concept in the mathematics of trading
which is that the risk/reward of a given trade changes as prices move. An
example is if you have a trade where you were risking 1% to make 2% and
then it quickly moves 1.5% in your favor. At that point the question is, are
you now risking 2.5% to make 0.5% (unattractive!) or do you ignore the
mark to market and stick with your original plan. The answer is not
obvious.
Most people respond that you should mark to market because the
current market price is the only thing that matters. The problem with this
approach is that you will never let your trades run to the take profit because
the risk/reward is so bad once the trade moves more than halfway towards
the take profit level. If you are risking 1 to make 2, but then you always
take profit when it moves 1.5… Your risk/reward ratio was never 1 to 2, it
was 1 to 1.5. Even worse, if you get nervous when it has moved just 1% …
You take profit and then your trading system is just risking 1 to make 1.
Decide where the finish line is before you start the race.
One way to deal with this is to move your stop loss higher as the trade
moves deeper in the money. This is generally logical, but introduces more
noise risk as a random pullback might knock you out when the trade would
have been safe under the original parameters. The most effective way to
trail your stop is to use a moving average that matches the trend and update
your stop loss once every 12 or every 24 hours.
There is no correct answer here, but my general feeling is that if you put
a trade on risking 1 to make 2, you cannot take profit all the time once you
make 1.4 because that means your original plan was not really true and your
risk/ reward on every trade is much worse than you think it is on inception.
You are putting on a trade with a certain plan in mind and then moving the
goalposts once the trade moves in the money.
Either trail your stop loss higher in a systematic way while still giving
the trade plenty of room to breathe, or take partial profits at predetermined
levels.
Trailing the stop systematically breaks the rule of setting stops based on
technical analysis and market logic, which is not ideal. But you can always
fine tune whatever stop loss the system spits out by looking at a few charts.
What you should not do is cut every trade early because “the risk/reward
sucks now”.
That is a logical fallacy that ignores the original structure of the trade
and ignores the fact that a core skill in successful trading is the ability to
find trades that offer substantially more reward than risk. Don’t truncate
your right tail all the time. Trying to extract the last 20% of a trade may
cause you to give back all your gains. That’s just the way it is. That’s just
trading.
As an FYI, this discrepancy between actual payout on trades and
forecast payout happens all the time and it’s something you need to monitor.
If you are structuring all your trades risking 1 to make 3 but then you cut
everything early because you get antsy or bored or are risk averse and
looking for excuses to reduce… Your risk/reward is not 1 to 3. It might be 1
to 2, or worse. Monitor this.
This is frequently an issue in options trading too. Often you will see an
exotic option like a reverse knock-out that pays something like 8 : 1. But
the only way for it to pay off that way is if the option expires exactly one
basis point away from the barrier. That is a totally unrealistic assumption. If
you are buying low-delta digital options at 8% because they look like juicy
leverage but then you sell them every time they double to 16%… You might
have been better off trading a simpler, more liquid structure.
If you are structuring trades for maximum leverage, make sure you get
the leverage you thought you were getting.
STICKING TO THE PLAN
There is always a tension between sticking to the plan and adjusting to
new information. The problem with adjusting to new information is that a
substantial percentage of the information you receive in a given trading day
is noise. Some days are 100% noise. Your predisposition, once you have a
trade on, should always be to do nothing. Leave it alone and follow your
original 
plan. 
Plans 
are 
generally 
made 
in 
a 
rational 
state 
of 
mind.
Adjustments on the fly are often emotional and biased reactions to the non-
stop onslaught of stimulus.
Prices 
are 
almost 
always 
changing. 
New 
information 
is 
arriving
constantly. Most of it is meaningless.
If you have a trade on, stick to the original plan until there is new
information you cannot possibly ignore.
That is, assume new information is mostly noise and react only when
there is an unambiguous signal. Some traders impose a restrictive rule to
avoid overtrading. For example, “Once I put on a trade, I will re-evaluate it
once per day at 11 a.m. and otherwise leave it until the stop loss or take
profit trigger.” This avoids the problem of sitting there, staring at the screen
as the dumb voices in your head say stuff like:
It’s trading heavy… Maybe I should get out.
That headline is making me nervous.
If this trade goes south, I’ ll be down on the month.
Look, a squirrel!
KNOW YOUR DEFAULT MODE
Part of this calculus is knowing your own default mode network. The
default mode network (DMN) is a cognitive science concept. Research
shows that there is a particular part of your brain that becomes active when
you are not busy thinking about anything in particular (wakeful rest). This
area tends to have the same thoughts over and over. These are the thoughts
you circle back to when you are not thinking about anything.
Mendel Kaelen suggests we think of the mind like a hill covered in
fresh snow. Each thought is a sled that slides down that hill, leaving a trail.
The more sleds that slide down those same trails, the deeper those trails
become and the more difficult it becomes to avoid sliding into the same
repetitive thought patterns.
What are your default modes?
When there is a trading lull, how do you typically think? What is the
action you default to? When you have a trade on, and you’re sitting in front
of the screen, what is your default mode? Do you generally want to add to
the position? Or cut it? Or are you fine to wait patiently and let it simmer
until it’s ready? Become familiar with your default thought and action
patterns and think about whether they are destructive, whether they add to
or subtract from your process, and whether they lead to productive or
suboptimal actions.
When you’re not busy at work, where does your mind go? Is it a
positive or negative place? Are your typical thoughts constructive or self-
critical? Do they encourage action or inaction? Does your DMN help you or
hurt you? How do you break the bad habits?
One part of my default mode is to scan through charts and think about
random market-related ideas. That’s a positive and productive DMN. I
default to thinking things like: “Hmm, VIX has dropped three days in a row,
is that bullish for stocks?” or “I wonder what lumber and soybeans are
doing; I haven’t checked the soft commodities in a while” or “When’s the
next RBNZ meeting?” I also default to tossing around ideas for upcoming
editions of AM/FX, my daily macro newsletter. I add them to a Word doc of
future ideas.
The negative part of my default mode is a strong and steady urge to
press the BUY and SELL buttons. I always want to put on or add to
positions. Whenever markets slow down and enter a quieter intraday phase,
I find myself tempted to increase my position size. I should be doing
nothing, 
because 
unnecessary 
increases 
in 
position 
size 
often 
lead 
to
suboptimal risk management scenarios, if price goes the wrong way.
This default mode is such a known part of who I am that my manager
Pete once wrote “REDUCE” on a sticky note and stuck it to the bottom
right corner of one of my monitors. Anyone who knows me as a trader
knows my positions are either the right size or too big. Almost never too
small. This is not good.
The “REDUCE” sign helped me maintain awareness of my default
mode, which is a subconscious desire to increase risk even when there is no
reason to do so. It helps me keep my hands off the BUY and SELL buttons
when 
there 
is 
no 
logical 
action 
to 
be 
taken. Alpha 
traders 
hold 
two
contradictory skills at once: they can sit there and do nothing for long
periods, and they can act aggressively, without hesitation. Most people can
do one but struggle with the other. I’m great at acting without hesitation, but
I will always be working on my patience.
Listen to your default thoughts when your mind is quiet and determine
if they are beneficial or toxic. For what it’s worth, this is a useful exercise to
run outside of trading too. Do the default voices in your head criticize or
motivate 
you? 
Do 
they 
spur 
you 
toward 
action 
or 
convince 
you 
to
procrastinate?
I believe that navigating the cacophony of competing voices in your
head and choosing which ones to ignore and which ones to listen to is one
of the most important determinants of survival and success in both trading
and in life. Shutting out the toxic voices and following the beneficial ones is
the definition of conscientiousness, willpower, and discipline. It also the
primary purpose of meditation and mindfulness exercises.
When you have a choice to either watch TV or go lift weights, there are
two competing voices that go something like this:
VOICE 1
You will feel great if you go work out.
All you need to do is get up off the couch and—
VOICE 2
(INTERRUPTING)
South Park is on! The really funny one from 2006! There’s
Sour Cream and Onion Ruffles in the cupboard!
Your health and fitness will be determined by which voice you listen to.
Same thing in trading. The voices are there too. For example, you slowly
piece together a strong trade idea, execute, and write down your planned
stop loss and take profit level. You like the trade idea and you have a clear
plan. Then half an hour later, the voices start:
VOICE 1
Why hasn’t it moved by now? This idea must be wrong. You should get out. Last thing we
want to do is lose money on a--
VOICE 2
(INTERRUPTING)
You are so cold right now. Like… Arctic cold.
Cucumber cold. You should just--
VOICE 1
(INTERRUPTING)
Wait! It’s rallying now! Double your position!
It is remarkable that even the smartest people in the world have these
dumb voices in their head. It’s all part of the fun of being a human being.
Ignore the negative voices and slowly tune your default mode network to
think: stick to the plan. Stick to the plan. Stick to the plan. Treat it like a
mantra. Stick to the plan. Stick to the plan. When that dumb voice in your
head tries to steer you towards the rocks, throw it off the boat. Stick to the
plan. Stick to the plan.
YOU CAN’T ALWAYS STICK TO THE PLAN !
Of course, there are times when you should abandon your plan and get
out of Dodge. Like a commercial pilot, stick with the flight plan as long as
humanly possible, but change course in the face of major new information.
A good example of when it makes sense to deviate from plan is if a
trade has moved substantially in your favor just before a market-moving
event (economic data, central bank meeting, etc.) You don’t want to risk a
major portion of your capital on a coin toss especially when you know there
is gap and liquidity risk around big events. Unless you have a strong view
on the outcome of a particular economic event, it usually makes sense to
lighten up on risk beforehand.
That said, if your trade plan was solid, you probably saw that event
coming and considered it in your trade plan. Upcoming catalysts should
always be reassessment triggers.
That concludes Chapter 11. I hope you now have a solid understanding
of how I think about risk. I hope you can use some of these tactics and fold
some of my ideas into your process. I could say this 100 times and it would
not be enough:
The number one rule of trading is: avoid ruin.
Before we hit Chapter 12, let’s take a little detour here to talk about
Jesse Livermore and the book Reminiscences of a Stock Operator.
END OF CHAPTER DETOUR :
A QUICK BOOK REVIEW KINDA THING
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator is a quintessential (and slightly
misunderstood) piece of trading literature. This 1923 classic is a slightly
fictionalized biography of Jesse Livermore written by Edwin Lefèvre.
Livermore was a famous speculator and Bobby-Axelrod-style celebrity-
rich-guy. The book is epic entertainment and full of all kinds of cool trading
wisdom and nifty old timey Wall Street jargon like “tape reading” and
“bucket shops”. It is also a cautionary tale and a case study in overtrading,
bad discipline, poor money management, and the dark side of trading.
Livermore, 
oft 
celebrated 
as 
a 
genius 
and 
as 
one 
of 
the 
greatest
speculators of all time, went bankrupt three times and eventually committed
suicide in the cloak room of the Sherry Netherland Hotel in New York City.
By all accounts, he was an incredible trader—with fatal flaws.
An interesting fact that tells me he was a classy guy: each time he
declared bankruptcy, he would borrow a small stake from a friend so he
could 
start 
trading 
again. 
Then, 
he 
would 
build 
it 
up 
substantially,
eventually making himself rich again. Once he was fully liquid, he would
pay back all the creditors he owed from before he declared bankruptcy. He
did this even though he was clear of the debts and was not legally required
to repay, thanks to the bankruptcy proceeding. He just paid people back
because it was the right thing to do.
Here are some of my favorite quotes from the book, with a bit of my
own commentary sprinkled in.
Fear and hope remain the same; therefore the study of the psychology of
speculators is as valuable as it ever was. Weapons change, but strategy
remains strategy, on the New York Stock Exchange as on the battlefield. I
think the clearest summing up of the whole thing was expressed by
Thomas F. Woodlock when he declared: “The principles of successful
stock speculation are based on the supposition that people will continue
in the future to make the mistakes that they have made in the past.
In other words, this time is not different.
A stock operator has to fight a lot of expensive enemies within himself.
Learning the rules is easy. Following them is hard. Self-awareness is
key.
One of the most helpful things that anybody can learn is to give up trying
to catch the last eighth— or the first. These two are the most expensive
eighths in the world.
It feels SO GOOD when you sell the ding dong highs or buy the ding
dong lows but it’s not something that can be done on a regular basis. Don’t
bother trying.
It takes a man a long time to learn all the lessons of all his mistakes. They
say there are two sides to everything. But there is only one side to the
stock market; and it is not the bull side or the bear side, but the right side.
It took me longer to get that general principle fixed firmly in my mind.
I 
also 
was 
better 
equipped 
than 
the 
average 
customer 
of 
Harding
Brothers in that I was utterly free from speculative prejudices. The bear
side doesn’t appeal any more than the bull side, or vice versa. My one
steadfast prejudice is against being wrong.
In other words: be nimble. Good traders are flexible and are not biased
toward a particular direction in any market. I often ask people who work for
some 
of 
the 
legends 
of 
trading, 
“What 
qualities 
make 
that 
trader 
so
successful?” Just about every time, the answer includes something like: “He
is happy to change his mind very quickly” or “He can be max short one day
and max long the next”. Bad traders are perma-something. Good traders are
intellectually flexible. Strong opinions, weakly held.
Another lesson I learned early is that there is nothing new in Wall Street.
There can’t be because speculation is as old as the hills. Whatever
happens in the stock market to-day has happened before and will happen
again.
The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that which is
done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the sun.
Ecclesiastes 1:9
What beat me was not having brains enough to stick to my own game –
that is, to play the market only when I was satisfied that precedents
favoured my play. There is the plain fool, who does the wrong thing at all
times everywhere, but there is also the Wall Street fool, who thinks he
must trade all the time. No man can have adequate reasons for buying or
selling 
stocks 
daily 
– 
or 
sufficient 
knowledge 
to 
make 
his 
play 
an
intelligent play.
#overtrading
No, sir, nobody can make big money on what someone else tells him to
do.
Trade your own view.
If you do not know who you are, the stock market is an expensive place to
find out.
I love this one. It reminds me of a famous Ed Seykota quote: “Win or
lose, everybody gets what they want out of the market.”
I was nearly twenty-seven years old. I had been at the game twelve
years. But the first time I traded because of a crisis that was still to come I
found that I had been using a telescope. Between my first glimpse of the
storm cloud and the time for cashing in on the big break the stretch was
evidently so much greater than I had thought that I began to wonder
whether I really saw what I thought I saw so clearly. We had had many
warnings and sensational ascensions in call-money rates. Still some of
the great financiers talked hopefully at least to newspaper reporters and
the ensuing rallies in the stock market gave the lie to the calamity
howlers. 
Was 
I 
fundamentally 
wrong 
in 
being 
bearish 
or 
merely
temporarily wrong in having begun to sell short too soon?
This quote rang particularly true in 2007 when the market sniffed out a
financial calamity very early on but many traders were too early to the trade
and got shoulder-tapped before they could capitalize. For every legend of
The Big Short winners, there were two or three bears who committed too
big, too early and lost as they were forced to stop out near the highs. You
only hear the stories of those who survive.
I did precisely the wrong thing. The cotton showed me a loss and I kept it.
The wheat showed me a profit and I sold it out. Of all the speculative
blunders there are few greater than trying to average a losing game.
Always sell what shows you a loss and keep what shows you a profit.
Cut your losses, run your winners.
The game taught me the game. And it didn’t spare the rod while teaching.
The best way to learn about the psychology of trading is to experience
mind-numbing losses. As my boss once told me after a particularly bad day
of trading: you don’t learn anything when you win.
You are now around 79% of the way through this book. I hope you feel
most of what you have read so far makes sense, and you see how you can
incorporate some of my techniques into your process. In the next chapter, I
will go step by step through my process, using many of the concepts and
tactics described to this point. I hope to take all this disparate information
and bring it together so you can see the entire trade selection and execution
process from start to finish.
123. FYI, in The Art of Currency Trading I used the terms 3-star, 4-star and 5-star. Upon
further review, I feel a) Why have a system that starts at 3? Doesn’t make a ton of sense,
and b) calling each trade “TYPE” helps clarify that the system is not linear or incremental.
TYPE I trades and TYPE III trades are completely different animals and should be handled
with a totally different approach.
124. The Kelly Criterion is a formula used by gamblers to calculate optimal bet size. Using
the Kelly Criterion leads to higher wealth compared to any other bet-sizing strategy (in the
long run). The Kelly Criterion relies on known odds and so it is not directly applicable to
trading because the probability of winning or losing in trading can only be loosely
estimated, it is not directly observable. Still, the concept behind the Kelly Criterion is
directly applicable to trading and risk management, even if the precise mathematics are
not. For an entertaining book that includes plenty of information about the Kelly Criterion,
check out Fortune’s Formula by William Poundstone.