T
CHAPTER 12
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER
The lifecycle of a trade, from idea to execution to exit
he preceding chapters have covered a wide range of topics. In this
chapter, I will bring it all together as I walk you through my real-world
thought process and detail the lifecycle of a trade from start to finish.
Chapter 9 introduced some questions people frequently ask me, like:
“Where do trade ideas come from?” “How do you come up with ideas?”
“Where do you start?” “What is the process?” My philosophy has always
been about combining as many disciplines as possible in an effort to narrow
down and filter out ideas, with the hope of discovering the rare trade where
all the planets are aligned. Many factors contribute to good trade ideas; they
are not born from a simple chart pattern or single bit of fundamental
analysis.
As mentioned earlier, I use fundamentals and microstructure to come up
with most of my ideas. Then, I use other disciplines like technical analysis,
sentiment, and cross-market analysis to filter and enhance the idea, and
optimize execution.
Below, I present a visual that details the essentials of my process from
start to finish. I will use this visual to walk you through how I come up
with, execute, risk manage and analyze my trades. We’ll start with generic
explanations of each step (each box in the table) and then I will walk
through a real-life trade I did recently to show you how it all works in real
life.
Generally, the process flows through the table from left to right and top
to bottom. Keep in mind that this table and the explanations that follow are
a general framework. There are times when you may be doing this in a
different order, or in your head, or in a less formal way.
For example, while this grid is laid out as a “Ready, Aim, Shoot” type of
process, when it comes to headlines, my framework is more like “Ready,
Shoot, Aim” (see Chapter 4). There is not enough time to think everything
through when a headline comes out, so I allow myself to react as quickly as
possible and execute the trade right away. Then, once I have the trade on, I
go back through the remaining steps in the grid to make sure that my logic
and risk management are sound. If they are not, then I quickly exit the trade
or recalibrate my plan.
This is less risky if you are experienced and deeply engaged in the
markets (i.e., have a strong knowledge of the narrative and an intuitive feel
for volatility and weak side/strong side of the market without having to
think about it much). “Ready, Shoot, Aim” is not recommended for noobs.
Figure 12.1 is the table; we will go through it step by step.
1. IDEA GENERATION
The number one way I come up with trade ideas is by surfing the
narrative. I explained this fully in Chapter 9 and I hope you have a sense of
what I mean by now.
Surfing the narrative
Before you can come up with a trade idea in your market, you need to
be an expert on the narrative that drives it. This narrative is an evolving
story that drives price over time and can often be comprised of one major
narrative along with multiple smaller narratives vying for attention. Rarely
will 
the 
market 
embrace 
two 
major 
narratives 
at 
once. 
That 
is 
too
complicated. Usually, one narrative dominates and the remaining narratives
hum in the background, waiting to potentially emerge as important drivers.
When you understand the narrative in your market, you have taken the
first 
and 
most 
important 
step 
toward 
becoming 
an 
expert 
trader. The
evolution of the narrative is one of the major sources of trade ideas and can
be a tremendous help even if you are a very short-term trader.
For example, if you are a short-term trader, you cannot possibly trade a
news headline unless you fully understand what it means. Let’s say your
main market is gold. It’s the Summer of 2020. You are short a decent-sized
position in gold futures, risking 3% of your capital. A red headline hits
Bloomberg:
*GOLD IMPORTS BY INDIA MORE THAN DOUBLE TO 35.5 TONS IN
AUGUST
What does that mean? Is it bullish? Or bearish? Or meaningless? If you
are an expert in gold, you know whether the market cares about physical
demand out of India right now and you know what was expected and what
is normal for Indian Gold Imports in August. Often, the answer may be:
nobody cares, that headline is irrelevant.
On the other hand, the market might be worried about Indian demand
because so many weddings have been cancelled due to COVID-19. If
speculators were worried that the only demand was institutional and ETF
demand, this number might be highly reassuring and could trigger a $10
rally in gold. You need to know. If you are an expert in your market, you
know what matters and what doesn’t. You know what your market is trading
off 
and 
what 
it 
is 
not. And 
then, 
as 
the 
narrative 
changes 
and 
new
information comes in… You can react faster and smarter than others, ride
the price to the new equilibrium, and get off as it overshoots.
Over time, this knowledge of the narrative will inevitably lead you to
trade ideas. You will feel the winds change direction before others and you
will jump on the turn before prices move. You may identify a new narrative
before others, catch the impulsive middle part of a strong trend, or smell
that an existing narrative is stale, crowded and ready to turn.
If you are still struggling to see how you can follow the narrative and
come up with trade ideas, the walkthrough later in this chapter should help.
For now, just remember that as you continuously study the narrative in your
market and rise to expert level, you gain valuable intuition and insight into
what matters and what doesn’t. You get a feel for what is in the price, and
what is not. You understand which catalysts will move the market and
which will not.
Beyond understanding the narrative as described in Chapter 9, there are
three other primary ways I come up with trade ideas. Note that generally I
have more than one reason for a trade. Part of the filtering process is to
make sure that wherever your idea comes from originally, it is supported by
the narrative, sentiment, positioning, technicals, correlated markets and
seasonals. We want ideas that are supported by multiple types of analysis,
but also please remember:
There is no such thing as a perfect trade.
In trading, and in life, the quest for perfection is commendable but the
expectation that the world, any situation, or any trade will be perfect is
flawed. You need to know when you have reached “good enough” or you
will wait forever for the perfect trade, perfect spouse, or perfect job. This
doesn’t mean you settle for a crappy relationship or put on sub-par trades, it
means you must have the wisdom to understand that life is not meant to be
perfect. Perfection is rare and fleeting and anything perfect should come as
a positive surprise, not as an expectation.
As the Italian proverb made famous by Voltaire says:
Perfect is the enemy of good.
This applies to self-evaluation too. Many traders spend way too much
time beating themselves up. Unless you finish the day at the ding dong
highs, you will always wish you took profit earlier or had a bigger position
or did something a little different. Assess your performance rationally. Set
high standards but do not expect perfection from yourself, or every day will
be a disappointment. When you do a good job: be proud. Don’t niggle away
at small performance glitches when you have generally run well. This is
draining and pointless.
Once you understand the narrative, you are in a strong position to trade
news and events as you will understand their meaning and how they might
disrupt or transform the prevailing story.
News and events
News and events can be a tremendous source of edge and trade ideas. If
you understand the current equilibrium and are familiar with the mind of
the market and what information and events led to the current pricing, then
when new info arrives, you are a ninja. Events like company earnings,
FOMC meetings, other central bank meetings, product announcements,
economic data and unexpected headlines are opportunities for the fastest,
most informed traders to capitalize on mispricing.
Prices do not find their happy place right away. When new info arrives,
there 
is 
a 
period 
of 
fast 
market 
action 
as 
hundreds 
of 
humans 
and
algorithms disagree on fair market value and trade aggressively against
each other until a few winners emerge and trading eventually settles at a
new price. Often, these waves of intense trading are when you can enter a
state of flow and capture outsized gains. These moments of in-the-zone
trading sometimes last just 10 or 15 minutes but can account for an entire
week of P&L.
Identify events in your market, educate yourself, read every preview
and every word of pre-game analysis. Create a clear plan. When the news,
event or announcement happens: attack.
Into events: Flat = strong
I don’t always have the discipline to do this, but I try to go into major
economic and central bank events as close to flat as possible. If you are a
short-term news trader, this should be your approach. Here are some
reasons it is suboptimal to hold positions into events.
1. Gap risk. Quite often you won’t get out as fast as you want, and you
will 
lose 
more 
money 
than 
you 
thought 
you 
would. You 
can’t
properly control risk in a gapping market.
2. You are biased. If you go into a Fed meeting short USD because you
think they are going to be dovish, your interpretation of the news
release and press conference are likely to be biased. You will be
looking for headlines that confirm your prior dovish view instead of
looking at the outcome through clear eyes. Flat is the most powerful
position in trading because it is the only time you are fully and
completely unbiased.
3. It is hard to flip if you’re wrong. If you are positioned for a dovish
outcome and the result is hawkish, you want to flip from short
dollars to long dollars. This is difficult because 1) You will react
slower when you are biased and leaning the wrong way and 2)
liquidity is not unlimited. If you have a decent-sized short USD
position, you may have trouble buying enough USD to flip long at a
reasonable rate.
It is easier to react to events than predict them.
As a rule, if you are fast and well-prepared, the Sharpe ratio of reacting
to events is higher than the Sharpe of trying to predict them. As we
discussed last chapter: a big part of successful trading is to understand the
current equilibrium and then when new information appears, react smarter
and 
faster 
than 
your 
competitors, 
before 
the 
market 
finds 
the 
new
equilibrium. If you are flat when new information comes out, you are
stronger, faster, and unbiased. You don’t always need to have a position.
Good traders know when to be flat.
Although predicting the outcome of an event often has very little edge,
predicting what the market will do in the days leading up to the event can
be a good source of trade ideas. Instead of trying to predict what everyone
else is predicting (the event itself ), smart traders can often more easily
forecast what the crowd will do into the event, and position ahead of the
crowd before it starts to move.
The run-up trade
The run-up trade is a phenomenon where prices move in a logical and
predictable direction in the days leading up to a major event. These run-up
trades are often easier to predict and monetize than the events that follow.
The idea behind the run-up trade is to identify an upcoming market
event and then estimate what traders will do before the event. If AAPL
earnings are coming up this week, which way are traders likely to play it? If
non-farm payrolls are a few days from now, what might the market do in
the days leading up to the release? The run-up trade is usually a function of
three things:
1. Positioning: Medium-term traders, investors and systematic strategies
tend to reduce risk into major events. They do this because volatility
tends to be higher and more difficult to predict through events. If
they are sizing their bets using forecast volatility (which most do,
because that makes sense), they need to reduce their exposure as
high-vol events near. If everyone is long, expect prices to fall in the
run-up to the day of the event.
2. What is the obvious trade? Quite often, the obvious trade works!
Plus, traders feel stupid missing obvious macro catalysts so they will
tend to position for them in advance then take them off quickly if
they do not materialize. If the US economy has been hot, the Fed is
thinking about hiking rates, and most indicators point to strong job
growth… Expect bonds to sell off in the days leading up to the jobs
report as traders get set for a blockbuster figure.
3. What is the lotto ticket trade? If a biotech company is announcing
Phase 1 results on Friday morning and it looks like a good result
could cause the stock to triple while a bad result will cause it to drop
20%… Expect the stock to rally into the news, even if the probability
of a positive outcome does not justify the trade from an expected
value 
point 
of 
view. 
Asymmetrical 
bets 
will 
always 
attract
speculators, even if they are bad trades with good optics. So the run-
up trade ahead of an event will often be driven by speculators putting
on lotto tickets beforehand.
Sometimes, all three factors above will apply: that’s a top-quality run-up
trade. When you catch a run-up trade, you will be tempted to keep it
through the event because you have a nice cushion by that point. Resist that
temptation! It is often easier to forecast the madness of crowds going into
an event than it is to forecast the outcome of the event itself. Furthermore,
the very fact that you caught the run-up trade means the security has moved
a fair bit already into the event and thus it is probably getting crowded in
that direction and offers asymmetric risk/reward (in a bad way).
Everybody’s bearish and nobody’s short
Sticking with the topic of events, there is a subtler way that upcoming
events can influence markets. Often, when a major risk event is coming up,
risk managers and traders lean on the conservative side until it is out of the
way (due to gap risk and concerns about extreme volatility). They reduce
their risk as the event nears, regardless of their view.
Once the event passes (regardless of the result), risk appetite returns to
normal and a move that probably should have happened before the event
happens afterwards. Speculators put on the trade they wanted to have
before, because now that the event (and associated gap risk) is out of the
way, it’s safe to do so.
This is one of my favorite setups. When there is a strong consensus
view but no positioning to match the view, you often see highly impulsive
moves. Once the event passes, the consensus move is free to unfold at high
speed. Often the event itself contains no new information, it is simply the
passing of the event (and thus the elimination of gap risk) that allows the
move that should have happened earlier to happen now. This setup is
powerful and has a high expected value, so watch for it.
Deviation from fair value
Another important source of trade ideas is scanning for moments when
your market deviates from fair value. Fair value is a slippery concept and is
almost impossible to measure with certainty so when I say “fair value” I
mean “loose or best estimate of fair value”. You never know what the real
fair value of a market is, but you know that if oil drops $2 and copper drops
5% at the same time, fair value for the Canadian dollar has probably just
gone down, not up.
I tend to think of fair value more in terms of direction and not level.
That is, I might say: “Today’s economic data was bad and oil is down 4%
today, yields look way too high.” But I would never say: “Given these
numbers and the move in oil, I think 10-year yields should be 1.10 not
1.20.”
One way to measure deviations from fair value is to use cross-market
correlation. This is explained in Chapter 9. Start by identifying one or two
markets that should logically be correlated to the market you trade. Follow
them. You don’t need to create a sophisticated regression model to track
deviations and movements. Just track momentum in the correlated markets
and get a feel for what it means for the market you trade. Over time, you
will slowly learn to watch other markets for clues and you will experience
how lead/lag trading can give you a forecasting edge.
Lead/lag or cross-market trading is not just about watching one market
move higher then buying the other market. It is about putting together a
coherent 
story 
using 
fundamental 
narratives 
plus 
moves 
in 
correlated
markets. Let’s look at an example of how deviation from fair value might
lead me not to put on a trade.
Let’s say I am an expert in trading FCX and BHP, two of the world’s
largest mining stocks. I am flat and US markets are closed, but since I’m a
highly-motivated and curious guy, at 9 p.m. I flick on Bloomberg TV to
check out the Chinese Export and New Loans data. There is a high degree
of uncertainty about the direction of the Chinese economy right now so
everyone is watching the release. The data comes out super-weak, much
worse than expected.
Since China is a huge consumer of commodities, this weak economic
data should be bad news for FCX and BHP. The market has been trading
mining stocks from the long side for months on the back of a popular
narrative that China stimulus and strong Chinese growth should boost
earnings. The trade is crowded and the narrative looks stale. My metrics
show there is a massive long position in copper so I expect it to get hit hard.
I care about markets, but I also care about health and sleep so I go to bed at
10 p.m.
I spend the night dreaming about how much FCX and BHP I will go
short in the morning and hope that the stocks have not sold off too much in
Asia/ London time. This seems like a solid multi-day trade idea with good
risk/reward but I don’t like trading on my phone when US markets are
closed.
When I wake up, I’m surprised to see FCX and BHP are unchanged.
Awesome! My entry point will be amazing here. Then, I flick to copper,
expecting it to be down between 2% and 3%. It’s up 1.4%. Huh, that’s
weird. The market has had seven hours to digest the bad China news, I
thought the market was mega-long and yet copper is up 1.4%?
At this point, my interest in shorting FCX and BHP would fizzle fast.
My thesis was that the market was long the whole China narrative but if
that were true, copper should be down on the bad news, not up. By
monitoring other, correlated markets, I can get clues about my thesis and
filter out bad trade ideas while homing in on good ones.
The 
better 
you 
understand 
a 
suite 
of 
related 
securities 
and 
the
underlying fundamental drivers of those securities, the more trade ideas you
will come up with, and the more likely you are to weed out bad ideas before
they cost you.
Here, I used deviation from fair value (copper rallying and BHP and
FCX unchanged = BHP and FCX look low) to avoid a bad short. Let’s look
at a simple example where deviation from fair value helps get me into a
trade.
I am bearish the US dollar as it has recently rolled over after a multi-
year rally. I believe we are entering a new down trend and I am looking for
opportunities but haven’t pulled the trigger yet. The dollar had a huge
interest rate advantage for the past few years, but the Fed recently cut rates
all the way to near zero while the rest of the world kept rates on hold. The
dollar is overvalued, the market is max long, the narrative is turning, and I
want to find a USD pair to get short.
Today is the last day of the month and I know from my research that in
months when stocks have gone up significantly, real money hedgers tend to
buy USDJPY as 4 p.m. London time approaches. I also know that the most
correlated market to USDJPY is US 10-year rates, which are still hovering
around 1.20% despite many interest rate cuts by the Fed. Big moves in US
rates almost always coincide with big moves in USDJPY.
USDJPY rallies from 107.00 to 107.60 as 4 p.m. London approaches. I
check to see if interest rates are moving higher (which would justify the
USDJPY rally). They are not. In fact, US yields are dribbling a bit lower.
The USDJPY rally is probably just flow—it makes zero macro sense.
Meanwhile, significant resistance I identified on my techs sheet this
morning lurks just above at 107.80. There is one more push up in USDJPY
right at 4 p.m. London and I sell at 107.74. Again, I check the US rates
market and see 10-year yields continue to trade lower. US stocks are also
lurching a bit lower. This is a great setup. Working in my favor are:
1. Bigger-picture bearish USD view as narrative turns.
2. Time of day effect in USDJPY signals my timing is likely decent.
3. US rates and US stock market both say USDJPY should be going
lower, not higher (cross-market supports the idea) and I can explain
why USDJPY is rallying (non-price-sensitive rebalancing flow) and
when the rally is likely to end (4 p.m. London).
4. Major resistance very close means I can put on a big trade with a
tight stop (high leverage situation).
A trade like this is not unrealistic. For most good trades, I will have 3 to
5 decent reasons and very few arguments the other way. This trade is a good
example of how cross-market analysis gives me greater confidence to take
the other side of a flow-driven move that is not supported by fundamentals
or by action in other markets.
Pattern recognition and indicator scanning
The 
final 
major 
source 
of 
trade 
ideas 
(after 
narrative, 
news, 
and
dislocations from fair value) is pattern recognition and indicator scanning.
This can mean many things and depends greatly on what products you
trade. Good traders recognize patterns in their market and understand which
patterns are the result of randomness and which are sending a persistent
signal. In the section above, I talked about the fact that USDJPY rallies into
month end when stocks have done well that month, and we discussed other
patterns of activity in various parts of this book.
When I say patterns here, I am not talking about technical analysis. I am
talking about recurring price patterns. The more you read and study your
market, the more you will learn about, identify and backtest these types of
patterns. Here are a few examples:
Stocks trade poorly from September 16 to October 9 then rip higher into
year end
This seasonal is well-known and persistent. The worst week of the year
for stocks has been the week after options expire in September (the week
after the 3
rd
Friday of September). September 21-25 is the 5-day window in
which you had the least chance of making money long US stocks from 1990
to 2020. Figure 12.2 shows the chart.
x-axis shows day of year (1 = 01JAN, 2 = 02JAN, etc.)
And Figure 12.3 shows the average path of equities over the course of
the year, again going back to 1990.
x-axis shows January 1 to December 31
There are all sorts of seasonal patterns like this in many markets. You
need 
to 
be 
very 
careful 
with 
seasonality, 
as 
much 
of 
it 
is 
random.
Experience and statistical acumen can help you sort through what is random
and what is persistent.
Analogs
When you have a few years of market experience, you will start to see
trades and narratives evolving in ways that you recognize from the past.
History doesn’t repeat but it rhymes. When you can compare the current
period to some period in the past, that analog can help you predict what
might happen next. For example, the EURUSD rally in 2017 and 2020 were
both incredibly similar:
Started with a relief rally after a euro-positive political event. In 2017
it was the election of Macron and in 2020 it was the agreement on a
European Economic Recovery Plan.
First wave of the rally went from 1.08 to 1.20.
Both times, the ECB eventually pushed back as EURUSD neared
1.2000.
Very few pullbacks in the first wave higher.
Here is a write-up I did on this topic in June 2020:
Going into round one of the French presidential election on April 23, 2017,
Emmanuel Macron held a narrow lead over Marine Le Pen. Markets
viewed Le Pen as a danger to the euro because (despite softening at the
last minute) she spoke frequently of euro exit, arguing it would allow
France to gain from competitive devaluation. Here are two representative
Le Pen quotes:
“The euro is not a currency. It is a political weapon to force
countries to implement the policies decided by the EU and keep
them on a leash.”
“(The end of the euro) would be an unbelievable opportunity. If
we don’t all leave the euro behind, it will explode. Either there
will be a popular revolt because the people no longer want to be
bled out. Or the Germans will say: Stop, we can’t pay for the
poor anymore.”
So far, so wrong. Anyway, when Macron’s round one win all but assured
him a second-round victory, EURUSD gapped and trended higher. The
current rally has a similar feel as the market has been waiting years for
the EU to loosen the purse strings and take some baby steps toward
fiscal union. The Macron-Merkel agreement on May 18, 2020 got the ball
rolling.
Event dates: April 23, 2017 and May 18, 2020
Comparing the 2017 rally with the current move, you get a chart that
looks like Figure 12.4.
The first takeaway is that this move in EURUSD matches the 2017 move
pretty well. The second takeaway is that around this point in the 2017
rally, there was a 5-week consolidation. The third takeaway is that most
dips were small on the way up. You didn’t get more than a 1.5%
retracement until the 4% correction in October 2017. Next, Figure 12.5
shows the rolling 40-day drawdown in EURUSD starting (once again) 60
days before the event date.
So if you believe in this EURUSD rally, and think it should follow a similar
path to the 2017 move, scale in from 1% to 1.5% off the rolling high. Note
that 1-month vol was in a 6%-8% range after Macron won in 2017 and is
currently around 7%; so using the analog makes sense from a volatility
perspective.
We touched a high of 1.1384 on Friday, so the 2017 playbook would put
the current buy zone at 1.1213/1.1270.
The analog was pretty good! It worked for months and correctly called
the approximate path of the euro for the next 1000 points.
Analogs are never going to be perfect but they are excellent tools that
will help you contextualize market action and set reasonable targets when
you catch a move. If the EUR rally in 2017 was 1.08 to 1.25 and the rally
looks similar in 2020 (and also started around 1.08)… You could do worse
than to guess the 2020 rally might target 1.2500 too.
Analogs bolster your understanding of narratives and volatility.
Month-end dollar effect
On the morning of the last trading day of the month, European pension
funds execute massive rebalancing trades. Any month that saw significant
moves higher in US equities will see large USD selling by pension funds as
4 p.m. approaches while any month where US equities tumbled will see
large USD buying. This pattern has existed since at least 2005. It does not
work every time (nothing works every time) but it is about as reliable as
patterns get.
This hedging goes the opposite direction of stocks and only matters
when US equities have moved meaningfully during the month. Here is why
it happens: imagine a foreign holder of US stocks who owns a billion USD
of S&Ps and is short one billion USD to hedge the position. If stocks rally
10%, he now has 1.1 billion of stocks and 1.0 billion of USD hedges. So he
needs to sell 0.1 billion ($100 million) USD to rebalance his hedges.
These asset managers are benchmarked to 4 p.m. London on the last day
of the month so activity peaks at that time as managers attempt to match the
benchmark rate. The huge volumes going through on the last day of the
month create some large and often illogical moves and these dislocations
can create significant patterns and opportunities for astute traders.
Bubbles tend to deflate by about 85% before rebounding
Looking at the major bubbles in recent history, here is how much price
sold off from high to low before making the ultimate bottom:
Bitcoin
2017/2018
84.2%
XLF (financial stocks ETF)
2007/2008
84.6%
US homebuilder stocks
2005/2008
84.6%
NASDAQ bubble
2000/2002
83.6%
Japan's Nikkei bubble
1989/2008
82.0%
USA Crash of 1929
1929/1932
86.2%
If you are looking to buy a deflated bubble asset, look for the 80%/85%
discount area. It is remarkably common for burst bubbles to bottom around
there.
Highs and lows are more likely on round numbers than on other
numbers
I explained this in the section on Round Number Bias. If you are
looking for an optimal entry point and there is a major round number
nearby, that’s helpful.
Bankrupt stocks usually rally on the open
When stocks re-open after being halted for a bankruptcy announcement,
that is often the ideal time for shorts to take profit. This is because once a
stock trades sub-$1.00 after beginning bankruptcy proceedings, it can take
months or even years before the stock is zeroed out. It is not worth it for
speculators to stay short all that time where the is so little juice left in the
trade.
This is kind of a ridiculous trade given you are buying the shares of a
bankrupt company but it doesn’t always have to make sense. Often, buying
the shares of a bankrupt company when the stock reopens after the halt for
the bankruptcy announcement can be highly profitable as a short-term (1
day to 1 week) trade.
The patterns I have described are just the tip of the iceberg. As you gain
expertise in your market and watch markets in general over the years, you
will discover more and more patterns. Remember that if you can explain a
pattern, and why it should continue to repeat, there is a much higher
likelihood that pattern will be useful for trading.
Random patterns that you observe or discover by data mining are quite
often simply the inevitable result of the fact that random data is chock full
of mostly meaningless patterns. Find patterns and do your best to explain
them. Then make a rational determination of whether they might repeat in
the future.
Indicator scanning
Indicator scanning is a process where you have specific filters that will
identify trading opportunities. This might be volume or large move filters in
the equity market or a dashboard that shows abnormal moves in options
markets. Scanning for large moves and unusual activity can often lead you
in the direction of a good idea. The markets are mostly a sea of efficient
tranquility and you are looking for whirlpools and weirdness that might tell
you something abnormal is happening.
Once you have a trade idea, hopefully with the help of the four headings
above (Surfing the narrative, News and events, Deviation from fair value
and Pattern recognition), you need to filter the idea using the other criteria
in the grid. You also need to figure out whether or not the trade can be
structured in a way that offers compelling leverage and risk/reward.
Can you profitably put this trade on at current levels or does it make
more sense to wait? Does the action in related markets support the idea, or
invalidate it? Are positioning and sentiment a headwind or tailwind for your
idea? Sticking with the huge grid, let’s move on to the next row and talk
about how we filter good ideas from bad.
2. FILTERING
Your initial idea can now be filtered using the steps listed in row 2 of
the diagram. Let’s go through how that works, column by column.
A. The narrative cycle
Depending on what your trade idea is, or where it came from, it may
have occurred to you totally independent of the narrative cycle. Say you
have seen a pattern where bonds rally at month end and you think it might
make sense to go long at noon on the last day of the month and take profit
at 4 p.m.
It’s just a four-hour trade, surely the narrative cycle doesn’t matter,
right? Well, it depends. You should still have an idea of what the story is in
bonds, generally, and what might disrupt that story during the short time
you plan to have this trade on.
Are there any Fed speakers, for example? If so, and the narrative has
been one of a dovish Fed while the most hawkish member of the committee
is set to come on CNBC at 3 p.m., that could be important. Are stocks
volatile these days? In bear markets, stocks often squeeze higher into the
end of the day. Is this a risk to your trade? The shorter your trade, the less
likely the narrative cycle will matter but it’s rare that it doesn’t matter at all.
Say news comes out that TSLA plans to release a battery that lasts 3X
longer 
than 
its 
previous 
model. 
You 
buy 
TSLA 
on 
instinct, 
and 
it’s
immediately $8 in the money. Now, you can filter a bit here. Where are we
in the TSLA narrative? Has there been chatter for weeks about a possible
battery advance and has everyone been building long positions on the back
of that? Is the market short TSLA because GM just came out with a battery
that lasts 2X as long as the original TSLA battery?
In these two narrative scenarios, price action after the initial knee-jerk
pop is going to be completely different. In scenario one, you are probably
stopping out as TSLA crumbles back down through the NewsPivot while in
narrative scenario two, the stock probably grinds higher all the way into the
close. No matter what logic you use for a trade and what time horizon you
are trading, think about where your market is in the narrative cycle and
what that means for the potential upside and downside on your time
horizon.
B. Positioning and sentiment
Positioning and sentiment are closely related to the narrative, usually. Is
the market long or short? Are positions strong or weak? Generally, if a
market has climbed significantly, the longs are confident and strong. If a
market was in a bull market but has now transitioned to a correction phase,
longs are going to be more nervous. If you know who has been buying or
selling, that can help too. Hedge funds are generally going to be much
weaker hands than real money or central banks.
Chapter 10 has a complete discussion of positioning and sentiment. For
this section, just ask yourself whether your idea is made weaker or stronger
by the current positioning. For example, if there is a bearish seasonal
pattern, but everyone is talking about it and short because of it, that
seasonal pattern becomes much less exciting. If you spot an analog to a
move you remember from last year, and then remember that positioning at
the time was very similar to positioning right now… Your analog just got
stronger.
I want to repeat something critical here. You don’t always go against
positioning. It’s a factor but it’s not the be all/end all. Traders who go
against positioning all the time miss every major trend because price loves
to trend and sentiment and positioning mostly follow price. Be flexible,
smart, rational and open minded when it comes to positioning.
C. Events and catalysts
What events and potential catalysts are coming up? Do they work for or
against you? How will they impact liquidity? If you are bullish S&P futures
for 7 good reasons but it’s 2:45 p.m. on the day before non-farm payrolls, it
might not be worth putting on the trade. Or you may be able to use non-
farm payrolls to get an even better entry point.
Events and catalysts can create opportunity, but they can also impact
liquidity and lead to discontinuous price action, random jumps and so on.
Sometimes you want a position into an event because you have a strong
view on that event, but often events should be avoided due to their random
and illiquid nature. Once again, think about whether upcoming events and
catalysts are pros or cons for your original trade idea.
D. Correlated markets
Earlier, I explained how I use correlated markets not just as a source of
ideas but as a critical filter for ideas that come from other sources. Once
you have your idea, flip through the most important correlated markets and
figure out whether those variables are supporting or contradicting your
thesis. Is there a coherent theme to those other assets that reinforces or
pushes back against your idea? Smart filtering with correlated markets will
help you dodge some bad trades.
E. Technical analysis
Charts are the worst place to come up with trade ideas but one of the
best ways to filter ideas you come up with elsewhere. Good technical
analysis (and the patience to wait for good entries) can give you the
leverage that makes the difference between disappointing and amazing
returns on a specific trade idea. A good idea, poorly executed is sometimes
worse than a dumb idea with razor-sharp execution parameters.
As an example, say there is a bullish AUDUSD headline but I know that
overall the narrative in the currency has recently turned bearish, and the
market is dying to add to its small short position. I react to the news and
buy some AUDUSD but then when I look at the chart I see:
1. We are mid-range with no support nearby.
2. There is a huge triple top close-by, just 20 pips above market.
3. My stop loss will need to be 80 points away for the trade to make any
sense, but even if the triple top breaks, there is a trendline and the 2-
year high 25 pips above that, so this is starting to look like a trade
where I am risking 80 to make 45.
So, the narrative overall is bearish, people are in “sell rallies” mode and
it’s a poor tech setup. The market is more likely to use the bullish headline
to sell more AUDUSD at better levels than it is to rip the pair higher.
This is a situation where the tech and narrative filters just don’t support
the trade. I get out, and move on. Don’t fall in love with your trades, treat
them like they are a dime-a-dozen. Every day presents new ideas, new
opportunities and new trades. Don’t overvalue your ideas. There will be no
shortage of them going forward. Learn to love small losses.
Another example: it’s 10 a.m., and as you walk to get a coffee from the
kitchen, a fantastic trade idea crystallizes in your mind. You have been
thinking about the spot rhodium market for a few weeks but finally realize
that it’s time to get long. Sentiment is at an extreme, supply is drying up and
nobody has talked about rhodium in ages even though the other precious
metals are all ripping higher. What are the odds that the spot rhodium
market is in the perfect place to buy, at the exact moment you come up with
your trade idea? Probably pretty low!
So now step back and take a look at some charts. Figure out the optimal
entry point or an optimal entry band. Is there an area where multiple
significant reference points converge and you can go long with maximum
leverage and a reasonably tight stop? 
125
Once you have completed this filtering process, your trade idea will
either be stronger, weaker or dead in the water. Do the filters support your
analysis, or do they point to crosswinds? This is a critical point in your
trade idea process. Do you move forward, or pause? Or do you nix the trade
because it is simply not supported by enough factors? Bad trades often start
out as cool ideas but then the trader ignores a series of obviously contrary
information and does not filter because he is so excited about his cool trade
idea that he can’t accept the contrary evidence.
That’s how confirmation bias works in this part of the process. Trade
ideas are hard to come up with, so the last thing you want to do when you
finally think of one is nix it because of a bunch of filters. But often that’s
exactly what you should do. While good trades have very few crosswinds,
that does not mean you only take the perfect trades. There is no such thing
as a perfect trade.
You go through the filtering process with an open mind and then make a
sound, unbiased judgment when you’re done.
The 
final 
step 
in 
the 
process 
is 
a 
critical 
one: 
consider 
alternate
hypotheses. We discussed this in depth in Chapter 5 and I mentioned
Richards Heuer of the CIA and his eight-step process. I said it then, and I
will say it again here: you should read Heuer’s book. It’s free on the CIA
website and is an excellent training manual for good thinking that will
benefit you not just in trading, but in any area of life that benefits from
rational thought.
At this stage of the trade idea process, you need to think about the other
side. If your trade idea is bearish corn futures, think about what the bulls are
saying. Find research notes that are bullish corn and go through their
arguments. Can you debunk them? Sometimes I read counterarguments to
my view and think: “That’s pretty unconvincing” and so I remain confident
in my view. Sometimes I read the counterarguments and think: “Oh crap, I
totally missed that.”
Remember that your brain is programmed to find supporting evidence
that confirms your existing hypothesis. You need to work hard to fight
against that programming and honestly pursue alternative stories that might
make sense.
A useful tool when attempting to embrace alternative hypotheses is to
picture how the trade could go against you. What would that look like?
What specific factors or events might derail your idea and stop you out?
This helps you think about your idea from different angles (and hopefully
with 
greater 
objectivity) 
and 
also 
gets 
you 
thinking 
about 
possible
reassessment triggers. If I’m wrong… What’s it gonna look like? This is
sometimes called a “pre-mortem”, as discussed in Chapter 7.
Bounce your trade idea off people you respect and see what comes
back. Don’t blindly defer to them or hope they agree with you. It doesn’t
really matter if they agree or disagree. What matters is any new information
or evidence that they offer up. If a ton of people disagree with your idea,
but you remain confident about it, that can be powerful because now you
know you are not part of the consensus. You have rigorously tested your
idea and it is resilient to scrutiny.
When someone smart gives me a good reason to doubt my idea and I
can’t really refute their argument… I am happy to toss my trade idea in the
trash and wait for a better one to come along. Don’t hold on to your ideas
too tightly. This goes back to the idea of “strong opinions, weakly held”
which I discussed earlier. You need to come up with strong trade ideas
backed by significant research and multiple streams of analysis, but then
have an open mind, admit error and change course if need be, as new
information comes in.
This is easy to say and hard to do. Strong opinions that are too weakly
held will be scared off by the first bit of noise. Determining when to give up
on a trade idea is tough; we’ll deal with that a bit later in this chapter.
3. TACTICS
OK, after filtering is done, it’s game on. Your idea is good and now it’s
time to determine tactics. Don’t rush to your keyboard and start pressing the
BUY or SELL buttons yet. First, it’s time to fine tune the tactics to
maximize leverage and make the most money possible if you are right.
Being right and making money are not always the same thing. You can be
right and get stopped out because of a poorly chosen stop loss level. You
can buy an option that expires worthless the day before your beloved asset
rips to the moon. You can enter a trade mid-range and make 11bps when the
guy next to you threads the needle at major support and makes 111bps.
Being right is just the start.
Before you can put on your trade idea, you need to decide what to trade.
In many cases, this is obvious, but not always. For example, I often have
ideas driven by stock market views, but due to the nature of my role, I can’t
trade stocks. Therefore, once I come up with a view on where stocks are
going, I need to figure out what the best FX proxy is for stocks. Often, that
means AUDJPY or USDJPY but sometimes it might mean AUDUSD or
even EURCHF. I analyze 90-day correlation stats and think about what
makes sense going forward, then finally pick what product to trade.
If you are bearish the NASDAQ, you need to decide between QQQ,
SQQQ, QID, PSQ, and NASDAQ futures. You might even decide that a
specific subgroup (short FANG via FNGD?) makes sense or you might take
a view in a single name like AMZN or NVDA. Which choice will give you
the exposure, leverage and directional movement you want with the lowest
transaction costs?
Be thoughtful about the product you choose to express your view. It
matters.
Once you have chosen your product, it’s time to pick your entry point,
stop loss and take profit. The first thing I do here is pull up a chart. What is
the dream entry point? What is a realistic entry point? Is the exact place
where the market is trading right now the best place to get in, or are you
better off waiting? Obviously this will often come down to the type of trade
it is. If you are trading news, you don’t have time to wait for the ideal entry
point. You get in and then determine your tactics after. But if this is a
scenario where you are playing a turn in narrative and your trade is likely to
last three to five days, you can finesse your entry point.
Using technical analysis, I will determine the ideal entry and stop loss at
this point. Rarely will I have a stop loss closer than one day’s range away
unless the trade is ultra-short-term. While a risk:reward ratio of 1:2 or 1:3 is
a decent rule of thumb for most trades, there is no hard and fast rule. If you
think there is a 70% chance you can risk 1 to make 1, and you have high
confidence in your 70% probability estimate… Do the trade! It has high
expected value. On the other hand, given the significant uncertainty around
probabilities in trading, higher payout ratios give you a wider margin of
safety.
Solid tactics give you superior leverage because the more fine-tuned
your entry point and the tighter your stop loss, the larger position you can
take with the same amount of money at risk. If you buy AAPL at $100 with
a stop loss at $99 you can take a 5X larger position than if you buy AAPL at
$100 with a stop loss at $95. Then again, your odds of getting stopped out
at $99 are clearly higher than getting stopped out at $95 so choosing a stop
loss is always about the tension between ‘as tight as possible’ and ‘lowest
chance of getting stopped out’.
If you want a system that is simple and generally effective, start by
risking one day’s range to make two. Or, if you are day trading, risk 35% of
an average day’s range to make 70% of a day’s range. Those are finger in
the air starting points and you can adjust as you gain experience.
When things are going well and you have a strong feeling for your
market, you will sometimes find trades where you can risk much less to
make much more. Sometimes you can sell right against a major resistance
point and risk just 20% of a day’s range knowing that if you catch the turn,
it might be a major top and you can extract two full day’s ranges from the
trade. 
Those 
trades 
are 
dreamy. 
Each 
trade 
will 
have 
its 
own 
ideal
parameters based on technical analysis and the unique timing features of the
trade.
Tactics are just as important as strategy. You need both to succeed in
trading.
Once 
you 
have 
your 
entry, 
stop 
loss 
and 
take 
profit 
determined,
automate everything as much as possible. If AAPL is at $100 and you have
determined that $101.50 is the perfect entry point, put the limit order in the
system, along with your stop loss. If you don’t put it in a system right away,
what do you think is going to happen in two hours when AAPL spikes from
$100 to $101.50? Your dumb lizard brain will say stuff like:
Whoa, it looks bid, I better check if there’s some news
out!
Hmmm, maybe I can sell at $103.00 and get an even
better entry point.
Somebody must know something! Why is it rallying so
hard???
Selling into a rally can be hard, just like buying dips is hard. Much
easier is to calmly enter a limit order to sell at $101.50 when nothing is
going on and the stock is bouncing around near $100.00. Automate and
outsource as much of the execution process as you can and you will find
you get better results. No matter how disciplined you are: computers are
more disciplined than you!
The last stage in the tactics phase is to write down or record your list of
reassessment triggers. A trader who clearly lays out her plan is way ahead
of most traders. She has cemented a concrete process and listed specific
triggers for reassessment or exit.
Reassessment triggers are important because once you have a trade on,
you will be influenced by all sorts of new information that is mostly noise.
Numbers jiggle on a screen. Random headlines scroll by. Your heart rate
picks up. Those are not reasons to adjust your risk. It is easier to list action
triggers ex-ante than to hope you will be sane and unbiased once the trade
starts to move.
Reassessment triggers will always include a stop loss and a take profit
but can also be other things such as:
Time trigger. For example, any day trade can have a reassessment (or
firm exit) time of 4 p.m. (when the main NYSE trading session ends).
Many good trades have a time trigger. Another example: say you have
done a ton of work on today’s US Retail Sales number and you expect
it will be weak. You go long bonds at 7:45 a.m. in anticipation of the
release at 8:30 a.m. You believe that most of the new information from
economic data gets fully priced within 10 minutes
126
. Does it make any
sense to keep the trade past 8:45 a.m. or maybe 9:00 a.m. at the latest?
Probably not. So you put a reassessment trigger at 8:45 a.m.
Level at which to tighten the stop loss. Once a trade has made most
of its gains, it makes sense to tighten up the stop loss.
New information trigger. You need to be as specific as possible here
to avoid undue reaction to noise. If a trader gets long oil on a Saudi
Arabia / Russia squabble, the trader should logically have a
reassessment trigger as: Truce or conciliatory Saudi Arabia and Russia
headlines. That is a logical reassessment trigger. A bad reassessment
trigger would be something like: “Re-evaluate if price action does not
cooperate.” Be specific.
Cross-market variable trigger. If you are long S&P futures and one
of your main reasons for entering the trade is that the VIX just dropped
below the key 20 level, it makes sense to use the VIX as a potential
cross-market reassessment trigger. Again, make it specific. For
example: “If VIX trades above 21, I will cut the position.”
Note that I am using the term “reassessment triggers” but often these are
action triggers. The last example is an action trigger. I use reassessment
trigger and action trigger interchangeably since often a reassessment leads
to an action.
The first two reassessment triggers for any trade are always the stop loss
and take profit. After that, you record anything else that might change your
mind. The goal for this stage of the process is to try to guess ex-ante what
might be signal and what is noise going forward.
When you have a trade on, every price movement feels like a signal or a
sign of danger for your position while in reality most price movement is
noise. Every time price jiggles lower or ratchets higher, you will have an
emotional reaction because you are invested. The idea with reassessment
triggers is to codify what will make you change your mind and what will
not before the price starts flickering and jiggling around and those dumb
voices in your head start to react to that flickering and jiggling.
Some other examples of good reassessment triggers:
I am long stocks because I think the Fed has turned more dovish and
the market hasn’t caught on yet. There are two Fed speakers this week.
If either one of those speakers is more hawkish than I expect, I should
reassess my view.
I am short bonds because I think the economy is strengthening. Any
major US data point that comes in more than one standard deviation
below consensus will trigger a reassessment.
One of my main reasons for going long AUDUSD was the rebound in
copper and iron ore prices. If either copper or iron ore break below
their 200-hour moving average, I will reassess my AUDUSD long
position.
If you take the time to record these reassessment triggers, you should
find very few occasions where you make on the fly decisions mid-trade.
Once you have a trade on, leave it alone and let it bake. Don’t rush it. Don’t
keep opening the oven to peek. The market doesn’t care about your time
frame. A market that is not moving is boring, but it’s not telling you
anything. 
Wait 
for 
your 
stop 
loss, 
your 
take 
profit 
or 
one 
of 
your
reassessment triggers to hit. Stop white-knuckling.
Of course, there are going to be times when you are long and bad news
comes out and you hit a bid and save yourself some cash. But these are not
all that common. Just as often, you will hit the bid and then find yourself
buying the stock back ten minutes later after realizing the news wasn’t as
bad 
as 
you 
thought 
and 
in 
fact 
the 
news 
was 
actually 
meaningless.
Remember that when you have a trade on, you are biased. Information
processing is distorted by your emotional state.
The best action is almost always no action.
This is true when you have a position on and it’s also true most of the
time when you don’t. Limit your actions as much as possible and you will
put on only the best trades. Then, you will stay in those trades long enough
for them to bear fruit. This is my kryptonite and the greatest strength and
greatest weakness in my life.
I can do 1,000 pushups in a day every Wednesday for 10 straight weeks
(action!) 
but 
have 
an 
incredibly 
tough 
time 
going 
two 
hours 
without
touching the BUY or SELL buttons (inaction). This bias to action gives me
the energy to write a decent macro newsletter every day and to pump out a
book every year or two but it also makes it shockingly difficult for me to sit
at work and keep my hands off the trading controls.
My default mode is action. I have known that for 20 years and yet it is
still my greatest weakness in trading. I never stop working on it, but I also
accept it is who I am. I forgive myself more easily now than I did when I
was 30. I try to automate as much as possible and convince myself to sit
there and do nothing as much as possible. Once you know your personal
kryptonite, fine tune your process and redesign your framework to address
it.
4. POSITION SIZING
Position size is a function of six factors:
1. Conviction level (TYPE I, TYPE II or TYPE III)
2. Free capital
3. YTD P&L
4. Market volatility
5. Distance from entry point to stop loss
6. Gap and liquidity risk
Here’s a quick summary of how to determine position size.
a. Decide on your conviction level (Type I, II or III as discussed in
chapter 11).
b. Given your YTD P&L and free capital, decide on a percentage of
your capital to put at risk. This tells you how many $ (or bps) to risk
on the trade.
c. Using market volatility and technical analysis, choose the appropriate
stop loss.
d. Calculate the position size: ($ at risk) divided by (risk per unit) … To
get the total number of units.
e. Think about liquidity. Is this a reasonable position size? Can you get
in and out without much of an issue? If not, can you scale in and out
and maintain the economics of the trade?
f. Think about gap risks. What major events are coming up? How has
the product been trading? Do you need to worry about limit up and
limit down? Is there enough liquidity for this position size? In this
step, you might reduce your position size because of gap risk, or
consider exiting the trade before an upcoming event.
I will go through this process again in the trade walkthrough at the end
of this chapter. That should solidify your understanding.
5. EXECUTION
Good execution reduces transaction costs and improves returns. This is
important at all skill levels and in all trading businesses. Remember those
charts that show the impact of transaction costs in Chapter 8? Transaction
costs are important. It is lazy to ignore them or minimize their importance.
Take TC seriously.
Here are a few ways to reduce transaction costs and pay less spread. I
discuss these approaches from the point of view of an equity trader, but
these concepts apply to trading in most markets.
1. Use limit orders. If TSLA is trading 1281.00 / 1281.30 and you want
to buy, you have some choices. You can:
a. send a market order and likely get filled around $1281.30.
b. leave a limit order at mid (if you want to buy leave a bid at
1281.15, if you want to sell leave an offer at 1281.15)
c. leave a limit order to buy just ahead of the best bid or sell just
ahead of the best offer (+@1281.01 or -@1281.29 in this case)
The decision depends mostly on the level of urgency you feel.
Option a) gets you filled every time and is the way to go if there is
news, it is a fast market, or you are stopping out of a position.
Option b) is less likely to get filled, but still has a high probability of
execution. The risk is that you bid 1281.15, and the market goes
straight up. In that case you will not get filled. Then again, if you bid
or offer at mid, you will get filled the majority of the time in most
markets if you show a bit of patience.
Option c) saves you the most on transaction costs but can be riskiest
since you need to wait for someone to cross a full spread. This can
be a good strategy when nothing is going on, but you need to weigh
the risk of the trade going hard in your direction before you get
filled.
I think people tend to use too many market orders and not enough
limit orders but I have seen a change in FX markets over the past
five years as more clients now use limits. Some people feel that
when you leave a limit order, you give a free option to market
makers or high-frequency traders (HFTs) and it is true that limit
orders have some value and optionality for banks and HFTs. Still, the
money you save by strategically using limit orders to minimize your
transaction costs is worth it.
There is not one correct execution method for all markets and all
regimes.
As a general comment, there is no strictly correct way to execute. No
order type or execution style is optimal at all times. It depends on the
market and situation. In a product with a wide bid/offer spread, you
are more likely to miss the trade if you don’t aggress, but you are
also saving more by using a passive strategy. It comes down to your
view of what is going to happen in the very short-term.
If you are worried about the trade ripping in a straight line before
you can get it on with a limit order, use a market order. If you think
nothing is going on or the market might even move against you a bit
before your idea works, use a limit order or algorithm to trade. When
in doubt, consult an expert or market maker in the product you trade
to get an idea of liquidity, bid/offer bounce and what might be the
weak side in the short term.
2. If you are a large institutional trader, don’t stick to one execution
style 
all 
the 
time. 
Learn 
about 
the 
different 
order 
types 
and
algorithms you have at your disposal and mix in various methods
depending on your urgency and on market conditions. Talk to a few
market makers you trust and ask them how they transact. There is a
time and a place for TWAPs
127
but there is also a time and a place to
pick up the phone and do a risk transfer.
Execution strategy always comes down to the trade-off between
footprint and market risk. Fast, aggressive execution has a larger
footprint but less market risk. If you go slow, you pay less in TC but
you take the risk the market will move against you in the meantime.
When it is time to execute, you need to decide how to balance the
tension between minimizing footprint and market risk at the same
time.
Generally for larger trades, I find a hybrid of human and electronic
(algorithmic) execution is best. You run a few algorithms in the
background to take care of half of your size and make sure the trade
won’t take all day, and you run the other half with discretion, using
limit orders while absorbing any meaningful chunks of liquidity
more aggressively.
One weakness with TWAP and VWAP orders is that they generally
ignore the amount of liquidity available in the market. Let’s say
EURUSD is 1.1500 and a client wants to buy 500 million EURUSD.
They decide to run a 50-minute TWAP (i.e., buy 10 million EUR per
minute for 50 minutes). The computer starts buying, slowly but
surely, and the market doesn’t move. Drip, drip, drip, the computer
buys euros slowly but surely at 1.1501 and 1.1502. After 3 minutes,
a large seller appears. Someone shows a large limit order, an offer to
sell 250 million euros at 1.1502.
A rational human trader would almost always buy those 250 million
euros because that is a huge chunk of the order to fill just 1 pip off
the bid. On the other hand, a TWAP won’t care. It will just keep
buying 10 euros per minute even though it could snag a huge clip of
euros all at once if it was smarter. A hybrid algo/human strategy
gives you the best of both worlds.
3. Are there securities or products to trade within your asset class that
have lower transaction costs? Many products trade as cash, over-the-
counter, futures, ETFs, and so on. ETFs are great for some traders,
but futures often have tighter bid/offer spreads with the identical
exposure. For example, you might be better off trading S&P futures,
not the SPY ETF when you have the choice. Futures also offer more
leverage than ETFs.
If you have a longer holding period, you might also discover that
futures are cheaper to hold than ETFs because futures do not charge
a management fee while ETFs do. For example, SLV, the silver ETF,
charges 0.65% / year. This is not an epic fee by any means but if you
can 
trade 
silver 
futures 
you 
might 
find 
that 
more 
attractive,
depending on funding costs. I am not telling you which products are
best, I am simply saying you should take the time to figure out the
best way to trade your product if there are various expressions
available.
Currencies trade over-the-counter but it is not always efficient for a
hedge fund to set up credit with a bank; sometimes it’s cheaper for a
fund 
to 
trade 
currency 
futures. 
Often 
it 
is 
better 
for 
smaller
participants to execute through an online FX broker. But sometimes
they would be better off in futures. The point here is to think about
the various ways of trading your asset or market, if more than one
avenue exists.
4. When you trade a particular asset, ask yourself whether there is
another asset or security within your asset class that will give you the
same exposure with better liquidity. For example, a hedge fund PM
who manages $1.4 billion expects China growth to pick up in the
next few months. He decides to buy $500 million NZDUSD (long
New Zealand dollars, short USD). Given AUDUSD is substantially
more liquid than NZDUSD, would he have been better off just
buying AUD? Very likely the answer in this scenario is yes.
Sticking with FX markets, sometimes a basket will also give you the
same exposure with better liquidity and lower transaction costs. If a
speculator wants to take a huge bet on a falling USD, she is better off
to execute 20% of her risk across a basket of five different currencies
instead of 100% short USDCHF. This situation applies to credit, too,
where a basket of names can often give you bigger exposure with
lower transaction costs than piling into a single name.
Retail traders rarely have to worry about liquidity and this is a huge
advantage for small traders. They can trade anything, whenever it’s open
and never have to worry about liquidity. Yes, they need to worry about
transaction costs but they don’t have to worry about being able to buy or
sell when they want (or need) to. I have heard retail traders complain that if
they only had a bigger account, they could succeed in trading. That is
almost always false. It’s like saying: “I can’t win this race on a jet ski… If
only I had an aircraft carrier!”
A larger account is more difficult to trade, especially now that almost
every asset class has minis, or fractional shares or unlimited divisibility
(crypto). The only time a small account is a handicap is if you need to make
X amount of money and your account size is too small to do that. Generally,
smaller accounts can achieve more leverage, pay lower transaction costs,
have more assets to choose from and can achieve higher returns.
In contrast, when funds grow larger than about $1 billion, the list of
products they can trade slowly shrinks. Small caps and thinly-traded credits
or some short-dated options (for example) become impossible to trade when
you are a behemoth.
Smart execution improves performance.
Once you have executed your trade, automate your stop loss and your
take profit (if you can) and record the trade in your journal. These final
steps should always be part of your execution process.
Here are a few more thoughts on stop losses.
1. If you trade huge size, it is more difficult to automate your stops. This
is a difficult fact of life for very large traders but does not apply to
most. Even a stop loss for 100 million euros (a decent position size in
FX) is perfectly manageable. If I am trading a position that is too
large 
to 
automate 
my 
stop 
loss, 
I 
simply 
automate 
whatever
percentage I can. If I’m short 200 million AUDUSD and I think
anything above 50 million AUD is too much to automate, I put a stop
loss for 50 million in my system. At least that is a placeholder and
serves as an alert when my level triggers. Once the 50 million has
been purchased automatically, I will get busy and cover the rest of
the position ASAP. This is less than ideal since it relies on discipline
and can lead to dumb-brain comments like: “Let me wait to see if it
pulls back and maybe I can get these on the bid” or “Man, AUD has
rallied so much already, I can’t pay way up here!” When your stop
loss level hits, you must act to get out of the position so you can
survive to play again tomorrow. Don’t screw around trying to get the
best-possible execution. That’s what you do on the way in, not on the
way out.
2. Sell stops should always be below a round number and buy stops
should always be above a round number. This is because of round
number bias. If you ever see a trader leave a buy stop in a stock at
$99.99 or $100.00… That trader probably doesn’t know what he’s
doing. Experts always leave their stops on the correct side of the
round numbers.
3. If your stop loss is in a really obvious place where a ton of stops are
likely to be, it’s probably going to get done! You need a bit of
second-level thinking when placing stop losses. If there is a triple
bottom at $101 and everyone in the market is talking about it…
Expect there will be a pocket of stop losses at $100.80. Leave your
stop below $100 instead. The extra space will protect you from a
whipsaw through $101.00 and could be the difference between a
winning and losing trade.
4. When deciding between two stop loss levels, pick the wider stop.
Surviving the trade is more important than maximizing leverage,
though obviously there is always an important tension between those
two goals. When you get stopped out at the lows before a huge rally,
it really hurts.
6. TRACKING
Once you put a trade on, take a few breaths and relax. Don’t sit there
staring at your screen trying to decide whether to add, cut or reverse. Your
plan is in place and you should not alter course unless one of your
predetermined reassessment triggers hits, or substantial new information
comes in. Stick to the plan. When the risk reward has changed substantially,
consider tightening up your stop loss.
7. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
High performing trading professionals constantly iterate through this
process:
It’s a never-ending cycle of action and analysis that should yield better
and better results as errors are corrected and strengths are leveraged. The
information and feedback from your detailed trade records and analysis will
help improve your process. Each month that you trade, your process gets a
bit more solid and you use these improvements to plan better and trade
more successfully.
The time to analyze performance is when you are well rested and calm.
After you exit a trade, record the information in your trading journal with as
much detail as possible. Your journal entries should emphasize the decision-
making process. Once a month, go through your journal to look for patterns.
Are you sticking to your plan? Do you take profit halfway to your target
because you get nervous? Do you move your stop loss for no reason or
ignore it sometimes?
Compare your trading statistics to your history. Are you improving or
getting worse? Focus specifically on the size of your winning days vs. the
size of your losing days. This is a key metric. If it’s getting better or worse,
can you explain why?
The number one question you need to ask is: what is working and what
is not? Search for patterns and adjust your strategy and tactics to eliminate
leaks and repeat errors. Are you biased to a particular direction (i.e., are you
always short S&P futures and never long)? If yes, either stop trading that
product or open your mind to both sides. Directional bias is a huge
weakness for short-term traders.
Once you complete your analysis and tweak your process, stop thinking
about trades in the past and go back to thinking forward. What I mean by
this is, you should ringfence your performance analysis and do it all at once,
then move on. Don’t keep thinking about trades you did in the past.
Now that you understand my process and framework in general, I want
to walk you through the specifics of a real trade from start to finish, in
detail. When you are done reading this example, I hope you have a clear
idea of how a trade comes to life. The trade I will describe is not some epic
once in a lifetime trade, it’s just a good trade of the sort you should
encounter fairly regularly. For confidentiality purposes, I have obscured a
few specific details like exact position size but this description is a very
accurate walkthrough of a real trade I did in 2020.
DETAILED TRADE WALKTHROUGH
Short EURUSD trade
September 2020
The setup
In June and July of 2020, EURUSD rallied in a steady up trend from
1.08 to 1.19 (see Figure 12.6). By the end of summer, the market was all-in
on this bullish EURUSD narrative:
Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel agree to a framework to bring
Europe closer to fiscal union. After approval at an EU Summit in July,
this removes eurozone break-up risk and makes the EUR a more
attractive alternative to the USD as a reserve currency.
ECB is quiet, saying fiscal policy (not monetary policy) needs to do
the heavy lifting on COVID-19 relief. No further easing from ECB is
bullish EURUSD.
The Fed has been mega-dovish in response to COVID-19 and is ready
to get even more dovish on the back of a new Average Inflation
Targeting (AIT) framework. The details of the framework are not yet
clear, and the market is excited to hear more from Fed Chairman
Jerome Powell at Jackson Hole (late August) and the next Fed
(FOMC) meeting (mid-September). The market assumes these events
will be dovish and USD-negative.
EUR long positioning (as measured the Daily Sentiment Index and
many other metrics) is at a multi-year extreme.
The stock market has rallied on global fiscal and monetary stimulus
and optimism around the economic bounce back as the world economy
reopens after COVID-19. Stronger global growth and world trade tend
to be bullish EURUSD.
Gold, silver, lumber and other hard assets have ripped higher in
sympathy as hard assets are viewed as reflationary/anti-dollar trades
and benefit from copious global liquidity.
US twin deficits have exploded, and this worries foreign investors.
You can see the chart in Figure 12.6.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
This was an amazing bullish narrative and many traders (most of the FX
market, actually) caught some or most of it. By the time we reached 1.1900
in July, bullish forecasters and traders were busy extrapolating as they
moved 
their 
1.2000 
targets 
to 
1.2500. 
Bearish 
forecasters 
meanwhile,
ratcheted their forecasts up from 1.05 to 1.15. A big series of forecast
revisions can often be a sign that we have come too far too fast. Strategists
cannot leave stale forecasts hanging out there for too long
128
. At this stage, a
great deal of good news was priced in.
Then, the narrative slowly started to shift.
Fed Chair Powell delivered an uneventful launch of the Fed’s new
Average Inflation Targeting regime at Jackson Hole. Markets were
hoping for a strong signal that the Fed was ready to act at its
September meeting. There was no such signal.
The ECB started to push back on euro strength with Chief Economist
Philip Lane and President Christine Lagarde both commenting
separately that a higher euro made the inflation target more difficult to
reach. When a central bank comments on its currency, pay attention.
Sometimes it’s irrelevant but other times it can be trend changing.
Gold, which had been leading, was making a series of lower highs.
Stocks were about to enter their worst month of the year (September)
and were trading with a very high positive correlation to EURUSD at
that time. Furthermore, I had several other reasons to feel bearish
stocks. Bullish retail hysteria was strong as Davey Day Trader and the
Robinhoodies gambled in stocks instead of sports. As retail bought
calls, VIX went up as stocks rallied. That is unusual. When stocks are
going up, volatility should be going down. If they go up in tandem,
that can be a serious danger sign.
As 
we 
approached 
the 
first 
FOMC 
meeting 
after 
the 
Fed’s
announcement of Average Inflation Targeting, speculators clung to the old
bullish EURUSD narrative even though it seemed fairly clear that the
narrative had expired, or at least made much less sense. This was especially
true as we had a 10%+ rally in EURUSD that already touched most
people’s original target of 1.2000. It’s funny how once a trade gets to a
target, many analysts and traders just raise their target instead of cashing
out of the idea.
The day of the FOMC meeting, I sent a survey to my readers and
responses showed a) there was a very low expectation of any major USD-
negative announcement but … b) check out the survey responses in Figure
12.7.
It was an interesting dichotomy: people didn’t expect much, but mostly
stayed short USD anyway. This is typical. The market will usually hold
onto a position or narrative until price forces them out, regardless of how
stale the narrative has become.
Since EURUSD was still near the highs then, people stuck with their
USD shorts into the Fed meeting. Furthermore, this is a classic bad trade
with good optics because the asymmetry favors short USD on the outside
chance of a big policy shift and a huge move lower in the dollar. Holding
short USD into the FOMC was the lottery ticket trade and speculators love
lotto tickets as we discussed in the section on favorite/longshot bias.
Based on this information, I believed it was an excellent time to take the
other side and go short EURUSD at the prevailing level (1.1865) the
morning of the FOMC meeting. Note for the record I am not writing all this
with the benefit of hindsight, this trade all happened in real-time and I
wrote about it before EURUSD moved. Here is an excerpt from my pre-Fed
write-up (which I published the morning of FOMC) to give you a sense of
how I was thinking about the trade:
If you want to fade the crowd and join me long USD, a good expression
would be short EURUSD here with a stop at 1.1951. Here’s the rationale:
EURUSD is the best vanilla expression of straight USD views these days
and EURUSD longs are still out there. 1.1917 was the high after Lagarde
(ECB meeting) and 1.1929 was the level when Philip
Lane spoke (talking down the euro) so you have a clear stop loss level
just above there.
It looks like the market does not expect much from the Fed but is going in
short USD just in case. To me that means there is a good chance of a
USD higher move as the meeting disappoints and weaker USD shorts /
lotto tickets unwind.
The result
The Fed meeting delivered nothing special and EURUSD sold off
aggressively down to 1.1788 in NY time and then hit 1.1737 in Asia time,
the same night. Still, participants mesmerized by the bullish EUR narrative
stayed in “buy the dip” mode and so the key 1.1700 level held again and we
got one last push to 1.1850. Figure 12.8 shows the chart. See the FOMC
meeting right in the middle.
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
You can see we rallied all the way back up to 1.1850 in the 24 hours
after the FOMC. At that point, the trade was extremely frustrating because
it looked to me like the narrative had clearly turned (bearish EURUSD), but
price just would not cooperate. I hung on to the view but my confidence
was dented by the rebound off 1.1737.
Then, the weekend after the FOMC meeting, Supreme Court Justice
Ruth Bader Ginsburg died. This is a great example of a catalyst that triggers
a move, even when the catalyst really makes no sense. Sometimes moves
that were meant to happen just need a random bit of news to kick up
volatility and then the market will go where you thought it should have
gone days ago.
If anything, the vibe on the weekend RBG passed away was that the
news would be bad for the USD because it increased the chances of a
constitutional crisis around election time. The first clients to trade on the
open sold dollars.
You can see that a few hours after Justice Ginsburg died, EURUSD
entered a steep, aggressive decline. As mentioned earlier, 1.1700 was
considered the bottom of the range and a major support for EURUSD so I
covered (too early!) at 1.1710. Net, I risked 86 pips to make 155 pips
(1.1865 entry vs. 1.1951 stop loss).
Astute observers will note that there was more money to be made in the
primary trend from 1.0800 to 1.2000 than there was playing the pullback.
That is true! In fact, the rally from 1.0800 was a textbook macro news trade
as the good news for euro (the Macron/Merkel agreement) came out right as
the market was max bearish EURUSD and still very bearish stocks.
When I went short EURUSD, I considered the possibility that it might
trade symmetrically and go all the way back down to 1.0800. But I believed
it was a countertrend move and the decaying US fiscal story would keep the
dollar on a downward trend in the bigger picture. That is why I played the
trade as a short-term pullback (not a new down trend) and took profit at
1.1710. In an ideal world, it would have been a major turn and I could try to
ride the thing all the way back down to 1.0800 but in this case that is not
what I believed.
I often trade countertrend and “narrative is turning” style trades but the
juiciest trades occur when you identify a new trend where positioning is
max short, you get in early, then you ride it all the way up until the market
is 
max 
long. 
The 
EURUSD 
move 
from 
1.0800 
to 
1.2000 
fits 
that
description and was rather tradable in real time because the pair hung
around 1.0900 for a full week after the Macron/Merkel news broke. Then it
finally ripped higher.
This is not meant to be a recap of one of the greatest trades of all time.
It is the detailed story of a good trade that made sense and made money. But
it is not some rare bird that can only be spotted once every seventy-pleven
fortmoons. This is a typical short-term global macro trade you will see all
the time.
Now that you have the overview of the trade, let’s go through each of
the seven steps in the “Lifecycle of a trade” grid to provide more granular
detail.
1. IDEA GENERATION
The idea comes to me gradually as I see the market build a bigger and
bigger long position in EURUSD even as it seems clear that the bull story
has become patchy and much less compelling. Crosswinds blow all over the
place and EUR bulls are still heading out to sea with full confidence.
The ECB pushback and the disappointment from the Fed (on the AIT
story, 
which 
had 
generated 
significant 
market 
excitement 
and 
media
attention) make me think we are past peak narrative and price is sure to
follow. This is a classic “stale narrative” trade.
2. FILTERING
The narrative cycle, positioning and sentiment all work in favor of the
short EURUSD trade idea. Correlated markets do not have much to say,
though 
there 
is 
a 
huge 
triangle 
forming 
in 
gold
129

and 
the 
weakest
seasonality of the year is coming up in stocks
130
.
Events and catalysts work strongly in the trade’s favor as the upcoming
FOMC looks likely to hurt anyone hanging on to the bearish USD trade. In
fact, there is a strange dichotomy where speculators expect nothing from
FOMC but hold large short USD positions anyway. Technical analysis
suggests two key NewsPivot highs (1.1910 and 1.1929, both on ECB
comments) represent a meaningful double top.
Alternative hypotheses: the main alternative hypothesis is that the Fed
might deliver something very dovish at the FOMC meeting. This is a real
possibility but I rate it about a 10% chance; I am comfortable with the risk.
Otherwise, I am fully aware of and steeped in the EURUSD bull narrative (I
have been participating in it and/or studying it for four months). Being
expert in the current narrative, I feel like I can shoot down the bulls’
arguments one by one, with high confidence.
That sounds a bit arrogant, but honestly, I am never as confident as that
last paragraph sounds. Still, I am as confident in this case as one can
reasonably be in a game where the rules and probabilities are constantly
changing. It’s more about being confident enough, not perfectly confident.
If risk/reward is 1 : 1, you need supreme confidence but at 1.8 : 1, there is
some margin of error to work with.
3. TACTICS
The whole story is about EURUSD so product choice here is easy.
EURUSD, obv. With regard to the stop loss, I consider the 1.1910/1.1929
area important, so I place my stop at 1.1951, above those two levels, plus
another 25% of a daily range (and one pip above the round number,
1.1950).
My take profit is 1.1710. There is a huge support at 1.1700 from July
and August so I simply place my take profit just ahead of that. Risking 86
pips to make 155 (1: 1.8 ratio) is fine by me. As you know, I don’t stick to
an arbitrary ratio. Instead, I think about my expected probability of success
vs. my upside.
In this case, I think I am better than 50/50 to be correct so risking 86 to
make 155 is excellent leverage. My reassessment trigger is easy in this case
and it is an automatic exit trigger: if the Fed meeting is unambiguously
dovish, my idea is wrong and I will get out as quickly as possible. I also add
“topside break of gold triangle” as a reassessment trigger (but not an
automatic exit). If gold starts ripping higher, that’s probably not good news
for my short EURUSD trade.
4. POSITION SIZING
I have to be a bit opaque here because when you work at a bank you are
not allowed to discuss specific trade details. So here I introduce a young
trader with four years of experience: Phoebe. She has a yearly stop loss of
$3 million. She is +$2 million P&L on the year and views this short
EURUSD idea as a Type II trade. She has free capital of $5 million (max
loss $3m + YTD P&L $2m) and decides to risk 4% of free capital on the
trade. That is 4% of $5 million, which is $200,000. Then, she calculates:
Position size
= $ at risk / (entry point - stop loss level)
= 200,000 / (1.1951 - 1.1865)
= 23.2 million EURUSD
She rounds it off and thus plans to go short 23 million EURUSD at
1.1865. The market can easily handle both an entry and a stop loss for 23
million euros, so liquidity is not a constraint here. Her stop loss is far
enough away that she believes with high certainty that she will be able to
access 23 million EUR of liquidity at or before 1.1951, even on the worst
possible FOMC outcome.
She thinks about the catastrophic outcome (Fed announces a massive
new QE program) and runs through her memory of similar incidents in the
past. She is confident that she will not blow herself up on this trade, even if
the Fed fires a bazooka. There is no risk of ruin.
5. EXECUTION
Because the Fed meets in a few hours, and she wants the trade on before
the meeting, there is no chance to fine tune the execution. She places a
1.1865 limit order to sell and gets a fill within a minute or two. The moment
she is filled, she inputs a stop loss order to buy 23 million euros at 1.1951.
She flips open her journal and enters the details of the trade, along with
a 
quick 
note 
saying 
she 
is 
nervous 
because 
she 
doesn’t 
usually 
take
positions through major events. She feels proud that she is keeping the full
size (23 million euros) whereas in the past she would have cut back to 10
million euros through an event like this, just in case. Her confidence in her
own judgment of event and gap risk has grown.
Once the trade is on, Phoebe literally sits on her hands to keep herself
from trading. The FOMC meeting starts, the statement is released and
EURUSD flies around during Powell’s speech. The currency pair goes up
first (for no reason?) then crumples under the weight of the disappointing
outcome. Nothing new from the Fed = disappointed USD bears. Phoebe
watches with minimal emotion knowing this is just one of many, many
trades she will do this year. She updates her stop loss by adding a take profit
OCO
131
to buy at 1.1710. She leaves the office and bicycles home.
That night, Phoebe is awoken by her loud neighbor at 2:14 a.m. and she
breaks her own sleep through the night don’t check your phone rule by
checking her phone. She sees EURUSD is trading around 1.1741. She does
a quick fist pump and falls back to sleep. She dreams of waking up with
EURUSD at 1.1660. She dreams of giant cartoon dollar signs. She dreams
of more fist pumping.
But… Sad trombone. When she wakes up, she sees that EURUSD has
rallied back to 1.1801. By the time she leaves work the next day it’s all the
way back at 1.1850! GRRRRR. #disappointing.
Her conviction is not broken, just bent. She knows nothing’s changed
and her thesis remains valid and intact. The Fed wasn’t dovish, gold has not
broken the triangle, her stop loss hasn’t hit and her take profit is nowhere
close. So… She sticks to the plan. That is the whole point of reassessment
triggers. If none of them have triggered: hands off the keyboard!
Eventually, a few days later, despite what looks like USD-negative news
(Ruth Bader Ginsburg dies, triggering a possible constitutional crisis into
the US election) EURUSD dumps lower and her take profit hits.
She made $356,000 profit on the trade. EURUSD keeps going straight
down but she is smart and rational and doesn’t much care what happens in a
market after she gets out of a trade. Once you exit a trade, don’t sit there
saying woulda/coulda/shoulda if it keeps going. Nobody cares and neither
should you. Start thinking about new trade ideas.
Think forward. Not back.
The ability to flush past trades quickly from your mind is a useful skill
that will help keep you sane and productive. Like the tattoo says: No
Regerts.
There are lessons to be extracted from most trades, but you should
extract them quickly and move on. Write any impressions and lessons you
take away immediately in your NOTES column and then start thinking
about what’s next. Here, Phoebe writes:
Took a good-sized position through a major event. STUCK WITH THE
PLAN 
despite 
some 
scary 
whipsaw 
moves. 
Good 
process 
/ 
good
outcome.
Record your trade results at the appropriate level of detail so that you
can go back and analyze your trading once per month. By conducting post-
mortems just once a month (and not on each trade individually), you will
view your trading more holistically and will be less likely to get bogged
down in the emotional joy or pain of specific trades.
That 
completes 
this 
walkthrough 
of 
the 
short 
EURUSD 
trade 
of
September 2020. I hope it helps you understand my thought process and
provides enough granular detail so that the giant grid numbered 1 to 7
makes complete sense at this point.
This concludes Chapter 12 and our discussion of the specific steps that
go into finding, executing and monetizing trade ideas. The methodology
and mathematics you use to develop and optimize your trading process are
critical to your success as a professional trader.
Now, let’s head to Part Four and dig into the two most critical aspects of
trader mindset: Adaptation and attitude.
125. “Tight stop in rhodium” is not really a thing, but let’s not quibble over details in a
theoretical scenario, OK? :]
126. This is a reasonable belief, by the way. Most studies show the directional impact (half-
life) of economic data lasts five to ten minutes and then the price action after that is
random.
127. TWAP stands for time-weighted average price. VWAP stands for volume-weighted
average price. They are similar electronic strategies that take a large order and break it
up into smaller pieces then execute those smaller pieces over time. For example, a client
wants to buy 200 million USDCAD. That’s too big of a ticket to do all at once, so they
might send a TWAP to buy the 200 USDCAD over 200 minutes. Then, the computer will
buy 1 million USDCAD per minute for 200 minutes (3h20m) until the order is completed.
With a TWAP like this is, you reduce your footprint substantially because you spread the
order out over a long period. The problem is, you are taking a ton of market risk because
if you are a buyer, the market could go substantially higher in the 3 hours and 20 minutes
it takes to complete the trade. TWAPs and VWAPs are best used when markets are quiet
or when the user thinks the market is likely to move in their direction in the time allotted to
the TWAP (i.e., if you are a buyer and you think the price is going lower, a TWAP makes
sense).
128. For example, if your forecast was 1.05 when EURUSD was 1.08… Then EURUSD
rallies to 1.1900… Your 1.05 forecast looks a bit ridiculous now. You don’t want to have a
ridiculous forecast. So you stay bearish and move your forecast up to 1.1500. That’s how
forecasting works, generally. “Forecasts” go up and down with the market price.
129. Gold usually has a strong positive correlation to EURUSD and negative correlation to
the USD in general.
130. Stock market correlation to EURUSD is very erratic and regime sensitive but at this
point in time, the correlation was positive. So if stocks dumped, that would help my
EURUSD short position.
131. OCO means “One cancels the other”. If her stop gets done, the take profit will cancel,
and vice versa. This is a standard order type.
Y
PART FOUR
ADAPTATION AND ATTITUDE
ou can memorize every method and synthesize every strategy in this
book, but if your mindset is bad, your trading will be bad. As an
experienced trader and the author of two books on trading, I am intimately
familiar with what needs to be done to trade successfully. Still, I go through
periods of terrible performance and sometimes struggle under the weight of
bad attitude or mindset. Experience helps, but even wily veterans like me
are not immune to periods of poor adaptation, sluggish mental energy,
sloppy trading, and frustration. A rigid mindset, negative mental loops and
low energy will derail the best-laid plans and render even the most carefully
planned process, strategy, and tactics all but worthless. Without the right
attitude, there can be no sustained success in trading. The next chapter will
discuss the importance of adaptation and then we will close with Chapter 15
and some final thoughts on the importance of a healthy attitude.