T
CHAPTER 14
ADAPT OR DIE
Stay flexible and achieve long-term trading success
Adapt or perish, now as ever, is nature’s inexorable imperative.
H. G. WELLS
rading success can be fleeting or sustained. In this chapter, we discuss
the mindset and approach that will allow you to thrive and survive as a
trader over the course of years and then decades. Latching on to one style or
overcommitting to a specific methodology is not the answer. The answer is
adaptation and flexibility.
Excellent 
traders 
adapt 
to 
changes 
in 
market 
conditions 
and
microstructure over time. Alpha Traders recognized, for example, that trend
following was delivering lower and lower returns in the 1990s. Instead of
complaining 
and 
sticking 
with 
a 
failing 
strategy, 
they 
developed 
new
strategies and found new ways to trade in the 2000s.
When they saw algos enter the market in the mid-2000s, they did not
scream: “These algos are stupid! This is dumb!” Instead, they thought “OK,
this is a major change in market structure. How am I going to adapt? How
can I beat the algos? How do I make money in this new regime?”
No market regime lasts forever. Profitable strategies slowly disappear
because efficient markets discover them and crowd into them. If everyone is
making 
money 
trading 
correlation, 
you 
can 
bet 
it 
will 
attract 
more
participants. With more participants, profits shrink and strategies die.
You saw this with the high-frequency firms in the 2010s. Initially, high-
frequency traders were obscenely profitable across the board but as the
decade wore on, the arms race heated up (faster and smarter strategies) and
by the end of the 2010s most high-frequency strategies barely generated
enough returns to cover costs. A small group of highly adaptable firms
crowded out all the less nimble participants.
Study and adapt to ongoing changes in market structure.
Markets are in a constant state of evolution and good traders need to be
aware of this. The big structural changes happen every 5 to 7 years, and
these are of epic importance. However, probably more important are the
continual changes in the market that require adaptation in real time. A poker
player cannot expect to win in the long run by employing the same style
and strategy over and over. She must adapt as the game changes, and
respond in real-time as the metagame evolves.
Here are the most important markers of market structure, and how to
continually adapt to them.
ORDER VS. CHAOS
Markets alternate between order and chaos. Chaotic markets (often
called 
“fast 
markets”) 
generate 
temporary 
inefficiencies 
and 
outsized
opportunities but also tend to be short-lived, dangerous, and volatile. Order
and equilibrium are the market’s default state, but when chaos arrives, so
does disequilibrium. Dislocations present the opportunity for traders to
capture abnormal returns. Fast markets are high risk and high reward. Here
is a primer on trading fast markets.
Trading fast markets
In World War 1, there was a famous quote:
Modern 
warfare 
is 
months 
of 
boredom 
punctuated 
by 
moments 
of
extreme terror
132
.
I would paraphrase here and say modern trading is hours of boredom
punctuated by minutes of extreme terror. Things are quiet most of the time
but what matters is how you act and react when the guano hits the rotating
blades.
Crisis markets can provide the best opportunities for profit and the
greatest chance of ruin. Markets can lay dormant for months, then go
completely insane. A whole day can go by without excitement, then a
headline hits at 4:00PM and everything boots off.
In this section, I discuss fast markets and, more specifically, trading
during a crisis or extreme high volatility event. Trading crisis markets and
trading idiosyncratic bursts of extreme high volatility involve most of the
same skills and concepts.
It 
is 
usually 
easy 
to 
identify 
when 
a 
crisis 
is 
happening 
but 
for
simplicity, I would say any time the VIX is above 40, that’s a crisis market.
Looking at all days since 1990, the VIX closed above 40 just 2.2% of the
time. Check out Figure 14.1.
The vertical bars are all famous events in financial market history:
There is nothing special about the number 40, it’s just a level we rarely
see in the VIX.
When markets are in crisis, you need to trade differently. You need to be
faster and smarter. The challenge is to be both more careful and more
courageous at the same time. That is hard to balance! Fast markets are
scary, but they are the best times to make money, and to truly excel at
trading you need to crush fast markets.
Here are some tips to help you trade fast markets:
1. Correct position size is the difference between winning and losing
in a crisis. Too big is not OK; you might blow up or get fired. Too
small is not OK either; you need to seize the moment. Trading in fast
markets is when the most money gets made and the alpha traders
emerge.
I remember as volatility went to the moon in 2008, I changed my
normal trade size in USDMXN from 20 million to 3 million and I
was still amazed (scared) by the volatility of my P&L. If you can
size dynamically using forward-looking estimates of volatility, that is
ideal. Look at what options markets are pricing for 1-week volatility.
If you can’t do that, look at the average daily range over the past 5,
10 or 20 days.
As a rough logic check: for day traders, your stop loss should rarely
or never be closer than within 1/3 of a day’s range. For swing
traders, use one full day’s range. In other words, if you are trading
Apple common stock and the average daily range over the past 5, 10
and 20 days is $25: day traders’ stops should be $8 or more away
from the entry point and swing traders stops should be at least $25
away from entry. This should be a good starting point in most
markets.
If you are getting stopped out and chopped up every day, your stops
are too tight. A smaller position with a wider stop is necessary in
crisis markets but you need to be mindful that you don’t get so small
that you are trading meaningless positions that won’t move the
needle on your P&L. Yes, a lot of traders get blown up in a crisis, but
a lot just hide under the desk and reveal they are fundamentally
riskaverse actors who are not really fit to trade moving markets.
Striking the balance between too big and too small is vital in trading
and that balance can be the difference between crushing a crisis
period or getting crushed by it.
2. Keep an open mind and use your imagination. When COVID-19
hit in 2020, the market took oil from $65 to $50 as concerns about
consumer demand knocked a market that was already bulled up on
“cheap” energy stocks. Then the OPEC meeting in early March
crumbled and crude plummeted from $50 to $27 in a week. The
pressure from COVID-19 started the ball rolling then the Saudi
pledge to pump like crazy broke the back of the oil market. Anyone
watching oil go from $65 to $50 might have thought that was enough
of a move. “It’s a big move! I’m going the other way!” Not a good
plan. Eventually oil went to MINUS $40. This leads to the next point
about crisis markets.
3. In crisis markets, there is no such thing as overbought and
oversold. Don’t be the person that fades the whole bear market all
the way down. In a crisis, stocks can stay oversold for ages and then
get wildly overbought days later. You need to differentiate between
run-of-the-mill risk aversion and crisis-level risk aversion.
Most risky asset sell-offs are routine affairs that should be traded
using sentiment and overbought and oversold signals. When you see
put/ call ratios or the Greed & Fear Index or DSI or whatever
positioning indicators flashing a reversal signal, it is normally time
to pounce. But in a real economic or financial crisis, these signals are
useless.
For example, there is a simple metric I use to calculate overbought
and oversold which I call The Deviation, as discussed in Chapter 10.
It measures the difference between the current price of an asset and
the 100-HOUR moving average. As The Deviation gets to prior
extremes, it can give a nice mean reversion signal. Figure 14.2
shows an example using EURUSD.
You can see that The Deviation (the gray line in the bottom panel)
oscillated consistently between -80 pips and +80 pips
133
over the
course of five months and the overbought and oversold readings
offered up some decent reversal trades. Then, the COVID-19 crisis
hit and all hell broke loose. Now look at the same chart, adding
February 2020 (see Figure 14.3).
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
Chart courtesy of Refinitiv
As the crisis hit, the old measures of overbought were blown away
as EURUSD ripped higher.
4. Have courage. Insane markets are the reason you got into this
business. Don’t hide under your desk and hope for the tornado to
pass. Get involved and trade like you know you can. Don’t put
yourself in a position where you look back years later with regret. It
is better to try and fail than to forever wonder what kind of trader
you could have been.
By the time the 2008/2009 Global Financial Crisis was over, careers
were made and lost. Some of those lost were not people that blew up
but 
just 
traders 
that 
sat 
there 
doing 
nothing 
while 
their 
peers
extracted insane P&L out of thin air. Most of my best trading
memories are from crisis periods because these periods deliver fast,
volatile, and exciting markets.
Like 
any 
high 
stress 
profession 
(pro 
sports, 
jet 
fighter 
pilot,
professional poker…), it all comes down to how you respond in the
periods of extreme stress. Don’t be shy, get involved.
Recognize when your product transitions from normal trading to a fast
market and adjust your position size and trading strategies accordingly.
VOLATILIT Y
Fast markets are temporary, but changes in volatility can be more
permanent. Do you know how to size your risk correctly to reflect current
levels of volatility? Does your methodology respond systematically to
changes in volatility? It should. For example, higher volatility means you
should be trading smaller positions. Lower volatility means larger positions.
Bad traders always put on the same position size.
Many traders are not very good at adjusting their position size and risk
management strategies in response to volatility. If S&P futures are moving
1% per day, should you have the same position size or stop loss parameters
as if they are moving 3% per day? Clearly the answer is no. Actively adjust
your trading as volatility changes.
The easiest way to volatility-adjust (or vol-adjust, as most professionals
say) is to use a spreadsheet that determines position size and stop loss
parameters 
based 
on 
a 
volatility 
input. 
This 
does 
not 
have 
to 
be
complicated.
The figure you use for volatility adjustment will never be perfect
because we don’t know future volatility until it happens. That said, there are
many ways to estimate future volatility, and those estimates will generally
be accurate enough for our purposes. For example, Figure 14.4 shows the
VIX on a given day plotted against the percent range in the S&P futures the
day after.
You can see from the that plot that tomorrow’s range has a strong
relationship with today’s VIX. The relationship between VIX and S&P
ranges is not linear or normal as you see by the many outliers. The point is
not to be perfect here.
Here is a simplified but realistic example of how a trader can apply this
information and use good thinking to determine position size.
Frank trades only S&P futures and has $1,000,000 in his account. He
buys or sells on the open each day and risks 2% of his account ($20,000) on
each trade. He does not believe much in technical analysis so he simply sets
his stop loss and take profit this way:
STOP LOSS = (entry level) + (half of one average daily range) TAKE
PROFIT = 2 * stop loss
In other words, he risks half a day’s range to make one day’s range.
These parameters are not unreasonable and a simple methodology like this
will work in real life. The point of the example is to show that changes in
volatility should change your sizing and risk management parameters.
Frank looks at yesterday’s close in VIX and plugs it into a formula in
Excel. Figure 14.5 shows Frank’s risk in six different volatility regimes.
Assume index at 3500 so 1% = 35 points 35 points X $50 per contract = $1,750 Therefore
each 1% move costs $1,750 per contract
You can see here that as volatility rises, Frank takes smaller positions. If
he 
normally 
trades 
50 
e-mini 
contracts 
and 
market 
volatility 
falls
substantially, he will find the volatility of his P&L falls if he doesn’t adjust
the number of contracts he trades. In contrast, if he sticks with the same
number of contracts and the same P&L parameters as volatility rises, he
will get stopped out of good trades all the time before they have a chance to
work. All other things being equal, the probability that your trade hits its
stop loss level is a direct function of volatility.
I cannot emphasize this enough. Your position size should change as
volatility changes. This is the easiest and most automatic adaptation you can
make as markets change.
Rangebound vs. Trending
While markets can be volatile or quiet, and liquid or illiquid, they can
also be viewed through the lens of Rangebound vs. Trending. Rangebound
markets favor mean reversion strategies (buy low/sell high) while trending
markets favor breakout or “go with” strategies (buy high/sell higher). You
should always have a good sense of whether each market you trade is
trending, rangebound or neither. It is not always easy to tell.
It is usually straightforward to figure out whether a market has been
trending 
or 
rangebound. 
Start 
by 
looking 
at 
the 
chart 
and 
making 
a
subjective, common sense assessment. Sometimes a rangebound or trending
market is easy to identify at a glance. The harder part is identifying when
the market is transitioning from one to the other.
The simplest way to identify the range or trend status of a market (and a
possible change) is with technical analysis tools. I prefer simple technical
analysis to more esoteric methods, so here are a few simple approaches to
gauge 
whether 
a 
market 
is 
rangebound 
or 
trending 
(note 
that 
this
methodology is suited to short-term trading with a 1-hour to 5-day time
horizon).
1. Has the price made a new 20-day high or low in the last ten days? If
yes, it is trending that way; if no, rangebound.
2. Put a 100-HOUR and 200-HOUR moving average on an hourly chart
and look at this matrix:
You can substitute different moving averages depending on what you
find generally fits the trend of the product and time frame you trade.
If you are trading a longer time horizon you can also put three
moving averages on your daily chart. Say, 20, 50 and 100-day
moving averages. When they are in order it is a trend (20 > 50 > 100
= uptrend or 20 < 50 < 100 = downtrend). When they are not in
order, there is no trend or the trend is weak.
3. Eyeball it. This sounds kind of stupid but generally no advanced
mathematics degree is required to determine if a market is trending
or rangebound. Often a cursory glance at a chart (or your experience
sitting there trading the market for the past month or two) reveals the
type of regime.
It’s not difficult to figure out if you are in a range or trend regime, but
the challenge is to trade appropriately and to figure out when the regime is
changing. Assume trends and ranges are somewhat persistent, and wait for
evidence of a regime shift before altering your approach. It is better to wait
for a signal to tell you the regime has changed than to try to anticipate or
front run that regime change.
Volatility, liquidity, and trend are the three features you should always
be able to describe with confidence for each market you trade. You should
always know where volatility is relative to recent history, whether liquidity
is good, bad, or ugly and whether your market is in a trend or a range. If
you update your view of these three variables daily, you will adapt in real
time better than most of your competitors.
Here are some other ways to adapt to bigger macro changes in market
structure.
Realize no trading method works always and forever. No matter how
well your methodology works right now, there is a chance it won’t work
tomorrow. Be vigilant to changes in the market and monitor the success of
different trading strategies. For example, if you notice that breakout trading
has not been working for you over the past two years, spend some time
thinking 
about 
why. 
Has 
your 
methodology 
changed? 
Did 
you 
stop
following your own rules? Or… Are there new algorithms doing the same
thing you used to do, but faster? Are the basic breakout trading strategies
such 
common 
knowledge 
that 
they 
no 
longer 
provide 
any 
edge? 
If
everybody is doing the same thing, the odds are low that it will make
money.
William Faulkner’s advice to fiction writers was: “Kill your darlings.”
What he means is no matter how much you love some paragraph or
character or scene you’ve written, if it doesn’t work in the bigger picture:
cut it. The same applies to trading strategies. Don’t be the trader that is a
one-trick pony and can’t drop a strategy even though he knows (and the
P&L shows) that it doesn’t work. Do not fall in love with strategies that
made you money in the past. Kill your darlings.
I tell you this from experience because throughout my career, my bread
and butter was always trading lead/lag and correlation between currencies
and variables like oil, gold, interest rates and equities. This made me a pile
of money from 2003 to 2013 or so, but since then it has been much more
difficult to extract profit from this approach. Too many people know about
the methodology, too many blogs post about it and too many algos trade it.
In 2006, very few FX traders had live feeds for gold, oil, and single
name equities. Now every single trader does. In 2006 there might have been
a few expensive, PhD-built algorithms trading correlation, now you can
build a correlation trading algo in Excel in two hours and plug it directly
into the market through an online broker.
Efficient markets eventually prevail. Always.
It took me a few years to transition, but now I use correlation more
selectively and question the logic more aggressively before I employ it as a
tactical or strategic decision-making tool. My first assumption now is to
assume lead/lag will not work, and then see if I can find reasons why it
might work in this particular instance. In the past, my base assumption was
the opposite. I’d assume it would work and then try to think of reasons it
might not.
When there is a major change to the structure of markets, STOP
AND THINK. How is this going to impact me? Here are a few examples of
major structural changes that have changed markets in my lifetime.
1996
Currency market trading moves from voice brokers to electronic
brokers.
2001
US stock markets stop trading in fractions and trade in decimals
instead.
2002 
-
2005
Algorithmic trading becomes an important part of most markets.
2010 
-
2015
Flash 
crashes 
become 
an 
important 
liquidity 
risk 
in 
many
markets.
Octobe
r 2019
Free stock trading for retail traders triggers several euphoric
“runnings of the bulls” in US stocks.
I believe that adaptation is one of the keys to survival and professional
longevity in almost every industry. A good athlete adapts as her sport
changes, just like a good trader adapts as markets change. Be thoughtful
about the current environment, how it is changing and how it might change
in the future. Think about how you can adapt your trading to stay ahead.
As Billy Beane says to the aging baseball scout in Moneyball, “Adapt or
die.”
This all circles back to the discussion near the start of the book where I
discussed conscientiousness and the growth mindset. Good traders adapt
because they are thoughtful about adaptation and employ it as a conscious
strategy in their trading. But they are also more likely to have a growth
mindset in life, too. Keep adding new knowledge on the existing base and
never say things like “I’m not good at that” or “I don’t trade that kind of
market”. The market won’t always be in your favorite regime. Identify and
trade the reality, not the ideal.
Since the market is a huge, adaptive system, you need to constantly
adapt to it. As the Red Queen in Through the Looking-Glass (Lewis Carroll)
says:
Now, here, you see, it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the
same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you must run at least
twice as fast as that!
You need to work twice as hard as everyone else if you want to get
ahead. Understand the market regime and fit your trading strategy to that
regime. Don’t embrace a trading style and hope the market complies with it.
“Trading 
style” 
should 
describe 
your 
time-horizon, 
risk 
management
approach and preferred analysis methodology, it should not describe the
specific strategies you prefer. Specific strategies work in specific market
regimes and you need to adapt your overall style to the regime.
Like most important trading behaviors, adaptation is easy to understand,
but hard to continually execute successfully. It is especially difficult to give
up particular strategies that worked for many years. Think about the areas
where you have been slow to adapt, and how you can catch up. Think about
how your market has changed, or is changing. And change with it.
That’s it for our discussion of adaptation. You are now more than 91%
done this book. In the final chapter, I will give you some parting thoughts
on healthy mindset and positive thinking. Your attitude and mindset will
determine some part of your success and help you bounce back when the
market pummels you into submission now and then.
132. 
https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/103851/where-does-the-phrase-of-
boredom-punctu-ated-by-moments-of-terror-come-from
133. See dark, horizontal lines. Note: 80 pips = 0.0080