I
CHAPTER 15
THANK GOD IT’S MONDAY!
It is impossible to succeed without the right attitude
n this chapter, I offer some final thoughts on how proactive goal setting,
selfawareness, and attitude shape our trading experience and impact
trading success. Before we dive in, let’s start with a Chinese fable.
There was once a farmer in ancient China who owned a horse. “You are
so lucky!” his neighbors told him, “to have a horse to pull the cart for you.”
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
One day the farmer forgot to latch the gate and his horse bolted. “Oh no!
This is terrible news!” his neighbors cried. “Such terrible misfortune!”
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
A few days later the horse returned, bringing with it six wild horses. “How
fantastic! You are so lucky,” his neighbors told him. “Now you are rich!”
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
The next week, the farmer’s son was breaking in one of the wild horses
when he fell off and broke his leg. “Oh no!” the neighbors cried, “such bad
luck!”
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
The next day soldiers came and took away all the young men to fight in
the war. The farmer’s son was left behind due to his injury. “You are so
lucky!” his neighbors cried.
“Maybe,” the farmer replied.
I like this story because it is a great reminder that we never know how
the movie is going to end. Your life is a big, long story and everything that
happens along the way is driven by six heaping spoonfuls of variance.
Don’t get too triggered by any specific short-term outcome.
This chapter explains what it takes to find and maintain a healthy
mindset over many years of trading. It is pretty easy to come in to work all
revved up when you’re 23 years old and in year two of your trading career.
But how do you find a state of mind that will let you trade for ten, twenty or
even thirty years? What kind of mindset do you need to keep trading well
into your 40s?
In this Chapter, I am going to once again ask you to complete a few
quick exercises. It is easy to be lazy and just skim over exercises in books
like this. Please don’t. When you passively absorb information from a book
it is so, soooo different from when you engage with questions, stop to think,
write things down, and actively and honestly assess your strengths and
weaknesses.
Self-Evaluation
Introspection can feel a bit cheesy at times and it makes some people
uncomfortable. I know I used to gag when this sort of stuff came up in
business school. Please, suspend your cynicism. This first exercise will take
less than 10 minutes.
Professionals who self-evaluate,
set specific goals, and create clear action
plans outperform those who do not.
The first exercise is to complete a super-quick self-evaluation. Feel free
to write directly in the book
134
. To give you a bit of inspiration and
momentum, I have completed the self-evaluation myself, just now. I plan to
follow through on the results. Below my responses, you’ll find blank boxes
for you to complete.
Now your turn:
People in the business world spend a lot of time working on their
weaknesses. Personally, I think working on strengths often has more value.
Not to say you ignore your weaknesses, just make sure you keep levelling
up your strengths, too.
It’s a bit like when you coach kids in a sport. If you spend all your time
focused 
on 
the 
weakest 
players, 
because 
they 
tend 
to 
demand 
more
attention, you neglect the athletes with all the upside. That’s clearly not
good for the best players but it’s also just generally bad for the team overall.
As I mentioned in Chapter 5, I am a big fan of setting just one or two
goals, no more. Look at the two goals you wrote in the boxes above and put
reminders in your calendar for three months and six months from now. Did
you complete both goals in the six months allotted?
If you didn’t fill in the assessment, go back and do it now. If you choose
not to, read this angry footnote instead
135
. Now let’s cover a few more facets
of quality trading mindset.
Passion
What is your purpose when it comes to trading? Organizations have
mission statements that help them stay on a path towards success. What is
your mission statement? Why do you trade? Write a simple statement of
purpose. Here’s mine:
Come in to work energized and positive. Wait for opportunity then trade
as aggressively as possible within clear, rule-based risk limits. Write
something interesting every day. Make clients happy. Avoid random, low
EV trades.
A simple statement of purpose can serve as a compass when you are
feeling lost. Print it out and stick it to your desk. Whether you are crushing
it, sucking wind or something in between, circle back to the statement and
ask yourself: “Am I on track?”
Now stop reading and write your statement of purpose. Don’t come
back until you’re done.
Notice that there is nothing in my mission statement about making
money. It is more about process and attitude. If I wrote a mission statement
when I was 25, money would have been front and center. I am not going to
pooh pooh money as a motivation. It is a great motivator! A bit later, I
discuss how money was my number one motivator when I entered the
business of trading. But now, it is way down the list.
Trading pays well if you are good at it. It’s an outcome that derives
from a process. Focus on the process and let the money take care of itself.
The longer you trade, the more you will find yourself focused on becoming
the best possible trader and the less you will focus on how much money
you’re going to make. The time to worry about compensation is when you
are 
negotiating 
an 
employment 
contract. 
Negotiate 
the 
most 
lucrative
contract you can, then be glad you are employed in one of the most fun jobs
in the world, and get to work.
I worked at a day trading shop called SwiftTrade in the late 1990s. They
had a huge banner across one wall that read: “Thank God It’s Monday!“ If
you don’t feel this excited about trading most of the time, that’s a bad sign.
The role of emotions in trading
We discussed emotions in Chapter 6 and here I give you a few more
thoughts. Emotions can cloud judgment and hurt your trading behavior
when extreme, but overall, I don’t think there is anything wrong with
emotions in trading. When you watch elite athletes perform, you see plenty
of emotion and yet their performance is at the highest level. The important
thing is to not ignore or repress your emotions. Observe and understand
them.
Don’t suppress your emotions, observe and understand them.
Emotions are not bad. You do not need to be a robot. In fact, you need
to be something that robots are not: self-aware.
When you are too high, you get sloppy and overconfident. When you
are too low, you lose confidence. Therefore, you need to be aware of these
emotions and include them in your decision-making. For example, you
might say:
“I just high-fived the trader next to me because we both jumped on the
same headline and are hugely in the money. That is clearly a sign I am
euphoric. I am going to cut half my position. Actually, I’m going to take
profit on the whole thing.”
Or…
“I have a lump in my throat because I am so angry about the terrible fill
that bank just gave me. And now I get a voice mail saying my sprinkler
system repair is going to cost $3,400? Grrr. My entry point on this trade
sucks and I can barely think straight…” Pauses and moves outside his body
to observe himself and his raging thoughts… “Shoot. I really can’t think
straight right now. I still like this position but given my emotional state I am
better off cutting it in half and moving my stop farther away to give it some
room to breathe. And to give myself a chance to breathe.”
This is how good self-awareness and metacognition work. When you
can think about how you are thinking, you move to the next level of trading
awesomeness because you will start to see errors happen in real time and
you will gain the ability to course-correct before a faulty decision hurts you.
Also note that the trader in the second quote is using time delay, a
proven strategy to avoid the potentially negative affect of emotions on
decision making. Time delay is the simplest and most effective way to
ensure 
an 
emotion 
will 
not 
impact 
a 
decision. 
Full-blown 
emotions
naturally dissipate over time and physiological responses fade. The best
way to stop strong emotions from leading to poor decisions is to simply
avoid making decisions when you are in a strong emotional state.
If you are feeling super high or super low, square up and go for a walk.
Take a moment to think back over the last week. What emotions have
you felt while trading? How strong were these emotions? List physiological
and behavioral markers that you can readily identify. For example: my face
gets flushed and hot when I am near or through my daily stop loss limit. I
feel like singing and joking around more when I am up huge on the day. I
feel kind of sick when I am in the process of breaking one of my own rules,
especially with regard to position size or P&L tolerance.
Think about your physiology and behavior throughout every day and
take note of irregularities.
Commitment, engagement, and hard work
Nobody succeeds in trading by doing it half-assed. You need to do the
work. If you are too tired to do the work, get some sleep. Again, if you can’t
bring yourself to complete the few 5 or 10-minute exercises in this book,
you are probably not ready to commit to maximum trading success. Get
motivated.
In trading, hard work means you must work to become an expert in
the 
products 
or 
markets 
you 
trade. 
You 
cannot 
become 
an 
expert
overnight; that is why I strongly advise new traders to pick a short list of
products to trade (one particular currency pair, a single commodity, or
maybe 3 to 5 different single name stocks in the same industry) and go as
deep as possible on those products.
Healthy body leads to healthy mindset
I know you know this but I’m going to say it anyway: you can never
reach peak mental performance without proper exercise. Sluggish body =
sluggish mind. Find a way to eliminate the decision-making process when it
comes to working out, and make it a regular habit that is not a choice or
option. The easiest way to do this is to work out every single day, even if
it’s just for 20 or 30 minutes.
Soon, you will find that if you don’t work out, you feel bad and you
want to get back in the gym. Rely as little as possible on willpower and as
much as possible on the power of habit.
Superstitions
In a book about rational trading, the section on superstition should just
be three words, like: superstitions are dumb.
There, done.
The thing is, even a person who takes a placebo knowing it is a placebo
still derives some benefit from it! The human mind is strange and complex.
If you are afraid of the number 13, why mess with it? It might put you off
your game. Personally, I avoid transacting in amounts of 13, even though I
know technically it’s not rational because I believe there is a non-zero
possibility my subconscious views it as bad luck and this subconscious
belief could infect my trading or confidence.
Nils Bohr, the famous atomic scientist, had a horseshoe hung above his
office door. Many viewed this as surprising or confusing as they viewed
Bohr as a scientist and a man of logic. When asked, “Do you, a Nobel Prize
winning 
scientist, 
believe 
in 
such 
superstitions 
as 
the 
magic 
of 
a
horseshoe?” His response was:
“Of course not, but I understand it’s lucky whether you believe in it or not.”
This is similar to the concept of Pascal’s Wager. Pascal said that no
matter how tiny the odds that God actually exists, it is still worth believing
in God given the huge upside (eternal life in heaven) versus the downside (a
few earthly sacrifices).
Anyway, I just included this bit about superstition in case you were
wondering why a book about rational thinking has no Chapter 13.
Forgive yourself
Don’t be too hard on yourself. Look at your failures as objectively as
possible. Analyze them but don’t waste your time smashing your head
against the keyboard. First of all, the sun will always come up tomorrow, no
matter how badly you traded today. After a big failure you should:
Step away. Calm down. Analyze. Extract any lessons
(often, there are none!) Move on. Get ready for tomorrow.
Every trade is a spoonful of water in a huge ocean. Flush your mind
quickly after a failure and come in each day with thoughts like this in your
mind: “Today is a new day. All I can do is work hard and do my best.”
Even the Gods of Trading experience huge failures. Here’s a passage
from Stan Druckenmiller’s famous speech at the Lost Tree Club in 2015. In
this excerpt, he recalls the devastating moment in 2000 when he paid the
ding dong highs for size at the peak of the dotcom bubble.
So, like, around March, I could feel it coming. I had to play. I couldn’t help
myself. And three times during the same week I pick up a – don’t do it.
Don’t do it. Anyway, I pick up the phone finally. I think I missed the top by
an hour. I bought $6 billion worth of tech stocks and in six weeks I had left
Soros and I had lost $3 billion in that one play.
You ask me what I learned. I didn’t learn anything. I already knew that I
wasn’t supposed to do that. I was just an emotional basket case and
couldn’t help myself. So, maybe I learned not to do it again. But I already
knew that.
You are just like Stan Druckenmiller; you are human. You will make
mistakes. That’s OK. Hitting a baseball in the major leagues is similar to
trading in that there is a high expected failure rate baked in to the process. A
hall of fame hitter will get on base maybe 35% of the time. The other 65%
of the time, he fails.
Billy Beane, the Oakland Athletics general manager immortalized in the
book and movie “Moneyball”, was asked why Lenny Dykstra succeeded in
baseball while he did not. Lenny was an inferior athlete to Billy and was
drafted much lower. Beane replied:
Lenny was so perfectly designed, emotionally, to play the game of
baseball. He was able to instantly forget any failure and draw strength
from every success. He had no concept of failure. And he had no idea
where he was. And I was the opposite.
Lenny understood, whether subconsciously or not, that failure is part of
the game. You strike out; you move on. You hit a home run. You move on.
Each at bat is a new test. Just like in trading. Each day is a new test.
This anonymous quote nicely sums up the inevitability of mistakes in
trading:
“Good judgment comes from experience. And experience comes from
bad judgment.”
Find your mantra
A mantra is something we repeat over and over out loud or in our heads.
Mantras can be positive or negative. For example, an insecure person’s
mantra might be “I’m too fat. I’m too ugly.” While a positive mantra might
be something like “I can succeed if I just try hard every day.” Develop your
own mantra and say it over and over. Use it to drown out negative thoughts.
My mantra is “stick to the plan”.
P.S., I still don’t always stick to the plan.
Think about your trading history
The strongest and most solid legs are formed by personal experiences that
we have a lot of emotion attached to because they were painful or
pleasurable experiences.
TONY ROBBINS
If you have been trading for more than a few years… Think about how
your trading history and experience to date influence your current approach.
If you started in a highly volatile year, are you more comfortable trading
breakouts and volatile markets? If your best year was 2008, are you always
hoping for a bear market? If you started in a less-volatile period, do you
favor mean reversion? And so on.
Research shows that salient memories are often an important driver of
future behavior. Think about your salient trading memories and how they
might influence you now. I sometimes find myself thinking, “I made so
much money with this strategy in the past, it’s really hard to give it up.”
Instead of dumping a losing strategy that I know doesn’t work anymore, I
stick with it like you stick with that old friend who is now a bad influence
and always borrows money from you but never pays it back.
You can go pretty deep into the psychology and dig into traumatic or
salient moments from your past and link them to current behaviors. I’m not
qualified to talk about that, plus I find it’s often a bit of a stretch when I
read about connecting (for example) that salient memory of being bullied in
the playground (or whatever) to your current trading leaks. Do whatever
works for you.
A true professional works hard and does their best each day, even if
they don’t feel like it.
Trading requires endurance and a commitment to work hard every day.
When I get sloppy or lazy, I pay the price. There is someone else out there
willing to do the work every single day and they want the same money you
want. The global alpha pie is a certain size and the competition for slices
(and crumbs!) is epic.
When I’m finding things hard, I narrow my focus to the current day. I
think about what doing a good job today means, and I try not to think about
the mediumor long-term. The long-term is just a whole bunch of single days
added together and what you do in each of those individual days determines
where you end up in the long run. I am often surprised by how some
random thing I did five years ago or random person I made an effort to
connect with three years ago comes back to help me.
The game of life is incredibly long. Make each turn count.
Think about your personal history
Think about your history (childhood and young adult years especially)
and how it might influence your trading. For example: if your dad was an
electrician and your mom was an entrepreneur… Your subconscious might
have trouble with the idea that in trading you magically pull money out of
thin air without any traditional hard work and without producing or creating
anything.
Many traders from blue-collar families struggle with this when they first
find success. It is a strange and sometimes surreal feeling to generate huge
income without producing anything. Clearly trading is not the only job
where this is the case, but the sometimes gigantic and sudden income
stream from trading make it different from most other pursuits.
I grew up in a lower middle-class family, in the second house down
from the top in this row of five attached houses:
Photo circa 1980-something, courtesy of the Donnelly Archives
We had enough money to live normally and not worry about cash but
when there was a school trip to Europe or whatever… No chance. There
was no extra money, just the minimum required amount.
Meanwhile, my godparents successfully created and sold an advertising
agency and retired when they were 40 years old. They had one child and to
keep her company (she was around my age), they used to take me on their
two-week trips to the Caribbean every March. I got to see a whole different
world of opportunity and awesomeness. “I want that!” I thought.
A fridge with a button you can press to get water!??! A full-sized
basketball hoop with fiberglass backboard, right on your driveway? I want
that!
That goal (getting out of suburban Ottawa and into something exciting
and new) had a huge influence on my perception of money as a giver of
freedom and novelty, and kept the fire in my belly through late high school
and university.
My high school years were the days of Gordon Gekko and Wall Street
(the movie) and after I read Liar’s Poker cover to cover at age 15, I knew
what I wanted to do. My one and only goal was to become a trader on Wall
Street
136
. I had a crystal-clear and laser-focused motivation: money. That
singular focus was good.
However, as I matured and built a decent life for myself and my family,
money became less important. There is a minimum level everyone must
reach before they can stop worrying about money. Above that amount, the
correlation between money and happiness usually flatlines. The naïve and
singleminded pursuit of a high-paying job when I was young made my life
pretty simple. I had one clear goal and all I had to do was work towards it.
The weird thing about dreams though, is that once you achieve them, there
is a hole where that dream once was.
So for many, including me, achieving a dream can produce a fleeting
sense of elation followed by a deeper existential disorientation as the thing
that was pushing you forward all those years no longer has any power. A
feeling of: now what?
By the time I hit my 30s and realized that any increase in money would
not give me new freedoms or happiness, I hit a bit of an existential wall. It
was not as clear or obvious what my motivation was. I still sometimes have
tricky thoughts about what I’m doing here still trading at age 47 when there
are so many other interesting things to do out there in the world. My early-
life focus on money meant I needed to find new reasons to trade as I got
older.
After looking inward and thinking about things for a few years, I
developed a new set of motivations.
1. I love trading. I enjoy going to work every day. Going in to an office
where I enjoy what I do, I like the people I work with, and I respect
the management I report to, have been the most important drivers of
my happiness over the years. The constantly evolving macro picture
and 
the 
ever-changing 
market 
regimes 
and 
nearly 
impossibly
complicated process of trying to solve the market is enjoyable. If you
enjoy coming into work each day, the money doesn’t matter as much.
No job is fun all the time, but if trading isn’t fun most of the
time, you’re not doing it right.
2. I want to publish my writing. One of my favorite things to do is write
about finance and markets. Working at a bank and writing AM/FX
every 
day 
is 
the 
ideal 
platform 
to 
do 
that. Again, 
intellectual
stimulation before money.
3. I want to maintain my current level of monetary success but do not
really aspire to anything more than what I have now, financially. The
idea of getting super rich does not excite me. Working as a trader at a
bank is a high-paying job that involves skills that most people don’t
have. I should just be thankful and keep trading until the day they tap
me on the shoulder or the day I don’t love it anymore. Until then, I
am grateful for the job I have, and I don’t need to dream of making
5X what I’m making now because I know that will not make me
happier.
Everyone has a money vs. happiness curve. Think about the shape of
yours. There is a point for everyone (except sociopaths) where more money
will not deliver more happiness. The shape of your curve will depend on
where you live, how many kids you have, how you grew up, your values,
your ambition and your opportunity set. Don’t be one of those people that
just always wants more. That will put you on a treadmill, running towards
an impossible-to-reach goal. Be thoughtful about what kind of money you
need to do what you want to do and aim there. Don’t keep moving the
goalposts or you will never be happy. Life is not a video game.
Think about your own upbringing, how you value money (or don’t) and
how that will influence your motivation. More money is not always the
answer. In fact, it usually is not the answer unless you are struggling to pay
rent or cannot afford to pursue specific, costly passions like travel or
owning a boat.
Many people believe that success leads to money and money leads to
happiness. I think that chain of causality is mostly wrong. In real life, if you
are happy (i.e., you enjoy coming in to work each day, are passionate about
what you do, and have a positive attitude) you will succeed and in trading,
an inevitable output of that process will be a whole bunch of money.
The number one reason to trade is that you love trading.
FINAL MINDSET ADVICE: SPEED ROUND
Don’t get too high or too low, don’t be an asshole, don’t burn bridges,
don’t sing on the desk when you are making money. Arrive on time. Do the
work. Enjoy yourself. Treat the gate keepers and the back office and support
staff with respect. Don’t bitch about algos. Turn off your phone at night.
Take cold showers. Take responsibility for everything that happens to you.
Learn about the size of the universe. Lift weights. Watch less TV. Or no TV.
Have outside interests. Don’t look back in anger. Fast, cheap, or good, pick
two. Don’t talk about trades you missed. Always go to the funeral. If you
have heartburn, don’t take a pill to fix it, figure out what foods are causing
it and stop eating them. Drink more water, especially if you are prone to
headaches. Be open and transparent. In business relationships, give more
than you take. If it comes down to luck, you are doing it wrong. Smile at
yourself in the mirror. Be nice. Call your mom.
134. Unless it’s not yours.
135. Are you serious about becoming a better trader? If you want to be good at something,
you have to put in the work. You have invested hours into reading this book. Take 10 or
15 minutes to look inward. :]
136. Not exactly true as I wanted most to be a major league infielder. But that was more of a
dream than a real goal. I didn’t work hard enough or lift weights or do the things
necessary to become a professional baseball player. On the other hand, I did do
everything possible to become a trader. There is some overlap between pro athlete and
professional trader in terms of the stress and excitement. In fact, I still remember a
Lehman Brothers recruitment brochure from 1993 that featured this Q&A with a senior
trader: “Q: Why did you decide to work at Lehman Brothers? A: Because I wasn’t good
enough to play for the New York Yankees.” Man, the 1990s were amazing.
I
CONCLUSION
hope you found this book educational and also not boring. I hope that I
improved 
your 
overall 
knowledge 
of 
markets 
and 
gave 
you 
some
interesting and random insights about trading, mathematics, and life. And I
hope you can extract some useful information from this book and use that
information to make more money and to achieve whatever goals you have
set for yourself. If you take nothing else from this book, remember these six
points:
The first rule of trading is: Don’t blow up.
To succeed in trading, you must be rational, and you need to put in the
work.
It’s OK to be wrong.
Variance is part of trading. Deal with it.
There is no single trading methodology that will work always and
forever.
Trading should be fun (most of the time).
Now before you go, please complete one final assignment. Flip back to
the questionnaire from Chapter 1. Pick a few categories where you want to
make a change, and draw small arrows from the current box to the box
where you would like to be. Be realistic. If you are generally risk averse
and have trouble committing to full sized positions, don’t target a 10 in risk
appetite. Try moving from 5 to 7 first.
You don’t need to change on every metric. This is about incremental
improvement. Pick traits where you think a change will make you a better
trader. If you are comfortable with your discipline score at 8 and think there
is not much value trying to change it: leave it. You want to find two or three
traits at most, and think about how to move the needle on them.
What is the date today? Go get your phone and put a reminder in for this
date, one year from now. It should read: “Redo questionnaire in Donnelly’s
Alpha Trader book”. Come back to this book once per year on this date for
as long as you are trading and do the survey again. Keep improving every
month and every year. You can change, it just takes time. Play a long game.
Keep pushing yourself. Do not give up, no matter how hard things get.
I almost gave up. A few times.
In December 2007, I was beaten down and frustrated. It was my worst
trading year ever and it looked like I might finish negative on the year.
When you work in a market making seat at a bank, it is fairly uncommon to
have a down year and I was proud of never having finished in the red. After
this long and frustrating period, all I wanted to do was finish the year in the
black. Even by $1.
Every time I got close to zero P&L, I would lose money again. By
midNovember, I had gone from down $2.5 million back to $250,000 in the
black and was thinking about making one last push to finish with a number
that might be at least respectable. I finally felt mildly optimistic for the first
time 
in 
ages, 
after 
almost 
an 
entire 
year 
battling 
repeated 
cycles 
of
frustration and despair.
Then, a brutal turn. A salesman slinked over to me with his tail between
his legs and told me there was an out trade in my book. Negative $700,000.
That put me back to minus $450,000 with less than two months in the year.
Gross. I grinded out the next few weeks and was finally up tiny YTD, about
$200k, on the very last day of the year.
At 10 a.m., our toughest client called and wished me a happy new year
by ripping my face off to the tune of $600,000. Despite what felt like a
heroic effort to the very last day, I ended the year in the red.
I’m done with this. I am the worst trader in the world.
I e-mailed my wife: “This is impossible. I don’t think I can do it
anymore.”
I walked out of the office miserable that day. But the sun came up on
January 1. Slowly, the frustration dissipated a bit, and the prospect of a new
year gave me some hope. Despite that exhausting and disappointing year, I
hung on and kept going.
Twelve months later, I was staring at my best year ever: I made more
than $50 million of trading profits in 2008. Sometimes the thing is just to
keep going. As Joe Mauro said in his classic 2016 e-mail to the Goldman
Sachs analyst class: “Keep running”
137
.
Thanks for taking the time to read my book. I really appreciate it. Please
feel free to reach out with feedback, criticism, or questions. You can follow
me on Twitter (@donnelly_brent) and LinkedIn.
I plan to publish future updates, fresh trading stories and new lessons,
tactics and strategies, exclusively for readers of Alpha Trader. If you are
interested, please sign up at brentdonnelly.com.
137. https://www.businessinsider.com/goldman-sachs-partner-email-2016-3#-4
B
ONE LAST STORY BEFORE YOU GO
efore I sign off, I want to take you on one last trip down memory lane.
Back to the year 2000, around the time of Napster and Limp Bizkit and
the hanging chad. The moment, some would argue, American optimism
peaked. A time before the dotcom crash and before 9/11 and the Global
Financial Crisis and waaaaay before COVID-19. A time when the world
was less cynical and bull markets were much loved and quantitative easing
was 
a 
weird 
experimental 
form 
of 
monetary 
policy 
that 
only 
PhD
economists knew or cared about.
Note: 
This 
story 
is 
written 
from 
the 
point 
of 
view 
of 
my 
wildly
overconfident, 27-year-old self
JULY 26, 2000
It’s 3:05 p.m.
I am sitting at my workstation in a 50-person day trading operation in
Toronto, Canada. I don’t have much risk on. Waiting for the 4 p.m. close.
A few months ago, in March 2000, the NASDAQ topped out just above
5,000 then crashed to 3,200. Everyone thought the tech bubble had gone
permanently Tango Uniform. People thought: “Finally, game over.”
But not so fast. Now it’s summer and we’re trading back above 4,000,
the Fed’s cutting rates and new all-time highs are within reach.
About a year ago, I deposited my entire net worth ($25,000) into a day
trading account. Now I’m running $350,000+. And it is worth noting this
factors in a fair number of purchases including a nice library of PS2 games,
two years of rent in downtown Toronto, a sweet-ass Sony 200-disc CD
player and a black 1996 BMW M3.
Many days I bail out of here by 2 p.m. because there isn’t much trading
to do after lunch, but today I’m here for the close. It could be a big one.
JDS Uniphase, a Canadian optical networking stock and internet darling,
(NASDAQ: JDSU) will be added to the S&P 500 today. When a stock is
added to an index, it creates a ton of demand for the stock because many
funds simply track the indexes and so they need to buy the stock that’s
added in order to accurately mirror the index. The JDSU inclusion was
announced a few weeks ago and there has been some excitement about it.
Today is the day.
The indexers are not particularly smart about how they add the stock.
They just buy it at the end of the day. This leads to a situation where large
S&P 500 adds create nearly impossible-to-fill demand for a stock in the
closing moments of trading on the day the stock is added. Stocks close at
4:00:00 p.m.
I own 800 shares of JDSU, a decent but not super aggressive position
size. Risking $4/share ($3,200 maximum loss or just under 1% of my
capital).
It’s 3:56 p.m.
To give you a sense of the hysteria around JDSU and Canadian tech
darlings at that time… From October 1999 to March 2000, JDSU Uniphase
stock rallied 600%, splitting two-for-one three times in just six months.
Meanwhile, Nortel Networks, another Canadian technology favorite,
represented 35% of the entire Toronto Stock Exchange market capitalization
in July 2000. That’s right. One Canadian company accounted for 35% of the
Canadian 
stock 
market, 
dwarfing 
the 
Big 
Six 
banks 
and 
the 
hugely-
profitable Western Canadian oil companies.
It’s 3:57 p.m.
JDSU is trading around $132 and everyone in the day trading office
(around 50 traders) owns some. I’m nervous because when everyone knows
something in markets, it’s usually wrong. The idea is to know something
before everyone else, and then get out once everyone knows it. But I don’t
want to miss the last push higher as every index fund in the world comes in
to hoover JDSU.
It’s 3:58 p.m.
The stock rallies to $136.50. I tap a few buttons and I’m out. No way
am I holding on until exactly 4 p.m. It’s way too dangerous. Sometimes
with these index adds, too many people are positioned in advance and the
buying from indexers isn’t big enough to offset all the day traders trying to
take profit so the price crashes right at 4 o’clock.
I am satisfied with the profits. I bought 500 shares at $129 about an
hour ago and sold them at $136.50 for a profit of $3,750 minus brokerage.
Brokerage is tiny so that’s pretty much $3,750 in my pocket. Traders here
keep 100% of P&L after brokerage fees. I settle into my seat to watch the
last two minutes of fireworks. I feel like I should have a bucket of popcorn
in my lap for this.
It’s 3:58:40 p.m.
Tension builds in the room. There is always a ton of activity at the close,
even when there is no index add, so with the JDSU thing happening,
everyone is still here and everyone is locked and loaded for any last second
opportunities. The greediest JDSU holders hope for one last push higher.
Our trading screen looks something like Figure QS.1. This is a sample
showing Cisco Systems (NASDAQ: CSCO), not the JDSU window.
This is called the NASDAQ Level 2 screen and it shows all the buyers
on the left and sellers on the right. MMID means “Market Maker ID”, BID
is the price someone is willing to buy, SIZE is the number of shares (in
100s). Ask is the price someone is willing to sell. If the bid price matches an
ask price, they match and the buyer transacts with the seller: a trade
happens and both prices disappear. For reasons that I hope are obvious, the
BID price is always lower than the ASK price.
The MMIDs indicate different banks and electronic communication
networks (ECNs, or brokers) that place orders. For example, JPMS is JP
Morgan, BOFA is Bank of America, LEHM is Lehman Brothers. ARCA,
ISB, SIZE and BTRD are examples of ECN prices. ECNs are used by day
traders and banks to show liquidity and execute in the market.
Our setup trades mostly with ISB, BTRD and ARCA. We trade using
hot buttons assigned to the function keys. You set up your default number of
shares (mine is set to 1,000) and the F keys on the left are F1: Sell on ISB,
F2: Sell on BTRD, F3: Sell on ARCA. Then to buy you press F6 F7 and F8.
You can operate these keys very quickly because there is no confirm dialog.
You press F1 and you have instantly sold 1,000 shares of whatever stock
window you are on at the best BID available on ISB.
It’s 3:58:50 p.m.
I am relaxed, watching the prices spin higher and lower in the JDSU
window. My PC can barely keep up with the number of quotes and trades
being jammed down the pipe but somehow it manages and the information
continues to flow smoothly and impossibly fast. Then I notice something
weird. JDSU is $141 bid on ISB. And $140 ASK on ARCA. Impossible.
And it’s not just there for a microsecond. It’s just sitting there.
“Guys, you see this?”
Everyone is in the zone, doing their own thing. Nobody has noticed the
discrepancy.
I tap F1 and then F8 in succession, selling 1,000 shares at $141 and
buying them back at $140 in less than a second. My P&L clicks $1,000
higher. I do it five more times in about 5 seconds. Still believing this is
probably too good to be true, I check my P&L. This must be a mindfart
right? Wrong. My P&L is $5,000 higher than it was before I made the
keystrokes. “Dude! ARBITRAAAGGGGGE!”
I yell out, to no one in particular (channeling the 1994 Beastie Boys
song: Sabotage). Then I go nuts on the keyboard. F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8
F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 as fast as I possibly
can. Like a kid playing the 1980s coin-op video game “Track and Field”.
I pause for breath and check my P&L. Up another $12,000 in about 12
seconds. The ISB and ARCA feeds both reset at 4:00:00 because the market
makers drop out at the official close. I can only do this arbitrage ‘til 4.
It’s 3:59:35 p.m.
F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8
F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1 F8 F1
F8 F1 F8
24 more times I press the F1 to F8 combo and my P&L jumps another
$24,000 in less than 30 seconds.
My final P&L that day is +$48,500, the best day anyone had ever
realized in that office to that point. Everyone gathers around my desk. My
heart is pounding, vision pulsating. My buddy points to my P&L.
“Nice!”
POSTSCRIPT
Never before or after that day did I ever see a market inverted like that
again. It was a one-time deal. JDSU stock never again traded higher than
the 4:00 p.m. print on that day: July 26, 2000. It went on to lose 99% of its
value in the next few years. The chart is shown in Figure QS.2.
Note that due to reverse splits, the prices on this chart don’t match the prices in my story.
That day was also high water for my P&L and the peak equity for my
trading account. The NASDAQ made its final last-gasp high a few weeks
later. 
Never 
in 
my 
life 
was 
I 
more 
overconfident 
than 
in 
the 
weeks
immediately following that day. By mid-2002, I shut down my account with
a balance below $35,000 and I was out looking for a “real” job by early
2003. Insult to injury: I had to accept a ridiculous low-ball bid to sell my
M3 to pay the rent.
I got crushed by a confluence of overconfidence and some epic market-
altering 
events. 
The 
two 
biggest 
changes 
that 
killed 
the 
day 
trading
community were decimalization (effective April 2001) and the collapse in
price of every single NASDAQ stock.
My main strategy was to capture the bid/offer on high-priced stocks.
Each morning, starting in 1999, I printed off sheets listing every NASDAQ
stock trading above $100. In 1999, that list was four pages long. By 2002, it
was four stocks.
Four lessons learned:
Markets don’t stay inefficient forever. The NASDAQ was wildly
inefficient from 1998 to 2002. If you find an inefficiency, make hay
while the sun shines and then stash away as many nuts as you can for
winter. Winter is always around the corner.
If you are overconfident, the market will swiftly and harshly beat that
overconfidence out of you.
Trading can be incredibly fun.
Indexes don’t tell the full story.

R
CODA
emember the flash crash USDJPY story from the start of this book?
Now, here’s the same story annotated with all the concepts I have
outlined 
throughout. 
I 
hope 
this 
demonstrates 
the 
way 
good 
and 
bad
decisions, great calls, dumb mistakes, and heaps of trader bias can all
influence a single trading day.
FAIRFIELD COUNTY, CONNECTICUT MAY 6, 2010 | 4:55AM
The Connecticut air is cold and damp. The trader moves in silence. He
steps quietly through the pitch-black darkness of his Colonial McMansion
and toward the door. As he disarms the home security system, the BEEP
BEEP BEEP of the keypad code he enters is impossibly loud in the quiet of
the predawn morning. He steps out of the house, closes and locks the door,
and hops into his car.
As he rolls down the driveway and into the foggy morning, he inserts a
Deadmau5 CD and blasts it at high volume in an effort to wake up and get
pumped for another day of trading. But this will not just be another day of
trading. This will be one of the most insane trading days of his career.
It has been a frustrating year so far. The Eurozone Crisis has been
smoldering for months but the trader’s attempts to sell the euro have been
met with massive countertrend rallies as the Fed embarks on another round
of USD-negative QE. They call EURUSD a collision of two garbage trucks.
The trader struggles to steer clear of the wreckage.
His strongest view recently has been lower USDJPY. There is risk
aversion popping up all over the place as markets worry about a domino
effect where Greece crashes out of the Eurozone, followed by Spain,
Portugal, Ireland and then finally Italy. Everyone is bearish stocks as the
S&P 500 rally from 666 in March 2009 to 1050 now is seen as a mirage; the
side effect of a money printing magic trick performed by central bankers.
Totally unsustainable. [grizzly bias]
EURUSD opened the year at 1.4500 and now trades sub-1.25 so the
short trade is now hard to stomach. Even when you know it’s the right thing
to do, it takes a lot of courage to sell something down >15%. [anchoring
bias] So the trader has shifted his attention to USDJPY and he expects it to
go substantially lower as global risk aversion remains elevated and safe
haven currencies like the yen should find demand.
The chart covers the period up to May 5. This story takes place May 6. Chart courtesy of
Refinitiv
USDJPY has been inexplicably well-bid given recent risk aversion and
the Fed “money printing”. It just rallied from 90 to 94 on air over the last
two weeks. Meanwhile, the best leading indicator for USDJPY is always
US bond yields and they have been plummeting for a month. USDJPY
looks completely wrong.
The trader stares at Figure C.1, which shows US 10-year bond yields
and USDJPY. The black bars are USDJPY and the dotted line shows US
bond yields. Note they usually follow in lockstep. The divergence is a
strong signal to the trader that he should be short USDJPY. [relative value,
lead/lag trading]
If you look in the top right corner, you can see that USDJPY is a bit off
the highs, but not much. Two days in a row, the high has been 94.99 [round
number bias] and USDJPY is now bouncing aimlessly around 93.80 as he
rolls into the hedge fund’s parking lot. It is still early so there are only three
Porsche 911s in the lot right now. More will arrive later. [money does not
buy happiness but it does buy nice cars]
This USDJPY trade has been tiring and painful as the trader got short at
94.00 with a stop loss at 95.05 and those two daily highs mean he has come
within a hair (6 pips, or 0.064%) of getting stopped out, two days in a row.
[endurance] Holding on to a trade like this is exhausting as the trader’s
fight-or-flight stress system remains activated for long stretches. Cortisol
overload. [ability to handle stress]
Now, he can relax a bit and let things play out. His target is 91.00.
Average daily range has been about 100 points lately so he figures we might
get there in the next week or so.
10 :45 AM
It has been a boring morning with USDJPY in a tight range. [hours of
boredom, moments of terror] The sun comes out and it’s almost shorts
weather outside so the trader decides to go for a run before lunch. [healthy
body, healthy mindset] Less than a mile into his run, he gets his first
indication that this is not a random, ordinary day. His Blackberry rings.
Bank sales on the line to tell him that USDJPY has just dumped 100 points
in 15 minutes. Trading 92.80 now… Odd. He turns around and sprints back
to the office, Spidey-sense tingling. [intuition is useful, though often
overrated]
By the time he grabs a quick shower and returns to the desk, USDJPY is
91.50. He is short $100 million USDJPY so that puts his profit (aka P&L or
profit and loss) around +$2.8 million on the day. That’s more P&L than this
trader typically makes in an excellent month. A huge haul. [fat tails and
variance] He scans the headlines and Bloomberg chats and finds no good
explanation for what is going on. The stock market is down, but not enough
to explain 100 points in USDJPY. This makes no sense. [it doesn’t always
have to make sense] When a trade shows a big profit that makes no sense,
he likes to cover it and move on.
The trader buys 100 million USDJPY at 91.50. He is back to flat with
no position and nearly 3 bucks of P&L in the bank. [flat is the strongest
position]
He sits there calmly and processes what has happened. He allows
himself to feel happy, just for a second. He stuck to his plan and had the
patience to sit with a decent-sized position for three days. [it’s OK to be
happy] He relaxes and basks in the satisfaction of a job well done.
[overconfidence]
Then… Some dumb voice in his brain says:
2.8 million dollars is an amazing day. But… Maybe I can make 5 million
today?
And his hands, as if possessed by some mischievous or evil force, move
slowly toward the BUY and SELL buttons. For no reason. And like a
moron… He goes long USDJPY. [don’t bleed out on dumb trades with
no rationale]
First, he buys $50 million at 91.50 and then another $50 million at
91.25. It’s an impulsive trade with no rationale. [lizard brain] His planned
stop loss is 90.85 but before he has time to input a stop loss order, he
notices S&Ps lurch lower on a huge volume surge. [automate your risk
management process] He puts on his headset and fires up the S&P squawk
to see what’s going on.
If you want to hear the soundtrack to what happens next, Google “Flash crash stock
market 2010 squawk” and select one of the YouTube replay videos
The announcer’s voice is strained as he narrates an unexplained fall in
stocks from 1150 to 1120. USDJPY skips through 91.00 and the trader’s
P&L shrinks to $2.0 million. He tries to sell at 90.80 and whiffs. USDJPY is
suddenly in freefall. 90.10 trades. 90.00 breaks. USDJPY has just dropped
more than four percent in a few hours. A monster move. [fast markets] The
trader’s eyes flick over to his P&L which has now shrunk back to six digits.
Two-thirds of three days’ work, gone in 60 seconds. [time dilation]
And then… Stocks sell off hard out of nowhere. Like… REALLY
HARD. The S&P squawk guy is losing it. Screaming. 1100 breaks in the
S&P. 1080, 1070, 1060. USDJPY is a waterfall. The squawk loses his mind
as he yells:
“We have some BIG paper sellers here… 7 evens are trading. 6 evens
are trading! 5 EVENS ARE TRADING!!!. New lows here…” [herding]
USDJPY breaks 89.00 and the trader has still sold only 23 million USD,
leaving him stuck with a position of 77 million USD. It is a fast market,
nearly impossible to transact. He picks up a phone to two different banks
and neither one answers. He tries to hit the 88.60 and gets a reject notice
from the aggregator. The price feed is stale and crossed now; it shows 89.00
/ 88.10, which is not possible. The trader is now down on the day. In the
red. His face is hot and feels red like his P&L. Urge to slam fist on desk is
rising. [do not let emotions control you] The trader feels like he is falling,
falling::::::::::::::::::::in cinematic slow-mo.
USDJPY stabilizes a bit even as the S&P squawk continues to go nuts.
“65 even offered! 60 trades… 60 even bid, this is the widest we have
seen in years,” his voice cracks, he’s yelling like the announcer at Churchill
Downs as the horses turn for the stretch.
“60s trading! 50s trading! 50 at 70 now! We are twenty wide!”
1060 trades in S&Ps now, just about 10% down today, on zero news. [it
doesn’t always have to make sense] Nobody knows what the hell is going
on and there is panic in the air. The squawk dude continues to scream. He is
pouring gasoline on the trader’s agitation.
The trader’s P&L is now six figures in the red. Sadness. Anger. He is
furious with himself [forgive yourself ] because he had the right trade,
waited patiently for almost three days for it to work, caught the move
perfectly according to plan [stick to the plan, you win] … And then
flipped the other way on a whim, for no reason and gave everything and
more back in half an hour. [when you don’t stick to the plan, you lose]
$2.8 million is a good month for this trader. He just made and lost that
much in less than two hours. [time dilation]
I am an idiot. How did I get into this mess?
He needs to make a decision here and quick but he realizes that he is
flooded. [Alpha Traders are self-aware] It is impossible to make a good
trading decision when you’re flooded. [Alpha Traders make rational,
quality decisions] He needs a second to clear his mind. He tears off the
headphones, drops them on his desk, and stands up.
He walks over to the window and tries to find a moment of lucid calm.
He has been through these emotional storms before and knows how to get
back to shore. [experience is an asset] He stares over the waters of the
Long 
Island 
Sound. 
Gradually, 
his 
heart 
rate 
lowers. 
Clarity 
slowly,
slowwwwly returns. His lizard brain retreats and his rational mind takes
over. [System 1 vs. System 2] He talks to himself, out loud:
It doesn’t matter how you got here. What are you going to do about it?
88.00 was the low in March. It’s a massive level. The panic is fading.
USDJPY is down 700 points in two days and now bonds are reversing
lower. This is the place to buy USDJPY, not sell.
He returns to his keyboard, puts his headphones back on. The squawk
guy has stopped screaming. He is noticeably more composed. S&P futures
have bottomed within a whisker of limit down. They are stable but have not
rebounded significantly. The bid/offer is super wide so it is hard to tell
whether they are moving higher or just bouncing along the bottom. [how to
trade fast markets]
The trader looks around the room and sees the panic and electricity
levels have dropped. Not as many phones are ringing. Voices in the room
are no longer frantic. [trading requires focused, decisive action] He buys
50 million USDJPY at 88.85. And another 73 million at 88.95. Max long
now, long $200 million USDJPY. But this time it’s thought out, not random
and he feels good about what he is doing. He feels confident but fully in
control. [there is a time and place to be a pig] He calmly thinks forward:
USDJPY could easily rally to 92.50 from here. When you catch a turn like
this, you can be greedy.
He leaves a stop loss for half his position (sell 100 million USDJPY at
87.94) [automate your risk management] and then sits back to let the
thing play out. He has his plan and now he knows all he can do is watch and
see if it works. There is one more frenetic whipsaw and USDJPY briefly
prints to a low of 87.95. One pip from his 100 million USD stop loss.
Amazing luck. [quality decisions sometimes look like luck] Seconds later,
stocks stabilize, and then it’s like everyone realizes all at once that whatever
the heck just happened… It’s over. [markets are efficient most of the
time, but not always]
USDJPY is paid at 88.70, then up through 89.50. It breaks 90.00 and as
it hits 90.40, the trader flicks his eyes to the P&L. It is almost exactly back
to the level where it peaked earlier: $2.8 million. He praises the trading
gods and squares up. NICE! [anchoring bias]
Figure C.2 shows the chart of that day in USDJPY:
The trader made a multitude of both good and bad decisions in the three
hours around the 2010 Flash Crash. The trading I describe in this story is a
microcosm of everything that can go right and wrong in trading. Traders
make good, careful decisions and get rewarded, they make bad decisions
and get punished … but sometimes a good decision leads to a bad outcome
… or a bad decision is rescued by good luck.
That’s it. We’re officially done. Thanks again for reading!
THE END

M
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
any people helped me write this book. Number one on the list is
Christine, who always supports me and backs my dreams. The one
who continues to love me despite, and also because. Thank you for carrying
all of us on your back through the endless, half-lit, mind-numbing tunnel of
distorted mirrors that was 2020. You literally built a house and filled it with
love, hard work, and pumpkin muffin smells (and two awesome kids).
There is light at the end of the tunnel. I am pretty sure I can see it now.
Adam, you are a handsome, mature young man whose understanding of
right and wrong far exceeds mine when I was your age. You make life
better for everyone you come in contact with and I am proud to be your
father. Oliver, you are a super-smart, funny and huggable little sloth-lover
and I could not love you more than I already do. I am so glad I get to be
your dad.
Thanks Mom, for playing catch with me when I was 8, for taking me to
Crock and Block on Thursdays, and for giving me total freedom to choose
my own life. Thanks Dad for teaching me there is extraordinary and
unforgettable joy to be had from airborne pickles (in or outside the jar). I
wish there was a way back to Olympic Stadium circa 1982 so I could keep
score with you at just one more Expos game.
Thanks Steve for all the fun and creative interactions over the last few
years and for the many gifts of Magic. Thanks Brother Craig, the last
remaining unconditional optimist on earth… Sometimes it feels like the
whole world is held together by your optimism (no pressure, though). Our
trip to the World Series will always be one of my best ever memories.
Thank 
you, 
Ben 
Hunt, 
for 
the 
intellectual 
stimulation 
and 
life
inspiration, the unmatched writing skill, and the non-stop original thought.
Thank you for writing the foreword to this book. And thanks be to Benajah,
who crushed my soul more than once with a ridiculous late-night oof-y boat
over boat. So sick!
I appreciate the support of the five men who put their names on my
book, backing it by blurbing on my behalf. I put them in alphabetical order
because I have a ton of respect for each one and I am secretly super
intimidated by all of them and don’t want to make anyone mad.
Jared Dillian, the hardest-working man in finance with new content
dropping daily on the intertubes, TV, radio and SoundCloud. Your
courage to talk about hard subjects makes me feel that I can do that
too.
Dave Floyd, the cool dude from the West Coast and a true student of
the market.
John Mauldin, whose long and prolific career is the epitome of the
long-run success and adaptation I outline in this book.
Ben Melkman: the man, the myth, the legend. Coolest hedge fund
office art in the business. Call level at 05 in USDCAD.
Jens Nordvig, possibly the smartest person I have ever met and
definitely the most handsome.
Thanks Nick Jonas, AM/FX proofreader supreme, Aussie trader, and #1
Newcastle-born Mets fan. The man who loves trading and a Shane Warne
flipper more than almost anything else. His ideas make my daily better.
Nick had a major role in editing this book and our on-desk conversations
inspired many sections.
Thanks Matt Thompson for his rare combo of smartness, generosity,
courageous integrity, and ludicrous chart-formatting skills. Also, one of the
most important things in life (to me) is working with people that are fun and
interesting—and that’s Matt in a nutshell. This is also Matt in a nutshell:
Illustration by Mr. Peter Little
Gus and Christina, thank you for contributing to this book and for being
consistently 
fun 
to 
work 
with. 
Corbi 
thanks 
for 
your 
wisdom 
and
friendship; I am sorry that you are not better at billiards. Joe Mauro: thanks
for the “keep running” inspiration and Twitter hilarity. Sal, thanks for all the
timely news and ideas and for being an excellent sounding board. And
GM@SatskoPickles.
I am grateful for Sam, Pete, Bracco!, MG, Locky, Witz, BH, and the rest
of the RNG crew who helped me survive all those numb ‘rona nights while
stationed abroad in Jersey City… When I was supposed to be writing this
book, but longed for distraction, human interaction and a bit of fun. RAD.
Gitt and Suv helped improve portions of this book. My life is strictly
better in the current timeline compared to any timeline where they do not
exist. Vin Chopra helped me brainstorm a section of this book when I was
stuck and he is also just one hell of a brainstormer in general (he’s also
really good at Googling). {VW} Saed, thanks for your camaraderie and
market knowledge and for the deep dive you did on this book. And sorry I
never answer the phone. :]
Thanks 
to 
B-Mac, 
Libardo, 
Clyde, 
Volkan 
and 
Richard 
for 
your
personal 
and 
professional 
support, 
not 
to 
mention 
the 
platform 
and
paycheck you have provided me for the past four years. Thanks to Refinitiv
for all the charts.
And thank you reader, for dedicating the time to read my book. I
appreciate it.
Special thanks to Stephen K. Donnelly, for all the hours
he poured into editing this project.
Good luck. Be nimble.
New Canaan, Connecticut
2021