1
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
The economic
organization of the
shipping market
Shipping is an exciting business, surrounded by many false beliefs,
misconceptions and even taboos… The facts of the matter are
straightforward enough and, when stripped of their emotional and
sentimental overtones in clinical analysis, are much less titillating than
the popular literature and maritime folklore lead one to expect.
(Helmut Sohmen, ‘What Bankers Always Wanted to Know about
Shipping but were Afraid to Ask’, Address to the Foreign Banks’
Representatives Association, Hong Kong, 27 June 1985. Reprinted in
Fairplay, London, 1 August 1986.)

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
2
1.1 The economic role of the shipping industry
The economic importance of shipping
The story of the shipping industry since the first steamships were built more than
a century ago has been one of ingenuity, professionalism, fabulous profits and
some disastrous miscalculations. It includes the drama of the supertanker,1 the
meteoric rise of shipping superstars like Niarchos and Onassis, and some equally
dramatic scandals such as that involving Tidal Marine, which built up at 700,000
dwt (deadweight tonnage) shipping fleet in the early 1970s and was subsequently
indicted, with a number of bankers in New York, on charges of fraudulently obtaining
more than $60 million in loans.2 There was the great asset play market of the 1980s
when ships bought for a few million dollars increased in value by 600–800 per
cent, making the lucky few investors some of the wealthiest men in the world.
Among the miscalculations, at the forefront must be the remarkable episode in the
tanker market in 1973 when orders were placed for over 100 m.dwt of supertankers,
for which the demand never materialized, with the result that some went from the
builder’s yard straight into lay-up, and few ever operated to their full economic
potential. In short, shipping is a ‘larger than life’ industry.
Our task in this book is to understand the economics of the industry. To do this
we must step back from these day-to-day events, however fascinating they may be,
and try to filter out the essential mechanisms that make the market-place operate.
Even shipping magnates are subject to the laws of supply and demand. However,
in carrying out our economic analysis we must not neglect the fact that the shipping
market is a group of people—shipowners, brokers, shipbuilders and bankers—
who together carry out each year the Herculean task of transporting more than
4,000 bt of cargo by sea and who may see shipping as much more than just a
business.3
Shipping is one of the world’s most international industries and in studying
maritime economics we are drawn into a discussion of the world economy as a
whole. Seaborne trade is, in a sense, at the apex of world economic activity. The
first reaction of shipowners on hearing of some global event, such as a nuclear
disaster in Russia or a change in the price of oil, is to consider what effect this will
have on the shipping market. Many shipping fortunes have been made from political
conflict, notably those brought about by the closure of the Suez Canal in the 1950s
and 1960s. We cannot afford to ignore the political aspect of the maritime market.
Nor should the strategic importance of shipping be underestimated. As business
has become more international and newly industrializing countries have taken their
place alongside the OECD countries,4 the maritime industry has provided the vehicle
for an extraordinary growth of trade. If we are to understand the economic and
political forces that mould developments in the shipping market, we must appreciate
the two-way interaction between developments in shipping and developments in
the world economy.
In his book The Economic History of World Population, Carlo Cippola suggests
that the transport industry has been one of the prime forces responsible for shifting
the world from an essentially national system to the global economy that exists today.

3
Fast and cheap transport has been one of the main products of the Industrial
Revolution. Distances have been shortened at an astonishing pace. Day by day
the world seems smaller and smaller and societies that for millennia practically
ignored each other are suddenly put in contact or conflict. In our dealings, in
politics as in economics, in health organisation as in military strategy, a new
point of view is forced upon us. At some point in the past people had to move
from an urban or regional point of view to a national one. Today we have to
adjust ourselves in our way of thinking to a global point of view. As Bertrand
Russell wrote, ‘the world has become one not only for the astronomer but for
the ordinary citizen’.5
The progression from a world of isolated communities to an integrated global
community was made possible by shipping and sea trade, but this has been a two-
way exchange which has, in turn, forced major adjustment on the maritime industry
itself. At the forefront in recent years must be the US Oil Pollution Act (1990), a
unilateral act by the US Congress which imposed stringent anti-pollution regulations
on shipowners operating in US waters.
The role of seaborne trade In economic development
The idea of shipping as the catalyst of economic development is not new. Adam
Smith, often regarded as the father of modern economics, saw shipping as one of
the stepping stones to economic growth. In chapter 3 of The Wealth of Nations, he
argued that the central economic force in a capitalist society is the division of
labour, and the extent to which this can be practised depends crucially upon the
size of the market. A business working in a country town without links to the
outside world can never, he argued, achieve high levels of efficiency because its
very small market will limit the degree of specialization.
Adam Smith saw shipping as the source of cheap transport which can open up
wider markets to specialization, by offering transport for even the most everyday
products at prices far below those that can be achieved by any other means. This
proved to be a profound insight. Economic development has gone hand in hand
with sea trade for sound economic reasons, a process which Adam Smith explains
in the following way:
As by means of water carriage a more extensive market is opened to every sort
of industry than what land carriage alone can afford it, so it is upon the sea-
coast, and along the banks of navigable rivers, that industry of every kind naturally
begins to subdivide and improve itself, and it is frequently not until a long time
after that those improvements extend themselves to the inland parts of the
country…a broad wheeled wagon attended by two men and drawn by eight
horses in about six weeks time carries and brings back between London and
Edinburgh nearly 4 tons weight of goods. In about the same time a ship navigated
by six or eight men, and sailing between the ports of London and Leith, frequently
carries and brings back 200 ton weight of goods. Since such, therefore, are the
THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF THE SHIPPING INDUSTRY

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
4
advantages of water carriage, it is natural that the first improvements of art and
industry should be made where this conveniency opens the whole world to a
market for the produce of every sort of labour.6
Technology has moved on since Adam Smith wrote these words in 1776, and the
economically developed countries now have a massive inland transport
infrastructure, but technology in the shipping industry has more than kept pace.
Since the mid-1960s, two dramatic developments in the economic organization of
the shipping business—unitization and bulk shipping—have played a major part
in opening up a truly global market for both manufactures and raw materials.
Two technical revolutions in shipping
The most important technical development was the unitization of the liner shipping
business. During the 1960s the traditional system of ‘break bulk’ liner shipping
became increasingly unable to cope with the escalating volume of world trade, and
industry observers could see that ‘the old methods had reached the end of the
line’.7 To overcome these problems, palletization and containerization were
introduced to speed up the flow of cargo. Putting general cargo into standard units
had more wide-ranging effects than even its most ardent advocates anticipated. In
the early 1960s, goods shipped from Europe to the United States could take months
to arrive, but twenty years later, just a few days after leaving the factory in the
Midlands of England, a container wagon could be arriving at its destination in East
Coast USA with its valuable cargo safe from damage or pilferage and readily
transferable to rail or barge with the minimum of delay or manual effort. In short,
the shipping industry used organization to solve its own fundamental problems
and, in doing so, opened the floodgates for the development of the global economy.
The bulk shipping revolution was no less wide-ranging in its effects. Bulk
transport of raw materials by sea was, for the first time, viewed as part of an
integrated materials handling operation in which investment could improve
productivity. By employing economies of scale, investing in high speed cargo
handling systems and integrating the whole transport systems, bulk transport costs
were reduced to such an extent that it is often cheaper for industries to import raw
materials by sea from suppliers thousands of miles away than by land from suppliers
only a few hundred miles away—for example the rail freight for a ton of coal from
Virginia to Jacksonville, Florida, was almost three times the sea freight from
Hampton Roads to Japan, a distance of 10,000 miles.8 Bigger ships played a central
part in this process. Over a period of 50 years from 1945 to 1995 oil tankers became
twenty times bigger and dry bulk vessels ten to fifteen times bigger. Improved
cargo handling in ports and better integration with land transport completed the
transformation.
The cost of sea transport
The shipping industry has been so successful at exploiting these technical
developments that the cost of sea transport has hardly increased. Coal and oil cost

5
little more to transport in the mid-1990s than in the late 1940s (Figure 1.1). In
1950 it cost about $8 to transport coal from East Coast North America to Japan.9 In
1996 it costs $12.7. Along the way there were seven market cycles, peaking in
1952, 1956, 1970, 1974, 1980, 1989 and 1995, but the average transport cost was
$10.9 per ton. The cheapest year for shipping coal was 1972 when it cost $4.5/ton,
while the most expensive was 1980 when it cost $24/ton. The oil trade shows the
same long-term trend, with transport costs fluctuating between fifty cents and one
dollar per barrel. The highest cost was during the 1956 Suez crisis when the cost
went up to $2.1 per barrel. In four years, 1949, 1961, 1977 and 1994 it fell to $0.5
per barrel.
FIGURE 1.1 Transport cost of oil and coal 1950–95
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources
Compared with other sectors of the economy, the bulk transport industry’s
achievement is exceptional. Average dollar prices in 1990 were nine times higher
than in 1960 (Table 1.1).10 A basic Ford motor car had increased in price from
$1,385 to $11,115; the UK rail fare from London to Glasgow from $23.5 to $106;
the price of a ton of domestic coal from $12 in the UK to $217; and the price of a
barrel of crude oil increased from $1.5 to $20.5. The three products with the smallest
increase in prices are air fares, seaborne oil freight and dry bulk freight all of
which approximately doubled. The fact that air fares head the list provides an
insight into why shipping lost the passenger transport business during this period.
With this exception the shipping business has been very successful in maintaining
costs during a period when the cost of most commodities increased by ten or twenty
times. One consequence is that for many commodities freight is now a much smaller
proportion of costs than it was thirty years ago. For example in 1960 the oil freight
THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF THE SHIPPING INDUSTRY

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
6
Shipping—how many markets?
To understand the economic mechanisms that have brought about these changes
one must step warily. While the shipping market is in some senses a single economic
unit, there are important subdivisions. We have already referred to the liner and
bulk industries, and probably the most striking aspect of the shipping business to
an outsider is the totally different character of the companies in these sectors.
Liner companies and bulk shipping companies belong to the same industry, but
they seem to have little else in common, a fact we shall discuss more extensively in
later parts of the book. The Rochdale Report commented on these divisions within
the industry as follows:
Shipping is a complex industry and the conditions which govern its operations
in one sector do not necessarily apply to another; it might even, for some
purposes, be better regarded as a group of related industries. Its main assets, the
ships themselves, vary widely in size and type; they provide the whole range of
services for a variety of goods, whether over shorter or longer distances. Although
one can, for analytical purposes, usefully isolate sectors of the industry providing
TABLE 1.1 Cost changes 1960–90
Source: ‘Prices down the years’, The Economist, 22 December 1990
Notes: 1. cheapest model
2. Soup, main course, pudding, coffee
3. London to America
4. London to New York return
5. London to Glasgow, 2nd class, return
was 25 per cent of the cost of a barrel of Arabian Light crude oil delivered to
Europe. In 1990 it had fallen to less than five per cent. Ironically this made the
tanker business much less important to the oil companies. This impressive cost
performance was achieved by a combination of economies of scale, new technology,
better ports and more efficient cargo handling. These are the topics which we will
address in the remainder of this chapter.

7
particular types of service, there is usually some interchange at the margin
which cannot be ignored.11
This suggests that there are several important ground rules for approaching shipping
economics. First, it emphasizes the importance of the commercial divisions within
the shipping market—the liner business carries different cargoes, provides different
services and has a different economic structure from bulk shipping. Second, it acts
as a reminder that shipping is in another sense a single market. Some shipping
companies are active in both the bulk and liner markets and many ships are designed
to operate in several different markets; indeed, this is one of the important
shipowning decisions that we shall discuss in chapter 7. Consequently, we cannot
afford to treat the market as a series of isolated compartments. We must recognize
that, particularly in a depressed market, owners can move their investment from
one market sector to another in order to avoid problems.12 As a result supply/demand
imbalances in one part of the market can ripple across to other sectors.
The final point is that, however hard we might try to develop the analysis in
economic terms, shipping is an international business and the economic forces
that make it so significant in economic terms also make it the subject of national
and international political intervention. The Rochdale Report concluded its definition
of the shipping industry with the comment that ‘Most of the industry’s business is
concerned with international trade and inevitably it operates within a complicated
world pattern of agreements between shipping companies, understandings with
shippers and policies of governments.’ Such matters cannot be ignored. Since the
mid-1960s the maritime industry has seen an escalation of political involvement,
ranging from the efforts of the Third World countries to gain entry to the international
shipping business through the medium of UNCTAD, to the subsidizing of domestic
shipbuilding; the regulation of liner shipping and the increasing interest in safety
at sea, pollution, and crew regulations. Just as these subjects cannot easily be
understood without some knowledge of the maritime economic framework within
which the game is being played out, an economic analysis cannot ignore the political
influences on costs, prices and free market competition. These are all subjects that
will be discussed in some detail in later chapters. In this chapter we shall concentrate
on discussing the shipping market as a whole. The aim is to show how the different
parts and institutions within the shipping market—the liner business, bulk shipping,
the charter market, etc.—fit together, and to examine the basic principles of how
freight rates and ship prices are determined. From this foundation we discuss the
components of the market in greater detail.
1.2 The international transport system
Transport modes and intermodalism
Shipping is only one link in the transport chain, so we must look beyond the narrow
maritime perspective. The aim of the shipper is to obtain better and cheaper transport
over the whole distance from origin to destination. To meet this need, in recent
THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT SYSTEM

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
8
Although statistics are patchy, it seems that in 1990 air freight was 31 btm, rail
3,853 btm and sea trade 12,056 btm. In terms of volume this makes shipping roughly
four times as important as rail and four hundred times as important as air freight.
As we shall see, shipping has, to a large extent, created its own markets by reducing
the cost of transport.13
Transport between regions
For most inter-regional cargoes deep sea shipping is the only economic transport
between the continental landmasses. It is the main subject of this volume. Traffic
is particularly heavy on the routes between the major industrial regions of Asia,
Europe and North America. There are about 20,000 ships in this trade, offering
services ranging from low cost bulk transport to fast regular liner services.
Air freight started to become viable for transporting high value commodities
between regions in the 1960s. It competes with the liner services for premium
cargo such as engineering goods, processed textiles, livestock and automotive spare
parts. Shipments have grown rapidly, reaching 12.9 btm in 1982, and 31 btm by
1990. Despite this growth, air freight still accounts for only 0.1 per cent of the
volume of goods transported between regions. Its contribution has been to widen
the range of transport services available by offering the option of very fast but high
cost transport.
Short sea shipping
Short sea shipping provides transport within regions. It distributes cargo delivered
to regional centres such as Hong Kong or Rotterdam by deep sea vessels, and
provides a port-to-port service, often in direct competition with land based transport
decades the world has evolved a transport system which provides fast and cheap
access to almost every corner of the globe. The system consists of roads, railways,
inland waterways, shipping lines and air freight services. In practice the system
falls into three zones, inter-regional transport, short sea, and inland transport.
BOX 1.1 International transport zones and available transport modes
Zone
Area
Transport sector
Vehicle
1
Inter-regional
Deep sea shipping
Ship
Air freight
Plane
2
Short sea
Coastal seas
Ship/ferry
3
Land
River and canal
Barge
Road
Lorry
Rail
Train

9
such as rail. This is a very different business from deep sea shipping. The ships are
generally smaller than their counterparts in the deep sea trades ranging in size
from 400 dwt to 6,000 dwt, though there are no firm rules. Designs place much
emphasis on cargo flexibility.
Cargoes shipped short sea include grain, fertilizer, coal, lumber, steel, clay,
aggregates, containers, wheeled vehicles and passengers. Because trips are so short,
and ships visit many more ports in a year than deep sea vessels, trading in this
market requires great organizational skills. As Tinsley (1984) comments
it requires a knowledge of the precise capabilities of the ships involved, and a
flexibility to arrange the disposition of vessels so that customers’ requirements
are met in an efficient and economic way. Good positioning, minimisation of
ballast legs, avoiding being caught over weekends or holidays and accurate
reading of the market are crucial for survival.14
Short sea shipping is subject to many political restrictions. The most important is
cabotage, the practice by which countries enact laws reserving coastal trade to
ships of their national fleet. This system has operated for many years in the United
States and in some countries in Europe.
The inland transport system consists of an extensive network of roads, railways,
and waterways. It is linked to the shipping system through ports and specialist
terminals.
Competition and cooperation in the transport industry
The companies in the transport system operate in a market governed by a mix of
competition and co-operation. In many trades the competitive element is obvious.
Rail competes with road; short sea shipping with road and rail; and deep sea shipping
with air freight for higher value cargo. However, a few examples show that the
scope of competition is much wider than appears possible at first sight.
For example over the last fifty years bulk carriers trading in the deep sea trades
have been in cut-throat competition with the railways. How is this possible? The
answer is that users of raw materials such as power stations and steel mills often
face a choice between use of domestic and imported raw materials. Thus, a power
station at Jacksonville in Florida can import coal from Virginia by rail or from
Columbia by sea. Where transport accounts for a large proportion of the delivered
cost, there is intense competition.
Cost is not the only factor, as shown by the seasonal trade in perishable goods
such as raspberries and asparagus. These products travel as air freight because the
journey by refrigerated ship is too slow to allow delivery in prime condition.
However, the shipping industry has tried to recapture that cargo by developing
refrigerated containers with a controlled atmosphere which prevents deterioration,
thus permitting them to compete for this cargo.
Although the different sectors of the transport business are fiercely competitive,
technical development depends upon close cooperation. Indeed the development
THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT SYSTEM

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
10
of Integrated Transport Systems15 in which each component in the transport system
is designed to fit in with the others has been one of the dominant themes of
international transport in the last 20 years. There are many examples of this co-
operation. Much of the world’s grain trade is handled by a carefully controlled
system of barges, rail trucks and deep sea ships. The modal points in the system
are highly automated grain elevators which receive grain from one transport mode,
store it temporarily and ship it out in another. Similarly, coal may be loaded in
Columbia or Australia, shipped by sea in a large bulk carrier to Rotterdam, and
distributed by a small short sea vessel to the final consumer. The containerization
of general cargo is built around standard containers which can be carried by road,
rail or sea with equal facility. Often road transport companies are owned by railways
and vice versa.
The driving force which guides the efforts of the transport system is the quest to
win more business by providing cheaper transport and a better service. We will
explore more thoroughly how the industry does this in section 1.5 below. First,
however, we turn to the demand for sea transport.
1.3 The demand for sea transport
The nature of transport demand
The primary task of the shipping industry is to move cargo around the world.
Although this is the correct starting point for studying ship demand, as an economic
definition it is too narrow. From the customer’s viewpoint, shipping is a service.
Saying that the shipping companies move cargo around the world, is rather like
saying that restaurants cook food. There are sandwich bars, fast food chains and
cordon bleu restaurants. Like the restaurateur, shipping companies provide a variety
of services to meet the specific needs of customers. These needs may involve a
whole range of factors, of which the most important are:
1
Price: The freight cost is always important, but the greater the proportion of
freight in the overall cost equation, the more emphasis shippers are likely to
place on it. For example, in the 1950s the cost of transporting a barrel of oil
from the Middle East to Europe represented 49 per cent of the CIF cost. As a
result, oil companies devoted great effort to finding ways to reduce the cost of
transport. By the 1990s the price of oil had increased and the cost of transport
had fallen to just 2.5 per cent of the CIF price so transport cost became less
important.
2
Speed: Time in transit incurs an inventory cost, so shippers of high-value
commodities value speed. The cost of holding high-value commodities in stock
may make it cheaper to ship small quantities frequently even if the freight cost
is greater. On a three-month journey a cargo worth $100,000 incurs an inventory
cost of $2,500 if interest rates are 10 per cent per annum. If the journey time
can be halved it is worth paying up to $1,250 extra in freight. Speed may also
be important for commercial reasons. A European manufacturer ordering spare
parts from the Far East may be happy to pay ten times the freight for delivery

11
in three days by air if the alternative is to have machinery out of service for
five or six weeks while the spares are delivered by sea.
3
Reliability: With the growing importance of ‘just in time’ stock control systems,
transport reliability has taken on a new significance. Some shippers may be
prepared to pay more for a service which is guaranteed to operate to time and
provide the services which it has promised.
4
Security: Loss or damage in transit is an insurable risk, but raises many
difficulties for the shipper, who may well be prepared to pay more for secure
transportation of his product without risk of damage.
Each part of the business provides for a different combination of needs. In studying
how this business is carried out, we need to be aware of the different demands
which commodities place on the transport system, and to understand how the system
has evolved to meet these needs. As we consider the part played by cargoes and
ships in the following sections we must not lose sight of the needs of the customers
who use the transport system.
What commodities are traded by sea?
In 1995 merchant ships transported about 4 bt of cargo. The trade consisted of
many different commodities. Raw materials such as oil, iron ore, bauxite and coal;
agricultural products such as grain, sugar and refrigerated food; industrial materials
such as rubber, forest products, cement, textile fibres and chemicals; and
manufactures such as heavy plant, motor cars, machinery and consumer goods. It
covers everything from a 4 million barrel parcel of oil to a cardboard box of
Christmas gifts.
The prime task of the seaborne trade analyst is to explain the growth and
development of seaborne commodity trades, and to do this each commodity must
be analysed in the context of the world economy. Where commodities are related
to the same industry it makes sense to study them as a group so that inter-
relationships can be seen. For example the crude oil and products are
interchangable—if oil is refined before shipment then it is transported as products
instead of crude oil. Similarly, if a country exporting iron ore sets up a steel mill,
the trade in iron ore may be transformed into a smaller trade in steel products. To
show how the various seaborne trades inter-relate, the main seaborne commodity
trades are shown in Figure 1.2 arranged into six groups reflecting the area of
economic activity to which they are most closely related.16 These groups can be
summarized as follows:
1
Energy trades: Energy dominates bulk shipping. This group of commodities,
which accounts for 45 per cent of seaborne trade, comprises crude oil, oil products,
liquefied gas and thermal coal for use in generating electricity. These fuel sources
compete with each other and non-traded energy commodities such as nuclear
power. For example, the substitution of coal for oil in power stations in the 1980s
transformed the pattern of these two trades. The analysis of the energy trades is
concerned with the world energy economy.
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
12
2
Agricultural trades: A total of twelve commodities, accounting for 13 per cent
of sea trade, are the products or raw materials of the agricultural industry.
They include cereals such as wheat and barley, animal feedstuffs, sugar,
molasses, refrigerated food, oil and fats and fertilizers. The analysis of these
trades is concerned with the demand for foodstuffs, which depends on income
and population. It is also concerned with the important derived demand for
animal feeds. On the supply side, we are led into the discussion of land use
and agricultural productivity.
3
Metal industry trades: This major commodity group, which accounts for 25
per cent of sea trade, represents the third building block of modern industrial
society. Under this heading we group the raw materials and products of the
steel and non-ferrous metal industries, including iron ore, metallurgical grade
coal, non-ferrous metal ores, steel products and scrap.
4
Forest products trades: Forest products are primarily industrial materials used
for the manufacture of paper, paper board and in the construction industry.
This section includes timber (logs and lumber) woodpulp, plywood, paper
and various wood products, totalling about 145 mt. The trade is strongly
influenced by the availability of forestry resources.
5
Other industrial materials: There are a wide range of industrial materials such
as cement, salt, gypsum, mineral sands, asbestos, chemicals and many others.
FIGURE 1.2 Seaborne trade by economic activity
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources

13
The total trade in these commodities accounted for 9 per cent of sea trade.
They cover a whole range of industries.
6
Other Manufactures: The final trade group comprises the remaining
manufactures such as textiles, machinery, capital goods, vehicles, etc. The
total tonnage involved in this sector accounts for only 3 per cent of sea trade,
but many of these commodities have a high value so their share in value is
probably closer to 50 per cent. They are the mainstay of the liner trades and
their impact upon the shipping industry is much greater than the tonnage
suggests.
Viewing the trade as a whole, over 70 per cent of the tonnage of seaborne trade is
associated with the energy and metal industries so the shipping industry is highly
dependent upon developments in these two industries.
Although these trade statistics help to convey the scale of the merchant shipping
business, they disguise its physical complexity. Cargo may appear in any of eighty
countries which have maritime trade, for consignment to any other country. Some
shipments are regular, others irregular; some are large, others are small; some
shippers are in a hurry, others are not; some cargoes can be handled with suction or
grabs, while others are fragile; some cargo is boxed, containerized or packed on
pallets, while other cargo is loose.
The parcel size distribution function
To explain how the shipping industry approaches the task of transporting this
complex mix of cargoes, we need to introduce a concept that is central to the
economic organization of the shipping market, the parcel size distribution (PSD)
function. A ‘parcel’ is an individual consignment of cargo for shipment. For a
particular commodity trade, the PSD function describes the range of parcel sizes
in which cargo is transported. If, for example, we take the case of iron ore shown
in Figure 1.3, we see that individual shipments ranged in size from under 40,000
tons to over 100,000 tons, with the majority concentrated in the upper size range.
A similar analysis for grain in the same figure shows a very different parcel size
distribution, with grain shipments concentrating in the under 80,000 ton category,
and only a few of over 100,000 tons. In short, for any commodity shipped by sea
we must expect to find cargoes appearing on the market in a wide range of parcel
sizes.
The precise shape of the PSD for each commodity is determined by the
characteristics of demand. The market has sorted out the economic balance between
large and small parcels. These are all subjects that we discuss more extensively in
chapters 7 and 8; for the present, we simply establish the principle that the same
commodity may be shipped in many different parcel sizes.
The importance of the PSD function is that it helps to answer the central question
‘which cargoes go in which ships?’ In practice, different sizes of cargo parcel
require different types of shipping operation. One important division is between
‘bulk cargo’, which consists of cargo parcels big enough to fill a whole ship, and
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
14
‘general cargo’, which consists of many small consignments, too small to fill a
ship, that have to be packed with other cargo for transport. Another is between the
size of ships used. Some bulk cargoes travel in small bulk carriers, while others
use the biggest ships available. Analysis of the range of commodity trades shown
in Figure 1.3 shows that each has its own distinctive parcel size distribution, with
individual consignments ranging from the very small to the very large.17
For many commodities the parcel size distribution contains some cargo parcels
that are too small to fill a ship—for example, 500 tons of steel products—and that
will travel as general cargo, and others—say 5,000 tons of steel products—that are
large enough to travel in bulk. As the trade grows, the proportion of cargo parcels
large enough to travel bulk may increase and the trade will gradually switch from
being a liner trade to being predominantly a minor bulk trade. This happened in
many trades during the 1960s and 1970s, and as a result the bulk trade grew faster
than general cargo trade. Because many commodities travel partly in bulk and
partly as general cargo, commodity trades cannot be neatly divided into ‘bulk’ and
‘general’ cargo. To do this it is necessary to know the PSD function for each
commodity.
FIGURE 1.3 Parcel size distribution
Source: Fearnleys, World Bulk Trades

15
Parcel size and transport mode
The parcel size distribution provides the basis for explaining the micro-economic
organization of the shipping market, the main elements of which are summarized
in Figure 1.4. Starting at the top of this diagram, world trade splits into large parcels
and small parcels, depending on the PSD function of each commodity. Large parcels
are carried by the bulk shipping industry and small parcels by the liner shipping
industry; these represent the two major segments within the shipping industry.
This distinction may appear slight when put in such abstract economic terms,
but there is no doubt about its reality. Bulk and liner shipping are as different in
their character as it is possible for two industries to be, as will become clear when
we discuss the matter in detail in Chapters 9 and 10. Finally we note that the ships
to carry the cargo are supplied partly from fleets owned by the bulk and liner
industries, supplemented by vessels obtained from the charter market, as shown at
the bottom of the diagram. This distinction between the operation of the vessel in
the bulk or liner trade, and its ownership is important.
Definition of ‘bulk cargo’
There is a long history of carrying cargo in shiploads—Roman grain ships, tea
clippers, bulk timber and the fleets of colliers in the nineteenth century are
examples—but bulk shipping did not develop as the major sector of the shipping
industry in the decades following the Second World War. A fleet of specialist crude
oil tankers was built to service the rapidly expanding economies of Western Europe
and Japan, with smaller vessels for the carriage of products and liquid chemicals.
In the dry bulk trades, several important industries, notably steel, aluminium and
fertilizer manufacture, turned to foreign suppliers for their raw materials and a
fleet of large bulk carriers was built to service the trade. As a result, bulk shipping
became a rapidly-expanding sector of the shipping industry and bulk tonnage now
accounts for about three-quarters of the world merchant fleet.
Most of the bulk cargoes are drawn from the raw material trades such as oil, iron
ore, coal and grain, and it is common to describe these as ‘bulk commodities’ on the
assumption that, for example, all iron ore is shipped in bulk. In the case of iron ore
this is a reasonable assumption, but many smaller commodity trades are shipped
partly in bulk and partly as general cargo; for example, a shipload of forest products
would be rightly classified as bulk cargo but consignments of logs still travel as general
cargo in a few trades. There are four main categories of bulk cargo:
•
Liquid bulk requires tanker transportation. The main ones are crude oil, oil
products, liquid chemicals such as caustic soda, vegetable oils, and wine. The
size of individual consignments varies from a few thousand tons to half a mt in
the case of crude oil.
•
The ‘five major bulk’ covers the five homogeneous bulk cargoes—iron ore,
grain, coal, phosphates and bauxite—which can be transported satisfactorily
in a conventional dry bulk carrier or ’tweendecker stowing at 45–55 cubic feet
per ton.
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
16
FIGURE 1.4 Transport of bulk and general cargo
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

17
•
Minor bulks covers the many other commodities that travel in shiploads. The
most important are steel products, cement, gypsum, non-ferrous metal ores,
sugar, salt, sulphur, forest products, wood chips and chemicals.
•
Specialist bulk cargoes includes any bulk cargoes with specific handling or
storage requirements. Motor vehicles, steel products, refrigerated cargo and
special cargoes such as a cement plant or prefabricated building fall into this
category.
Definition of ‘general cargo’
The transport of general cargo is a very different business. General cargo consists
of consignments of less than ship or hold size and, therefore, too small to justify
setting up a bulk shipping operation. In addition there are often high-value or delicate
cargoes that require a special shipping service and for which the shipper requires a
fixed tariff rather than a fluctuating market rate. There are no hard and fast rules
about what constitutes general cargo—boxes, bales, machinery, 1,000 tons of steel
products, 50 tons of bagged malting barley are typical examples. The main classes
of general cargo from a shipping viewpoint are:
•
Loose cargo individual items, boxes, pieces of machinery, etc., each of which
must be handled and stowed separately. All general cargo used to be shipped
this way, but now almost all has been unitized in one way or another.
•
Containerized cargo standard boxes, usually 8 feet wide, often 8 feet 6 inches
high and 20, 30, or 40 feet long, filled with cargo. This is now the principal
form of general cargo transport.
•
Palletized cargo cargo packed onto a pallet for easy stacking and fast handling.
•
Pre-slung cargo small items such as planks of wood lashed together into
standard-sized packages
•
Liquid cargo travels in deep tanks, liquid containers or drums.
•
Refrigerated cargo perishable goods that must be shipped, chilled or frozen,
in insulated holds or refrigerated containers.
•
Heavy and awkward cargo large and difficult to stow.
Until the mid-1960s most general cargo travelled loose and each item had to be
packed in the hold of a cargo liner using ‘dunnage’ (pieces of wood or burlap) to
keep it in place. This labour-intensive operation was slow, expensive, difficult to
plan and the cargo was exposed to the risk of damage or pilferage. As a result,
expensive cargo liners spent two-thirds of their time in port and cargo-handling
costs have escalated to more than one-quarter of the total shipping cost.18 As the
volume of cargo increased, liner operations found it increasingly difficult to provide
the service that shippers required at an economic cost and their profit margins
were squeezed.19
The shipping industry’s response was to ‘unitize’ the transport system, applying
the same technology which had been applied successfully on the production lines
in manufacturing industry. Work was standardized, allowing investment to increase
productivity. Since cargo handling was the main bottleneck, the key was to pack
THE DEMAND FOR SEA TRANSPORT

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
18
the cargo into internationally accepted standard units which could be handled
quickly and cheaply with specially designed equipment. At the outset many systems
of unitization were examined, but the two main contenders were pallets and
containers. Pallets are flat trays, suitable for handling by fork-lift truck, on which
single or multiple units can be packed for easy handling. Containers are standard
boxes into which individual items are packed. The first deep sea container service
was introduced in 1966 and in the next twenty years containers came to dominate
the transport of general cargo, with shipments of over 50 million units per annum.
Limitations of seaborne trade statistics
An obvious question is: ‘What is the tonnage of bulk and general cargo shipped by
sea?’ We have already encountered the problem of obtaining statistics about the
commodities shipped by sea and, unfortunately, there is another statistical problem
in determining how the commodities are transported. As we have seen, the volume
of trade in general cargo cannot be reliably identified from commodity trade
statistics. For example, we may guess that a parcel of 300 tons of steel products
transported from the UK to West Africa travelled as general cargo in a liner, whereas
a parcel of 6,000 tons from Japan to the USA was shipped in bulk, but there is no
way of knowing this for certain from the commodity statistics alone. As we have
already noted, some commodities (such as iron ore) are almost always shipped in
bulk and others (such as machinery) invariably travel as general cargo, but many
commodities (such as steel products, forest products and non-ferrous metal ores)
straddle the two. In fact, as a trade flow grows it may start off being shipped as
general cargo but eventually become sufficiently large to be shipped in bulk.20
The difficulty of identifying bulk and general cargo trade from commodity trade
statistics is very inconvenient for shipping economists, since seaborne trade data
are collected mainly in this form and
very little comprehensive information
is available about cargo type. The only
regular source of information about
bulk cargo shipments is World Bulk
Trades, published annually by
Fearnleys of Oslo. On the basis of these
statistics we can estimate that, out of a
total seaborne trade of 4,506 mt in
1994, approximately two-thirds was
bulk cargo and one-third was general
cargo (see Table 1.2) although, since
general cargo has a higher value and
volume, its importance to the shipping
industry is certainly understated by
these statistics.
Although the distinction between
bulk and general cargo is blurred in
statistical terms, in the shipping market
TABLE 1.2 Seaborne trade 1987–94
Source: Fearnley’s Annual Review 1995, Table
1, and World Bulk Trades (1985 and 1995),
Table 1
Note: Dry bulk in vessels under 50,000 dwt
estimated on the basis of a fleet of 105.3 m.dwt
transporting 5.5 mt per annum. Derivation of
the estimate of containerized cargo can be
found in Table 10.5

19
there is no such lack of clarity; the industry has evolved a totally different approach
to the shipment of bulk cargo from that used to transport general cargo.
1.4 The world merchant fleet
The world merchant fleet grew from 9 m grt in 1860 to over 491 mgt in 1995 (Figure
1.5). In December 1995 the world fleet of self propelled sea-going merchant ships
over 100 gross tons stood at 82,890 vessels with a capacity of 491 mgt. Within this
total cargo-carrying vessels account for 95 per cent of the gross tonnage (465 mgt)
but only 53 per cent of the numbers (43,802 vessels). The remaining 39,088 non-
cargo-carrying vessels included 23,929 fishing boats, 2,845 offshore support vessels,
7,721 tugs, 818 research vessels, 1,125 dredgers and 2,650 other non-cargo vessels.
Types of ship in the cargo fleet
What sort of cargo carrying ships does the fleet consist of? During the last century
there has been a steady flow of new ship designs developed to carry particular
types of cargo, with the result that today there are many different categories of
specialized vessels used in the shipping business. A few of the major innovations
are shown in Figure 1.5, starting with the first bulk carrier in 1852. However,
although some ship types are well defined, it is surprisingly difficult question to
divide the fleet into clearly defined categories which provide a sound starting point
for analysing supply. Merchant ships are not mass-produced like cars or trucks
and few ships in the fleet are precisely the same. Most are designed to meet a
specific owner’s needs, so classifying ships into types relies on selecting distinctive
physical characteristics which serve to identify the ‘type’ of ship when it is built.
This approach has its limitations. For example oil tankers are readily identifiable
from their hull structure, but ‘products tankers’ are not clearly defined as a separate
group because they do not have any distinctive hull characteristics.
Lloyds Register of Shipping divide the cargo fleet into sixteen main categories
of ship, mainly determined by the characteristics of the hull, as shown in Figure
1.6. The four biggest groups, which account for 78 per cent of the tonnage, are oil
tankers, bulk carriers, general cargo ships and container ships. The eight other
groups cover more specialized vessels, including combined carriers (which can
carry oil or dry bulk), chemical tankers, gas tankers, ro-ro vessels, and refrigerated
cargo vessels. The characteristics of these merchant ships is discussed in greater
detail in Chapter 11.
However there is much more to analysing the supply of merchant ships than
identifying ship types. Since ships have a life of twenty or thirty years, the fleet
trading at a particular point in time is a diverse mixture of technology representing
the cumulative investment decisions of several generations of shipowners. In recent
years the design of ships has advanced enormously as technology has been adapted
to improve the efficiency of vessels in these trades. Four aspects of this evolution
deserve special mention, shipbuilding technology, economies of scale, cargo
specialization and cargo handling. Each of these has played an important part in
the industry’s response to the challenge of providing cheaper and better transport.
THE WORLD MERCHANT FLEET

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
20
FIGURE 1.5 Innovation in the world merchant fleet
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping

21
Developments in ship design
The technical efficiency of merchant ships has grown with the technical capability
of the shipbuilder, who constructs the hull, and the marine engineering industry
which supplies machinery and equipment. Modern shipping started in the 1860s
when shipbuilders were first able to build a commercially viable iron hulled
steamship.21 More efficient compound steam engines permitted long voyages and
the iron hulls were more consistently watertight than their wooden predecessors.
For the first time shipping became a business that could be planned and run to a
timetable. Between 1880 and 1914 the steamers drove out the sailing ships. It was
a hard fought battle spread over thirty years, with steamers forcing the sailing
ships to the secondary routes and finally to the scrapyard. There were other technical
changes along the way, though none so fundamental. The first deep sea diesel-
powered ship, the Selandia went into service in 1912 and over the next fifty years
the diesel engine replaced the steam engine, except in the largest ships. Welding
started to replace rivets in hull construction and automation halved the number of
crew required to man a deep sea vessel.
More recently the improvements, though less dramatic, have been equally real.
Hatch designs, cargo handling gear, and navigation equipment all improved in
efficiency. During the 1980s the fuel efficiency of diesel engines increased by 25
per cent. Shipbuilders became more adept at fine tuning hull designs, with the
result that for some ship types the tonnage of steel was reduced by 30 per cent; hull
FIGURE 1.6 Ship types—cargo-carrying ships 31 December 1995
Source: Lloyd’s Register of Shipping ‘World Fleet Statistics’
THE WORLD MERCHANT FLEET

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
22
paints improved to give better smoothness for the submerged hull and improved
longevity for tank coatings.
The growth of ship size
The second dominant trend is in the size of ships. In 1776 Adam Smith talked
enthusiastically about the efficiency of the ship that ‘carries and brings back 200
tons weight of goods.’ By 1876 when shipbrokers talked about a ‘handy’ vessel
they meant 3,000 gross tons. Today a handy bulk carrier is 45,000 dwt. However,
the increase of size has been greatest in the specialized trades where transport
integration has provided the investment in ports and cargo handling facilities needed
to operate very large vessels.
The outstanding example is the oil industry. During the twentieth century the
average size of tanker increased from 4,000 tons to 95,000 tons (Figure 1.7). To
begin with the progress was very slow. The Narraganset, 12,500 dwt was built in
1903 and this remained a very acceptable size of vessel until the late 1940s. At the
end of the Second World War in 1945 the largest tanker was the Nash Bulk of
23,814 dwt. Then in the 1950s tanker sizes started to increase. At this time the
Suez Canal restricted the size of tanker which could be used in the Middle East to
Europe trade. The closure of the canal in 1956 and the rapid growth of the Japanese
trade finally undermined this barrier to size and in the 1960s tanker sizes shot
upwards. In 1959 the largest tanker afloat was the Universe Apollo 122,867 dwt.
The first Very Large Crude Carrier (VLCC) the Idemitsu Maru followed in 1966
and the first Ultra Large Crude carrier (ULCC) in 1968. This upward trend reached
FIGURE 1.7 Average size of tanker 1900–97
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources

23
its peak in 1980 when the Seawise Giant was extended to 555,843 dwt.22 This
increase in ship size had the effect of reducing unit shipping costs by at least 75 per
cent.
In dry bulk shipping, the move into large bulk vessels was equally pronounced.
Iron ore bulk transport started in the 1920s with the use of 24,000 dwt ore carriers.23
By the 1970s vessels of 200,000 dwt were widely in use on the volume routes,
while the first generation of 300,000 dwt vessels started to come into service in the
mid-1980s. There was also a steady upward movement in the size of ships used for
the transport of commodities such as grain, sugar, non-ferrous metal ores and forest
products. Taking the grain trade as an example, in the late 1960s most of the
grain shipped by sea was in vessels under 25,000 dwt.24 It seemed inconceivable
to shippers in the business that vessels of 60,000 dwt could ever be used
extensively in the grain trade, although by the early 1980s this is precisely what
had happened.
By capitalizing on economies of scale and developing integrated transport
systems, bulk shipping has reduced transport costs to such an extent that it is often
cheaper for industries to import raw materials by sea from suppliers several thousand
miles away than by land from suppliers only a few hundred miles away.
Cargo specialization
Specialization is the cornerstone of economic development and this is precisely
the path followed by the shipping industry. With each decade new ship types were
developed to improve the transportation of specific cargoes, as shown in Figure
1.5. The first bulk carrier was designed in 1852, the first tanker in 1886, the first
refrigerated vessel in 1880, the first combined carrier in 1925, the first chemical
tanker in 1956, the first car carrier in 1956, and the first deep sea cellular container
ship in 1965. All of these vessel types are represented in the fleet today in substantial
numbers.
Some of the specialist vessels did not last the course. The outstanding example
is the passenger liner, designed to carry passengers and mail at great speed. These
vessels started to be built in the second half of the nineteenth century and reached
their peak immediately before the First World War when cargo liners of 800 feet in
length and capable of crossing the Atlantic in four days were constructed. After the
Second World War this market was lost to air transport and the passenger liner
disappeared from the seas. If nothing else, this illustrates the continuous ebb and
flow of specialization within the shipping market.
The cargo handling revolution
Getting cargo in and out of the ship has always been a problem area, and one
where major improvements have been made. New cargo handling techniques
revolutionized the liner and bulk trades. Usually the cargo handling technology is
more evident in the ports where investment in specialist terminals using high-speed
THE WORLD MERCHANT FLEET

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
24
cargo-handling gear forms an important part of the automation of cargo-handling
systems. However in some trades the introduction of improved cargo-handling
technology has resulted in a major change in the design of the ships.
The biggest change was in the liner trades where cellular container ships and, to
a lesser extent, ro-ro vessels replaced conventional cargo liners. The container
ships have box-shaped holds and cell guides which allow the containers to be
dropped into place below deck, reducing loading times to a matter of minutes. Ro-
ro ships provide access to the cargo holds by ramp, allowing wheeled vehicles
such as fork lift trucks to load cargo at high speed.
Design changes in bulk shipping have been less spectacular, but just as important.
Steel hatch covers with hydraulic opening mechanisms replaced the old system of
canvas and batons. On some ships holds were widened to allow stowage of unitized
bulks such as packaged lumber, steel coils, paper and cotton bales. Cranes replaced
derricks.
Ageing, obsolescence and fleet replacement
The continuous progress in ship technology, combined with the costs of ageing
which grow more evident over the twenty- or thirty-year life of a ship, present the
shipping industry with an interesting economic problem. How do you decide when
ships should be scrapped? Ageing and obsolescence are not clearly defined
conditions. They are subtle and progressive. A great deal of trade is carried by
ships which are obsolete in some way or other. It took fifty years for steam ships to
drive sailing ships from the sea. Yet somehow the industry has to decide when to
scrap the old ships and order new ones.
This is where the sale and purchase market comes in. When an owner has finished
with a ship he sells it. Another shipping company buys it at a price which he believes
he can make a profit. If no owner thinks he can make a profit, only the scrap dealer
will bid. As the ship grows old or obsolete it trickles down the market, falling in
value, until at some stage, usually between twenty and thirty years, it hits the
demolition market. This whole process is eased forward by shipping market cycles.
By driving freight rates and market sentiment sharply upwards (when new ships
are ordered) and downwards (when old ships are scrapped) the cycles make poorly
defined economic decisions much clearer. In case there is any doubt, it reinforces
economics with sentiment. The decision to scrap a ship is much easier if the owner
feels gloomy about the future. Thus, cycle by cycle, fleet replacement lurches
forward. We discuss cycles in Chapter 2 and the four markets which are involved
in the fleet replacement process in Chapter 3.
1.5 The supply of sea transport
How does the shipping market use all the ship types discussed in the last section to
transport all the cargoes described in section 1.3? At first sight it is tempting to
answer this question in terms of ship types—to say that bulk cargo goes in bulk
carriers and general cargo goes in cargo liners. However, this answer would be

25
highly misleading, since, as we shall see in the review of the world fleet in Chapter
11, shipping companies use the ships that are available and that offer the best
profit. In fact one of the main functions of the shipping market mechanism is to
match a sub-optimal fleet of ships to an ever changing pattern of cargo flows, with
the minimum of waste.
The shipping industry unit cost function
Cost dominates the supply side of the shipping market and economies of scale
dominate say that bulk cargo goes in bulk carriers and general cargo goes in the
cost equation. An insight into the economics of providing sea transport can be
obtained from the unit cost function, defined in the following terms:
E1(1)
The unit cost of transporting a ton of cargo in a particular ship depends on the
capital cost of the ship (LC), the cost of operating the ship over its life (OPEX) and
the cost of handling the cargo (CH) divided by the tonnage of cargo it can carry
(PS). Unit costs generally fall as the size of the ship increases because capital,
operating and cargo handling costs do not increase proportionally with the cargo
capacity. For example a 280,000 dwt tanker only costs twice as much as an 80,000
dwt vessel but it carries more than three times as much cargo (we examine this in
more detail in Chapter 4). Thus the cost of carrying very small cargo parcels is
much higher than the cost of large parcels and economies of scale dominate shipping
economics. As parcels become too small to occupy a whole ship the cost escalates
farther because of the high cost of handling and packing small parcels. For example,
crude oil can be transported 12,000 miles from the Arabian Gulf to the USA for
less than $1 per barrel using a 280,000 dwt tanker, whereas the cost of shipping a
ton of lubricating oil from Europe to Singapore in a small parcel can be over $100.
The shape of the cost function is illustrated in Figure 1.8 which relates the cost
per ton of cargo transported on the vertical axis to the parcel size on the horizontal
axis. The shape of the cost function also shows how unit costs escalate as the
parcel size falls below the size of a ship and the cargo slips into the liner transport
system. There is clearly a tremendous incentive to ship in large quantities and it is
the slope of the unit cost curve which creates the economic pressure which has
driven parcel sizes upwards over the last century.
Liner and bulk shipping companies, who operate at opposite ends of the unit
cost function, carry out fundamentally different tasks. Liner companies have to
organize the transport of many small parcels and need a large shore-based staff
capable of dealing with shippers, handling documentation and planning the ship
loading and through transport operations. The bulk shipping industry, in contrast,
handles fewer, but much larger cargoes. A large shore-based administrative staff is
not required, but the few decisions that have to be made are of crucial importance,
THE SUPPLY OF SEA TRANSPORT

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
26
so the owner or chief executive is generally intimately involved with the key
decisions about buying, selling and chartering ships. In short, the type of
organizations involved, the shipping policies, and even the type of people employed
in the two parts of the business are quite different. The nature of the liner and bulk
shipping industries is discussed in detail in Chapters 5 and 6, so the comments in
this chapter are limited to providing an overview of these two principal sectors of
the shipping market.
These differences in the nature of demand provide the basis for explaining the
division of the shipping industry into two quite different sectors, the bulk shipping
industry and the liner shipping industry. The bulk shipping industry is built around
minimizing unit cost, while the liner shipping industry is more concerned with
speed, reliability and quality of service.
The bulk shipping industry
The bulk shipping industry provides transport for cargoes that appear on the market
in shiploads. The principle is ‘one ship, one cargo’, though we cannot be too rigid
about this. Several different bulk cargoes may be carried in a single ship, each
occupying a separate hold or possibly even part of a hold in a traditional ‘tramping
operation’, though this is less common than it used to be. A shipper with bulk
FIGURE 1.8 Shipping cost function
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

27
cargo to transport can approach the task in several different ways, depending on
the cargo itself and on the nature of the commercial operation—his choices range
from total involvement by owning his own ships to handing the whole job over to
a specialist bulk shipper.
Large companies shipping substantial quantities of bulk materials often run their
own shipping fleets to handle a proportion of their transport requirements. For
example, in 1995 the major oil companies collectively owned approximately 22.5
m.dwt of oil tankers, representing 8.5 per cent of the tanker fleet.25 Steel companies
in Japan and Europe also run fleets of large bulk carriers for the transport of iron
ore and coal. This type of bulk shipping operation suits shippers running a stable
and predictable through transport operation.
One of the first examples of modern dry bulk transportation was the construction
for Bethlehem Steel of two ore carriers to carry iron ore from Peru to the newly
constructed coastal steel plant in Baltimore, USA (see Chapter 9). The whole
transport operation was designed to minimize transport costs for that particular
plant and this pattern is still followed by heavy industrial operations importing
bulk cargo. Similarly in the 1970s, two 90,000 dwt bauxite carriers were purpose-
built to carry bauxite from Australia to a newly constructed alumina plant in Sardinia,
Western Europe. In both cases the ships were optimized to provide precisely the
material flow required by the plant at the minimum cost. However, industrial
conglomerates do not necessarily become shipowners just to optimize the shipping
operation. It is also necessary to ensure that basic transport requirements are met
at a predictable cost without the need to resort to the vagaries of the charter market.
The main problem is the capital investment required.26
If the shipper has a long-term requirement for bulk transport but does not wish
to become actively involved as a shipowner, he may charter tonnage on a long-
term basis from a shipowner. Some companies place charters for ten or fifteen
years to provide a base load of shipping capacity to cover long-term material-
supply contracts—particularly in the iron ore trade. For example, the Japanese
shipping company Mitsui OSK ships iron ore for Sumitomo, Nippon Kokan and
Nippon Steel on the basis of long-term cargo guarantees and operates a fleet of ore
carriers and combined carriers to provide this service. In the early 1980s the
company was carrying about 20 per cent of Japanese iron ore imports.27 In such
cases, the contract is generally placed before the vessel is actually built. Shorter-
term time charters for twelve months or three to five years would be obtained on
the charter market.
However, many shippers have only a single cargo to transport. This is often the
case in agricultural trades such as grain and sugar where seasonal factors and the
volatility of the market make it difficult to plan shipping requirements in advance,
or the cargo could be a consignment of prefabricated buildings for the Middle East
or some heavy plant. In such cases, bulk or multi-deck tonnage is chartered for
a single voyage via some market such as the Baltic Exchange, where the shipper
can hire a ship for a single voyage at a negotiated freight rate per ton of cargo
carried.
Finally, the shipper may enter into a long-term arrangement with a shipowner
who specializes in a particular area of bulk shipping supported by suitable tonnage.
THE SUPPLY OF SEA TRANSPORT

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
28
For example, Scandinavian shipowners such as Star Shipping or the Gearbulk
group are heavily involved in the carriage of forest products from West Coast
North America to Europe and run fleets of specialist ships designed to optimize
the bulk transportation of forest products. Similarly, the transportation of motor
cars is serviced by companies such as Wallenius Lines, which runs a fleet of pure
vehicle carriers servicing the Japanese car export trade.
The service offered in specialist bulk trades involves adherence to precise
timetables, using ships with a high cargo capacity and fast cargo handling. Such an
operation requires close cooperation between the shipper and the shipowner, the
latter offering a better service because he is servicing the whole trade rather than
just one customer. Naturally, this type of operation occurs only in trades where
investment in specialist tonnage can provide a significant cost reduction or quality
improvement as compared with use of general-purpose bulk tonnage.
Many different ship types are used for bulk transport but the main ones fall into
four groups: tankers, general-purpose dry bulk carriers, combined carriers and
specialist bulk vessels. The tankers and bulk carriers are generally of fairly standard
design, while combined carriers offer the opportunity to carry dry bulk or liquid
cargo. Specialist vessels are constructed to meet specific characteristics of difficult
cargoes. All of these ship types are reviewed in detail in Chapter 11.
The liner shipping industry
Liner services provide transport for cargoes that are too small to fill a single ship
and need to be grouped with others for transportation. The ships operate a regular
advertised service between ports, carrying cargo at fixed prices for each commodity,
though discounts may be offered to regular customers. The transport of a mass of
small items on a regular service faces the liner operator with a more complex
administrative task than the one facing the bulk shipowner. The liner operator must
be able to:
•
offer a regular service for many small cargo consignments and process the
associated mass of paperwork;
•
charge individual consignments on a fixed tariff basis that yields an overall
profit—not an easy task when many thousands of consignments must be
processed each week;
•
load the cargo/container into the ship in a way that ensures that it is accessible
for discharge (bearing in mind that the ship will call at many ports) and that
the ship is ‘stable’ and ‘in trim’;
•
run the service to a fixed schedule while allowing for all the normal delays—
arising from adverse weather, breakdowns, strikes, etc.; and
•
plan tonnage availability to service the trades, including the repair and
maintenance of existing vessels, the construction of new vessels and the
chartering-in of additional vessels to meet cyclical requirements, and to
supplement the company’s fleet of owned vessels.

29
All of this is management intensive and explains why, in commercial terms, the
liner business is a different world from bulk shipping. The skills, expertise and
organizational requirements are very different.
Because of their high overheads and the need to maintain a regular service even
when a full payload of cargo is not available, the liner business is particularly
vulnerable to marginal cost pricing by other shipowners operating on the same
trade routes. To overcome this, liner companies developed the ‘conference system’,
which was first tried out in the Britain to Calcutta trade in 1875. In the 1980s there
were about 350 shipping conferences operating on both deep sea and short sea
routes. However, the prolonged market recession in the 1980s, the changes brought
about by containerization and regulatory intervention weakened the system to such
an extent that liner operators started to look for other ways of stabilizing their
competitive position. Liner operations are discussed extensively in Chapter 10.
1.6 The role of ports in the transport system
There is a third component in the transport system which is just as important as the
merchant fleet. Ports are the crucial interface between land and sea. It is here that
much of the real activity takes place. In the days of cargo liners and tramps the
activity was obvious. Ports were crowded with ships and bustling with dockers
loading and unloading cargo. Artists loved to paint these busy scenes and the
waterfronts were famous for the entertainment they provided to sailors during their
long portcalls. Anyone could see what was going on. Modern ports are more subtle.
Today, ships make fleeting calls at highly automated and apparently deserted
terminals, sometimes stopping only a few hours to load or discharge cargo. The
activity is less obvious but much more intense. Cargo handling speeds today are
many times higher than they were twenty or thirty years ago.
Before discussing ports we must define three terms ‘port’, ‘port authority’ and
‘terminal’. A Port is a geographical area where ships are brought alongside land to
load and discharge cargo—usually a sheltered deep water area such as a bay or
river mouth. The Port Authority is the organization responsible for providing the
various maritime services required to bring ships alongside land. Ports may be
public bodies, government organizations or private companies. One Port Authority
may control several ports, e.g., Saudi Ports Authority. Finally, terminal is a section
of the port consisting of one or more berths devoted to a particular type of cargo
handling. Thus we have coal terminals, container terminals, etc. Terminals may be
owned and operated by the port authority, or by a shipping company which operates
the terminal for its exclusive use.
Ports have several important functions which are crucial to the efficiency of the
ships which trade between them. Their main purpose is to provide a secure location
where ships can berth. However, this is just the beginning. Improved cargo handling
requires investment in shore-based facilities. If bigger ships are to be used, ports
must be built with deep water in the approach channels and at the berths. Of equal
importance is cargo handling, one of the key elements in system design. A versatile
port must be able to handle different cargoes—bulk, containers, wheeled vehicles,
general cargo and passengers all require different facilities. There is also the matter
THE ROLE OF PORTS IN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
30
of providing storage facilities for inbound and outbound cargoes. Finally, land
transport systems must be efficiently integrated into the port operations. Railways,
roads and inland waterways converge on ports and these transport links must be
managed efficiently.
Port improvement plays a major part in reducing sea transport costs. Some of
this technical development is carried out by the shipping companies who construct
special terminals for their trade, or shippers such as oil companies and steel mills.
For example, the transfer of grain transport from small vessels of 20–30,000 dwt
to vessels of 60,000 dwt and above depended upon the construction of grain
terminals with bulk handling and storage facilities. Similarly the introduction of
container services required container terminals. However the port industry provides
much of the investment itself. It has its own marketplace which is every bit as
competitive as the shipping markets. The ports within a region are locked in cut-
throat competition to attract the cargo moving to inland destinations or for
distribution within the region. Hoong Kong competes with Singapore for the Far
East container distribution trade. Rotterdam has established itself as the premier
European port in competition with Hamburg, Bremen, Antwerp and, in earlier times,
Liverpool. Investment in facilities plays a key part in the competitive process.
The facilities provided in a port depend on the type and volume of cargo which
FIGURE 1.9 Four levels of port development
Source: Martin Stopford, 1997

31
is in transit. As trade changes, so do the ports. There is no such thing as a typical
port. Each has a mix of facilities designed to meet the trade of the region it serves.
However, it is possible to generalize about the type of port facilities which can be
found in different areas. As an example four types of port complex are shown in
Figure 1.9, representing four different levels of activity. In very rough terms, the
blocks in these diagrams represent, in width, the number of facilities or length of
quay wall, and in height, the annual throughput of each.
•
Type 1 Small local port: Around the world there are thousands of small ports
serving local trade. They handle varied cargo flows, often serviced by short
sea vessels. Since the trade volume is small the facilities are basic, consisting
of general purpose berths backing on to warehouses. Only small ships can be
accommodated and the port probably handles a mixture of containers, break-
bulk cargo plus shipments of commodities in packaged form (e.g. part loads
of wheat in bags, or oil in drums) or shipped loose and packaged in the hold
prior to discharge. Cargo is unloaded from the ship on to the quayside and
stored in the warehouses, or on the quayside until collected. Ports like this are
found in the developing countries and in the rural areas of developed countries.
•
Type 2 Large local port: When cargo is higher, special investment becomes
economic. For example, if the volume of grain and fertilizers increases a dry
bulk terminal may be constructed with the deeper draft required to handle
bigger bulk carriers (e.g. up to 35,000 dwt), a quayside with grab cranes, apron
space to stack cargo, railway lines and truck access. At the same time the
break-bulk facilities may be expanded to handle regular container traffic, for
example, by purchasing container handling equipment and strengthening the
quayside.
•
Type 3 Large regional port: Ports handling high volumes of deep sea cargo
require heavy investment in specialized terminal facilities. Unit loads such as
pallets, containers or packaged timber are handled in sufficient volume to justify
a unit load terminal with cargo handling gear such as gantry cranes, fork lift
trucks and storage space for unit load cargo. For high volume commodity
trades, moving in volumes of several mt a year, special terminals may be built
(e.g. coal, grain, oil products terminals) capable of taking the bigger ships of
60,000 dwt and above used in the deep sea bulk trades.
•
Type 4 Regional distribution centres: Regional ports have a wider role as
distribution centres for cargo shipped deep sea in very large ships, and requiring
distribution to smaller local ports. This type of port, of which Rotterdam, Hong
Kong and Singapore are prime examples, consists of a federation of specialist
terminals, each dedicated to a particular cargo. Containers are handled in
container terminals; unit load terminals cater for timber, iron and steel and ro/
ro cargo. Homogeneous bulk cargoes such as grain, iron, coal, cement and oil
products are handled in purpose built terminals, often run by the cargo owner.
There are excellent facilities for trans-shipment by sea, rail, barge or road.
Ports and terminals earn income by charging ships for the use of their facilities.
Leaving aside competitive factors, port charges must cover unit costs and these
THE ROLE OF PORTS IN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
32
have a fixed and variable element. The shipowner may be charged in two ways, an
‘all in’ rate where, apart from some minor ancillary services, everything is included;
or an ‘add-on’ rate where the shipowner pays a basic charge to which extras are
added for the various services used by the ship during its visit to the port. The
method of charging will depend upon the type of cargo operation but both will
vary according to volume, with trigger points activating tariff changes.
1.7 The shipping companies who run the business
Who makes the decisions?
Perhaps the most striking aspect of the shipping business to an outsider is the
totally different character of the companies in different parts of the industry. For
example liner companies and bulk shipping companies belong to the same industry,
but they seem to have little else in common, a fact we shall discuss more extensively
in later parts of the book.
Within the bulk and liner shipping industries there are many different types of
business, each with its own distinctive organizational structure, commercial aims
and strategic objectives. Consider the examples in Box 1.2. This is by no means an
exhaustive account of the different types of shipowning companies, but it illustrates
the diversity of organizational types to be found and, more importantly, the different
pressures and constraints on management decision-making.
The Greek shipowner with the private company runs a small tight organization
over which he has total autocratic control—he makes all the decisions and has a
direct personal interest in their outcome. In fact, the number of important decisions
he makes is quite small, being concerned with the sale and purchase of ships
and decisions about whether to tie vessels up on long time charters. He is a free
agent, dependent on his own resources to raise finance and beat the odds in the
marketplace.
The other examples show larger structures where the top management are more
remote from the day-to-day operation of the business and are subject to many
institutional pressures and constraints in operating and developing the business.
The container company has a large and complex office staff and agency network to
manage, so there is an unavoidable emphasis on administration. The oil company
division reports to a main board, whose members know little about the shipping
business and do not always share the objectives of the management of the shipping
division. The shipping corporate is under pressure from its high profile with
shareholders and its vulnerability to take-over during periods when they market
does not allow a proper return on capital employed. Each company is different and
this influences the way it approaches the market.
1.8 Politics versus economics in shipping
Finally, however hard we try to develop the analysis in economic terms, shipping
is an international business and the economic forces that make it so significant in

33
Private bulk company A tramp company owned by two Greek brothers. They run
a fleet of five ships, three products tankers and two small bulk carriers. The company
has a two-room office in the West End of London run by a chartering manager with a
telex and a part-time secretary. Its main office is in Athens where two or three staff do
the accounts and administration and sort out any problems. Three of the ships are on
time charters and two are on the spot market. One of the brothers is now more or less
retired and all the important decisions are taken by the other brother who knows from
experience that the real profits are made from buying and selling ships rather than
from trading them on the charter market.    
Shipping corporate A liner company in the container business. The company operates
a fleet of around twenty container ships from a large modern office block housing
about 1,000 staff. All major decisions are taken by the main board, which consists of
twelve executive board members along with representatives of major stockholders. In
addition to the head office, the company runs an extensive network of local offices
and agencies who look after their affairs in the various ports. The head office has
large departments dealing with ship operations, marketing, secretariat, personnel and
legal. In total the company has 3,500 people on its payroll, 2,000 shore staff and
1,500 sea staff.    
Shipping division The shipping division of an international oil company. The company
has a policy of transporting 30–40 per cent of its oil shipments in company-owned
vessels, and the division is responsible for all activities associated with the acquisition
and operation of these vessels. There is a divisional board, which is responsible for
day-to-day decisions, but major decisions about the sale and purchase of ships or any
change in the activities undertaken by the division must be approved by the main
board. Each year the vice-president is responsible for submitting a corporate plan to
the board, summarizing the division’s business objectives and setting out its operating
plans and financial forecasts. In particular, company regulations lay down that any
items of capital expenditure in excess of $2 million must have main board approval.
Currently the division is running a fleet of ten very large crude carriers (VLCCs) and
thirty-six small tankers from an organization that occupies several floors in one of the
company’s office blocks.    
Diversified shipping group A company which started in shipping but has now
acquired other interests. It runs a fleet of more that sixty ships from offices on the
outskirts of London, where it was relocated when the group sold its prestige City office
block. The company is quoted on the London Stock Market and the majority of shares
are owned by institutional investors, so its financial and managerial performance is
closely followed by investment analysts who specialize in shipping. The company is
organized into divisions, with a bulk shipping division, a liner shipping division and a
division running cruise ships. In recent years the problems of operating in the highly
cyclical shipping market have resulted in strenuous efforts to diversify into other activities.
Recently the company was the subject of a major takeover bid, which was successfully
resisted but management is under constant pressure to increase the return on capital
employed in the business.    
Semi-public shipping group A Scandinavia shipping company started by a
Norwegian who purchased small tankers in the early 1920s. Although it is quoted on
the Stock Exchange, the family still owns a controlling interest in the company. Since
the Second World War the company has followed a strategy of progressively moving
into more sophisticated markets, and it is involved in liner shipping, oil tankers, and
the carriage of specialist bulk cargoes such as motor vehicles and forest products, in
both of which markets it has succeeded in winning a sizable market share and a
reputation for quality and reliability of service. To improve managerial control the
tanker business was recently floated as a separate company. The company runs a
large fleet of modern merchant ships designed to give high cargo handling performance,
and is based in an Oslo office with a sizable staff.
Box 1.2 Examples of typical shipping company structures
POLITICS VERSUS ECONOMICS IN SHIPPING

ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE SHIPPING MARKET
34
economic terms also make it the subject of national and international political
intervention. The Rochdale Report we referred to in section 1.1 concluded its
definition of the shipping industry with the comment:
Most of the industry’s business is concerned with international trade and
inevitably it operates within a complicated world pattern of agreements between
shipping companies, understandings with shippers and policies of governments.28
Such matters cannot be ignored. Over the last hundred years the maritime industry
has seen an escalation of political involvement. From the Plimsoll Act (1870) which
stopped ships being overloaded, to the US Oil Pollution Act (1990) which set out
stringent regulations and liabilities for tankers trading in US national waters,
politicians have sought to limit the actions of shipowners. Interest in subjects such
as safety at sea, crew regulations, environmental pollution and the physical condition
of ships have all increased in the 1990s.
Just as these subjects cannot easily be understood without some knowledge of
the maritime economic framework within which the game is being played out, an
economic analysis cannot ignore the political influences on costs, prices and free
market competition.
1.9 Summary
In this chapter we have concentrated on the shipping market as a whole. During
the last fifty years the cost of transporting major commodities by sea has fallen
steadily. Our aim is to show how this has been achieved and how the different parts
of the shipping market—the liner business, bulk shipping, the charter market, etc.—
fit together. We have discussed market organization and the economic mechanisms
which match a diverse fleet of merchant ships to an equally diverse but constant
changing pattern of seaborne trade.
Because shipping is a service business, ship demand depends on several factors
including price, speed, reliability and security. It starts from the volume of trade
and we discussed how the commodity trades can be analysed by dividing them
into groups which share economic characteristics such as energy, agricultural trades,
metal industry trades, forest products trades and other industrial manufactures.
However to explain how transport is organized we introduced the parcel size
distribution. The shape of the PSD function varies from one commodity to another.
The key distinction is between ‘bulk cargoes’, which enters the market in ship size
consignments and ‘general cargo’, which consists of many small quantities of cargo
have to be grouped for shipment.
Bulk cargo is transported on a ‘one ship, one cargo’ basis, generally using bulk
carriers. Where trade flows are predictable, for example, servicing a steel mill,
fleets of ships may be built for the trade or vessels chartered in on a long-term
basis. Some shipping companies also run bulk shipping services geared to the
transport of special cargoes such as forest products and cars. For trades such as
grain where the quantities and routes are unpredictable, tonnage is drawn from the
charter market. To meet marginal fluctuations in demand, or for trades such as

35
grain where the quantities and routes over which cargo will be transported are
unpredictable, tonnage is drawn from the charter market.
General cargo, either loose or unitized, is transported by liner services which
offer regular transport, accepting any cargo at a fixed tariff. In the mid-1960s the
liner trades were containerized, which turned loose general cargo into a
homogeneous commodity which could be handled in bulk. This changed the ships
used in the liner trades, with cellular container ships replacing the diverse fleet of
cargo liners. However the complexity of handling many small consignments
remained and the liner business remained distinct from the bulk shipping business.
They do, however, go to the charter market to obtain ships to meet marginal trading
requirements.
Sea transport is carried out by a fleet of 80,000 ships, of which about 25,000
carry cargo in the deep sea trades. Since technology is constantly changing and
ships gradually wear out, the fleet is never optimum. It is a resource which the
shipping market uses in the most profitable way it can. Once they are built, ships
‘trickle down’ the economic ladder until no shipowner is prepared to buy them for
trading, when they are scrapped. The management of the supply of sea transport
falls into two industrial segments, the bulk shipping industry which transports ship-
sized parcels, and the liner shipping industry which transports small cargo parcels.
They have different tasks, which they approach in totally different ways.
Ports play a vital part in the transport process. Automation of cargo handling
and investment in specialist terminals have transformed the business.
Finally, we discussed the organization of the companies that run the business.
They have very varied organization and decision-making structures, a fact which
market analysts are well advised to remember.
SUMMARY

