77
Chapter 3
The four shipping
markets
Economists understand by the term Market, not any particular market
place in which things are bought and sold, but the whole of any region in
which buyers and sellers are in such free intercourse with one another
that the prices of the same goods tend to equality easily and quickly.
(Antoine-Augustin Cournot Researches Into the Mathematical
Principles of the Theory of Wealth 1838 (Trans. N.T.Bacon 1897))
Chapter 3

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
78
3.1 The decisions facing shipowners
A shipowner had a difficult decision to make. He had ordered two 280,000 dwt
VLCCs which an oil company was prepared to charter for five years at $33,000
per day. This would guarantee revenue to cover his finance costs for the first five
years of the ship’s life, but the return on his equity worked out at only 6 per cent
per annum. Not much for the risk he had taken in ordering the ships. In addition,
the time charter would shut him out from the tanker boom he felt sure would
happen in the next few years.
He decided to wait and trade the ships on the spot market. To begin with this
looked like a good decision, since the ships were delivered into a rising market.
Unfortunately the next three years proved to be very poor and the vessels earned
only $15,000 per day each. To meet bank payments the owner was forced to sell
three old combined carriers. Since there were no offers from trading buyers he
eventually sold them to a breaker for $5 million each. Two years earlier they had
been valued at $23 million each.
In this example the shipowner trades in four different markets:
1
The newbuilding market where he ordered the ships;
2
The freight market where he chartered them;
3
The sale and purchase market where he tried to sell the combined carriers; and
4
The demolition market where he finally sold them.
The aim of this chapter is to explain how the four markets work from a practical
viewpoint and to identify the differences between them. How are ships chartered?
How does the sale and purchase market operate and what determines the value of
a ship? What is the difference between buying a new ship and buying a second-
hand one? How did selling the ship for scrap differ from selling it for continued
trading? An understanding of these practical questions lays the foundation for our
discussion of the economic principles in chapter 4.
3.2 The four shipping markets
Jevons, the nineteenth century economist provided a definition of a ‘market’ which,
a century later, still serves very well for shipping. He says:
Originally a market was a public place in a town where provisions and other
objects were exposed for sale; but the word has been generalized, so as to mean
any body of persons who are in intimate business relations and carry on extensive
transactions in any commodity. A great city may contain as many markets as
there are important branches of trade, and these markets may or may not be
localized. The central point of a market is the central exchange, mart or auction
rooms where traders agree to meet and transact business… But this distinction
of locality is not necessary. The traders may be spread over a whole town, or
region of country and yet make a market if they are…in close communication
with each other1

79
In shipping there are four shipping markets trading in different commodities. The
freight market trades sea transport, the sale and purchase market trades second-
hand ships, the newbuilding market trades new ships and the demolition market
deals in scrap ships. Beyond this there is no formal structure. This is an important
point which calls for a warning. In the next two chapters we will discuss the
economics of the shipping markets. While this analysis provides guidance on how
the markets operate, we are not dealing with immutable laws. The fact that market
traders have behaved in a particular way in the past is no guarantee that they will
do so in future. Because markets consist of people going about their business, the
best commercial opportunities often arise when the market behaves inconsistently.
For example, ordering ships at the top of the market cycle is usually bad business,
but if for some reason few ships are ordered, the rule will not apply. Commercial
judgements must be based on an understanding of market dynamics, not economic
principles taken out of context.
Because the same shipowners are trading in all four shipping markets their
activities are closely correlated. When freight rates rise or fall the changing sentiment
ripples through into the sale and purchase market and from there into the
newbuilding market. The markets are also linked by cash. The relationship is shown
graphically in Figure 3.1. Cash flows back and forth between the industry’s bank
account (represented by the circle) and the four shipping markets (represented by
the squares). The cashflow into the shipping companies’ bank account is shown by
the light shaded bars, while the black bars show outflows. The hatched bars indicate
cash which changes hands from one shipowner to another, but does not change the
cash balance of the industry as a whole.
The main cash inflow is freight revenue. This goes up and down with freight
rates and is the primary mechanism driving the activities of shipping investors.
The other cash inflow comes from the demolition market. Old or obsolete vessels
sold to scrap dealers provide a useful source of cash, especially during recessions.
The sale and purchase (S&P) market has a more subtle role. Investing in a second-
hand ship involves a transaction between a shipowner and an investor. Because the
investor is usually another shipowner money changes hands, but the transaction
does not affect the amount of cash held by the industry. The sale of a tanker for $20
million just transfers $20 million cash from one shipping bank account to another,
leaving the aggregate cash balance unchanged.2 In this sense the sale and purchase
market is a zero sum game. For every winner there is a loser. The only real source
of wealth is trading cargo in the freight market.3 In the case of the newbuilding
market the cashflow (shown in black) is in the opposite direction. Cash spent on
new ships flows out of the shipping industry because the shipyard uses it to pay for
materials, labour and profit.
Waves of cash flowing between the four markets drive the shipping market
cycle. At the beginning of the cycle freight rates rise and cash starts to pour in,
allowing shipowners to pay higher prices for second-hand ships. As prices are bid
up investors turn to the newbuilding market which now looks better value. With
the confidence created by bulging wallets they order many new ships. A couple of
years later the ships arrive on the market and the whole process goes into reverse.
Falling freight rates squeeze the cash inflow just as investors start paying for their
THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
80
newbuildings. Financially weak owners who cannot meet their day-to-day
obligations are forced to sell ships on the second-hand market. This is the point at
which the asset play market starts for those shipowners with strong balance sheets.
In extreme circumstances like 1932 or 1986 modern ships change hands at bargain
prices. For older ships there will be no offers from trading buyers, so hard pressed
owners are obliged to sell for demolition. As more ships are scrapped the supply
falls, freight rates are bid up and the whole process starts again.
The whole commercial process is controlled and co-ordinated by cashflow
between markets. Cash is the ‘stick and carrot’ which the market uses to drive
Note: This diagram shows the cashflow in the shipping market. It involves three markets, the
Freight Market, the Sale and Purchase Market and the Newbuilding Market. Note that cash
invested in newbuildings shows OUT of the industry, while the main inflows come from freight
earnings and scrap.
FIGURE 3.1 The four markets which control shipping
Source: Martin Stopford Maritime Economics, 2nd edn, 1997

81
activity in the required direction. Whether they like it or not, shipowners are part
of a process which controls the price of the ships they trade and the revenue they
earn.
3.3 The freight market
What is the freight market?
The freight market is one of the markets Jevons must have had in mind when he
wrote the definition cited in the previous section. The original freight market, the
Baltic Shipping Exchange, was opened in London in 1883, though its functions
had long been performed, in a less organized way, by the Baltic Coffee House. The
Baltic operates in exactly the way Jevons described. At this institution merchants
looking for transport met ships’ Captains looking for cargo. The freight market
today remains a marketplace in which sea transport is bought and sold, though the
business is mainly transacted by telephone and telex rather than on the floor of the
Baltic. Nowadays there is a single international freight market but, just as there are
separate sections for cows and pigs in the country market, there are separate markets
for different ships in the freight market. In the short term the freight rates for
tankers, bulk carriers, container ships behave quite differently, but because it is the
same group of traders, what happens in one sector eventually ripples through into
the others. Also, because it takes time for ships to move around the world, there are
separate regional markets which are only accessible to ships ready to load cargo in
that area. This becomes important when we discuss the theory of short term and
long-term freight rate determination in section 4 of the next chapter.
The freight market has two different types of transaction, the freight contract in
which the shipper buys transport from the shipowner at a fixed price per ton of
cargo and the time charter under which the ship is hired by the day. The freight
contract suits shippers who prefer to pay an agreed sum and leave the management
of the transport to the shipowner, while the time charter is for experienced ship
operators who prefer to manage the transport themselves.
Fixing a ship
When a ship is chartered or a freight rate is agreed, the ship is said to be ‘fixed’.
Fixtures are arranged in much the same way as any major international hiring or
subcontracting operation. Shipowners have vessels for hire, charterers have cargo
to transport, and brokers puts the deal together. Let us briefly consider the part
played by each of these:
The shipowner comes to the market with a ship available, free of cargo. The
ship has a particular speed, cargo capacity, dimensions and cargo handling gear.
Existing contractual commitments will determine the date and location at which it
will become available. For example, it may be a Panamax bulk carrier currently on
a voyage from the US Gulf to deliver grain to Japan, so it will be ‘open’ (available
for hire) in Japan from the anticipated date at which the coal has been discharged,
THE FREIGHT MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
82
Shipper Individual or company with cargo to transport.
Charterer Individual or company who hires a ship.
Charter-party Contract setting out the terms on which the shipper contracts for the
transportation of his cargo or the charterer contracts for the hire of a ship.
Voyage charter Ship earns freight per ton of cargo transported on terms set out in
the charter-party which specifies the precise nature and volume of cargo, the port(s)
of loading and discharge and the laytime and demurrage. All costs paid by the
shipowner.
Consecutive voyage charter Vessel hired to perform a series of consecutive voyages
between A and B.
Contract of Affreightment (COA) Shipowner undertakes to carry quantities of a
specific cargo on a particular route or routes over a given period of time using ships
of his choice within specified restrictions.
Period charter The vessels is hired for a specified period of time for payment of a
daily, monthly or annual fee. There are three types, time charter, trip charter and
consecutive voyage charter.
Time charter Ship earns hire, monthly or semi-monthly. The shipowner retains
possession and mans and operates ship under instructions from charterer who pays
voyage costs (see chapter 3 for definition).
Trip charter Fixed on a time charter basis for the period of a specific voyage and for
the carriage of a specific cargo. Shipowner earns ‘hire’ per day for the period
determined by the voyage.
Bare boat charter The owner of the ship contracts (for a fee, usually long-term) to
another party for its operation. The ship is then operated by the second party as if
he owned it.
Laytime The period of time agreed between the party to a voyage charter during
which the owner will make ship available for loading/discharging of cargo.
Demurrage The money payable to the shipowner for delay for which he is not
responsible in loading and/or discharging beyond the laytime.
Despatch Means the money which the owner agreed to repay if the ship is loaded or
discharged in less than the laytime allowed in the charter-party (customarily
demurrage).
Common abbreviations
c.i.f. The purchase price of the goods (by importer) include payment of insurance and
freight which is arranged by the exporter.
f.o.b. Goods are purchased at cost and the importer makes his own arrangement for
insurance and freight.
BOX 3.1 Glossary of chartering terms

83
say 12 May. Depending upon his ‘chartering strategy’, the shipowner may be
looking for a short charter for the vessel or a long charter.
The shipper or charterer may be someone with a volume of cargo to transport
from one location to another or a company that needs an extra ship for a period of
time. The quantity, timing and physical characteristics of the cargo will determine
the type of shipping contract required. For example, the shipper may have a cargo
of 50,000 tons of coal to ship from Newcastle, New South Wales, to Rotterdam.
Such a cargo might be very attractive to a bulk carrier operator discharging coal in
Japan and looking for a cargo to reposition into the North Atlantic, because he has
only a short ballast leg from Japan to Australia and then a full cargo back to Europe.
The question is, how does the shipper contact the shipowner?
Often the principal (i.e. the owner or charterer) will appoint a shipbroker to act
for him. The broker’s task is to discover what cargoes or ships are available; what
the owners/ charterers want to be paid; and what is reasonable given the state of
the market. With this information they negotiate the deal for their client, often in
tense competition with other brokers. Brokers provide other services including
post fixture processing, dealing with disputes, and providing accounting services
in respect of freight, demurrage, etc. Some owners or shippers carry out these
tasks themselves. However, this requires a staff and management structure which
only very large companies can justify. For this reason most owners and charterers
use one or more brokers. Since broking is all about information, brokers tend to
gather in shipping centres. London remains the biggest, with other major centres
in New York, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Singapore, Piraeus, Oslo, Hamburg, etc.
Four types of contractual arrangement are commonly used. Under a voyage
charter, the shipowner contracts to carry a specific cargo in a specific ship for a
negotiated price per ton. A variant on the same theme is the contract of affreightment,
in which the shipowner contracts to carry regular tonnages of cargo for an agreed
price per ton. The time charter is an agreement between owner and charterer to
hire the ship, complete with crew, for a fee per day, month or year. Finally the bare
boat charter hires out the ship without crew or any operational responsibilities.
The voyage charter
A voyage charter provides transport for a specific cargo from port A to port B for
a fixed price per ton. For example, a grain trader may have 25,000 tons of grain to
transport from Port Cartier in Canada to Tilbury in the UK. So what does he do?
He calls his broker and tells him that he needs transport for the cargo. The broker
will ‘fix’ (i.e. charter) a ship for the voyage at a negotiated freight rate per ton of
cargo, e.g. $5.20. The terms will be set out in a charter-party and, if all goes well,
the ship arrives on the due date, loads the cargo, transports it to Tilbury, discharges
and the transaction is complete.
If the voyage is not completed within the terms of charter-party then there will
be a claim. For example, if laytime (i.e. port time) at Tilbury is specified at seven
days and the time counted in port is ten days, the owner submits a claim for three
days demurrage to the charterer. Conversely, if the ship spends only five days in
THE FREIGHT MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
84
port, the charterer will submit a claim for two days despatch to the owner. The
rates for demurrage and despatch are stated in dollars per day in the charter-
party.
The calculation of demurrage and despatch does not normally present problems,
but cases do arise where the charterer disputes the owner’s right to demurrage.
Demurrage becomes particularly important when there is port congestion. During
the 1970s there were delays of up to six months in discharging cargo in the Middle
East and Lagos, while during the coal boom of 1979–80 bulk carriers had to wait
several months to load coal at Baltimore and Hampton Roads. In cases where the
demurrage cannot be accurately predicted it is important to the charterer that he
receives a demurrage payment equivalent to his daily hire charge.
The contract of affreightment
The Contract of Affreightment (COA) is a little more complicated. The shipowner
agrees to carry a series of cargo parcels for a fixed price per ton. For example, the
shipper may have a contract to supply ten consignments of 50,000 tons of coal
from Colombia to Rotterdam at two-monthly intervals. He would like to arrange
for the shipment in a single contract at an agreed price per ton and leave the details
of each voyage to the shipowner. This allows the shipowner to plan the use of his
ships in the most efficient manner. He can switch cargo between vessels to give the
best possible operating pattern and consequently a lower charter rate. He may also
be able to arrange backhaul cargoes which improve the utilization of the ship.
Companies who specialize in COAs sometimes describe their business as ‘industrial
shipping’ because their aim is to provide a service. Since a long-term contract is
involved, COAs involve a greater commitment to marketing the service to the shipper
and providing an efficient service.
Most COA business is in the major dry bulk cargoes of iron ore and coal and the
major customers are the steel mills of Europe and the Far East. The problem in
negotiating COAs is that the precise volume and timing of cargo shipments is not
generally known in advance. Cargo volume may be specified as a range (e.g.
‘minimum x and maximum y tons’) while timing may rely on generalizations such
as ‘The shipments under the contract shall be evenly spread over the contract period.’
The time charter
A time charter gives the charterer operational control of the ships carrying his
cargo, while leaving ownership and management of the vessel in the hands of the
shipowner. The length of the charter may be the time taken to complete a single
voyage (trip charter) or a period of months or years (period charter). When on
charter, the shipowner continues to pay the operating costs of the vessel (i.e. the
crew, maintenance and repair as detailed in Chapter 4), but the charterer directs the
commercial operations of the vessel and pays all voyage expenses (i.e. bunkers,
port charges and canal dues) and cargo handling costs. With a time charter, the

85
shipowner has a clear basis for preparing the ship budget, since he knows the ship
operating costs from experience and is in receipt of a fixed daily or monthly charter
rate (e.g. $5,000 per day). Often the shipowner will use a long time charter from a
major corporation such as a steel mill or an oil company, as security for a loan to
purchase the ship needed for the trade.
Although simple in principle, in practice time charters are complex and involve
risks for both parties. Details of the contractual agreement are set out in the ‘charter-
party’. The shipowner must state the vessel’s speed, fuel consumption and cargo
capacity. The terms of hire will be adjusted if the ship does not perform to these
standards. The charter-party will also set out the conditions under which the vessel
is regarded as ‘off hire’, for example during emergency repairs, when the charterer
does not pay the charter hire. Long time charters also deal with such matters as the
adjustment to the hire charge in the event of the vessel being laid up, and will set
out certain conditions under which the charterer is entitled to terminate the
arrangement, for example if the owner fails to run the ship efficiently.
There are three reasons why subcontracting may be attractive. First, the shipper
may not wish to become a shipowner, but his business requires the use of a ship
under his control. Second, the time charter may work out cheaper than buying,
especially if the owner has lower costs, due to lower overheads and larger fleet.
This seems to have been one of the reasons that oil companies subcontracted so
much of their transport in the 1960s. Third, the charterer may be a speculator
taking a position in anticipation of a change in the market.
Timechartering to industrial clients is a prime source of revenue for the shipowner.
The availability of time charters varies from cargo to cargo and with business
circumstances. In the early 1970s about 80 per cent of oil tankers owned by
independent shipowners were on time charter to oil companies. Figure 3.2 shows
that twenty years later the position had reversed and only about 20 per cent were
on time charter. In short there had been a major change of policy by the oil
companies, in response to changing circumstances in the tanker market and the oil
industry. About 30 per cent of iron ore is carried on the spot market but a larger
proportion of grain.
The bare boat charter
Finally, if a company wishes to have full operational control of the ship, but does
not wish to own it, a bare boat charter is arranged. Under this arrangement the
investor, not necessarily a professional shipowner, purchases the vessel and hands
it over to the charterer for a specified period, usually ten to twenty years. The
charterer manages the vessel and pays all operating and voyage costs. The owner,
who is often a financial institution such as a life insurance company, is not active
in the operation of a vessel and does not require any specific maritime skills. It is
just an investment. The advantages are that the shipping company does not tie up
its capital and the nominal owner of the ship may obtain a tax benefit. This
arrangement is often used in the leasing deals discussed in Chapter 6.
THE FREIGHT MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
86
The charter-party
Once a deal has been ‘fixed’, a charter-party is prepared setting out the terms on
which the business is to be done. Hiring a ship or contracting for the carriage of
cargo is complicated and the charter-party must anticipate the problems that are
likely to arise. Even on a single voyage with grain from the US Gulf to Rotterdam
any number of mishaps may occur. The ship may not arrive to load at the time
indicated, there may be a port strike or the ship may break down in mid-Atlantic. A
good charter-party will provide clear guidance on precisely who is legally
responsible for the costs in each of these events, whereas a poor charter-party may
force either the shipowner, the charterer or the shipper to spend large sums on
lawyers to argue a case for compensation.
For the above reasons the charter-party or cargo contract is an important
document in the shipping industry and must be expertly drawn up in a way that
protects the position of the contracting parties. It would be too time consuming to
develop a new charter-party for every contract, particularly voyage charters, and
the shipping industry uses standard charter-parties that apply to the main trades,
FIGURE 3.2 Oil time charter market
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources

87
routes and types of chartering arrangement. By using one of these standard contracts,
proven in practice, both shipper and shipowner know that the contractual terms
will cover most of the eventualities that are likely to arise in that particular
trade.
An example of a basic general charter-party is the BIMCO ‘Gencon’. This
consists of two parts, a schedule (Part 1) setting out details of the charter, shown in
Figure 3.3, and notes (Part 11) setting out the standard terms, shown at the end of
the chapter. It is usual to specify the standard charter-party to be used at the time
when the order is quoted—this avoids subsequent disputes over contractual terms,
a very important point in a market where freight rates can change substantially
over a short period and one of the contracting parties may look for a legitimate
loophole. Because there are so many variants there is no definitive list of charter-
party clauses.4 Taking the ‘Gencon’ charter-party as an example, the principal
sections in the charter-party can be subdivided into six major components:
1
Details of the ship and the contracting parties. The charter-party specifies:
•
The name of the shipowner/charterer and broker;
•
Details of the ship—including its name, size and cargo capacity;
•
The ship’s position;
•
The brokerage fee, stating who is to pay.
2
A description of cargo to be carried, drawing attention to any special features.
The name and address of the shipper is also given, so that the shipowner knows
whom to contact when he arrives at the port to load cargo.
3
The terms on which the cargo is to be carried. This important part of the voyage
charter-party defines the commitments of the shipper and shipowner under the
contract. This covers:
•
The dates on which the vessel will be available for loading;
•
The loading port or area (for example, US Gulf);
•
The discharging port including details of multi port discharge where
appropriate;
•
Laytime, i.e. time allowed for loading and discharge of cargo;
•
Demurrage rate per day in US dollars;
•
Payment of loading and discharge expenses.
 
If loading or discharge is not completed within the time specified the shipowner
will be entitled to the payment of liquidated damages (demurrage) and the
amount per day is specified in the charter-party (e.g. $5,000/day).
4
The terms of payment. This is important because very large sums of money
are involved. The charter-party will specify:
•
The freight to be paid;
•
The terms on which payment is to be made;
THE FREIGHT MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
88
FIGURE 3.3 BIMCO ‘Gencon’ Charter, Part I

89
 
There is no set rule about this—payment may be made in advance, on discharge
of cargo or as instalments during the tenure of the contract. Currency and
payment details are also specified.
5
Penalties for non-performance—the notes in Part 11 contain clauses setting
out the terms on which penalties will be payable, in the event of either party
failing to discharge its responsibilities.
6
Administrative clauses, covering matters that may give rise to difficulties if
not clarified in advance. These include the appointment of agents and
stevedores, bills of lading, provisions for dealing with strikes, wars, ice, etc.
Time charter-parties follow the same general principles, but include boxes to specify
the ship’s performance (i.e. fuel consumption, speed, quantity and prices of bunkers
on delivery and redelivery) and equipment, and may exclude the items dealing
with the cargo.
Efficient business depends upon shippers and shipowners concluding the business
quickly and fairly without resorting to legal disputes. In view of the very large
sums of money involved in shipping cargo, this goal can be achieved only by
detailed charter-parties that provide clear guidance on the allocation of liability in
the event of many thousands of possible mishaps occurring during the transport of
cargo across the world.
Freight market reporting
The rates at which charters are fixed depend on market conditions and the free
flow of information reporting latest developments plays a vital part in the market.
Since the starting point for the charter negotiations is ‘last done’, shipowners and
charterers take an active interest in reports of recent transactions. In this section
we shall review the way in which charter rates are reported. As an example we will
take the daily freight market report published in Lloyd’s List. Figure 3.4 shows a
typical dry cargo market report, while Figure 3.5 shows a typical tanker chartering
report.
Dry cargo market report
The report consists of a commentary on market conditions followed by a list of
reported charters under the headings: grain, coal and time charters. Not all charters
will be reported. On this particular day the report comments: ‘Panamax freight
rates continued to edge lower, while capesize levels moved higher due to the volume
of forward coal cargoes.’ In the fixture report, the details of the charter are generally
summarized in a specific order. For voyage charters we can illustrate this point by
referring to the first example of a grain charter as follows:
US Gulf to Japan—Tai Zhou Hai, 52,000–54,000 t heavy grains, $24.25 fio,
basis no combination, 11 days, Mid-Mar, (Korea Line)
THE FREIGHT MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
90
The vessel Tai Zhou Hai has been chartered to load cargo in the US Gulf and
transport it to Japan. The cargo consists of 52–54,000 tons of heavy grains, at a
freight rate of $24.25 per ton. According to the Clarkson Bulk Carrier Register the
Tai Zhou Hai is 64,170 dwt, so this is a part cargo, loading the ship to the maximum
draft for Panama Canal transit. ‘No combination’ means it will be a single port
discharge (many cargoes have two or three port discharge). Eleven days are allowed
for loading and discharge. The vessel must present itself ready to load in mid-
March, though the charter-party will certainly be more specific, naming the precise
dates. The charterers are Korea Line.
The layout for time charters is slightly different, as we can see taking the first
example:
Cape Jupiter (170,000 dwt, built 1997) delivery Japan, end March, Pacific round
voyage, $ 18,000 per day. (K Line)
FIGURE 3.4 A dry cargo market report
Source: Lloyd’s List, 28 February 1997

91
The ship details are given in brackets after its name, and in this case the vessel is a
brand new 170,000 dwt bulk carrier delivered 1997, so it is almost certainly on its
maiden voyage. Sometimes the speed and fuel consumption are quoted, since these
are significant in determining the charter rate. The vessel is to be delivered to
charterers in Japan at the end of March, to undertake a Pacific round voyage at a
charter rate of $18,000 per day and is chartered by K Line. Often the location of
redelivery is specified. For example, the next time charter for the Hellas specifies
‘redelivery China’. Note that the daily charter rate for the Hellas, a 139,000 dwt
vessel built 1982, is $13,300 per day, about 26 per cent below the charter rate for
the Cape Jupiter. All of the time charters reported in Figure 3.4. are for a single
round voyage or a six-month period, emphasizing the fact that the time charter is
not exclusively a means of fixing vessels for long periods.
FIGURE 3.5 A tanker market report
Source: Lloyd’s List, 28 February 1997
THE FREIGHT MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
92
Tanker market report
The tanker charter report in Figure 3.5 follows a similar pattern to the dry cargo
market, though in this case the main division in the reported charter is between
‘clean’ and ‘dirty’. The clean charters refer to products tankers carrying clean oil
products, while the dirty charters refer to crude oil and black products. Tanker
fixtures are generally in Worldscale, an index based on the cost of operating a
standard tanker on the route. The first item reported in the commentary is the
firming of rates for tankers of 50–70,000 dwt in the Caribbean from W115 to
W125. Also the report notes that rates for ULCCs like the Jabre Viking, the world’s
biggest tanker of 564, 763 dwt, were quite steady at about W42.5 (the vessel had
been fixed to Exxon two days earlier). The details reported for each charter follow
a similar pattern to dry cargo. For example:
Aden to Persian Gulf and Japan—Sponsalis, 55,000 t, Worldscale 205, Mar
2.(SSS)
This means that the motorship Sponsalis has been fixed for a voyage charter from
Aden to Japan via the Persian Gulf. The cargo is 55,000 tons, which is a part
cargo—checking in the Clarkson Tanker Register, we see that Sponsalis is a 1986-
built epoxy coated products tanker of 87,000 dwt. The charter rate is Worldscale
205 and commences on 2 March. The charterer is SSS, which is the designation of
Showa Shell. Note that the charter rate for the 87,000 dwt products tanker is almost
four times higher than for the 564,763 dwt ULCC, reflecting the smaller cargo size
and indirect voyage undertaken on the products fixture.
Liner and specialist ship chartering
The biggest international charter market is in tanker and dry bulk tonnage. There is
also a significant market for liner and specialist vessels. Liner companies from
time to time need to charter in additional ships to meet the requirements of an
upswing in trade or to service the trade while their own vessels are undergoing
major repairs. For this reason there is an active charter market in ‘tweendeckers,
roll on, roll off vessels (ro-ros) and container ships.
Freight rate statistics
Shipowners, shippers and charterers take great interest in statistics showing trends
in freight rates and charter rates. Three different units of measurement are commonly
used. Voyage rate statistics for dry cargo commodities are generally reported in $/
ton for a standard voyage. By convention this is a negotiated rate covering the total
transport costs. This measurement is commonly used in the dry cargo trades where,
for example, brokers such as Clarksons report average rates on 26 routes each
week. For example, $12 per tonne for grain from the US Gulf to Rotterdam or
$5.50 per tonne for coal to Queensland to Japan. In contrast time charter rates are
generally measured in $000s per day. Time charterer rates are commonly reported
for ‘trip’ (i.e. round voyage), 6 months, 12 months and 3 years.

93
The Worldscale Index (W/S)
The third and most complex measure of freight rates is Worldscale. The tanker
industry uses this freight rates index as a more convenient way of negotiating the
freight rate per barrel of oil on many different routes. The concept was developed
during the Second World War when the British Government introduced a schedule
of official freight rates as a basis for
paying the owners of requisitioned
tankers. The schedule showed the
cost of transporting a cargo of oil on
each of the main routes using a
standard 12,000 dwt tanker. Owners
were paid the rate shown in the
schedule or some fraction of it. The
system was adopted by the tanker
industry after the war and has been
progressively revised over the years,
the last amendment being in January
1989 when ‘New Worldscale’ was
introduced.
The Worldscale index is published
in a book which is used as the basis
for calculating tanker spot rates. The
book shows, for each tanker route,
the cost of transporting a metric tonne of cargo using the standard vessel on a
round voyage. This cost is known as ‘Worldscale 100’. Each year the Worldscale
Panel meet in London and updates the book. The standard vessel has, from time to
time, been updated. The one in use in 1997 is shown in Table 3.1. The Worldscale
system makes it easier for shipowners and charterers to compare the earnings of
their vessels on different routes. Suppose a tanker is available spot in The Gulf and
the owner agrees a rate of Worldscale 50 for a voyage from Jubail to Rotterdam.
To calculate how much money he will earn he first looks up the rate per metric
tonne for Worldscale 100 from Rotterdam to Jubail. Consulting the appropriate
entry he finds that it is $17.30 per metric tonne. Since he has settled at Worldscale
50 he will receive half of this amount, i.e. $8.65 per metric tonne. If his ship
carries 250,000 metric tonnes, the revenue from the voyage will be $2,162,500. It
is an equally simple matter to make the same calculation for a voyage to Japan.
The Baltic Freight Index (BFI)
The volatility of the charter market creates uncertainty over future freight charges
that may be unwelcome to many businessmen. Consider the case of a European
grain merchant who in February purchases 55,000 tons of maize to be shipped
from the US Gulf to Rotterdam in July. Since he is obliged to wait until July
before chartering a vessel, there is a risk that the freight rate will increase, wiping
out his profit on the deal.
THE FREIGHT MARKET
TABLE 3.1 Worldscale basis tanker
Source: Worldscale Association, London

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
94
The Baltic International Freight Futures Exchange (BIFFEX) was opened in
January 1985 to enable shippers, owners and charterers to hedge against sudden
changes in the freight rate. The freight future market is based on the Baltic Freight
Index (BFI), a statistical index covering freight rates on eleven different trade
routes (grain (four routes), coal (three routes), iron ore, and trip charter (three
routes)). The index is calculated each day as the weighted average of actual rates
on the thirteen routes. If there are no charters, a panel of brokers independently
submit their estimates of what the charter rate would have been and these are
averaged. In addition to providing a settlement index for hodging, the Baltic Freight
Index (BFI) is the most widely used market indicator in dry bulk shipping. The
path which the index has followed since it was set up in 1985 is shown in Figure
3.6. Also shown on this graph are brief notes recording key events which influenced
the market. Over the decade 1987 to 1997 there were thirteen occasions on which
the index moved several hundred points up or down in a period of a few months.
This is the volatility which hedging markets are designed to deal with.
The hedging operation is achieved by trading units on the freight futures
exchange. Like any futures market, the price at which individuals are prepared to
buy and sell forward depends upon their expectations of the future—if in January
it is expected that freight rates will have risen by April, then the price of contract
units for settlement at end April will be higher than the current BIFFEX Index and
vice versa. Contract units can be bought and sold at a rate of $10 per BIFFEX
index point, with units traded ahead for settlement at three-monthly intervals. A
typical broker’s report of trading on 11 February 1997 is illustrated in Table 3.2.
This shows that on the day in question the actual value of the index was 1,435 but
contract units for settlement at the end of February were being traded at $15,100,
while contract units for settlement at the end of July were being traded at $13,050
suggesting that traders expected freight rates to fall during the next six months.
A shipper who purchased a contract unit for $13,050 on 11 February for
settlement at the end of July would be entitled to receive on the last day of July a
payment of $10 for each point in the actual BIFFEX Index at the end of July (in
practice the settlement price is calculated by taking the average of the index for
TABLE 3.2 Example of BIFFEX trading report
Source: Lloyd’s List, 11 February, 1997

95
each of the last five trading days in the month of settlement). If, for example, the
BIFFEX Index had risen to 1,500 at the end of July then the holder of a July
contract unit would receive $15,000, giving a gross profit of $1,950 over the original
purchase price. Out of this he must pay a commission to the broker who carried
out the transaction for him. Conversely, the trader who sold the contract unit for
$13,050 in January would have to settle at $15,000 at the end of July, incurring a
loss on the transaction.
From the shipowner’s point of view, if he sells contract units for settlement in
July at $13,050 and by July the BIFFEX Index has fallen below 13,050, then he
will make a profit on the transaction that will compensate him for the losses he will
be making on chartering his ship at the lower freight rate. Conversely, if the index
rises to 1,500 then he will make a sizeable loss, but he should be able to recoup this
loss from the additional profits made by chartering his ships at the higher rate. In
short, by using the futures market he is able to hedge his future income.
On the other side of the deal, the shipper has also secured his future financial
position. If he buys forward and the outturn BIFFEX rate is higher than the purchase
price, he makes a profit that compensates him for the higher freight rate he will
have to pay to charter a ship. Conversely, if BIFFEX falls below the rate at which
he bought forward, he will make a loss that he will recoup by chartering a ship at
less than the anticipated rate.
FIGURE 3.6 The Baltic freight index (BFI 1985–97 and significant events)
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
THE FREIGHT MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
96
The amount of risk a trader takes can be varied by varying the number of
contract units purchased. For example, the shipper with 55,000 tons of grain to
transport in July at $16 per ton would face a freight bill of about $880,000. To
hedge on the futures market he would need to buy sixty-seven contract units at
$13,050 per unit and this would cover him against the total outlay on freight. He
could, however, buy just thirty-three units, giving partial cover, or he might decide
to take the chance that the freight market will not turn out as badly as traders
expect.
3.4 The sale and purchase market
We now come to the sale and purchase market. About 1,000 deep sea merchant
ships are sold each year, representing an investment of $9.6 billion. The remarkable
feature of this market is that ships worth tens of millions of dollars are traded like
sacks of potatoes at a country market. There are many bigger commodity markets,
but few share the pure drama of ship sale and purchase.
The participants in the sale and purchase market are the same mix of shippers,
shipping companies and speculators who trade in the freight market. The shipowner
comes to the market with a ship for sale. Typically the ship will be sold with prompt
delivery, for cash, free of any charters, mortgages or maritime liens. Occasionally
it may be sold with the benefit (or liability) of an ongoing time charter. The
shipowner’s reasons for selling may vary. He may have a policy of replacing vessels
at a certain age, which this ship may have reached; the ship may no longer suit his
trade; or he may think prices are about to fall. Finally there is the ‘distress sale’ in
which the owner sells the ship to raise cash to meet his day-to-day commitments.
The purchaser may have equally diverse objectives. He may need a ship of a specific
type and capacity to meet some business commitment, for example a contract to
carry coal from Australia to Japan. Or he may be an investor who feels that it is the
right time to acquire a ship of a particular type. In the latter case his requirements
may be more flexible, in the sense that he is more interested in the investment
potential than the ship itself.
Most sale and purchase transactions are carried out through shipbrokers. The
shipowner instructs his broker to find a buyer for the vessel. Sometimes the ship
will be given exclusively to a single broker, but it is common to offer the vessel
through several broking companies. On receipt of the instruction the broker will
telephone or fax any client he knows who is looking for a vessel of this type. If the
instruction is exclusive, he will call up other brokers in order to market the ship
through their client list. Full details of the ship are drawn up, including the
specification of the hull, machinery, equipment, class, survey status and general
equipment. Simultaneously the broking house will be receiving enquiries from
potential purchasers. For example an owner may be seeking a ‘modern’ 65,000
dwt bulk carrier. The broker may have suitable vessels for sale on his own list, and
would not pursue enquiries through other brokers. If no suitable candidates can be
found, he may look for suitable candidates and approach their owners to see if
there is any interest in selling.

97
The sales procedure
Broadly speaking the procedure for buying/selling a ship can be sub-divided into
the following five stages:
1
Putting the ship on the market. The first step is for the buyer or seller to appoint
a broker—or he may decide to handle the transaction himself. Particulars of
the ship for sale are circulated to interested parties in the market.
2
Negotiation of price and conditions. Once a prospective buyer has been found
the negotiation begins. There are no hard and fast rules. In a buoyant market
the buyer may have to make a quick decision on very limited information.
Alternatively during a weak market, he can take his time, inspecting large
numbers of ships and seeking detailed information from the owners. When
agreement has been reached in principle, the brokers may draw up a ‘recap
telex’ summarizing the key details about the ship and the transaction, before
proceeding to the formal stage of preparing a sale contract.
3
Memorandum of Agreement. Once an offer has been accepted a Memorandum
of Agreement is drawn up setting out the terms on which the sale will take
place. A commonly used pro forma for the Memorandum of Agreement is the
Norwegian Sales Form (1987).5 The memorandum sets out the administrative
details for the sale (i.e. where, when and on what terms) and lays down certain
contractual rights, such as the right of the buyer to inspect Class Society records.
A summary of the key points covered in sales form documents are listed in
Box 3.2. At this stage the memorandum is not generally legally binding, since
it will include a phrase to the effect that it is ‘subject to…’.
4
Inspections. The buyer, or his surveyor make any inspections which are
permitted in the sales contract. There will probably be a physical inspection of
the ship, possibly including an underwater inspection by divers. There will
also be an inspection of the Classification Society records for information
about the mechanical and structural history of the ship. Sales often fail at this
stage if the buyer is not happy with the results of the inspections.
5
The closing. Finally the ship is delivered to its new owners who simultaneously
transfer the balance of funds to the seller’s bank. At the closing meeting
representatives of the buyer and seller on board ship are in telephone contact
with a meeting ashore of representatives of sellers, buyers, current and
prospective mortgagees and the ship’s existing registry.
How ship prices are determined
The sale and purchase market thrives on price volatility. ‘Asset play’ profits earned
from welltimed buying and selling activity are an important source of income for
shipping investors. Bankers are just as interested in ship values because a mortgage
on the hull is the primary collateral for their loans.
THE SALE AND PURCHASE MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
98
This four page pro-forma contract has 15 clauses covering the issues which can be
problematic in selling a ship. The following summary refers to the MOA as drafted,
individual clauses are generally modified during the negotiation, with terms added
or removed.
Preamble: At the top of the form are spaces to enter the date, the seller, the buyer
and details of the ship, including the classification society, year of build, shipyard,
flag, etc.
1 Price: The price to be paid for the vessel. where.
2 Deposit: States the deposit paid by the purchaser, when it must be paid and
3 Payments: The purchase money (amount and bank details stated) must be paid
on delivery of the vessel, but not later than three banking days after the buyer
has been notified that the vessel is ready for delivery.
4 Inspections: The buyer can inspect the vessel and its class records. The clause states
where and when the vessel will be available and restricts the scope of the inspection (no
‘opening up’). After inspection the buyer has 48 hours to accept in writing, after which the
contract is null and void. (N.B. In practice buyers generally inspect the ship before the
MOA is drawn up, in which case this clause does not apply).
5 Place and time of delivery: States where the vessel will be delivered and
when, usually a range of ports over a period of time. The buyer can cancel the
purchase if the ship is not delivered by the stated date.
6 Drydocking: The seller is to drydock the vessel at the port of delivery for the
bottom inspection. Any defects which affect the vessel’s class must be rectified. It
states who is responsible for the various expenses. (N.B. Nowadays it is more
common to use divers.)
7 Spares/Bunkers etc: Names moveable items included in the sale of those
which the seller can take ashore. Bunkers and lubricating oils are handed over
at the market price.
8 Documentation: The seller must provide a notarially attested bill of sale; a
certificate stating that the vessel is free from registered encumbrances; a certificate
demonstrating that the vessel has been deleted from its current registry; and all
class papers
9 Encumbrances: The seller warrants that the vessel is free from any third party
claims which could damage its commercial value. Any claim arising subsequently
but incurred before delivery, must be paid by the buyer.
10 Taxes: Buyers and sellers are responsible for their own costs of registration etc.
11 Condition on delivery: The ship must be delivered in the condition in which it
was inspected; it must be in class, and the class society must have been notified
of anything which could affect its class status.
12 Name/Markings: On delivery the buyer must change the name of the vessel
and all funnel markings (i.e. so that it is clear that it is not still trading under the
previous owner).
13 Buyer’s default: If the buyer defaults and the deposit has not been paid, the
seller can claim his costs from the buyer. If the deposit has been paid, but the
purchase money is not paid, the seller can retain the deposit and claim
compensation for losses, with interest.
14 Seller’s default: If the seller fails to deliver the vessel with everything belonging
to her by the agreed date, the buyer can cancel the contract and receive interest
and compensation for expenses.
15 Arbitration: Sets out the terms under which arbitration will be carried out.
BOX 3.2 Sale and purchase Memorandum of Agreement (MOA): example:
Norwegian sales form 1987

99
There has always been plenty of volatility to attract investors and worry bankers.
Early in the twentieth century Fairplay monitored the price of a ‘new, ready 7,500
ton cargo steamer’. The price of this vessel increased from £48,000 in 1898 to
£60,750 in December 1900, and then fell by one-third to £39,250 in December
1903.6 The same vessel was worth £232,000 in 1919, £52,000 in 1925 and £48,750
in 1930. In the 1970s and 1980s we find much the same pattern. For example the
price of a 60,000 dwt bulk carrier, shown in Figure 3.7, fell to $6 million in December
1977. Three years later December 1980 the price had increased by 60 per cent to
$22 million. Within two years the price was down to $7 million, and did not reach
$22 million again until late 1989, after which it was steady for several years.
If we express the price of a 30,000 dwt bulk carrier as a percentage deviation
from a linear regression trend fitted over the period 1976–94, the extent of the
volatility becomes clear. In 1980 the price reached a peak 70 per cent above the
trend, while in 1986 it fell 70 per cent below trend (Figure 3.8). Obviously selling
a ship at the bottom of a market cycle is disastrous, and a great bargain for the
buyer. No shipping company follows this suicidal course of action by choice.
‘Distress’ sales during market troughs are generally driven by cashflow pressures.
The seller might be a shipowner who cannot pay his bunker bill, or a banker who
has foreclosed on his client and taken posession of the fleet. Fortunately the extreme
price fluctuations shown in Figure 3.8 are relatively uncommon and the more limited
volatility which occurred between 1987 and 1997 is more common. It all depends
on the underlying cashflow of the industry.
Movements in the price of different ship types tend to be closely synchronized.
Over the twenty-year period shown in Figure 3.7, 89 per cent of the price movements
FIGURE 3.7 Price cycles for tankers and bulk carriers (five-year-old ships)
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
THE SALE AND PURCHASE MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
100
of a 65,000 dwt bulker and a 30,000 dwt bulker were correlated. The relationship
is slightly weaker for the 30,000 dwt and 280,000 dwt tankers, with 75 per cent of
the price movements correlated. Even tanker and bulk carrier prices show a
correlation coefficient of 67 per cent for the small vessels and 68 per cent for large
vessels. Considering the different character of the markets, the relationship is
remarkably close. It raises an interesting question. If the prices of different types
of ships are so highly correlated, does it really matter what ship type asset players
buy? For really major swings in prices it probably does not matter because cashflow
pressures work their way from one sector to another. However there is plenty of
room for independent price movement during the more moderate cycles.
For example, between 1991 and 1995 bulk carrier prices held steady, while the
price of large tankers fell. This is where the choice of market really does make a
difference.
FIGURE 3.8 Bulk carrier price volatility 1976–93 (30,000 dwt bulk carrier)
Source: Figure 3.7
Box 3.3 Second-hand price correlation in tankers and bulk carriers
Correlation
Correlation of price movements 1974–94
Coefficient (R2)
65,000 dwt and 30,00 dwt Bulk Carriers
0.89
30,000 dwt and 280,000 dwt Tanker
0.74
65,000 dwt Bulk Carrier and 280,000 dwt Tanker
0.68
30,000 dwt Bulk Carrier and 30,000 dwt Products Tanker
0.67

101
Price dynamics of merchant ships
In the circumstances outlined above it is natural that second-hand prices play a
major part in the commercial decisions of shipowners—very large sums of money
are involved. What determines the value of a ship at a particular point in time?
There are four factors which are influential: freight rates, age, inflation and
shipowners’ expectations for the future.
Freight rates are the primary influence on ship prices. Peaks and troughs in the
freight market are transmitted through into the sale and purchase market, as can be
seen in Figure 3.9 which traces price movements from 1976–93 for a five-year-old
bulk carrier, comparing the market price with the one-year time charter rate. The
relationship is very close, especially as the market moves from trough to peak.
When the freight rate fell from $8,500 per day in 1981 to $3,600 per day in 1985,
the price fell from $12 million to $3 million. Conversely, when the freight recovered
to $8,500 per day, the price increased to $15 million. This correlation provides
some guidance on valuing ships using the gross earnings method. Analysis of the
past relationship between price and freight rates suggests that when freight rates
are high the S&P market values a five-year-old ship at about six times its current
annual earnings, based on the one year time charter rate. For example if it is earning
$4 million per annum it will value the ship at $24 million. When the market drops,
so does the earnings multiple. In recessions the value may fall as low as three time
earnings.
The second influence on a ship’s value is age. A ten-year-old ship is worth less
than a five-year-old ship. The normal accountancy practice is to depreciate merchant
FIGURE 3.9 Correlation of second-hand price and freight rate (five-year-old bulk
carrier)
Source: Clarkson Research Studies
THE SALE AND PURCHASE MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
102
ships down to scrap over 15 or 20 years. Brokers who value ships take much the
same view, generally using the ‘rule of thumb’ that a ship loses 5 or 6 per cent of its
value each year. As an example of how this works out in practice, Figure 3.10
shows the price of a 1974 built products tanker over the 20 years to 1994. The
slope of the depreciation curve reflects the loss of performance due to age, higher
maintenance costs, a degree of technical obsolescence and expectations about the
economic life of the vessel. For a specific ship the economic life may be reduced
by the carriage of corrosive cargoes, poor design, or inadequate maintenance. When
the market value eventually falls below the scrap value the ship is likely to be sold
for scrapping. The average age of tankers and bulk carriers scrapped in 1995 was
23–25 years, but in protected trades, such as the US domestic trades, the average
scrapping age in the mid-1990s was about 35 years.7 Ships operating in fresh water
environments such as the Great Lakes last much longer.
In the longer term, inflation affects ship prices. Inflation of asset values accounted
for about half the return on bulk shipping in the 1970s and 1980s. To illustrate the
effects discussed above we can look at past behaviour of the price of a second-
hand bulk carrier as the ship grows older. The development of a second-hand price
for a 35,000 dwt bulk carrier built in 1965 is shown in Figure 3.11. The graph was
calculated by taking the reported resale price of the ship in dollars, deflating it to
remove the effects of inflation using the OECD consumer price index and fitting a
linear trend to the deflated data. The trend line thus presents a rough estimate of
FIGURE 3.10 Price life cycle and depreciated trend (30,000 dwt products tanker
built 1974)
Source: Clarkson Research Studies

103
what the resale price of the ship would have been if there had been no market
cycles and no inflation during the life of the vessel.
After 10 years the trend resale value of the 35,000 dwt vessel has fallen by 49
per cent relative to its new value. This suggests that, if this vessel is typical, leaving
aside the effects of market cycles and inflation, we would expect that after 10
years the vessel would have a market resale value of about 50 per cent less than the
original newbuilding value. However, inflation seems to have a very significant
effect and, as time passes, the market price line moves progressively further above
the deflated price line. After a few years, even during depressions the market price
does not fall below the trend value.
The fourth and in some ways most important influence on second-hand prices
is expectations. This accelerates the speed of change at market turning points. For
example buyers or sellers may first hold back to see what will happen, then suddenly
rush to trade once they believe the market is ‘on the move’. The market can swing
from deep depression to intensive activity in the space of only a few weeks, as the
following newspaper report demonstrates:
A very large crude carrier damaged in a Persian Gulf missile attack and destined
to be broken up has become the subject of one of the year’s most remarkable
sales deals. Market sources believe that the buyer has paid $7 million for the
tanker which, until the recent surge in demand for large tonnage, appeared to
FIGURE 3.11 The effects of age, market cycles and inflation on a bulk carrier
(35,000 dwt)
Source: Compiled by Martin Stopford from various sources
THE SALE AND PURCHASE MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
104
have no future. The rescue of the Volere is indicative of the continuing shortage
of large tankers which has prompted many vessels to break lay-up. A month ago
the 423,700 dwt Empress was brought from Taiwanese interests after being
towed half around the world for intended demolition.
(Lloyd’s List, 4 July 1986)
The Volere was resold two months later for $9.5 million and second-hand tonnage
was in very short supply as owners held back on sales to see how prices would
develop. In short, although there is a clear correlation between second-hand prices
and freight rates, the movement of prices is often not a leisurely process. Peaks
and troughs tend to be emphasized by the behaviour of buyers and sellers.
Valuing merchant ships
Valuing ships is one of the routine tasks undertaken by sale and purchase brokers.
There are several reasons why valuations are required. Banks lending against a
mortgage need to value the collateral and will probably continue to monitor the
ship’s value over the term of the loan. Prospectuses for public offerings of equity
generally include a valuation of the company’s fleet, as do the annual accounts of
public companies. Finally, leases often require a view on the ‘residual value’ of the
ship at the end of the loan period. This is a much more complex and difficult task
than simply appraising the current value.
Valuing a merchant ship involves a mixture of procedure, market knowledge
and judgement. First the broker consults his records to check the physical
characteristics of the ship and recent sales of similar vessels. He will pay particular
attention to the ship type, size, age, yard of build, survey status, equipment and
specification. Most of these are self evident, but some deserve comment. Bigger
ships are generally worth more than smaller ships, but the relationship varies with
the freight cycle. For example, in the distressed market of the 1980s a 250,000 dwt
tanker could be bought for the same price as an 80,000 dwt vessel, whereas at the
market peak in 1989 the 250,000 dwt vessel was worth twice as much. We have
already discussed age and the ‘rule of thumb’ that ships lose about 5 per cent of
their value each year. This is a useful guideline, but it is not always reliable,
especially for very new or very old ships. The yard of build is important because
ships built in some marginal yards sell at a discount, so care is needed.
Equipment is sometimes important. Shipowners prefer ships with standard
machinery, so any ship with an unusual engine or auxiliary equipment is likely to
be discounted. Some ships are better specified than others and owners are keen to
see this reflected in the valuation. A double hull tanker, above average cargo handling
gear, tank coatings, good fuel economy, high speed, pallet capability (in reefers),
automated engine room all make the ship more desirable. However, like ‘extras’
on motor cars, these features make the ship easier to sell but do not always increase
its value. Sometimes an ‘extra’ is not an advantage. For example, small bulk carriers
frequently require cargo handling gear, and a geared ship is worth more. In contrast
Panamax bulk carriers are not generally geared, so a geared Panamax may not
attract a premium.

105
Physical condition certainly affects the price of a ship, but this is something
which brokers are not in a position to evaluate. For valuation purposes the ship is
generally assumed to be ‘in good and seaworthy condition’. The responsibility for
establishing the physical condition of the ship lies entirely with the purchaser/
owner/banker. Survey status is another matter. If the ship is old and a special survey
is imminent, this will be taken into account. Although the valuer does not know
how much the ship will need spending on it, he knows how the market treats ships
in this situation, and will take that into account.
Ultimately the valuation is the broker’s judgement of what the vessel would
fetch if put on the market on a ‘willing buyer, willing seller’ basis. This qualification
is important, because if no ‘willing buyer’ is available, normal prices may be heavily
discounted. Although the broker will take into account ‘last done’, the ship is
normally valued at what it would sell for today. In a rising market, the valuation
will be above recent reported sales and lower in a falling market. Sometimes a
broker may be asked to value a ship of a type for which there has been no recent
sale. In this case the valuation is entirely judgemental. Three brokers may arrive at
three different prices, depending on how they feel the market would respond to the
sale of a ship of this type.
In view of the large sums of money involved, it is to be expected that there will
be disputes over what a ship is really worth. For example a bank may produce a
TABLE 3.3 Example of residual value calculation
valuation showing that the collateral cover on a loan is inadequate due to the
falling value of the mortgaged ships, but the borrower produces his own higher
valuations. When prices are falling there is often little business transacted, so the
valuation is particularly subjective, with the result that different brokers take
different views. A panel of valuers is the usual solution to this difficulty.
Another common problem is the charter status of the ship. What happens if the
ship has a time charter? One possibility is to carry out a present value calculation,
based on the charter revenue and projected operating costs, but this raises the difficult
THE SALE AND PURCHASE MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
106
question of whether the charterer is creditworthy and how to value the ship at the
end of the charter. Most brokers value vessels charter free.There may also be
problems valuing ship types that are rarely sold. This is often a problem with
specialized ships such as chemical parcel tankers, LNG tankers, big container ships,
etc. Because the market for these vessels is so thin, brokers find it very difficult to
value them. To deal with this problem more than one shipbroker may be asked to
value the vessel.
Finally, there is the question of quality. Owners often argue that their ships are
of superior quality and should be valued above the average market rate. In general
valuers are unwilling to fall in with this line of thought. Quality ships sell more
easily, but this is not something which can be quantified accurately. For this reason
most valuers still insist on the ‘average market condition’ clause, despite today’s
quality consciousness in the shipping industry.
Valuing a ship for scrap starts with the lwt tonnage of the ship. This is the
physical weight of the vessel (i.e. the amount of water it displaces). Scrap prices
are quoted in $/lwt ton. for example a VLCC might have a lwt of 36,000 tons. At
$180 per ton its scrap value is $6.48m. In practice scrap prices are almost as volatile
as second-hand ship prices. During the last 10 years the scrap price of tankers has
swung between $100/lwt and $240/lwt.
Calculating the residual value of ships
So much for the current value of a ship, but what will it be worth in future, for
example at the end of a 10-year lease? The basic methodology is to use the three
determinants of a ship’s price: the depreciation rate, the rate of inflation and the
market cycle. Take as an example a new bulk carrier costing $28 million in 1996
(see Table 3.3). If we assume that vessel depreciates at 5 per cent per annum on a
straight line basis during the first 10 years of its life, by the end of 10 years its book
value will have fallen to $14 million. However, during this time we assume that
shipbuilding prices have increased by 3 per cent per annum, so the replacement
cost after 10 years would be $18.8 million. This is the most likely value. However,
we need to take account of the market cycle, which we have seen can affect the
resale price by plus or minus 70 per cent, if we take the most extreme price
movements in Figure 3.9. A sale at the top of the market could bring a price of $32
million, which is higher than the initial purchase price of the ship. If, however, the
sale occurs at the bottom of a trough and we allow for a price 70 per cent below the
trend value, the minimum resale value would fall to US$5.6 million, which is 20
per cent of the initial cost.
This approach has many pitfalls. Depreciation rates and inflation are difficult
enough to predict, but the market cycle is the real challenge. The cyclical value
range of $5.6 million to $32 million is so wide that a view has to be taken on what
intensity of cycles might lie ahead. This is pure shipping risk and it is up to the
investor to decide what level of risk he is prepared to accept. For example the
analysis in Table 3.3 is based on one of the most extreme market cycles of the
century. The view might be taken that this is unlikely to happen in the period under
consideration, so a smaller residual value range would be appropriate. Study of the

107
market cycles discussed in chapter 2 and the market fundamentals in chapter 4 can
help to narrow the range, but will never entirely remove it. That is the judgement
that no amount of statistical analysis will remove. Someone has to take a risk.
That, after all, is what the shipping market is all about.
3.5 The newbuilding market
Although the shipbuilding market is closely related to the sale and purchase market,
its character is quite different. Both markets deal in ships, but the newbuilding
market trades in ships which do not exist. They must be built. This has several
consequences. First, the specification of the ship must be determined. A few
shipyards sell standard vessels, but most merchant ships are designed, at least to a
certain extent, to the buyer’s specification. Second, the contractual process for
such a major undertaking is more complex. Third, the ship will not be available for
2 or 3 years from the contract date, by which time conditions may have changed.
The purchaser entering the newbuilding market may have several different
motives. He may need a vessel of a certain size and specification and nothing
suitable is available on the second-hand market. This often happens when market
conditions are firm and the supply of good quality ships is restricted. Second hand
prices may even be higher than the price of a newbuilding. Another possibility is
that the ships are needed for an industrial project. Steel mills, power stations, LNG
schemes and other major industrial projects are generally developed with specific
transportation requirements met by newbuildings. Some large shipping companies
have a policy of regular replacement of vessels but this is less common than it used
to be years ago when British shipping companies would replace their fleets at 10
or 15 years of age. Finally, speculators may be attracted by incentives offered by
shipbuilders short of work—low prices and favourable credit are examples.
The shipyards form a large and diverse group. There are about 250 major
shipyards in the world. Their size and technical capability ranges from the small
yards with a workforce of less than 200 employees building tugs and fishing boats
to the major South Korean yards employing 15,000 workers building container
ships and gas tankers. Although some shipyards specialize in one particular type
of ship, most are extremely flexible and will bid for a wide range of business. In
adverse markets major shipyards have been known to bid for anything from floating
production platforms to research vessels.
The negotiation is complex. Occasionally an owner will appoint a broker to
handle the newbuilding, but many owners deal direct. The buyer may approach the
shipbuilding market from several different directions. One common procedure is
to invite tenders from a selection of suitable yards. The tender documentation is
often very extensive, setting out a precise specification for the ship. Once tenders
have been received the most competitive yards are selected and, following a detailed
discussion of the design, specification and terms, a final selection is made. This
whole process may take anything from six months to a year. In a sellers market the
tender procedure may not be possible. Buyers compete fiercely for the few available
berths and shipyards set their own terms and conditions. Often shipyards take
advantage of a firm market to insist upon the sale of a standard design.
THE NEWBUILDING MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
108
The contract negotiation can be divided into four areas on which negotiations
focus, the price, the specification of the vessel, the terms and conditions of the
contract, and the newbuilding finance offered by the shipbuilder. In a weak market
buyers will seek to extract the maximum benefit from their negotiating position in
each area. Conversely in a strong market the shipbuilder will negotiate for the
maximum price possible on a standard vessel, with favourable stage payments.
Price is the most important. Usually ships are contracted for a fixed price, payable
in a series of ‘stage payments’, which spread payment over the construction of the
vessel. The shipbuilder’s aim is to be paid as he builds the ship, so that he does not
need working capital and will aim for stage payments along the lines shown in
Box 3.4.
The pattern varies. In a seller’s market the builder may demand 50 per cent on
contract signing. In a weak market the buyer may insist on payment on delivery.
The specification of the vessel is also important, because modifications to the design
may add 10–15 per cent to the cost. There are many negotiable elements in the
contract, as discussed below. Finally, the provision of finance by the shipbuilders
is a long established way of securing business, especially by shipyards who are
uncompetitive on price, or during recessions when customers find it difficult to
raise finance. This is discussed in Chapter 6.
The shipbuilding contract
Once the preliminary negotiations are complete, a ‘letter of intent’ is often drawn
up as a basis for developing the details of the design and the construction contract.
At this stage the letter of intent is not generally legally binding, though this can
become a delicate issue if the shipyard is devoting significant resources to working
up the design. The cost of developing a detailed design for a ferry or a containership
can exceed $1 million.
The shipyard contract is often drawn up on a standard form. Two commonly
used forms are the AWES form and the SAJ form. These are much more detailed
than the sales for used for second-hand transactions. The AWES form runs to thirty
pages containing a preamble and nineteen articles. The brief summary in Box 3.5
provides an insight into the problems which can arise during the construction of a
merchant ship.
BOX 3.4 Typical pattern of shipyard stage payments
Stage in production
Payment due
Signing of contract
5 per cent
1,000 tons steel delivered
5 per cent
Commencement of steel fabrication
15 per cent
25 per cent steel erected
20 per cent
75 per cent steel erected
20 per cent
Steel erection complete
15 per cent
Launch
5 per cent
Delivery
15 per cent

109
BOX 3.5 Articles in the AWES shipbuilding contract
Article 1: Subject contract A detailed description of the ship, it’s yard number,
registration and classification.
Article 2: Inspection and approval Important section covers the rights of the
purchaser to inspect the vessel during construction. The purchaser is required to approve
three copies of the drawings and technical information for machinery and equipment
to which the vessel must be built. The shipyard may sub-contract work subject to the
purchaser’s approval.
Article 3: Modifications Lays down the rules for any modifications to the design
requested by the purchaser after the contract date, or to meet changing regulatory
requirements. It gives the builder the right to charge for any changes and modify the
building programme if necessary.
Article 4: Trials Specifies the terms under which sea trials will be carried out, including
the conditions under which tests will be carried out and the right of the contractor to
repeat trials or postpone them if necessary.
Article 5: Guarantee for speed, cargo carrying capacity and fuel
consumption Sets out the compensation which will be paid if the speed, deadweight,
cargo capacity and fuel consumption measured on the sea trials do not exactly comply
with the terms of the contract.
Article 6: Delivery of the vessel States where the vessel will be delivered, sets out
the liquidated damages and premiums for late/early delivery and defines ‘force majeure’
which may be acceptable reasons for late delivery. The latter include strikes, extreme
weather conditions, shortage of materials, etc.
Article 7: Price Specifies the contract price, the instalments and the method of payment
for modifications, liquidated damages and premiums.
Article 8: Property Defines who owns the plans, the working drawings and the
vessel itself during construction. Three alternative formats are offered. The first specifies
that the vessel belongs to the contractor until delivery; the second makes it the property
of the purchaser, but gives the contractor a lien for any unpaid portion of the price; the
third lays out a procedure for marking parts which become the purchaser’s property
held as securtity against instalments paid.
Article 9: Insurance The builder is responsible for insuring the vessel and all
associated components.
Article 10: Defaults by the purchaser Defines the interest rate at which late
payments will be charged and defines the terms under which the contractor can rescind
the contract and sell the vessel. Four alternative clauses are offered.
Article 11: Defaults by the contractor Defines the rights of the purchaser to be
repaid with interest if the contractor defaults. Two alternatives are offered.
Article 12: Guarantee Sets out the terms and period over which the vessel is
guaranteed against defects due to bad workmanship or defective materials.
Article 13: Contract expenses Allocates payment of taxes, duties, stamps and
fees between the contractor and the purchaser.
Article 14: Patents Makes the contractor liable for any infringements of patent on
his own work, but not on the work of suppliers.
Article 15: Arbitration Nominates the legal regime, and sets the conditions for
appointing a technical expert to resolve any disputes over the construction of the vessel
and the arbitration regime for any contract disputes.
Articles 16–19 Deals with various technicalities, including the terms on which the
contract becomes binding, legal domicile of the purchaser and contractor, the purchaser’s
right to assign the contract to a third party, and addresses for correspondance.
THE NEWBUILDING MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
110
Shipbuilding prices
Shipbuilding prices are just as volatile as second-hand prices and are closely
correlated with them, as can be seen in Figure 3.12. Like second-hand prices they
are determined by supply and demand. However, in this case the sellers are not
other shipowners, but shipyards. On the demand side, the key factors are freight
rates, the price of modern second-hand ships, financial liquidity of buyers, the
availability of credit and, most importantly, expectations. From the shipyard supply
viewpoint the key issues are the number of berths available and the size of the
orderbook. A yard with three years’ work cannot offer a realistic delivery, while
another yard with only the ships under construction on order will be desperately
keen to find new business. This balance is what drives shipyard prices. During
booms when the yards have built up long orderbooks and many owners are
competing for the few berths available, prices rise sharply. In a recession the opposite
happens. Shipyards are short of work and there are fewer buyers, so the yards have
to drop their prices to tempt in buyers.
3.6 The demolition market
The fourth market is demolition. This is a less glamorous but essential part of the
business. The mechanics are simple enough. The procedure is broadly similar to
the second-hand market, but the customers are the scrap yards (see Chapter 13)
rather than shipowners. An owner has a ship which he cannot sell for continued
trading, so he offers it on the demolition market. Usually the sale is handled by a
FIGURE 3.12 Correlation of new and second-hand prices (five-year-old 60,000
dwt bulk carrier)
Source: Clarkson Research Studies

111
broker and large broking companies have a ‘demolition desk’ specializing in this
market. These brokers keep records of recent sales and, because they are ‘in the
market’, they know who is buying at any point in time. When he receives instructions
from the owner the broker circulates details of the ship, including its lightweight,
location and availability to interested parties.
The ultimate buyers are the demolition yards, most of which are located in the
Far East, for example in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and China. However the buying
is usually done by cash speculators who act as intermediaries, buying the ships for
cash and selling them on to the demolition yards. Prices are determined by
negotiation and depend on the availability of ships for scrap and the demand for
scrap metal. In Asia much of the scrap is used in local markets where it provides a
convenient supply of raw materials for mini-mills, or cold rolled for use in
construction. Thus, demand depends on the state of the local steel market, though
availability of scrapping facilities is sometimes a consideration. Thus prices can be
very volatile, fluctuating from a trough of $100/lwt in the 1980s to more than
$200/lwt in the 1990s. The price also varies from ship to ship, depending its
suitability for scrapping.
As offers are received, the price firms up and eventually a deal is made. Although
a standard contract such as the Norwegian Sales Form is sometimes used, so few
of the clauses are relevant to a demolition sale that brokers tend to use their own
simplified contract. On completion the purchaser takes delivery of the ship and, if
he is an intermediary, makes the arrangements for delivering the ship to the
demolition yard.
3.7 Summary
In this chapter we have looked at the four shipping markets, the freight market,
the sale and purchase market, the newbuilding market and the demolition market.
Since markets are practical places, economists who want to understand how they
work must study what actually happens, and this is what we did. Starting from the
definition of a market place, we examined how the four shipping markets go about
the business of managing the supply of ships.
The freight market consists of shipowners, charterers and brokers. There are
four types of contractual arrangement, the voyage charter, the contract of
affreightment, the time charter, and the bare boat charter. The owners trading in
the voyage market contract to carry cargo for an agreed price per ton while the
charter market involves hiring out the ships on a daily basis (time charter). The
charter is legally agreed in a charter-party which sets out the terms of the deal.
Freight rate statistics show the movement of prices over time, recorded in dollars
per ton, worldscale, or time charter. Finally the Baltic International Freight Futures
Exchange (BIFFEX) allows charterers and shipowners to hedge their freight risk.
Second-hand ships are traded in the sale and purchase market. The buyers and
sellers are shipowners. Broadly speaking the administrative procedures are similar
to real estate, using a standard contract such as the Norwegian Sales Form. Ship
prices are very volatile and this makes trading ships an important source of revenue
for shipowners, though these transactions do not affect the cashflow of the industry
THE NEWBUILDING MARKET

THE FOUR SHIPPING MARKETS
112
as a whole. The second-hand value of merchant ships depends on the freight rates,
age, inflation and expectations.
The newbuilding market is quite different. The participants are shipowners and
shipbuilders. Because the ship has to be built the contract negotiations are more
complex than the sale and purchase market, extending beyond price to such factors
as specification, delivery date, stage payments and finance. Prices are just as volatile
as second-hand prices and sometimes follow the same pattern.
Finally we looked at the demolition market. Old or obsolete ships are sold for
scrap, often with speculators acting as intermediaries between the shipowners and
the demolition merchants.
These four markets work together, linked by cashflow. The ‘players’ are jostled
in the direction the market wants them to go by a combination of cashflow and
market sentiment, but the market does not have complete control. Ultimately what
happens tomorrow depends on what people do today. In this respect shipping is
just like the country market. By the time the farmer arrives at market with his pig
and finds that all the other farmers have bred pigs, it is too late. Prices will fall, and
the farmer, who has feed bills to pay, must accept the price on offer. But this situation
was created a year earlier when prices were high and everyone started breeding
pigs. The smart farmers saw what other farmers were doing and switched to
chickens. This has nothing to do with the demand for pigs or chickens. It is a
supply side management. Like the farmer, the successful shipping company must
know when to steer clear of pigs!
